AN APOLOGY FOR THE SIX BOOKSELLERS, Subscribers of the second BEACON fired.

OR, A VINDICATION of them from the foul and unjust aspersions cast upon them
by M. John Goodwin in a late Pamphlet INTITVLED A FRESH DISCOVERY OF THE HIGH
PRESBYTERIAN SPIRIT.

Together With brief Observations upon some remarkable passages in the said
Book.

By one that subscribes not his name, because he confesses himself to be
NVLLIVS NOMINIS.

Prove. 18.17. He that is first in his own cause seems just, but his neighbor
comes and searches him. LONDON, Printed by S. G. for Matthew Keinton at the
Fountain in Paul's Churchyard. 1655.

An APOLOGY.
IN the perusal of diverse late printed papers, etc. I found one entitled, The
second Beacon fired, wherein (as in the first) the zealous and religious
Authors (for so they were, however M. Goodwin may fancy, he sees some other
hand in it) did seasonably represent to the Lord Protector and Parliament,
diverse of the reigning sins and spreading errors of the times, among which they
had the hap to meet with one (as they might have met with many) out of a
certain book that calls M. Goodwin Father, which is this; That in case any
assurance of the unchangeablenesse of Gods love were to be found in, or
regularly deduced from the Scriptures, it were a just ground to any intelligent
man to question their Authority, and whether they were from God or no.
Redemption redeemed, p. 335.

At this M. Goodwin takes fire, and presently an angry Pamphlet comes out,
wherein this great Presbytero-Mastix, and Antisionita (College or Church,
choose you whether, some men think the Church has fared the worse for the
Colleges sake) cries out of Antichristian dealing, falsification; etc. (as M.
Goodwin never wants Rhetoric of that strain.)

This furious outcry made me turn in and see what the matter was; and after
search, I found the omission of one word such has by a strange kind of
multiplication produced a thousand, wherein he renders them to the world as
guilty of no less then forgery and calumniation.

Possibly some may wonder, that M: Goodwin should cry out of calumniation, who
has so far profited in that Art, that he is not ashamed to prostitute the
sentences of Calvin, Piscator, Paraeus, the Synod of Dort, etc. to the
maintenance of those Arminian Doctrines, which all the world knows their souls
abhorred, except this be the drift of it, That the world may be possessed with
an opinion of the grandeur of Master Goodwins parts, who can ex quolibet ligno
Mercurium facere, and quidlibet ex quolibet probare; or else this stupendous
Conciliator has put an end to this jangling controversy, and made these,
hitherto thought irreconcilable (not only persons, but causes) to think and
speak the same things.

These things when I considered, the desire of relieving oppressed innocence, a
willingness to testify that my heart is toward those zealous assertours of
Gods glory, and opposer of M. Goodwins great Diana, that accursed Idol of
Toleration, a fear lest the truth should suffer upon such a pretended mistake,
a desire to beget a right understanding in those that possibly may, by M.
Goodwins high and mighty confidence, be drawn into this persuasion, that he
has received some considerable injury; These things have forced me to this
present Vindication.

Master Goodwins great charge is, that the Booksellers proceed a tanto, or
tali, ad totum, and because he denies such unchangeableness, they charge him
with denying any unchangeableness, which indeed may at first glance seem a
perversion of his mind; but if things be impartially weighed, it will evidently
appear, that however there is some difference of words, yet the sense is the
same.

For 1. I am well assured, having had much conference with the Booksellers
since, etc. that it was not wilfully, or maliciously left out, to deprave his
meaning, and render him more odious then he deserved. And in this the Authors
of it do solemnly make their appeal to that God to whom they must give an
account.

2. The true reason why the word such was left out, was, because it was a
relative term, and so if it had been expressed, would have necessitated the
transcription of a far larger proportion of M. Goodwins words, (who does not
use to write magnum in parvo) then the nature of that work would permit.

3. That assurance (which the firers of the Beacon speak of) of the
unchangeableness of Gods love, which they implicitly assert, and with the
denial whereof they charge Mr. Goodwin, is well known (to the Lord Protector,
Parliament, and all intelligent men) to be that very same which M. Goodwin
opposes, to wit, an unchangeableness of Gods love to such and such particular
persons, though possibly they may fall into sin foully, and lie in sin too long,
as was the case of David, Solomon, etc. And this is that which M. Goodwin means
by such unchangeableness, though he represents it in more hideous expressions.
And this Dilemma M. Goodwin is desired to consider of, either that such
unchangeableness he speaks of, is the unchangeableness which his adversaries
assert, or it is not; if it be not, then he calumniates when he fastens it upon
them, and draws this horrid inference from it; if it be, then they have done
him no wrong, nor is there so much difference betwixt any unchangeableness and
any such unchangeableness, as was pretended.

4. Let it be considered, that M. Goodwin does frequently deny, and his whole
dispute is levied against the unchangeableness of Gods love (I am not ignorant,
he confidently tells us, that in his judgment Gods love is unchangeable, as it
is no new thing for a spirit of error to be accompanied with a spirit of
contradiction.) Whether M. Goodwin asserts the unchangeableness of Gods love,
as well as we, and so whether the Booksellers have wronged him, let the
impartial Reader judge by these passages, (taken word for word out of his
writings, lest he should say he is wronged) c. 13. 33. page 335. Whether any
such assurance of the unchangeablenesse of the love of God toward him that is
godly, ^s the Objection speaks of, can be effectually, and upon sufficient
grounds given unto men, is very questionable; Yea, I conceive there is more
reason to judge otherwise then so. There you see his Skepticism. Yea, he does
not only question that assurance, etc. but the very possibility of it; and c.
10. 41. p. 207. To reason thus, If God should love a man to day, and hate him
to morrow, it would argue a strange inconstancy or mutability in God, or in his
love, is a very inconsiderate and weak reasoning. And a little before in the
same Section, In case God shall destroy with eternal death, such men and women,
whom he sometimes truly loved, and respected dearly, this does not necessarily
argue the least change or alteration in any attribute of his whatsoever, as
either Love, Goodness, Mercy, etc. Whether this does not argue alteration, to
love to day, to hate to morrow, I leave to all those to judge that have their
senses exercised to discern between good and evil. And whereas M. Goodwins
salvo is this, Gods love is the same, he always loves righteousness, and hates
unrighteousness, and so there is no alteration in him, but in the person
beloved; I answer, there is a twofold love in God, a love to righteousness, a
love to persons; the former is unchangeable I confess according to M. Goodwin,
but the latter (about which the difference lies) M. Goodwin makes changeable,
which may appear by this similitude. A Prince that loves a loyal and faithful
subject, but when he proves disloyal, he hates him. Will any man deny that the
Princes affections are changed? and yet he continues to love loyalty, and hate
disloyalty. A Judge that loves righteousness, and hates iniquity unchangeably,
loves his friend, if he be righteous; if he turn wicked, he hates him, and
punishes him. Can any deny that there is a change in him? So in this case, if
God loves to day, and hates to morrow, is not here a change? It is true, the
original cause of the change, in all these cases, is the person offending, but
still the subject of the change, (according to this Hypothesis) is, as the
Prince and the Judge, so God himself; and so God is, according to M. Goodwins
doctrine, (as M. Goodwin has proved himself to be) not unchangeable, (...).

And if God be not altered in this case, M. Goodwin is desired to tell us what
alteration is, or when a person may be said to be changed in regard of his mind
or affections. If Master Goodwin mean to make this good, he must (as he has
done in part) bring into the world a new Philosophy, as he has done a new
Divinity.

Again, this dreadful consequence which is justly charged upon M. Goodwin, not
only is hanged upon this such unchangeableness, (which he would have to be
thought to be some other and higher degree of it then men dare to assert) but
does no less truly flow from other passages in his Book, where this word such
is not found. I will use but one argument, which is c. 13. 37. arg. 8. It is
too large to transcribe, the sum of it (I appeal to M. Goodwin) is this, That
doctrine which evacuates and turns into weakness and folly all that gracious
counsel of the H. Ghost, etc. (these are his very words) must needs be a
doctrine of vanity and error: But such is the common doctrine of absolute and
infallible perseverance, mark it, he says the common doctrine; (and who ever
doubted that the Booksellers meant that very thing?) Thence let me use this
one Argument, That doctrine which in M. Goodwins judgment, evacuates and turns
into weakness and folly all that gracious counsel of the H. Ghost, etc. were it
to be found in, or regularly deduced from the Scriptures, it were a just ground
to any intelligent man to question their Authority, and whether they were from
God or no: But such is the common doctrine of absolute and infallible
perseverance, Ergo, I confess the syllogism is somewhat long, (But M. Goodwin
is a Ciceronian, he uses to dispute in words at length, not in figures). The
major I know he will grant; the minor he cannot deny, it is his own words; and
I hope he will suffer the conclusion to pass peaceably. And if so, M. Goodwin
does still lie under the just imputation of that odious consequence, which
according to these other expressions of his is this; If the Scripture should
maintain the common doctrine of absolute and infallible perseverance, it were a
just ground to any rational man to doubt of its divine Authority; which, let
any sober man judge what it differs from the words which the Booksellers use.

Nay more plainly, That such unchangeableness is a necessary and unavoidable
consequence of the common doctrine of perseverance, He often says in his
voluminous discourse, and in hIs Letter to M. Caryl, annexed to his last piece,
p. 78. upon this very particular occasion, Nor do I wrong your doctrine of
perseverance, to the value of the least hair on your head, because evident it
is, that without SUCH an UNCHANGEABLENESSE supposed, the said doctrine will
neither have footing nor foundation to support it. From hence with M Goodwins
favor, I will try one syllogism, If the doctrine of such unchangeableness, and
the common doctrine of perseverance are inseparably joined together, and the
one inevitably flows from the other, then that consequence which follows from
the one, follows also from the other: But the doctrine of such
unchangeableness, and the common doctrine of perseverance, are inseparably
conjoined, etc. nay, are to M. Goodwin one of the same. Ergo, the Booksellers
did him no wrong, when they fastened his odious consequence to the common
doctrine of Gods unchangeableness, which he there fastens to such
unchangeableness.

Nor does M. Goodwin wash off the guilt of this consequence in his Letter to M.
Caryl, where he has these words; The style of the discourse is built upon
this foundation, That God cannot deny himself, he cannot blaspheme himself. If
therefore any Book contains any thing blasphemous against God, the divine
Authority of it might justly be questioned. But Mr. Goodwin should consider,
that it is one thing when a Book contains something which does expressly or
undenyably blaspheme God, (then M. Goodwins reasoning were tolerable) but if it
contain it only doubtfully, and by a remote and controverted consequence, it is
not modesty (to use no harsher expression) in M. Goodwin to say, if any thing
be said in the Scripture which his weak and dark (so all men's are) and
prejudicate apprehehensions conceive repugnant to Gods holiness, etc. he may
rationally doubt of the divinity of it: And truly Sir, to speak impartially, if
any man who believes the truth of the doctrine of perseverance, should use such
expressions as these, If any unchangeableness of Gods love were to be found in,
or regularly deduced from the Scriptures, it were just ground to any rational
man to doubt of its divine Authority, I should both question his modesty, and
less value his judgment. And yet I think, nay certain I am, he might show as
fair and fairer cards from reason and rational consequence, against the
doctrine of Gods changeableness, then you can against the unchangeableness of
his love. I could tell Mr. Goodwin of very considerable Authors, that in their
highest debates on the behalf of the truth, when reason pleads the most
strongly for their doctrines, yet have so much sobriety, as to put in this
Proviso, That if God in Scripture evidently say such a thing, they will receive
it and conclude, that there reason mistook in this, (as it commonly does in
other things) and I do not mean Lutherans neither. And it is observable, the
many words you spend to take off the odiousness of your consequence, do not at
all prevail with M. Caryl to eat his words, nor in the least to mitigate his
censure of this passage. So that all these things considered, M. Goodwin was
justly charged with denying, not only such unchangeableness, but Gods
unchangeableness, i. e. in that sense in which the Orthodox asserted it.

But I have not yet done, I must needs have a little conference with Mr.
Goodwin about some passages in his Book. And first, as for that tartness which
you complain of in the language of the letter which the Booksellers sent you,
they do ingenuously acknowledge their error in it, and as I have heard from
them are ready to retract it, setting you a copy what you ought to do in the
like case. M. Goodwins pen it is thought has been as much dipped in gall as
another man's. Your scurrilous language toward the learned and reverend M.
Walker, and in particular your bitter recipe which you prescribe for him, as
for one that is not co^pos sui; Your elegant variety of taunts, reproaches, and
most contumelious expressions toward M. Jenkins, which for the benefit of the
Reader, he has collected together in his Blind Guide, cum multis aliis, may
make M. Goodwins cheeks change color as often as he charge the Booksellers or
any others with scurrilous and unseemly language.

For what you say in favor of all cursed and damnable doctrins, I mean for the
toleration and against the suppression of them, I shall hardly think that M.
Goodwin is a man of so incompetent judgment, that his own conscience is
satisfied with what he has said, which I am the rather induced to believe,
because I remember M. Goodwins (...), (so it was without any (...)) wherein he
has set his wits, and the Scripture too upon the rack to maintain that Monster
of universal liberty of conscience, (as it is commonly, though unduely called).
This Book M. Edwards did answer satisfyingly and convincingly in the judgment
of any impartial man: A solid reply whereunto the world did and does expect ere
ever M. Goodwin appeared upon the stage again in that cause, or else by silence
a confession (which I am confident is the truth, and so I believe are thousands
besides me) that he cannot answer it. For this I have observed to be one of his
(...), to answer those Books which are more sinewous and unanswerable, no
otherwise then by contempt and silence. And so it seems M. Goodwin resolves to
answer those two acute and learned Doctors, Dr. Owen, and Dr. Kendall, whose
labors have had the high approbation of diverse learned men, no whit inferior
to M. Goodwin, nor his congregation neither (though it is true, all men's tastes
are not of the same temper, and non est disputandum de gustibus.) But, Sir,
give me leave to tell you, that if you resolve to answer those two champions in
that manner, you will give many more cause to think what some already do, and
what Sir Francis Nethersole called you, at least that you are not many miles
distant from his (...), self-condemned.

And now I have mentioned that ingenious Knight, I cannot but let the world
know what kind of answer they may expect from Mr. Goodwin to Dr. Kendal, etc.
by representing one of your answers to his charge (by which you may see that
Mr. Goodwin abhorres an ingenuous tractation, as much as he does an high
Presbyterian): Yet let not M. Goodwin twit me in the teeth with Carolizing,
Scotizing, (as he does M. Jenkins, telling him also of his bands, etc. most
disingenuously and barbarously, but most of all unbecoming him, who professes
himself to be a man of most exquisite constitution, and full of humility,
ingenuity, etc.) for I mention this only, to show with what trash M. Goodwin
can (at least makes many believe he does) satisfy himself and his credulous
congregation. Sir Francis accused M. Goodwin of inconsistency in his judgment,
that in his Anti-Cavalierism, pa. 7. he has these expressions, As for offering
violence to the Kings person, etc. we leave the proof of that to the Jesuits
-- we conceive it to be the just Prerogative of the persons of Kings IN WHAT
CASE SOEVER to be secure from the violence of men, and their lives to be as
consecrated Corn meet to be reaped and gathered only by the hand of God
himself. This passage Sir Francis opposes to M. Goodwins justification of that
design of putting the King to the death. To this Mr. Goodwin replies, not by an
ingenuous acknowledgement of his weakness, etc. (which would better have
becomed him) but by this profound answer, as you have it in his Pamphlet called
The unrighteous Judge, p. 9, 10. That he meant it only of violence offered from
private men, not from Magistrates, and that what Magistrates do in a way of
Justice, God himself may be said to do. Thus M. Goodwins just Prerogative of
Kings, (which no man that has not his senses sodden into Trapezuntius his
temper, to use Mr. Goodwins own phrase, doubts but he meant of something (...),
proper to them, and I am persuaded his conscience tells him so) is levelled to
that universal privilege, which even the vilest Rogue enjoyes, i. e. that it
is unlawful for their lives to be taken away by any other then the hand of the
Magistrate. Which is so manifest an (...), or self-contradiction, that he that
runs may read it. By this judge of this great Doctors (...), and (...), I will
not say (...).

One or two passages more I cannot but observe: 1. His (...), that I say not
(...), nor (...), p. 35. He brings in the testimony of one (whom he calls as
learned, grave, and judicious as any English born at this day) on the behalf of
his Book about the Authority of the Scripture; That it was as good a Book as
any was written since the Apostles days. This testimony says M. Goodwin (I
confess, if you do not many others do) may be as much too wide on the right
hand, as your malignant imputation is on the left. Note how cautelously he
speaks it; he dare not say, it is too wide, but it may be, it is not impossible
I confess, I thought Mr. Goodwin would have veiled the Bonnet to Mornay,
Grotius, (or at least to his Camero upon that subject) though they have not
such a (...), nor such a mixture of errors there (that I remember) as Mr.
Goodwin has. But it seems (as he speaks of Dr. Owen in relation to Dr. Kendal,
p. 43.) he reserved his high thoughts for his own writings.

2. I Observe his (...), when he is charged with this absurd assertion, That
knowledge, etc. is not attributed to God, any otherwise then eyes. It is not
(says he) for want of ignorance, that Dr. Kendall, Mr. Pool, and others
contend against me for such a saying. He cites a saying of Austins, We speak
few things properly of God. Sed quid hoc (...). We acknowledge this to be a
great truth, but this knowledge is one of those few: And for what Mr. Goodwin
adds, It argues extreme oscitancy for a man to think that they speak more
honorably of God, who ascribe unto him knwoledg properly as it is found in
men, or other creatures, then they who attribute the same unto him by way of
eminency and transcendency of perfection, free from all the deficiency in men,
etc. But what a piece of oscitancy, what (...), is this, that Master Goodwin
should not understand, or else contrary to his understanding, relate our
opinion? (utrum horum mavis, accipe): Did ever the Orthodox say, that knowledge
is in God, as in men? etc. Do they not free it from all imperfections? as much,
Yea more, I am sure, then Master Goodwin? witness his imputing to God
ignorance of future contingences, more Sociniano. But Master Goodwin would do
well to rub up his Philosophical notions, and to consider, that knowledge is
not the less properly knowledge, because it is freed from imperfections, but
rather more properly. Shall any man absurdly say, God is not properly holy,
just, wise, merciful, because these are not in God as they are in the creature?
(...). I shall trouble Master Goodwin no farther, only thus: If he answer me as
he has answered Sir F^ancis Nethersole, or Master Jenkins, etc. I shall not
trouble either him or the world with any Reply, but that which is his constant
refuge in arduous cases, I mean, that of silence. This only being added for
parting, if Mr. Goodwin does not moderate the heat of his carriage and
expression, let him take heed lest some deal by him as Lubbertus did by
Vorstius (one of his Masters) who wrote a Book and entitled it Non aginta
novem errores, etc. The ninety nine errors of Conradus Vorstius, for some
conceive Master Goodwins works will afford a Counter-part.

FINIS.

