An Apology for the Sentiment of the Modalists; and a Defense of the Scriptural
Terms.
TO defend the Doctrines of the Trinity and Incarnation requires not many
Arguments, when these matters are rightly taken, for in order to vindicate
them, they need only be represented and put into a true light. As for the
Doctrine of the Trinity, it has been sufficiently cleared, even in the Pamphlet
entitled, The Consequences of the Modalists System, p. 8, etc. For there these
Remarks are made concerning it The Divine Intellect, or Mind and Understanding,
is the Cause o^ (...) the Divine Wisdom; and from both the Divine Intellect and
the (...) does proceed the Divine Will or Power, which is the same thing in a
perfect Being, for God does whatsoever he pleases. These three Properties,
Intellect, Wisdom, Power, comprehend the whole Divine Essence God may be
particularly and distinctly considered with respect to each of these three
Properties, and thus being thrice considered may be called three Persons,
according to the original Signification of the word Person, which imports a
Being considered with respect to a certain Capacity or Property. The first
Property being the Cause of the second, and the third proceeding from the two
former, the first Person is therefore called the Father, the second the Son,
the third the Spirit that proceeds from the Father and Son. Thus the Orthodox
Expressions are susceptible of a good Sense; and pertainly, meaning this Sense
by these Terms, it cannot be denied but that the Sentiment of the Modalists is
true: It is actually true, that there is in God on infinite Understanding,
Wisdom, and Will, etc.

And as for the Doctrine of the (...), one would think there could be no great
difficulty in it, intending thereby, as the Catholic Church does, that the
Divine Wisdom so dwells in Christ, as always to assist, illuminate-conduct
and actuate him; Christ thus being, God, in respect of the Indwelling Divinity,
which is in an content manner manifested both i^ and by out Lord Jesus Christ,
as also in respect of his representing God to us, and of his acting in the
stead of God, at the Helm of the Universe

Yet some weighty Objections are here made; as that this confounds Christ with
God, and is the occasion that the Names of Christ are given to God, and Christ
is taken to be literally the most High God; as if from a Being's dwelling in a
Temple, it followed that the House or Temple is literally that Being which
dwells in it.

Now it is to be observed, in answer hereunto, that the Doctrine of the
Incarnation does not necessarily confound Christ with God; for all that can be
understood thereby, agreeably to the System of the Modalists, who are generally
esteemed to be the most Orthodox, is, that our Savior is both God and the Man
Christ Jesus, or that the Man Jesus Christ and God are most eminently united
together in the work of Salvation, in that Christ is made the Head of the
Church and placed at the Helm of the Universe, and God constantly assists and
actuates him, to enable him to save those that come to God through him; and thus
Christ is evidently distinguished from God, by Christ properly being meant the
Man Jesus.

Indeed it is very improper to give to God the Names of Christ, as it seem to
be done in these Invocations, O Christ hear us, O Son of David have mercy upon
us, etc. But the Orthodox do readily acknowledge the Inconveniency of these
Expressons; Athanasius himself declares, that it is always God, and not the
Creature, that is worshipped by the Orthodox, ( 3d Oration against the Arians)
so that these Invocations are to be undersTood as implying this Sense, O thou
who dwell in Christ, or in the Son of David, hear us, and hve mercy upon us,
etc. And undoubtedly it were well, if the said Pra^^^ were thus expressed. Most
properly the Gospel-Method is to pray (...) there in the Name, or through the
Mediation and Intercession of his Son, our Lord Jesus Christ; so that after
having said in the beginning of the Litany, O God our Creator have mercy upon
us, O God our Redeemer have mercy upon us, O God our Comfortere have mercy upon
us, it would be most proper to address the rest of the Prayer particularly to
the Father, who eminently sustains the Majesty and Character of the Deity. The
ordinary Expressions that follow from taking another Method, seem often
uncouth, and much must tacitly be supplied thereto, not to take them in a wrong
Sense, as the Vulgar are very apt to do; men of ordinary Capacities not being
accustomed to nice Distinctions, and not being able to make any deep
Reflecttions of themselves. Besides, it is certain that when the Father is
worshipped, the whole Deity is worshipped, and our Prayers then cannot be
defective or imperfect.

As for Christ's being or not being the most High God, that is in a great
measure a Dispute of Words. The Deity that dwells in Christ, is certainly the
most High God: If then by Christ be meant both the Man Jesus, and the Deity
that dwells in or that constantly assisteth him; no dobut, in that sense,
Christ is the most High God. But if Christ be taken as an Appellation peculiar
to the Man Jesus, as it seems to be in Scripture; then it is most proper to say
with the Scripture, that in Christ Jesus dwells the Fullness of the Godhead:
to esteem otherwise, were to assert that an Appellation peculiar to the Manhood
is peculiar to the Godhead. No body will say that a Man, as a Man, is literally
the most high God; but our Salvation being wrought both by the Man Christ Jesus
and God that dwells in him, it is certain that our Savior is both God and
Man, as sometime several Men make one Admiral, etc.

Ideas may arbitrarily be joined to certain Terms, and then those Terms are
understood according to those Ideas. Accordingly the Church has used the Name
Christ, to denote both the Man Jesus Christ, and the Deity that manifests it
self in and by him; and has used the Term Incarnation to signify the Union of
God with Jesus Christ. In that sense the Church says, that Christ is God, and
that God is become Man. But she means to be sure, and ought to mean no more but
what may be worded in the Expressions themselves of the Scripture; which
Expressions, or the like, in Articles of Communion, are even to be left in that
general Sense which they are susceptible of, that every man may be allowed the
Judgment of discerning. These Considerations must be before our eyes, whenever
we will give a rational account of the Orthodox System.

It is objected by some, That, meaning what has been said by the Incarnation,
and on that account giving to Christ the Honor and Name of God, the like might
be done to other Creatures, which God likewise assists or enables to perform
their several Officers, and in and by which God manifests his Wisdom, his Glory
and Majesty. (Thus any one of the Prophets might have been said to be God, and
God incarnate, for God was with them, and inspired them; the Temple of
Jerusalem might also, on these Principles, have been said to be God, for God in
an extraordinary manner dwelt therein; and the same, in fine, may be said of
the Sun and Moon, and the whole World, for therein and thereby God manifests
his Wisdom and Glory) Yet it would certainly be Idolatry, on these or the like
accounts, to call any Parts of the World, or any Prophets, or even any Angels
or glorified Saints, God; and undoubtedly it would be damnable Idolatry, and a
Work of the Flesh, to take them for God, and honor them as God: Why then
should it not also be reckoned Idolatry, on this account to call Christ God,
and to take him for the most High God, because God dwells with him, assists
him, and manifests his Wisdom in him?

If this Difficulty be resolved, that is all that the Orthodox need to do, and
indeed all they can do. For to pretend a more gross Incarnation than what has
been owned and asserted, would not only be contrary to the Truth, to Reason and
Scripture, but would also be a Petitio Principii, seeing that incontestably it
is not cler and evident, to say no more of it. If any man would lay it down as
certainly revealed in Scripture, that there are three infinite and divine
Spirits (which indeed would be to assert three Gods) and that one of these
infinite Spirits is incarnate in a human Body after the grossest manner
imaginable, and would make the Belief of this an Article of Communion; he would
herein do no better than beg his own Assertion, which is denied him, and so
would set himself up for the Judge of Controversies, and deny to other
Christians their Judgment of discerning. That cannot then and ought not to be
our Refuge, in order to resolve the foregoing Difficulty.

And if God is but one Spirit, as the Modalists with good reason assert, there
can be no ground left to take the Incarnation in a gross Sense. For it cannot
be said that this one Spirit is thus grossly incarnate, for then the whole
Godhead were incarnate, which is contrary to the Notion of the Orthodox. The
Orthodox hold that it is the Divine Wisdom only that is incarnate. The
Incarnation therefore can reasonably be taken but to imply was has been said,
namely, That the Divine Wisdom so dwells in Christ, as always to assist,
illuminate, conduct and actuate him; and that the Divine Majesty is manifested,
and is in an extraordinary manner present in Christ, our Lord Jesus Christ
representing God to us, and acting in the stead of God at the Helm of the
Universe.

This last Particular, which is the very Essence of what is meant by the
Incarnation rationally understood, is not in the least taken notice of in the
foregoing Objection. The Objection supposes, that by the Incarnation is only
meant a Manifestation of the Divine Wisdom in, and a Cooperation with Christ,
or the like. And indeed if it was so, the Prophets, the Temple of Jerusalem,
the Sun and Moon, and all other Creatures which God co-operates with, and in
and by which he manifests his Wisdom, might be called God, as well as Christ,
tho not with altogether so great reason, seeing the Divine Cooperation and
Manifestation is greater in Christ than in any other Creature, and may be said
in him to be extraordinary. But that which altogether distinguishes Christ
from all other Creatures, which makes the Divine Wisdom and Majesty most
extraordinarily present in him, and which may authorize the giving him the Name
of the most High God, and the honoring and worshipping the most High God in
him, is, That this Man Christ Jesus (in whom dwells the Divine Wisdom, or in
whom the Divine Wisdom is manifested, and whom the Divine Wisdom always
assists, illuminates, conducts and actuates) in a most eminent manner
represents God to us, being the Heir of all things, and Lord of Lords, having a
Supreme Authority over all Creatures, ruling and governing all things under
God, and acting in the stead of God at the Helm of the Universe, all things
being subjected unto him by God's Decree. It is God's own Authority and Majesty
that he is invested with. He may therefore be said to be God in that respect,
and this Divine Majesty and Authority may be adored in him.

This Consideration was altogether overlooked in the Objection; and yet this
Article (that all Power is committed to Christ, that he represents God to us,
or is God's Vicegerent, and acts in the stead of God at the Helm of the
Universe) is not and cannot be denied by any that receive the Holy Scripture as
their Rule. Herein therefore we are not guilty of any Petitio Principii. We
mean neither more nor less than all those must needs mean, and do actually
mean, who own the Scripture. We do not therefore take away from any body the
Judgment of discerning. We do not act as if we were to be, and as if we were
actually magisterial Judges of Controversies. We insist only on what is clear
and undeniable.

It may perhaps be said, That tho Christ be invested with Supreme Authority
over all Creatures, yet his Authority is not absolutely supreme like that of
God, seeing he is himself subject to God; and it is not plain and undeniable
that ever the Scripture expressly calls Christ the most High God, or expressly
orders that Christ should be looked upon as the most High God: the Modalists
therefore cannot enjoin that Practice, or the use of such Expressions, without
violating the Gospel-Terms of Communion, or without setting themselves up as
magisterial Judges of Controversies, and without taking from others the
Judgment of discerning, etc.

Now, in answer to this, it cannot be denied but that we should all keep to the
Expressions and general Sense of Scripture. It is the Sentiment it self of the
Modalists which I vindicate, and not any thing else. I have shown, that the
Modalists mean neither more nor less than all those do, who receive the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament. If any do scruple the use of any
unscriptural Expressions, God forbid that I should appear as an Adversary
against them. But this only I say with Athanasius, that we do not worship the
Creature, but that it is God we worship in Christ.

Thus to use a Comparison, tho somewhat imperfect, the Queen's Majesty is
honored in her Viceroy in Ireland. As long as the Viceroy does truly discharge
his Office according to his Commission, he truly bears the Character of, and
truly represents the Royal Authority. It would be impertinent to dispute,
whether then the Viceroy's Authority be truly the Supreme Authority it self.
Indeed the Man himself is subject to another, but so is not the Authority by
which he acts: Certainly the Authority by which he acts is the Supreme
Authority, and therefore the Supreme Authority ought to be respected in him.
Here perhaps men may differ in the manner of expressing themselves; but yet all
those who acknowledge the Queen's Authority, and who therefore obey her
Viceroy's Commands, according to her Will expressed in the Commission, cannot
but actually agree in the thing, and mean actually the same thing. This
Comparison, how imperfect soever it be, does in a sufficient measure illustrate
the matter before us. We may say, that Christ is the most High God; but by this
his Supreme Godhead meaning the Divine Authority thta appears in him, we say no
more than what others mean, when they express themselves in other Terms,
namely, that in him dwells the Fullness of the Godhead.

God will not indeed have his Glory be given to another; neither do we ascribe
Divinity but to God himself: For still the Authority by which Christ acts, is
God's own Authority; and we do not of our own accord, or without God's warrant,
assert it to be in Christ. Now when God says he will not give his Glory to
another, the meaning visibly is this, that he wills not that Men of themselves,
and according to their own Fancies, should dispose of the Honor and Glory that
is due to him. As for God himself, he may communicate of his own without doing
any wrong; and his meaning was not that he never would thus communicate
himself, he has not tied his own hands; the question was not what himself might
do, but what his Creatures were not to presume of themselves to do. Thus the
Queen of England may say she will not give her Glory to another, and yet she
may order the same Honors to be paid to her Viceroy which are only due to her,
which indeed terminate on her Majesty wherever they are paid according to her
Order, but which could not lawfully be rendered to her in the Person of him who
is her Viceroy, before her Declaration of her Will and Pleasure in this matter
and the delivering of the Viceroy's Commission. Notwithstanding this saying of
God, that he will not give his Glory to another, the Orthodox believe that he
has given himself and so his Glory to the Man Christ Jesus. Howbeit, after all
it is certain God has but so given his Glory to Jesus Christ, as that it still
remains his own Glory, and the said Glory after all truly is ascribed to and
terminates on God.

Tho God's Lieutenant, inasmuch as he represents God to us, be termed God,
because the Supreme Authority he appears invested with is God's own Authority;
yet it cannot truly be said that we make a Creature God, or hold one for God
that is only a Creature: for it is God or the Divine Majesty and Supreme
Authority we consider and adore in Jesus Christ, for in Jesus Christ dwells
the Fullness of the Godhead; and when we say that Jesus Christ is God, we mean
it in respect of the Deity, or the Divine Wisdom, Majesty and Authority that
dwell in him. If any think it not so proper upon that account to call Christ
the most High God, it is true it would be most proper to content our selves to
say with the Scripture, that the Fullness of the Godhead dwells in the Man
Christ Jesus. Howbeit, the Deity that dwells in the Man Christ Jesus, and is
communicated to him as has been said, is truly and properly the most High God,
or the Majesty, Wisdom and Supreme Authority of the most High God; and that is
all we mean by the Orthodox Expressions, but we do not intend that it is the
Creature that is the most High God.

But (to prove that it is Idolatry to call Christ God, and to honor him as
God, upon the account that God dwells in him by Manifestation of his Wisdom
in and by him, and on the account that God constantly assisteth him in the
discharge of his Office of representing God and acting in the stead of God at
the Helm of the Universe) some urge, That it would be treasonable to give the
Name of the Sovereign to the Viceroy, on any account whatsoever, whether upon
the account of representing, or upon the account of being upheld by the
Sovereign, or upon the account of the Sovereign's Majesty appearing and
dwelling in him, etc.

To this I shall reply thus much. In that case the fault would be only in the
Expression, but not in the Sentiment it self; and so this would be only a
Controversy of Words. And besides, there is this difference in the present
Comparison, that in an earthly Sovereign, who is a finite and imperfect Being,
the Sovereign's Wisdom, Majesty and Authority are different from the
Sovereign's own Person; but it is an Axiom of Divines, That every thing in God
is God, and it is upon this Axiom that it is said that Christ is God, upon the
account that the Divine Wisdom and Majesty in a supreme degree appear and dwell
in him; or else by Christ we mean both the Man Jesus Christ, and the Divine
Wisdom and Majesty that dwell in him.

Howbeit, as to the Practice of honoring Christ as God, that is countenanced
by the Example of the Viceroy's being honored like the Sovereign. In the
Person of the Viceroy the Sovereign is honored; and the Scripture likewise
commands, that every Knee should bow to Christ to the Glory of God. The Viceroy
in public Solemnities wherein he represents the Sovereign, might be ddress'd
unto, as being the Sovereign upon the account of the Sovereign's Authority by
which he acts, and which is present in him or dwells in him, whilst he
discharges his Office: If that were usual, it would not at all seem strange or
unreasonable.

There is yet this difference in the said Comparison, that an earthly Viceroy
may prove a Rebel, but this cannot be said of Christ. We are sure that Christ's
Laws are God's Laws, Christ's Kingdom is God's Kingdom, Christ's Majesty is
God's Majesty.

Christ does not require of us any Services that are carnal or vicious, and
that may be termed Works of the Flesh, as did the Pagan Gods. The Gods of the
Heathens were worshipped by the Slaughter of human Sacrifices, by Prostitutions,
and by other corrupt and immoral Practices. Christ commands us to worship the
Father in Spirit and in Truth, and directs us to ask all things of God in his
name, or as his Disciples, and for his sake. And the Orthodox declare, that
this is all they intend to do, howsoever they express themselves. What Idolatry
then, or what Work of the Flesh is here?

There can be supposed, one would think, but an Impropriety of Speech, in
saying that the Man Jesus Christ is truly and properly the most High God,
meaning that the most High God, or the Divine Wisdom, Majesty and Supreme
Authority do truly and properly appear in him. Howbeit, the Meaning and
Sentiment of the Modalists is certainly good. And now the Result of all that
has been said, seems to be as follows.

1. That some Persons may condescend to the use of unscriptural Terms. 2. That
others, who are no less sincere, may scruple the use of them. 3. That those, on
whom it is incumbent, should establish the Scriptural or Gospel Terms of Union.
1. Some Persons may condescend to the Use of unscriptural Expressions. For
this the Reader may be referred to the Half-sheet that is entitled, The
Scripturalists Christian Condescension considered. The Reasons of this
Condescension are, that it seems the Orthodox Expressions may in some measure
be taken in a Latitudinarian Sense, and that whatsoever admits of a tolerable
Construction, tho otherwise uncouth and unscriptural, may be submitted to for
Peace sake, till Men at least may have had the time and means to be better
informed, and whilst the Gospel Terms of Communion are not yet sufficiently
known. Those who are persuaded of the Validity of these Reasons, may use this
Condescension, tho on the other hand they believe, that the unscriptural
Expressions are extremely improper, and subject to great Inconveniences. They
may study to take these Expressions in a good sense, that they may use them
with Devotion: But seeing it is Necessity in great part, in this case, that
justifies their Compliance, they ought not to affect the use of them more than
needs must; and surely they ought not so to plead for the unscriptural Terms,
as to give them the preference before the Terms of Scripture, or as to condemn
them that scruple the Use of unscriptural Expressions. They ought not to
accommodate themselves to unscriptural Expressions out of worldly Interest, or
that they may enjoy Ease and Pleasure in this World, (that were certainly to be
in a state of Damnation) but that they may labor more usefully, and may be in
a greater Capacity to promote the Truth. They ought therefore to embrace all
occasions to do this, and they ought to do it zealously and strenuously, if
they will save their Souls. It Is wonderful indeed how Men generally are wanting
in what they might do for the Truth! But yet, all charitable Condescension
notwithstanding, they ought not to be ashamed of or to deny the Truth, but must
be ready, if occasion be, to sacrifice even themselves for the Truth's sake. A
Man that writes Institutions concerning the Orthodox Doctrines, may profess
that the Dissent and Controversy (on both sides) is only from a Misapprehension
of one another's Sense and Meaning, etc. Thus some Persons may conscientiously
condescend to the use of unscriptural Terms.

2. Others, who are no less sincere, may scruple the Use of these Expressions.
They may think them passable in Articles of Peace, but doubt whether they are
reverent enough in public Acts of Religion. They may fear that it is too
uncouth to say, O Son of David have Mercy on us, meaning, O God who dwell in
the Son of David have Mercy on us, etc. Especially seeing how those who stretch
the Christian Condescension so far, are accused of Hypocrisy by some Writers,
they are loath to appear obnoxious to so foul an Aspersion. Besides, they may
reckon that Men have had sufficient time to consider and bethink themselves;
and seeing that all this while they have not seriously applied themselves to
the means of Information in a matter of this vast moment, or have slighted and
have not at all regarded all that has been written, they may think that they
ought to go out from among them, and look on them as Men that are resolved to
shut up the Key of Knowledge.

3. Those, on whom it is incumbent, should establish the Scriptural or Gospel
Terms of Union. This is particularly made out in the Irenicum Magnum, in a
Sheet concerning Subscriptions to Articles of Communion, and another entitled,
The Consequences of the Modalists System. This Temperament of Scriptural Terms
is used in our Liturgy, with respect to the Questions concerning
Predestination. It would not be more difficult to content our selves with the
general Terms of Scripture in all other respects. If we do it not, we leave
Stones of stumbling in the way, we needlessly cause Divisions and are guilty of
Schism, and contradict the fundamental Principles of Protestants. We reproach
the Scripture, as if it were not a perfect or sufficient Rule. We leave not to
others the Liberty of discerning. We act as if we were infallible. We set up
our selves as magisterial Judges of Controversies. We exercise Dominion over
other men's Faith. We oppress men's Consciences, and endanger their Salvation. In
fine, we take away the Key of Knowledge, and run the hazar of crushing the
Truth, and of being found violently to fight against God.

FINIS.

