20. Febr. 1694/5.
The Argument and Reasons of the Brethren of Trinity-house, touching the Breach
in the Level near Purfleet in Essex, whereby the River of Thames is much
Damnify'd, and the Navigation thereof greatly obstructed, and in danger of
being wholly destroyed.
THat the Cause which produced the said Breach, was not from the weakness of
the Sea-Banks, defect of Sluices, or want of care in the Proprietors of the Land
to preserve their defenses against the Encroachments and Inundations of the
River, in which Reach the Tides are very rapid, and the weather often so
dangerous, that for their own safety-sake, they are forced to be more on their
guard than other People; wherefore they keep their Sea-banks in better repair
and are at a greater expense to secure their Land on that Level than most
others. If this misfortune had befallen them through any neglect or default of
theirs, why did not the Commissioners of Sewers foresee the Danger by their
Surveyors, and direct timely remedy? Or the Water-Bayliffs, who are the
Conservator's Instruments, discover the growing evil, and Caution the
Proprietors before it was to late; for defects of that kind increase by
degrees, and for the most part give warning enough before the mischief happens.
But neither the Commissioners of Sewers, who are very regular in their Surveys
and severe in their Injunctions, nor the VVater-Bayliffs, who are the
Conservator's Officers, and are so very sharp and mindful of their Business,
that Complaints are often made of their double diligence, are in fault, so that
it cannot be presumed that they had in any thing neglected their duty; nor the
Proprietors, whose interest it is to preserve their own Estates by keeping the
Banks in good repair, are in the least degree chargeable, because it has been
proved, that tho they had all contributed their utmost joint Care and Forces in
their several stations to have prevented it, this great disaster had in all
moral Probability notwithstanding happened: In as much as no humane foresight
or wisdom can obviate a mischief that has never at any time before fallen out;
(and such was this Inundation) for tho the Banks of this Level were of a
competent height, such as that no objection was ever made to them, nor any
Experience or Observation from any Tides or VVeather, (in the memory of Man)
has at any time heretofore been observed, to give them jealousy; yet it
pleased God to permit at that time such a Deluge and swell of a Tide, as
surmounted by many feet the Tops of the said Banks, and (not as has been
untruly objected) Broken them down through any neglect of those whose duty it
was to have kept them in better repair. This Deluge, then filling the Level,
was by the Banks that were designed to keep the water out, made a deep standing
Lake of water, which had no way to issue back or discharge it self but by
forcing out the Banks that kept it in, which upon the coming of the Ebb, and
falling away of the Tide came to Pass; that great weight of water so confined,
at length bursting out where the Breach now is, which was the Cause and the
only Occasion of the damage to the River, and to those Gentlemen who are the
sufferers, and who now humbly apply for redress to that Authority from which
alone they can justly hope for Succor. People who are undone by Fire and
Conflagrations are the objects of Parliamentary Care, and are constantly heard
and relieved; this Calamity was the hand of God, and no humane Power could have
prevented it: Fire and water are merciless Enemies, and the sufferers by the
one seem to challenge as much right to compassion from the Public as the other.

If the Remedy of the damage which the River of Thames has sustained, and the
Navigation thereof by this Breach (which is only a Consequence and Coincidence
of the Deluge and Inundation of this Level) should be deemed chargeable on the
Proprietors of the Land, while perhaps they might be able to drain the same for
their own Private use, by methods that will come by two third parts cheaper
than those that are proposed, and found necessary for the Rivers better
conservation. If this should be their Sentence, I say, it would seem very
grievous, and no body in time will think Land on the Thames Level worth the
holding, and it may come to pass, that by a few such Presidents the Banks will
be totally neglected, and the River consequently swallowed up and lost in the
said Level. For as by taking this Land heretofore out of the Thames (which is
all under High Water mark) the Channel was at first begotten, and Navigation
obtained, so by losing it to the River again, the depth of Water and the
Navigation will be lost.

It was therefore their Opinion, That the Proprietors of the Level will be
charged very sufficiently, if over and above the money they have been already
out of Purse, amounting to at least 3200 l. together with the loss of their
Land for many years to come after it shall be drained, if the said proprietors
be further made liable to restore and secure their own Sea-banks: while the
repair of the main Breach which brings a National profit seems to call for a
National expense; in as much as that for the sake of the Rivers conservation
only that work is designed, and forasmuch also as it requires an expense by
many degrees Superior to what may be computed simply necessary for the
draining the Level. The charge of this Work therefore, which is to obtain a
public benefit, and is foreign to the uses of drayning the Land seems to call
for public Compassion, and to require a public Purse to Compass. And not only
a public Purse, but public Care too, least by bold and unexperienced
Undertakers, who cannot possibly make a due judgment of the difficulty and
danger of such Works, the Nation, by a proposal of saving a little Money (which
works of this kind will by no means suffer) may chance to incurr a much greater
Expense by the loss of all their Labor and Charge: The undertaking thereby
being rendered much more difficult and expenssive than at first, and the River
of Thames damnified a new by the miscarriage of such slight and ineffectual
projects, in as much as all the matter whereof their Defenses are to be
composed, must necessarily, in case of any disaster, be driven by the force of
the water into the Channel.


