The Declaration, And APOLOGY of the PROTESTANT PEOPLE That is, Of the
Noblemen, Barrons, Gentlemen, Burgesses, and Commons of all sorts, Now in Arms
within the Kingdom of Scotland.

PSALM LXVIII. V. 1. 2. Let God arise; let his enemies be scattered; let them
also, that hate him, flee before him; as smoke is driven away, so drive them
away; as wax melts before the fire, so let the wicked perish at the presence
of God. Reprinted more exactly then formerly conform to the True Copye.

The Declaration, and Apology of the Protestant People; That is of the
Noblemen, Barrons, Gentlemen, Burgesses, And Commons of all sorts, now in Arms
within the Kingdom of Scotland, with the concurrence of their true and faithful
Pastors, and of several Gentlemen of the English Nation, joined with them in
the same cause; For defense and releif of their Lives, Rights, and Liberties,
and recovery and reestablishment of the true Protestant Religion, in behalf of
them selves, and all that shall Join with, and adhere to them.
They must be altogether strangers, or very little concerned in the Christian
world, who (after all that the Nations and Churches about have Seen, of the
Lords mighty hand and streatched-out arm in the late wars betuixt King Charles
the First. and his People and Parliaments of Scotland, England and Irland.
Against the then Conspyreings of Popery and Tyranny, to the ruin of true
Religion and Liberty; The wonderful advancement of the Gospel and Kingdom of
our Lord Jesus within these Kingdoms, that thereupon ensued: With the general
refreshment, joy, and security of all the Protestant Churches abroad, that
thence redounded: And the no less rooted and firm Loyalty of the same people,
who notwithstanding of their long bloody and fatal contendings with the father,
Did Yet upon reasonable fair and just treaties, concluded with all the
assurance, that either Religion honor or gratitude could promise, call back
and restore Charles the 2d. his sone to his thron and empire) Are not fully
convinced and satisfied, that considering the perpetual contradictings and
counteractings of all these sacred and solemn engadgments that imediatly and
ever since have been practiced; the whole reign of the aforsaid Charles the 2d.
(through the sinistrous and subtle influences of a wicked and popish party,
now manifestly discovered) was a constant and uniform course of perjury
apoftacy, and violence: Begun with open rebellion against God, The rescinding,
not only of particular laws, but, by an un-paralled most un-politick and
pernicious device, of whole unexceptionable parliaments, for the space of
tuenty seven years preceding, notwithstanding both our Religion and liberties
were therein expressly, legally and well provided for; and the cruel shedding of
the best Protestant blood, in the most unjust execution of the Late Marquis of
Argyll, and many other worthies, contrar to all Law and reason: Carried on by
the smiting and casting out of more faithful and pious Pastors, and scattering
and dissipating more true flocks and followers of Christ, than was done in
most of the ten primitive persecutions, and the diludgeing of these Lands with
all villainous debauchries and abominable licentiousness, to the very
profligating of conscience morality and common honesty from among men: And
thence forward accomplished by a most un-relenting persecution, and appression
of the generality of Gods people in their consciences, Persons and Estates,
with vexations and rigours almost incredible, and that for no other reason, but
because they could not actively comply with these notorious Perfidies. and the
manifold profanations and mischeifs, where with they are attended.

But this hellish mystery of Antichristian iniquity and arbitrary Tyranny,
imposing upon many at home too willing, through their love of ease, to be
abused and deluding the Protestant churches abroad (in that woeful and visible
indifferency, that every where reigns) by the vain pretext of the mere notion
of our courts empty and simulat protestant profession, having of a long time
under the late King made most remarkable advances in the following particulars,
and many more that might be enumerated, all too evidently seen, and heavily
felt, to need any explicit proof or demonstration;

As 1. not only in the abovementioned open and avowed revolting from God, by
breach of Sworn treaties, Covenants, and coronation oaths, and slighting and
despiscing spontaneous promises and proclamations, the overturning the very
foundations of Parliaments, and ranversing at one blow our best and most legal
establishments. The ungrate as well as unjust putting to death of most innocent
and faithful men, upon absurd pretenses: convelled by the Laws and customs of
nations, and in the time of Gods greatest indulgence toward the authors; The
desolating of the Churches, and changing of the ordinances of God, for setting
up the frivolous and superstitious inventions of men, the countenancing and
encouraging of all vice and profanity, and the violent and griveous persecuting
of all conscience and conscientious men.

But nixt and more particularly, in the conniving at Papists their meetings and
Idolatrous masses, while in the mean time all Protestant Nonconformists are
persecuted with endless severities:

The raising of standing forces, the very bane of all civil and Lawful
Government, and that without any other measure, save what the indigence of
Court Luxury and profusion did necessarly put unto it:

The declaring and appointing all Judges and Officers, to enjoy their places
only during pleasure, on purpose to make them more souple and complyant to all
their masters designs.

The abusing of the great trust of calling and dissolving Parliaments, the most
high and necessary courts of the Kingdoms, by iniquous Packing, unseasonable
proroguing, pernicious discharging, and insolent baffling them at pleasure.

The exalting of the Kings supremacy, under the color of his pretended right
and power, about the external Government and Policy of the Church, to an
express and absolut power, of enacting and statuting in all Church meetings and
matters, as he in his wisdom shall think fit; a ready and prepared tool to
bring us back not only to Popery but to Paganism.

The strange perversion of the high trust of the Militia, committed to his
Majesty expressy, for the protection of good subjects, and the assistance of
all our protestant friends abroad, only to the invading and oppressing by
lawless hosts of the worst of high landers and low landers, in times of
profound peace, the best parts of the Kingdom, purposly to ruin them, because
too Protestant, by free quarter and other illegal exactions' and the making
war most causlesly and obstinatly against the States of the united
Neitherlands, our best neighbors, and the strongest bulwarck of the Protestant
interest:

The forcing of poor people, by the extreme rigours of exorbitart finings,
imprisonings, beatings stigmatizins, spoilings, banishments, and other
violences, for the simple cause of Nonconformity, to take arms in their own
defense as at Pentland and Bothwel bridge and then demeaning and executing
them, what in fields what on scaffolds, as the most desperate of traitors, and
at the same time involving whole countries upon the most slender and absurd
pretexts, of inevitable intercommunings and reset, both in their crimes and
punishments:

The setting up of the most violent and obnoxious of men, to be Ministers of
the Law, and Packing juries, and assizes most partially, for their worst ends:

The straining, streaching, and wreasting of Law, not only in prejudice of
every one suspected to be dissaffected to their evil courses but the violation
of all right, for spoiling, and robbing cities and incorporations of their
ancient and undoubted privileges,

The transporting of freemen as slaves to foreign plantations, for not making
faith to answer (against law) super inquirendis, as also for not dilating men
upon Oath (according to a most impious Law lately made against Nonconformists)
in matters where in the party put to swear, judges them to be in their duty,
and without exception of his nearest relations;

The arbitrarie imprisonings and detainings of free subjests without either
bringing them to trial, or allowing them any hearing.

The torturing of several persons, even fyve times more, of conscientious non
conformists within these tuenty years, then of all sorts of fellons and
malefactors in Scotland these hundred years by past, and that without either
just previous grounds, regarding of Legal methods, or observing the measures of
common humanity.

The eliciting by promises of indemnity, and the public faith interposed for
that effect voluntary confessions of some as of Mr. James Mitchill etc. and
then not only retracting, and dissowning the promise and condition upon Oath,
in face of the justice court, but further witnessing the confession to the poor
man's condemnation: not with standing the books of council containing the
aforsaid indemnity were produced and laid open before and at the very time of
their swearing; Like as of Late after most cruel and exquisit tortures
practiced upon Mr. Spens and Mr. Carstairs, and a full and ample promise there
after made them with an act upon it, that neither they nor their evidence
should ever be made use of to their or to any other men's hurt; they never the
less cause produce and do sust^ine Mr. Carstairs deposition Against Bailzie of
Iarviswood for an adminicle or aid to their lame and defective probation;

The making men offenders yea traitors for words, and these true fair and
innocent; As the Earl of Argyl, for declaring before the Council after leave
given, and with submission and only for exonering his own conscience that he
believed, the Parliament intended no contradiction in the test, and therefore
was willing to take it in their sens viz: for securing the Protestant Religion,
and that he did not thereby mean to bind up him self from endeavoring Lawfully
in Church and State, what Religion and Loyalty might obleidge and allow him to
do, for which words nevertheless he was tried and condemned as a traitor, in
the loss of his life, lands, and goods; and stands de facto deprived of both
Lands and goods, having only saved his life in the extremity by a gracions
providential escape

The cruel executing to the death of several hundreds within these tuenty
years, besides many hundreds more, that have either fallen in the fields, or
been made to, perish in their imprisonments, or transportations, and that for
the alone cause or on the occasion of their conscientious non conforming. And
some of them (of which number several poor women) for their bare opinion about
the Kings breach of trust, never before by them vented, but simply declared
upon examination, and most part of them dispatched with that barbarous
inhumanity as that (after no better example then that of the bloody Duke of
Alba) they were by beating of Drumms hindered to speak to the people their last
and dying words; And some of them, contrair to the perpetual custom of Scotland
and all the forms used in the Christian world. and as if it had been on design
to destroy both their souls and bodies, tried sentenced and put to death in one
Day, yea the time and hour of their Death industriously concealed from them,
that they might be cut of by a more mortal surprise.

The condemning some to death, others to the boring of their tongues, and
syning many in most exorbitant sums even to 100000 pound Sterling, for
calling the Duke of York a Papist, notwithstanding the notoriety of the matter
to all men and his recusancie sound and declared by a grand jurie, and
expressly Supposed by an exception in his favors, contained in an Act of
parliament, and that now he goes openly to the mass, and marches in solemn
processions to the horror of all good Protestant subjects:

The loosing and exempting the Kings Sons and brothers, from what themselves
conceaved to be the best fence and greatest security for the Protestant
religion.

The imposing and pressing of Oaths without Law manifestly contradictorie, and
that by terrible menacings, violent beatings, rigorous imprisonings and
irreligious swearings, no less barbarous then what was practiced by the
Spanjards in Christianising the wild Indians;

The eating up of men by free quarters, or otherwise falling on them by
dounright violence, as dryving with drawn Swords, to constrain them to hear,
whom in their conscience they judged unsent and uncalled Curats, to the
effaceing of all conscience and oppen scorn of God and that pure and free
religion, which he only accepts.

The compelling the heritors of Shires to assesse them selves and the free
subjects within their bounds, a thing expressly denied by Law to the King
himself, and only reserved to Parliaments.

The Sorning upon, harrassing and destroying the best parts of the Country by
four extraordinary circuits upon one and the same subject of Bothwel bridge, on
purpose as it were to justify his highness judgment to his late majesty. That
it would not be well with Scotland until the South of Forth (the better and
more substantial half of that Kingdom) were turned to a hunting field. And to
verify the late Chancellor the Earl of Aberdeen his affirmation at the Council
board, that there was not a loyal subject west ward of the Castle of Edinburgh.

The industrious stifling hindering or eluding the detection of all popish
plots.

The Shamming of Mock plots upon good Protestants:

The suborning of witnesses, hounding out and encouraging of Assassins to
murder and cut the throats of honest men.

And generally in the studied and constant ensnaring or ruining upon every
Shadow of pretense all esteemed either fixed to the protestant interest or
well affected to their Countries liberty.

This wicked mystery, we Say, and conspiracy of Popery and Tyrranny
inseparably twisted both in experience and reason in all their attempts upon
these great and mighty Nations so unanimously united and firmly fixed in their
contrary Profession, rights and liberties, having made so great a progress by
the steps abovementioned, is now at length evidently disclosed and brought to
full maturity by the most suspicious (though with all most ungrate) cutting off
of the late King as having indeed very unhappily acted all that part of which
the conspirators did judge him capable. The ascending of James Duke of York a
notorious apostat and bigot Papist to the throne, notwithstanding his being
thrice excluded by the Commons of England. And that he neither has given nor
can give without an hypocritical and damning cheat repugnant to his Profession
and contemptible to all ingenuous men the oath and security indispensably
required of him before, and at his entry to the government. I 6. P. 1. c. 8.
The approaching of two Parliaments, both called by him, one in Scotland, by his
own vigilant Providence (in procureing it to be enacted in the last Parliament
held by him in that Kingdom, That for the future not only all members of
Parliament, but also all their electors should take that contradictorie and
irreligions oath commonly called the Test, which no man owning conscience, or
careing for any religion can possibly approve) long since prepared for all his
pleasure. And the other in England packt, caballed, and returned by all the
arts and methods that either fraud or injustice could invent, to render it
pliable to his intentions, and which no doubt he will cajoll with all the fair
promises and Large offers of Laws, that can he desired for securing both the
Protestant Religion and their liberties; Providing they will but give money,
which answers all things, and will as assuredly frustrat; and ranverse all
these vain cautions. The persueing with indefatigable malice even without the
bounds of the Kingdoms, and in all foreign parts all honest men, escaped for
their lives and that either by Public addresses or private violences: so that
they are necessarly reduced to that fatal dilemma, either to do or die. The
entering into and entertaining more closs correspondences then at any time
before, with popish Princes and States, Especially the King of France, a most
notorious enemy both of the true religion and liberty of mankind. And lastly
by all that may be already seen in the changes and alterations he has lately
made, and that for here-after may be apprehended, from a false and bloody
Religion, always breathing forth and practicing fire and faggot, murders and
massacres and, a provock'd and enraged mind, Possessing and reigning in the
most determined of Princes, unquestionably capable and ready to execut all
these bloody cruelties.

Which things being all of them either palpable perversions or utterly
inconsistent with the true and great ends of government, rendering our common
Wealth our Common calamity, and him who pretends to be its protector its most
hostile enemy. and consequently importing no less then a total dissolution of
all the bonds of Subjection which the rulers have first so wickedly broke and
cut assunder; and the liberating and alloweng all distressed subjects, whither
those already overwhelmed by, or who may justly for hereafter fear to be
involved in these miseryes, that undoubted right and power which both God and
nature with common reason and the constant custom of all Nations have given us,
for recovering defending and maintaining our lives and liberties, and above all
the inestimable blessing of our pure Religion, to the effect that the same pure
Religion with our just rights and liberties so valiantly asserted by our
ancestors may be by us faithfully transmitted to our posterities.

We have been and are obliged and constrained by extreme necessity and for
common safety (the suprem laws) To take up just and necessary arms in the name
and fear of the Great God, and the confidence of his mercy and assistance for
our own and our Countries releif from the aforsaid most griveous and
intolerable Tyrannies and oppressions; The defense and reestablishment of the
true and pure Christian Religion, commonly called Protestant, in opposition to
that Antichristian Roman Religion, commonly called Papistical, and the recovery
and reestablishmene of all our just rights liberties and privileges, according
as we Stand indispensably obliged there to, both before God and men; And that
against the said James Duke of Yorck and all other his accomplices, our most
unnatural and wicked enemies and oppressors.

Desyring in the first place to be deeply humbled each of us before God, for
our manifold sins and provocations, Especially our false heartedness and
unsteedfastness in, and revoltings from our great and manifold engadgments to
him, that alone have brought upon us all these sad mischeifes, earnestly and
with our whole hearts supplicating, that he would cease from his anger, Cause
his face to Shine upon us. and save us for his own names sake.

And in the nixt place declaring like as we hereby expressly declare, that our
sincere and single ends and designs in this our undertakeing, are, First the
restoring and settling of the foresaid true reformed Protestant Religion in its
power and purity, and with such a just comprehension of pure Christian
charity, as may through the good hand of our God upon us be truly satisfieing
to all that fear him, and love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity; Renouncing
and detesting as well imposings as errors, in all matters of Conscience, and
trusting that after the many teaching experiences we have had, we shall be for
here after preserved from all unhappy missunderstandings. But rather through the
Spirit of truth love and peace graciously led into all the paths thereof.

2ly. The suppression and perpetual exclusion of antichristian Popery with all
its idolatrous superstitions and falsehoods, as also its most bitter root and of
spring prelacy, with its new and wicked head the supremacy, and all their
abuses, that so not only the Gospel and work of God may be revived in these
lands, but also all the Churches of Christ abroad thereby refreshed and
strengthened.

And 3ly The restoring of all men to their just rights and liberties especally
the recompensing of all sufferers, whether unto blood or loss of liberty and
goods, the releif of such who are in present distress, the removing of all
oppression, and establishing such righteous Laws and methods of Government, as
may be most for securing of liberty and property with the greatest ease and
equality;

Which things as we purpose and hope to accomplish only thorough the presence
of our God with us, and his blessing upon us, So we are most willing and
resolved that they be all settled and perfected by a free full just and
Sonveraign representatife of all the present undertakers and such as shall
Hereafter sincerly concur and take part with us; and that in such forms and
ways as God by his good providence can only most happily direct and conduct us
unto? declaring and protesting further, that since such have been and are the
manifest perfidy treachery and falsehood of our adversaries, not only in their
treaties and Convenants but also in their pardons indemnities and indulgences,
as that they leave no ground or tolerable assurance of faith and trust to be
given to them, we will never enter into any terms of Capitulation treaties or
conditions with them, as to the great ends of this undertaking; but on the
contrary prosecut the same with all reality constancy and vigor without any
separation division or backdrawing, until they be perfectly and finally
obtained. Upon which grounds and for which ends abovementioned we not only
hereby most sincerely and firmly protest and declare as in the presence of God,
constantly and perpetually to assist and maintain one another to the uttermost
against all, deadly. But do more-over freely and heartily resolve and engadge
our selves to countenance and concur with all our persecuted and oppressed
brethren and friends in England and Irland, who from the Like reasons and
motives shall be induced and stirred up to the like undertaking for the same or
the like Ends.

Wherefore we most seriously and humbly beseech and obtest in the bowels of our
lord I Christ all that love his truth and this our righteous cause, nonne
excepted, though either formerly little concerned for, and favorable to us and
these interests, or even still in actual opposition against us and them (their
sincere repentance being at all times to God most acceptable and not to be
better witnessed before men then by a contrary and vigorous amendment) to
come and join with us for Gods Glory, and Gospel, our country, lives rights and
liberties and our posterities, and all our hope, Against an apostat Papist, an
usurping and persecuting Tyran, by the most sacred article of his Religion, our
mortal enemy under the pain of his own Damnation, and by the fundamental and
express laws, of the land I. 6. P. 1. c. 9. and P. 20. c. 5. incapable of the
meanest office within the Kingdom* and in effect a declared enemy and rebel I.
6. P. 3. c. 47. And who even by the Act lately made by himself for pathing the
way to his succession Chapter 2. p. 3. c. 2. can have no shadow of pretense to the
benefit thereof. Unless he first instruct him self both to be the Lawful and
the immediate and nearest heir of the croun, which without satisfieing the old
Law. Ia. 6. p. 1. c. 8. at the same time ratified Chapter 2. p. 3. c. 1. by
swearing to embrace and maintain the true reformed Protestant Religion, he can
never possibly be, as was then distinctly understood, and declared by the
principal framers of that Act. And against his adherents and pertakers, a
perjured revolted and self condemned generation. Upon whom the Lord, who will
not give his glory to another, has formerly got him self a name and renoun
before all the Nations, whom our sins only have exalted, and whose hearts can
never endure or their hands be strong when the Lord (...) who is on our side,
and has a perpetual indignation against all the wicked in the earth shall
arise, and deal with them. And this our most earnest call and request we
confidently hope shall be the more readily hearkened unto, and heartily and
seriously complied with, that in the issue, through the blessing of God, it
assuredly promises not only the restitution of truth, prosperity and glory to
these long misgoverned harassed and disgraced Nationes: but the sure defense
and protection of true Religion and liberty every where (Britains certain and
great interest of late most shamefully abandoned) and even the depression of
Antichrist and the advancement and exaltation of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ in all the earth.

Let us therefore be of good courage, and play the men for our people and for
the cause of our God. And the Lord do that, which Seems him good.

THE DECLARATION of ARCHIBALD Earl of ARGYLE, Lord Kintyre, Cowall, Campbel and
Lorn, Heritable Sheriff and Lieutenant of the Shires of Argile and Tarbett, and
Heritable Justice General of the said Shires, and of the West Isles, and
others. With his Order to his Vassals and others in the said Shires, and under
his Jurisdiction, to Concur for Defense of their Religion, Lives and Liberties.
I shall not mention my Case, published in Print in Latin and more largely in
English, nor mean I to repeat the Printed Declaration emitted by several
Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others of both Nations now in Arms, but because the
Sufferings of me and my Family are therein mentioned, I have thought it fit for
me, to declare for my self; That as I go to Arms with those who have appointed
me to Conduct them, for no private, nor personal end, and only for those
contained in the said Declaration, which I have concerted with them and approve
of, so I do claim no interest, but what I had before the pretended Forfeiture
of my Family, and have sufficient right to.

And that I do freely, (and as a Christian) forgive all Personal Injuries
against my Person or Family to all, that shall not oppose, but Join and Concur
with us in our pre, sent Undertaking, for the ends mentioned in the said
Declaration. And hereby I oblidge me never to pursue them in Judgment; nor out
of Judgment; And I do further declare, That obtaining the peaceable and quiet
Possession of what belonged to my Father and my self before our pretended
Forfeitures. I shall satisfy all Debts due by my Father and my self, as any
Heir or Debtor can be obliged.

And as my Faithfulness to his late Majesty and his Government, has
sufficiently appeared to all unbiassed Persons, void of Malice, so I do with
Grief acknowledge my former too much complying with, and connyving at the
methods that have been taken to bring us to the sad condition we are now in,
though God knows never concurring in the design.

I have now with Gods strength suffered patiently my unjust Sentence and
Banishment three years and a half, and have never offered to make any Uproar or
defense by Ar^^ to disturb the Peace upon my private Concern; But the King
being now Dead, and the Duke of York having taken off his Mask, and having
abandoned and invaded our Religion and Liberties; Resolving to enter into the
Government and Exercise it contrary to Law; I think it not only Just, but my
Duty to God and my Country, to use my outmost endeavors to oppose and repress
his Usurpation and Tyranny.

And there fore being assisted and furnished very nobly by several good
Protestants, and invited and accompanied by several of both Nations to lead
them, I resolve, as God shall enable me, to use their assistance of all kinds,
toward the ends expressed in the said Declaration.

And I do hereby earnestly invite and obteste all honest Protestants, and
particularly all my Friends and Blood Relations, to concur with us in the said
Declaration; And as I have written several Letters, so having no other way
fully to intimate my mind otherwise, I do hereby require all my Vassals any
where, and all within my several Jurisdictions with their Fencible Men within
their Command, to go to Arms, and to join and concur with us according to the
said Declaration, as they will be answerable on their peril; And that they obey
the particular Orders they shall receive from me from time to time.


