The Army Mastered, OR, GREAT BRITTAIN'S JOY: BRIEFLY Presented to those true
PATRIOTS of their COUNTRY, now assembled in PARLIAMENT, by thousands of
Persons well affected to the lawful Authority of these NATIONS.
HAving observed upon what dangerous Seas, and with what various tempests the
Ship of this Commonwealth has for these many Years been floating and tossed,
and perceiving that after all her hazards and tumbling, she is now arrived at
an Haven, where she may be conveniently rigged and equipped: To prevent the
like future mischief, we cannot with ungrateful Passengers, cease from
breaking forth into a most thankful admiration of Divine goodness, being
almost astonished at that infinite wisdom, which has secured her, when the
Governors, Masters, and Pilots were all thrown over Board, and her self
exposed to the contrary winds of Men's private embition, and distracted by the
dangerous gulphs of selfeish interests: And therefore we think it a duty
incumbent upon us, who have been faithful unto the true interest of this
Commonwealth, to congratulate your and the Nations safe arrival (after all
our rowlings) upon the terra firma of so solid and hopeful a Government. Nor
can we contain our selves from declaring to the World, that our hopes and
expectations therefrom are not begot by some ayery notions of a groundless
fancy, but created in us by the strength of a well tempered reason, superadded
unto our former experiences of you; Especially now since your most puissant
wisdom has in the revolutions of a few days effected that toward the
restoration of great Britains Liberties, which the continual struggling and
hot contests of above twelve years were never able to accomplish, we mean,
that absolute conquest you have lately made of those (till now) untameable
Lions of the Army, that had (as it were) transformed the peoples freedom and
liberties into their proper food and prey, which to eat up and devour, these
most inhumane Monsters have boasted to be the glory and crown of all their
victories. It Is incredible to demonstrate with what a resurrection of life and
joy, the almost dead and lately desponding spirits of the Nations are now
quickened and transported to behold you the Champions of their liberties thus
gallantly to have captivated their horrid captivity, and to observe the
Day Star of their freedom (so long benighted with the darkness of Tyranny and
consusions) once more to arise in this their Horizon; wherefore we cannot but
avouch it as an unquestionable truth, that by your rending and plucking the
rights and privileges of these distracted Countries out of the jaws of these
hardbiting and all devouring Lions, you have infinitely more indeared your
Authority, and more heightened your interest in the hearts and affections of
the people, then by the whole series of all your former most noble and most
heroical actions The whole Nation being so fully possessed with the sense and
admiration of your deep wisdom, (though your generous natures reposing too
much confidence in your military Vassals, occasioned in 53. your interruption
by a rebellion, which was their wickedness, yet now) is confident that your
future care and providence will not admit you to be imposed upon the second
time, least it should be adjudged your own weakness And therefore we are fully
persuaded that you will become as well the resolute Keepers, as you have
appeared the valiant restorers of our Liberties, by paring the claves, and by
destroying the Interest of those, who have been so ready upon all occasions to
scratch at, and to destroy the face and verry being of all our civil
Authorities, so shall your Authority be owned as the only deliverer of us from
under our military thraldom, foreign Nations abroad will admire you, and
succeeding Generations will have their memories filled with praises
everlastingly due unto you.

Printed in the Year, 1659.


