THE Marquess of Argyle HIS PETITION TO THE PARLIAMENT OF SCOTLAND; Craving a
Precognition of his Case, Containing many weighty Reasons urging the necessity
thereof.

Presented to the Parliament February 12. 1661.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1661.

To my Lord Commissioner his Grace, and Honorable Estates of Parliament.
The Humble Petition of Archbald Marquess of Argyle.
Humbly shows,
THAT for as much as the Petitioner can with a safe conscience affirm, and
solemnly protest, that whatever his actings or accession has been in relation
to public business since the beginning of the troubles, till his Majesty's
departure hence in the year 1651. though he will not purge himself of errors,
failings, and mistakes, both in judgment and practice incident to humane
frailty, and common to him, if not with the whole, at least with the greatest
part of the Nation; yet in one thing, though he were to die, he would still
avouch and retain his innocence, that he never intended any thing treasonably,
out of any pernicious design against his Majesty's late Royal Father of ever
glorious memory, or his present Majesty, (whom God may long preserve) their
Persons or Government; but endeavored always to his uttermost for settling the
differences betwixt their Majesty's and the people: And as to any actings
before the year 1641. or from the said year, till his Majesty's being in the
Parliament at Perth and Sterling, your Petitioner did with a full assurance
rely upon his gracious Majesty, and his Royal Father, their Treaties,
Approbation, Oblivion, and Indemnity for what was past, and firmly believed
lieved that the same should never have risen in judgment, or that the
Petitioner should have been drawn in question therefore; and during his
Majesty's absence, and being forced from the exercise of his Royal Government
by the late Usurpers, and long after that the Nation by their Deputies had
accepted of their authority and government, and they in possession, the
Petitioner was forced to capitulation with them, being in their hands, and
under sickness, and the same was after all endeavors used, according to the
duty of a good subject, and upon the Petitioners part, so innocent and
necessary for self preservation, without the least intention, action, or effect
to his Majesty's prejudice; That albeit upon misinformation (as the Petitioner
humbly conceives) his actings and compliance both in their designs and quality
have been misrepresented, as particularly singular and personal, stating the
Petitioner in a degree of guilt beyond others, and incapable of pardon, the
same have so far prevailed upon his Majesty, as to cloud and damp the
propitious and comfortable rays of his Royal Grace and Favor, and have
strained his gracious Inclination beyond its natural disposition of clemency
expressed to his other subjects, to commit the Petitioners person, and give way
to the trial of his carriage and actings; yet so firmly rooted is the
Petitioners persuasion of his Majesty's Justice and Clemency, and that He
intends the reclaiming, and not the ruin of the meanest of his subjects, who
retein their loyalty, duty, and good affection to his Person and Government,
that upon true and right representation of the Petitioners carriage and
actings, he shall be able to vindicate himself of these aspersions, and shall
give his Majesty satisfaction, at least so far, to extenuate his guilt, as may
render him a fit object of that Royal Clemency, which is of that depth, that
having swallowed and past by not only Personal, but National guiltiness, of
much more deep a dye as any the Petitioner can be charged with, or made out
against him; and so will not strain to pass by and pardon the faults and
failings of a person who never acted but in a public joint way, without any
sinistrous or treasonable defigne against his Majesty, or his Royal Father, and
against which he can defend himself either by acts of approbation and oblivion
in verbo principis, which he conceives to be the supreme, sacred, and
inviolable security, or which he was forced to much against his inclination, by
an insuperable necessity. And albeit his Majesty's grace and favor is strictly
tied to no other rule but his Royal Will and pleasure, yet his Majesty's so
innate, essential and inseparable a quality of his Royal nature, that the
Petitioner is persuaded in all humane certainty, that the leaving and
committing to his Parliament (as is expressed in his Majesty's Declaration of
October. 12. last by past) the trying and judging of the carriage of his subjects
during the late troubles, as indeed it is in its own nature, and ought to be so
accepted of all, as an undoubted evidence of his Majesty's affection to, and
confidence in his people; so no other trial or judging is therein meaned, but a
fair, just, legal, and usual trial, without any prejudice, passion, or
prelimitation, or precipitation; like as by the said Declaration there was a
freedom for all the people interessed, to make their application to the
Parliament, or in the mean time to the Committee, from whom only his Majesty is
pleased to declare he would receive address and information: And seeing it was
the Petitioners misfortune during the sitting of the said Committee, to be
prisoner in England, whereas if he had been prisoner here in Scotland, he would
have made application to them, and would have craved, and in justice expected
that precognition might have been taken by them, to whom the preparing and
ordering of that affair (to wit, anent the trial of the subjects carriage
during the troubles) was recommended, that the Petitioners absence, which was
his punishment, not his fault, may not be prejudicial, seeing the Petitioner
has lately received two several ditays wherein there be many crimes grossly
false, with all the aspersions and aggravations imaginable laid to his charge,
importing no less then the loss of his life, fame, and estate, and the ruin of
him and his posterity, which he is confident is not intended by his Majesty;
and that by the law and practice of this Kingdom, consonant to all reason and
equity, the Petitioner ought to have upon his desire a precognition for taking
the deposition of certain persons, which being frequently and usually practiced
in this Country, when any person is defamed for any crime, and therefore
incarcerate before he was brought to a trial, at his desire precognition was
taken in all business relating thereto, which the Petitioner in all humility
conceives ought much more not to be denied to him, not only by reason of
respect to his quality, and of the importance and consequence thereof to all
his Majesty's subjects of all quality in all time coming, but also, in regard
it has been so meaned and intended by his Majesty's Declaration foresaid, like
as the manner of the crimes objected being actings in times of wars and
troubles, the guilt thereof was not personal and particular, but rather
National and universal, and veiled and covered with acts of indemnity and
oblivion, and so tender and ticklish, that if duly pondered after a hearing
allowed to the Petitioner, in prudency and policy will not be found expedient
to be tossed in public, or touched with every hand, but rather to be
precognosced upon by some wise, sober, noble, and judicious persons, for their
and several others reasons in the paper hereto annexed; nor does the Petitioner
desire the same animo pro telandi, nor needs the same breed any longer delay,
nor is it sought without an end of zeal to his Majesty's power, and vindication
of the Petitioners innocence, as to many particulars wherewith he is aspersed;
and it would be seriously pondered that seeing Cunctatio nulla longa ubi agitur
de vita hominis, far less can this small delay, which is usual, and in this
case most expedient, if not absolutely necessary, be refused, ubi agitur non
solum de vita, sed de fama, and of all worldly interests that can be dear or of
value to any man.

Upon Consideration of the Premises, it is humbly craved, That your Grace, and
the Honorable Estates of Parliament, may grant the Petitioners desire, and to
give Warrant to cite persons to Depone before your Grace, and the Estates of
Parliament, upon such interrogators as your Petitioner shall give in, for
clearing of several things concerning his intention and loyalty during the
Troubles; And for such as are out of the Country, and Strangers, residentars in
England, Commissions may be directed to such as your Grace and the Parliament
shall think fit, to take their Depositions upon Oath, and to return the same;

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.
Edinburgh, Febr. 12. 1660.
This Petition being read, was refused.


