THE ARMIES DECLARATION Examined and Compared WITH Their DECLARATION May 6.
Their PETITION and ADDRESS May 12. AND Their PETITION and REPRESENTATION.
Discovering some of their Contradictions, Lies, Calumnies, Hypocrisy, and
Designs. Well worthy Observation.

LONDON, Printed, 1659.

THE ARMIES DECLARATION EXAMINED, etc.
IT was the serious wish of some who were very careful for the reputation of
the Army, after they understood how well the Army had made good their most
Christian Declaration of the Sixth of May past, by forcing the Parliament a
second time, according to their wonted way of Exposition or doing clean
contrary, that now they would no more declare, to make themselves and friends,
the scorn of Heathens for falsness and ficklenss, but leave themselves a
sufficient latitude and field to ramble in, who could never yet be kept within
the limits they had set out for themselves; however they have pleased me better
as it falls out, for without peradventure many men who but the other day
excused, extenuated (or at least respited their judgment upon) the strange
practice of the Army in keeping out the Parliament, deamed that those worthy
Persons had miserably violated their trust, or had practiced some unheard of
mischief against the good people of this Nation, that should necessitate this
extravagant, and indirect proceeding of the Army, contrary to their own
Declaration of a very late date, and all Humanity and Christianity; who by
reading this New Declaration, or at least by taking the Examination thereof
along with me, must needs be undeceived by little and little, till they
understand the naked reason of these Masters of misrule; wherein, the better to
help thy observation, take here verbatim their Declaration of May Sixth, which
will take up but little room, which I re-print, that you may see I mean to deal
fairly, and it will be of some use in the sequel. It begins thus:

THE Public concernments of this Commonwealth being through a Vicissitude of
dangers, deliverances and backslidings of (...) brought into that state and
posture wherein they now stand, and our selves also contributing thereunto, by
wandering diverse ways, from righteous and equal paths; and although there has
been many essaies to obviate the dangers, and to settle these Nations in Peace
and Prosperity, yet all have proved ineffectual, the only wise God in the
course of his providence disappointing all endeavors therein.

And also observing, to our great grief, that the good Spirit which formerly
appeared amongst us; in the carrying on of this great work, did daily decline,
so as the Good old Cause it self became a reproach; We have been led to look
back, and examine the cause of the Lords withdrawing his wonted presence from
us, and where we turned out of the way, that through mercy we might return and
give him the glory.

And amongst other things, calling to mind, that the long Parliament
consisting of the members which continued there sitting until the 20th. of
April 1653. were eminent Assertors of that Cause, and had a special presence of
God with them, and were signally blessed in that work (the desires of many good
people concurring with ours therein) we judge it our duty to invite the
aforesaid Members to return to the exercise and discharge of their trust, as
before the said 20th. of April 1653.

And therefore we do hereby most earnestly desire the Parliament, consisting of
those Members who continued to sit since the year 1648, until the 20th. of
April. 1653. to return to the exercise and discharge of their Trust, and we
shall be ready in our places, to yield them, as becomes us, our utmost
Assistance to sit in safety; for the improving the present opportunity for
settling and securing the Peace and Freedom of this Commonwealth: praying for
the presence and blessing of God upon their endeavors.

Signed by direction of the Lord Fleetwood and the Council of Officers of the
Army. Tho. Sandford Secret.
6. May 1659.
I shall trouble your Memory but little to look further back, having taken
notice how apt your are to forget your selves: Look you now! whose was this
Bracelet? Was this the Armies Declaration, or no? surely that and this now to
be examined, never came from the same men; or those men, are not the same they
were -- You begin with telling how unpleasing it is to you to be necessitated
to justify your selves or your Actings to these Nations; -- we never yet found
you backward to say all that could be said for your-selves: but I think it will
be a hard matter to justify your selves, or your Actings since 1652. and that
may make it a little displeasing, if you, or any body for you can do that, we
will all go to School again; when you can justify your selves, and actings: In
first turning out this Parliament, then opening the Door for them again, as you
say, you were bound in duty; and now shutting them out again, and setting up
Three and twenty Persons, unto whom you have delegated such Power, as most
honest men say, is not yours to give. I say, when you can justify your selves
herein, you shall be forgiven your former Trespasses, and have as full
Indemnity as your hearts can wish; -- You go on -- to do our selves Right, we
must necessarily insist upon the Miscarriages of Others; of which we hold our
selves obliged to give the People an Acount, and of our Proceedings -- verily
the People are much beholding to you: I doubt you would make a bad reckoning
o'nt, if the People were enabled to call you to account: We see the ARMY to
justify themselves; resolve (as they are obliged by necessity) to insist upon
the Failings of the Parliament, and let them not spare: they have done their
worst; let every sober minded man be assured; that the Parliament are free from
any Imputations that malicious Tongues and Pens have uttered against them,
which are not found in this black Bill: who are so sure to say all that could
be said against them (and all little enough to justify themselves) that they
strain hard to charge them with some things, that though they were true, yet
are of little consequence to justify such a proceeding in the Army; they turn
every Stone to make Matter against them: But I must not anticipate thy
Judgment; you shall see by and by, what the Mountain brings forth, and as you
go along pray note how much they insist upon their own Miscarringes and
Failings. Having thus Prefaced, you declare in these Words -- Before the
recalling of the [late PARLIAMENT] Observe, it was the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, the Fifth of October last, as they style them in
their Petition, and Representation: But now the late Parliament! surely they
are as much a Parliament now, as then; and if Six years force could not hinder
them of being a Parliament, much less can Three weeks force: but the Jest is,
they are the supreme Authority of the Nation, when the ARMY please to Christen
them so: if the Army have any hopes they will serve their turn, then they are
the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England: If they keep close to the good
of the Nation, then they are the ( late Parliament --) We had diverse
Consultations and Thoughts of heart, in what way and manner we might provide
for the Peace and good Government of this Commonwealth, -- truth is, you have
been very busy all along; you break our Heads, and then think of Plasters for
us: you broke this Parliament formerly, and after six years, when you found
your own dirty Interests going down, then you had many Consultations, how to
keep them up: and when you could not go on your own way, the way you are now
agoing, for the Clamours of the People, and the interposing of your own
inferior Officers, you had some Conferences with some of the late Parliament,
as you call them, from whom, it seems, receiving some good hopes of doing your
Journey-work, you resolve to put it to the Trial, Whether they will be your
Slaves, or the faithful Servants of the People? Who having failed your
Expectation, can be a Parliament no lo longer: -- at length, calling to mind
(no sure, it was put in your Heads much against your Minds) those many great
Things that had been effected for the good of these Nations, during the sitting
of the said Parliament: Look back upon the Declaration of May 6. and see how it
is there expressed, -- Calling to mind, That the long Parliament consisting of
the Members which continued there sitting until the Twentieth of April, 1653.
were eminent Assertors of the GOOD OLD CAUSE, and had a special presence of
God with them, and were signally blessed in that Work. Read the very Words and
observe a Juggle: That may be done during their sitting, that is not done by
them. Make your own Observations, -- and being likewise fully persuaded, that
the Government of these Nations might be most happily placed upon the
Foundations of a Commonwealth [and that upon such Principles as was then agreed
upon by us] -- this is the Plague o'nt, they that for the most part of them, (
Viz. The General Council of Officers) must make a Mark for their Names; think
themselves so wise as to agree Principles among themselves, which are best for
the Government of this Commonwealth: and what are these Principles? You shall
find them in their Petition and Address, May 12. 1659. the chief Corner Stones
whereof are these;

Article 12. We do unanimously acknowledge and own the Lord Charles Fleetwood
to be Commander in chief of the Land Forces of this Commonwealth.

Article 13. That there be a select Senate Coordinate in Power with the
Parliament.

Article 15. That all Debts contracted by his late Highness, or his Father,
since the Fifteenth of December, 1653. may be satisfied, and that an honorable
Revenue of Ten thousand pounds per annum, with a convenient House, may be
settled upon him and his Heirs for ever, and Ten thousand pounds more per annum,
during his life, and upon his honorable Mother, Eight thousand pound per
annum, during her life: To the end, that a mark of the high esteem this Nation
has of the good service done by his Father, our ever renowned General, may
remain to Posterity. -- It concludes thus:

These having been the thoughts and desires of our hearts, unanimously agreed
upon, before your returning to sit, etc.

You may judge whether these are not rare Principles to brag of A Senate to
control the Parliament: And Ten thousand pound per annum, and a convenient
House for ever: Ten thousand pound per annum for life for the Protector; and
Eight thousand pounds per annum for the old Dowager. -- Upon my word, I do not
know who contrived this so rarely; but it is a good Reward for making bold to
rule us by his Will and pleasure, to pay his Son and his Wife so well for it;
besides what Rewards he took out of the Earl of Worcesters Estate, and what
besides he converted to his own Coffers. If I were Lord Lambert, I should
venture hard to make my self somebody, if when the worst came, my Heirs and
Wife should be so well rewarded: If when I could keep my Kingdom no longer, I
should be so well cared for, that my Son should live like a Prince. These are
brave Principles for a Commonwealth, that the Council of Officers should boast
of: -- You proceed,

And hoping through their experience of Affairs of Government, we might most
safely deliver the Power, and Trust of these Nations into their hands, (pardon
me, you have done all you can to keep both in your own hands) and having those
further encouragements, that they having lain under that rebuke for some years,
which God has given them for their former miscarriages: That is, the Rebuke
you had given them, when you turned out of the way; and turned them out of the
House, who you say your selves, Decl. May 6. were such eminent Assertors of the
GOOD OLD CAUSE, and had such a special presence of God with them, that you
judged it your Duty, to invite them again to discharge their Trust; and really,
it is their eminent asserting the GOOD OLD CAUSE, (and nothing else) that are
the miscarriages for which you so rudely rebuke them: -- And also from some
previous meetings with some worthy and leading Members of that House, (these
were I hope, none of those the Army is now so angry at) who upon debate with
us, approved of the Principles aforesaid, and communicated them to some of
their Fellow Members.

Mark here their debate, and the agreement of some Members with them in their
Principles, of their Address, is a grand argument to persuade them to readmit
the Parliament. You find no such matter in Decl. May 6. But there it seems to
be only conscience of their sin in disturbing the Parliament, and wandering from
equal and righteous paths; together with a sense of their duty as bound to
call them again, being such eminent Assertors of the GOOD CAUSE. This is
strange prevarication: It seems too, they were not so unseigned in the shame
they took to themselves, for all the disfiguring of their faces, that they
durst trust. God having done their duty; but must feel the Pulse of some
Members first, and give them their Lessons, or the Principles they meant to
insist upon: So that they can take shame to themselves, and yet drive on their
Design; they are Masters of Art in Dissimulation, and can make Religion a Nose
of Wax to serve their Interest: We were like to have our business well
managed by this praevious Meeting, if the Parliament had had so little honesty,
as the other wit. --

That not only old displeasures would have been forgotten (so they were) but
that the single, and settled Government of this Commonwealth would have been
only aimed at. -- So most men believe it was, having understood nothing to the
contrary, but observed the Parliament very earnest in contending for it; and
had made a large progress in it, even to admiration; though they had met with
many Disturbances, and not a few from your selves; but the mischief is, that
all this was not done in two months, that they might have died in Mount Nebo
before now: But to show what they might have done, and that two months was
long enough in conscience; their new 23 must settle a Government in six Weeks,
and then I trow they may go to Mount Nebo and die too: -- And although we were
not ignorant, that by their former interruption, it was the opinion of many
able, and learned persons, that the late Parliament was wholly dissolved --
Speak out Gentle-folks, Mr. Pryn told you so; and what did he tell you besides?
Tell the whole truth. Does not he tell you, You are Rebels, perjured persons,
Papists, Jesuits, Sectaries: And is not this last as true as the first? If you
knew them really dissolved, why did you conjure them up again? Why would you
put such an abuse upon the Nation? Why did you resist Sir George Boothe to
blood, for denying them to be a Parliament? Surely, if this be true, you laid a
Stumbling Block in your Brothers way, whose Blood and Estate you yet seem
vigorously to pursue: Certainly upon your heads must fall all the blood that
has been spilt in this Quarrel: it is your sin to set up an unjust power, not
Sir George Booths to resist such a power. But why if this be true, do you so
often style them The Supreme Authority? why do you say, it is your duty to call
them again to their trust: that it becomes you to yield them your uttermost
assistance to sit in safety. Does it become you do you think, to juggle thus
before God and men; especially since you were so well instructed of their being
wholly dissolved?

Good Lord, to what impudence shall we arrive ere long? and what may not
profane Wretches do, if men that pretend so highly to Saintship dare deal
thus? Lord, what will thou do for thy Great Name? What a Reproach lies upon
the Protestant Religion? Lord, roll away this Reproach from us. And to this
wretched shift is the Army driven, lest they should own them to be a
Parliament: For if they were a Parliament, then they have no way of escape, but
are Traitors with a witness; -- Yet being desirous, like Drowning men (who are
ready to catch hold of every twig) to lay hold on any thing that had the least
appearance of Civil Authority -- This is pretty, so it seems, you now lay hold
of another twig, I mean your 23. but that they want the least appearance of
Civil Authority -- But do you think this is Christian-like, to do evil that
good may come of it? is this to abstain from all appearance of evil? I cannot
tell but this Twig may in time make you smart for your folly and wickedness,
-- Thereby hoping to see the Nation established upon the Basis aforementioned.
Mark that, They laid hold on this Parliament, hoping they would settle the
Nation as the Army had contrived it in their Petition, and Address before
mentioned: This is rare good sport, is it not? Therefore -- we did think fit in
our Declaration of the 6 of May, (nay, you say there, You judged it your duty,
it is one thing to think fit, another thing to think it your duty) to invite
the Members of that Parliament, etc. Look back a little, and observe, whether
the reasons they allege there, that persuade them of their duty to call the
Parliament; and the conceits they mention here, which made them think fit to
invite them, do well agree: I think you find few of the former reasons in
this Declaration, and as few of th^se Conceits in the former Declaration. Pray
stay here a little, and meditate, it will be worth your while: There you may
observe, they confess, they had wandered diverse ways from equal, and
righteous paths; and that God disappointed all Essays for settlement; that the
GOOD OLD CAUSE became a Reproach, and the good Spirit that formerly appeared
among us began to decline, and did daily decline; and being led to look back
and examine the cause of Gods departing from them, and where they turned out of
the way, that they might return, and give him glory. And calling to mind, that
this Parliament were eminent Assertors of the GOOD OLD CAUSE, and had a
special presence of God with them, and were signally blessed in that work;
therefore they judged it their duty to invite, and did most earnestly desire
them to return to the exercise of their Trust.

What is all that? is it no more then this, calling to mind what great things
were effected during their sitting? or is there ever a word of your own
thoughts of he^rt; that they were the best Principles and fittest to bottom
the Commonwealth upon, that you agreed among your selves. No, we immediately
saw it was but a feigned Repentance, and a partial shame, when we read your
Address of the 12. May, of which I gave you notice in Print: Have you any such
motive there, as the experience of this Parliament in affairs of Government,
that you mention in that Declaration, May 6. to induce you to deliver the power
and trust of the Nation into their hands; not a word I warrant you to this
purpose, nor yet of such an encouragement us this, that the Parliament having
lain under the rebuke of God, for their former miscarriages, would be like to
follow him more close now in the ways leading to peace and righteousness; nor
a word of any previous meetings with any Leading Members of the House, and
their approving of the Armies thoughts of heart; nor yet of laying hold upon
them only as that which had only an appearance of Authority. I am sorry to have
occasion for such work as this -- Mind your Preface in your Address, May 12.
-- Calling to mind the former Declarations of Parliament, and the grounds
therein inviting us to take up Arms; and those many signal providence wherein
the Lord has owned you, and your Forces by Sea and Land, in asserting that
Righteous Cause; wherein the Civil and Religious Liberties of the People are
involved, so as all open opposition was beaten down before you; and likewise
weighing with our selves, how in these several Changes of Government, that
public Spirit that appeared in that work, has since that time been
discouraged, (that is, since the Parliament was first disturbed by Cromwell)
and another raised up, drawing back to the things you had contended against,
even to the hazarding the Essentials of that Cause: We did upon serious
thoughts of heart think it our Duty to appear against those back sliding ways
once more; And the good Providence of God holding forth an opportunity to us to
open unto you a way for the further discharge of your remaining Trust, in
Parliament; we did by our Declaration May 6. humbly desire you would be pleased
to return to the exercise and discharge thereof. I only lay these things before
thee: Judge righteous judgment. -- Soon after their sitting, We presented our
Address, to which we had to our great content, ample assurance of their good
acceptance, expressed not only by their hearty thanks, but by approving many
things therein contained, and referring the rest to Committees of their
Members. -- Mark -- It Is most certain the Parliament did all man could do, to
keep fair with them, and did grant any thing they desired, so far as they
might not enslave the people, by a Senate; or give away their Money against all
reason; to maintain them in Pomp, who rose to such a height by the ruin of the
Nation.

It Is true, they petitioned that a godly, faithful and painful Ministry be
every where encouraged, countenanced and maintained; but the Parliament could
not presently find a better maintenance then Tithes for that purpose; neither
did the Army petition to have Tithes taken away, though now it seems they are
resolved upon; though I doubt, they do not yet know, which way to provide so
well for them: nor could the Parliament think taking away Tithes could be a
likely means that every where such a Ministry be encouraged, countenanced,
(...) maintained.

-- But now comes on the Charge, now it is that they justify themselves, by
insisting upon the Miscarriages of the Parliament, -- First and foremost the
Act of Oblivion was long before it was passed, and then most imperfect and
ineffectuall for the Ends expected, -- that it stuck long in hand is no great
wonder, for if it had easily passed, it might have given too much encouragement
for new Designs upon the Government; but it came out at last, that is sure
enough, but now it is miserably imperfect, and ineffectuall to the Ends
expected: though this were true, yet it is scurvy dealing on your side; why did
you not put the Parliament in mind of it in your Petition, and Representation,
and desire its amendment? you have had time enough to do it, as doubtless you
would have done, if that Act had not done its business pretty well: but we do
not know what you mean by the Ends expected, unless you would have had full
Indemnity for what ever you have done, or shall do amiss to your lives end:
Indemnity for keeping out the Parliament formerly, and Indemnity for shutting
them out now, and Indemnity for turning out every Authority that shall not
please you: this would do wondrous well indeed to the Ends expected; but I hope
this Imperfection is only the opinion of those Learned and able men that
persuaded you the Parliament was wholly dissolved: notwithstanding which you
made every body to own them for the supreme Authority, and took the Money they
levied for you, as if they had been a Parliament; and no question their Act of
Indemnity will serve your turn one time or other, one way or another, -- and
for what concerned our twelve Proposalls, wherein we owned the Lord Fleetwood
to be Commander i^ chief of the Land Forces of this Commonwealth, and
concerning which we had assurance given, that the same should be granted in
Parliament; -- verily this is excellent, who could give you assurance? these
Generals signify nothing: was it Sir Henry Vaune, who promised and vowed this
thing in their Name? you are hard put to it I perceive, -- we were not less
deceived in our Expectation (very strange the Parliament durst do any otherwise
then as you should direct them: to what a pitch of Pride are these Men grown!
who but a while since a great many of them I should hardly have numbered with
the Dogs of my Flock) his Commission being restrained to England and Scotland
(verily this is a critical piece, we would have him Commander in chief of the
Land Forces of the Commonwealth, and his Commission is restrained to England
and Scotland: he should have been Commander in chief of Jamaica too one would
think by the story -- upon my word you make hard shift to pick Quarrels: Does
any body think if the Parliament had gone about to oppress the Nation in the
least, that they would have routed in such Holes as these to have found out the
Sluts corner? Verily I am much pleased to see them in these Straights -- his
Commission was limited to the sixth day of May, or to be revoked at pleasure --
was this ever til now thought to be such an heinous Crim? what should tho
Parliament give such a Power that they could not recall? this would make the
Commander in chief Cosm German to a single PROTECTOR: What give a Sword into
mad men's hands! You have used the Sword so well formerly, that it is not good
trusting you further then we can see you; still it is better and better: you see
the Miscarciages the Parliament were guilty of -- and the further to abridge
him of his Authority, necessarily belonging to him, to keep the Army in good
order (that is, to make them for his own interest --) and to make the Army
wholly subservient to their Will; I pray to whose Will should they be
subservient? to the Parliaments, or my Lord Fleetwoods: (O gross Miscarriages
of the Parliament) they resolved that all Commissions should be given by Mr.
Speaker, this indeed is a grievous one, but I think pretty well agreeing with
the Principles of a Commonwealth, which nevertheless was submitted unto by the
Army for Peace sake, not for Conscience sake it seems; that is to say, rather
then lose their sweet Offices and Commands, they submitted for Peace sake, as
no question they would to the Turk rather then fail; though not a few of these
Sparks made very learned Speeches, and fair Promises of their faithfulness to
the Parliament, and seemed highly to resent the Parliaments Favor in thinking
them worthy of such Employments; and yet after all this you see what it is come
to, and a rare Principle you have introduced to be a Foundation for your Free
State, that I may take a Commission from you, and receive your Pay, and yet
when I see my time, turn your own Swords upon you: If some men should deal thus
with you, they paid you in your own Coin: and you could not refuse to take it
in current payment -- What Factions hereupon grew up in the Army? what new
moulding, changing, and transforming thereof, to the discomposure of the whole?
how Parties were made and headed, and encouraged by diverse Members sitting in
Parliament -- This is excellent; was that ever counted Faction before, which is
only Conscience of duty and honesty: some of the Commanders of the Army having
bewailed their Apostasy among the rest, thought it too much smelling of
hypocrisy to go over their old Lesson again, and dictate a Government to the
Parliament, having been sensible of their little good speed before, yea, and
bewailed it too in these very words, Declar, May 6. although there have been
many Essays, (that is, they had made many Essays since the disturbing of the
Parliament, as by the sense of that Declaration you must needs understand it)
to obviate dangers, and settle these Nations in Peace and Prosperity; yet all
have proved ineffectuall, the only wise GOD in the course of his Providence
disappointing all Endeavors therein: I say, these men observing upon what
Rocks you had run by your own confession, thought it good Christianity to
acquiesse in the wisdom of the Parliament, whom you had so earnestly desired
to return to their Trust; your selves hoping that through their Experience in
Affairs of Government, as you still say, you might safely deliver the Trust and
Power of the Nation into their hands: These are the very words of your new
Declaration: is this Faction to be satisfied in their Resolutions to whom you
had committed the Power and Trust? yes verily that is Faction, that will not
turn with every wind and breath of your changling Council of Officers: they had
taken their Commissions from the Parliament, and were not well convinced of the
necessity that lay upon them to be perfidious, but thought fit to be constant
to their Faith and Trust, and this is Faction; upon my word it is well defined:
I did not so thoroughly understand Faction before; the new moulding, changing,
and transforming, you make such ado about, is no more but this, you put out
some single person men out of your Army, as Gough, Ingoldsby, Whaly, Mills,
Falconbridge, Howard, and in their places the Parliament put in such as had
been right for a Commonwealth (except Lambert and Packer, two of your own
Creatures) as Okey, Rich, Overton, Alured Saunders; none were put out but
Protectorians, such as you had pointed at, or put out before; and none brought
in, saving only those you overrul^d them in, but such as had declared
themselves sufficiently for a Commonwealth: most of whom you approved, unless
Rich and Overton, and one or two more, whom you thought would not comply
enough, but were too honest for such Company -- Parties were made, headed, and
encouraged, by Members of Parliament; Made, Headed, and encouraged! here are a
great many words together to make up this Crime; that is to say, Colonel
Morley, and Sir Arthur Hasterigge, the latter of whom was laid by formerly by
the Protector, for being a true Friend to the Liberties of this Nation, and an
Eminent Assertor of the Principles of a Commonwealth, who exposed himself to
the fury of the Court, by contending for Englands Birthright, when the best H
E in the Army durst not speak a word for it, and has ten thousand times more
Honesty then all these Officers together, who never yet had occasion to bewail
his Apostasy, since 1653. for complying and acting under every Government: and
Morly I think is one of those Eminent Assertors of the Good Cause your
Declaration, May 6. speaks of, and one of those whose Experience in the Affairs
of Government, gave you hopes you might give the Power and Trust of the Nation
into their hands: Me thinks then he might be trusted to Command a Regiment; and
this is the sad story they tell, of making and heading Parties, unless
Lieutenant General Ludlow's Command in Ireland stick in their stomachs, who is
as honest as the best Commander of your now Council: a sad Crime indeed, that
two or three Parliament Men should have Commandes in the Army, when we remember
how marny Commanders of the Army got in the late Protect^rrs Parliament: and
what sin is the one, more then the other? but all the Mischief is, that Word
(Encouraged) the Parliament did all that could be done to pay the Army, and
therein gave them great Encouragement, that they should not be so in Arrear, as
they had been used to be: and this was the Crime, so that the Army began to see
they had mended their Masters, and generally were much satisfied with the
Parliaments Proceedings, which it seems began to steal away their hearts from
the Interest of the Great Officers, which in time might have made them too well
to understand themselves, to turn with every pretense of the Great Officers,
and believe me 'twas time to look to this; it is not fit any body should
encourage the Army but themselves: Lambert may give them a thousand pounds at a
time to Encourage his Officers to be his Jannisaries: but the poor Soldiers
must not be Encouraged by the Parliament. What a sad Predicament are our
Parliaments brought into; if they had not Encouraged the Soldiers, then that
had been a Crime with a witness: What take no Care of them that venture their
Lives for you? how often are the Parliament twitted in the Armies
Representation and Petition for their Rebukes upon the Proceedings of some of
the Northern Brigade; what misunderstand their humble Servants that had
ventured their Lives for them with so good Success, and now it is their Crime
that they Encouraged the Soldery: Good Lord! what is not a Crime, if the Army
please to call it so? We have brought our Hoggs to a fair Market -- and
strengthened, not only by bringing diverse persons into Commands of prejudiced
minds; you would do well to instance in any one man brought in of a prejudiced
mind to a Commonwealth Government, but a few of your own Creatures; As the
Instrument Maker, and that Valiant Decimator, Colonel Packer: unless you mean
men of prejudiced Minds to your former Ways, who were turned out because they
would not bow their Knees to Baal: As Okey, Rich, Overton, Alured, Saunders,
and some others: these did strengthen the Common wealths Principles, though
very like they might believe the Parliament would provide better for the
Nation, then your thoughts of heart and Consultations had agreed among your
selves: these strengthen Faction, because they would not strengthen your Hands
to set up the Brat of your own Brains, but thought it better wisdom to expect
settlement from the Parliament, who, as you say your selves, were signally
blessed of God, when your selves never thrived in any Design, but in unsetling
and ruining us -- And by removing faithful Officers into remote parts of this
Common wealth, without any cause shown, or Consultations had with the Commander
in chief thereupon, which is not only notoriously known unto all that are
concerned in Military Affairs, but obvious to common Observation -- O brave,
Here is a Charge with a witness; What is the mystery of this Business? I think
few are acquainted with the History of it. the Parliament may not order the
Forces they Pay, where they think most fit to dispose of them, for the security
of the Nation; but must ask their Lieutenant General leave first: surely if
this had been a matter of any moment, their Petition and Representation would
have rung a Peal in the Parliaments eans about it; and they would have been
more express, and particular in the Charge; But it is an Old Cheat to put things
into General terms, and to seem mighty consident of what is said; that by the
former one might more hardly undeceive ones self, by examination of
particulars; and by the latter might be more obliged to believe that which they
lay down as a matter notoriously known, and so not worthy of particular
instance: I profess my own ignorance in the matter, so as it may make a
Charge, and desie you to instance in particulars; which till you have done, I
tell you, You lie.

-- By which means the aforementioned design of a general Insurrection took
further encouragement, spreeding it self into every part of this Nation, and
being now grown ripe (though by the wonderful goodness of God prevented in
other places) broke out in Cheshiere --

O malice, maliced you had best say, as some of your Sneaking Creatures have
said, That the Parliament had a hand in Sir George Booths Plot. It had been
better for the security of the Nation, if more of those seditious Officers, and
their Forces, had been disposed into every Quarter of England, and not kept
loytering about London, to have awed the Parliament, and kept their Counsels
to dictate to them. This was that gave so much encouragement to the Plot; the
Officers of the Army lie plotting at London, and neglect their Charge, and in
the mean time they took opportunity to plot in the Country: And this must be
laid at the Parliaments door. And whereas the Plot in most places was
prevented, this, snith the Declaration, was by the wounderfull goodness of
God; but never a word of the Parliaments or Council of States wisdom, in
disposing of our Forces so as thoy were almost every where in readiness to
attend them: And if the Officers of the Army had been as they should be, many
of those Forces that lay at London, might have been in Chesh ere, and prevented
that danger too.

-- For the suppression of which, a convenient number of the Army were
appointed to march under Lambert, (Who appointed them?) and through the
Blessing of God, etc. were routed, and subdued. See, here is never a word of
the Parliaments, or the Council of States quick and almost miraculous bringing
over the Forces from Ireland and Dunkirk; no, their business now, is not to
commend the signal presence of God with the Parliament: these are Brave Youths.

-- The sull seace of which Mercy, put it into the hearts of some of the
Officers of that part of the Army, to meet, and consider how the same might be
improved to the glory of God, etc.

This makes my hair stare, that men dare speak after this rate; but it is the
Old Cheer with which we have been too long bewitched; the Officers met, to
consider how they might improve their mercies to the glory of God; and they
roated this Parliament; and did so again; and called the Mock-Parliament; and
again too and routed them; once more, and made their Protector; yes, and they
improved that to the glory of God too, and made him Protector for ever, thought
fit for the glory of God, that he should nominate his Successor; yes, and for
the glory of God too set up the Other House, and many of them were Members
thereof: Aie, and for the glory of God too pulled down the Protector, and both
his one House and his other House; and then for the GOOD OLD CAUSE, and the
glory of God, who, they say, had withdrawn his wonted presence from them,
invite this Parliament to sit again, because when they were turned out before,
the Army then thought, and say, they turned out of the way; and now, through
mercy, they return to give him the glory: Very good, and now the Northern
Brigade, for to improve the glory of God, must improve the glory of their Great
Commander; must have a General, and Lieutenant General, and Major General,
etc. Yes too, and to improve the glory of God, they must turn out the
Parliament again; vote all null and void that the Parliament did which
displeased them; yes, and for the glory of God too, they must have the sole
power of placing and displacing their Officers; yes, and for the glory of God,
they must act without Commissions, and against Commissions; take the whole care
of the Nation into their own hands, make Flcetwood Commader in Chief, that is
in English, General; Lambert the next man to him, and Desborough next to him;
yes, and for the glory of God too, it was set upon their Spirits, after seeking
of God, to create a Council of State, or Committee of Safety, into whose hands
they have given all power; that whosoevers sins they remit, shall be remitted;
and whatever they bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, or among the Saints
at Wallingford-house, if they like it, that must be always understood: And I
dare lay odds, that ere long, for the glory of God, it will be put upon their
hearts to lay them aside too: it is for the glory of God too, no doubt, that it
is now upon their spirits, to find a Better maintenance for the Ministry then
Tithes; to reform the Law, or rather to be a Law to themselves. But it is no
wonder if they mend the Law, since the Articles of War, it seems, want some
Reformation; yes, and it is for the glory of God too out of all question, that
to justify themselves, they must not only insist upon the failings of others;
but make the World believe strange things, when they cannot say one word to the
purpose to condemn the Parliament, or justify themselves, but in such a way of
juggling, dissembling and double meaning, that no Christian durst declare at
such a rate. These are so notoriously the Products of your Consultations for
the improvement of Gods glory, that not a Child in the Streets almost but will
say, Is the Army a fasting? surely some mischief is a working; and they have
Prophesied for the most part. For Gods sake either be more bonest, or boast not
so much of your Religion; those things that have been done by you, had been
horrid Crimes in them that never heard or believed in a Jesus. O this Religion,
these pretenses of yours, wherein you are wondrous dexterous, has done your
work hitherto, and fooled many honest hearts to a compliance with you; For
which perhaps the next Age may fame you, with, The most infamous Crew of
Munster.

-- Whereupon they resolved upon a Paper, etc. that is the Paper wherein they
desire a General, and other general Officers; This is for the glory of God:
but it will never be better as long as those busy bodies take so much upon
them; there is no doubt but as long as you essay to obviate dangers, and settle
the Nation, by such Principles as you agree among your selves, you will have
ever now and then occasion to look back where you turned out of the way; as
long as you say to the Parliament -- You take too much upon you, all the
Congregation or Camp are holy, we shall never see a better World; it is your
meddling has done all our Mischief: This Paper, says the Declaration, was sent
to Fleetwood, and his Excellency desiring to put the same into such a way, as
might not savor of Offense to the Parliament, Consulted with Sir Arthur
Hasterigge thereupon, as also with Vaune, and Salway; all which were to consult
what was fit to be done: Mark how fain they would have drawn in honest Sir
Arthur, who could never yet be drawn off from the Interest of his Country, and
his faithfulness to them; and judge what course was like to be taken in it, by
what course has been taken since, notwithstanding the dislike the Parliament
manifested against it, being also to be counseled by Vane and Salway, two very
precious Pieces

-- But the next day Sir Arthur informed the House of the said Paper; Yes, and
I think he had been a Knave if he had not.

-- Whereupon the House possessed with prejudice upon this misinformation: Mark
that here, and in some places afterward they would needs persuade us the
Parliament are such Fools, (as themselves) to be led by the Noses by two or
three Grandees. It Is well we know them better: and the consequence proves them
to have been in no mistake about this matter; None but such Woodcocks would
make themselves so ridiculous as to go about to persuade us that the Parliament
did not understand themselves as well as the General Council -- fell into
high Debates, expressing great heat and anger against the Lord Lambert (I
wonder how he came to be a Lord) and several, other faithful Officers of the
Brigade, from whence the Paper came. I wonder who told you this News, he was a
worshipful Member that thus told Tales out of Shcool, and knows, or should
know what he deferves for his pains? it is fit this were a little redressed; but
was it ever denied a Member to speak his Mind in the House, though it were
against the King himself, or rather his Council? I think the House is free,
some spoke freely enough in the House not long since against Protectorship, and
again the other House, and yet I never heard that sin laid to their charge:
what is it an unpardonable sin to express some anger against Lambert in
Parliament? I think they were too tender of him; And if they could have done
more, and said less it had been better for the Nation -- although they were
truly informed by the Lord Fleetwood, That Lambert gave no consent, nor had any
hand in it. ('It Is true he went into Yorkshire on purpose, as it is said, that
he might dissemble it the better) but do you think any man in his right wits
will believe it: no question, he that made a former Instrument, played a little
upon this too -- But endeavored the suppression thereof, both before and after
his coming to Town: Did you ever read the like Impudence? do you imagine he
that could suppress the Parliament could not suppress a poor Paper; sure you
take us to be very blooks -- so that now it was apparent that those Factions
already said (Castles in the Air) began to pursue what they had in prospect,
and design (what was that? why a free Commonwealth) more openly and vigorously
then before: as how for example, Why by Voting that any other General Officers
then what were already, were chargable, dangerous, and unnecessary: for that
was the design of the Paper to have a General and general Officers; if that
had not been the business, you would have heard of it in the Petition and
representation you may be sure: nor do they deny it (but dissemble it) here,
and make you believe they will expose it to public View; I believe so at
latter Lammas, or when they have licked it into another shape: and yet these
men are utterly against a single Person, or Peers; mark the issue on it, if they
be not stopped in their Career --

Hereupon the Officers of the Army thought it their duty to represent to the
Parliament (what your duty, when you knew that before they were wholly
dissolved) their Innocence; and to obviate the aforementioned Designs (you have
understood before what those Designs were) to desire (or rather to will and
require) that the Army might receive their Commissions, with the Advice of such
persons, who by experience had the knowledge of their Abilities, and fitness
for service: See now how much concerned they are to shrink away the shoulder
from the Parliament; O this taking Commissions from the Parliament went to
their hearts, but yet it is no bar against turning them out: I wonder who were
more fit to judge of the Ability of any persons for Employment then the
Council of State? why might they not serve turn for a Committee of Nomination?
and I think you can rarely name a man that had any Commission, but who were
first presented either by the Committee of Nominations, or the Council of
State, unless some men that were too well known to be suspected of unfitness
for such an Employment -- And that they might not be turned out Arbitrarily
(give an instance of one that was so turned out if you can) but by the usual
and known way of a Court Marshall: was this ever an usual or known way, that
the Court Marshall should be above the Parliament, if a Parliament think fit to
put out a Commander, and the Court Martial think it not fit, then that
Commander shall keep his place in despite of the Parliament: and yet these be
the men that intend not to set up a Military Power in this Nation: I wonder
whether the Parliament asked the Court Martial leave, when they at one clap
Voted all the Membert of the Parliament too out of their Commands in the Army:
when they took away Essex his Commission, and all the Officers of his Army, and
formed a new Army, displacing any Officer as they saw occasion; and if this be
denied the Parliament now, it is because their Servants are their Masters: for
whoever has this Power, if the Court Martial must have it, I Will warrant them
the Supreme Authority of the Nation --

And lastly, Asserting the Liberty and Rights belonging to the People, etc.
Surreverence in your Teeth: you assert the Liberties of the People: that is a
very good one; if we had no better Assertors of our Liberties then you, we
might think ourselves happy under WILL. the Conqueror, you assert our Liberties
bravely by doing what you please, setting up what Power your selves please, and
pulling down as often as they displease you: you have beggered the Nation
almost, and tell us stories of asserting our Liberties: but since you mock God,
we take it the less to heart that you mock us, for the Servants are not greater
then their Masters -- of presenting in a peaceable way their desires to the
Parliament, was humbly presented in our Representation and Petition, Oct. 5.11.
we understand with what Spirits, and what were the matters contained therein,
and how well they agreed with a peaceable and submissive Spirit: indeed you are
very submissive men who have taken upon you to Rule the Nation, almost time out
of mind, and I perceive you are very unwilling now to become our Servants,
though you do not think it below you to take the Wages of your hire: you
present your Pelition very submissively, but you resolve to have what you ask
for --

The Genenerall Council of Officers (that is half a score of the high and
mighty Officers, the rest being led like a blind man by a Dog and a Bell) when
they agreed the foresaid Representation resolved then to the end, that the true
state of Affairs might be communicated to those of the Army who were equally
concerned with them That Copies should be sent to every Regiment, etc. inviting
them in case they were free, to concur with them in their just desires: See now
if this be not a submissive way of Petitioning: for as Monk and Overton very
well write: If your Representation be already delivered, to what purpose is it
that we subscribe: to no purpose in the world, but knowing that the Parliament
would never yield to this unreasonable Request; they would feel the Pulse of
all the Forces in England, Scotland, and Ireland, to see what numbers they
could engage for them, and see who would not that they might have an eye upon
them, till they could turn them off: and by this means if they could not fright
the Parliament, yet they could sorce them out when they saw their time; that is
to say, As soon as they had settled the Monthly Assesment, and surnished them
with a legal course of gathering Money --

The Parliament upon the Tenth of October resolved, That the Officers of the
Army had received and should receive from time to time Marks of the Favor of
the Parliament, and Countenance answerable to their Merit -- A fair Answer I
think: but it seems very far short of what they meant in their first Proposal;
it is pity but the Parliament should be bound to answer them to an hair: this
is a gross fault indeed: but it seems the next is worse; Resolved, That it is
the duty of all persons, especially Members of Parliament, to inform the House
of any thing which in their apprehension may concern the public safety; and
that it is the undoubted right of the Parliament to receive and debate those
Informations, and resolve what they think sit thereupon -- a most incomparable
generous and truly English Resolve; and yet it seems being applied to the
Armies second Proposal (never were Parliament thus bound to humor a company
of Mercenary Soldiers, that they must have the length of their foot to a hair)
it asserts that it is the duty of all persons to inform the House of any thing,
be it never so frivolous and false, and to resolve thereupon the ruin and
destruction of persons and Families: the Parliament should have Voted their
Insormation frivolous and false, and punished the honest Member that informed
them, and then they would never have complained of their Resolution: It is a
hard matter to please every fool. --

Upon Tuesday, the next day after a Bill was brought into the House, and
contrary to the usual Orders of Parliament, thrice read in one and the same
day: this is that Act that cuts them to the heart, and if it had been read in
the House two several days, you may be sure an Order would have been taken it
should not have been read a third time: men must be quick in case of necessity;
there was no trisling now, they had found out your Design, and it was fit they
should nip you a little? and you must note, that this was not done before they
had notice of this Conspiracy, of getting hands after the Petition was debated
in the House: There is no reason the Parliament should take care for them who
take so little care for our Parliaments, but call them and break them at their
pleasure: however, you are not lest without remedy, Parliaments may give you
money when they please, and I do not hold it reason you should have it any
other way: yes, but by this means the godly Ministers will suffer: Pray take no
care for that; you are resolved to take away their Tithes, and then it matters
not much who gets their places:

Many other mischiefs you reckon up, but they will fall upon you, own heads;
when you foresaw these dangers that would arise, what made you such mad men as
to break the Parliament; if they had continued, here had been none of all this
difficulty; But the Commissions of your nine Tories, or Bandits (for such they
are having no Commissions) are a valuable consideration for all this hazard;
yea, this Nation must wallow in blood rather then Lambert must not be Lord
Lambert: Could you think the Parliament were such Novices, as to be only your
Tools and Engines? we should have laughed at them for their wisdom, if they
had been such Noddies; they had experience of your faithfulness once before:
-- Concerning which we add, That had not strange precipitancy, and design
driven it on; it could never have been imagined that any Supreme Authority
would ever have exposed a people to such inconveniences -- What do you now
abuse them with the Supreme Authority? It seems, it was their design to be the
Supreme Authority, which they could never be while you were the Supreme power.
See how they are at it with Precipitancy again; indeed I think they were too
nimble for you; and I am betten pleased, you should spite them, then pity them;
but I think it was your precipitancy that exposed us to all these
inconveniences; and I believe if they had been ten times more, you would have
ventured them, rather then part with the Supreme power. -- Things being thus
prepared, the next day the Parliament hoping they had a great influence upon
part of the Army, and conceiving by their late Acts they had sufficiently
perplexed them, who they doubted might oppose them. (Mark, you see by their own
confession, those acts were made only in defense;) -- and that the Government
of the Nation was so sure in their own hands, as in all probability things must
run into consusion, except managed by themselves; as indeed by your own
confession they did, after you first forced them, till you restored them again;
and will in all probability still run into disorder till they are called back
to settle them; and although you scoff at them, while you tell them they
thought the Government sure in their own hands; yet I think any body that had
nor been acquainted with your falsenesse, would have thought it had been so
indeed, when they read in your Papers, that you were their servants, their
faithful servants; that you were their Army, that it was your Duty to obey
their Commands; who would have doubted but the Government had been sure in
their hands; till they could have secured the Rights of the Nation, and fairly
have delivered the power into other hands, by the Sixth of May next.

But if you look back upon your Declar. May 6. and Petition and Address, May
12. you your selves give them such high Characters, as one would think they
were the fittest men to have the Government in their hands. Reader, look back,
and ponder, I will not repeat. -- In the morning the doors of the Lobby by
their appointment being fast shut and guarded, that none might by any means
come near the House, or understand their proceedings, -- And but good reason;
for you have seen before, there are Tell-tales Members. -- Occasion is
ministered from one of the Letters which was signed by several Officers,
according to appointment of the General Council. -- It should seem whatever the
General Council Orders must be done, Right or Wrong; but it is pretty sport,
these Signers put the General Council upon this work, and then the General
Council order them to Sign; and the very truth is, a few of them rule the
General Council, and some of their wives rule them, and who do you think Rules
the Nation? -- sent to a Regiment of the Army, and produced by a Member of the
House, (it being of no other purpose then the sending of the said
Representation to one of the Regiments, as is before mentioned. -- That is to
say, to get their Subscriptions, after it had been debated in the House for the
ends I mentioned before: -- Nevertheless they fell soul upon the said Officers
who subscribed it, -- That is very true, and bravely done, for they made no
Difference of persons; but fell foul (if you term it so) upon every one of them
according to the merit of their Confederacy: -- and took this rise, in
pursuance of their former intent, to make a plain breach upon the Army; the
question is, whether they were to be blamed for falling foul upon them without
just cause shown; I appeal to any sober man. Does any body think the Parliament
sought any occasion of breach? did not the Army give them this occasion? There
were Fifty Members against Fifteen in this business; and those Fifteen had not
a word to say to excuse the business; but some of them were silent, as not
knowing what to say, or not daring to speak what they thought; and those that
spoke, had no better arguments then this; the Army could not bear your Rebukes
the other day, when you voted against a General, and how do you think will
they bear this? What is it a plain breach upon the Army to punish Treacherous
Servants? to punish them did I say? to put them out of Service: -- and
thereupon vote out of their commands, (without hearing, etc.) This was no time
to observe Formalities; they might have been heard next day if they had
pleased, but that they had nothing to say for themselves, nor would come at the
Parliament, (who upon submission might have made their peace,) or the General
Council might have represented to the Parliament the state of the case, if it
was misunderstood, as sure enough it was not; else they would not have betaken
themselves to their Old Shift of Disturbing the Parliament -- and as they did
the other day, they hastily Now passed the Act for the Seven Generals -- Which
had not been done, if Fleetwood had not declined being faithful to the
Parliament; but they were rather to take care of things then persons; to keep
up the Reputation of the Nation, then the Grandeur of the Old Protectors
Son-in-law; and therefore if he would be careless of the Interest of the
Nation, and prefer the Governing of the Nation by the Sword, before the real
Welfare of so many Millions of Souls as were concerned in this Affair: The
Parliament were not to be blamed, if they put them into command that would be
more firm to the Interest of the Nation, and into so many hands, as might not
easily agree to enslave us. -- Whereupon three of the said number (the House
adjourning) immediately repaired to the Speakers Chamber; and having provided
Six Barrels of Powder, (If this were true, 'twas in their own defense,
suspecting you would force the House; though I have heard say you brought them
thither, and then gave out, that the other did it) forthwith gave out Orders
for Coll. Morleys Regiment to march thither, (and need enough) as also diverse
others that they thought would be most sure to them: and likewise gave order to
Okey to draw his Regiment to the Palace-yard, upon which he marched to
Tuttle-fields with Four of his Troops, and from thence having sent one to the
Palace-yard, he marched with the other three into London. Pray mark how exact
they are: they tell you where he marched, first into Tuttle-fields, then sends
one into the Palace-yard, himself with three more marched into the City: When
they tell truth, you have the exact time, place, number, every circumstance
that you may trace it to a tack: But as I noted before, when they juggle, there
is no such exactness, if many things before recited had been true, you should
have been sure to have had then every circumstance to a tittle; being hardly of
less consideration, and more unworthy of our knowledge, then that Coll. Okey
marched into Tuttlefields; -- he marched into London, for countenancing the
drawing together the Militia Forces in order to a conjunction with him (and may
his Posterity be your Vassals, that might have done it, and did not) it might
have saved what we may now pay more dearly for; -- But this had better success
in Southwark, where Thomsons Regiment drew together; and indeed they are highly
to be honored for the only English Spirits within the Lines of Communication;
it was time for the Parliament to look about them.

-- The Officers of the Army having received notice of these things thereupon
judged it their duty to draw together in Arms; and march to the Palace-yard,
the place they had appointed for their Rendezvouze; that was the place of their
Rendezvouze formerly upon the like occasion; -- to understand the grounds of
their so assembling themselves together; and does any body think this was all
the business? no sure 'twas for no good that this was their place of
Rendezvouze; the Parliament knew their old tricks, and where to expect them the
next morning; they do not tell us what time of the night or day it was, when
they came to the Palace-yard, nor when they came to the Lord Majors; but
Captain Pride can tell you who met them in the way. One would think as they
tell the story, that Okey had been in the City before them; and that Thompsons
men were up before they thought of Arming themselves;

-- And being arrived there, and finding several Companyes of Morleyes
Regiment were placed in the Hall, (whom it should seem you did not expect to
find there, falling into their power before you were well aware, who might
have spoiled you, if they had intended any thing more then to defend their
Masters the Parliament, whom you came to force from their trust) -- and for the
grounds and reasons aforementioned (as also that they might not be encouraged
in such a dangerous opposition, to the apparent hazard of the public peace,)
There needed have been no opposition nor breach of peace if you had not made
it; your Fellow Soldiers intended only to guard the Parliament, as in all duty
and conscience they were bound -- therefore upon you be the breach whatever yet
may happen: -- We found our selves necessitated to put a period and
determination to the Parliaments meeting together. Your ever Renowned General
taught you this prank, you are very towardly Babes of Grace.

-- And think our selves yet further obliged (sure you do but think so) to
declare all Orders, Acts, pretended Acts, or other Declarations, or any of
them, made, enacted or passed on Monday the 10 of October, and on Tuesday and
Wednesday following, them and every of them null and void, to all intents and
purposes; (this would do very well, if it were so easily done) and do hereby
declare them and every of them, and every Clause and sentence of them, invalid,
null and void to all intents and purposes; and likewise all Acts and Orders and
proceedings thereupon had or done, in as full and ample manner, at if the said
Orders, Acts, pretended Acts, or Declarations, and every of them had never been
done.

Very gallant, and I Declare you and every of you, stark mad, in as full and
ample manner, as if you were of the Congregation of Bedlam; or as any there
are, to all intents and purposes.

-- All which we thought fit to publish, hoping all unprejudiced persons will
acquiesce in the justice and necessity hereof.

I do not know what you hope, but I dare say, no unbyassed rational man can
either approve the justice, or dare justify the necessity thereof; upon my
conscience you can no more justify this action before indifferent judges, then
I can, if I should break open my neighbors house, and rob his chest.

Reader, I leave thee free to judge, you have seen what the Army say for
themselves, and how double tongued they are; you have seen them compared with
their former selves, and how unlike themselves they look. You have seen what
they have said against the Honorable Parliament, or any members thereof, which
is so far from any miscarriages, that they have done the Parliament this
kindness, to let the Nation see a little how much they are indebted to them and
generally men are well assured that the Parliament meant the Nation a very
happy Government, in the enjoyment of their ancient Birthrights: and who ever
he be that can show us wherein they have broke their Trust reposed in them in
the least, since they sat, Let him cast the first stone at them: and I will
stand still and hold my peace; they would have been sure to hear of it in this
Declaration, if any such thing had been true: and let me tell you here (which I
forgot before, for all what the Declaration says) That the Parliament in the
Act before mentioned, did expressly take care of the Act of Oblivion, and the
Adventurers for Lands in Ireland, excepting them particularly in the said Act,
that nothing in the said Act should be construed to the Impairing thereof.

I will only now rightly state the Case between the Parliament and Army very
briefly and impartially, because you have seen how the Army faulter and mince
the matter. --

The Army having made a Rod for their own Breach, by agreeing to the Protectors
nominating his Successor (as they had agreed him to be King, if he had lived a
little longer) the old Man dying, up starts his Son to Reign in his stead (whom
God made an honester man then his Father) the Army soon finding him too
careful of the Liberties of England (though Principled for Kingship: an
Epidemicall Disease among them at that time) they were desirous to have
Fleetwood their General (fearing else their Kingdom would not last long) but
the Protector was persuaded it was better for him to be General, and let
Fleetwood be Protector (I think so too) but if a General, he was as willing to
trust Falconbridge, as Fleetwood. --

In this Juncture of Affairs, the Protector hastens a Parliament, as they
called it; which though it was thwacked with Officers of the Army and many
Pensioners of his Highness, yet could not endure to be Bearded by Wallingsord
house, nor will any Parliament ever e^ure it till the Worlds end.

Hereupon followed those Votes for the discontinuing their General Councels:
which put them in such a Rage, that nothing would serve them but its
Dissolution, which accordingly was effected: now all the Power falls into the
hands of Wallingford-house, who had many thoughts of heart, and Consultations
how to settle the Nation in the way they are now agoing; merning nothing less
in the World, then the recalling this Parliament: but so it fell out, that some
honest Hearts set this Design a going among them, which took so with the small
Officers of a sudden, that there was no way (though enough against the minds
of some Grandees) but this Parliament must be called. The Great men seeing
things thus run against them, and their Interests were forced to each hold of
this Twig to save themselves from drowning (as they now tell us, with is the
truest word in all their Declaration) to keep their Heads above water: To this
end they had the previous Meetings with some leading Members, (as they call
them) to Cog them into a subserviency of their Interest; and hoping well that
this Twig might keep their Interest from sinking a while: They most Christian
like dissemble their Repentance in their Declaration, May 6. and invite the
Parliament to return: but it is well known, they did but lie in their hearts,
when they took shame to themselves: unless they were convinced, and converted
in the very minute of penning that Declaration. the Parliament being Assembled,
it was soon manifest by their Address of May 12. what Designs they drove at,
Viz. A Senate to check the Parliament, and Eight and twenty thousand pounds per
annum for the Protector and his Mother, and to have Fleetwood Commander in
chief, of England, Scotland, and Ireland; to say nothing of the Two latter: The
Honesty of the Parliament is for ever to be had in Memory, that they did not
agree for a Senate: such a Temptation as has hardly ever been resisted by men:
for by this means most, or all of the Parliament might have been joined with
the Ringleaders of the Army, and been a Senate for ever; called Parliaments and
made Fools of them, having no Power left them to do any thing but by
concurrence of the Senate: thus they might have been an Everlasting Parliament,
and they and their good Servants have ruled for ever and ever: this Proposition
of the Army not being answered to their Expectation; for this was the main of
the matter -- together with their receiving Commissions from the Parliament,
which was put upon them, to oblige their Consciences to that duty, which they
declared they owed unto the Parliament: the Parliament finding them not
altogether such humble Servants as they declared themselves; which Commissions
they accepted for Peace sake, till they should find an opportunity to turn
over a new leaf: Much regret was discovered against this by many Principal
Blades, and many thoughts of heart there were, how to get their Necks out of
this Yoke, that they might the better go on for a Senate.

In the mean time Sir George Booth's Rebellion breaks out, which being quelled,
some of the Officers of that Brigade (for you must believe Lambert had no hand
in it) found it upon their hearts to consult how they might improve this for
the Glory of God (you know what I mean) then up comes this Paper for a
General, and general Officers, the only means to effect their Designs: but
this (with it may be some other particulars) were too gross: and had been
grievously rebuked by the Parliament: However this Design must not be laid
aside (for their Good old Cause would down if it did) although Fleetwood had
undertook great Matters to the Parliament to still this noise of the Waters,
and tumult of his People.

But after long Banding among the General Council, and rancor enough against
the Parliament; to the Parliament they came with a Petition and
Representations, full of sweet Expressions of Obedience and Duty (to have
drilled out the Act of 100000 l. per mensem, and the Custonics and Excise,
which was well enough understood) but their Representation abusing the
Information the House had received, and their Petition calling for some things
of dangerous consequence, they could not then receive an Answer thereunto, but
had the thanks of the House for the good Expressions of their Affections.

In the mean while it must not sleep, but the said Petition must be dispatched
to every Regiment and Garrison, as was said before: the Parliament in the mean
while go on to consider their Petition, and resolve very honorably upon
several heads thereof: during this Juncture, the Parliament having certain
assurance of the said Conspiracy of going about to engage all the Forces of
this Commonwealth to side with them in their said unreasonable Desires, and a
Letter being produced with the Names of several Officers, wherein was enclosed
one of the said Petitions to be subscribed by the Regiment, to whom it was
directed.

The Parliament also taking notice of the mischievousness of their Desire, That
no Officer might be Disbanded but by a Court Martial; whereby they would have
been enabled to Cashire any Officer that was faithful to his Trust, they having
no other way to suppress that Conscience that was in many Commanders, That they
ought to be faithful to them from whom they had received their Commissions:
Nor had they any other way to carry on their Design of a Senate, the most
horrid Vilany that ever was mentioned among us; and there being no other
Construction to be made of it, but the Army by doing thus after their Petition
was delivered, and Debated, intended to force their Desires; their faithful
Servants going about to play REX, the Parliament could not but find it a Duty
highly incumbent on them, if they would be faithful to the Interest of their
Country, to use their best Endeavors to stop this Carrier.

Hereupon it was (with good reason) resolved, That no Money should be levied
upon the people of England, without their consent in Parliament, and other
things in that Act contained, of very great prudence to the end forementioned:
and then with much Justice discharged the said Officers, who had signed the
said Letter from their Employments.

The Parliament knowing how well some of the Army stood affected to them, and
how this would ripen and whet that violence that would nevertheless shortly
have been acted upon them, hoped well that Fleetwood would have been faithful
to his Trust -- (whose Commssion was altogether, or very near of as long
continuance as the Parliament had resolved the uttermost of their Session, Viz.
(till May next) but he then lost that Reputation of Faithfulness which he had
with many men before, and declined the securing of the Parliaments Privileges,
and after acted against them; Of which I hope he will repent one day.

The Parliament being at this loss, Created seven Commissioners, (of which
nevertheless he was one) but this was below him forsooth; Three whereof began
to act for Guarding the Parliament, expecting that a Force should be put upon
the House, which was soon endeavored; for it was not long before a
considerable Party came into the Palace Yard for the same purpose: but being
prevented of taking possession of the House, they intercepted the Speakker, and
after Affronts given him, turned him back: and so they say they have put a
period to the Parliament.

I appeal whether this be the naked state of the Case, and truth of the Matter
yea or no to their own Consciences.

You will judge then, they have well told their own Tale; the rest of the story
every body knows; and I hasten to the Press. --

It remains now, that I should make some Observations upon what, they declare,
is upon their hearts to do, but because what is upon their hearts to day, or
what they tell us is upon their hearts to day, will be at their Heels to Morrow.

I hold it not at all worth my Labor, but resolve henceforward never ot
believe what they declare for the Good of the Nation, till I see it done, and
then I shall never believe it: and for what they resolve to do, which tends
only to Ruin, as some things they now have upon their Hearts; look sturvily
that way. I shall heartily wish that some wiser men may take the WORK out of
their Hands: Or if I should take them a little to Task, I should but make
sport, and I am loath to be a Fool in the Play: Does any body think that they
will endeavor that a (Due) I do not understand what they mean by that Word
Due; I doubt it comes from a Root that signifies something else besides Just)
Liberty may be assured to all the Freeborn People of these Nations: Freeborn
People of the Nations, who are they? they must be twenty years old and upwards
I think, but if they were not born Fools, I am sure they are made Fools, what
pretty Work are they like to make with the Reformation of the LAW? sure no body
doubts but you will do more hurt then good --

That a faithful, godly, and painful Gospel Preaching Ministry may be
maintained; a long story, but not a word of Learning, no that is superstitious
He warrant you: they can tell you the mind of Christ peremptorily enough,
without consulting the Original: not a Wise man among them at their Devotions
in Whitehall: And the truth is, if they would make all of our Ministers
Officers of the Army, they might be maintained in a more certain and honorable
way, then that scurvy way of Tithes; which will yet be more vexatious to the
People ten thousand times, when you can bring it into the Exchequer, as I
really believe that to be the Design.

But here comes a most certain Truth, no body questions it, Why do you trouble
your selves about it? We have no Aims or Ends to set up a Military, or
Arbitrary Power -- but I hope Necessity may put you upon it, if the People
prove unruly, and will not submit to those Principles you have agreed among
your selves -- But have already provided (you shall have no thanks for your
pain) that the Civil and Executive part of Government may be lodged in a
Committee of Safety: This is a fine new Name indeed; this is no Military
Government: Whose Deputies are they trow, if one should Carechise them?

Question, Who made you? Answer, The General Council of Officers. Quest. Who
gave you your Name? Answ. The General Council of Officers.
How many Colonels, Generals, and Lords of the Army are there among them? what
are they no Military Power, because they are not all of the General Council
of Officers? yet there is one Lawyer among them, it seems, and that makes them
a Civil Power, I think half of this Committee of Safety, are of the General
Council of Officers; and yet they have no Aims to set up a Military Power --
and they obliged in a short time (I thought it bad been just six weeks) to
prepare such a form of Government, as may best suit with a Free State and
Commonwealth: that is wisely done He promise you; I hope they have more wit
then to be obliged to it: can you tell what is that form that will best suit?
or will you take their words for it, That what they prepare is the best? if
they should have so good a conceit of their own Contrivances, as to promise you
that it is such? No, It must be according to the Principles agreed upon at
Wallingford House, must it not? wherein, no doubt all that know you, will say
on your behalfs, You are not sufficient for these things: and will cry unto the
Lord (not to carry on the work in your hands) no honest men dare do that; That
he will arise from his holy Habitation, and judge the Cause of the oppressed,
of the Father less, and the widow: That he would judge between them that fear
God, and them that fear him not: That he would make bare his holy Arm, and
witness against the ungodliness and unrighteousness of them, even those that
have made void his Law. That he would scatter the people that delight in War;
And that they that take the Sword, may perish by the Sword: And that he would
restore us Judges as at the first, and Counselors as at the beginning; Men
fearing God and hating Covetousness: To be Repairers of our breaches, and
Restorers of Paths for us to dwell in: That we may never want Parliaments to
Rule over us: least we become a Prey to the Teeth of unreasonable men, whose
tender mercies are cruelties.

And for you, Soldiers, that you may do no Violence, but be content with your
Wages; and if for this we become your Enemies, and you count us evil men,
because we cannot say as you say: Let God, the righteous God, judge between US,
and YOU.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
REader, Take notice there is two sheets of Paper, Entitled, A Parliamenters
Petition to the Army: which is verbatim the latter part of a late Book,
Entitled, The Grand Concernments of England Ensured: To which some body has
added one Page of Notes, stolen out of a Sermon, which I utterly disown and
dislike. All which is done without any knowledge of mine, and I fear with no
good design: -- Besides some expressions of those prophetic Notes (as they are
styled) were severely censured by learned, and godly men, as savouring of too
much Levity, and for his Sermon, I think the Parliament gave him no thanks.


