A LETTER Sent from the Marquess of ARGYLE TO THE KING of SCOTS;

Concerning the raising of a new Army against the English; And his Desires and
Proposals touching the same.

Also, his Declaration to the People, and his Summons to the Gentry in the
North; with the Rising of the Highlanders and Redshanks; their falling upon the
Parliaments forces, and the event and success thereof.

Likewise, the manner how they fortify the Hills and Mountains; and the
strange Engines of War which they have planted.

Imprinted at London, for George Horton, 1652.

A DECLARATION Of the Marq. of ARGYLE Concerning the Parliament of England; and
his Resolution and Summons to the Gentry: With the Rising of the Highlanders.
SIR,
THe Marquess of Argyle is returned to the Highlands, being possessed with
sundry jealousies and fears touching the present Government of the
Commonwealth of England; for, indeed, he has declared, That he cannot give his
assent for the incorporating the Kingdom of Scotland, with the Commonwealth of
England; but holds himself bound in duty, whilst he has any power) to
preserve the interest of the Kirk, and to include a Toleration for the
Discipline of that Nation, as it was concluded, enacted, and agreed upon by the
General Assembly of Divines; And upon that account he was resolved to stand or
fall: In pursuance whereof, he has sent a Summons to the Lords and Gentry in
those parts (a Copy whereof, I have sent you here enclosed) for them immediately
to make their personal appearance at Candress, to consult and determine upon
the weighty and emergent affairs of that Nation; for the defense and
preservation of their Religion, Laws, and Liberties.

And accondingly on the fourth of this instant April, diverse of the Gentry met
at the aforesaid place, where the Marquess presented* 19 Propositions, touching
their fundamental Laws and Government, the Presbyterian Pro^ession, and the
^^iviledges of the People; and after mature deliberatio^ thereupon their
consultation produced these Results* That they found them to be consonant to
the Word of God (yet the Voters Aliens to Religion) and according to the solemn
League and Covenant, and therefore thought themselves bound in Conscience, and
Duty to adhere thereunto, and to give their condescensions for promoting thereof.

Whereupon the Marquess desired their subscriptions, and unanimously they
assented thereunto; so that there is a new League and Confederacy against the
English; by which means, an Highland War is expected this Summer; in order
whereunto, about 1000 Redshanks are levied, being armed with Bows and Arrows,
Long Skeines, Cross-bows, Darts, and other strange Engines of War, (yet nothing
so sure, but that they are instruments for their own destruction) and have made
a spacious Line along the River near Andress, with several Half-Moons,
Flankers, and Sconces; but want great Canon exceedingly to plant: however, they
are very active and busy in making of Lether-Guns of several sorts both great
and small; and are raising diverse Bulworks and Fortifications at sundry Passes,
Rivers, and Foords, and are as busy, as so many Rats in a Barley-mow.

They talk high, and say they will level us with the Valleys, by stoning us
from the Rocks; and think themselves as safe as so many Thieves in a Mill,
because of their Mountainous Fortifications, having upon each Rock, where there
is any possibility to attempt a pa^^age, placed great heaps of stones and
flints, to tumble down upon their heads, in case they should attempt to storm.

These Highlanders have lately made an attempt upon the Low-Lands, where they
fell upon some of our Out-quarters; but the Allarm being given, our men very
opportunely came in, and soon expelled them; killing twenty two, and took
thirty four prisoners.

We could not embrace the pursuit, by reason of the advantagiousness of the
grounds for the Enemy, yet notwithstanding upon the securing of the prisoners,
we demanded what their principles were they fought for; they answered. For God*
their dear Lord Marquess, and their good King; but seemed to be very
passionate; and truly I must ingenuously confess, they are a stout (but
Heathenish) Generation.

For their Ministers are as crosse-grain'd as ever, and throw so many
Fireballs at the Government, that (if possible, and permitted) they will set
all again in flames; and great is their spleen against those of their own
Nation, that are satisfied in acting by Commission, under the Authority of
England, or appear any ways inclinable to an Incorporation with it.

So much, for their own Ends, are they enemies to the good of their domineering
Hierarchy. If the yoke of the Lords, Lairds, and Priests be once taken off,
then they will be deprived of that wicked compliance, which was wont to be
maintained betwixt themselves, as cruel Taskmasters, both in Spirituals and
Civils, for inslaving of the poor people.

But now (praised be God) things work pretty well; for, the Scales begin to
fall off from men's eyes, to a lothing of former Vanities, insomuch that several
Kirks about Aberdeen are fallen off, and have deserted that Presbytery, which
gives a strong Allarm to the rest of the Clergy. Its reported, That the
aforesaid Marquess of Argyle has fent a Letter to the pretended King Charles
Stuart, for a supply of Arms and Ammunition, wherein he assures him that he
will be both loyal and faithful to the last minute, and that he has now a new
Game to play, etc. Indeed, we may probably conjecture, That he has some
notable Design in hand, by reason of his Confederacy and Combination with the
adverse Party; a clear demonstration whereof, is apparently made evident by the
ensuing Summons.

THese are strictly to charge and require all Lords and Gentlemen whatsoever,
that they forthwith make their appearance at Candress, there to consult and
determine upon such things as may tend to the honor of Religion, the peace and
welfare of this Nation, the preservation of our Liberties and Freedoms, and the
due observing of our ancient Laws and Customs, in Kirk and State, against all
those who shall endeavor the extirpation thereof. Dalkeith April 9. 1652.
FINIS.

