ARGUMENTS AGAINST All Accommodation and Treaties, Between the City of
London, AND The Engaged Grandees OF THE Parliament and Army.

Written by one that honors God, and loves his King and Country.

Printed in the Year 1648.

Arguments against all Accommodation and Treaties between the City, and the
engaged Grandees of the Parliament and Army.
1 IT will neither be safe nor honorable, for so great a City to accommodate
and join interest with a conspiring Party, that by frequent violations of
their faith and duty, have inslaved King, Parliament, City and Kingdom, and
broken the Faith of this Nation given to the Scotts in the large Treaties, and
in the National Covenant.

2 By accommodating with them, you make all their crimes your own, their
subtilty being to involve you to join with them in defense of their crimes.

3 The Scottish Quarrel is not against the English Nation, but against the
treacherous and hypocritical Grandees, who by perjuring themselves, and
satisfying their engagements both unto Kingdom and Army, keeping the Soldiers
by false suggestions from disbanding, and totally obstructing Irelands relief;
and also a conspiring party in Parliament, who keep them up to make good the
aforesaid crimes, forcing what Votes they please to pass, by over-awing the
Parliament: witness Cromwells laying his hand upon his sword, and forcing the
House to pass those traitorous Votes against the King, contrary to their own
consciences, Allegiance, Protestations, Vow and Covenant, and to raise Taxes
upon the people, which they share amongst themselves. This war is not likely
to be of any continuance, considering there being in the Army many
conscientious men, who have had such ample experiment of the falsehood of their
Grand Officers, that they are not like to hazard their lives again under the
command of such grand Impostors as they are; also knowing the general hatred
of the Kingdom to them under whose insupportable burdens and oppressions it
groaneth. Nor have we any way to break the power of the said Grandees of this
Army but by the Scots, whereby the just Rights and Interests of all three
Kingdoms may be settled, and Ireland relieved: all which the Scots have
declared in their former Papers delivered to both Houses of Parliament.

4 If you accommodate with this Faction, you must have the same friends and
foes with them, as well as the same sins and quarrels; and then it will grow
to a National Quarrel between England and Scotland, which will be of long
continuance and misery: and the Interest of the King and his Children, and of
all Princes of Christendom concerned in the example, will be carried on in the
Kingdom of Scotland against you, if you join with those beggarly Grandees who
have enriched themselves and their fellow-Impostors by the ruins of the
Kingdom. You will lose your credit and interest with your friends and Brethren
of Scotland; the only fear and terror of whose coming into England kept this
Faction (which all men know is never satisfied with money and blood) from
taking many of your innocent heads from off your shoulders: and confiscating
your estates to pay the arreares of the Army: witness their often speeches to
this purpose in the House of Commons, and their illegal and violent
proceedings against you: you will likewise lose all the people of England.

I have showed you your losses; let me show you your gains by this
accommodation; that by comparing one with the other, you may cast up your
account, whether you shall be gainers or losers by it.

1 They offer you the Tower of London, and your Militia to be restored (things
of no great consideration) and your Aldermen and Citizens to be set at liberty:
they do not offer to disband their Army, which makes them Lord it over you,
and overpower both Tower and Militia; and when they have divided you from all
your friends, and destroyed your reputation, and are secure from the Scots, the
same violence which at first took your Tower, your Militia, and your most
honest Citizens from you, can deprive you of them all again at pleasure, when
you shall have none to stick by you: your obligations to them shall be of
steel, theirs to you but of straw: he that gives me that he can deprive me of
at pleasure, gives me nothing.

2 Cromwell and his Party know your City to be the entire strength of England.
In Rich. 2. days, (when it was not half for great and populnus as now) it
slew Wat Tyler and routed his rabble, six times as many in number as the Army.
They therefore fear you, and consequently hate you, and labor nothing more
then to divide and weaken you, which is their proper interest: for which
purpose (to divide the City in it self) they caused the Parliament to change
your Militia into other hands: they cut off Westminister, Southwark, and the
Hamlets from your Militia, to weaken it, they have divided you from the
Parliament, they have endeavored to divide the Country from you; Ut dividendo
singula, imperent universis. Wherefore the Army in their Remonstrance 7.
December. 1647. insolently demand Reparations from the City to the Country
adjacent, for above 100000. l. loss sustained through the Armies attendance on
the Cities defaults; which was a device only to make the Country quarrel with
the City, and to make the Army Vmpiers.

3 Consider, you shall join with them that never keep Faith longer then they
may gain by it, whereof you have many examples. Any honest man may be deceived
once, but he is a fool that will be deceived twice by one man.

4 Nay you cannot treat with these men, nor give them a Common Council, or
Hall, without loss and danger: They have always made lies their refuge, and
built their designs upon the sandy foundations of Rumors and Tables.

Cromwell and Glover already give out, that they and you are as good as agreed,
that you differ only upon a puntilio of honor, which will soon be reconciled:
what is the meaning of this? but that they (having creatures of their own,
Commissioners in Scotland) they have advertisment to spread the same reports
there, thereby to take off the edge of your friends affections; to lay an
imputation of inconstancy upon you, and make you inconsiderable in the
judgments of your best friends, and retard all endeavors for your succor. In
the mean time, this party has blocked up all passages to Scotland, that truth
can have no access to you, and you have only such news as Darby-house does
please to impart to you. These men have committed those crimes that cannot be
safe without commiting greater: they must on headlong: go not with them for
company; they desire to bestow their plague-sores upon others. Let it not
trouble you, that the Parliament has approved their subscription of the
Engagement with the Army; it was a Vote extorted in a thin house, many Members
having been driven away by threats of the Army before; and there were many
dissenting Members. A little patience and constancy will settle you in a
lasting peace.

To petition the Houses to repeal their four Votes against the King, is to
save their reputation, that seek to destroy yours.

FINIS.

