THE Marquess of Argile HIS ANSWER TO HIS CHARGE Sent unto Him in the CASTLE of
EDINBVRGH, The 28. of January.

Printed in the Year, 1661.

A Preface to some general things concerning this LIBEL.
I. IT may appear to any to be framed merely out of malice, because it takes in
all things (either alleged, spoken, or done) since the year of God, 1638.
notwithstanding his Majesty's Royal Fathers, and his own acts of Oblivion and
Approbation.

II. Because it does not so much as allege any reason or motive for any thing
has been done, nor any end why, or to which any did drive, and so making any
man who was engaged more malicious then the Devil, and more unreasonable then
brute Beasts.

III. It repeats all that has been done by Kirk or Kingdom, to be the Marquess
of Argyles deeds, though he neither was at the beginning of the business, nor
very many of the particulars mentioned, as the narration of his carriage can
show, he show both the reasons and ends of his doing all he did, being merely
for Religion, King and Kingdom, according to the Covenant, never pressing any
thing earnestly, but for the Covenant, nor opposing, but when it was refused.

1. Mr. Jobn Stewarts Process will clear much of the falsehood of this point;
for though such a discourse had been, it was but narratively of a debate, which
was before the fitting of the Parliament, 1640. Wherein Mr. Alexander Henderson
used those very words, though nothing to his Majesty's disadvantage, and
whether I related that debate, no man's memory can be charged with such a thing,
after so long a time, and a clear Act of Oblivion of his Majesty's Royal Father
1641.

2. This is a great mistake, when the Defender came to the house of Airly,
Montross had put a garrison in it for the use of the Country, and when I come
there with the Countries Order, Sibbald who was in it, upon sight of my
Commission did presently leave it; and the Earl of Airlies own friends knows,
except what Bushes were cut for Hutting to Soldiers, I had no use to cut the
Planting; and my stay there a few days was, expecting the Lord Ogilby, whose
Friends were gone to him for that purpose, and the slighting of the house was
then a favor, his order being more strict, and I believe his Friends or
Tenants had no loss to my knowledge: As for burning the house further in
Glenyla, the Defend^r knew nothing of it at all, until some days after it was
done; and howsoever, it was included in the Act of Oblivion, 1641.

3. Some men indeed, named under my Command, lay at Dumbartan by order of
Committee and Parliament, whereby that Garrison was loath to come abroad, and so
many of them fell sick; whereupon Sir John Henderson sent for me, that I might
come to the Castle and receive it from him upon honorable terms, which I did,
and suffered him to make his own Articles, for matter of honor: And I
tran^ported none of the Canon, but when his Majesty was in Scotland, 1641. the
Duke of Richmond did give the Defender two Canon, this is known to many; this
business is likewise before the Act of Oblivion, 1641.

4. This is answered formerly, there is added a promise of mine, which needed
not been mentioned, for I acknowledge my many obligations to his Majesty as
strong as that promise could make it: And it were to wrong his Majesty, to say
he desired any promise to take away that, which his Majesty commends so much in
the large Treaty, Scotlands desire of Unity in Religion and Uniformity in
Church Government, as a special means for conserving of peace betwixt the two
Kingdoms; neither did Scotland at all join with any Army in England in League
and Covenant, but with the two Houses of Parliament.

5. I neither did burn, nor give Order to burn the house of Menstre, though I
had great provocations to it, the day before Menstre was burnt, the whole
houses of two Parishes, whereof I was only Superior was burnt, and many poor
Families put to extreme necessity by it: And a Son of the Earl of Sterling, who
had Menstre in possession, by comprising did concur with the actors of so cruel
a fact, to poor people that were not wronging them at all; himself and his
father before him, not only holding the same of me, but in effect without
money: and my Father gave them the Land; and when many years few duties had run
on, I my self discharged that Lady of the same, amounting to a considerable
sum; so far do I abhor to be ungrate, though I have often met with such
dealing; howsoever the 30. Act, 1647. for liberating the good subjects from the
pursuit and actions of the Rebels Civil or Criminal would suffice.

6. This is answered formerly and it is a most unjust calumny.

7. There are three or four things in this article, 1. Concerning the men in
Loathhead and Dunavarty. 2. An old man begging his sons life denied. 3. Sending
200 men from Yla to sterve in Jura. 4 The carrying of Col. Mc. Gillespie from
Lies rode, being brought there by order of Committee of Parliament. To these I
desire it may be known, that in May or June 1646. his Majesty sent orders to
Alexander Mac Donald and all under him, to lay down Arms; of the which number
these men in Kintyre were a part, who continued in arms contrary to his
Majesty's order. Next, I desire it may be known, they were lying under
engagements not to have joined with Alexander Mac Donald, notwithstanding all
which they were in arms fighting against David Lefly and his party; yea, after
Alexander was beaten they refused to come to him, when other Countrymen did;
and went to the house of Lochhead and Dunabarty, out of which David Leslie took
them without any capitulation, and disposed of them as the Council of War
thought fit, which the Defendare cannot be charged with. For the second, of the
old man's request for his Son, he never heard of any such thing before he saw
this Libel, so he conceives it to be a fiction; and just so of the third, for
the Defendare was never in Yla nor Jura, but with David Lesly, and he does not
remember any color for such a discourse. For the 4th. of Col. Kittacks
bringing to Leith Road by order of either Committee or Parliament, is a mere
fiction, he was taken prisoner in Yla, by the party under David Lesly, and
delivered to me; and I put him aboard of Captain Browns ship, who undertook to
deliver him at Dunstaffage, but Captain Brown not being willing to lose the
opportunity of a fair wind, did not go to Dunstassage, but went straight to
Leith Road, and immediately gave me notice, he had my prisoner aboard, whom I
received from him and sent to Dunstassage; Captain Brown I think lives at
Weymes, who can declare this. One thing I shall add in general, that I thank
the Lord by his grace helping me, I never took any man's life, but what was done
in conflict or by order of Law for notorious crimes according to standing acts
of Parliament.

8. It is well known I was in Ireland by Commission for the getting assistance
of the Scots Army against those in arms in Scotland when his Majesty come to
the Army before Newark, so that his Majesty's Declarations anent his Majesty's
gracious intention and resolution in coming to the Scots Army, was sent both to
the Committee of Estates of Scotland, and to the two Houses of the Parliament
of England before I come to Newcastle his Majesty's Declarations were all
recorded in the Committee Books, and Printed, that his Majesty come not with
any intention to continue that unnatural War any longer, or to make any
division betwixt the Kingdoms, but to comply with his Parliaments, and these
entrusted by him in every thing for settling Truth and Peace: And that he would
apply himself totally to the Councils and advices of his Parliaments, upon
which the Committee of the Parliament of Scotland, and the General Officers of
the Scots Army declared to his Majesty himself, and the two Houses of the
Parliament of England their receiving his Majesty was upon these terms: All
this was done before the Defender come to Newcastle, after his Majesty's coming
there to the Scots army: In this article these whom his Royal Majesty who then
was, and his gracious Majesty who now is, calls his Parliaments, are called a
Factious party, and the Defender the Ringleader. It is said in this article,
that I went to London, but omits to tell, by his Majesty's and Commissioners
order at Newcastle as one of the Commissioners; and only carried Instructions
to the rest of the Commissioners at London, for hastening the Propositions: And
likewise from his Majesty was commanded to take the advice of the Duke of
Richmond and Marquess of Hartford anent what might concern his Majesty; and
particularly, if it was advisable that the Scots Army should declare for his
Majesty, wherein they told me, and conjured me to tell it to his Majesty, that
it was the only way at present inevitably to ruin his Majesty, and desired me
to show it to his Majesty in these terms* that himself knew, neither the
Nobility nor Gentry of England, who attended his Majesty at Oxford, desired him
altogether to prevail over his Parliament by his Sword, much less would they
endure the Scots Army to do it, that would make all England as one man against
his Majesty. Therefore desired his Majesty might by any means give way to the
Propositions, no other being left, which could be of advantage to his Majesty;
this very advice he delivered to his Majesty at Newcastle, and told the same to
his Majesty, who now is, when he was in Scotland, and entreated the Lieutenant
of the Tower of London, to propose for me that the Marquess of Hartford then
living might be examined in this, but he put it off from time to time, because
of other great affairs in hand. It must likewise here be remembered that at that
time the two Houses of the Parliament of England was sitting fully and freely,
and neither Independent nor Sectaries were able to carry one vote in the
houses: And that the Houses declared fully their resolution for maintenance of
his Majesty's person and authority; and such of them who attended his Majesty
most, were most for the disbanding of the Scots Army, and his Majesty's staying
in England. Next observe this Article, that it is a great mistake that any
thing done at London, concerning leaving the King in England, when the
Defendare was at London, that alledgeance of a Discourse of mine in the
Committee of both Kingdoms must be likewise forged; for as is said there was
nothing moved at that time concerning his Majesty's person, but merely for the
Army, and what concerned their satisfaction; so that I think the Army, at least
to my knowledge, emitted no such Declaration. And though they had done it, I
may say, I was never at any of their Consultations, let them answer for their
own deeds. And to what the Parliament did, no man was ever yet made answer for
such things, especially where the lawful King has approved the Parliament as
a lawful Parliament: no succeeding King will ever question his Predecessors
acts, much less can a King in honor question any man for acting in a
Parliament, which himself has approved. And of such nature are the most part
in this Libel; yea all of them except words before 1651. so I may say without
offense, it were more for his Majesty's honor and this Kingdom to think on a
Declaration vindicating the Parliament of Scotland from such acts, then so
unjustly to lay such foul things on them, and call them a factious party.

9. It is to be observed, that the meeting of Parliament, 1648. is called the
Estates of Parliament, met by his Majesty's special authority, and it was so
indeed, being one of the Sessions of Parliament, 1644. And in the first place
there is a great mistake; for no proposition was made after the Vote of
Parliament, the Protestation it self will clear this as is said in the former
Libel. I did not come to wait upon the Committee of Estates after Preston, but
being called, and of necessity considering the times; neither went I unsent to
Mordington, neither did the Invader Cromwell bring his Army into Scotland, only
that he resolving to propose some things to the Committee, which the Books will
clear he brought a small party with him to Lothian, and the stopping him from
bringing in his army, and that he did not require pledges and the Strengths of
the Kingdom, was thought a mercy at that time both to those who returned out of
England, and all the Nation, the Margin doubtless in one branch is mistaken,
at least as to me, no man can say he heard me; and neither his sayings nor
doings was justifiable; for the truth is, he declared always he would not
remove until he had Berwick; and the Informers may imagine that was in my
power, and he did remove: and when that was done, what Instructions were sent
to, or with Sir John Chiefly were neither of my Dyting or Writing.

10. Being well known how active and isntrumental the Defendare was in every
thing concerning his Majesty's Restitution to his Crowns and Royal authority,
this Clause or Article is purposely for soyling his faithful Service, but his
Majesty both knows and has acknowledged the contrary of this by Word and
Write. And for what concerns the Marquess of Montrosse his death, I neither
Consulted nor Voted in the manner nor matter of it, though it was done in
Parliament. The next point in this Article is corresponding with Cromwell after
his Majesty come to Scotland, which is most false; the like was said and
recanted by Hamilton, who was a Spy, and so was hanged at Sterling.

For any Declaration at the West-kirk, I had no hand in it by word writ nor
message, but on the contrary I did deal with some Ministers who came from the
Commission of the Kirk, to forbear pressing of his Majesty; and where some of
his Majesty's Bedchamber desired that I might deal with his Majesty to sign
it, I told them I could not well press the King to a thing he said was so
contrary to his Conscience, seeing it reflected as he thought on his Royal
Father; but to speak to the King I would not refuse, and if the King had done
for a desire, I know no crime in it.

11. There are some things in this note in the former Libel, as joining with
Colonel Twisleton in his March up Lochlomount, he knows and I hope will not
deny, that before I went with him, he told me that one Wakmsha was with him,
whether from the Earl of Glencairn himself or from General Monk concerning
him, I do not remember; but he said the Earl of Glencairnes business was as
good as ended, and except I went with him, I could not but miss General Monk,
who had sent for me, who was upon March, but that he was to meet with him, or
hear certainly from him the day he was going, and all things did fall out
accordingly, and being under a Capitulation, I did not know why I might not be
in their company, being resolved never to join with them in any action.

As for having a company of Foot under their pay, it is a mistake; the Shire of
Argyl trusted me with a Watch for the Shire of Argyl, which is most ordinarily
in all places of the High-lands in broken times, I made it known to General
Monk, the poor Country not being yet well planted after the burning, could not
be able to pay Cess and entertain the watch; he was pleased to promise once
help for 100. men, but I hope his grace will not say that ever he required any
engagement of them as Soldiers, nor ever employed he them at all, but because
they did not oppose my Son, he would not continue his assistance to the Shire
any longer, and spoke against me what his grace pleased for my dissatifaction
to the English.

And for exchanging prisoners it is a mistake, two men who had been in
Roseneth, whereof I have charge, come from thence, shortly after my boat in the
twilight, going up Clyde to see General Monk whom I had never seen before, I
staid for them, thinking it had been some poor men flying from abuses, but
aboard, they alleged they were men belonging to the Earl Glencairn, which I
doubted; however I chid them for coming that way, and for abusing the Country
where they com, I told them I would only leave them at Dumbartan until* I
returned from Kilsyth where General Monk was, and in the mean time, that they
might not suffer any thing, desired they might deliver any Arms or Moneys they
had to a servant of mine, and all should be safely returned, as it was done at
my return; and that they might not go as by way of any exchange, I would not
suffer them ^o be enrolled by Captain Thomson, who was exchangeing some
prisoners at my return, but got them from him and sent them back without any
Capitulation or exchange, though some men, I have forgotten who it was about
that time, took out of Dumbarton some of my boat-men and returned them to me
without any treaty or Capitulation for that effect, because its said the Earl
of Glencarn and Middleton were commissioned by his Majesty; I can say truly I
never knew it, neither did any of their honors, so much as by word, writ or
message intimate so much to me, If they had, I am confident I had satisfied
them concerning my Car^age; (...) because of this, though there was some
hazard in it to me, I did desire to meet with his grace the Earl of Midleton
in the Hills, but I got no answer, whether the messenger dealt faithfully I
know not, but I believe his grace knew so much* and the necessary reasons I
gave for the unseasonableness of that sti^ning, all which I am ready yet to
declare, which doubtless will satisfy any.

As for my taking upon me to bring off any, it is certain a mistake, for the
person mentioned John Mac-dowgal of Dow^olleith was not at all engaged in that
service, when the Earl of Glencarns and Midleton was in the fields.

A Short Answer to the Libel and Dittay given in upon the 28. day of Jannuary.
Before I say any thing particularly, I must difference all can be said against
me, first in these heads and that is before his Majesty's going out of
Scotland, 1651. and since the Cromwell killed and took possession, until his
Majesty's happy return, in Anno, 1660.

These again which were acted before his Majesty left Scotland in Anno 1651. of
Public concernment. 2. Of private relating to particular persons; Now for
these things wherein I was an actor in relation to the public concernments, I
never acted without the approbation of Parliament and General Assemblies
ratified by his Majesty's Royal Father and himself.

And so the second relating to particular persons I never had accession to any
thing but what is warranted by Act of Parliament approven by his Majesty and
his Royal Predecessors, for my acting, after his Majesty left Scotland, 1651.
until his Majesty's happy return 160^. I was still a prisoner on demand, and
had no agreement nor Capitulation with the English after his Majesty went,
until August 1652. being long after the deputies had taken the tender, and were
gone to London, and all others in Arms had Capitulate, and that all the rest
in Scotland were living peaceably at their own houses except my kins-men and
vassels in Argyle Shire, and the invaders in full possession of the power and
Government, and never did then Capitluate but out of necessity.

An Answer to the particular Articles of the Libel.
1. The Commissioners for Conservation of the peace* stablished by his Majesty
in the Parliament 1641. were to look to the keeping of the Articles of the
large treaty, whereof the endeavors to procure an uniformity in Religion was
one, and that Monttosse and others censured by Parliament should not have
access to his Majesty; And when these Commissioners found these things
slighted and themselves unequal for such a burden, they met with the Privy
Counsel* and they both with the Committee of Common burdens, and all of them
together invited a Convention of Estates, and what they did anent their
application to his Majesty and their desire of settling differences betwixt him
and his people, and the League and Covenant is set down particularly in the
Ratification of Parliament, 1644. which Parliament was called and convened by
his Majesty's special authority, and which the said Parliament was never
disclaimed but owned by his late Royal Majesty, and is the foundation of all
that followed even of the Parliament 1644. which is not only approven by his
Majesty, but by it his Majesty was called home and Crowned, and from it the
last Committee which met (before this Parliament) had then power; so all that
was done 164^. is fully ratified by his Majesty in Parliament.

2. For this it was done in public Parliament where all the same members who
sat 1648. were present, and it is likewise Ratified by his Majesty, and it was
conceived inevitable and best for his Majesty as matters stood for the time
being, the least of two evils, and no man then imagined his Majesty's person
nor Government in any hazard.

3. No Protestation 1648. against any Act of Parliament, the Protestation it
self will witness, and it was before the Vote in Parliament, the difference
then may be mentioned, for it was not as it is reported Commonly.

4. The defender was presuing no forces, but coming to meet with the Committee
1648 after the defeat at Preston, being to consult what was best, fearing no
harm (being at Sterling) was invaded by George Monro and others, and some of
his friends who were with him were killed, and others taken Prisoners.

5. There was no invitation, so far as the defender knows at all to Oliver
Cromwell to come into Scotland, but on the contrary, an earnest endeavor was to
keep him out by fairness, which could not be done by force, as the Acts of
Committee and treaty at Sterling can show; And for Cromwels visiting of
Edinburgh and Edinbrough Castle, and of visiting of him in it, the defender was
no keepers of the said Castle.

6. The defender acknowledges his Oath, and he did not desert either his
Majesty or his Army, but his stay behind his Majesty in Sterling, was by his
Majsties own allowance, because of his wifes dangerous sickness.

7. The Defenders Capitulation is not as Libelled, for he agreed not to the
Government, though he agreed to live peaceably under the Parliament, of the
Commonwealth of England, and mention not without King and House of Lords,
which he particularly refused, as the Paper which he was pressed to sign-yet
extant can show; And never yielded to the same Articles which he signed, while
he was a prisoner in the hand, and at such a time when he could not make any
escape, being heavily diseased, as Dr. Cunningham and many others knows, who
were with him the same time, it being as in the Preface, in August 1652.

8. He was hardly able to come out of his Chamber when the Forces went out of
Argyle shire, so he was not present, but I think hardly could 200. or 300 men
stop the passing of two strong Regiments of Foot, Overton and Read, and about
300 Horse commanded by Blackmone; when that year all his Hills and Bogs were as
passible as the best Highways in that Country; and though the Defender had
done it, it was but according to his Articles, which he could not then alter,
and sure no man can think it a crime.

9. The Defender did not accept any Commission at that time, but refused to be
in the Parliament, and was resolved to forbear still, if necess^^y had not
compelled him afterward.

10. Did sell some Cannon to Dean, when he told him he would not suffer him to
keep them.

11. There is a mistake, or call it what you will, in this Article, for Col.
Cobbet had ended his expedition when some of his ships were broken in Mull, one
Company went by land and was not so much as challenged; And if the Defender had
not given some way to go through the Country, it would have been accounted a
breach of Articles, or if he had staid upon free quarter in the Country, until
he had sent to Air for new provision, it would have ruined that part of the
Country, for it was not so much want of shipping, as provision, made him go the
Land way; And if I had betrayed him, I know no man could like a Traitor,
howbeit they had liked the treachery, neither was Glencarn in the fields, nor
the Earl of Middleton in Scotland at that time, nor had any man Commission from
his, Majesty, for any thing he knows.

12. It is a general only, so it cannot but have a general answer, that is,
most false.

13. This Article is mistaken, it was at proclaiming Oliver that I was as
present, being occasionally in Town, I was commanded by General Monck to wait
on the Council, before I knew any intention of such a Proclamation.

14. This Article is mistaken also, I was desired by Aberdeen-shire, to go for
them to London in Richards time, I had refused likewise to go then, as I had in
Olivers time, if I had not been driven by necessity to it out of respect to
Religion, my native Country, and to preserve my self from utter ruin, not
without hopes but some^hing might have been thought upon for his Majesty,
because of the freedom of Elections in England, and as nothing was so much as
mentioned at that time to his Majesty's disadvantage; so the breach was there
made, by which his Majesty entered by the Lords blessing there-after, this I
told to severals was most probable when I come back to Scotland, my endeavor
to stop the Act of Union, until three things were first or jointly done, sh^ws
my resolution for my Religion and Country; ^he three things were that our Laws
and Judicatories might stand until they should be altered by common consent. 2.
That our Religion in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, might stand according
to the Covenant. 3. That the Assess: of Scotland might be made proportionable
with England. I did to severals declare, the union could not be without these,
and I was told likewise, that these would never be granted; my own necessity
was to get off a most unjust decreat of great sums laid upon me, by that called
the Exchequer in Scotland, which was impossible for me to pay, this I shall
make clearly to appear; And beside all this, my going was not until the
invaders had been past seven years in possession by consent, and that all the
Lawyers did plead their authority and Ordinances as Laws.

15. It was well known I was hard pressed to accept that, and did it never* until
the poor people in whom I was nearly concerned, were in great difficulties for
want of justice, and I would not then embrace it, but with a protestation,
though it was long after the invaders possession, and that there was no other
visible power nor authority.

16. I can say nothing to this, but it is a most false Calumny say it who will,
and I hope when it comes to be particular in the circumstances it will appear
to be so, for ever when the English were at Inveraray, the Parish Minister Mr.
Alexander Gordonn my own Chaplain, in his family prayed constantly for his
Majesty, and my self in company did always pray for such whom we were engaged
to, by either natural, civil, or Christian bonds.

17. I can say to this as to the former, and that it cannot be true, because
that brake out only upon the Earl of Calenders marching to the Well, whereof
it is not said he was privy, and though it were true, all that business is
approven in Parliament, ratified by his Majesty.

18. This is a great mistake, I had no such precept, but I had by Act of
Parliament of Scotland, the half of Excise of wines and Strong Water in
Scotland for payment to me, for a great sum laid out by me for the Irish Army,
and by my Articles I was to enjoy my liberty, and these debts due to me; and
when I craved performance of my Articles 1657. the Protector would not let me
have the Excise, but only so much yearly out of it, until I were satisfied,
wherein I had not what I ought, so far was it from favor.

19. I did never correspond with Richard Cromwell, nor Fleetwood, except in
order to my own affairs, nor with Sir Archbuld Johnston, either to the
prejudice of King or Country, nor to my memory at all after the Committee of
Safety ^ee.

20 21 22 23 24 25. To all these answers, Arch Kinglas* had his Commission as
Colonel from the Parliament, or Committee and not from him, and if he pursued
Lamond doubtless it was as a Rebel at that time to the Estate of the Kingdom,
according t^^ Act and Declaration of Parliament, approved of by his Majesty,
and his Royal Father, and Predecessors; so what Ard. Kinlas or any other did to
Lamond, let them answer for what they did unwarrantably, it cannot reflect on
him, but he hopes they will clear themselves.

26 The Defendor was is England when Lamond was brought out of his house, and
knew nothing of the business, until he received letters showing what had past,
and that Lamond had refused to return Alexander Mac-Donald, according to his
capitulation, choosing rather to remain a prisoner with the defender, the paper
it self may be found if he deny, whereupon he was detained prisoner, having no
security to give; and having so often sworn and promised and after failed,
which will be shown under his hand, and having murdered so many people, men
women and children severals of them after quarter given, beside the burning of
many Gentlemen, his neighbors houses, and destroying their goods and their
lands, and going in to Alexander Mac-Dona^d, notwithstanding he was in service
against him with the defender, not having fairly exonered himself; This can be
all clearly instructed, and if this was not cause to keep him a prisoner, let
any judge.

27. He know not nor remembers not any such things, so it is but forged against
him.

28 He caused no such thing, it was a thing done for his own entertainment, and
the defender being to secure Lamond for some just debts due to himself, the
Captain of Dunstaffage desired his bond likewise to be pursued in the defenders
name, which the Geutleman himself can show.

29. The Marquess is in possession of none of their Lands to his knowledge, if
he were, it is a legal civil process.

30 He never knew any such thing.

31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 To all these let every man answer as
he is concerned, as he hopes they will clear so, but this he must say for
himself and his depute, That it cannot be said, they murdered any of these men
with their own hands, neither did they judge any man to die by the hand of
Justice, but such who were notoriously guilty according to standing Laws, and
no man can justly say any man was ever processed before them who had received
any Articles, though it was never conceived by any Judicatory in Scotland that
any man taking a Rebel could pardon him, except the person doer of it had
particular warrant for that effect, otherwise the Committee after Philliphauge
had been much to blame for ordaining so many to be processed, at which
Committee were the sentencing of such who died at Glasgow shortly thereafter,
the Defender was not present.

This Answer was drawn upon the first receipt of the Libel, but a more full
answer may be expected after he has consulted with his Advocate.

FINIS.

