The Just Man's Defense, OR, The Royal Conquest: BEING The Declaration of the
Judgment of James Arminius, Doctor and Professor of Divinity in the University
of Leyden; Concerning THE PRINCIPAL POINTS of Religion, before the States of
Holland and VVestfriezland.

Translated for the Vindication of Truth, by Tobias Conyers, sometimes of
Peter-house in Cambridge.

Magna est veritas and praevalebit. LONDON, Printed for the Author; and are to
be sold by Henry Eversden, at the Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard, 1657.

TO HIS HIGHNESS, Oliver, Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of Great Britain
and Ireland.
Great Sir,
I Presume the dedication of these papers without any Apology to your
Lordship, having been already presented to States and Princes; not that your
Highness (in whom so many princely virtues are constellated) stood in need of a
translation, but that an obvious Dialect might supersede the pains of an
Original Traverse, and remit unto your Lordship all possible time to satisfy
the importunity of those affairs which do publicly solicit you for a dispatch
of them. Had not the concernments of truth been of greater importance to me
then any personal consideration (though I am not stupidly insensible) I should
have been loath my Lord -- But in as much as the name of Arminians is violently
obtruded upon us, who believe that Christ died for all, and tasted death for
every man according to the Scriptures, whereby our persons are indevoured to be
rendered odious, and the blessed word of the kingdom in our mouths scandalous
and offensive, I judged it reasonable to offer the authors judgment to English
view; not that I desire the Translation of his should be looked upon as the
interpretation of mine (being never yet drawn by any inquisitory examinination
to a full approbation or dislike of it) but that I might put an opportunity
into the hands of indifferent men, of resolving themselves that Arminius was no
such monster in religion as some men have attempted to represent him, and that
his name stands undeservedly blotted in the Ecclesiastic Rolls of continual
obloquie. It was a worthy essay of Your Highness upon occasion at Whitehall;
That it was not so much what a man held, but how he held it; (A religous
calenture has always been a dangerous malady in the Eye of State-Physitians)
I am confident the Doctor in this draught of himself will abundantly please
you, in whom Learning and Ingenuity, Piety and Moderation contend together for
the mastery, and this by the happy ducture of christian Principles; which if
the like tenderness, candor and modesty had been used by the Reformed Churches
in Scotland and Geneva, they had not given that cause by their faction and
disobedience to the Duke of Savoy, and other persons of great and lesser
quality to complain of them, and endeavor the extirpatation of their religion.
Witness those sad Massacres in France; that lately in Piemont, so fatal to the
Hugonets barracado'd from the stroke of justice with their own engines.

It would not become me to unravell this bottom, hoping by the timely
interposure of Your Lordships wisdom and goodness, with the care and prudence
of those noble Patriots about you, we may not have ground (in things of less
alloy) to expostulate in our own Country: Its well known (my Lord) what
countenance the Scriptures carry with the doctrine of general atonement, and
how much it looks like the doctrine of the Church of England (so we call it)
and that the major part of the Bishops and Doctors during the Episcopal
Hierarchy, were deeply babtized thereinto, and the late King himself: yet did
they never discountenance piety and learning in men of the contrary judgment,
either in Country or University, by rendering them incapable of employment,
either Civil or Ecclesiastic, or draw them to recant their opinions before
their institution and induction into any place; witness the credit and
promotion of Sibbs, Preston, Pridjeux, Holdsworth, Bromrig, Love, Hall, etc.
Nay great Strafford president of the Court in the North, did in the hearing of
some persons, who are still living testimonies thereof, publicly rebuke some
Ministers of the Arminian party so called (though he himself a great promoter
of that interest) for bearing themselves high upon court favor, and told them,
it was the will of his master and the Doctors of the Church, that all
moderation should be used herein. The Scoene is altered; these plucked off the
stage, and your Lordship taken up. I should be highly injurious to those many
sacred vows and protestations your Highness has so often made for Christian
Liberty, should I entertain a thought you would act your part with less
tenderness and indulgency than any of those that have had their fatal Exit. My
Lord, You have been a man of War, Liberty was that Motto in your Ensign which
encouraged the Soldiers of Christ to fight and pray under you, and for which I
make no question victory came so often and lighed upon your banner: I beseech
you by the mercies of God, and by what ever is dear or near unto you, that you
would not expose us by your authority to the wills of those who are so
straightened in their principles, as their affections, in brotherly toleration are
shut up against us likewise; but that all your Acts of Grace, like the Orders
of Heaven issuing out from your great Master, may impartially look to the good
of all. I cannot (with the zeal of Arminius) petition your Highness for a
National Synod, and to establish Ecclesiastic Sanctions by civil authority,
left in have the same event (or somewhat An. 1618, and 1619.
worse) with the Dort-Conference, but (salving the honor and consciences of
those Gentlemen, the commissioners for Approbation of Ministers) I must needs
think the nature of Orthodox and Heterodox would be better proved by a
subscription to a known Confession of Faith drawn up in Scripture terms and
phrases, according to which the Preachers of the Gospel might and ought to frame
and level their judgments and doctrines; then by the sudden and extempore
resolves to a few unpredimeditated Questions (till the present occasion) locked
up in the breasts of some particular men. And this I am bold to offer to your
Lordship, not as to one of Machiavells Princes, who will not follow Religion
too close at the heels; or to a Roman Gallio, who cares for none of these
things; but as to a good Josiah, whose heart melted at the hearing of the Law,
and covenanted with his God, to take away all the abominations out of all the
Countries that pertained 2 Chronicles. 34 35.
to the Children of Israel. That no Pharaoh Necho may come up against you, and
the people of this Land; but that peace and prosperity may attend You, and your
Name be as apretious ointment poured out upon the inhabitants of Zion, is the
unfeigned Prayer of

My Lord, Your Highness's most humble Servant, Tobias Conyers.
June 5. 1655.
To the CHRISTIAN READER.
ITs the chief intent of the Author (as far as I can judge) next to the
Vindication of Truth, and himself, to set thy judgment right in the great
points of Predestination and Providence, and to show the happy compliance
'twixt the free and unmerited grace of God and Man's Will, not sacrilegiously
addmitting the latter as a copartner with the former in the work of conversion;
but with much respect subordi^ating the one to the other, reserving unto each
their peculiar virtues and operations, making the new creation so to animate
the old, as to restore weakened powers and debilitated faculties to much of
their ancient strength and vigor, and fit them for action. Surely had I thought
the Doctor had been an enemy to grace (as too many of the great Clerks of the
world are) I should have wished his Judgment had for ever slept in darkness and
never been awaked by me or any other to see the English light! But by that
lively portraiture which he has drawn of himself, I am apt to think his mind
was well beautified with many fair Ideas of Truth, and his understanding
enlightened with a raie from that divine sight which sighteth every one that
comes John 1. 9.
into the world; I cannot attribute the growth and increase of the
Sup^alapsarian and Sublapsarian doctrine in some of the reformd Churches, to
any thing so much as the untutord zeal of some men (otherwise eminent in their
generation) in the beginning of reformation; who having fallen out with the
church of Rome, and that upon the account of their strange innovations, and
ungodly errors, their Mass, Sacraments, works, merit, indulgencies, pardons,
etc. they tore away indeed much of this Superstition, and testified to the
world their dislike of all such erroneous Tenants and cursed practices: But
when like wise Chirurgians they should have known when the cure had been nigh
finished, they still continued launcing the sore deeper and deeper till they
had let out some of the very vitals of Religion, and maimd the doctrine of
Christianity in some of the principal members thereof. What was Orthodox at
Rome must needs be Heterodox at Geneva, for fear (as I imagine) least the
Orifice should close, and the Body Ecclesiastic return to its former temper A
good end is not to be attained by sinister and indirect means.
How does Calvin beat his head thorough the whole body of his Institutions (the
more to alienate, as I conceive, the minds of men from the Romish Religion) to
draw up the Protestant Principles in the greatest contrariety imaginable to
those of Rome, fearing least he should never get far enough both in doctrine
and discipline from them: Think not Christian Reader, that I favor the Romish
Church herein, or intend to throw dirt in the face of the Reformed, (this were
to slander my mother, and reproach the womb that bare me) I only labor thy
satisfaction, and by a modest disquisition, to light thee in to the rise and
grounds of this controversy. Neither am I engaged in my judgment against all
or half of the Protestant Churches, the major part are of the same mind in the
doctrine of Predestination as the author will satisfy thee in the ensueing
discourse. I know no rigid Predestinarians, but those o^ Sabauda and Geneva,
the Presbiterate Scots, who (according to their an^ient-league and freindship
to comply with the French) have fetched much of their Religion thence, and
those at home upon whose Spirits the doctrine of the Kirk has been too much
ascendant. Yet what great respect I have born to the opinion of my reverend and
learned brethren dissenting herein, even to the shaking of my own faith, being
more ready to accuse my self of pride, ignorance, and singularity (the usual
parents of error) then them of unsoundness, I have abundantly testified,
privately and publicly; and herein Mr. Richard Copeman a worthy (...)
Gentleman and a Justice of Peace for the County of Norffolk, and many others,
though of a different opinion, will be my witness: The more I came to search
into the nature and being of that great Jehovah reveald in the word of life,
the more I found it unworthy of the entertainment of a Christians heart, that
no way could be found out by infinite wisdom to glorify the divine
Attributes, but by the precise ordination of almost infinite numbers of his
children to eternal and remediless torments, without the least intuition or
respect to their sin and disobedience: I should forget that I were a creature
(which the egritudes and infirmities of soul and body do daily admonish me of)
were I unwilling to acknowledge that great prerogative of heaven, Gods
Sovereignty over me, yet should I be a parasite in religion in attributing any
thing to divine power, but what his Justice, Wisdom, and Goodness permits me.
Job 13. 7. 9.
Will a man tell a lie for God -- I solemnly profess, I know not with what hope
of advantage I should propound Christ as an object of faith in a general
exhortation to the people, if he dyed not for them; certainly the secret will
of God is the same with his reveald, he is unskild in the art of dissimulation;
his words always agree with his mind; let God be true and every man a liar. I
cannot be of the judgment of Piscator, who Pisc. resp. ad vors. Part 1. page
120.
says reprobate persons are absolutely ordained to this twofold evil, to
undergo everlasting punishment, and necessarily sin, and therefore to sin that
they might be justly punished: Zanch. lib. 5. de not. Dei, cap. 2. de Predest.
and Zanchy tells us that reprobates are held so fast under Gods Almighty
decree, that they cannot but sin and perish. Its reported See Gods love to
Mankind.
of Tiberius, upon the fall of Elius Sejanus raised for the ruin of the house
of Germanicus, being resolved to leave no stem to grow out af that unhappy
root, purposd to put the young and tender daughter of Sejanus to death, the
Roman laws forbiding to strangle a Virgin, Peter Bertius Ep.
he caused her to be defloured by the executioner, at the foot of the Gemonian
stairs, and then strangled: Pardon O good God the teachers of thy Church, who
have published thy unalterable resolves in thy eternal decree of putting to
everlasting death infinite numbers of virgin and undefloured souls (the
righteous laws of heaven not permitting it) thy determinations likewise that
sin and Satan should first vitiate and constuprate them: If this were once
generally received that men sin necessarily and unavoidably, and all that they
do in pursueance of the divine decree, what would this introduce but Stoicism
and Manichisme? would it not be an inlet to all loosnesse and licentiousness,
an inundation to all barbarism and wickedness, and in fine this
undergovernment of the world suffer a dissolution? But O my dear Brother!
labor to eschew evil, and do good, and be confident his grace will be
sufficient for thee. Say not in thy heart I am shut out from the love of God, I
am as a dry tree: draw near to this communicative and diffusive love of God,
that thy soul may be drenched therewith: I am very well assured by the blessed
word of truth, there stands no decree of Reprobation, like the Cherubim in the
garden of Eden with a flaming sword in it is hand, to keep the way from the
greater part of men to the tree of life: God is not contributory by any
voluntary purpose or act to the perdition of any of his Creatures; yet is he so
great a lover if righteousness and justice that he will punish sin unrepented
of where ever he finds it. Above all things pursue peace with all men if it be
possible, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord, take not up
any thing cantained in these papers for contention, strife, and debate; O flee
vain janglings, which defile the judgment, corrupt the heart, and tend not to
edification! The church of God is too too much made an Amphytheater; Religion a
mere digladiation; the several opinions the combatants, the weapon^ carnal
and not Spiritual, and the prize (I fear) Self-glory, and selfeadvancement. If
thou know these things, happy art thou if thou Joh. 13. 17
do them, let thy knowledge look to practice, as the fruit, and thy
practice to knowledge, as the guide; and be assured, they will both lead to
happiness, as the end: But, not to swell this Epistle beyond its proportion,
let me tell thee, thou must vouchfafe this piece a diligent perusal, if thou
would reap any profit by it; expect not Rhetorical flourishes to court thee
with entic^ing words of vanity into the Authors judgment, or the soft strains
of Eloquence to touch thee with delight; this the mind of the Author, the
nature of the thing, and the translation it self forbids thee. Try all things (
by the test of the Scriptures) hold fast that which is good, Phil. 3. 15, 16.
Never the less, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same
rule, let us mind the same things, and if in any thing thou he otherwise
minded, God shall reveal even this unto thee:

June 5. 1655.
TO THE Noble and Potent STATES OF Holland and VVestfriezland.
My Supreme Lords,
AFter the conference betwixt M. Gomar and my self at the Hague by the command
of your Highnesses, before the Lords Counselors of the Supreme Court, four
Ministers being present, and relation made thereof to your Highnesses,
intimating the weight and moment of the Controversy betwixt us, it afterward
was thought requisite by your noble Highnesses, to call both of us together,
with the four Ministers, before you into your honorable Assembly, to signify
to us all this way what you should judge most expedient for that time; So it
fell out, Mr. Gomar confirmed the debate a foot betwixt us, to be of that grand
importance, that he durst not join issue with such an opinion as this of mine,
in the presence of God; and more then that, if it were not presently stopped,
'twould set the Provinces, Churches, Cities, and Citizens together by the ears,
and every man's hand against his brother. To all which I answered nothing at
that time, save that I knew not my self guilty of any such cruel opinion in
Religion, being confident I should never administer any just cause or ground
for Schism or dissension to build upon either in Church or State; in testimony
whereof I was ready openly in all truth and sincerity to declare my mind in the
whole matter of Religion, when ever I should be commanded thereunto before this
Assembly, and that before I removed from the place where I then stood.

Upon which motion, it was judged convenient by your Highnesses that I should
be called before you now to make good the proffer in these Sessions; and
therefore it is that I now appear in this place faithfully to discharge it. But
in as much as a sinister report of me has for so long a time spread it self
not only at home, but abroad in foreign parts, and no little evil has ensued
thereupon, as if I had hitherto altogether refused (being often required
thereunto) to declare my judgment in the business of Religion; Wherefore I
make it my humble request that you will please to give me leave ingenuously to
open my self in this matter before I proceed to other things.

In the year 1605. June 30. There came to me at Leyden three Deputies of the
Synod of South-Holland, viz. Francis Lansberge, Libert Fraxim, and Daniel
Volege of happy memory, Ministers of their respective Churches at Roterdam, the
Hague and Delph, being present with them two Ministers of the Synod of
North-Holland, namely John Bogard of the Church at Harleme, and James Roland of
the Church at Amsterdam, telling me in their Classical Examinations of some
Students in the University of Leyden, in order to their entrance into the
Mininistery, they received some new and unusual answers to the questions
propounded, contrary to the received Doctrine in the Churches, which they
confirmed as having been disciplined into them by me; which things being so,
they desired a friendly conference with me to know the bottom of this matter,
whereby for the future they might better consult the affairs of the Church. To
which I answered I could no way approve this manner of process, which would
necessarily ever and anon multiply conference upon conference, even as often as
any Student should give any new answer, pretending to have learned the same of
me; therefore 'twas better in my judgment, when any Scholar should frame any
new Responsory in his Examinations, confirming the same from me, which should
be judged by the Brethren contrary to the Confession and Catechism of the
Belgic Churches, they would send for us both together, being ready upon this
account at my own charge to come wherever it should please the Brethren to
appoint; and this course being taken once and again, the calumny or truth would
plainly be evinced.

And further to Mr. Lansberge, urging the conference in the name of the rest,
answer was made, that as yet I saw not how I could admit of any such thing with
them, appearing as Deputies from the Synod to whom they stood bound to give an
account of all things done by them, unless my Superiors were likewise privy,
and consenting, and also commanding me hereunto; besides it is being joined with
no small hazard, if so be I should wholly cast my self upon their faithfulness
in their own relation of the event of our conference to the Synod. And further,
that they had no cause why they should require any such thing of me, not
conscious to my self of delivering any Doctrine either at Leyden or Amsterdam
contrary to the Word of God, Confession, or Catechism of the Churches in
Holland; That hitherto not any such thing was ever objected to me, being
confident it would not easily be effected, if the Objector should be obliged to
make good his Objections by proof; and in default thereof, to bear the blame
himself. Notwithstanding if they would wave the title of Deputation, and
proceed in their own name to a conference with me, I was ready at that instant
to embrace it; provided that in every point to be debated they would explain
their judgment, and I mine, each of us alleging our proofs, and debating one
another judgments and reasons; if by this means we could satisfy one another,
well and good; if not, no further relation should be made of it, but the whole
matter deferred till a National Synod.

This being refused, we had departed asunder; had I not desired them, that in
like manner they would move a Conference to Mr. Gomar, and Trelcatius of
blessed memory, not judging my self to have given greater cause to them of such
a motion as this, then either of them had done. The grounds of this my request
I then added, which were too long now to repeat: To which they answered they
would do accordingly, and that before their departure from Leyden; and so they
did, as they themselves told me.

And this was the first request of this nature that ever was made to me, which
occasioned much Discourse; some giving a Narrative thereof imperfectly, and not
as the whole matter was carried, smothering in silence the motion made by me,
and the grounds thereof. Not many days after, about the 28. of July, in the
same year 1605. the like was required by me in the Name of the Synodry of the
Church of Leyden, yet with this Proviso, That if I approved of it, others
likewise should be moved unto the same; if not, they would not proceed any
further in this case: But when I had signified my dislike (with the Reasons
thereof) herein to the Burrough-Master Brouchovius, and Mr. Merula, of godly
memory, the Elders and Deputies sent to me in the Name of the said Synod they
were so well satisfied therewith, that nothing was further attempted by them in
this business.

November the 9th. in the same year, Francis Lansberge, Festus Hommius, and
their Associates, Deputies of the Synod of South-Holland, exhibited nine
questions to the Lords Visitors of the University of of Leyden, with a Petition
annexed, that they would please to command the Professors of Divinity to answer
to the same. The Lords Visitors returned, Doctor Arminius was now Professor of
Divinity at Leyden.
that they could not approve the Proposal of any such questions to the
Professors of Divinity; if they supposed any thing to be taught in the
University contrary to the Truth, it was to be referred to the National Synod;
(which was hoped to be had very shortly) in which they might more fully come to
the knowledge and debate of it. Notwithstanding this Reply, the Deputies of the
Synod further urged, that with their good leave they themselves would propound
them to the Professors S. T. to know what every of them would voluntarily and
freely answer thereunto; but neither could this likewise be obtained by them.
All this being done without my knowledge, being ignorant why these Deputies
came to the City, although not long after I came to know it.

In the mean while the whole year passed over, and I was not called upon again
touching this matter, except Anno 1607. A little before the Synod of
South-Holland was held at Delphe, there came to me John Barnard Minister of
Delphe, Festus Hommius of Leyden, and Dibbetius Minister of Dort, to know of me
what I had done in the refutation of the Anabaptists, of which giving them an
account, it afforded matter of much discourse to us; being about to take their
leave, they moved if I had done any thing in the business of Religion; that I
would not think much to communicate the same to them, and they to the Synod, to
satisfy their Brethren herein; which I could not consent unto, in that it
could not be with that fruit, fitness, and advantage any where as in the
National Synod, which we hoped upon the first opportunity, to be celebrated
according to the purpose of the noble and potent Lords the States; and there I
would endeavor openly to manisest my thoughts, not being reserved in any thing
of which they might complain. To which I added, if I should open my self in any
thing to them, I could not commit the relation of it to their fidelity, every
one in things of this nature being his own best Interpreter; and so we took our
leaves one of another.

Besides all these, I was privately desired by some Ministers, that I would
vouchsafe to communicate my Meditations to the College of Brethren in the
Synod. By others I was moved to declare my thoughts to them, which in the fear
of God, they would consider amongst themselves, giving their Faith not to
divulge them. To the first of these I answered indifferently, that they had no
ground why they should importune me in this more then others. To one of them
(and he none of the meanest) I offered a conference 3 several times touching
all the heads of Religion to be debated, whereby the truth of them might be
solidly fortified, and the falsity refuted, and that in the presence of the
chiefest of our Countrymen; which was refused by him. To the rest several
answers were given, plainly denying what was requested to some; to others
opening my self a little, and this as they were more or less known to me: But
this accident sometimes befell me, that whatever I manifested to any, 'twas
presently reported to others, although in the delivery it was judged Orthodox,
and their Faith engaged not to divulge it.

It Is necessary that I also add what passed by Letters the utmost confines of
our own Nation, viz. when in the Preparatory Convention at the Hag^^, June
1607. by the Summons of the Potent Lords, the States General, celebrated by the
COLLEGE of BRETHREN, I was friendly desired to make known my thoughts in the
business of Religion to the said College, engaging to do their utmost
endeavor to satisfy me, I should utterly refuse so to do. Now being sensible
what a great deal of envy the matter thus related has created me with many
who thought greater honor due to this Assembly from me, being congregated from
all the Provinces, I think my self obliged to give a more perfect account of it.

Before my departure from Leyden to this Convention at the Hague, there came to
my hands five Articles appertaining to Religion, dispersed in some Provinces,
read by some Ministers in their Ecclesiastic Conventions, and judged by them
as containing my Judgment in those points of Religion.

The Articles were concerning Predestination, the fall of Adam, Free Will,
Original Sin, and the Eternal Salvation of Infants, which when I had thoroughly
perused, I easily perceived by the Author of them whom I then spoke, being
there present, signifying freely to him, that I had ground to believe those
Articles proceeded from him, which he not obscurely confessing, answered, That
they were not sent abroad as mine, but as points controverted amongst the
Students at Leyden: To which I Replied, He well knew that what ever was but
lightly divulged this way would greatly prejudice my innocence, and the
Articles be imposed upon me, which I there openly professed never issued from
me, neither did they agree with my judgment, neither (as far as I could judge)
with the word of God.

Things thus passing 'twixt him and me in the presence of two Witnesses I
judged it requisite to mention the same in the Convention because of these
persons being present who had read the Articles, supposing them to be mine (as
some of them confirmed to me) which accordingly I did. The Convention being
about to dissolve, their acts and proceedings registered, and some of the
Members injoined to give an account thereof to the Lords, the States General, I
moved the Brethren they would be pleased to stay a little, having something to
offer to them; which they consenting to, I told them the five Articles (then in
my hands, the tenor of which I briefly read to them) I had certainly found to
be sent abroad into several Provinces, as Zealand and the Diocese of Utrecht,
by some of this Assembly, and read by some Ministers in their public Meetings,
and looked upon as comprehending my Judgment; I there solemnly with a good
conscience in the presence of God, and before all that Convention professed,
that these points of Religion were not mine, neither did they contain my
judgment; and this I repeated over and over again, humbly beseeching the
brethren, they would not so easily credit those flying reports of me, neither
so lightly entertain that as coming from me, dispersed so much to my prejudice.

To this answer was made by one of the Convention, I should do well to signify
to the brethren what I approved, or disliked in those Articles, whereby they
might come to some knowledge of my judgment; which motion was seconded by some
one. But I returned, this Convention was not summoned for any such end; that we
had sit long enough; and that the Lords the States expected an answer: And thus
we dissolved, no man urging it any further, or testifying their joyntconsent by
any persuasive to the reasonableness of it; Nay, some there present gave out,
as I afterward understood, that they had it in special command not to enter a
debate of any Doctrine, which if it had fallen out, they would presently have
deserted the Convention; and therefore the soliciting of me herein was far from
being the mind of the whole Assembly.

This is a true relation, Most Noble and Potent States of my brethrens
solicitation and my refusal, whence in my opinion its clearly manifest, if
respect be had to their request and the manner of it to my denial, and the
ground thereof, together with my Presentiments herein, there was no cause for
this my accusation. Their request leading to a Declaration of my self in the
matters of faith was not in my apprehension grounded upon the least reason,
having never administered cause to them (by teaching that at any time oppugnant
to the Word of God, the Confession or Catec^isme of the Belgic Churches) why
they should desire this of me more then any other, having often avouched my
readiness to give way (if any fruit shall be judged likely to come thereof) that
this should be inquired into in a Synod either Provincial or National, that a
further knowledge may be had thereof.

The manner of their Desire by Deputies did manifestly dislike me, being much
oppressed with the prejudice of the Synod which is not presumed to solicit any
man to a conference by their Deputies, without cause given them so to do;
therefore 'twas not safe to admit of any such thing, lest by that means I
should confess my self guilty of teaching something contrary to what was right.

Reasons of my refusal were these.
First, not being under the Synod of South or North-Holland, but having other
Superiors of my own, to whom I stood bound to give an account of my actions,
I could not consent to any conference with their Deputies, unless with their
consent, and an express command from them; especially it being incumbent not as
a private duty upon me, the Deputies themselves clearly enough intimating the
Conference not to be of a private nature, in denying to lay aside the Title of
Deputation, and proceed in their own names with me. And therefore I had sinned
against my Superiors if I had not refused the same. I wish their Brethren would
remember, there was never yet any of our Ministers (subjected as a Member to
their respective Synod) durst at any time enter a conference without the advice
of the Magistrate, neither ever any particular Magistrate permit the Minister
under his Jurisdiction to undertake a conference with the Deputies of the
Churches, unless they had first consented to it, which they would often do by
being present themselves by their Deputies.

Let them only recollect what was done at Leyden in the cause Nomina Locorum
Gouda, Horna Medenblicus.
of Colhasius at Gouda, with Hermannus Herberts at Horn, in the case of
Cornelius Wigyer and Medenblich in the cause of Taco.

Second Reason dissuading me from the conference, was the great inequality
thereof; equality being a necessary qualification in personal debates. 1. They
came against me (with whom all things stood in a private capacity armed with
public Authority: Now I am not ignorant how greatly they are under-propt, who
do any thing by virtue of this power. 2. They were three in number, besides the
two deputed from the Synod of North-Holland with them; I was alone, not only
destitute of help, but also of witnesses, to whom (as they likewise) I might
safely commit my affairs. 3. They were not at Liberty, being compelled to hang
upon the judgment of their Superiors, therefore strictly obliged to contend to
the utmost for that opinion in Religion they were of, insomuch as 'twas not
safe for them to admit of my reasons or arguments, though never so cogent and
insoluble; which considered, I did not see what fruit or advantage could
mutually result from this conference, as in equity should, and which on my part
was likely to do, being free in my self, and able (by bringing my conscience
in, without the ppejudice of any, to the examination) to admit of that which my
conscience convinced of the Truth, should dictate to be right. Of how great
concernment all these things are your Highness's had known more fully, if you
had been present by your Deputies in that Preparatory Convention.

Third Reason. Their own relation after the conference to the Synod, could not
but be diverse ways prejudicial to me, whether absent or present; if absent, it
might easily happen (either by omission, addition, or dislocation of words, by
inconsiderateness in defect of understanding, or imbecility in the want of
memory, or by the prejudice of disaffection) a Narrative should be made
otherwise then the truth of the thing required. If present, 'twere difficult to
escape or correct this inconvenience, better credit being likely to be given to
their own Deputies, then to my self a private person.

Lastly, By this means I should have yielded the Convention some right and
prerogative over me, which it neither has, nor I could give, considering my
place, without injuring those our common Magistrate would set over me.

Therefore Equity did not more constrain me, then Necessity, to repudiate this
conference; yet might they have obtained their desire, if they would have
embraced a private Debate of all the Articles of Christian Faith, as ^ offered
them; this being more accommodate to a mutual edification, where every one (as
the manner is) may speak with freedom and familiarity, then the other where
the Formalities of De^utations are observed: Neither was there the least ground
why they should show themselves so hard to be entreated in this case, when
every one might have done it himself; having further delivered my mind herein,
that whatever should be transacted by us should abide with us, and not pass
abroad to any; which if they had consented to, I doubt not but we had either
satisfied one another, or at last made appear, that no damage could accrue upon
this our mutual controversy to the Truth necessary to salvation, godliness, or
christian peace.

To omit these things, I cannot give an account to my self how these rumors
are consistent one with another; I am complained of for not declaring my
judgment, and yet in my own Country and foreign parts I am inveighed
against, as if I endeavored the introduction of some impure Novel and false
Tenants in Church and Christian Religion.

If I declare not my judgment, whence is the unsoundness of it manifest? If I
explicate not my self, how can I bring in any falsities? If they be nothing but
suspicions obtruded upon me, it is against the rule of Charity to attribute so
much to them: But I am reported to express my self in some things, but not in
all; yet even in them it is not darkly manifest whither I tend. That Is to be
here observed, whether any thing delivered by me be judged contrary to the Word
of God, or the Confession of the Belgic Churches. If the last Not agreeing
with the Belgic Confession.
be proved, that I have taught any thing contrary to that I engaged my self by
my own subscription, I am liable to punishment; if the first Contrary to the
Word of God.
be made good, I ought to be much more strictly dealt with, and obliged either
to recant or to lay aside my place, especially if the heads of doctrine were
notoriously injurious to the honor of God, and salvation of men. But if they
were found neither to clash with the Word of God, nor the Belgic Confession,
neither the inferences depending upon them, according to the Rule of the
Schoolmen, The consequences of a doctrine being false, the doctrine is false
likewise, and so on the contrary. One of these ought to have been done, either
a charge brought in against me, or a discrediting the reports of me: The later
I wished for; the first I feared not, notwithstanding the one and thirty
Articles dispersed every where under my name, to the great prejudice of me,
were noted by persons of great quality, into whose hands they were given, with
what unsavouriness they were framed; with what faith and conscience they were
imposed upon me: But I expect to hear, Why did you not to avoid these
commotions, and to satisfy so many Ministers, fully open your self to your
fellow-brethren in the whole matter of Religion, either for your own timely
instruction, or their seasonable preparation to a mutual conference?

Three inconveniences deterred me from this: Least

First, my judgment professed, should afford matter to them to frame an Action
against me.

2. Least the same should be disquieted and refuted in their Pulpits and
Academical Disputes.

3. Least it should be transmitted to Foreign Universities and Churches, with
hope of obtaining a condemnatory sentence against it, and of bearing me down
this way; that I had weighty cause to fear all these things, were not hard for
me from the Tenants and Writings of some of them clearly to demonstrate. That
which respects my Infortion or instruction, which I might hope from thence, so
it is; there being besides my self many others who had drawn up their
meditations in the matters of Religion; instruction could not so profitably be
administered any where as in the place of our joint appearance, where a
Definitive Sentence as they call it, might and ought to be pronounced; as for
my brethrens seasonable Preparation to the Conference, certainly it would be
Then most commodious When every one have produced their meditations together,
and so the reason of all things at once might be had.

And thus I have washed away the things chiefly cast upon me, and come to
discharge my promise and execute the commands which you my Lords the Noble and
Potent Sates have laid upon me, being confident hence no prejudice will arise,
either to my person, or judgment, in that obedience arises from it, which next
after God, and according to God, I owe to this honorable Assembly.

The first and chief b^anch in Religion, upon which I have fixed my thoughts
for these many years last past, is the Predestination of God. That is, the
election and reprobation of men to life and death; making my entrance here, I Will
first explain what some have delivered in our Churches, and this University of
Leyden, both in words and writings concerning it; then manifesting my thoughts
upon that, I will lastly proceed to a Declaration of my own judgment in this
point.

The Teachers in our Churches are not at oneness and simplicity in their
judgments touching this doctrine, but various and different amongst themselves.

The opinion of those who take the high and rigid way (as it is every where
contained in their writings) is this,

1. That God by an eternal and immutable decree out of men, not considered as
made, much less as fallen, has predestined some to everlasting life, others
to eternal destruction, without any intuition, or respect to righteousness or
sin, obedience or disobedience, of his pure good pleasure, to demonstrate the
glory of his justice and mercy, (or, as others) his saving grace, wisdom, and
most free power.

2. Besides this decree, God to have fore-appointed some certain means
belonging to the execution thereof, and this by an everlasting and unchangeable
Ordination, these means are necessarily to follow by virtue of the preceding
decree, and unavoidably to lead him that is predestined to his fore-appointed
end; Some of these Means lying in Common, appertaining jointly to the decree
of Election and Reprobation; others in special respecting each.

3. Means common to both, are three: First, the Creation of Man in the right
state of Original righteousness, or according to the image and likeness of
God in Righteousness, and holiness. Second, the permission of the fall of Adam,
or the Ordination of God, that man should sin, and become vicious. The Third,
the losing or the taking away of Original Righteousness, and the shutting of
him up under sin and condemnation.

IIII. For unless God had created some, he had not had upon whom he might
bestow eternal life, and bring upon everlasting death; had not he created them
in righteousness and sanctity, God himself had been the Author of sin, and so
had been deprived of the right of punishment to the praise of his Justice, and
salvation for the honor of his mercy; unless they themselves had sinned, and
by the merit thereof rendered themselves guilty of Death, there could have been
no place to demonstrate either Justice or Mercy.

5. The means foreordained These are the special means.
for the putting into execution the decree of election, are these three. First,
The preordination or the giving of Jesus Christ, a mediator and Savior, who
should purchase by his merit for all and only the Elect, life and lost
righteousness, and by his virtue communicate the same. Second. Their vocation
to faith outwardly, by the word inwardly* by his spirit in the mind, affections
and will by an operation so efficacious, that the elect person must needs
assent and yield obedience thereunto, in so much as he is not in any capacity
able not to believe this his Calling, or not to be obedient thereunto. Hence
comes to pass their justification, and sanctification, by the blood and spirit
of Christ, and in like manner all their good works, and this by the same
forementioned force and necessity. Third means to be, is the Keeping the Elect
in the faith, sanctity and zeal of good works, or the donation of the
perseverance to them, whose virtue is to be this; that the believing and elect
persons do not only not sin with that plenitude and wholeness of will, or not
fall Totally from faith or grace, but they Cannot sin with that full bent of
mind, neither Can they totally, or finally fall away from faith or grace
received.

6. The two Vacotion and perseverance.
last of these means belonging only to the adult elect, person of ripe years,
but for the children of believers who pass out of this life, and never come to
maturity of age, God leads them a shorter way to salvation, if they belong to
the number of the elect (which God only knows) by giving Christ a Savior to
them, and them to Christ, who saves them by his blood and holy spirit, without
actual faith and perseverance, and this according to the promise of the
Covenant, I will be your God and the God of your seed.

7. The means appointed to These proper to the decree of Reprobation.
put into execution the decree of reprobation, are partly proper to All the
reject and reprobate, (whether they have lived to ripeness of years, or died
before their maturity) partly peculiar to Some of them only.

Means Common to them all, is, their dissertion in sin, by the suspension of
that saving grace, which is sufficient and necessary to salvation; and this
has two branches. 1. God not being willing that Christ should die for them,
neither ( i. e.) He neither dignitate pretii died for them, in regard of the
value of the price: Nor voluntate propositi, God never intending that he
should shed his blood for them.
Quoad Voluntatem Antecedentem, according to his Antecedent will, (as some call
it) or Quoad Sufficientem, according to the sufficient or the value of that
reconciliatory Price, which was never offered for the Reprobate, either in
respect of the divine decree, or the virtue, and efficacy of it. The 2. branch,
Gods unwillingness to communicate the spirit of Christ to them, without which
'twere impossible for them to be made partakers of him and his benefits.

8. The means Peculiar to some of them only, is that obduration which befalls
Adult persons, for their often and enormous violation of the Law of God, and
repudiation of the Grace of the Gospel.

To the executing the first For their violation of the law of God.
induration appertains the witness of their minds to the righteousness of the
Law, by knowledge, illumination and conviction, it not being possible for the
Law, not to detain them in unrighteousness only, but necessary to the
rendering them inexcusable.

To the execution of the second For their refusing the grace of the Gospel.
obduration, God makes use of their calling by the preaching of the word, which
is to be both insufficient and ineffectuall as well in regard of the decree of
God, as the event thereof. This vocation is to be either external only, which
they neither will nor can obey, or internal whereby some of them are raised in
their understandings to embrace and believe the things they hear, yet with
such a faith as the devils endowed with, believe and tremble; some of them are
carried on further, even after a manner to desire to taste of the Heavenly
Gift, these being the most miserable of all, who are therefore taken up on
high, that their fall may be the greater; it being impossible that this event
should not befall them, necessitated to return to their vomit, and to fall
away from the f(...)

9. From this decree of election and reprobation divine, and the administration
of the means appertaining to the execution of both; it follows, that the elect
should necessarily be saved, so as they are not in any possibility of
perishing, and the reprobates unavoidably damned; so as it is utterly impossible
for them to be saved, and that out of the absolute purpose of Gods preceding
all things and causes, which are in things, or could result from things.

This Opinion by some of those that adhere thereunto, is judged the foundation
of Christianity, Sa^vation, and the certainty thereof, in which the sure and
undoubted consolation of all believers (giving them a peaceable conscience) is
founded; and upon which the praise of the grace of God leans, in so much, as
the contradicting this doctrine is surely to rob God of the glory of his grace,
to attribute the merit of salvation to the free will and power of man, which
savours of Pelagianisme, these being the causes pretended why they labor so
anxiously to retain the purity of this doctrine in their churches, and oppose
themselves to all alterations repugnant there unto.

For my part, to speak what I think freely (with the Salvage of a better
judgment) I am of that mind, That this doctrine of predestination contains
in it many things false, impertinent, and discrepant with it self, which
Universally to run thorough time permits me not, but I shall leave it to be
examind in gross in its latitude. There (...).
are four special heads in my view; and those of the greatest weight in this
doctrine; I shall first declare them, then give you my own judgment concerning
them; They are these.

First, That God has Absolutely and precisely decreed the salvation of some
particular men by his mercy or grace, and the condemnation of others by his
justice, without any sight or intuition in this decree of righteousness, or
sin; obedience, or disobedience; that might proceed from either of them.

Secondly, That God, for the bringing to pass this his preceding decree,
determined the creation of Adam, and all men in him, in the right state of
original righteousness, and futher ordained, that they should sin, and so be
deprived of original righteousness, and become guilty of eternal condemnation.

3. That God has decreed those (whom he would precisely save) as to salvation,
so to the means appertaining thereunto, to bring them to faith in Jesus Christ,
and perseverance in it; and this indeed by his irresistible grace, and power,
so as they cannot but believe, persevere, and be saved.

4. That God has decreed to deny unto them whom in his absolute will he has
preordained to destruction, and accordingly does not confer that grace which is
sufficient and necessary to salvation; so as they are neither able to believe
neither can they be saved.

Now after the diligent weighing and examination of these four branches in my
own breast, I come to deliver the things that Arminius his Arguments against
the doctrine contained in the four branches mentioned above.
follow touching this doctrine of predestination.

1. That this doctrine is not the foundation of Christianity, Salvation, or the
Certainty thereof:

Not of Christianity.
1. For this predestination is not that decree of God wherein Christ is
established by his Father, the Savior, head and foundation of those who are
made heirs of eternal life, which is the only fundamental of Christianity.
2. Neither is this of predestination that doctrine, by which men (as living
stones) are built upon Christ alone the corner stone by faith, and joined to
him as members to the head.

Not of salvation.
1. For this predestination is not that decree of the good pleasure of God in
Christ Jesus, upon which alone our salvation leans, 2. It is no foundation of
Salvation, for it is not the powor of God unto salvation to those that believe,
in that the righteousness of God is not manifested by it, ex fide in fidem,
from faith to faith. Neither of the certainty of salvation. For that stays it
self upon this decree, they that believe shall be saved; I believe, therefore
I shall be saved; but this doctrine of predestination neither comprehends the
first, or second member of this syllogism, which some confessed in these
words, We mean not that Consult the Belgic Theses.
the knowing of this (predestination) is the foundation of Christianity or
salvation; or that it is necessary after the same manner, as the doctrine of
the Gospel.

Secondly; The doctrine of 2 Arg.
predestination thus delivered, does not contain in it either the whole or any
part of the Gospel; for this consists partly of an injunction of faith, and
repentance; partly of a promise of forgiveness of sins, of the spirit of grace,
and of eternal life, according to the tenure of the sermons of Christ and the
Baptist his forerunner, and his successors the Apostles, after his ascension;
but this predestination neither respects the command of faith and repentance,
neither the promise; it does not teach us What kind of persons God has
predestined in general, which is properly the Eva^gelical doctrine, but
contains in it a mystery (only known to God) wherein are comprehended the
individual persons whom God has decreed to save and condemn; whence I further
conclude this doctrine of predestination not to be necessary, either to be
known, believed, hoped in, or effected, to salvation; so a learned man
confesses in his questions to be disputed; Why, the Gospel cannot be termed a
Book, or discovery of predestination (...), simply in its self, but (...),
respectively, because it neither Sets down the numerical matter nor form,
absolutely, that is, It does not declare how many, nor whom ( As Jeremiah, whom
God knew before he came out of the womb, and sanctified him, Jer. 5
a very few only excepted) but what kind of persons in general are
predestined.

Thirdly; This doctrine of predestination was never admitted, decreed, or
approved 3 Arg.
of for the first six hundred years after Christ; in any council, General
Councils.
either general, or particular; not in the Council holden at Nice, wherein it
was determined against Arrius, for the diety and (...) of the Son of God; not
in the first at Constantinople, in which it was decreed against Macedonius, for
the diety of the holy Ghost; not in the Ephesine Council against Nestorius for
the unity of the person of the Son of God; not in that holden at Calcedon,
which condemned Eutiches, and determined for two distinct natures in one and
the same person of our Lord Jesus Christ; not in the second held at
Constantinople, in which Peter Bishop of Antioch, Anthym the
Constantinopoletane, and others were condemned for asserting the passion of the
Father with the Son; not in the third at Constantinople, in which the
Monothelites were condemned for affirming to be but one only will and operation
in Jesus Christ. Neither had this doctrine any better intertainment in
particular Councils, as that at Jerusalem Particular Councils.
Arausin; neither was it vintilated or confirmed in that held at Milevite, in
Afric, against Pelagius and his errors, as appears by the Articles of
doctrine decreed in it against them.

And the doctrine of Austine himself touching this point was so far from
being received in these Councils that Celestine the Roman bishop, his
contemporary writing to the bishops of France, and condemning the Pelagion
tenants shuts up his Epistle in these words, As we dare not contemn, the more
profound and difficult parts of those questions started and broadly handled by
the opposers of the Heretics; so judge we it not necessaty to abet them,
believing it sufficient what the writings have taught us according to the
forementioned rules of the apostolical seat, to the owning of the grace of God
from whose power and worth nothing ought to be subtracted. For those Canons
mentioned by Celestine in his Epistle, and decreed in the three foregoing
particular Councils, we shall agree well enough, especially as to those things
which were requisite for the maintaining of grace against Pelagius and his
errors.

Fourthly, There was never 4 Arg.
any sound, and orthodox teachers of the church for 600. years next after
Christ, that ever broched and approved this doctrine of predestination, no not
the keenest assertors of Grace against Pelagius; such was Jerome, Austin, the
Author of the Book entitled, The Call of the Gentiles, Prosper, the Aquitani,
Hilarious, Fulgentius, Orosius, as appears by their writings.

Fifthly, This holds no agreement 5 Arg.
or correspondency with the Harmony of Confessions put forth in the name of all
the reformed and Protestant Churches, Printed and published at Geneva. For if
they be faithfully consulted, 'twill be apparently manifest, that many of them
do not agree in this point, some of them only glancing at it. And as to the
four heads abovementioned, chiefly urged in this Doctrine, not once touched
upon by them, no Confession of any Reformed church, delivering the doctrine of
predestination, as before propounded by me. The Bohemian Confession, the
confession of the Church of England, that of Wittenberge, the first Helv^tian
confession of the four Cities, Argentorate, Constantia, Memminga, and
Lindavia, make not the least mention of it. The Basilian and that of Saxony do
only point at it in three words. The Augustan confession is so dark, that it
stands in need of annotations to preadmonish us of it, as they of Geneva have
thought; the last Helvetian confession, which has the consent and subscription
of the greatest part of all reformed churches, does so speak of it that I would
gladly see how it is consistent with it as before represented; though the
Sabaudican and that at Geneva have approved it.

Sixthly, Without all strife and 6. Arg.
contention this doctrine may be justly called into question touching its
concordancy with the Belgic Confession, and Heydelberg Catechism, as I shall
briefly demonstrate. Artic. 14. Confess. Belg. you have this passage, Man
knowingly and willingly subjected himself to The Author proves the disagreement
of this doctrine with the Belgic Confession, being that of his own County,
rather then any other.
sin, and by consequence to Death and Malediction, whilst he inclined his ear
to the words and impostures of the Devil. Whence I conclude, Man sinned not by
any necessity of the preceding Decree of Predestination, which is diametrically
opposite to the Doctrine thereof. Again, Artic. 16. speaking of the Eternal
Election of God; God showed himself merciful by saving and freeing them from
damnation, whom in his everlasting and unchangeable counsel for his gracious
goodness, without any respect of works, he chose in his Son Christ Jesus our
Lord; and also just in relinquishing others in that their fall and perdition
whereinto they had precipitated themselves. How these words are consistent with
the forementioned Doctrine, I plainly see not.

In the Heydelberg Catechism, Quest. 20. Salvation is not given to all those by
Christ who perished in Adam; but to them only who are ingrafted into him by
faith, and embrace his benefits. Whence I conclude God to have fore-appointed
none absolutely to Salvation, but those beheld in his Decree as believers;
which is in open defiance with the first and third head of this Predestination.
So Quest. 54. See page 26.
I believe the Son of God out of all Mankind does from the beginning unto the
end of the World gather a chosen company consenting in the true faith unto
Eternal life; Where Election to life and consent in Faith are mutually placed
together, and the latter not subordinate to the former, which according to the
nature of this Doctrine ought necessarily to have been; and the words run thus,
The Son of God calls and gathers by his spirit and word a company chosen unto
life everlasting, that they might believe and agree in the faith. Things being
thus, there is no cause why the maintainers and promoters of this Doctrine
ought with that violence contend to obtrude the same on their Accomplices, or the
Church of Christ, or take it in such ill part when any thing is taught either
in Church or University, not consenting, or at variance therewith.

Seventhly; This Doctrine 7. Arg.
fights against the very Nature of God; especially with those Attributes of his
Divine Being, by which he works and manageth all things, viz. With his
Wisdom, Justice and Goodness. It opposes his Wisdom three ways; 1. In that it
asserteth God to decree something for that end, which neither is good, nor can
be made so; such is Gods creation of some persons to eternal Perdition to the
praise of his Justice. 2. In that it averreth God by this Predestination to
have proposed to himself the demonstration of the praise of his Mercy and
Justice: which he could no way do but by an act contrary to both; such is that
decree whereby he determined that man should sin and become miserable. 3. It
changetk and invert's the order and method of the twofold Wisdom of God,
manifest in Scripture, in that it asserts God absolutely to have fore-appointed
the salvation of men by the Mercy and Wisdom comprehended in the Doctrine of
the Cross of Christ; without foreseeing 'twas impossible that man, and that
through his own default, should be saved, by Wisdom perfected in the Law, and
infused into him by Creation, when the Scripture avers the contrary, 1 Cor.
12. 1. It pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching, to save those that
believe, [i. e.] By the Word of the Cross, after that in the Wisdom of God the
world by wisdom knew not God.

2 It wars against the Justice of God, which represents him not only as a Lover
of Righteousness and hater of sin, but as having a perpetual and unshaken will
of giving every one his right: Against the first of these, in that it makes God
precisely to will the salvation of singular men, and decree the same without
any intuition or respect to righteousness or obedience, and become a lover of
those men more then his own Justice. Against the later, in that it stateth Gods
vvillingness to entail misery upon the creature, (which is only the punishment
of sin) not beholding it as peccant, and so a culpable subject of Wrath and
Punishment, and so is made to impose upon the creature both that which belongs
not unto it, and likewise that which is in conjuction with its greatest evil,
which is abhorrent from his Justice. According therefore to this Doctrine, God
first detracts from himself that which is his right, and attributes to the
creature that which appertains not unto it, to the making of it miserable.

3. It is in open defiance with the goodness of God, which is an affection in
him of communicating good according to that fitness and congruity, judged and
permitted by his Justice. But in this Doctrine of Predestination, God is set
forth unto us induced of his own accord, without any external Motive, to will
and ordain the greatest evil to the Creature, and that by an eternal
preordination, preceding any determination in him of indowing it with the least
good, this Doctrine being a declaration of Gods will to damn, which that he
might execute, he purposed also to create; now Creation is the first egresse of
Divine goodness: How discrepant are these things from that bounty of God
whereby he does good, not only to the undeserving, but also evil and guilty
persons, and which we are commanded to imitate in our heavenly Father?

Eighthly, It oppugneth the nature 8. Arg.
of man, considered in his being created after the Image of God, in knowledge
and righteousness, in freedom of will, with aptitude and affection to the
enjoyment of Eternal life. These three things may be concluded of him out of of
that short sentence, Do this, and live; in the day thou do Romans 10. 5 Genesis
2. 17.
that, thou shall dye. If any of these be taken away from him, the force and
weight of that monition exciting him to obedience, falls to the ground.

1. It opposes the Image of God in man, consisting in sanctity and knowledge
of him, according to which man was apt, able, and obliged to know, love,
worship, and serve God; but by this Predestination, intervening, or rather
prevening, man was foreordained That he should be vicious and sinful; [ i. e.]
That he should not know God, love, worship, or serve him; neither perform that
which according to the Image of God in his aptitude, potencie, and obligement,
he stood bound to do, which tant. amounts this, That God created man after his
own Image in holiness and righteousness, but foreordained and decreed, That
man should become impure, injust; [ i. e.] be made conformable to the Satanical
Image.

2. This doctrine combats the liberty of man's will, with which he was invested
by his creation, in that it impedes and hinders the use and exercise thereof by
binding up and determining the same to one part, in the doing this or that; so
that one of these two, God (which be far from us to think) must be guilty of,
either for that he created man with freedom of will, or hindered him in the
exercise thereof, being thus created; the first charge him with incogitancy,
the last with mutability, and both with being injurious to man and himself.

3. It Is prejudicial to man, in regard of that propensity, and capacity
implanted in him by his creation for the enioyment of everlasting life, in as
much as by this predestinatory decree it is fore-appointed, that the greater
part of men shall not partake of eternal bliss, but fall into everlasting
condemnation, and that before the ordinance was passed in heaven for their
creation, they are deprived of satisfying their innate inclinations, those
concreated tendencies to life ingrafted in them by the hand of their Creator,
and that not by their own preceding sin and merit, but simply and alone by
this Predestination.

Ninethly, This Predestination 9. Arg.
is diametrically repugnant to the act of Creation; For,

1. Creation is the communication Creation is made a means to put in to
Execution the Decrees.
of good, according to the intrinsecal propriety of its nature; but such a
Creation as has this intent and meaning, that it may be a way by which
Reprobation formerly made might attain its end, is not the communication of
good; all good is to be estimated and judged of according to the mind of the
giver, or the end to, or for which it was given. The intent of the Donor here
had been damnation, which must have the creature for its subject; the end or
event of this Creation, the eternal perdition thereof; in which case Creation
had not been the communication of any good, but a preparatory to the greatest
evil, and that both according to the intent of the Creator, and the event of
the thing, according to that of our Savior, It had been Matthew. 26. 24.
better for that man that he had never been born.

2. Reprobation savours of hatred, and arises from thence; but Creation cannot
proceed of hatred; therefore it is no way or means appertaining to the
execution thereof.

3. Creation is a perfect act of God, a declarative of his Wisdom, Goodness,
and Omnipotency; therefore not subordinate to the end of any precedaneous Work
or action of God; but rather is to be looked upon as an act appointed
necessarily antecedaneous, and preceding all other actions, which he either
could decree or undertake; for without the preconception of it, he could not
ordain the actual undertaking of any other business; without its execution he
could not absolve and finish any other Work.

4. All the actions of God, tending to the damnation of his creatures, are
aliens and forraigners, in that God consents unto them for some other
extraneous cause; but Creation is the most proper act of God, to which he could
not be moved by any external cause, being that first act of God, without which
indeed there is nothing else but God, every thing that now is having its being
by this action.

5. If Creation be the way or means by which God will execute the Decree of his
Reprobation, then he wills more the act of REPROBATION, then that of creation,
and pleases himself That which a man wills as the means, must needs be less
considerable by him then that which he wills as the end. Arminius means Elect
and reprobate persons, being both in Adam according to this Doctrine.
more in the act of condemning some of his harmless creatures, then in the act
of their Creation.

Lastly, Creation cannot be a way or means to Reprobation, according to the
absolute purpose of God; when that being finished, man might still remain in
obedience to Gods command, and not sin, to which God had afforded sufficient
strength on the one part, and placed answerable impediments on the other, which
is in open hostility with this Doctrine of Predestination.

Tenthly, This Predestination 10. Arg.
suits not the nature of eternal life, and those Titles wherewith it is
dignified in Scripture; its called the Inheritance of the sons of God; but
those are the only sons Tit. 3. 7.
of GOD according to Joh. 1. 12.
the Doctrine of the Gospel, who believe in the name of Jesus Matthew. 5. 12.
Christ; it is further termed, The reward of obedience, and of the labor of
love, the recompense of those Heb. 6. 10.
who have fought a good fight, and Rev. 2. 10.
run well, a crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4. 7.
etc. Therefore God has not designed eternal life to any out of his absolute
decree, without any respect or consideration had of faith and obedience.

Eleventhly, This doctrine disagrees with the nature of eternal 11. Arg.
death, and those names put upon it by the Holy Ghost; it is styled The wages of
sin; the punishment of Romans 6. 23
eternal destruction, which is reserved 2 These. 1. 8, 9.
for them that know not God, neither obey the Gospel of Christ; eternal Matthew.
25. 41.
Fire prepared for the Devil and Heb. 10. 27
his Angels; Fire which shall consume the Adversaries of God: Therefore
everlasting death is prepared for none out of the absolute decree of God,
without any sight or intuition of sin and disobedience.

Twelfthly, This doctrine jarrs 12. Arg.
with the nature and property of Sin, and that two ways. 1. Sin is known by the
names of disobedience and rebellion in Scripture, which finds no place in that
person upon whom an unavoydable necessity of sinning by virtue of the preceding
decree of God is incumbent. 2. Sin is the meritorious cause of condemnation:
Now the meritorious cause is that which moves the will of God to reprobate
according to justice; it induces God to whom sin is hateful, to reject and
reprobate; therefore sin can be no middle or intermediate cause by which God
executes his decree or will of reprobation.

13. This predestination fights 13 Arg.
against the very nature of the grace of God, and as much as in it lies,
destroys its very being, although it is pretended to be most advantageous and
necessary for its establishment; and this it does three ways: First, Grace is
accommodated to the nature of man, not abolishing the liberty of his will, but
rightly disposing it, and correcting its depravity, yielding unto him his
proper motions and inclinations; But this Doctrine introduces such a kind of
grace by which the freedom of the will is wholly taken away, and the exercise
of it hindered. Secondly, Grace in the Scripture is set forth unto us as
resistible, that may be received in vain, omitted, not assented unto, not
co-operated with; this Predestination affirming the contrary, that it is an
irresistible force and operation. Thirdly, Grace according Acts 7. 51. 2 Cor.
6. 1. Heb. 12. 15. Matt. 23. 37. Luke 7. 30.
to the primary intent and mind of God, leads to the good of those to whom it
is tendered and received; but this doctrine imports grace to be afforded some
reprobate persons, and communicated to the very illumination of their
understandings, and participation of the Heavenly Gift, for no other end and
purpose, then that being lifted up on high their fall might be the greater,
that they might merit and receive the more heavy condemnation.

14. It Is injurious to the glory of 14 Arg.
God, which stands not in the declaration of Liberty or Authority, consists not
in the demonstration of Wrath and Power; but as it is well consistent with his
Justice, with the honorable salvage of his goodness; but it strongly results
from this Doctrine, That God is the author of sin upon this fourfold account.

1. In that it makes God precisely to have decreed the demonstration of his
glory Glory by punitive Justice, supposes a subject peccant and culpable; if
he decree the end necessarily, why not the means, sin and transgression.
by punitive Justice and Mercy in the salvation of some, and condemnation of
others, which neither is, nor ever could be effected but by the entrance of sin
into the world.

2. In that it affirms, God (for the attaining of his end) See p. 21. where the
ordination of man's fall is made a means to execute the decree of Predest.
ordained that man should sin and become vicious; by which appointment of God,
man's fall was unavoidable.

3. For that it asserts God to have subtracted and denied that grace to man
sufficient and necessary to the avoidance of sin, and that before his actual
transgression; which is all one, as if he had imposed upon his creature a Law
impossible for him to keep, consider^d in the natural capacity wherein he was
created.

4. Because it attributes to God those actious concerning man as well external
as internal; mediate (by the intervening of other creatures) as immediate; by
which man was necessitated to sin, and that necessitate consequentis, by a
consequential necessity (as the Schoolmen call it) anteceding the thing it
self, which is wholly destructive to the freedom of man's will; and this act it
imputes to God, as out of his chief and primary intention, without any
presciencie, or foreknowledge of man's inclination, will, or action: Hence may
be deducted, That God truly sins; because (according to this Doctrine) he
provokes to sin by an unavoidable act, out of his own purpose and primary
intent, without the least inducement from the precedent merit and sin of the
creature: It Is further concludable from these Premises, That God only sins; it
not being competible to that man (being the commission of a forbidden act) who
is moved thereunto by force inevitable.

Lastly, It follows, That sin is no sin, it neither being so in its self, nor
worthy of that Name, which God himself does. Besides these, it wounds the honor
of God another way; but for the present these may seem sufficient to be
alleged.

Fifteenthly, This Doctrine is highly ignominious to Christ our 15. Arg.
Savior; for, 1. It shuts him out Vid. page 22. where Christ is placed as a
means to put into execution the Decree of election.
of the Decree of Predestination, by pre-determining the end, and affirming men
were first fore-appointed to salvation; and then Christ ordained to save them,
which removes him from being the foundation of Election. 2. It denies him to be
the meritorious cause in the recovery of our lost salvation, placing him only
as a cause subordinate to the salvation fore-appointed, as a Servant and
Instrument to apply the same to us: and this holds corespondency which that
opinion wherein God is judged absolutely to will the salvation of some men, and
that in his first and supreme Decree (upon which all his other Ordinations
depend and follow) so that it was impossible those men should lose their
salvation, and therefore not necessary by the merit of Christ, preordained a
Savior to them alone, to be repaired, and as we may so speak, found anew, and
recovered for them only.

Sixteenthly: This Doctrine is 16. Arg.
noxious and harmful to the salvation of men: For,

1. It hinders that saluteferous and godly sorrow for sin, which cannot be
found in those who have no remorse and feeling thereof, which Contrition no man
is capable of who commits sin by the inevitable necessity of 2 Cor. 7. 10.
the Decree of God.

2. It puts to flight that pious solicitude of turning our selves from fin to
God; for he that is purely passive, and like a dead man, not only in the
preception Rev. 2. 3.
of the present Grace of God exciting him; but also in his assent and obedience
thereunto, and is so converted by an irresistible power, that he cannot but
feel the pulses of grace, forced to give up his assent thereunto, whereby he is
changed, cannot conceive or induce into his mind any such carefulness, unless
he has first felt that irresistible motion; or if at any time he should stir
up in his heart any such solicitude, it would be frustraneous, and of no
advantage unto him; for it could not be any true carefulness which was not
begotten in him by that irresistible force, according to the precise purpose,
and absolute intent of God for his salvation.

3. It inhibiteth and restrains the zeal and study of good works in converted
persons, when it says regenerate persons are in no capacity of doing either
more or less good then they do; for he that is acted by saving-grace is obliged
to work, neither can he intermit it; but not being agitated therewith, he can
do nothing, he must of necessity omit it.

4. It extinguisheth all precatory zeal and fervencie; Prayer is that
efficacious means instituted of God for the obtaining of every good thing,
especially salvation at his hands; but from him who has determined the
salvation of these men, by an unchangeable and immutable Decree, Prayer can be
no means to procure it; it is only the Worship and service of God; for out of
his positive decree of Predestination he has appointed the salvation of such
individual men.

5. It takes away that wholesome fear and trembling in which we are commanded to
work out our Ph. l. 2. 12.
salvation, in that it positively affirms, That the elect and believing person
cannot sin with that full bent of will as the wicked do, neither totally or
finally fall away from faith or grace received.

6. It begets in men a despair of doing that which their duty required, and
obtaining that whereunto their desires were carried out, when they are taught
that the grace of God, which is necessary to the production of every good act,
out of the absolute and precise Decree of God, is denied to the major part of
men, and that in pursuance of a preceding Decree, equally peremptory with the
later, wherein he determined not to confer eternal life, but everlasting death
upon them; it cannot but easily hence arise, that whoever is not persuaded of
his being elected, should judge himself of the number of Reprobates, whence
must needs spring up in him a fearful desparation of doing righteousness, and
gaining eternal life.

Seventeenthly, This Doctrine 17. Arg.
inverts the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. In the Gospel God requires of men
faith and repentance, promising to converts and believers life everlasting; but
by this Decree of Predestination, God is set forth as precisely willing to give
salvation to some singular men, together with faith and repentance by an
absolute and irresistible power, because 'twas his will and pleasure to save
them. In the gospel God denounces eternal death to Impenitents and
Unbelievers, that deterring them by his threats from their infidelity he might
save them; but in this Decree of Predestination God is represented unwilling to
give unto some men that grace necessary to Faith and Conversion, because he had
peremptorily decreed to condemn them. The gospel says, God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son, 3 John 16.
that whosoever believed in him should not perish, but have everlasting life:
but this Doctrine says, God so loved those he absolutely elected to eternal
life, that he has given his Son for them alone, and works them up to faith by
force irresistible. In a word, the gospel says, Perform the Command, and thou
shall obtain the Promise; believe, and thou shall live: but this Doctrine
says, Because it is my will and pleasure to bestow life upon thee, therefore
will I give faith unto thee likewise; which is the very inversion of the
gospel, and a turning it upside down

Eighteenthly, This Predestination 18. Arg.
is in open hostility with the Ministry of the gospel.

1. For no man can be a Minlster and fellow laborer with God, neither the Word
preached by him an instrument of grace and the spirit, if the Lord quicken him
who is dead in sin by an irresistible power, no more then the creature could be
an instrument of Instrument of Grace i. e. of love in the Creation of the world.
grace in the first Creation or Contributory to its resuscitation from the dead.

2. By this Doctrine the dispensation of the Gospel is made the savor of death
unto death to the greater part of Auditors, and an instrument of condemnation
out of the primary purpose, and absolute intent of God, without the least
intuition of their preceding Rebellion.

3. By this Predestination baptism to reprobate Infants, the children of
federal and believing Parents, is a mere blank, and seals nothing, and so
altogether unprofitable, and that out of the precise Intention of God, without
any default of the Infants, to whom according to divine Command this Ordinance
is administered.

4. This obstructs faith and confidence in public prayers and supplications
to God for the benefit of all those that hear the word, when according to this
doctrine there are many amongst them whom God is not only not willing to save,
but in his absolute, eternal and immutable will preceding all things and
causes, would condemn, notwithstanding the Apostle injoining Prayers and
supplications to be made for all men adds this reason, for this is good and
acceptable before 1 Timothy 2. 1, 4.
God our Savior, who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the
knowledge of the truth.

5. The composure of this Doctrine easily renders Pastors and Teachers
sloathfull and negligent in their function, as if their diligence were only
advantageous to those whom God would precisely save, being in no possibility of
perishing; and their negligence only Prejudicial to those whom God would have
miscarry, and are necessarily to be undone for ever without any possibility of
salvation.

19. This Doctrine tends to Religions 19* Arg.
overthrow in General, and the christian in special: Religion considered in
general, is founded upon a twofold love of God, without which it neither has
nor ever will have any being in the world; the first is that Love of
righteousness, which gives being to the hatred of sin; the second is, the love
of the rational creature, the love extended to man, as in the business in
agitation, according to that of the Apostle, He that comes unto Heb. ii. 6.
God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of those that
diligently seek him: his love of righteousness is demonstrated in this, that
he will not give eternal life to any but those that seek him; his love of men,
that he will bestow blessedness upon them, if they inquire after him. The
mutual relation betwixt them is this; There can be no place for the fefluxes
of love to the creature, but as the love of righteousness permits it. The The
love of Righteousness more noble then the love of the creature.
former is far more excellent then the la^er; there is always a way open for
the emanations of love to the Creature, where the love of righteousness has
not stopped it.

The first is evident, in Gods condemning man for sin, which he loves as his
Creature, which he would not do, if man were more dear to him then his own
justice; or his eternal ruin more abhorrent then his disobedience: The second
is clear, in that he condemns none but for sin, and saves those that are turned
from it, which would not be done by him unless he yielded his love to the
Creature so far as justice regulated by judgment permitted it. This Doctrine of
predestination inverts and changes this order and mutual respect; First, by
asserting God precisely to will the salvation of some men, without having in
his purpose an eye to their obedience, whereby his love of men is preferred to
his love of righteousness; and that as men, they are more respected by him
then his own justice, and their misery more abhorrent unto him, then their sin
and disobedience. The second, by averring the contrary, that God absolutely
will's the destruction of some men, no consideration had in his decree of their
disobedience, which detract's from his love to the Creature that which
appertains to it, and represent's a Creature-hatred in God, without any cause
or necessity drawn from his love of justice, and hatred of obliquity; wherein
true it is not, that sin is the primary object of Divine displeasure, and the
sole meritorious cause thereof. Of how great importance this is to the razing
the foundation of Religion, we may aptly see in this similitude; suppose a
child speaking, My father is so great a lover of justice and equity, that if I
should be found in ways of disobedience before him, he would disinherit me,
though his beloved son, therefore the duty of obedience is highly incumbent
upon me, if I think to be his heir. Another says, My father has fixed his
love so much upon me, that he is absolutely resolved to make me his heir; what
need is there of obedience? for in his immutable Will I am destinated to the
inheritance* and rather then he will suffer me to come short thereof, he will
draw me to obey him by force irresistible; which is in a direct line of
opposition to the words of the Baptist, Matt. 3. 9.
And think not to say within your selves, We have ABRAHAM to our Father; for
I say unto you, God is able of these Stones to raise up Children unto ABRAHAM.

The Christian Religion is also built upon this double Love, as upon its
foundation, though a little otherways considered then before, according to the
change of man's state, who being created in the Image and favor of God, became
peccant through his own default, and an enemy to his Maker. The love of
Righteousness, upon which our Religion leans, is chiefly that which once he
declared only in Christ, that nothing should expiate sin, but the blood and
death of his Son, neither would he admit him our Advocate and Intercessor, but
as besprinkled with his blood. A declarative of this he makes daily in the
preaching of the Gospel, that he will not communicate Christ and his benefits
to any but those that turn unto and believe in him. The Love to miserable
sinners, upon which also the Christian Religion is bottomed, is, first, that by
which he has given Christ his Son for them, and appointed him the Savior of
them that believe; as also that by which he requires obedience, not according
to the rigor and severity of his utmost right and authority, but with grace
and clemency, and the promise of remission of sin, if so be lapsed man repent.
This Fundamental the doctrine of Predestination encounters two ways: First, by
affirming Gods love to be so great to some Sinners, that he would precisely
save them before he had given satisfaction to his love of Justice in Christ
Jesus, and that in his foreknowledge according to his purpose; nay, it
overturns the foundation of Christianity, by representing God willing to have
his justice satisfied, because he would precisely save these men; which is to
subordinate his love of Justice, testified in Christ, to his love of sinful
men, whom he would resolutely save. Secondly, by making God absolutely willing
to damn some* sinners, without any consideration of their impenitency, when a
plenary satisfaction to his love of Justice, and hatred of Sin had been given
in Christ Jesus; so that nothing stood in the way of his mercy to be shown unto
Sinners, be they what they will, but the condition of repentance; except some
have a mind to say, what is contained in this doctrine of Predestination, that
God will proceed in greater severity with the major part of men, then he did
with Lucifer, and his apostate Angels; and that it is his will that Christ and
the Gospel profit them no more then the infernal spirits; that the gate of
mercy is equally shut against them both; when these sinned in their own persons
out of malice by a voluntary act, the other in their Parent Adam, having no
actual being of themselves.

To the better understanding A more exact declaration of the precedent things.
how this twofold love is the foundation of Religion, and that in the mutual
respect one to another, let us ponder more accurately that of the Apostle to the
Hebrews, Heb. 11. 6.
He that comes unto God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of
all those that diligently seek him: In these words, two fundamentals are laid
against the two fiery darts of Satan, Security and Despair, the pernicious
Pests of Religion, either of them sufficient to the eversion and extirpation
thereof. The first flatters a man into the persuasion that though he serve not
God, yet shall he not perish, but obtain salvation. The other renders him
confident, that though he do worship and serve him, yet shall he not get. any
remuneration of him; either of these exclude all true divine worship. An
Antidote against both, the Apostolical words affords. He that believes God will
give eternal life to those only that seek him, and upon all others inflict
everlasting death, cannot easily be secure; he that credits God to be a
rewarder of those that seek him, will not readily despair: The ground of the
first persuasion is Gods love of Righteousness, more dear to him then Man
himself, which shakes off security; The foundation of the other, by which man
believes steadfastly God to be a rewarder of the true seekers of him, is that
his so great love to the Creature Man, that nothing impedes his bestowing
salvation on him, but the love which he bears to his own Justice; which is so
far from being an hindrance, that it does rather promote and advance it: Upon
this account, Man in his disquisition and search of God, is not dubious of
divine remuneration; and thus diffidence or desperation is put to flight: If
so, that this double love, and the mutual relation, as has been cleared, be
Religions foundation, without which it cannot subsist; then the doctrine
repugnant to this love, both absolute and relative, everts and overthrows the
same.

Twentiethly, This Doctrine 20 Arg.
of Predestination, as well in former times, as these wherein we live, stands
rejected by the greater part of the Professors of Christianity. To pass in
silence the Ages foregoing, things themselves witness it has been reputed
erroneous by the Church of Rome, the Anabaptisticall and Lutheran Churches.

Luther and Melanchthon, though in the beginning of the reformation they
approved it, yet afterward deserted it: This the later writings of Melanchthon
apparently testify of him. The same being witnessed of the other by the
Lutherans themselves, who earnestly contend rather for their Masters more full
declaring of his judgment in this, then desertion of the former opinion.
Philip Melan^hth^n believed this opinion of Predestination not much different
from the Stoical Fate, as his papers testify, especially his Epistle to Casper
Peucerus, [Lelius certifies the contests are grown so high at Geneva about the
Stoical Fate, that one is imprisoned because he differs from Zeno. O miserable
times! the doctrine of the Gospel obscured with strange and foreign disputes!]

The dissent of the Danish Churches in general is evident from the writings of
Nicholas Hemminge in his Treatife of Universal grace, where he thus states the
Controversy with his Adversaries, [ Whether the Elect believe, or Believers
are elected?] Those who assert the first, he judges them to agree with the
doctrine of the Manichees and Stoics; those of the later persuasion, with
Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles.

Further, Many in our own Country do so ill resent this doctrine, as they
have openly professed they neither can nor will have communion with our Church.
Some that have joined themselves, yet with this protestation, that they could
not close with this opinion; and not a few (upon the score of Predestination
only) have fallen away from our Churches, who have been of the same mind with
us; others threatening to leave us, unless they were satisfied; the Church was
not of this judgment.

Certainly, there is no doctrinal point, the Papists, Anabaptists, and
Lutherans do more sharply oppose, and by whose means procure greater envy to
our Church, casting an Odium upon all the Doctrines thereof, as if there were
no blasphemy against God so dreadful, either utterable or imaginable, which
according to this opinion of our Teachers, might not upon good consequence be
deduced from this Predestination.

Lastly, There was rarely ever any difficulty, or controversy in these our
Churches all along since the times of Reformation, which has not had its rise
from this Doctrine, or been in some conjunction with it: For the truth of this,
we may recollect the contests at Leyden in the matter of Coolhasius; those at
Gouda, in the business of Herman Herberts; those at Horn about Cornelius
Wigyer, and Medenblick in the cause of Taco Sibrand.

And this was not the least motive inducing me to a diligent animadvertency of
this point, endeavoring that no damage accrue thereby unto our Churches; the
Papacy hence geting ground, whose ruin (as of the Kingdom of Antichrist) all
pious Teachers ought to wish, studiously seek, and as much as in them lies,
pursue: And this in brief, is that I have meditated upon this Doctrine of
Predestination, as it has in all faithfulness been propounded by me from the
Authors thereof, not affixing the least syllable to them which I cannot
clearly prove from their own writings.

Others of our Teachers do hold forth the Doctrine of Predestination with some
diffrence from the former, and that two several ways, which I will briefly run
through.

The Judgment of some of them is this.

First, That God has purposed in himself by an Eternal and Immutable Decree,
out of the lump of mankind, to make the lesser part (for his good pleasure)
partakers of grace and glory, to the praise of his renowned Mercy; but by his
preterition, to leave the greater part in the state of Nature, impotent to
supernatural things, and not communicate to them that saving and spiritual
grace, by which their nature yet whole and integrate might be established; or
corrupted and depraved, restored to the demonstration of his Liberty; but
afterward being made peccant and culpable, to punish them with eternal death,
for the illustration of his Justice.

Secondly, Predestination (which word with these men is taken in the strict
sense for Election, and opposed to Reprobation) is considerable in respect of
the end and the means leading thereunto. In respect of the end, which is
salvation, and a manifesto of his glorious grace, Man's considered absolutely
and indifferently in his own nature in reference to the means; he is looked
upon as of himself, and in himself perishing, and as guilty in Adam.

Thirdly, In the Decree, touching the end, these gradations are observable;
Gods prescience by which he foreknew the predestinate, then his prefinition, by
which he preordain'd the salvation of those whom he foreknew: First; By
electing them from eternity; then by preparing grace for them in this life, and
glory in the life to come.

Fourthly, Means appertaining to the execution of this Predestination, are to
be Christ himself; then efficacious calling to faith in him; whence arises
Justification, and then the gift of perseverance to the end.

Fifthly, Reprobation, as we are capable of understanding it, consists of two
acts, Preterition, and Predamnation; the first antecedaneous to all things and
causes which are either in them, or exist by them; ( i. e.) beholding man
absolutely and indifferently under no consideration of sin.

Sixthly, To execute this act of Preterition, two means to be foreappointed,
Dereliction in the state of Nature, incapable of supernatural performances, and
Noncommunication of grace, whereby their nature uncorrupted might be confirmed,
or depraved might be restored.

Seventhly, Predamnation likewise to precede all things; yet not without the
prescience of the causes of damnation; God in his foreknowledge beholding man
as an offender, and guilty of death in Adam, therefore liable to perish out of
the necessity imposed upon him by Divine Justice.

Eighthly, The means ordained to put into execution this Predamnation. 1. Just
desertion, and that is either of Exploration, wherein God conferres not his
grace; or of Punishment, when God deprives man of all his salutiferous gifts,
and delivers him up into the power of Satan. 2. Means hardening, and those
things that accompany it, to the real damnation of the Reprobate.

Others declare their Opinion thus: The second Opinion concerning
Predestination.


First, That God willing to decree from eternity the Election of particular
persons, and Reprobation of others, looked upon mankind not only as made, but
as fallen and corrupted, and therefore guilty of Malediction, from which he
determined freely by his grace to save some for a declarative of his Mercy, and
leave others under the curse in just Judgment, for a manifesto of his Justice;
and this without any consideration had of Repentance and Faith in the one, or
Infidelity and Impenitence in the other.

Secondly, The special means See the stating of the first opinion.
particularly belonging to the execution of this Decree of Election and
Reprobation, are to be the same with those laid down in the stating of the
first Opinion, excepting those in common, appertaining jointly to both; for the
judgment of these men we now represent, makes not the fall of man as a means
preordain'd to the accomplishment of the preceding Decree of Predestination,
but only as a proaeresis, or an occasion administered for the framing hereof.

Both of these Opinions, according Arminius examines these Opinions.
to their outward shape, do in this only differ from the first, that they
neither place Creation nor the fall as a middle cause foreappointed of God to
execute this preceding Decree of Predestination, though the two later
themselves agree not concerning the Fall. The first of them propounds Election
in respect of the end, and preterition the first part of Reprobation, as
preceding the fall, the second, as both of them subsequent thereunto. Amongst
other reasons inducing these men to deliver the Doctrine of Predestination this
way, without keeping the high Road with their Predecessors, this was not the
meanest, their willingness to prevent, lest God with the same probability
should be concluded the Author of sin from this their Doctrine. as some of them
have judged it concludable from the first. But really, if with diligent
inspection we well examine these Opinions of a later The second and third
Opinions about Predestination.
Edition, compared with the Judgments of the same Authors in other points of
Religion, we shall find the fall of Adam not possibly otherwise considerable,
(according to the Tenants of these men) then as a necessary executive means of
the preceding Decree of Predestination; and this the purport of the two reasons
comprehended in the second Opinion apparently evidence. The first is, Gods
determination by the Decree of Reprobation, to deny unto man that grace
necessary to the antidoting his nature against the poison of sin; ( i. e.)
decreed not to confer that grace which was necessary to avoid obliquity; so
that man's transgression being under a Law, becomes inevitable, and his fall a
means appointed to bring in to act the Decree of Reprobation. The second is,
their bicotomy of Reprobation into Preterition and Predamnation, which
according to the tenor of this Decree are coupled together by a necessary
connection one with another, and equally extensive; for all they that were
passed by of God in the collation of grace, are also damned, and no others;
whence we gather, Sin is a necessary result of the Decree of Reprobation;
otherwise there were a possibility of not sinning left unto persons under this
Preterition, and so of not perishing, (sin being the only procuring cause of
damnation) and so some thus passed by of God, neither saved nor condemned,
which is a great absurdity. This Opinion we see is obnoxious to the same
inconvenience with the first; and whilst it endeavors to avoid it, it falls
into an open and absurd contradiction of it self, according to this; Prima
ubique su similis sit.

The third Opinion escapes this Rock better then the other, had Permissio
peccati est privatio auxilii Divini, quo posito, peccatum impediretur;
Whitaker quoted by Maccovius, Coll. Theol.
not the Patrons thereof delivered some thing for the declaration of
Predestination and Providence, from whence the necessity of the Fall may be
inferred, which cannot have any other rise then Predestinatory ordination.
Their description of divine permission of sin is very pertinent; [ Permission
is the substraction of Divine grace, whereby God, (executing the decrees of his
will by rational creatures) Substracto auxilio Dei homo facultatibus ad standum
been ut^ non potuit. Paraeus, cap. 4. p. 46. lib. De Gratia primi hom.
either does not reveal his will to the creature, whereby he would have it
effected; or does not incline its will in that act in obedience to his own.] To
which they add, If it be so, the creature sins necessarily, yet voluntarily
and freely. If any reply, This description is not quadrant to Gods permission
of Adams sin, we close with him; yet nevertheless, hence it follows, That all
other sins are done unavoidably. Again, It Is reducible hither what some of them
contend with that eagerness for, viz. That the manifestation of glory divine,
which needs must be illustrated, is placed in the demonstration of Mercy and
Justice punitive, which cannot be effected but by the entrance of sin and
misery by it, at least to the lowest desert thereof into the world; such a
declarative of Gods glory introducing a necessity of sinning; And the Apostacy
of Adam being unavoidable, therefore it (together with Creation) are means
subservient to the execution of this Decree; man's revolt could not necessarily
ensue upon his Creation, unless by virtue of this predestinatory Decree, which
cannot hold any middle place betwixt them, but is set over them precedaneous to
them both, subordinating Creation to Apostasy, and both to the execution of one
and the same decree, to demonstrate Justice in the punishment of sin, and Mercy
in the remission thereof: Otherwise the necessary sequel of Creation had not
been intended by God in it, which is impossible. But grant the necessity of the
fall could not be concluded from the premises of either these two last
Opinions, yet all the forementioned Arguments levelled against the first, with
a little diversification, are prevalent against these; as would plainly appear
upon a debate of them.

Hitherto I have declared the Opinions of others in the point of
Predestination, so much inculcated in our Churches and university of Leyden,
together with my own reasons inducing me to a disallowance of them: I come in
the last place to offer my own Judgment concerning it, and as I believe, most
conformable to the Word of God.

1. The first and absolute decree Arminius his own Judgment in the point in
hand.
of God concerning the salvation of sinful Man, is that whereby he decreed to
appoint Jesus Christ the Mediator, Redeemer, Savior, Priest and King, who
should abolish sin by his death, recover (by his obedience) lost
righteousness, and by his virtue communicate the same.

2. The second precise and absolute decree of God, is that whereby he
determined to receive into favor repentant and believing persons, and those
persevering to the end, to save in Christ, for Christ, and by Christ; the
impenitent and unbelievers to leave in sin under wrath, and destroy as aliens
from Christ.

3. The third decree, is that whereby he ordained (to administer sufficiently
and efficaciously) means necessary to faith and repentance; and this
administration to be framed according to his Wisdom, whereby he knows what
best becomes his mercy and severity, and according to his Justice, by which he
is prepared to follow the prescript of his Wisdom, and put the same into
execution.

4. Hence follows the fourth, whereby he decreed the salvation and condemnation
of some singular and certain persons; and this Divine Ordination leans upon his
Presciency, whereby he knew from eternity, who (according to the vouchsafement
of idoneous means to faith and conversion by his preventing grace) were to
believe, and by his subsequent persevere, and who were not to believe nor
persevere.

This Predestination thus explained, is,
1. The Foundation of Christianity, Salvation, and Assurance.

2. The Materials of the Gospel, yea the very Gospel it self; and as to the two
first Articles thereof, necessary to be believed unto salvation.

3. Neither has it had need to be examined or discussed in either General or
Particular Councils, being clearly and expressly totidem verbis contained in the
Scriptures, nor ever contradicted by any Orthodox Divine.

4. Always acknowledged and held forth by all sound Teachers.

5. It accords with the Harmony of all Confessions set forth by the Protestant
Churches.

6. It agrees very fitly with the Belg^ck Confession and Catechism; and if the
words in the 16. Art. [Some and others] be explained by believers and
unbelievers, my judgment is dilucidly comprehended in it, which moved me
(being to dispute publicly in the College) to order the questions In Collegio
publicoprivato Academiae
to be stated in the words of the Confession. It agrees with the Catechism,
Quest. 20. 54.

7. It very well suits the Nature of God, viz. his wisdom, goodness, and
righteousness, is the principal matter and clearest demonstration of them.

8. It Is at very good agreement with the Nature of Man, whether considered in
the state of Innocence, Apostasy, or restoration.

9. It holds good correspondency with the Act of Creati^n, confirming it to be
the communication of good, according to the intent of God, and the event of the
thing; that it had its rise from Divine goodness, its continuation and
preservation from Divine Love, and that it is the perfect and proper work of
God, wherein he pleased himself, and procured all things which were necessary,
ad non peccandum, to a not sinning.

10. It consents with the Nature of eternal life, and those titles wherewith it
is dignified in Scripture.

11. With the Property of eternal death, and those names put upon it by the
Holy Ghost.

12. It makes sin to be truly disobedience, and the meritorious cause of
condemnation, and so concords with Apostasy and Transgression.

13. It harmonizeth with the Nature of Grace, by ascribing all things
competible thereunto, reconciling it to his justice, and the nature and liberty
of Man's will.

14. It Is a most advantageous declarative of the glory of Gods Justice and
Mercy, representing him the cause of all good, and our salvation; and Man the
cause of fin, and his own ruin.

15. It contributes to the honor of Jesus Christ, appointing him the foundation
of Predestination, the procuring and communicatory cause of salvation.

16. It greatly promotes the salvation of men, being the power and means unto
everlasting life, procreating in them sorrow for sin, a sollicitous care of
conversion, faith in Christ, study of good works, zeal in prayer, causing us to
work out our salvation with fear and trembling, and as far as is necessary,
hinders desperation.

17. It confirms and establishes that Order and Method the Preaching of the
Gospel requires; First, exacting Faith and Repentance; then promising Remission
of Sin, the grace of the Spirit, and eternal life.

18. It strengthens the dispensation of the Gospel, and renders it fruitful in
the promulgation thereof, administry of the Sacraments, and Public Prayers.

19. It is the foundation of Christianity, in that in it the double Love of God
are happily joined together, and at good agreement one with another, namely, his
Love of Righteousness with his love of men.

Lastly, This doctrine has always been allowed of by the major part of
Christians, and to this day stands approved by them; neither can it administer
an occasion of its abhorrency, or ground of contention in the Christian Church:
Its much to be wished, that men would proceed no further in this matter,
neither be inquisitive into the unsearchable judgments of God any more then as
revealed in the Scriptures.

And this is that (most Noble and Potent States) I have to declare to your
Highness's concerning this Doctrine so much ventilated in the Church of Christ:
And if I should not be burdensome, I have other things to offer to your
Highness's conducing to the declaration of my judgment, and leading to the
self-same end, for which I am commanded hither by your Highness's: The
Providence of God; the Free Will of Man; Perseverance of Saints; Assurance of
Salvation, are points of so great affinity with this Doctrine of
Predestination, and have so much dependence upon it, that with your good leave
I shall deliver my self upon them.
THe Providence of GOD, I judge to be that careful, continual, and ever-present
eye of God, by which the care of the whole Universe, and all particular
Creatures (not one exempted) is upon him, to the conservation and government of
them in their essence, qualities, actions, and passions, as it best becomes him
and suits them, to the glory of his Name, and salvation of Believers. Herein I
substract nothing from Divine Providence competible to it; but yield it the
conservation, regulation, gubernation, and direction of all things, even to the
abolition of Chance and Fortune; yea, I subject to the great Providence the
Will of Man, and the very acts of the rational creature, so that nothing is
done without its will, though contrary thereunto: This difference betwixt good
and bad actions only observed; in that we affirm God both to will, and do good
acts, but freely to permit the bad, being willing to concede the attribution of
all acts excogitable concerning evil to the providence of God, so we take heed
lest thence God be determined The Author of Sin, which I evidently enough
testified in a Dispute once and again under me at Leyden, concerning the
righteousness and efficacious Providence of God in evil; in which I
endeavored to ascribe unto Providence all those acts concerning sin attributed
to God in Scripture, making such progress herein, that occasion was taken by
some of impeaching me with making GOD the Author of Sin, which was often
produced against me at Amsterdam, according to their suggestion from those
Theses; but how justly, it is sufficiently manifest from my answer to the one
and thirty Articles (mentioned above) falsely imposed upon me, this being one of
them.

Touching man's will, I am of that opinion that he was in dowed with knowledge,
holiness and other ablities by his Creation, whereby he was able to understand,
estimate, consider, will and perform true good; even as far as the commandment
obliged him; yet not this without the auxiliaries of Divine grace: In the state
of Apostasy and sin, he is disabled of himself and by himself to think, will,
or do any thing truly good, and stands in need of the renovating and
regenerating power of God in Christ by his Spirit in his intellect affections,
will and all other faculties, to empower him hereunto; but, participating
hereof as freed from sin, he is able to think will and do good, yet still as
under the Supplies of the grace of God.

Concerning the grace of God I believe it to be that gratuitous and undeserved
assio^, whereby God is well affected toward a miserable sinner; by which,
first he gave his Son, that whosoever believe's in him might have eternal
life; and then in and for Christ justifies him, and adopts him into the right
of his sons unto Salvation.

2. It is the infusion of Spiritual gifts into the understanding, will, and
affections of man, appertaining to his regeneration and renovation, viz. Faith,
hope, Charity etc. without which gracious donatives, man is not meet to think,
will or do any thing that good is.

3. Grace is that continued assistance, that non-intermissive help of the Holy
Ghost, by which the Spirit does instantly persuade and excite man, (before
Regenerate) unto goodness, infusing Salutiferous cogitations, inspiring him
with holy desiers, to the willing of good Actually; yea also by this he so
wills and works together with man, that what man will's, he might accomplish.
And thus I atribute to Grace the beginning, continuance, and consummation of all
good, so far as that man now regenerate, without this preventing, exciting,
Subsequent, and Cooperating Grace, is in capable to think, will, or do any
good, or resist any noxious temptation. Hence it is apparently manifest, I am no
way injurious to the grace of God, by ascribing too much to the free will of
man, as some asperse me. The hinge upon which all the Controvercy is turned, is
this; whether the grace of God be an irresistible force: actions and operations
as ascribable to grace, are not here disputed, none more ready then my self to
confess and inculcate them all; the manner of the operation only is that in
debate, wherein I believe according to the Scriptures, that many resist the
HolyGhost, and repel Grace offered them.

As to the perseverance of Saints my judgment is this, Persons engrafted into
Christ by true Faith, and participating of his quickening spirit, have strength
sufficient to encounter Satan, Sin, the World, and their own corruption, and by
the same assisting grace to carry away the Victory; Christ himself standing by
them in their assaults by his spirit, extending his favorable hand toward
them ( so they be found in a fighting posture; implore his aid, and not be
awanting to themselves) preserve them from falling; so that neither the fraud
or violence of Satan shall be able to seduce or pluck them out of his hands.
But whether these very persons by negligence may not desert the imitation of
their existency in Christ, embrace again this present world, fall from the
sound Doctrine once delivered to them, lose a good conscience, make void the
grace of God, would be diligently inquired into out of the Scriptures, and very
useful and necessary to be debated in our first convention; yet I profess
ingenuously, It was never taught by me that the true Believer might totally or
finally fall away from the faith, and so perish; though I cannot dissemble,
there are places of Scripture which seem to countenance the same, to which I
could never meet with any satisfactory answer, although on the other part there
are some places alleged not unworthy of observation.

Concerning assurance of salvation, I judge him who believes in Jesus Christ,
as well by the act of the holy spirit inwardly moving, and the Fruits of Faith,
as by his own conscience, with the Testimony of the spirit witnessing with it,
may have a certain persuasion, and indeed be assured, if his heart condemn him
not that he is the son of God, and stands in the love of Christ; yea more, may
depart this life with an unshaken confidence of the grace of God, and mercy in
Christ Jesus, and appear before that Tribunal of grace devoid of all anxious
fear and trembling solicitude; yet ought he always to pray, Lord, enter not
into judgment with me; but in as much as God is greater then our hearts, and
knows all things, and man not his own Judge; for though he know nothing by
himself, yet is he not thereby justified, it is God that judges him: I dare
not equal this certainty with that wherewith we know there is a God, and that
Christ is the Savior of the world; but the extent of this may be further
treated of in our Convention.

Besides all these, there has been much discourse abroad concerning the
perfection of Believers and regenerate persons in this life; wherein I have
been traduced as heterodox, and as almost of the Pelagian Opinion in this
point, viz. That the regenerate in this life may perfectly keep the Law of God.
To which I answer, That if I should thus judge, yet should I not Pelagianize
either in whole, or in part, if so be I added this, they were able to do by the
grace of Christ, and not without it; yet that there could be a plenary
observation of the precepts of Christ by a renewed person in this life, I never
affirmed, neither ever denied, but left it always dubious, contenting my self
with that of Austine, whose words I often quoted in the University, having
nothing to add of my own; they were these: There are four questions Austine's
Judgment.
observable in the business in hand; 1. Whether there was ever any man without
Sin who from the beginning to the end of his life never transgressed?

2. Whether there ever has been, now is, or ever can be any such person that
sins not, (i. e.) who has reached that perfection here that he
transgresses not, but fulfils the Law of the perfect God.

3. Whether there be a possibility in this life for a man to be without Sin.

4. If It be possible, why there was never any such person found.

To the first the Father answers* That there was never any such person found
besides the Lord Jesus Christ.

To the second, He thought never any man attained perfection in this life.

To the third, He judged it possible by the grace of God and man's free will.

To the fourth, Man does not that which is possible by the grace of Christ,
either because he is ignorant what good is, or places no complacency or delight
in it.

Hence its apparently manifest, Austine (the sharpest adversary the Pelagian
Doctrine ever had) was of this Judgment, That it was possible by the grace of
Christ in this life to be without sin: Yea, he further adds, Let Pelagius
confess man's possibility of being without sin to be only by the grace of
Christ, and we are agreed; but the Pelag^an Tenent appeared to this Father as
if man by his own strength (though with greater facility by the grace of
Christ) had been able to keep the whole Law: How far I dissent from this
Opinion, I have entered above, and now testify mine account of it as Heretical
diametrically opposite to the words of Christ's, Without me ^e can do nothing,
and perniciously John ^5. 9
destructive to the glory of God.

My judgment thus stated, I cannot see any thing comprehended therein, for
which any man should justly fear to appear together with it in the presence of
God, or suspect any grievous evil to arise; He refers to Mr. Gomar's Expression
to the States, p. 1.
yet being sensible of those daily Aspersions more and more cast upon me, as
if I should carry in my bosom some pernicious Heretical opinions, I am not
able to divine what the matter is, unless they pretend something amiss in my
Judgment concerning the divinity of the Son of God, and man's justificat^on
before him; for as I understand, touching both these heads much speech was had
after the last Act before the Supreme Court, and many things given out upon it,
for which I think my self engaged to declare to your Highnesses the carriage of
the whole business.

That which relates to the Divinity of the Son of God, and the word (...) of
which a Dispute was once had in our University; I cannot enough wonder, what
brought me into suspicion with some men, their jealously not being grounded
upon the least probability, indeed as much remote from reason and truth, as
what ever is dispersed to the prejudice of my Repute herein, may be truly
termed notoriously scandalous. At a dispute one Afternoon in Leyden, the
question concerned the Divinity of Christ; the Opponent objected the Son of God
was (...), and therefore had his essence of himself, and not of his Father. The
Respondent replied the word (...) was taken two ways, and either signified him
who was truly God, or him who was God of himself; according to the first
acception it was well and truly attributable to the Son of God; according to
the latter it was not. The Student still urging his Argument, vehemently
contended, that this was competible to him according to the second
signification, and the Essence of the Father could not be said, but improperly,
to be communicated to the Son and Holy Ghost, and that in right and propriety
it was common to them all; and this he managed with the greater confidence,
having Mr. Trelcatius Junior of blessed memory for him, as appears by some
passages in his Commonplaces to this purpose. To which I then answered, That
this opinion was oppugnant to the Word of God, and all the ancient Greek and
Latin Churhes, who always taught, That the Son had his Deity by eternal
generation from his Father, and that it unavoidably drew along with it two
repugnant Errors, Tritheism, and Sabellianism; (i. e.) hence would inevitably
follow a Trinity of Gods, who should together collaterally have divine Essence,
without the one having it from another, being only personally distinct; when
for the defense of the unity of Essence in the trinity of persons, this only
Fundamental has been adhibited, the original Progress of one person from
another, namely that of the Son from the Father. Hence would also follow, the
confounding of the Father with the Son, inferring only a nominal difference
betwixt them, which was the Opinion of Sabellius. It Is proper to the Father to
have his Deity of himself, or to speak more rightly, ^f none, if in this sense
the Son were (...), God of himself, he should be the Father.

This Dispute went every where abroad, and reached Amsterdam it self, where I
was enquired of by a Minister now fallen asleep in the Lord, how the case
stood, who received a full account of me, with my desires that he would inform
Trel^atius of pious memory, admonish him to rectify his Judgment, and correct
those impertinent words in his Common-places, which after a sort he took upon
him to do. Herein I was far from being liable to any blame, having defended the
truth and the Judgment of the Catholic and Orthodox Church; but rather
Trelcatius, who had usurped a form of speaking derogatory to the truth of the
thing. This is my infelicity, or the zeal of some men, the least variance
arising, to have all the fault cast upon me, as if 'twere more impossible for
me to be found in the Faith then any other man, though herein M. Gomar
assented, who in a dispute concerning the Trinity, not long after the
publication of those forementioned Common-places, did in his Theses three
several times contradict Mr. Trelcatius, which I showed the Amsterdam Minister,
who confessed the same; yet notwithstanding all this, none endeavored my
vindication from this obloquie, as some did the excusal of Mr. Trelcatius, by
all can did Interpretation, which yet could not stand in any consistency with
the words: So much favor and zeal could do.

Their tender Interpretation was this, The Son of God may be styled (...), or
said to have his Divinity of himself, qua Deus, as he is God; though from his
Father qua Filius, as he is a Son. It Is only for enlargement that God or
Essence ought to be considered absolutely and relatively; in the first
acception the Son to have Essence Divine of himself; in the other from his
Father. These are new Modes of speaking, novel opinions, and inconsistent; for
the Son, both as God, and as Son, has his deity from his Father; the
denomination of God only, does not express his being from the Father, as the
word Son does. The Essence of God is not any way considerable, wherein it can
be said not to be communicated to the Son from the Father; neither in any
diverse respect can the same Essence both be communicated and not communicated
to him; being Contradictories they cannot be reconciled in any double
consideration: If it be relatively communicated to him, he cannot have it
absolutely of himself. I shall be peradventure demanded, Whether to be God, and
the Son of God, be not two distinct things, which is confessed, but when by a
further process it is affirmed that as to be the Son of God, imports his having
an Essence from the Father; so to be God, implies the having it from himself,
or from none: It Is denied with a further asservation, That it is (...). an
Error, not only in Divinity, but natural Philosophy also. To be a Son* and to
be God, are at no repugnancy one with another; but to have an Essence from the
Father, and yet withal to have it from none, are contradictories, and mutually
destroy one another.

To bring this Fallacy to the light, we must observe the equipollencie of these
six propositions, placed parallel-wise.

God is eternal, having Divine Essence from Eternity.

The Father is from none, having Divine Essence from none.

The Son is of the Father, having Divine Essence from the Father.

The word God imports the having true Divine Essence. The term Son implies the
having the same from the Father, whence properly he is called both God, and the
Son of God; but as he cannot be called Father, so neither can he be said to
have essence of himself, or from no other; yet what endeavors are made to
excuse these things, by telling us, that when the Son of God, as God, is said
to have Essence of himself, nothing else is intimated, but that Essence Divine
proceeds not from any. But if they are pleased to do thus, nothing can be so
depravedly spoken, which an excuse may not patronize. Although God and Essence
Differ not Essentially.
(...), yet whatever is predicable of the later, may not be predicated of the
first, because distinguishable after our manner of conception, to which all
forms of speaking ought to be exacted; therefore made use of that by them we
may have a right perceptive of things. Hence it appears we speak rightly, in
saying Gods Essence is communicable; but falsely, that God may be communicated;
he that understands the difference 'twixt the Abstract and the Concrete, so
much controverted 'twixt the Lutherans and us must easily perceive how many
absurdities would follow, if such Explications as these were once permitted in
the Church of God: It admits of no excuse that the Son of God should be (...),
neither is it proper to say that the Essence of God is common to the three
persons, when it is said to be communicated one from another. From what I say
it is openly manifest how much we can tolerate in him whom we suspect not of
Heresy, and on the contrary how greedily we snatch up any thing to burden him
whom we have in suspicion; the first is conspicuous; for the later, this
example is the least.

Concerning man's justification before God, I am not conscious to my self of
teaching or thinking any thing which is not the unanimous sense of the reformed
and Protestant Churches, and at very good accord with their* judgments herein.

Some controversy of this nature indeed there was afoot betwixt Piscator the
Nassovian Professor of Divinity, and the French Churches, stated thus; Whether
the obedience and righteousness of Christ imputed to Believers, and in which
they are righteous before God, were only the passive obedience of Christ,
according to the judgment of Piscator; or both active and passive, which in
his whole life he yielded to the Law of God, and that holiness wherein he was
conceived, as the Gallick Churches believed?

For my part, I never durst sink into this question, or assume the examination
thereof, being satisfied, the Professors of the same Religion may dissent from
one another herein, salving the unity of Faith and Christian Peace; the
Adversaries one to another seeming to be of the same mind in mutual toleration
and brotherly forbearance, although in our Country some be of another
judgment.

A Question is moved from the words of the Apostle Romans 4. [Faith was accounted
for righteousnesse] whether it be understood properly, so that faith as an act
done according to the Evangelical Precept, be imputed before God to or for
righteousness, and that by grace, in as much as it is not the righteousness of
the Law; or whether it be to be understood figuratively, and improperly, that
the righteousness of Christ apprehended by Faith, be imputed to us for
righteousness; or thus, whether Righteousness (into, or for which faith is
imputed) be the instrumental work thereof, as some assert. I have followed the
first opinion, in the Theses of Justification disputed under (...).
me, Non praecise not rigidly, yet simpli iter, plainly, as elsewhere in a
certain Epistle. For this I am judged unsound in the doctrine of man's
Justification; but this will be more clearly manifest in a mutual conference in
its due season: For the present briefly thus: I believe the justification of
sinners by the sole obedience of Christ, and that his Righteousness is the
only meritorious cause for which the condonation of sin is granted to
believers, and reputed as just as if they had fulfilled the Law perfectly; but
inasmuch as God imputes this Righteousness of Christ to believers only, I judge
in this sense it may be well and properly said, that faith is imputed for
Righteousness by grace to him that believes, God having set forth his Son
Tribunal Gratiae, a Mercy-seat, or propitiation by faith in his blood. But
however my judgment is the same with Calvin's, (whom none of us reprehends as
unsold in this point) and am ready to subscribe to what he lays down in the
third book of his Institutions concerning it.

And these are the chief Articles, most noble and potent States, at the command
of these Sessions I judged necessary to declare my sense of.

I have made some annotations upon the Confession of the Belgic Churches and
Heydelberge Catechism; but of these a debate will be most seasonable in our
Synod, which with your consent and evocation we hope for by the first
opportunity; only give me leave to add a word or two concerning a certain
Claufe, under which the Noble and Potent States General consented to a
National Synod in this Province; which was this, that in it the Confession and
Catechism of the Belgic Churches should be subjected to Examination. This has
displeased many, who judged it not only unnecessary, but very unmeet to be
done; and who should procure this from the Lords the States General, but a
person of quality and my self? But neither of these upon any ground; for the
later, we were so far from being the authors of it, that eleven or twelve years
ago at the great importunity of the Churches for a National Synod, the States
of South-Holland and Westfriesland could not judge it otherwise requisite to
yield thereunto by their decree, then that in it the Confession of the Belgic
Churches should be brought under Examination; we not promoting any such thing
at that time either by advice or endeavor; yet really if we had, we had done
nothing but our duty, and what was agreeable both to Equity and Reason, and the
necessity of our present Estate.

First, that it might appear to all the world we bear that honor to the word
of God alone (as becomes us) that it only is determined to be without, nay
above all dispute, beyond al exception, and worthy of all acceptance.

Secondly, these book's being the writings of men Error may be contained in
them, whence it behooves us to be inquisitive, (yet lawfully in a National
Synod) whether there be any thing that stands need of Correction and emendation
in them.

1 Whether they have an agreement of parts with the word of i. e. An exact
agreement thoroughout.
God, as well according to the words themselves and manner of speaking, as the
genuine sense thereof.

2. Whether or no whatsoever is Comprehended in them, be necessary to be
believed unto salvation; so consequently, saving health ascribed to those
things to which it is not Competible.

3. Whether the Confession does not contain and comprehend too many things as
necessary to be believed unto salvation, and that saving health according to
that rule be refused to be given up to what it appertains.

4. Whether the words and form's of speaking made use of in them, are not of
ambiguous acception, administering an occasion of contention; for Example, 14.
Art^^. Confess. you have this passage, Nothing is done without Gods ordination;
if by ordination be meant Gods appointing that something be done, the
Proposition is false, in that it follows, that God is the Author of sin; but if
the import of it be, his Ordination to a good end, its rightly understood.

5. Whether there may not be found things repugnant one to another. Ex. Gr. A
person much honored in the Church, writes to Piscator; the Nassovian Professor
wishes him to adhere to the Heydelberge Catechism; in his Doctrine of
Justification cites to this purpose three places, which he thought at variance
with the judgment of Piscator. The Professor returns, For his part he did
steadfastly abide in the sense of the Catechism, alleges for his proof eleven
or twelve places thence. Now I solemnly profess, I see not how these places
admit of reconciliation.

6. Whether all things in these writings be digested in that right order and
method the Scripture requires them to be.

7. Whether all things be most aptly constituted for the preservation of peace
and unity with all Reformed Churches.

3 Reason. The end of a National Synod, is, diligently to consult the right
ordering the affairs of the Church, to which chiefly belongs a Doctrinal
Scrutiny, as well that which by Unanimous consent is admitted of, as what some
Teachers earnestly contend for.

4. Reason Such an Examination as this will not only procure authority to these
writings, when after a Mature and rigid Scrutiny they shall be found concording
with the Word of God, or more and more conformed thereunto; but also raise the
credit of the Ministers in the minds of men, when they perceive the truth
reveald in the Book of God to be so dear, and of that great account with them,
that they will spare no pains to set their Doctrine in a greater Conformity
thereunto.

5 Reason. Why if at any time, now especially we Judge such a thing necessary,
because there are many Ministers having some Meditations by them upon several
things contained in the Confession and Catechism, which they secretly reserve,
not revealing them to any, hoping to debate them in a National Synod; this
being promised them, some suffer themselves to be persuaded not to permit their
thoughts herein to see the light.

Further; The end of a National Synod should be this, That it may please the
Noble and Potent Lords and States to establish some Ecclesiastic Sanctions by
public authority, according to which every one ought to frame himself in the
Church of God. That this may be obtained from your most illustrious Highnesses,
and others able to execute the same with a good Conscience, its necessary They
understand the Doctrine comprehended in the form of unity to be Consentaneous
to the Word of God. This ought be an inducement to us to present and offer the
examination of our Confession before the Supreme States, either to show its
agreement with the Word of God, or to render it suitable thereunto.

6. Reason, is drawn from the example of the Associates of the Augustan
Confession; the Helvetian and French Churches, who not above two or three
years ago, enriched their Confession with a new entire Article; and the
Belgic its self, since its first Edition, has undergone a Scrutiny in
substraction from it, addition to it, and mutation of it.

I wave other Reasons that might be brought, judging these sufficient to prove
that the Clause for Examination and Review, as they call it, is rightly
inserted in the Instrument of Consent, of which mention was made even now.

I am not ignorant what Allegations are made against these, especially that
published abroad every where, and judged to carry the greatest weight (to which
I think it requisite to make answer) That to review the Doctrine of the Church,
would be to call the same into question, which neither ought, nor is fit to be
done.

1. Because it is approved by the suffrage of many grave and learned men, and
stiffly defended against all the opposers thereof.

2. Sealed with the blood of so many thousand Martyrs.

3. From hence would arise confusions, scandals, ruin of consciences within
the Church, derisions, reproaches, and criminations without.

To all these I reply, 1. 'Twere better this odious kind of speaking such as
to call into question, and the like, were not used but when only humane
Writings are under debate, which may have a mixture of Error in them: What
reason is there to say such a Writing is called into question, which was never
questionless, nor ever ought to be so reputed?

2. The defense of any Writing against its adversaries, the approbation of
learned men, the obsignation thereof with the blood of Martyrs, suffice not to
make a Doctrine authentic; these Martyrs and Teachers being liable to err,
which is not to be denied in this Argument.

3. The Materials of the Confession admit of discrimination; some touch the
foundation of salvation, and are the very fundamentals of Christianity; some
only are built upon this bottm, and are not absolutely in themselves necessary
to eternal bliss. The former are approved of by the unanimous consent of all
reformers, and strongly defended against all gainsayers; the later disputed to
and fro amongst them, and some of these not without some show of truth oppugned
by their Adversaries. To the first of these the Martyrs have set to their seal
in blood; to the last not at all. It Is worthy our diligent observation what was
propounded to these Witnesses of Religion in our time, and for what their own
lives were not dear unto them; which if we do, we shall find they were never
questioned about any thing judged worthy (by me) of a debate in the Synod;
therefore not sealed with the blood of any. To allege an example; When the
question was concerning the eleventh Cap. to the Romans, 'twas asserted by
some, That that place was cited in the Margin of the Confession, and that in
his sense who avouched the same, and that The Martyrs had sealed the Confession
with their blood. Answer was, If the exactest search were made through the
great Book of Martyrs set forth by the French, 'twould not be found that ever
any of them were so much as examined concerning it, or shed the least drop of
their blood for it: In brief, the blood of those sacred Witnesses confirmed
this, That in the Integrity and simplicity of their consciences they professed
the Faith; and not that their Confession was beyond all Reproof and Exception,
unless they had been so led into all truth by Christ that they could not err.

4. If the Church were rightly instructed in the Difference which is, and ever
ought to be 'twixt Divine and Humane Writings, and of that Liberty the Church
and all other Christians are lawfully invested with, of regulating the later by
the former, they would neither vex themselves, nor be offended when they see
all the writings of men brought to the probative touchstone of Gods Word, but
rather 'twould be matter of great joy to the Church, that God had bestowed such
Pastors and Teachers upon it, who might justly and fitly (due order always
observed, to the Test. of the Scriptures) level their Doctrine accordingly,
that it might every way accord, and in the least things perfectly agree
therewith.

5. The fear of ensuing trouble, the Scorns, Cavillings and Criminations of
disaffected persons ought not to render a Doctrine once received less obnoxious
to examination; they might rather turn it to their advantage, when 'twould be
manifest, such persons as would do this, were not sound in their Religion, it
being of Divine injunction to search and try the spirits whether they were of
God.

If these Considerations had been of any moment with Luther, Zwinglius, and
others, the Doctrine of the Pontificiar es had never been brought to the test
by them; neither those who follow the Augustine Confession had judged it
reasonable to subject it to a new Examination, and change it in some places
thereof. We cannot but approve this deed, and judge Luther not to have done
well, being admonished by Philip Melancthon in the close of his life, (as it is
testified in writing by our Contrymen) to reduce the Eucharistical
Controversy of the Lords Supper to some better agreement, in refusing so to do
upon this ground, retorted upon Philip, as it is reported of him, That by this
means the whole Doctrine should be called into question; for if reasons of this
nature had been admitted, then the endeavors of the Church of Rome had been
lawful in hindering the controverting and questioning by any new scrutiny the
Doctrine received in the Church for so many hundred years.

To this it is opposed, If the doctrine of the Churches should be subjected to a
new Examination, at the Celebration of every National Synod, they would never
have any thing on which they might rest and firmly lean; and that it might be
truly said of these Churches, That they had fidem anniversariam, an anual
faith, and were carried about hither and thither with every wind of Doctrine.
To which I answer.

First, The Church have Moses and the Prophets, the Evangelists and Apostles, (
i. e.) the whole Scripture of the Old and New Testament wherein the necessaries
to salvation are fully and clearly comprehended; Upon this the Church shall
build its faith, and stay thereon as upon an immovable foundation, into which,
notwithstanding our Confessions and Catechisms every determination in all
causes of Faith and Religion ought to be resolved.

2. There are some points in the Confession so certain and indubious, that they
will never be questioned by any but Ex. Gr. Whether Christ be the Son of God?
Whether the soul be immortal?
Heretics; other branches are of that nature that 'twere very advantageous, as
often as may be, to have them debated amongst learned and God-fearing men, that
they may be ranked as near as possibly they can, with points of greater
certainty.

3. It would be endeavored that the Confession be made up of as few heads as
may be, and those briefly framed in Scriptureterms; omitting all larger
Explications, Proofs, Digressions, heapings together of words and sentences,
Amplifications, Exclamations, and only delivering in it the necessaries to
salvation.

The brevity will render it less obnoxious to Errors, Obloquy, and Examination,
taking for our example the practice of the primitive Church, which gave a
draught of the Articles judged necessary to be believed in very few words.

Some there are that make a distinction betwixt the Confession and Catechism,
as to a review, and judge the former (because proper to the Belgic Churches,
and not so much made use of by others) may with less difficulty fall under a
Synodical review and examination; but the Catechism not being peculiar to us,
but chiefly appertaining to the Palatinate Churches, and of general use and
concernment, cannot without great detriment be brought to the test. To which I
answer, If the Catechism of Heydelberg must needs be the form of concord
amongst the Teachers of the Churches, and to which every of them is bound to
subscribe, its necessary to subject the same to Examination; for there are no
Churches ought to be in that place unto us, that we should so admit of any
writing composed by them, as not to preserve our Liberty of examining the same.
And this I look upon as the principal cause why the Churches of several
Provinces agreeing in the Fundamentals of Religion, have framed their
Confessions peculiar to every of them. Let it be granted that the Heydelberg
Catechism is no such form and liberty conceded in its Explication as is
fitting, and 'twil not be necessary either to review or examine the same; the
burden only of subscription thereunto removed, and moderate liberty yielded in
the unfolding thereof.

CONCLUSION.
AND this is that (most Noble, Potent. Wise, and prudent Lords) I have to
propose to your Highnesses; together with a return of thanks to this Noble and
Potent Assembly (to which next after God himself, I acknowaedg my self bound
to give an account of all my actions) that of your Clemency you have vouchsafed
to hear me patiently; with my solemn protestations that I am ready to
entertain a fraternal and amicable conference with my fellow brethren
concerning these things, or any other about which at any time any controversy
may arise, at what time or place, or upon what occasion soever it shall be
judged requisite by these Sessions. And I further engage in every debate to
yield my self moderate and flexible, not less prompt to learn then teach: And
in as much as in every thing to be conferred of amongst us, there are two
things attendable, First, whether that in debate be true, and then whether it
be necessary to be believed unto salvation (the Scriptures being the ground of
our inquiry in both) I do Sacredly affirm and solemnly oblige my self not to
obtrude any point to be believed, my brethren dissenting from me therein,
though proved by solid arguments to consent with the Scriptures, unless I have
clearly Evinced it from the Divine word it self, and as dilucidly true so also
necessary to be believed by every Christian to salvation; which if my brethren
will be prepared to do, my opinion is, there will scarce any debate or Schism
be amongst us. And further I add; (that I may take away all fear and jealousy
that on my part may hang upon this Noble Assembly, now charged and burdened
with weighty affairs, upon which the peace and prosperity of our Nation and
the reformed Churches depend) there will certainly be very many things, and
those of a high nature which I shall bear with in my fellow brethren, not
being Lord of another man's faith, but a Minister in this to those that believe,
that in them may grow the Knowledge, truth, piety, peace, and joy in Christ
Jesus our Lord. But if my fellow-brethren see not how they can attolerate me
and grant me a place amongst them, yet notwithstanding for that which concern's
my self, I hope no rent or division will ensue, which God avert; there are
Schisms enough already in the Christian world; its incumbent rather upon every
one to diminish and abolish them. In this case, I Will possess my soul in
patience: and my place (though I shall endeavor to live so long as God shall
prorogue my life for the common good of Christianity) I will lay down;
mindful of that

Sat Ecclesiae, Sat Patriae datum.
FINIS.
These books following are to be sold by Henry Eversden, at the Greyhound in
Paul's Churchyard.
AN Exposition with Practical Observations on the Nine first Chapters of the
Proverbs, by Francis Tailor Minister of Canterbury, in quarto.

An Exposition, with Practical Observations on the whole Book of Canticles in
quarto, by John Robotham Minister of the Gospel.

An Idea, or body of Churchdiscipline in the Theorick and Practick, by Mr.
Rogers, in quarto.

Imputatio Fidei, Or a Treatise of Justification; wherein the imputation of
Faith for Righteousness (mentioned in Romans 4. 5. 6th.) is explained, by Mr.
John Goodwin, Minister of the Gospel, in quarto

The Right of Dominions, or the Prerogative of Kings, proved from Scripture, by
Dr. Welden.

Lucas Redivivus, or the Gospel-Physitian, prescribing (by way of meditation)
divine Physic to prevent diseases, not yet entered upon the soul, by John
Anthony Doctor in Physic, in quarto.

Mercy in her Exaltation, a Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mr. Thomas
Tailor, by Mr. John Goodwin, in quarto.

Anabaptists Meribah, or Waters of strife, being an answer to Mr: Tho. Lamb,
Merchant; by Mr. Price one of Mr. John Goodwins Congregation.

The natural man's case stated, or an exact map of the little world, man, in
seventeen Sermons, by Mr. Christopher Love; to which is added a Sermon preached
at his Funeral, by Mr. Thomas Manton of Newington in 80.

Gods glory in man's happiness, or the freeness of Gods grace electing us, by
Francis Tailor of Canterbury, in 80.

The Lords Prayer unclasped, being a vindication of it, against all
schismatics and Heretics, called Enthusiasts and Fratracilli, by James
Harwood, B. D.

Hippolitus Translated out of Seneca, by Edm. Prestwich. Gospel public
worship, or the Translation, Metaphrase, Analysis, and Exposition of Romans 12.
from verse. 1, to 8th. describing and prescribing the complete pattern of Gospel
worship.

Also an Exposition of the 18th Chapter* of Matthew; to which is added a
discovery of Adams threefold estate in Paradise, viz. Moral, Legal, and
Evangelical, by Thomas Brewer, in 80.

A Comment on Ruth together with two Sermons, one teaching how to live well, the
other minding how to dye well; by Thomas Fuller Author of the Holy State.

Pearls of Eloquence, or the school of Complements, wherein Ladies, and
Gentlewomen may accomodate their Courtly practice, by Will. Elder Gent. in 12.

The doctrine of laying on of hands vindicated and asserted, being an Answer to
Lieut. Col. Paul Hobson, in quarto.

The Male of the Flock, a Sermon preached before the Lord Mayor, out of the 4th
of Malachy, by Mr. Aggas Minister of Chynis.

These Books are now in the Press and ready to Publish.
Riverus Universal body of Physic, in English folio.

The seventh day Sabbath sought out and Celebrated by The. Tillam, in 8^.

Mr. John Goodwin in answer to Mr. Kendall. and Mr. Resbury, and Mr. Pauson.


