An ACCOUNT OF THE Proceedings and Transactions that have happened in the
Kingdom of ENGLAND, Since the Arrival of the Dutch FLEET, And the LANDING of
the Prince of Orange's ARMY, etc.

As also, The Progress the Prince made; The going over to him of the Nobility,
etc. The Seizure of Towns, Skirmishes, and Matters of the like Nature: The
Kings Journey to Salisbury; His Retreat and Departure from London; His Return,
and the Arrival of the Prince, the proceedings at London and Westminster, upon
that Occasion. Together with the King and Queens departure for France, and
Arrival there. Also, The manner of the Taking the Lord Chancellor, and diverse
others.

Impartially Related from the best and most Authentic INTELLIGENCE and ADVICE,
and Published for the General Satisfaction of the Nation.

LONDON, Printed for P. B. in the Year 1688.

A Brief Account of the Proceedings and Transactions that have happened in the
Kingdom of England, since the Arrival of the Dutch Fleet, and Landing of the
Prince of Orange's Army, etc.
ON the third of November, about eleven of the Clock, about half Seas over, the
Dutch Fleet was discovered, and about five in the Afternoon passed by Dover,
steering a Channel Course Westward, the Wind at East, North-East, a very fresh
Gale, when on the same day the Swallow, an English Ship, Commanded by Captain
Aylmer, brought into the Downs a Fly-boat, a Tender to the Dutch Fleet, having
on Board 4 Companies of Foot of Colonel Babington's Regiment, Commanded by
Major Collambine, and had notice that His Highness the Prince of Orange was on
Board the Fleet that set Sail from the Gore on the (...) of (...) in the
Afternoon: And on the 5th. of November, about 9 of the Cl^ck in the Morning the
Fleet, upon the clearing up of the Weather, appeared off Plymouth, consisting
of six hundred thirty five men of War, Fly-boats, Pinks and Fireships, as the
Account Printed in Holland mentions, viz. Sixty five men of War, five hundred
Fly-boats, sixty Pinks, and ten Fireships; the Army on Board being according
to the said account, ten thousand six hundred ninety two Foot, and three
thousand six hundred sixty Horse, though since we have found an Additional
number, and so they proceeded to Land, having likewise had a small Pink taken
by Captain Hastings, Commander of the Woolwich, below Hole-Haven separated from
the Fleet, and containing on Board only an inconsiderable number; as also a
Fisher-boat with twenty four Horse.

By this time His Highness having Landed his Men at Torbay and other places,
after a Refreshment, marched toward the City of Exeter, which without any
opposition received him with many demonstrations of Joy, He entering that City
in much Splendour, and with the loud Huzza's and Shouts of the People, the Bells
Ringing, and the Bonefires at night flaming in every Street; yet the Bishop
retiring, and the Mayor not being altogether ready to comply with his
Highness's Commands, Orders were taken for the security of that City, and such
as had Shoes, and other necessaries convenient for the Army, were ordered to
bring them in, and receive Money for them at Marketable Rates. And here it was
that His Highness's Declaration, relating His Intentions for the preservation
of the Protestant Religion, and Redressing the Grievances of the Nation, by
removing Evil Counselors, etc. was published, more especially publicly Read.
And sundry Persons Listed themselves under His Highness, to whom Arms were
given and distributed; and for the better Convenience of the Artillery,
especially in Landing, it was conveyed in the Ships that brought it out of
Holland, to Topsham, together with the Carriages there, being Landed, in order
to be brought to the Army.

The Prince still continuing in Exeter, Dr. Burnet read His Highness's
Declaration in the Cathedral, and Preached there, being attended by a numerous
Auditory, people crowding from all parts to see and hear him: And Robert
Ferguson preached in the great Meeting House.

Immediately after these Transactions, we had News that the Lord Lovelace,
going to the Prince with about seventy Horse, very well Armed and Appointed,
was stopped in Cereencester by the Militia of those parts, but not willing to
submit himself, a Dispute ensued, in which diverse were killed, and his Lordship
at that time secured, by the Order of the Duke of Beausort, with diverse others
taken at the same time.

Soon after this the Lord Cornbury, with diverse of the Forces under his
Command, went over to His Highness the Prince of Orange, together wi^h Colonel
Langston Commander of the Regiment of St. Albans; so that at this time, the
greater part of three Regiments of Horse and Dragoons espoused the Princes
Interest. Upon notice of which for the Soldiers better observing themselves in
the Countries where they Marched, the King published an Order for their good
Behavior, and paying their Quarters, etc. under a Restriction both to Soldiers
and Officers, as also by what means, or to whom the Injured Parties should have
Recourse for their Redress, in case they found themselves aggrieved, together
with other Proclamations and Orders, too tedious to Incert in this Relation,
etc.

The next material News we received, was, That the Dutch Fleet was diligently
keeping the Coast, and the English Fleet, under the Commaud of the Lord
Dartmonth, was plying off Portsmouth, at East South-East, the Wind blowing very
hard at South, but with no disposition tending to an Engagement; which appeared
by several of the latter soon after coming into a Harbor.

On the 19th. of November. in the Evening, the King approached Salisbury, and was
met about a Mile from thence by the Principal Officers of his Army, who had
Quartered his Forces in those parts; as also by the Mayor and Aldermen in their
Formalities, who waited upon him to the Bishops Palace, appointed for his
Lodging. Soon after this, we had an account of the Lord Dalameers declaring for
the Prince of Orange and preservation of the Established Religion and Laws,
etc. Exhorting his Tennants and Friends to join with him, appointing his
Randezvous upon Boddon Downs, where he accordingly met with a numerous
Concourse or Attendance, well Armed and appointed with the promise of greater
Assistance in Men and Money, his number still increasing.

The Prince of Orange having secured the Western parts as far as he had
advanced, leaving Exeter, advanced with his Army, who by this time increased by
the coming in of not only the Commons, but of diverse of the Nobility and
Gentry, left Exeter, a great part of his Forces being advanced a considerable
March before him: And on the 20th. of November, the King Exhibited a
Proclamation for the Pardon for those that were gone over to his Highness the
P. of Orange, if they returned, with Conditions: and soon after a Skirmish
happened near Warminster, wherein diverse were killed, and others taken
Prisoners, etc.

On the 26 of November. the King having left Salisbury, returned to White Hall,
and Colonel Skelion was appointed Lieutenant of the Tower: And on the 28 the
Lord Chancellor had Orders, by the Kings Special Command, to Issue out Writs
for the calling a Parliament, to Sit on the 15 of February, 1688; and pursuant
thereto, Issued out his Proclamation, bearing Date the 30 of November. Whilst
things happened, the Dutch Fleet at Sea, set upon 5 French Men of War, and took
three of them, sinking the other two: And soon after, the French King
Proclaimed War against the States of the United Provinces; Commanding his
Subjects to fall upon them with Fire and Sword; insomuch, that they proceeded
to burn several Villages upon the Frontiers; but had their Progress in that
unchristian-like undertaking, by the advance of the Dutch Forces, and a sudden
Inundation of Waters.

And now his Royal Highness the Prince of Denmark, going over to the Prince of
Orange, her Royal Highness withdrew in private, to the no small Consternation
of the Court, leaving her Reasons for her so doing: And diverse Lords being up
in Arms in the North, seized upon the City and Castle of York, making the
Governor Prisoner, and disarming, according to the Statute in that case
provided, all Papists in those parts; with whom, the Lieutenant-Governour of
Hull, concurring, he so contrived it, that drawing the Townsmen, a good part
of the Garrison, and many of the Seamen, to side and take part with him, he not
only seized the Governor of that strong and Impotent Garrison-Town, but
secured the place for the Interest of the Prince of Orange; making all the
considerable Papists Prisoners, and turning out such as were of no Power or
Esteem; to shift for Habitations elsewhere: And the Lord Molenex, a Popish
Lord, who was up in Arms in those parts, was obliged to Retire, upon notice of
the General Concurrence of the Northern Counties, with the Protestant Lords,
then in Arms for the defense of the Laws and Religion, etc.

The Lord Lovelace, after his being surprised and taken at Cerencester, was
carried to Gloucester, and there consined as a Prisoner for some time; but the
Sheriff, by Order, as we had it Credibly reported from the King, being about to
remove him, and the people of those parts getting notice of it, came in in such
numbers, that he found himself incapable of doing it: And whilst the matter was
delayed, some Troops of Horse of the Prince's party Advanced and entered the
Town, so that his Lordship was entirely set at Liberty, and went soon after to
wait upon the Prince, who advanced by slow Marches, toward London.

The Proceedings being thus far advanced, the Mobile, in most considerable
Towns, as well in the North as the West, got together, and pulled down or
defaced, the Popish Chapels and Mass-Houses, burning or carrying away the
Trinkets and Superstitious Trumpery; and defaced the Houses of many noted
Papists, as well Resident as Absent.

The King hearing of these Proceedings, and that a party of his Forces had been
worsted near Twyford, by an Advance party of the Princes, on the 9 of December,
and in the Dispute, beside the gaining of the pass, a considerable number of
Scotch and Irish that were too far Advanced, killed; and that the Nobility and
Gentry daily fell away from him, he called a Council on the 12 of December, to
Advise what was best to be done, the Queen having that morning about 10 of the
Clock, privately withdrew her self, together with the Child and his Nurse, and,
as we sidce hear, is arrived in France. The Debates of the Council continued a
considerable time; and although several Lords had been appointed to wait on the
Prince, with Proposals of Accomodations and Right Understanding; yet upon the
breaking up of this Council, the King about Two of the Clock in the morning,
thought fit, privately to withdraw himself, which as soon as known, caused a
great Consternation in the Court; and made, especially the Jesuits and Priests,
scamper all manner of ways to provide for their safety: And the Protestant
Lords who where then in Town, had no sooner notice of it, but they assembled at
White Hall, and there of some consideration what was most Expedient to be done
in so Emergent a juncture of Affairs, they Adjourned to the Guild Hall of the
City of London, where they continued till about Three in the Afternoon; the
Court of Aldermen and Common Council being likewise assembled, whether their
Lordships sent for Colonel Beuil Skeleton, the Lieutenant of the Tower, and
caused him to Resign the Trust and power of that Important Citadel, into the
Hands of the Lord Lucas: And before they departed, drew up their Declaration;
That seeing the King was gone, and the Government in so great a Emergency and
Danger, they thought fit to concur with the Prince of Orange for preventing
those Accidents and Misfortunes that might ensue upon the Kings withdrawing
himself, etc. This being done, and the Lords departed, the Lord Mayor and
Aldermen sat in the Mayo^s Court, the Common Council being there assembled, and
drew up an Address of Thanks to his Highness for his care of the Government,
etc. Voting that it should suddenly be presented to him; and four Aldermen,
together with eight Commoners, were sent to wait upon him, and to invite him to
the City; and although great care was taken by the Trained Ba^ds and Civil
Officers, yet that day, toward the Ev^ning, the Rabble got together in
prodigious numbers, and pulled down the Mass-Houses in St. Jones's,
Lime-street, Lincolns-Inn-fields, and Plundered the Spanish Ambassadors
Lodgings, and Old Hill's Printing House, burning and carrying away the Goods,
etc.

On the 13th. of December we had the News of the Disbanding the Kings Army by
the Earl of Feversham; and the Lord Chancellor being taken in Wapping, was
brought before the Lord Mayor of the City of London, and from thence carried to
the Tower, whether a Commitment was sent by the Lords at Whi^e-Hall to se^ure
him, and the next day notice was given that the King was discovered near
Feversham, in a Vessel, intending to pass the Se^s, w^e^eupon some Lords were
immediately dispatched to wait upon His Majesty, to in^reat him to return to
his Royal palace, etc. whose Entreaty so far p^evailed, that on Sunday the
16th of December he came through the City in his Coach, attended by a splendid
Train of Nobles and Gentlemen, with all manner of Respect and Duty; as likewise
with the loud Acclamations and Shouts of the People, and so proceeded to
Whit^^^^ll, where the Nobility and Gentry resorted to Congratulate his return;
and he sent to invite the Prince to St. James.

On the 18th. early in the morning, some of the Princes Forces were sent to
remove the Guards, and mount them themselves, upon which the King thought fit
to retire to Rochester, and accordingly did about 12 of the Clock that morning,
going through-Bridge in a Barge, but had 3 of his Coaches and some Troops to
wait upon him when he pleased to Land: And about 3 of the Clock the Princes
Advance Guards marched through the City; and the Prince in a very splendid
Equipage, together with Marshall de Scomberg and his Sons, with a very
numerous Train of Noblemen and Gentry, entered the Town by the way of St.
James, being every where saluted with the loud Shouts and Acclamations of the
People; and after a splendid Entertainment and Repast, gave Order for the
placing of the Guards, and providing necessary and convenient Quarters for his
Troops, and Regiments of Foot, and was for the most part taken up in paying and
receiving of Visits. The seven Bishops have been to wait upon his Highness, and
had a very favorable Reception, the Bells ringing, and the Streets illuminated
with Bone-fires for the most part of the Night: And the same day the
Common Council of the City of London Assembled, and unanimously agreed, and
ordered that all the Aldermen of the said City, and their several Deputies,
with two Common-Council-Men for each Ward should wait upon, and Congratulate
his Highness the Prince of Orange upon his arrival, at such time and place as
his Highness should appoint them; and that the two Sheriffs with Mr. Common
Sergeant should wait upon him to know his Pleasure, when he would be attended
by the said Committee, and accordingly, the 19th the Sheriffs and Common
Sergeant attended his Highness at his Palace at St. James; and since we have
News that Portsmouth is yielded, and all the considerable Towns in England. And
by our last Advice from Edinborough, we had an account that the Rabble were up
in that City, and had pulled down diverse Houses, in opposing whom, many, as
well the Militia as others, were slain: Diverse Gentlemen, as well as Priests
and Jesuits, have been seized, and are secured in the several Goals about Town,
etc.

Upon the Kings retirement to Rochester, a great Council of the Lords, as well
Spiritual as Temporal, assembled to Consult what was convenient to be done in
so Important a Juncture of Affairs, and considering it was necessary to Convene
a further Council, the better to settle the Affairs of the Kingdom, those
Parliament Men who were chosen to serve in Parliament, in the Reign of King
Charles (...) were required to meet or assemble themselves; and accordingly the
Pe^^s and C^^mons meeting at Westminster, the Lord Mayor of the City of London,
together with the Commonalty, waited upon his Highness the Prince of Orange,
and having heard his Speech, wherein he resolved to protect the Protestant
Religion, and the Laws of the Kingdom Established, etc. they, upon notice given
to Consult as they thought fit for the good of the City, etc. retired to
Westminster, where after sundry Debates it was agreed, That the Prince should
take upon him the Administration of the Civil and Military Power till the 22
day of January next; a^ also to take care of Ireland, (...) they supposed to be
in danger, by reason of the Earl of Tyrconnels being up in Arms with sundry
Roman Catholics, to which, and other things of the like nature his Highness
returned a suitable and sa^isfactory Reply; so that it being concluded, that
upon this great Assembly meeting on the day before mentioned, that a Parliament
should be called to settle the Affairs of the Nation. Circulary Letters are
since Issued out for the choosing of fit Members in all Counties, Buroughs,
etc. to serve in the said Parliament. Since these proceedings the Earls of
Salisbury, Pete^burrough, Baron Jenner, and others have been brought to the
Tower, and several Romish Priests to Newgate.

The King upon his second retirement went to Sir Richard Heads House at
Ruchester, where he was attended with all manner of Civility and Respect
becoming his Character, as well by his Guards, as sundry Noblemen and
Gentlemen, where he sent for his Dogs and Hunting Horse; when on the 23d. of
December, about 3 in the Morning, contrary to expectation, his Majesty had
withdrawn himself from Sir Richards with a slender company, part by Water, and
part by Land, got to the Sea, near Deal or Sandwich, and wafted over into
France, where at Bologne our last Advice left him.

FINIS.

