ARGUMENTS AND MATERIALS FOR A Register of Estates.

Qui been Dimidium facti cepit habet.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Lowndes over against Exeter-Exchange in the Strand.
School.

ARGUMENTS AND MATERIALS FOR A Register of Estates.
A Gentleman of the Long Robe happened lately to be in Company with several
Members of Parliament, and others; where the Motion for a Register of Estates
in England (among other Parliamentary Affairs) fell in Discourse: This
occasioned a particular application of the Company to that Person, for his
Opinion; he was loath to come to, but at length, being warmed with Questions
and Debates upon it and a few Glasses intersperst, he surrendered himself to
Discourse, and seemed to display all his Sentiments to the satisfaction of the
Company. After which, he was much pressed to digest his Thoughts, and publish
them in Print; or at least, communicate them in Writing to some particular
Members of Parliament, in order to support the Cause of a Register, against the
Opposition like to be made in the House, by the Gentlemen of his Profession, or
those who practice as such; but he would not be prevailed upon to do either;
pretending, that true Friends in Public, and faithful Trustees in Private
Concerns, seldom escape without scratcht Faces; and that with a severity
proportionate with their Zeal and Sincerity; therefore he was determined to
live in Peace, and meddle with neither. This Repulse did not content me, but
thinking I understood his Notions, and could set down, by way of Minutes, the
material part of them; After I came to my Chamber, I went to Work accordingly,
the Result whereof follows, viz.

1. He said, he was for a Register; and thought if somewhat of that sort were
not done, the incertainty of Titles and Pedigrees would become an intolerable
Grievance; and appear continually more and more, not only by the Frauds of
Owners, cheating with double Conveyances; but Forgeries, which would increase
as the Means of detecting them fell away.

2. That elder times have had the advantage of a Registry, in great Estates, by
Offices Post Mortem, which recorded Matches, Issues, Deaths; Purchases and
Settlements almost Verbatim; and for small Estates, by the Rolls of Courts
Baron and Surveys, where Tenures and Services were Registered for the benefit of
the Lords. And in those days, no Conveyance could be Chambered over and over
again, as now, by Lease and Release; but must be done by Feoffment only, which
had its force from public Livery and Seisin; and for his part, he said, if it
were res integra, and undermined, he should give his Opinion, that a Lease and
Release, as now in common use, was not a legal Conveyance of Inheritances, but
a mere Trick and Gimcrack of the Law; That the Virtue of Offices Post Mortem,
for discovery of Forgeries, and clearing of Pedigrees, is not yet altogether
worn out, but very near it; And whereas the last Age has had only that Aid
(near spent as it is) for detecting of Forgeries, the next will have none at
all; And at present there being little or no Guaranty of Titles, but the
uncertain honesty of Persons, and that only as to their own Acts, the Trade for
Land will sink, and in the room, Fraud and Forgery advance.

3. That the Parliament have ever been hammering at a Reform by way of
Register, and sometimes fancied they had it. For when the Servility of Tenures
in Capite made People study Clandestine Settlements, that their Heirs might be
free from Wardships and Marriage, the Lawyers found out the Trick of Uses,
which then was the same as we now call Trusts. And the Judges resolved such to
be Disposeable by Will, though Land it self, without a Burgh-English Custom,
was not so: These Uses arose by Bargain and Sale for Money, or Covenants to be
seized for Consideration of Blood, but mostly the former. The Crown labored
against Uses, as Destructive to the Prerogatives of Tenure in Capite; Wherefore
in 27. Henry 8. Cap. 10. the Statute was made to turn Uses into Possessions,
which was intended to take Uses clean away. But the contrary happened, and it
was soon found that most Purchases would pass by Bargain and Sale; a Chamber
Conveyance, like our Lease and Release, which our Parliament thought would be a
Practice most Mischievous, as it was, and therefore, 27 Hen. 8. Cap. 16. it was
Enacted, That Bargains and Sales should be Void, unless Enrolled within six
Months; Here they thought they had caught a Register, but the more modern trick
of Lease and Release has prevented it; and another Law now, for which there is
the same Reason, to make Leases and Releases Void, unless Enrolled in a time
certain, would be almost a Register, unless some yet newer Device were found
out, like that, to Evade it.

The Statute of Fines and Non-Claim, was a sort of Register and is useful
accordingly at this day; for Thousands of Fines are Leavied only to Gain, by
Efflux of five years time, a Bar upon Record.

4. That it is ridiculous and senceless, in a Nation pretending to Literature
and Law, That a Man should be capable to Sell his Estate over and over again in
the same Morning; and take the Money, and no one Purchaser has any human Means
to know of the other. Our Neighbors are wise: For Scotland Registers an
Abstract: Holland Registers by the Tax of Sales; And the clearness of Titles
accidentally resulting from the Collectors Accounts of that Revenue, (for a
Non-Payment of the Tax makes the Sale Void) is a recompense for the Tax it
self, though heavy, as he said, even to 20 l. per Cent. of the Purchase Money.
In France there is a Process to clear Titles by Judgment, the method whereof,
is, To fix on the Church-Door, a Monition for all Claiming, etc. to come in;
and then after some Form's past, (which by the way, are much too slow and
chargeable) the Land is at length, by Judgment, freed from all Titles and
Encumbrances whatsoever. In other Places almost all Contracts as well for Land
as other Matters, are made by public Officers, called Notaries, and Registered.
Nay, the Turks rely on Oggets or Decrees of the Caddes Registered. And out
little Nation of the Fens has a Register, which is approved by many years
Practice, and may serve for a Model for the rest of England. Therefore he
wondered that this Kingdom is so long without their Convenience and Security;
and in a matter that concerned them so Universally, as their Purchases and
Settlements among themselves. He thought that after all he could ever hear
Objected to a Register, it could not be in Common Sense right, that in any
Nation, the Law should be such as that a wise and careful Man had no human
Means, by Skill or Industry, to be safe in his Dealing: Vigilantibus and non
Dormientibus obvenient Leges: But the Policy of late has been so preposterous,
rather to lay Cushions for Fools to Blunder upon, than to provide Foundations
for the Wise and Careful: In former times it was a Reason of Law, Authentic in
Westminster Hall, Que serra arrect sa folly, and so for laches, etc. And in
latter Days, the Chancellors have said in open Court, They sat not there to
relieve Fools. However pittyful we now are to careless and supine Men; it is a
sad thing, that for their Sakes, the wise and vigilant should have no sure
Footing, and in his Opinion they never could have in England, unless a Register
of Estates, of some sort or other, were Established.

You may imagine, that this Emportment of our Lawyers was no less diverting
then a surprise, because we all expected he should have taken the side of most
of his Profession, to be against a Register; and some could not forbear asking
the Reason of his differing so much from them, in a Cause generally thought
very opposite to their Interests; for many promoted a Register in pique to the
Lawyers; and they on the other side, were observed to defend, as if the
Freehold of their Profession were at Stake: To this, said he.

I do believe some Lawyers are mainly from that Motive against a Register,
others are so really, thinking unseen Mischiess may spring from it, and so to
the Public, as well as to their Profession; but on the other side, many, and
of those some Eminent Persons have been for it. And I must agree considering
both sorts, generally speaking, the most public Spirited, and disinterested in
Practice, have been, and are for it; and those who court Business most, are
against it. And if we reflect how the Interest inclines, we may conclude, if
Registers were not highly Useful, or rather necessary, you should not have the
single Voice of a Lawyer for it; and that some have been so, is a greater
Argument Pro, then all the rest opposing is Contra.

He mentioned my Lord Chief Justice Hales, that great Light of the Law, whose
subtlety and foresight suggested so many Casualites upon a Register, that he
was afraid of the manner, rather than against the thing, as appears by his
little Tract on that Subject, which has been made public; wherein he
concludes with some Cautions to be had in the Modelling; which shows he was not
altogether against it. And he said, He had also seen a Tract on the same
subject by another Eminent Chief of his Time, who is earnestly and clearly for
a Register; And he had converst with many others of the Profession of great
Value, who were much for it.

But he told us frankly, He thought the Lawyers were to be made use of by the
Parliament, in a concern, such as this is, as by a prudent Client, who Consults
them, but determines upon his own Reason, and gains his Advantage out of their
Skill, by smiting with Doubts and Questions, as for Fire from a Flint. A Man
that in all his Affairs will blindly steer himself by regular Counsel; If by
Lawyers shall be strangely entangled in his Business; if by Physicians, lose
his Health. A Prudent Man, versed in general Business, and a Lawyer, do well
together, but either apart is not so well: It is the same in all other Arts and
Professions, the Formality of their Employments oft-times wants a Ballast of
Prudence. It was lately observed in the Chancery, That the best Advocates at
the Bar did not make the best Judges upon the Bench; to say no worse: For they
were Bred and Practiced, even to an habit of Spinning Cavils and Exceptions,
Pro and Con. and could not forbear, when they were above it. The Parliament
should use the Lawyers as their Council, to put in Form, but make their own
Bargains, and therein they have reason to expect their Councils best Endeavors
(according to their Profession) to draw up, and execute in the best manner they
can contrive, but should not to be ruled by them, Pro or Con, positively upon
the main; for that is matter of Policy and Constitution, more than Law: Bring
any Business to a Lawyer, he goes to work with it as with a Title, studying
Scruples; and treats it with a world of Subtlety, as if it were to be instantly
Tried, or he were to move in Arrest of Judgment, or Quash an Indictment. A
Legislator is a Spirit above a Chiccaneur, and must have a more comprehensive
Aim, than serves to kick down an Indictment or a Declaration. He concluded, it
was a peculiar unhappiness this matter had in Parliament that the Lawyers were
so much hearkened too; he thought the other Members ought to understand so much,
as not to hang upon their Tongues either way; nor to have their Eyes blinded
with misty Objections, which Interest and Partiality will ever be raising. As
to the matter it self, a great deal was said, and I wish I could express it
with as much satisfaction as I heard it, but what I can Recollect, follows:

I. That if he were to Rule, every Man should be obliged to Register his last
Conveyances, but knowing what a Bugbear that is, and how apt to startle Men, he
was content to quit it, and that the Register should look only forwards, and be
as Seed Sown in good Ground, to grow up, and get strength gradually, and that
more out of Encouragement then Compulsion.

II. Therefore it should be Enacted, That (after a time to be prefixed) all
Conveyances, Assurances, Last Wills, Instruments and Agreements, concerning
Lands, (except Leases at Rack) and all Judgments, Statutes, Recognizances,
Originals Filed upon Bonds against Heirs, and in Warran' carta, lis pendens in
Cancellar', and all other Acts and Processes, which may in consequence affect
Lands in Purchasers Hands, shall be Registered in (...) days after the Date or
Execution, and the Deed or Instrument it self be accordingly Marked, otherwise
to be Void against all subsequent Purchasers. This is the gross Body of the
Design: Whence Observe, 1. That the Deed has not its Legal Force from the
Register, but as formerly, and as other Enrolled Deeds have; only in Case of
Loss, the Register; (like Inrollments for Safe Custody) will be a clearer
Evidence then any is yet for Repairing them. 2. That Men are compelled to
Register only their Sales, Mortgages, or Marriage Settlements upon
Consideration; as for Gifts and voluntary Settlements, they may Enjoy their
Dear Darling Secrecy. 3. That the puzzle and charge to Search in Three, Four,
or Five Courts, and in the Common Pleas no less than in Three several Offices,
for Judgments, besides the Rolls Chapel, and with the Clerk of the Peace, for
Deeds Enrolled, at the Fine-Office for Fines and Recoveries, at the
Statute-Office for Statutes; and at the Inrollment-Office for Recognizances;
with other Places he named, where the Business of the whole Nation is Collected
all together, (all which should be done be every one who would deal upon
Judgment and not upon Trust) is intolerable, and sometimes pretended, but
scarce ever was, supposing it possible, (which he did not grant) to be done
completely. 4. The Business of Records will be brought into a Searchable
compass and order, for they will be distinguished by Counties, where the Land to
be Charged lies, which is in no sort regarded now, but Judgments mostly are in
such Counties Men please to choose, of which Middlesex and London have a share
equal with almost all England beside. 5. Men will not Register all Judgments,
etc. but only such as they expect Use of upon Land, which may not be one Fourth
part of what are Entered upon the Rolls. 6. If Men are Cozened by Prior or
Double Titles, or Encumbrances, it is their own Fault; Et serra arrecte lour
folly.


III. That Encouragement be given, viz. That the First Freehold Deed of every
Estate Registered, shall have the Force of a common Recovery and Fine, with
Non-Claim, and shall not be Void for want of Execution or Formality.

This will give a quick Growth to the Register, which out of tenderness to
Men's Scruples, must not be compulsive, nor of past Acts: For, First, Most Men
that are Awake, will make a Deed of their Estates on purpose to be Registered;
and thence will arise a Foundation of Title for most Estates of England, which
future times will Build upon.

And, Secondly, This will be a reasonable and general Purgation of Titles, such
as the Laws intended should be, in particular Cases, by Fines, the vast Benefit
of which to the Nation is obvious.

IV. That not all the Deed, but only the material part, viz. The Date, Parties,
Consideration, Limitation, Uses, Conditions, and Powers, be Registered; and as
for the Parcels, not Verbatim, but only the Names of Manors, and Villages, or
Town-ships: But Recitals, Covenants, and Agreements, that work not on the Legal
Estate, need not be Registered.

This would be no long Register, not yet so short as the Scotch or Dutch is;
yet sufficient to secure a Purdhasor. If People affect length in their
Limitations and Conditions no harm is done if they pay the more; but he thought
it would have contrary effect, and Men would fall into a way more concise, then
at present is used, unless it be in Deeds intended to be Enrolled.

V. That although it is not necessary to a Register, yet for the convenience of
the People dealing in Longdon, and the Country, there may be Offices in each
County, for the Business of that County; and another in London, for the
Business of the whole Nation; And each Man may Register in which Office he
please. But then either Office should make Extracts of all that is done, and
Weekly transmit them to the other; so by the Register of the Transmissions, you
may know if any thing be Entered in the other Office.

As for instance; Every Saturday's Post should carry the Extracts from London,
and the Return of the same Post bring up the Extracts from the Country. So that
upon the arrival of the Post, and the Extract delivered out to the Office, all
Parties may see, infallibly, if any thing has been Entered in the other in the
former Week, and the Payment of Money may (if they please) be Suspended, till
such Satisfaction is had. Some might think this too much Work, and others not
exact and full enough: As for the latter, Whoever is acquainted with the
Entries of Fines, which is only A. B. quer' C. D. deforc' de terris and
tenementis in D. and of what great use it is, will not think this method
Defective; and for the other, there is not so much, but many will skip at the
Employment for moderate Fees.

You may well imagine how importunate and teazing we were all upon him, with
our Objections and Queries, which made him cry, Hold, soft and fair, to take
Breath a little, and then give a Reply to what he thought justly demanded it:
But First, as to the Business of Objecting in general, he thought,

I. That the House was too much inclined to lay weight upon bad Consequences
objected, which are (perhaps) mere Natural Possibilities, and very improbable
probable to fall out, and which in Fact do not ever, or rarely happen in like
Constitutions; and from such remote Possibilities, they are made averse to
Regulations, which carry great and certain Advantages. He thought Men ought to
weigh Benefits and Hazards, as Merchants do Profit and Loss; not caring what
the latter is, so the other be grater: And also consider, that no human
Constitution ever was, or can be, perfect; but after all the care and
contrivance the Wit of Man can apply, to obviate, shall or may be abused; Esce
la leg, Esce la trampa. If it were now to be proposed, That any Fact, should
by Act of Parliament be made Capital, might it not be Objected, That then
Innocent Persons might be accused, and made to suffer Death, by the false
Testimony of one or two Witnesses? and those perhaps the real Offenders
themselves? And has not this Abuse (great as it is) sometimes happened? Yet
Capital Laws are necessary. This shows that no Law can be Established, but
Possibilities of Abuse will lie open upon it: Must there be therefore no Law?
Such is their Conclusion, who from Possibilities of Abuses, deny their Consent
to a manifest good Law. For this Reason he discharged himself of all our
Clamor on account of Frauds, Forgeries, false Entries, and Failings of
Officers and others; for, said he, If we startle at such Things, we ought to
Rescind the Jurisdiction of King's Bench, Common-Bench, etc. whose Offices are
liable to the same, and (if we consider well) much greater Objections. And yet
how often are any such Abuses there, as false Judgments Entered, Men Personated
or the like? Some have been, it is true, but so rarely as scarce worth
mentioning. Men in great Concerns are Naturally Fearful, and when the Records
of an Office are esteemed Sacred, and Penalties of Abusing them very high,
there is little fear of false dealing; if any be, the Nation will not be
without Justice to set all Right again; and for that End, the fixing such a
Power in the chiefs of our Judges, for some time, by the Act, (if any pass)
would not be amiss.

II. As to the disclosing Men's Concerns, and exposing their Deeds, whereby
their Titles might be called in Question: He smiled at the first, and said, If
he were to Pronounce, Every Man's Debts that Charge his Estate, should be wrote
in his Forehead; it is only design of Fraud, or consciousness of Folly that
makes Men affect Secrecy. And this Humor has been the Bane of more Families,
than Vice and Prodigality: For, Who would not take care to be out of Debts, if
all Men's Debts were public? It is the Secret Shop-Usury, that Cankers the
Estates of England; and that will always make open War against a Register. If
Debts are known, Men will take Care, either to Discharge or Justify them; as
by Purchasing, Matching, or the like; and would not sneak into Debt as they do,
to the surprise, and often times Ruin of their Families. O! But if our Debts
are known, we lose advantage in the Match of our Eldest Son, and other
Children; I answer (said he) that if their Debts are not known, those that
Match into their Family are cheated; and which should the Public take care of,
that you should cheat (for it is litte better) or that they, and perhaps your
self in your own turn, should not be cheated? in this matter, showing is
proving sufficiently. As to Settlements, if voluntary, they need not be
Registered; however he saw not the harm of it, if even those were so; but why
Men should value themselves as clear Owners of Mortgaged Estates, and none able
to discover the contrary, he was not capable of understanding. And he thought
among the many advantages by a Register, it was not the least, that Men of
Estates, as in their Conversation, so also in their Negotiations, would
endeavor to preserve Honor, and a fair Reputation, and do nothing Senceless,
and Imprudent; much less so ruinous to themselves and Families, as the Trade of
secret Usury, at present, is.

As for quarrelling with Titles, he thought it a Cavil exagerated more for
Argument against a Register, than otherwise; for who now has a considerable
Purchase Deed made, but by Advice; and the forming a Legal Assurance, is not
such a Mystery, but it is practiced by every Attorney, and many Clergymen; and
some Alehousekeepers make them after Precedents, and in small things not amiss;
perhaps when they are public, Men will take better care, and go to Counselors
as the old way was; which with the Men of his Profession he thought no
objection: But here he fell from the Matter, to complain of the Puzzles in
Titles from Fines and Recoveries, which he said served for litte in themselves,
but to keep up a Jargon and Misterious Science, beneficial only to Men of Law
and Officers, but a vast Charge to the Subject; and that it were well the Law
were declared more intelligibly; Here one, being charged with another
Objection, interrupted him, desiring he would leave that Matter, and return to
the good old Cause of a Register; he replied, he was just at it, and straight
declared his mind plainly, that were he to rule, he would have every Registered
Deed have the force of a common Recovery, Fine and Non Claim.

This let loose a heavy Charge upon him, for seeking to supplant so many
Officers and their Families, who had bought and subsisted by the Business of
Fines and Recoveries, as also a Revenue the Crown had from them.

He said no, he would have the Registry advance, and not diminish the Interests
of all the Officers belonging to the Courts of Justice; but it should be in a
direct plain way, and not by Ambage and Trick; that is, he would have them made
amends, either by being made the Officers in the Registry, (if they thought fit
to accept) or else by Money at full Rates: and so also the Interest of the
Crown might be answered And he thought a very small I and Tax, to be collected
gratis, which all Men would willingly pay, would much more than answer that
Occasion. He added, that he thought it another infelicity this Affair had in
Parliament, that, besides the endeavors of Attorneys, Scriveners, and other
Persons, who esteem the Vicious practice of the Law, their gain; there are so
many Officers of Courts, and in places, who are prudent deserving Men, and have
good Esteem and Interest, but thinking their Freehold, (as they call it)
purchased with their Money, at stake, in the Cause, oppose a Register with all
their force, which has considerable Efficacy; for Men are loath to supplant
the Livelihood of others not underserving, without compensation: therefore,
whatever Taxes were imposed on other Occasions, he would not have one wanted
for this, which he thought no less important to the Public, than any in hand.

As for the Lawyers, he thought they were in a mistake, apprehending a Register
would curtail their practice; it seemed more probable it would increase it; for
if Wealth and Security grew from a Register, which would scarce be denied,
Lawsuits would grow no less. It was ever found, that multitude of Dealing
produces Controversy; and Wealth, Pride and Obstinacy; Some Counties of
England formerly noted for Litigiousness, now are very peaceable; not from any
late clearness grown up in our Laws, but on the contrary, from Great Charges,
and incertainty of Success: Besides, few Lawsuits for Land are now upon nice
Questions of Conveyancing; but upon Mortagages, Descents, Dormant Intails, and
the like: The great Land Disputes now run upon Trusts, and Equities in
Chancery; in so much that the Attorneys at Law are glad to turn Sollicitors
there, to be employed.

But to conclude (for it grew late) he said, a Register had probably succeeded
in King James's Parliament, but for one Accident, which was a Jealousy that
the Officers (who must be named by the Crown) would be of a Faction not proper
to be general Inspectors of Men's Estates: He thought the Jealousy not
Adequate, but so it was; that hint whispered, killed the Bill. It is not so
now, said he; but yet I fear Whispers, which are often more venomous to good
Businesses than open Opposition, having been so fatal to that attempt, may also
be prejudicial to this.

Upon the whole Matter he would have it confidered, that it is impracticable to
frame a Register, without Objection from possibility of Abuse, or perhaps hard
Cases in some particulars; which latter may be remedied (if thought fit) by a
power set up to relieve for some time. Nay, he allowed, that many unforeseen
Abuses would afterward in practice appear, which no Human Wit, or Sagacity
could prognosticate; but he would not have this keep down a good Constitution;
for, as he said, it was an Objection of the same force against all Law, and
Jurisdictions whatever. And to see how little danger there was of that sort, in
this now Discourst of Register; look, said he, to the Fenns, where is a
Parliamentary Register established, and practiced for many years; and no
Forgery, Abuse, or so much as a Grumble, for any thing amiss that he (though a
Neighbor) ever heard of yet, in the survey of that Office, Let that Example of
a very great Benefit in the end, and little or no Abuse in the practice, answer
all the Fears and Jealousies conjured up by Partial Interests. Yet, said he,
for once grant that many and considerable Abuses may be; are we to be without
Parliaments; to regulate and polish in time, what perhaps cannot be digested in
perfection at first? Establish a Register, lay a Foundation; the Care and
Prudence of the best Men, will help, by degrees, to give it perfection; and
looking forward only, there is no danger of any great harm from it, to any
particular Person whatsoever. And the sooner this is done, the better; for in
process of time it must, and therefore will be; Why then should this, or the
next Age want it?

For my own part, I confess, these Discourses so recovered (tho imperfectly) in
Writing, have engaged my Opinion most clearly, that a Register of Estates is
not only useful, but almost necessary to be set up in England, for the Security
of Titles to Land; and consequently, that it is every Man's Duty to promote it;
And it lying not in my way to join in so good a Work at present, otherwise than
by making these Notes public; I have committed them to the Stationer, to
launch in Print, hoping, (whatever the Nations share is) he may be no loser, by
so doing.

Misera servitus ubi jus est vagum.
FINIS.

