THE APOLOGY OF Robert Tichborn AND John Ireton.

Being a serious VINDICATION of themselves and the GOOD OLD CAUSE, from the
Imputations cast upon them and it by the triumphing City and Nation in this
their day of Desertion.

Rebellion never prosper'd: what is the reason?
'Cause if it prosper'd none durst call it Treason.
Printed for every body but the light-heel'd Apprentices and headstrong
Masters of this wincing City of LONDON.

THE APOLOGY OF Robert Tichborn AND John Ireton.
IT is not unknown to us under how many scandals we groan, and how our Names
hang up a sunning in all parts of the Nation, all bedaubed with infamous
imputations, like an old greasy pair of breeches embroidered with Fullers
Earth. We confess that according to the Proverb, Men that have ill Names are
as good as half hanged. Truly although we might aver this Proverb to be a lie,
not finding the exercise of our Lungs at all straightned by the forfeiture of
our Reputation; yet, to give the world a clear discovery of our spirits; and to
show that we do not repent because of our Reproaches, we have thought good to
publish these few lines by way of our justification; only let the Reader take
this Caution along with him, that if there be any honor obtained by the
penning thereof, he is to ascribe it only to him who is named first in the
Title, for that my brother Ireton, though he be a good cunning man for the
world, yet he never wrote a Book in his life, as I have done, so that it is not
to be thought, that he who never put pen to paper should be so good a Penman
as I, that have made a shift to make a whole Treaise. But methinks we now hear
the world begin to Catechize us, first asking us, What are our Names? why we
would have the World to know that we are not ashamed of our names; our names
are Robert Tichborn and John Ireton, the which names of ours are also fringed
about with the titles of Aldermen. You Will say, Who gave us these Names? Why even
our Godfathers and Godmothers forsooth; for then the Swine of the world
trampled upon these divine Truths which are since more freely practiced: for a
man could not have been washed from his sins in those days in deep Rivers, (as
they cleanse sheep before sheering time) but he must have been hooted at by all
the street. Neither to tell ye the truth did we much look after such kind of
Stories, til we found Profession, or professing, which you please, necessary
for the exaltation of our particular mortified Interests: But if you ask us,
who made us Aldermen? we answer, not the City; for we were never beholding to
them in our lives, (nor did we give them any reason to oblige us:) but our
gracious Protector of happy memory raised us for his own ends and our profit:
we say, of happy memory, for that he never opprossed us, never tyrannized over
us, and therefore we have no reason to speak ill of him.

We came several ways into preferment. As for my brother Ireton, All the world
knows where he lived, and in what affairs of this transitory world he did
occupy himself. It was Henry Ireton that like Cantharides, raised up this City
Blister of Authority. Truly he was his brother, and ye cannot blame him. Would
ye not have thought it very strange, and a very unnatural thing in a brother to
see himself Commissary General of a great Army, and Deputy-Lievtenant of
Ireland, and let his own flesh and blood still continue a seller of Druggett
and Bombazine. Neither was he an ungracious, or an unthankful brother; for he
was very officious, and obedient to him in all things, as being the more
superior power. The subtle old Fox fescu'd to him with all diligence his
primar of Policy, which the pretty apt thing learnt with so much docibleness,
that partly by his own industry, partly by the assistance of the Spirit he
arrived in a short time to perfection, and enjoyed the fullness of his brothers
Matchiavillianisms. Therefore when the Protector went first about to ride the
great City he made use of us, as of two Bitts to rein his High-metal'd Steed.
Nor must I be silent of his brothers charity, for he lent the compounding
Cavaliers, though they were his enemies, money upon Mortgages and great
advantages to himself, imitating therein the pious example of Mr. Moorecrafts
kindnesses to the younger Lovelace, as you shall find it written in the Play
of the Scornful Lady, whereby he got unto himself much of the riches of this
world.

For myself, I was always Pragmatical, and withal very Schismatical; and
being in the cave of Narrow-fortune, I made my Mother the City drunk with the
Clusters which I brought from Canaan, and she in her drink made me a Colonel;
now because I had not so much money then, as I have now, I even contented my
self with my Lord of Pembrokes old Clothes, and in them my thought I was as
fine as the best Colonel of them all. Some that saw me march before my Regiment
would say, What is the old Earl of Pembroke risen again from the dead? No
foolish Galathians, it was not he, for the dead live not, so that it was not my
Lord of Pembroke that lived in my Clothes, but I that lived in my Lord of
Pembroks old Clothes: Why if the Earl of Pembroke had carried his old Clothes
to his grave, I could not have had them, neither should I have desired them;
but since that he had no need of taking them along with him (as indeed there is
no need of clothes where Whoremasters and Swearers remain, because the place is
heated with perpetual fires even like a Glass-house) should my Lord of
Pembrokes old Clothes have been thrown away? Nay verily, but they are in an
error that say so: And I shall say this to the face of the whole world, that
for my part I think my Lord of Pembroke was more beholding to that servant that
sold me his Clothes, than to any man in the world, for that he raised unto his
Lord a living Monument. But it was not my Lord of Pembrokes Clothes that made
me famous, it was a certain deliberate, grave, serious, pithy, godly, and most
obstreperous piece of (I will not say) sense, because I was the Author, but let
them be Judges that have patience to read it. Truly it will require some
patience in a man to read it all over. So that if patience be a virtue, he that
reads it quite through must needs be virtuous. I entitled it a Cluster Canaans
Grapes, meaning the Grapes which the Spies brought out of Canaan. Truly I think
it is ominous to bring Grapes from Canaan; for from the time I brought home my
Clusters, have I been counted a Spy too, not without reason; for to tell the
truth, I have been a Spy upon the City ever since. This book made me appear to
the world such a simple fellow, as if butter it self would not melt in my
mouth. But Cromwell my very good Lord and Master, a man of a most piercing
apprehension, finding that my mouth was not only able to melt the butter, but
that my throat also was wide enough to swallow the Gudgeons, and perceiving me
to have an Ostrich conscience, he took me into his arms, and said, Friend
Tichborn, I find thee as fit for my Turn as if I had made thee my self, and
therefore do but help me to carry on this great work of mine, and I will reward
thee, not, that like a Saint thou shall trust me till the world to come, but I
will reward thee in this world, yea even in this world wherein thou now live.
Do thou want Honor? I will make thee Lord Mayor of London; do thou want
money? thou shall be my Danae, and I will shower gold into thy Lap. Say you so,
thought I, money will make a Mayor to go. Truly it made me to go about many
Designs which few men but he thanked me for: and I will say thus much for my
self, and a fig for my self, that if faithfulness and reality be virtuous, I
was virtuous, for I was always faithful and real to him I served. Truly it is a
hard matter for a man to act his part well upon the Stage of this world. We
thought we had done our parts as well as others, but the altering of one Scene,
how it has changed our condition! And now what do not men say of us? They say
that we have carried on all the barbarous Designs of the Anabaptists in the
City, that we betrayed the Councels, and were two Spies upon all the actions of
our Fellow Gown-men within the walls. Truly a great piece of business, and we
live in a fine Age indeed, when men shall be blamed for being diligent in their
Calling. I remember, that when I was a young man, my Master would say, Keep
close to your Trade, and your Trade will maintain you. Now we believe that that
way whereby a man gets his livelihood, he is bound to follow, and it is his
Trade and Occupation. Truly we had a very good Trade, so that when all the City
complained for want of Trading, we felt no such oppression. The Spanish Wars
did us no harm, and I think we should have been fools indeed to have shut up
our shops at such a time. Nor are we to be blamed for serving our Play Master so
faithfully; for what is there in the world so base as Treachery, especially
treachery to a man's friend. It Is true we grant, that a man may betray his
Country, or a whole City, or the most ingenious and faithful Party of a
Nation. For there is a multitude, and a man has no obligation to one in ten
thousand; but to betray a man's friend, and the best friend he has in the
world, that is your treachery. Judas was not cursed for betraying his Country,
but for betraying his single Master, who had so many ways obliged him, and at
length made him his Treasurer, never calling him to any account. Then people
say, We endeavored all we could to break the City Charter, though we were
members thereof, and extremely angry they were because my Brother Ireton would
have been twice Mayor. Law ye now! what a coil here is. Truly it is a strange
thing to us that people should keep such a stir with a Charter. Why, suppose ye
had never a Charter, think ye the City would perish? I wonder what Charter that
City had which Cain built in the Land of Nod. And yet, for ought I know, one
man might have been Mayor there forty times, and no body have said any thing to
him. In former time Mayors were Mayors as long as they lived, and were called
Kings, witness Bera Mayor of Sodom, and Birshu Mayor of Gomorrah, and
Chedorlaomer Mayor of Elam: Truly if I or my Brother Ireton were such a Mayor
of London, as he was of Elam, we should be as good Mayors as he for all his
hard name. Others blame us for unhorsing the Cavaliers; but they talk like
fools, for we have made them beggars, and it is conttary to the Proverb, to set
beggars a horseback. Give them Horses and they will ride upon our shoulders. A
great many people say we have no Charity. Truly we find it to be a very cold
virtue, therefore we dare not let it come too near our hearts by reason of its
benumming and venomous quality. As many there be that say we have as little
Honesty. But as for that, we shall only give this short answer, that if we
have cozened the State, we have done no more than a great many of our
Companions, and what we can justify from the continual practice of the Saints.
And truly there is a great deal of reason that my Brother Ireton should have an
Ishmaels portion, being the son of the Bom^woman.

Thus, I hope, we have fully satisfied the world, if the world be not as
unreasonable as our selves; for I confess I think 'twas not a small matter
that satisfied us. It Is true, perhaps we may be a little puzzled what to say at
the last day; but be of good comfort Brother Ireton, for if it be impossible
for Saints to err, then it will go well enough of our side. Now I am as
confident as I stand here we are two Saints; for I have proved it in my most
Odoriferous Treatise of Muskadine, which gives you such essential marks of a
Saint, that it may indeed be called the Saints Butter-print: You may there see
a Saint cut as exactly as a French gown. Now does any body think that my soul
could breath forth such experiences and holy truths, and I be a Knave* Now if
there were nothing else, this were enough to satisfy any reasonable man. And
therefore I shall say no more till I shall come to Preach to the multitude upon
a Ladder, and then you shall hear as much again, if it be but only to delay
time.

FINIS.

