ARTICLES EXHIBITED IN PARLIAMENT, AGAINST Master JOHN SQVIRE, Viccar of Saint
Leonard Shoreditch, August 7th. 1641.

Printed in the year, 1641.

ARTICLES Exhibited in PARLIAMENT against Mr. John Squire, Viccar of St.
Leonard Shoreditch, August the 7th. 1641.
1.
THat this Squire did arrogantly introduce many Popish Ceremonies into their
Parish Church, Tyrannically insulting over the consciences, and liberties of
the Parishioners, Commanding them to subscribe thereunto without any
interdiction.

2.
That he affirmed publicly in the Pulpit, that the Papists were the Kings best
subjects in three regards.

1. In regard of their liberality, who were always eady to extend their
charity, and did present themselves with their purses in their hands always
before his Majesty.

2. In regard of their loyalty, who did not only seem hospitable in their
purses, but were always in their own persons ready to do his Majesty
service.

3. In regard of their patience: who (notwithstanding the many affronts, and
persecutions offered them by English men) have patiently submitted to their
cruelty, and buried all in oblivion: wherefore upon the consideration of these
three regards he was confident (as he related) that they were the Kings best
subjects.

3.
That he called all those Schismatickes, Who would not bow at the name of
Jesus; but being afterward privately examined upon that point he could not
lawfully call those Schismatics which did not, unless those Idolaters which
did.

4.
That he writes himself commonly Priest, and approves of it to be an
honorable name, and dispiseth the nomination of Minister, or Pastor, etc.
although we have had sufficient testimony that this name was abrogated after
Christ's coming, and more decent names given them in the holy Gospel.

5.
That our King was like unto the wounded man that fell among thieves (the Scots
by his imaginary supposition) robbing his Majeste of his Castles, Holds, and
withal the hearts of his subjects: and that the formal Confessors was like
unto the Levite, that passed by; the Protestant like unto the Priest; but the
Papists like unto the good Samaritan, who lifted up his Majesty from those
wicked Enemies to our Nation, and by their Hospitable benignity were very
indulgent to his Majesty.

6.
That it was a sin of damnation for any man to hear voluntarily any other
Minister than his own, only three Causes excepted.

1. Either going to the Christning of a chid. 2. Or to an Offering. 3. Or
unless invited forth to Dinner.
Although St. Chrysostom, St. Augustine St. Hierome, and all the Fathers, in
next Antiquity to Apostolical men, do with one assent affirm that the Church
in the Gospel is taken Catholickely, and is universal.

7.
That any man, which passed Excommunication from the Priest publicly in the
Church, unless reconciled before his death, went directly to hell in his
judgment, although we have sufficient prohibitions in the Gospel, that no man
(much less a Minister) should judge any man before the time.

8.
That it was lawful for any man to play and take any recreation on the Sabbath
Day, if so be it were not service time.

9.
That he did alter the ancient Structure of the said Parish Church, and withal
did insolently induce many Pictures therein, against the will, intent, and
subscription of any of the people, and such Images, as he pleased without
prohibition.

10.
That he allowed the Pictures of the Virgin Mary, of Christ, and his 12.
Apostles at his last Supper in Glass: and the Parishioners desired rather that
in their stead a Crucifixe might be erected, but he would not condescend
thereunto.

11. That he was persuaded those had not safe consciences, who would not bow
with all humility, and great reverence to the Communion Table, both at their
entrance into the Church, and at their departure thereout.

12. That he would not Administer the holy Sacrament to those which would not
come up unto the Rayles, and bow thereunto with humble adoration; whereupon
most of the Parishioners for conscience sake have (not presuming to submit to
this ceremony) omitted the receiving of the said Sacrament.

13. That he did oftentimes exasperate, and foment strife and enmity betwixt
neighbor and neighbor; and those who would not subscribe to his Ceremonial
Innovations, he was their perfect enemies, until many of them have been
compelled to leave that Parish, to the great detriment of their trades.

14. That he affirmed publicly in his Pulpit, that it was a damnable sin for
any man to deprave or speak against any of those Canons Which were published
by superior authority.

15. That if the King should demand either the lands, houses, possessions, and
whole Estate, nay, the very life it self of any subject, without any offense
by him committed, unless he did voluntarily attribute, and surrender it unto
him, that he committed a most abominable sin of damnation.

16. that he have brought many of his Parishioners into the Court, and thereby
great troubles have been incident to many, and to some excommunication, only
because they would not subscribe to these Ceremonies, and withal, that he have
caused great sedition, and discord in the said Parish.

17. That in all these Popish Observations, and Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, he
have been no less offensive than Canterbury himself, in some respect, a man
prompted for exalting that Roman Religion. And to incur the favor of many
Bishops, he have been extreme diligent to execute all their Canons, and
Ceremonies to the full extent.

FINIS.

