ARTICLES OF High Treason AGAINST Major General Harrison, Sir Arthur Hasilrig,
Sir Henry Vane, and Mr. Thomas Scot.

WITH The Charge and Impeachment upon an Arrest of High Treason, in Order to
their speedy Trial in WESTMINSTER HALL: AND A Declaration touching their
several Treasons, Tyrannies, Theft and Murders; For which they are to be
Arraigned, Tried, and Convicted, according to the known Laws of the Land.

Aug 4 LONDON, Printed for Marm. Johnson, 1660.

ARTICLES OF High Treason, AGAINST Major General HARRISON, Sir ARTHUR HASILRIG,
and Mr. SCOT; With the Charge and Impeachment against Them, etc.
THat the Ship of this Commonwealth has for many years past been sadly tossed in
a violent Tempest of Civil Commotions and Distractions, has been rather felt,
than duly considered, but merely through Gods mercy, the Impetuosity thereof
being providentially allayed, though to the cost of more Christian blood and
treasure, than would have served even to Conquer that Roman party and interest,
that set us so craftily at variance; and how has she been threatened by the
swelling Waves of Faction, which commonly are most dangerous after such a
storm, in that therein the fierceness of the Wind drove them all one way, but
daringly presumed to fly one against the other for mastery, all meeting upon
the almost shipwrackt Vessel; and what is as bad, the insinuating leaks of
Schism and Heresies, insensibly increase (through her widened seams) such
quantity of troublesome water in the Hold, that it were scarce imaginable she
should escape sinking, yet the dextrous and unwearied Pilots, or rather Diving
Providence sitting at Helm, not only orders a moderate sail, such as she can
well bare, to carry her through the former danger, but carefully keeps the
laborous Matiner watching and working at the Pumps to rid her of the latter,
and though she meet no other then almost contrary winds and enemies; at length
with difficulties, even to a miracle, this long weather beaten and shattered
Navy given by most for lost is brought into Port, with patcht Sails, over-worn
and split Cables and Tackling, Ammunition and Provision spent, many of her best
Officers and Mariners lost, and others very much discomposed and infeebled,
only the Artillery remains, which yet was threatened to be cast over board, and
so it had been, but that there was hazard in doing thereof, and now the most
skilfullest Ship wrights are gathered not only to survey, but put their
helping hands for her speedy repair, whereby she may be kept from the ground by
seating her upon a bed of blocks, and upheld by shoars, beams, and other
convenient timbers: yaluing themselves of a high Spring tide, to do all with
safety: and having made use of the serviceable waters, to complete their
desires, then retireing of course, may be afterward kept out by the
Floodgates, prudentialy appointed for that purpose. And being thus pleased,
that nothing may oppress her, the towering masts and yards with her tackling
formerly necessary, are laid aside to be mended, or changed, and nothing is
left of seeming great impediment, save the paying her Mariners and Soldiers.
But that a thorough search may be deliberately made, of her lower and upper
works within board and without, each party appointed undertaking their several
task. Some to view the Keel, Post, Stem, Ground, Timbers, and Planks, ordering
the absolutely defective to be taken out, and better to be put in their rooms,
yet so workmanlike, as that the other part adjoining be not weakened by this
addition, others to observe the seams where the former lurking leaks had
access, and care fully to caulk them with well spun Okam, and laying on of
Pitch, Tarr, and other necessaries, so well tempered as those insinuating
subtil-waters may never have considerable entrance again: And thus the bulk
being strenghened, or at least so much thereof as is to be done without
pre^udice to the whole it will follow that the upper works, Cabins, and
accommodations be fitted and adorned answerable to the dignity of so great a
Fabric, and all being solidly perfected what will remain, but that this our
Ship be moderated balassed, and proportionably Masted, which being well
fastened, stayed, and shrouded, will not only make her complete but comely, and
may securely be lanch't, and cast the Anchor of hope with well-twisted Cables,
receive Ordnance to fill her commodious Ports with Ammunition and Provisions
necessary, and being thus accommodated, together with a pious, prudent, and
valient Captain, skillful, faithful, and vigilant Pilots, Godly learned and
every way quallified Chaplains expert and well tempered Officers, obedient and
well-rewarded Soldiers and Mariners, the Sayls, may be brought to yard, and
the Standard displayed against adversaries, and terrify others, raising up the
drooping spirits of our affflicted and persecuted friends in all parts.

But to look back upon the grand causes that exposed us to such direful
calamities, experience plainly demonstrates, that it proceeded from the
arrogancy of sundry new upstart and domineering Tyrants; amongst whom, Major
Genesis Harrison, Sir Arthur Hasilrigg, and Mr. Thomas Scot, are now impeached of
High Treason, their Charge consisting of these following Articles; in which,
both themselves and diverse others were combined, viz.

1. To arraign, condemn, and execute their lawful King himself, with the Peers
and Commons of this Realm. 2. To dis-inheritt his Majesty's Royal Issue and
Posterity of the Crown. 3. To extirpate Monarchy, and the whole House of Peers.
4. To violate the Privileges, Rights, Freedoms, Customs, and alter the
Constitution of Parliaments themselves; to change and subvert the ancient
Government, Seals, Laws, Writs, Courts, and Coin of the Kingdom. 5. To sell and
dispose of all the Lands, Revenues, Jewels, Goods of the Crown, with the Lands
of Deans and Chapters, for their own advantages, not for the easing of the
People from Taxes. 6. To dispose of the Forts, Ships, Forces, Officers of
Honor, Power, Trust or Profit, to whom they please. 7. To raise and keep up
what Forces by Land or Sea they please, and impose Taxes, etc. to make what new
Acts, Laws, and reverse what old ones they thought meet. 8. To absolve
themselves (by more then a Papal Power) and all the Subjects of this Land, from
their Oaths of Allegiance, Engagements, and Protestations, etc.
For all which Treasons, Usurpations, Tyranny, Theft and Murders, these, and
many others, stand Charged and Impeached upon an Arrest of High Treason, in
order to a speedy Trial.

FINIS.
An Advertisement.
Gentle Reader,
AMongst the rest of the English grand Impostors, another sad Object is here to
be taken notice of, viz. A notorious Villain, as its well known throughout the
City of London; being apprehended for his former Cheats, Defrauds, and
Couzenages, especially for his unparalleld and horrid proceedings, and most
unjust actings against Mr. Henry Newman, a Gentlemon and Citizen of London of
good Credit and Reputation, who by his wicked and underhand dealing, procured
false witness and perjured persons to swear against the said Mr. Henry Newman,
to the writings which the said fellow had forged and counterfited against him,
as since those witnesses have declared before the Judge, by their several
Affidavits: These are therefore to give notice to all honest persons, who have
or shall at any time, have any writings whatsoever counterfeited against them,
that this fellow is the most suspected person to be the Author and Forger of
any such writings or papers; in being known to diverse, that it has been his
usual way and practice: Witness a protection allowed (as he pretended by an
honorable Member of Parliament his Hand and Seal) at both Counters; which upon
examination was acknowledged to be false, by the said honorable Member of
Parliament, and by him declared, both for his Hand and Seal, to be both
counterfeit and forged.


