AN ANSWER TO DIVERSE SCANDALS Mentioned in a certain Pamphlet, Entitled, THE
Humble Remonstrance OF Sr. JOHN STAWELL.

WRITTEN By JOHN ASH Esquire, 1654.



LONDON, Printed by Thomas Newcomb, dwelling in Thamestreet, over against
Baynards Castle, Anno Domini 1654.

AN ANSWER TO Diverse Scandals mentioned in a certain PAMPHLET, Entitled, THE
Humble Remonstrance OF Sir John Stawell.
IT is not my purpose at this time, to write an exact Narrative of all
proceedings and passages which have been in the Case of Sir John Stawel, from
the 18 of July 1646. which was the time of his first coming to London from
Exceter, unto the year 1652. at which time he was Arraigned before the High
Court of Justice; I having done that formerly even upon the first sight of that
Scandalous Pamphlet, Entitled, The Humble Remonstrance of Sir John Stawell;
but did not at that time expose it to public view for these Reasons.

1. First, Because an Answer had been given by me to all those Particulars
which may any way seem to reflect on me before the High-Court of Justice, to
the general satisfaction of the whole Court, and all that were present, and to
the shame and confusion of the said Sir John Stawel, who was then a Prisoner at
the Bar of the said Court.

2. Secondly, Because the Scandals mentioned in the said Pamphlet, were so
apparently false and improbable, that any one who has been in the least manner
acquainted with those transactions, might easily perceive, even in the said
Paper, a manifest confutation of those falsehoods, which are therein maliciously
suggested, and vainly charged on me.

3. Thirdly, Because that in regard of my respects to his Family, I was willing
to be silent, lest in giving an Answer to those scandals, wherewith he
endeavors in the said Pamphlet to asperse me (by saying that I did
clandestinely obstruct his composition) I should do what I conceive my self at
this time obliged unto (viz.) clearly prove by undeniable arguments and
circumstances, that he never intended to compound at all, but resolved on the
contrary, flattering himself with hopes of seeing the late King restored to his
Power and greatness, from whom he might receive not only his whole Estate,
(which was unjustly taken from him, as he constantly affirmed) but also a great
reward for his many sufferings in owning and defending the Cause of the said
King, beyond any of his Party.

But since the Honorable Parliament has been pleased to refer the Petition of
the said Sir John Stawell unto a Committee, where the matter of Fact may be
thoroughly examined, to the end that my testimony on the behalf of the
Commonwealth, may not seem to be any way impeached, in regard of those feigned
Scandals mentioned in his said Pamphlet, and lest my carriage in the business
of his Composition, might be misrepresented to those who were strangers to my
actions therein,

I have judged it necessary to publish these ensuing lines, premising a few
Particulars which were fully cleared in that discourse, which I did then write,
which are as follows.

First, That although Sir John Stawell did appear at the Committee of
Goldsmiths Hall, about four days before the time limited by the Articles of
Exceter for Compositions were expired, yet he never intended to make any
Composition there according to the Order of Parliament, and the Rules
prescribed for Composition upon the said Articles, but did oftentimes declare
his resolution to the contrary: And when the Lady Stawell his wife, and Sir
Edward Stawell his son then in France, did earnestly solicit him, that they,
or either of them, might Petition the Parliament to be admitted to compound for
the said Estate, since he refused it; Sir John Stawell did deny to give his
consent thereunto, and did threaten his said son, that in case he did attempt
any such thing, he would disinherit him; and was much incensed against the said
Sir Edward Stawell, for that he had written Letters unto Mr. Ash for his
admission to Composition, since his Father refused it; some of which Letters
Sir John Stawell intercepted.

2 That Sir John Stawel did wholly depend upon the late Kings restoring to his
power and authority, that from him he might receive not only his whole estate,
(then unjustly taken from him by the Parliament, as he said) but also a great
reward for his many sufferings, in owning and justifying the late Kings Cause
beyond any other of his party; and did send to the said King when he was last
at Hampton Court, desiring him to take notice of the great suffering he had
undergone for his Majesty's Cause: and did let him know the hopes he had of his
Majesty's great favor, and reward when he should be restored.

And upon this confidence did Sir John Stawell neglect his composition, and
refused the benefit of Exceter Articles.

3. That Sir John Stawell, during the life of the late King, and after his
first appearance at Goldsmiths Hall, did never tender any Petition for his
admittance to composition, or to claim the benefit of Exceter Articles, either
unto the Parliament or Committee of Parliament, or any other Court whatsoever.

And when in the life time of the late King, he was arraigned for Treason at
the Upper Bench Bar, he did not then claim the benefit of Exceter Articles, nor
made any mention of them; for his exemption from that trial: but on the
contrary, he not only refused to own the Judge that sat there, by Commission
from the Parliament; but uttered an expression to the Court to this, or the
like effect, viz. My offense is not Treason, for which I am here arraigned; but
because I would not permit the Committee of Goldsmiths Hall to pick my purse,
and give my consent to pay a sum of money for the redemption of my Estate,
which is unjustly taken from me: by which expression, he sufficiently declared
his resolution against compounding.

4. That I did with all reallity and faithfulness, use my utmost endeavors to
persuade Sir John Stawell to submit unto the Parliament, and to make his
Composition; that so himself and his posterity might be preserved from ruin:
and that Sir John Stawell did refuse to follow that my council and advice, and
did declare that his resolution was not to Compound, but to depend upon the
said Kings favor.

And when I did press him to follow the examples of all the other Gentlemen of
the Kings Party who submitted to Composition, he did seem to jeer and deride
them for their follies, intimating that his Estate would be restored him by the
King, with sufficient damages from those that had possessed the same during the
Sequestration; and for that reason would not permit either his Lady, or any
other friend for her, to take any of his Estate at a Rent from the
Sequestrators.

Fifthly, That those scandalous aspersions cast upon me by Sir John Stawell in
his Pamphlet, Entitled his Humble Remonstrance, and mentioned in page 23, 24,
28, and 30. are mere fictions, and never heard of by me, or any other person
that I could ever meet withal, until the Parliament had ordered Sir John
Stawell to be tried by a High Court of Justice, and had required me to attend
the said Court, as a Witness against him. And I do believe that Sir John
Stawell did frame and contrive those false and scandalous fictions, after the
death of the late King, hoping thereby to save his reputation, and to excuse
his wilful perverseness; thereby endeavoring to make the world believe that it
was not his own madness and folly that had brought him to ruin; but the
treachery of a friend, upon whom he relied: And this is one reason, as I verily
believe, that those fictions were printed and published.

6. And lastly, That in case I should at any time hinder Sir John Stawel's
Composition; nay, if I had not endeavored to the utmost of my power, to
persuade him to the same, I might deservedly be censured to be guilty of as
much madness and folly, as he now lies under for not Compounded.

For that the Parliament had Ordered Sir John Stawels Composition-money, with
the Compositions of Mr. Coventry, and Sir Edward Moseley, to be paid unto me
for the discharge of several disbursments and engagements which I had paid and
entered into, together with Col. Alexander Popham, Col. Nathaniel Fines, Col.
Hollis, and other Gentlemen of the County of Somerset, for the service of the
Parliament, and paying of their Forces; and by the said Order, I was to receive
some satisfaction out of the said Compositions, toward my great loss and
damage sustained by the late War; but Sir John Stawell not compounding, those
debts, disbursments, and engagements, are not all satisfied and paid, nor have
I received any satisfaction toward my said loss and damages, by which means I
and the other Gentlemen above mentioned, have and will suffer very much, in
case the Parliament do not discharge those obligations still in force.

And I in particular do lose at least five thousand pound, for that Sir John
Stawell did not make his Composition, for that his Composition amounted unto
seven or eight thousand pound, or thereabouts.

These, and many other particulars are set forth, plainly manifested, and
clearly proved, in the Treatise which I did then write, as is above mentioned;
but in regard the Book proves to be of so large a volume that it will require
much time in the Printing thereof, and if Printed, those Honorable Persons to
whom Sir John Stawell has directed his Remonstrance, will want time, as I
conceive, to read the same. I have therefore for these and the other reasons
first given, and in the beginning of this Treatise expressed, contracted the
matter, and only printed something for the present in answer to what is
contained in the pages 28 and 30 of Sir John Stawels Pamphlet, Entitled, his
Humble Remonstrance, and is as follows.

READER,

In the first Page of the said humble Remonstrance of Sir John Stawell, he does
engage the Faith of a Christian, and honor of a Gentleman, to declare and
Remonstrate his Case in all humility and truth: In answer to which, I may with
confidence affirm, and do presume, that the ensuing discourse will clearly
prove the same; that if his actings in Somersetshire, and his dealings with the
people of Taunton, be as truly declared and related, as those passages set down
in Page 23. 24. 28. and 30. concerning his discourses and proceeding with my
self, that then there is not scarce one line of truth in the whole narrative:
for I do say and affirm, that the whole relation contained in Pages 23. 24. 28.
and 30. is a false and scandalous aspersion, and a fiction invented and
contrived by Sir John Stawell since the death of the late King, for the ends
and reasons before mentioned; and because the matters contained in pages 28.
and 30. do seem most to reflect upon my reputation, and are more notoriously
scandalous then the rest: I am resolved at this time to give an Answer only to
those, and the rather because the passages contained in pages 23. and 24.
relating to Sir John Stawell's appearance at Goldsmiths Hall, his miscarriages
there, and the report thereof made to the Parliament will be examined, and at
large declared before the Committee, now appointed to examine the same.

Reader, if thou shall seriously peruse, what is set forth by Sir John Stawell
in page 28. thou may easily perceive, that his design is to insinuate these
particulars.

First, that Sir John Stawell being put into a little dark corner, where he was
kept from nine of the clock in the morning, till three in the afternoon, and no
man suffered to come to him but Mr. Ash, and that then Mr. Ash resorted to
him four or five times, during his abode in that little dark corner.

Secondly, that whilst Sir John Stawell was in the said dark Corner, Mr. Ash
did treat with him about the purchase of his Farm at Abery, and did offer to
give four thousand pound for the same.

Thirdly, that some few days before Sir John Stawell was put into the said
dark corner, Mr. Ash had discourse with him about the sale of his Fee-simple
lands to pay his composition.

Fourthly, that Mr. Ash having discovered his desire to buy the Farm of Abery,
he was sharply reproved for the same by Sir John Stawell.

These four particulars are plainly set down, and with convenient boldness
affirmed in this Paragraph. Unto all which I shall in the first place make this
general Answer, and for the proof of it I have more then one hundred
witnesses: Sir John Stawell being brought before the High Court of Justice in
Westminster Hall; and I being then present as a witness by order of Parliament:
Mr. Atturny General was pleased, to acquaint the Court that Sir John Stawell
(at his first appearance there, when Mr. Ash was absent) had cast out some
words of reflection against him, and had likewise filled the Town with reports
of the great matters he had to charge Mr. Ash with all, if ever he appeared in
that Court: Whereupon the said Atturny General did pray the Court, that since
Mr. Ash was there present, Sir John Stawell might openly declare what he had
to charge Mr. Ash withal; which motion the Court approved of, and thereupon
willed Sir John Stawell to speak what he had to say; Sir John Stawell willingly
condesended to what the Court had approved of upon Mr. Atturnies motion; and
then related several headless stories, fictions of his own brain; and when he
had said all, Mr. Attorney told the Court that he did believe, Sir John Stawell
had much more to say, for that which he had then spoken did not any way reflect
upon Mr. Ash, nor answer the reports he had spread about the Town; wherefore
the Attorney General pressed Sir John Stawell again and again to speak all that
he had to say; and Sir John Stawell then said he had spoken all: Then the Lord
President of that Court spoke unto Sir John Stawell to this effect. Sir, the
Court with much patience has heard you tell a long story, though nothing at
all to your business that is before us; the substance of which you have now
said, is only this: That Mr. Ash did advise you to sell your Farm at Abery,
and with that money to pay your composition; did he, or any for him treat with
you to buy the same, or did he discover any desire he had to buy the Farm at
Abery of you?

Sir John Stawell answered no my Lord he did not; how then said the Lord
President can this story of yours reflect upon Mr. Ash. Yes said Sir John
Stawell, for I do think or believe, that Mr. Ash did intend to buy the Farm,
because he did advise me to sell it.

This being the truth of all that Sir John Stawell had then to accuse me of; as
to the purchase of the Farm of Abery, the Reader may plainly perceive, that
then he had not fully contrived the fiction and Scandal now printed in his
Remonstrance. But let us now farther examine the particulars; Sir John Stawell,
in that part of the Paragraph from whence the first particulars above mentioned
is taken, has so penned the same, as if the Reader should conceive, that the
Sergeant at Arms attending the Parliament, had by direction from me placed Sir
John Stawell in that little dark place, that so I might with the more privacy
treat about the pretended purchase; when as I did not know where the Sergeant
had put him, or did know that little dark Corner, as the Sergeant can and will
testify.

That Sir John Stawell was kept in that little dark Corner, from nine of the
Clock in the morning, till three of the Clock in the afternoon, and no man
permitted to speak with him but my self, is that which I can give no answer
unto; but I do believe that the Sergeant at Arms, who put Sir John Stawell into
that place can and will testify the contrary.

But that I did resort unto Sir John Stawell whilst he was in that dark place
four or five times is a notorious untruth, and a contrivance to complete the
remainder, viz. the grand fiction; for besides the testimony of the Sergeant at
Arms, who knows the contrary. Sir John Stawell toward the end of this
Paragraph faith, that after* (as he pretends) I was soundly reproved for
attempting to purchase the Farm of Abery; I then left him, which was about a
quarter of an hour before he was called to the Bar of the Parliament. Sir John
Stawell does not say that I came unto him again, whilst he was in that dark
Corner, nor can the ingenious Reader believe that after Mr. Ash had received
such an angry reprehension from Sir John Stawell, for attempting that purchase,
he would resort unto him any more upon that errand; therefore it must be
understood, that Mr. Ash resorted unto Sir John Stawell into that dark Corner
4 or 5 times between the hours of 10 and 11; for I do affirm and believe that
the Sergeant at Arms, besides many other persons do yet well remember,

That it was 10 of the Clock when the Sergeant first gave notice to the
Speaker, that he had caused Sir John Stawell to be brought, and that he was at
the door to attend the pleasure of the House; and that at or before 11 of the
Clock Sir John Stawell was called into the House, and from thence ordered to
Newgate.

To the second part of this Paragraph, where Sir John Stawell says, that some
few days before he was brought to the Parliament, and put into that dark
Corner; Mr. Ash had some discourse with him about the sale of his Fee-simple
lands, to pay his composition: I do give this answer, that the same in every
particle is an absolute untruth; for that neither a few days before, or at any
time in all my life, had I any such discourse with Sir John Stawell.

And therefore I do now advise Sir John Stawell that in case he shall print
another Remonstrance, to employ his invention to find out the place where, and
the time when, the aforesaid discourse was between us; and certainly he must
then contrive it, as if it had been in some unknown place in Eutopia for it was
never spoken in England.

But Sir John Stawell has saved us the labor, to enquire further after the
time when the said discourse should be between us; for he tells us in the very
same page, that this discourse was when Deans and Chapters Lands were set to
sale for 10 years purchase; which was in the year 1649. and in the year 1646
when this discourse is pretended to be; both Houses of Parliament had then
settled the Deans and Chapters Lands, for the increase of the Ministers
Maintenance, and the Scholars in the Universities, and those Lands were never
put to sale until the year 1649. wherefore Sir John Stawell must here be put
in mind of the old Proverb (which in civil English signifies thus much) That, A
good Memory is needful to those who shall frame feigned discourses.

As for those two other particulars drawn from this Paragraph (viz.) That Mr.
Ash should Treat with Sir John Stawell about the Purchase of his Farm of
Aubery, and offered for the same 4000 l. And that Sir John Stawell should
sharply reprehend him for this Treaty and Offer, which is the grand fiction,
and principal ground work upon which all his other Stories are raised, I can
give no other answer thereunto, than what I have given to the former
Accusations: Which is, That I never had any such Treaty with Sir John Stawell,
or did offer him the said Sum of 4000 l. and I have no less number of Witnesses
to make good this my Affirmation, then all those Honorable Judges who sat at
the High-Court of Justice, and those Gentlemen who were at the same time
present, when Sir John Stawell did there relate this story, as is aforsaid at
large recited.

And now to the end the ingenious Reader may rightly understand, and be truly
informed upon what unjust grounds Sir John Stawell has made this great noise,
and cast these false aspersions upon me; and that the world may behold the
slender twigg which this prudent, yet wilful and obstinate Gentleman has
catched at, to save himself, his estate, and lost reputation, from an absolute
sinking, is one end of this present Writing.

I shall in the next place set down, and give the Reader a true, faithful, and
exact Narative of all that was said and done by me, at the time when Sir John
Stawell was brought to the Parliament House, and put into that little dark
corner, as he is pleased to call it: Which is as follows.

Upon the 18 of August, 1646. about nine of the clock in the morning (prayers
being ended, and the Parliament sat) Mr. John Stevens took the first
opportunity to acquaint the Speaker, that he was ordered by the Committee at
Goldsmiths Hall, to report to the House the insolent behavior and miscarriage
of one Sir John Stawell that came there under a pretense of a Compounder, That
the Committee of Goldsmiths Hall had delivered the said Sir John Stawell to
the custody of the Sergeant at Arms, that so he might be forthcoming, to
answer that Charge which he should then give against him; and therefore did
move that the said Sergeant at Arms might be ordered to bring Sir John Stawell
to the Bar of the House, to hear the Charge which should be delivered against
him in his said Report. And the Parliament did then order the Sergeant to send
for Sir John Stawell from Ely House accordingly; which done, the House fell
upon the Debate of other Business, which took up the greatest part of the
forenoon.

That about ten of the clock, the Sergeant came and informed the Speaker that
Sir John Stawell was there ready, if he pleased to have him called in; the
Speaker made answer (according to the usual custom) that as soon as the
business then in Debate was at an end he would put the House in mind thereof,
that so Sir John Stawell might be called in.

I then observing that the present Debate, in which the House was then engaged,
was like to last for half an hour, or more, out of my real and hearty respects
to Sir John Stawell and his welfare, went out of the House on purpose to sit
with him and keep him company, resolving to spend that time in giving him my
best advice and council, to prevent (if it might be) his utter ruin.

But coming forth to the Lobby without the Parliament door, where usually all
persons are placed, who either are brought or sent to appear before the House
of Parliament, expecting to find Sir John Stawell there, but missing of him, I
returned back into the House to the Sergeant, to be directed by him where Sir
John Stawell was, and thereupon the Sergeant at Arms said to me, come along
with me, and I will bring you to the place where Sir John Stawell is; and
accordingly the Sergeant brought me to that little room mentioned in his
Remonstrance, upon the head of the stairs, a place that I never saw before, or
ever heard of and there I found Sir John Stawell sitting by himself, with a
Tobacco-Pipe in his hand, and a candle burning by him: What Mr Sergeant (said
I) is this little Cell to which you bring me: This is, said the Sergeant, my
own Retiring Quarter, where I have always two or three bottles of good Wine to
refresh my self, and all accommodations, as Tobacco, etc. to welcome my
friends, if there should be occasion: And thereupon the Sergeant very nobly
offered Sir John Stawell and my self the said entertainment; which done, the
Sergeant departed to attend the service of the House, promising me, that as soon
as the Debate of the House grew to a conclusion, he would come and give me
notice thereof, that so I might return to the House when Sir John Stawell was
called in.

Now when the Sergeant was departed, and Sir John Stawell and my self alone
together in this said little room, out of my real and hearty care of his
welfare, I did most seriously and earnestly press him to be well advised of
what he said or did when he came to the Bar of the Parliament House: For, said
I, if your carriage here, should be like that at Goldsmiths Hall, you will be
undone for ever; and much to this purpose I spoke then to him. Sir John gave me
the hearing, but replied very little, only sometimes when I was earnest with
him to submit and conform, he would reply. Come, come, trouble not your self, I
shall do and say (when I come into the House) what I shall think to be most
fit. And when I had there even tired my self in giving him my most earnest and
importunate advice, and had pressed him to submit and conform, wherein I spent
about half an hour; the Sergeant came and gave me notice that the present
Debate in the House was drawing to a conclusion; and therefore advised me to
come away; Rising then to depart, I said to Sir John Stawel, be not, I pray
you, so wilful and obstinate as to destroy your self and your whole Posterity,
but hearken to the friendly advice that I have given you; and with that I was
stepped one foot without the door of the said little room, going away, at which
time Sir John Stawell arising out of his place, and coming toward the door
after me, said, I pray what is that good advice that you do give me! To whom I
replied, When you come to the Bar of the House of Parliament, do you there
acknowledge your miscarriage at Goldsmiths Hall, and pray the pardon of the
House, and desire that you may be remitted to Goldsmiths Hall, there to make
your Composition according to the Articles of Exceter. Sir John Stawell
replied, Is that your advice? I like it not; for, were I willing, yet I am
altogether unable to pay the money of a Composition, for I have no money to pay
it, but am alread indebted, therefore your advice is not seasonable and good.
Fie, fie, what mean you Sir John Stawell, replied I, do not you know that I am
very well acquainted with many Gentlemen whose debts are great, and the
encumbrances upon the estates very many, who pay for their Compositions, some
three years value, some five, and yet they make a shift either by morgaging or
selling, to save a part, rather then lose the whole; and you, said I, have
lately bought a Farm in Wiltshire, which is an addition to your Estate at
Awbery; and (as you told me your self) cost you between eight and ten thousand
pound; it is but the selling again of that Farm, and your Composition is paid,
and all the rest of your Estate saved. Well, well, said Sir John Stawell, all
your advice tends to this, That I should sell away part of my Lands: No,
replied I, my advice is, that you should submit unto a Composition, and save
your self and your Estate from ruin; and so I departed from him into the House
of Parliament, and never spoke with him more until about four or five days
after, when I was sent for to visit him at Newgate: And by what means I came to
Newgate and the passages between him and my self, does follow in my Answer to
the next Charge mentioned in the 30. page.

Reader, thou may observe that Sir John Stawell in his relation of the
matter, does acknowledge that in all my discourse, I did seem to condole his
deplorable condition; and Sir John Stawell thought then that I did really, and
not seemingly compassionate him, as will appear by what passed between us four
or five days after at Newgate. It was always the study and endeavor of Sir
John Stawell, to gain himself the repute of a wise, stout, and prudent
Gentleman: and so no doubt he thought himself to be, when he could laugh at the
indiscretions of all those that made their compositions; whilst he did with a
strong Faith, behold at a very remote distance, the King restoring him to his
Estate without money, and therewith a liberal reward for his great sufferings,
in justifying and owning his Cause beyond any other of his party: and I do
believe, that Sir John Stawell having through his pride and obstinacy lost that
his reputation, in the judgment of the world, is therewith as much troubled as
at the loss of his Estate.

But now Reader, thou art here desired by that which follows, to observe the
wisdom and prudence of this Gentleman.

Whereas in the former relation; mentioned in page 28. unto which I have given
an Answer: Sir John Stawell might suppose when he penned that invention and
contrived fiction, that his bare affirmation thereof might beget credit with
those that read the same, thinking that I could make no reply thereto, but a
plain denial; because the discourse was in private betwixt us two.

But here in his second relation (a choice invention) set down in page 30 and
31. a relation wherein truth is not found in any one line; in the penning
whereof Sir John Stawell's own conscience and reason could tell him, not only,
that the things there related were untruths, but that I had several witnesses
to prove them so to be; and if so, then Sir John Stawells great wisdom and
integrity, or rather something else is here to be admired, especially since he
has engaged the faith of a Christian, and honor of a Gentleman to make a true
relation.

Reader, If thou do seriously peruse Sir John Stawel's Relation, set down in
page 30. and 31. to which I am now to give an Answer, thou will find there
these three particulars much insisted on.

1. That Mr. Ash merely of his own accord and officiousness (nay if it be
true that he received that sharp reprehension, but four days before, from Sir
John Stawell) did most debasedly, unsent for, resort unto Sir John Stawell then
in Newgate, after he had been three or four days in that prison.

And that he did then and there most earnestly solicit him, that he might be
employed in doing Sir John Stawell some further service.

2. That Sir John Stawel did then resolve to Petition the Parliament, that he
might be admitted to his composition, and restored to his liberty; but Mr. Ash
disliked that Petition which he had drawn to that purpose; because it did
express that he had formerly submitted to Composition, but was denied, for
refusing the Negative Oath and Covenant; and that Mr Ash persuaded him to draw
up a Petition in another Form, which he consented unto; a Copy whereof is
inserted in page 31 of his Remonstrance.

3. That Mr. Ash did engage and promise Sir John Stawell to deliver that his
Petition to the Parliament, and although Mr. Ash was often solicited, and
minded of that his engagement and promise, yet to this day he never delivered
the same.

And here Sir John Stawell, might with as much truth have added, that which he
did affirm at the High Court of Justice, where his expression was to this
effect,

That in three or four days after he was committed to Newgate, he did draw an
humble Petition to the Parliament, wherein he did acknowledge his miscarriage,
and desired that he might be remitted to Goldsmiths Hall, there to make his
Composition; which Petition he commended to the care of Mr. Ash, (who called
him Master, he noting thereby the intimacy and familiarity that was between
us.) And Mr. Ash did engage to deliver the same to the Parliament, but never
performed his engagement; by which failer and breach of his trust, Mr. Ash
like Judas betrayed his Master.

To the first of these I answer and say, that there is not one word of truth in
it, save only that I was with Sir John Stawell in Newgate, about four days
after the Parliament had committed him to that prison; but I do deny that I
came thither of my own accord and unsent for, as Mr. Edward Ash, the Lady
Stawell, and her waiting woman can and will testify.

For thus it was, that upon the day before mentioned, the Lady Stawell between
9 or 10 of the clock at night (when Mr. Edward Ash his gates were fast shut,
where I then lodged,) came thither, and desired that the gates might be opened,
that she might be admitted to speak with Mr. John Ash, and to deliver unto him
a message from Sir John Stawell: Mr. Edward Ash did unwillingly permit his
Gates to be opened at that time of the night; but because the Lady Stawell was
a person of honor and worth, did assent thereunto.

And when the Lady Stawell came in, she found me and Master Edward Ash in a
little Parlor sitting together, and ready to go to bed.

Then said Master Edward Ash to the Lady, Madam, What business has drawn you
abroad so far from your Lodging, at this time of the night? Sir, said she, I
am sent in a message to your Brother, Mr. John Ash, from Mr. Stawell, my
Husband, now in Newgate, who does earnestly desire your Brother to come unto
him presently; for that, she said, Mr. Stawell has a business of great
concernment to impart unto him, which will not admit of any delay, but with the
danger of his life. Mr. Edward Ash then replied, Madam, my brother shall not,
with my consent, go forth of my house at this hour of the night, and I hope you
conceive it not fitting, and so will he (my family and servants being all in
the Country) and that it will not stand with my safety to keep my Gates
unshut, so long until my brother shall return home, in case he do go along with
you to Sir John Stawell, as you desire. And I did then tell the said Lady, that
it was a very unseasonable time, at that hour of the night, for me to go into a
Prison, and desired her to excuse me unto her Husband, letting him know, That I
would be ready any hour the next day, to wait upon him, if he should please to
desire it: But the Lady Stawell continuing on in her importunate request, and
telling me, That in case I did not go with her, and speak with her Husband, he
would not rest that night, nor would his mind be at quiet; and that he gave her
in charge not to return until she brought me along with her. The Lady with
these importunities at length prevailed with me, and I went with her to Newgate
to sir John Stawell, where he then lay.

Now this being the very truth, as I have here related it, and what the
Witnesses aforenam'd can and will testify, I do presume, that the ingenious
Reader cannot believe, that I would at that unseasonable hour of the night go
to Newgate, and there earnestly solicit sir John Stawell to employ me in some
new service, when but four days before, (if his relation in page 28 were true)
with a severe reprehension he did cashier me from his service.

But what was said and done by me, and sir John Stawell, that night at Newgate,
is in the next place to be declared, and is as follows, being my answer unto
the second particular contained in the 30 and 31 pages of the said Remonstrance.

When I came to Newgate, and the Lady Stawell had directed me to her Husbands
Lodging, I found sir John Stawell sitting in a Chair, taking a Pipe of
Tobacco, who said to me, You are welcome; this is done like a friend indeed, to
visit me in Prison so late in the night; and then called his man to give me a
stool to sit down by him, and requested me to accompany him in taking a Pipe of
Tobacco; I told him that I understood by his Lady, that he had a business of
importance to impart unto me, and therefore had sent for me: I desired him, in
regard it was very late, That he would let me know his business, because I had
engaged to my Brother in Fanchurch street, to return home unto him speedily.
Sir John Stawell still pressed me, first to take some Tobacco, saying, It was
not then much past ten of the Clock, and his custom was, not to go to Bed
before one or two in the morning. The Lady Stawell, then standing by, said, I
pray Mr. Stawell impart unto Mr. Ash what you have to say unto him, for which
you caused me to bring him hither: For I have engaged to Mr. Edward Ash, that
his Brother shall not be detained here by you above half an hour at the most.
Sir John Stawell hereupon caused the servants, then present, to depart the
Room, and there was only left with me, himself and his Lady. Then said Sir John
Stawell, Mr. Ash, you know very well in what houses, and in what manner I have
lived all my life time; and now see into what a noisome and little ugly Chamber
I am put into There, said he, (pointing to one side of the Chamber) is a Trunk,
through which passes the filth of the upper Prison; and under my Chamber is
the Vault, into which all the filth of the Prison is emptied; by means whereof
I am annoyed with such a noisome stink, the weather being hot, that it is
impossible for me to endure it for any time without the danger of my life:
Wherefore you being my only faithful friend, upon whom I can rely, did think
fit to send to you for my relief; and therefore do now entreat you, That either
by a Motion, or upon a short Petition, you would procure leave from the
Parliament, that I may be removed to another Prison, where I may enjoy the
benefit of the open air, and some wholesome walk; and if upon your Motion, or
the delivery of my Petition, you nominate the Tower of London, though it be a
very chargeable place, I am contented, rather to be placed there, then to lose
my life in this stinking Goal. I gave Sir John Stawell then this answer, Sir,
as I am most ready and willing to deliver to the Parliament, any Petition for
you, that may tend to your good, so am I very unwilling to deliver that which
may be for your hurt: For, said I, the Parliament will make this construction
of your Petition, That you stand still resolved in you contempt of their power
and Authority, and for that end, do only desire health and strength to carry
you through the encounter; and therefore my advice is, and, as a faithful
friend I give you my Council, That since you have a mind to prefer a Petition
unto the Parliament, let it be such a one, as may do you good, and quite free
you from this, and all other prisons. What Petition, said Sir John St^well, do
you mean? A Petition, said I, wherein you should acknowledge all your
miscarriages, both at Goldsmiths Hall, and at the Parliament, and crave pardon
for the same, and let the Prayer of your Petition be, to be remitted to
Goldsmiths Hall to make your Composition, and receive the benefit of Exceter
Articles.

To this advice of mine Sir John Stawell gave this Answer, Sir, you know my
resolution, as to Compounding; and you know, as I have often told you, That if
I had a mind to Compound, yet have I no money to pay the Composition; and
therefore Sir, let me entreat you to deliver this short Petition to the
Parliament for my removal out of this Prison, and therein you will do the part
of a faithful friend since it is for the saving of my life. You have, said he,
told me the danger of this Petition; so that if I suffer by it, it is my own
fault, and none of yours.

I did at last consent (when I could not persuade him to do otherwise) and did
promise him to deliver this Petition unto the Parliament, so as he would draw
it up in such humble Language, as I might not receive a reproof upon the
delivery thereof, Sir John Stawell then promised to send me a foul draught of
that Petition the next day, that in case I did mislike his expressions, I
should correct it; and I bad him good night, and left him.

Reader, thou have here a faithful, and an exact Narrative of what was said
and done by Sir John Stawell and my self, at that time, when I visited him at
Newgate, which if compared with what is set down by Sir John Stawell in his
Remonstrance, page the 30 and 31. is quite another thing; and thou may
clearly understand, that the Petition which he often mentions, and which I
promised to deliver to the Parliament, was not the Petition which he has there
Printed, nor a Petition for his readmission to Composition at Goldsmiths Hall,
as he told the High-Court of Justice, was it but a Petition only for his
removal from Newgate to a better Prison, as will more plainly appear by what
follows.

Upon the next day after, I was at Newgate, Sir John Stawell performed his
promise, and I had a sight of the foul draught of the Petition, which he
intended for me; but the Preamble was penned in such high and unseemly
language, that I was enforced with my own Pen to correct the greatest part of
it, and so returned the same unto him again with my amendments, which he not
liking, did the next day send me another Petition of his own drawing; but I
disliked that also, because the language was such, as did not become a
Delinquent in his condition, to tender unto the Parliament; but at last, after
several amendments, when I could not prevail, to have it drawn as well as I
desired, I took it as it was, and promised sir John Stawell to take the first
opportunity to present it to the Parliament; which promise I did faithfully
perform, and did for about sixteen days together, (for so long and no longer,
had I that Petition in my custody) wait early and late to get a time to deliver
the same unto the Parliament; but Michaelmas then drawing on, and my particular
occasions calling me home into the Country, for the ordering my affairs, and
settling my Estate there, having been above four years absent from thence by
reason of the War; I thereupon sent my Letter to sir John Stawell, letting
him know, That I could not gain a time as yet to deliver his Petition to the
Parliament, although I had done my utmost endeavors therein, and that my
occasions did call me suddenly into the Country; therefore I did desire him to
direct me into what hand I should put his Petition, whilst I was absent, which
should not be above three weeks at most.

This Letter I sent to Newgate to sir John Stawell, and he returned me an
answer to this effect, That he was very thankful to me for the great care I
had taken in the delivery of his Petition, and was sorry that it had no better
success; and that since my occasions called me into the Country, he directed
me to place his Petition in the hands of Mr. Denzil Hollis, or Sir Philip
Stapleton: the very next morning, I came to the Parliament House, somewhat
early before the House sat, and there very happily I met Mr. Hollis, who was
in a private discourse with another Gentleman, I took the opportunity, because
I was to go out of Town the day following, and somewhat uncivilly interrupting
Mr. Hollis, told him, That Sir John Stawell presented his respects unto him,
and had sent him a Petition, which he did desire might be presented to the
House by his hand; Mr. Hollis took from me the Petition, and put it in his
pocket, willing me to acquaint Sir John Stawell, that he would take care
thereof: And the same day, as soon as I did return unto my Lodging, I wrote a
Letter to Sir John Stawel, wherein I told him, That according to his direction,
I had delivered his Petition to Mr Hollis, who had promised to take care
thereof, and advised him to employ some friend to mind Mr. Hollis of the same,
lest he should forget it. Sir John Stawel gave me an answer to this Letter the
next morning, which Letter his servant delivered me as I was taking horse to
ride into the Country; The Contents of which Letter were, That he heartily
thanked me for lodging his Petition in so worthy a hand, and that he would
observe my advice, by sending some friend to Mr. Hollis to mind him thereof,
and so wished me a happy journey, and a safe return.

I then went into the Country, and returned again to the Parliament about
three weeks after, and as soon as I met with Mr. Hollis, I asked him what he had
done with Sir John Stawels Petition, which I had delivered him? he told me,
That it was such a Petition, that if he had delivered it to the House, it would
have more incensed the House against him: For in that Petition, said Mr.
Hollis, he desired nothing of the Parliament, but his removal from Newgate, to
a better Prison. Then said I, Where is the Petition? and what is become of it?
Mr. Hollis answered, That he had sent it back to Sir John Stawell, with this
direction, That Sir John Stawel should draw another Petition, humbly
acknowledging his miscarriages, and to desire pardon for the same, and the
Prayer to be, That the Parliament would remit him to Goldsmiths Hall, there to
make his Composition, and receive the benefit of Exeter Articles. And I also
sent him word (said he) that if he would send me such a Petition, which would
be for his good, I would not only deliver the same to the Parliament, but would
engage all my friends, that his desires might be granted.

Well, said I, did Sir John Stawell hearken to your advice? and has he sent
you such a Petition? No, no, said Mr. Hollis, he does utterly refuse to be
advised by me: Certainly the man is either mad, or has lost his wits, else he
would not be so obstinate.

Then said I, Sir John Stawell has often been advised by me, and other his
friends to follow that course which you have now advised him unto: But he has
always rejected our counsels, and is peremptory in his resolutions, which will
be his ruin. And I do affirm, that I never received any other Petition from
Sir John Stawell, but that which I now mentioned.

And now Reader, having thus in all plainness and truth made thee this faithful
Narrative, with all its circumstances, and showed who the Witnesses are that
can (and I presume will, if called) make good the same, thou will exceedingly
admire the front and boldness of this Gentleman Sir John Stawel, who with so
much confidence should adventure to publish in Print, that which not only his
own conscience tells him to be a notorious untruth, but also knows the Witnesses
that can convict him thereof; and what cause have thou then to believe those
other stories which he has printed, and were, as they are pretended, private
discourses between Sir John Stawell and my self.

I had here concluded this discourse, but finding in page 59, 60, and 61. the
Copy of a Letter signed by Sir Anthony Irby, and directed unto Thracy Paunsfoot
Esquire and also a Certificate signed by Sir David Watkins, I thought it requisite
to give some answer to the said Letter and Certificate, and then to conclude.

In that Letter signed by Sir Anthony Irby, amongst other things which he does
there misrecite, these particulars are related and asserted (viz.)

That Sir John Stawels deportment to us of the Committee at that time (meaning
at his second appearance) and the other time that he was before us, for my part
I took no offense at it, neither do I think justly there could be any: he is of
himself of a blunt carriage, but for incivility I saw none at the times he was
before us, either in gesture or language; for my part I would have had him
admitted to Composition, knowing money would have done the Parliament service;
besides, by his Articles we ought; but I was but one, others were not of my
mind, but heightened his offense high, took acceptions at his carriage and
language, would have it reported to the House. For my part, then I thought that
there was more in it than was outwardly expressed; but the truth was, by the
Order of the House, we were bound up from admitting him to compound, unless he
took the Covenant, except the House would dispense with it, which they did when
they approved of those Articles.

To this part of the Letter I give this Answer, That Sir Anthony Irby was the
principal man of all the Committee that took exceptions at the Paper which he
is pleased now to call Sir John Stawels Petition, and was presented at his
first appearance: And he first moved, That the said Paper might be rejected,
saying, it was rather a Remonstrance then a Petition. And Sir Anthony Irby
especially, together with all the rest of the Committee then present, were so
offended at Sir John Stawels language and behavior, that they made an Order
that I (then being in the Chair of that Committee) should the next day report
the same to the Parliament; which Report had been made accordingly, but that I
my self (out of my respects to Sir John Stawell) did prevail with the Committee
to suspend that their Order for a time; and also obtained for him this favor,
That three or four days time for consideration was given him, in which time he
might amend his Petition, and therewith bring a particular of his Estate under
his hand, upon which the Committee might proceed to perfect his Composition;
This favor I say again, was procured from the Committee only by my mediation,
much against the mind of Sir Anthony Irby, who pressed the Report forthwith to
be made.

And Sir John Stawell at his second appearance before the Committee of
Goldsmiths Hall, carrying himself with the like insolency, and giving the same
language (if not worse) than he did at the first: Sir Anthony Irby principally
taking offense thereat, did, with the rest of the Committee then present, order
Mr. John Stephens (then Chairman) to report the same to the Parliament. All
which in effect I did affirm unto Sir Anthony Irby upon Thursday the 23 of
November last, before the Committee of Parliament sitting in the Starr Chamber,
by whom Sir Anthony Irby had been examined, as a Witness for Sir John Stawell,
and his Examinations are in effect the same as is contained in this Letter.

Which Examinations being there read in the presence of the said Sir Anthony
Irby, I did move the Committee to ask him two or three questions, which being
granted, were as follows.

First, Whether he was present at the Committee at Goldsmiths Hall the first
and second time when Sir John Stawell appeared there.

He answered, He was then present.

Secondly, Whether the Committee at Goldsmiths Hall (taking offense at Sir John
Stawels language and misbehaviour there) did order Mr. John Stephens to Report
the same to the Parliament.

He answered, Yes, that Order was then made by the Committee.

Thirdly, Whether to the making of the said Order for Mr. Stephens to Report as
aforesaid, he (Sir Anthony Irby) did give his consent and his Vote in the
affirmative for the same.

He answered, Yes, he did, for there was no Member of the said Committee that
gave a Nagative to the said Order.

But in the Answer to this third Question, Sir Anthony Irby made some pause,
and it stuck some time with him, because he knew it did contradict what he had
said before in the justification of Sir John Stawels good language and fair
deportment.

In the next place Sir Anthony Irby in his Letter says.

That the Committee was bound up by an Order of the House to put Sir John
Stawell to take the Covenant and Negative Oath, before he was admitted to
Composition, but that Order the House did suspend when they approved of the
Articles of Exceter.

Here Sir Anthony Irby might have written the whole truth, and evidenced the
same if he had been so pleased; for he knew, that by an Ordinance of both
Houses of Parliament, the Committee of Goldsmiths Hall were bound up not to
admit any Delinquent to his Composition, before he had taken the Covenant and
Negative Oath, and that by the said Ordinance, they mere empowered to commit
the Delinquent so refusing to Prison, until he should do the same. And Sir
Anthony Irby does know that the House of Lords had not then approved of the
said Articles, but refused the same, and therefore the Committee of Goldsmiths
Hall were still bound by the said Ordinance to do as aforesaid, and that the
same Ordinance was not suspended, as Sir Anthony Irby pretends: But Sir Anthony
Irby in his said Letter, does yet proceed further (viz.)

But since (I must confess) I have heard from some of the then Members of
Parliament, that one of our Society would have bought a Manor of Sir John
Stawell, that lay near him, but I knew nothing of it then, but took notice of
some tartness in the party, which being neighbors and Countrymen, I something
wondered at, thinking that Sir John Stawell might have exasperated him by some
action in the time of War.

Reader, I pray observe here, that Sir Anthony Irby does not name the person
who would have bought this Manor of Sir John Stawell, nor does he name those
Members of Parliament that told him this story, nor the time when this was told
him. But in his examination lately taken before the Committee of Parliament, he
does there set forth, that the time when he heard this story, was about two
years since, when Sir John Stawel was brought before the High Court of Justice,
and that the Member that told it him, was Sir Edward Baynton, as they two sat
together in Sir Abraham Williams his House, and that I my self was the person
of our society that would have bought the said Manor.

Where note, that when Sir John Stawell at the High Court of Justice had
published this scandalous fiction, which coming to the knowledge of Sir Edward
Baynton, he tells it to Sir Anthony Irby, and now Sir Anthony Irby does make use
of this story in this his Letter, thereby to induce the Reader the better to
believe what he has written in the justification of Sir John Stawell.

Which scandalous fiction was never heard of or told by Sir Anthony Irby, till
about seven years after that Sir John Stawell had been at the Committee of
Goldsmiths Hall.

And observe likewise, that Sir Anthony Irby says, it was a Manor that I would
have bought of Sir John Stawell, and that it lay near me; when as Sir John
Stawell tells you it was a Farm, and it lay at Aubery, which is above sixteen
miles from my dwelling, and I have no Land near the place.

But Sir Anthony Irby's memory must be blamed, that has here failed him,
according to the common lot of those which contrive and invent such like
fictions.

As for the Certificate signed by Sir David Watkins, wherein he says, That Sir
John Stawell came to the Committee at Goldsmiths Hall, with a fair and civil
respect, and presented his Petition within the time limited by the Articles of
Exceter, etc.

Where observe, That Sir Anthony Irby and Sir David Watkins, do give the
self-same evidence, as to Sir John Stawels fair and civil deportment at the
Committee of Goldsmiths Hall; but Sir David Watkins, as well as Sir Anthony
Irby did give his vote in the affirmative, that Mr. Stephens should report to
the Parliament the insolent language and ill behavior of Sir John Stawell
before the said Committee; for says Sir Anthony Irby, every Member then at the
said Committee consented to the said Order, that Sir John Stawells miscarriage
there should be reported to the House.

I shall not trouble my self nor the Reader with any more of this old
Gentleman's Certificate; for the time when Sir John Stawell came to Goldsmiths
Hall, was in the heat of Summer, and it is very likely that the good old man
was then nodding, and so could not mind what the Committee and himself did, or
it may be his memory through age does fail him, for it is now about eight years
since that these transactions were at Goldsmiths Hall.

It might be expected that I should give some answer to that aspertion which
Sir John Stawell has cast upon me and Mr. Stephens in the first Paragraph of
p. 26. of his Remonstrance, where he seems to insinuate, and would make the
Reader believe that the Report which Mr. Stephens made to the Parliament of his
insolent behavior before the Committee of Goldsmiths Hall, was no other but
what Mr. Stephens had received from me, and that I had instructed him what to
say; and why? Mark Sir John Stawells reason for this insinuation, Because says
he, The Report which Mr. Stephens made to the Parliament, is the same with Mr.
Ash his Testimony given at the High Court of Justice, and therefore Mr.
Stephens took his Report from Mr. Ash.

This is a notorious untruth, and an idle aspertion, cast both upon Mr.
Stephens and my self; for Mr. Stephens did report no other thing to the
Parliament touching sir John Stawels ill behavior, but what he heard come
forth of his own mouth, which was so much as gave Mr. Stephens occasion to say
in the close of his Report to the House,

That if the Parliament did not make Sir John Stawell a Traitor, Sir John
Stawell had made them Traitors.

And thus, Reader, after a long forbearance, and not without some
unwillingness, have I given thee a rude, yet a most true and faithful Account
of all that passed between Sir John Stawell and my self, in relation to those
scandals, which in the Pamphlet, Entitled, his Humble Remonstrance, are most
maliciously insinuated: I could have added much more, if I was not unwilling,
either to tire thy patience, or to recriminate, or to aggravate his ingratitude
toward me; but by what I have written, thou may clearly perceive how
injuriously he has charged me with the sin of Coveting the Goods of my
neighbor, and consequently with the breach of all the Commandments: And I
could wish that I had not just cause (were I minded so to do) Quere who it was
that coveted Mrs Bassets Lands, and got it by a Cheat.
to retort the same crime in a high nature on himself: and to desire him
seriously to lay it to heart, and consider whether, even that offense of his,
be not one cause why it has pleased God so to harden his heart, that he should
contemn the Parliaments mercy, in refusing to submit unto a Composition
according to the Articles of Exceter, by which means he has been most justly
deprived of his whole Estate.

To the Honorable, the Referrees of his Highness most Honorable Council, in
the Cause between Sir John Stawell and the Purchasers.
The Petition of William Lawrence of Edinburgh, Esquire
Humbly shows,
THat whereas your Petitioner is employed in his Highness service in Scotland,
which requires his personal attendance there; and he being one of the said
Purchasers, as he is informed, the said Sir John Stawell in his absence,
without summons or other legal notice, has, and does endeavor by surprise to
pursue your Petitioner, and work diverse things against him prejudicial to his
right. And whereas your Petitioners purchase was before he left England,
confirmed by Act of Parliament, and in confidence thereof, your Petitioner
suspending nothing, left no provision nor order against any suits, not doubting
the same. And your Petitionr in the present condition he is in, is now deprived
of all Council, intelligence, Agents writings, evidences, proofs, and other
things necessary to maintain a Title, and of all fit means to make use of them.

Your Petitioner therefore humbly prays that no proceedings be suffered
against him otherwise then is by Law allowable against a person not summoned,
and out of the Nation, and who has besides the warrant of an Act of
Parliament, which if permitted to be questioned, there can be no end of
controversy. And that for the farther security of your Petitioner the present
Petitiin and Reasons annexed, may be read or inspected, and rest the with
papers of other Purchasers before your honors misinformation from the said Sir
John Stawell.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

Reasons that the Petitioners purchase ought not to be questioned by Sir John
Stawell.
I. Your Petitioner says that such members of the Committee of Articles as
have acted for the said Sir John Stawell, against Purchasers, are parties, and
not Judges, and their orders and certificates ought to have no credit or
authority. And your Petitioner says they have mistated the Case, transgressed
the duty of an inferior jurisdiction, and presumed on Acts of Sovereign power,
they have wrongfully indebted the Commonwealth in vast sums of money to the said
Sir John Stawell, they have occasioned false scandal on it of infringing his
Articles, and have not been indifferent or equal in their proceedings, either
as to public or private rights, all which your Petitioner will be ready to
prove.

II. Your Petitioner says, that diverse Purchasers, some through fear, and
others by conspiracy with the said Sir John Stawell, have, and do put in diverse
feigned and feeble Petitions and pleas, part of which the said S. John Stawell
to delude the vulgar, has put in print, and the same purchasers have and do
endeavor to betray the Cause of the Commonwealth, and their companions; your
Petitioner therefore desires that no proceeding be made against him in gross,
but his cause heard patiently and particularly.

III. Your Petitioner says, that has been already decided and adjudged by
Parliament, that the said Sir John Stawell has forfeited his Articles. And
thereupon the Act of sale of his Estate was made, and that judgment being
given by Parliament, to whose proceedings Purchasers neither could nor ought to
be privy, and so much time since past, That though the evidence and proofs were
then never so clear, yet the memory may be now lost; the Members Witnesses
proofs dead, removed, unknown, or taken off. It would be unreasonable to put
Purchasers now to prove over again, what has been adjudged, and would not only
question Sir John Stawells, but most part of all the lands, the Parliament ever
sold or shall sell.

IV. Your Petitioner says, notwithstanding that if he shall be enforced, he
will prove that the said Sir John Stawel never submitted to Composition
according to Articles, and that he has both omitted and committed diverse Acts
then, and since, which have clearly forfeited them.

V. There is sufficient publicly and vulgarly known of the said Sir John
Stawell, as none needs admire at the judgment passed against him; for he
offered nothing but insolences and affronts to the Parliament it self, when
brought before them, he reviled the Commit for compounding, charging them to
be Delinquents themselves: He charged the Judges at the Upper Bench that they
sat by a counterfeit Sale, and that they were mock Judges, and the Jury a pack
of Knaves; he openly denied and defied the Supreme authority, and charged the
Court and Attorney General with high Treason for acting by it, publicly, and
to their faces. He declared for the Scots in Arms against this Commonwealth,
and till all was lost; he made only a show and pretense to desire to compound,
but really resolved and declared against it, and derided and scorned all those
who submitted to it. All which was besides many others.

1. No fit language or behavior to demand a Composition with.

2. A breach of the Peace within the Parliaments quarters.

3. An incensing of the People to rebel, and adhere to the enemy.

4. The highest prejudice to the Parliaments quarters a prisoner could do,
though he knew by his Articles he was not to prejudice the same, and had given
security to that end.

5. Diverse of the same Acts have been made treasonable by Ordinance of
Parliament.

6. If any innocent person had presumed on half so much it had been his ruin,

VI. The said Sir John Stawell refused to acknowledge himself a Delinquent, and
thereby wilfully refused his Composition.

1. It was the command of the Parliament, and the Commissioners for compounding
could not justify composition on any other terms.

2. The House of Lords being part of the Parliament, had not then confirmed his
Articles.

3 The Parliament had considerately designed that all Delinquency should rema
in of Record, that both in the disposing of Offices of trust and power, and
other future Acts relating to the Commonwealth, they might the more readily
guide themselves.

4. A dishonor might have been aspersed upon them, that it had been
Latrocinium, and not Bellum, a robbery, and no just War, if together with the
penalties, a confession or trial of the offense had not likewise appeared.

5. Both Commissioners and Sequestrators might have been otherwise liable to
future actions and suits from the said Sir John Stawell and his heirs.

6. The Parliament had appointed other Courts, as namely the Commissioners of
Appeals, and those of the Common Law for relief of persons sequestered, being
not Delinquents, which were open unto him for trial, if he would stand on that
point; but by standing on it with the Commissioners for compounding, it is clear
heousted them of jurisdiction to meddle with him.

7. His refusal was not out of error or mistake, but advisedly, and
obstinately, and after he was told of it.

8. Both before, and at time of making his Articles, it was known that by the
usual course of submitting to composition; the first point was acknowledgement
of Delinquency, and therefore if the said Sir John Stawell had not liked it, he
might have chosen whether he would have taken Articles without an express
dispensation of that very point.

VII. Your Petitioner says that the interest of the land in question does not
totally belong to the said Sir John Stawell, but there are diverse charges upon
it, and diverse transactions have been made touching the same to other persons,
making no pretense to Articles, who never made claim, and therefore bound by
the sale which your Petitioner ought to have liberty to examine, as well by the
Oath of the said Sir John Stawell, as other persons, and to have a Production
of the Deeds, Titles, and Evidences of the said land in Court, if there be
cause.

VIII. Your Petitioner says, that Purchasers were commanded to pay in their
second moyeties by Act of Council at White Hall, and their Estates were
thereupon confirmed by Act of Parliament called by his Highness, which is the
deepest fundamental of property can be laid, and the highest assurance the Law
can give, and ought not to be questioned.

IX. His Highness has been pleased likewise by his Oath in the Iwstrument
Government, to confirm the securing property, and to Govern therein according
to the Laws and Statutes, the benefit whereof your Petitioner does claim.

X. Your Petitioner acknowledges Laws may be repealed, Judgments reversed,
and Authorities countermanded, but humbly says, That buying and selling binds
Supreme Power it self: And that in the particular sale the full price, both of
money and blood has been received. And therefore neither God nor man can
revoke their onwn bargain and sales; and the whole Christian Religion it self
has no other foundation but a bargain and sale.

XI. Your Petitioner says, his Purchase being a reversion, he was necessitated
to drown and extinguish his old Lease, for which old Lease the said Sir John
Stawell received of this Petitioners father far more then the whole Inheritance
was worth. And your Petitioners occasions have likewise since his Purchase
compelled him to commit acts of forfeiture of his said old Lease by Feoffments,
and otherwise, and to charge the mixed interest of old and new Purchase, part
with a jointure, part in tail to an infant, part with debts, part orphans
money, part others. And upon such transacting and charging, the same has bound
himself in many penal Covenats, and Bonds, to warranty, so that if Justice be
not done to your Petitioner in maintenance of his Right, your Petitioner is
utterly destroyed and made incapable of other Indemnity or Reparation.

XII. Your Petitioner was totally ignorant of the Articles of Exceter, or any
pretense of the said Sir John Stawell to the same, and the same Sir John
Stawell might and ought to have given him notice of the same, and was earnestly
requested and solicited to give your Petitioner notice and directions of his
desires touching his intended purchase. And the said Sir John Stawell did
notwithstanding purposely and fraudulently conceal the same from your
Petitioner; which point, though your Petitioner had nothing else to say, is
unanswerable both in the laws of peace and war.

XIII. Your Petitioner says, that the said Sir John Stawell might, and ought
further to have given notice to the Trustees for sale, the Committee of
obstructions, the Terretenants of the land, who had preemption, as it is the
course, and other persons have done, though inacted to be sold, and their
claims taken away; as the said Sir John Stawel's was, but he did not; and
therefore by his own wilful defaults he lost the benefit of stopping sales,
which others in the like condition obtained.

Your Petitioner says, that the said Sir John Stawell is a subject, and the
Land in question English Land, and the said Sir John Stawell neither does nor
can claim by his Articles to be in better condition then the residue of the
Subjects of England. And they, if their Estates happen to be sold by mistake in
Parliament, or erroneus Judgment at Common Law, or their claims have been
unjustly refused, or there be a trust or title of Equity in Chancery on the
Land, whereof Purchasers have no notice, must take in lieu thereof that
expedient which the Law allows, namely, reparation in value as far as is
proper. And for the residue, damage by way of Action, which legal expedient is
made good by the said Articles, and without them he can have no benefit of the
same.

By the Act for settlement of Ireland, the Parliament declared in a far
stronger case, and though no sale were made to necessitate it; that persons
there might be transplanted from their own Estates of equal value,
notwithstanding they had been adjudged comprised within Articles.

Sir John Stawell himself has measured the same, and far worse measure to
others; for the whole Parish of Cothelstone in Somerset has been by him
miserably and totally depopulated. And not awaiting the expiring of their
Estates, he by force, fraud, and terror expelled them, their wives, children
and families to swim through their own tears to new Plantations. Here therefore
as the Law warrants, and necessity commands, so the Finger of God seems to
direct, and Justice it self to cry aloud for retaliation.

It would be a very great cruelty and injustice by not making good public
sales to sacrifice to his rage and revenge all the well-affected people of
fifteen or sixteen great Manors, who have incurred his hatred merely out of
service to the public, and have the faith and honor, both of military and
civil power engaged to protect them: which if not performed unto them, he will
in point of Estate neither give quarter to man, woman, or child, but will
totally extirpate and destroy them.

The said Sir John Stawell himself is in no such case as he pretends: For as
your Petitioner is informed, his principal place of Residence being a
magnificent seat, is purchased by his Lady for his use; and besides he has
left him unsold and purchased by his Ladies assigns, and friends, fifteen
hundred pounds per annum more. And if he has the residue of his Rents filled
up with Rents of State-Land, the money whereof is as good as his own, he has
nothing to object but that he scorns the title, and desires only to deal in
Merchandise will swim best if the ship of the Commonwealth and Government sink
together. But certainly cannot say, but as touching his poor depopulated
Tenants, whom he pulled out like snails from their only houses, to which their
lives were tied. But he is far better dealt, then he dealt with them, or
intends to deal with the residue, if ever delivered into his hands.

REASONS FOR ESTABLISHMENT OF PUBLIC SALE.
Humbly tendered, as well in behalf of the Commonwealth, as likewise of the
Purchasers of the Estate of Sir John Stawell, and all others, who upon the
Warrant and Authority of an Act of Parliament, and in service thereto have not
only engaged their Estates and money, but the price and blood of themselves
and nearest Relations.

1. TT is an absolute maxim, that no power can be of continuance unless
founded on the title of Land, and that foundation cannot be laid without credit
to sell.

2. One President of Revocation, will make the credit of the State
excommunicate, none will buy or fell with it; For once forsworn, ever forlorn.

3. This will destroy the being of Soldiery, by making all got by the sword
unseasonable; neither can the spoils and Conquests, though of the whole world,
be of use, if not vendible; but then the more victories, the poorer.

4. There is no other permanent Bar against the King of the Scots, but sales of
land; and to destroy these will reduce him.

5. If Articles may reverse sales, by the same justice ought perjury in
Witnesses, injustice in Judges, absence of Witnesses or Parties at time of
their trial, new Discoveries since, and infinite others, which principle will
make questionable, or destroy all Sales ever made or to be made, and leave the
Parliament no power at all to warrant any.

6. Reversing Sales will make the Enemy potent and formidable, and Friend poor
and despicable.

7. The Friend lost, and Enemy not got, but made more fit for dissimulation and
dangerousness, neither is there any way to assure them, but transplanting to
other lands on the Parliaments title.

8. To unfreeze an Enemy, and be stung to death, is folly, not charity.

9. Touching Grants by Act of Parliament, necessity and the Law of the Land
frees them from being avoided by any error of Fact, Law, or Equity preceding.

1. Otherwise no Enemy could or would Article, Truce or League with the
Parliament, for fear of invisible error and preincumbrance on their Acts, and
want of power to warrant them.

2. Such a principle may not only destroy all Articles in general, but does
part icularly those of Exceter: For at the beginning of the wars, all adherers
to the Parliament, were promised indemnity therein, against the Delinquent and
his party; which very Indemnity is clean contrary since by those Articles
granted the Delinquent against them; and that without any ceremony or hearing
of those innocent adherers to their friends, who had lost their lives and
estates in the service: And it cannot therefore be reason or justice to allow
the Delinquent to disannul the Act of Sale by a pre-promise of indemnity in
Articles, and not to allow those Innocents to avoid his Act of Articles by
those pre-promises of indemnity to them at the beginning of the wars.

3. All Acts of indemnity to their own Soldiery might be avoided, by
admitting Reviews for error or equity preceding.

4. All ancient Parliament laws, and Magna Charta it self may be avoided on
that ground.

5. As to Estates and Titles, if an Act of Parliament shall not be a Non ultra
of Controversies, the liberty of the people is destroyed; and there is no
Freehold in England, but all Tenants at will.

6. It is in vain in the regulation of the Law, to free inferior transactions
from secret pre-incumbrances, if the Supreme are liable to the same, or worse.

10. It is unjust if Acts of Sale should be binding to innocents, and not to
Delinquents: what a shame would it be if our Laws should be cords to one, and
cob-webs to the other?

11. It is unjust to prefer a pure promise before property; For Rem Domino vel
non Domino vendente duobus; In jure est potior traditione prior.

12. Quod fieri non debet factum valet. If an Inheretrix happen to be married,
or Inheritance sold, though contrary to Articles; it is not lawful to perform
those Articles by committing adultery or robbery, for that were to do evil that
good might com thereby: But there is an honorable and just way left to perform
them, which is restitution in value, and may be more honorable too then
specie, for value may be sevenfold if Parties please; But specie can be but
single.

13. It is a known Rule, if Covenants happen by matter ex post facto to be
either impossible in themselves, injust as to third persons, contrary to the
Laws, or inconsistent with public safety. It is unlawful to perform them
otherwise then in value.

14. No supreme power ought to repeal their own Bargains and Sales, though they
may their laws, for Regum Contractus non sunt leges.

15. By the very words of the Articles of Exceter, a Delinquent neither does
nor can claim to be in better condition then the residue of the subjects of
England. And they if their Estates happen to be sold by command of authority,
either by a mistake in Parliament, or erroneous judgment at Common Law; or if
they have a Title to a Trust or Equity in Chancery, whereof Purchasers have no
notice, they must lose it, and be content with such recompense in value as the
Law allows; what an abomination would it be if two measures of justice should
be kept, a greater for the Enemy, and a smaller for the Subject.

16. The Case in point is resolved and practiced to the subjects of Ireland,
yet have they as good Articles as those of Exceter, as appears by the Act for
settling Ireland, dated 12 August. 1652. in the tenth Article and last Proviso;
for it is expressly enacted, That they may be transplanted from their own
Estates to remote Estate of like value, notwithstanding they have been adjudged
comprised within Articles.

17. Purchasers for the most part are undone, and incapable of Indemnity,
Tenants having drowned and forfeited their Estates, Widows, Wives, Orphants,
and Fatherless having yielded up their portions; and the estate passed from
hand to hand, to so many manner of conveyances, uses, trusts and crose
Covenants, as is impossible to reconcile or accommodate with any value; whereas
the estate of the Delinquent is only the interest of a single person, who can
allege no reason why to avoid all these inconveniences, he should not accept
an estate equal or better then his own in value; But only that he scorns to
take land on the Title, either of Parliament or Army.

18. Touching Honor, it will reflect deeply on the Honor of the Parliament,
to retract their own Sales; on the Honor of the Protector, himself being so
eminently named, and made a party to the Act of Sale; on the Honor of the
army, the people esteeming public Sales to be the military Market, and
planting of the Sphere, where by the Laws of Nations all ought to have security
and protection in dealing, and the rights of buying and selling to be observed
inviolable. And the Honor of God not to justify Delinquents to destroy
Innocents.

By all which it is hoped it will appear to all just and intelligent persons,
that to reverse public Sales of Delinquents Lands, made by Act of Parliament
upon Articles or any cause preceding, whereof Purchasers had no notice, is
contrary to wisdom, Justice, Honor, and the Laws of God and man.

Reasons why the Purchasers of Sir John Stawels Estate, desire the late Vote
concerning the confirmation of the Purchases may be enacted.
1. A Great noise of terror is spread amongst the People by the proceeding of
the Committee of Articles; and men still remain fearful to bring in their money
to the State, unless satisfied with an Act.

2. The presumption of the Committee of Articles in those proceedings against
the Resolution of the late Parliament, was grounded merely on this, That the
same was a Vote, and not an Act.

3. In the Intervals of Parliaments, on the same grounds men of impudent
spirits will slight a Vote not enacted.

4. It is usual and equal for Sellers to do Acts of further assurance.

5. The Purchasers are menaced and threatened they shall not hold quiet long
what they have purchased.

6. They shall not be able to sell off their Purchases to others, but with
great loss.

7. An Act leaves Purchasers in no other condition as against the State, then
they were before, but only is to secure them against Sir John Stawel.

8. Many Acts of Parliament have been confirmed again by Parliament, though
sufficiently valid before, and particularly Magna Charta, though unquestionable
in it self, has been confirmed above thirty several times.

Thursday the thirteenth of October, 1653.
An Act for confirmation of the Sale of the Lands and Estate of Sir John
Stawell Knight of the Bath.
BE it Enacted and declared by Authority of Parliament, That all Sales made of
any Estate, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods or Chattels of Sir John
Stawell Knight of the Bath, by virtue or appointment of any Act or Acts of
Parliament, are hereby confirmed and established: And accordingly all
purchasers and buyers of the same, shall and may have, hold, and quietly enjoy
the same to them, their Heirs and Assigns, according to their respective
interest and estates purchased or bought, and according to the Rules,
Conditions, and Limitations prescribed in the said Acts, any Law or Judgment
to the contrary notwithstanding:

Hen. Scobell, Clerk Parl.

FINIS.

