God's King the People's Blessing. A SERMON Preached on the Day of THANKSGIVING
FOR PEACE, At St. Ann's Church in Dungannon, In the Diocese of ARMAGH. By EDM.
ARWAKER, Rector of Drumglass, and Chaplain to his Grace the DUKE of ORMOND.

DUBLIN: Printed by Joseph Ray, and are to be Sold at his Shop in Skinner-Row,
over against the Tholsel. M DC XC VIII.

To His GRACE MICHAEL Lord Archbishop of Armagh, Primate and Metropolitan of
all Ireland.
MY LORD,
I Can make no Apology to the Public, for sending this Discourse abroad; nor
to Your Grace, for its appearing under Your Patronage; but that I believe the
Occasion of it sufficiently Agreeable and Satisfactory to Both, to gain Your
Approbation of the Design: For the Sincerity whereof, I am induced to hope You
will Accept the Performance, and Pardon its Imperfections.

It Is true, His Majesty has done so Great Things for our Nations, that He needs
not the Help of any Weak Endeavors to Support His Interest, or Endear His
Person and Government to their Inhabitants; Yet since He who was above all
Praise of Men, did vouchsafe to Accept it from the Mouth of Babes and
Sucklings, to still the Enemy and Avenger; Why may not as mean an Orator prove
Serviceable to put to silence the Ignorance of Foolish Men, who have said of
our Sovereign, as those in the Parable, of their King, We will not have this
Man to Reign over us?

The Hope of such Good Success, and some little Good Liking that my Hearers
discovered to this Sermon, after its Delivery from the Pulpit, encouraged me to
venture it to the Press: And that Presumption drew me into a Greater, to
shelter it under Your Graces Name.

But, Since Men that fly to Altars for Sanctuary, ought to bring Offerings
thither with them; I humbly beg leave to Assure Your Grace, That in this
Dedication, I aim no less at an Acknowledgment for Your past Favor, in
Collating me to a Considerable Benefice, than at Your Future Countenance and
Encouragement.

And I esteem my self under the Greater Obligation to Your Goodness, that
notwithstanding Your Grace's Extraordinary Care to provide an Able and
Deserving Clergy for Your Diocese, You have however Admitted me into that
Learned and Reverend Society; my Unworthiness of which, makes me seem to my
self like Saul among the Prophets.

Might I be Improved by the Advantage of such Excellent Conversation, to
Prophecy to the Edifying of the People whom I have in Charge, I should be
Happy in several respects: But in none more, than in making Your Grace, by that
means, the Best Return within my Power, for all Your Benefits; Since nothing is
so pleasing to You in Your Clergy, as the Diligent and Exact Performance of
their Duty on their Cures.

For the Continuance whereof, May Your Grace live long, to Oblige and Encourage
them to it: And as You have Honorably Born, and Faithfully Discharged, the
Highest Offices in our Church and State; So may You, when You shall be taken
from this World, Arrive at a Proportionable Degree of Glory in the Celestial
Hierarchy, to receive Above, the Reward of all the Good You bave done Below;
and particularly to,

My Lord, Your Graces most Obliged, and most Dutiful Son and Servant, EDM.
ARWAKER.

2 CHRONICLES. IX. 8. Blessed be the Lord thy God, which delighted in thee, to set
thee on his Throne, to be King for the Lord thy God: Because thy God loved
Israel to Establish them for ever, therefore made he thee King over them, to do
Judgment and Justice.
SO Great, so Valuable is the Blessing which we this Day Celebrate, even the
Blessing of Peace in all our Lands, Psalm. 29. 10. So long has it been Wanted
and Desired, so Earnestly has it been Pursued and Sought, Psalm. 34. 14. And at
last so happily Obtained and Settled, that we can never sufficiently Adore the
Goodness of our God, the Author, nor enough Applaud the Gonduct of our King,
the Instrument of its Joyful Restoration.

But though our Gratitude cannot reach the Inaccessible Height of this
Obligation, yet should we fail in our Just Endeavors to Acknowledge it, the
Queen of the South would rise up in Judgment with us, and condemn us, Mat. 12.
42. For she was drawn from the uttermost parts of the Earth, to hear the Wisdom
of Solomon, and to admire the great and wonderful Effects of it, not only in
his Proverbs and Answers, but in the Grandeur and Magnificence of his Court,
and in the Plenty and Tranquillity of his Kingdom, 1 King. 10. 4, 5. And behold!
through the tender Mercy of our God, if not a Greater, yet one little less than
Solomon is among us; a Prince by whose Excellent Management our Circumstances
are brought to resemble Isreal's, in his Days, when every man dwelt safely under
his Vine, and under his Fig Tree, from Dan even to Beersheba, 1 King. 4. 15.

Since then our King, like Solomon, has Peace on all sides round about him, 1
King. 4. 24. Since the Lord has given him Rest and Safety from the Fatigues and
Dangers of a Tedious War; and since we, not only in our Just Concern for Him,
but through His Care of us, partake of this Inestimable Benefit; so that there
is neither Adversary, nor Evil Occurrent, 1 King. 5. 4. No Complaining in our
Streets, Psalm. 144. 14. but the Voice of Joy and Gladness: If the People are
happy, who are in such a case; if they are blessed who have the Lord for their
God, to Establish their Felicity, by giving them so Excellent a Prince; We
ought certainly to be Sensible of our Happiness, and Grateful for it.

And how can we better render, either to Caesar the things that are Caesar's,
or to God the things that are Gods? Mat. 22. 21. How more suitably extol the
Merits of our King, or the Goodness of the King of Kings in giving him to us,
than in the Queen of Sheba's Congratulatory Complement to Solomon, when she
found how much the Fame she had heard, was inferior to the Truth of his Acts,
and of his Wisdom, 2 Chronicles. 9. 5, 6. Blessed be the Lord thy God? etc.

Which Words afford three things to our Observation.

First, The certain Evidence of God's Favor and Affection to his People, in
placing a Good King over them: Because thy God loved Israel, to Establish them
for ever, therefore made he thee King over them.

Secondly, The Excellent Qualifications of the Prince whom God makes choice of
to convey Blessings to his People; implied in these words, Which delighted in
thee, to set thee on his Throne, to be King for the Lord thy God.

Thirdly, The Grateful Acknowledgements due from Gods People, both to God and
the King; for the Unspeakable Benefits of the One's Care and Kindness, in the
Extraordinary Advantages of the Other's Government; which oblige them to say,
Blessed be the Lord thy God.

That God's Placing a Good King over his People, is a certain Evidence of his
Favor toward them. The Blessing of leading a quiet and peaceable Life in all
Godliness and Honesty, is by St. Paul ascribed to the Just Administration of
the Regal Power; wherefore he exhorts that Prayers, Intercessions, and giving
of Thanks, be made for Kings, and all that are in Authority, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2.
that they may be Good, in order to make their Subjects Happy. And indeed, the
General Welfare of a Nation depends so much upon the Temper of its Governors,
that God declares he gave Israel a King in his Anger, when he placed Saul on
the Throne, Hos. 13. 11. And he threatens it as a Punishment for their not
fearing him, that they should be deprived of the Benefits they enjoyed under
the happy Influence of their better Princes; and say, We have no Kings, Hos.
10. 3. And the severity of this Curse will appear from the Observation, That
when there was no King in Israel, every one did that which was right in his own
Eyes, Judge. 17. 6. And what is to be expected but Confusion in that State,
where every distempered Humor is the Rule for disordered Actions? Where there
is no Superior Power to control the Unruly Wills of Men, swayed by their
Lusts and Passions?

But the Advantages of a Good King are not so well discovered from the
Inconveniences of having No King, as from the Miseries which a People suffers
under an Evil King.

When Israel had desired a King, and the Prophet thus described the manner of
the King that should Reign over them; That he would take their Sons and appoint
them for himself, for his Chariots, and to be his Horsemen, and some should run
before his Chariots; And that he would appoint him Captains over Thousands, and
Captains over Fifties, and set them to Ear his Ground, and to Reap his Harvest,
and to make his Instruments of War, and Instruments of his Chariots: And that
he would make their Daughters to be Confectionaries, and Cooks, and Bakers: And
that he would, with an Arbitrary Injustice, take their Fields, and their
Vineyards, and their Olive-yards, and dispose of them to his Servants: And that
he would take their Menservants, and their goodliest young Men, and their
Asses, and put them to his work; nay, and make themselves his Servants, 1 Samuel
8. 11. to 18. Would they not have Reason to cry out in that day, because of
such a King; and conclude that instead of a Nursing Father, Isa. 49. 23. God
had given them a Devouring Lion?

Nor would they be Sufferers only from the Tyranny and Injustice of their King;
his Imprudence, Intemperance, Irresolution, or Impiety, would be as injurious
to them.

Solomon denounces a Woe to that Land whose King is a Child, Eccles. 10. 6. That
is, Not so much in Years, as in Understanding; whose Ignorance how to Govern,
destroys his People by Maladministration: For even a Child, in respect of
years, if Wise, is better than an Old and Foolish King, that will not be
admonished, Eccles. 4. 13. That being grown old and hardened in his Folly, is
Irreclaimable by Reproof, and past all Hope and Expectation of Amendment by
Advice.

How miserable must a People be under such a Governor, who, though ignorant how
to Rule them, will not however be Advised, but is obstinately wedded to his own
Opinion, and rejects that Safety which is in the multitude of Counselors?
Prove. 11. 14. Thus, Not the green Years, but Imprudence of Rehoboam, in making
him slight the Counsel of those Old Men that stood before Solomon his Father,
and prefer the Advice of others, whose want of Judgment and Experience rendered
them unfit to be consulted; made Israel cast off his Government, and Rebel
against the House of David, 1 King. 12. 8. and 19. And he justly deserved the
Ignominious Character which the Son of Sirach gives him, That he was the
Foolishness of the People, and one that had no Understanding; since he turned
away the People through his giddy and inconsiderate Counsel, Ecclus. 47. 23.
Which sufficiently declares God's severe Displeasure against Judah and
Jerusalem, when he threatens that he will take away from them the Prudent, the
Ancient, and the Counselor, and give Children to be their Princes, and Babes
to Rule over them, Isa. 3. 2, 3, 4. For the consequence will be Oppression,
Rapine, Ruin and Destruction, Verse. 5, 8. And how sad and calamitous must the
condition of a People be, when their Domestic Jars weaken and expose them to
Foreign Outrage and Insults? How easily shall they be Overcome and made a Prey,
when the same want of Prudence in their Ruler, which hindered him from keeping
them in Peace, will not let him with good Advice make War? Prove. 20. 18.

Nor is a People in more danger from the Imprudence, than from the Intemperance
of a Prince, whether in respect of Excess as to Meat and Drink, or Immoderation
in other Appetites. Misfortune attends that Land, whose Princes eat in a
Morning, for Drunkenness and not for Strength, Eccles. 10. 16, 17. For when
Kings drink Wine, and Princes strong Drink, they forget the Law, and pervert
the Judgment of the Afflicted, Prove. 31. 4, 5. They incapacitate themselves to
Govern by Law or Reason, and so cloud their Understanding, that it cannot
discern what is Just and Equitable. And when Reason is so weakened, Passion will
quickly be predominant; and then as he that cannot rule his Spirit, will be as
a City that is broken down, and without Walls, Prove. 25. 28. So he will break
down all the Fences of Law and Justice, of Clemency and Moderation, and will
run into all the Violence and Outrage, to which his Ungoverned and Misguided
Will inclines him; will be like a Lion in his House, and Frantic among his
Servants, Ecclus. 4. 30. And as when his Belly is his God, Phil. 3. 19. he will
sacrifice the Revenues of his Kingdom to his Appetite; so when his Will is his
Law, he will subject the Liberties and Properties of his People to its
Determinations.

But neither Imprudence nor Intemperance make a Prince more pernicious to his
People than Irresolution and want of Courage, without which they cannot long
continue in Peace, nor shall be Victorious in War. He whose strength is so
small, that he faints in the day of Adversity, Prove. 24. 10. and turns himself
back in the day of Battle, Psalm. 78. 9. leaves his Realms Defenseless, and his
People without Protection. He that has not Courage enough to do Valiantly, and
to play the Man for his People, and the Cities of his God, 2 Samuel 10. 12. will
leave them like Sheep without a Shepherd, 2 Chronicles. 18. 16. to glut the Sword
and Fury of their Enemies, to be spoiled and slaughtered by them. For when he
that should lead them on, is the first whose Heart faints, and seeks for Safety
rather in Flight than Forwardness, how shall they but follow his Example, and
turn their Backs to the Smiters? Isa. 50. 6.

Courage is so necessary a Qualification for a King, for the Defense and Safety
of his Subjects, that we find whenever God raised up a Deliverer for his
People, he inspired him with an extraordinary Valor, Taught his hand to war,
and his fingers to fight, Psalm. 144. 1. The time would fail me to tell of
Gideon, and of Barak, of Sampson and of Jephthah, who through Faith were endued
with that Courage by which they subdued Kingdoms, escaped the edge of the
Sword, waxed valiant in Fight, and turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens,
Heb. 11. 32, 33, 34. And the People of Israel were so sensible of the evil
consequences of wanting a King to go out before them, and fight their Battles,
1 Samuel 8. 20. that they still persisted to desire one for that reason,
notwithstanding all the Inconveniences of it, represented to them by Samuel,
to divert them from that Request.

And though Saul proved as great a Scourge to Israel, as the Prophet had
foretold he would, yet since from the Blood of the Slain, and from the Fat of
the Mighty, the Sword of Saul returned not empty; David reckoned it as just a
reason for the Daughters of Israel to weep over him, as his Clothing them in
Scarlet, and putting Ornaments of Gold on their Apparel; and he knew that the
occasion of their Sorrow would make the Daughters of the Philistines rejoice
and triumph, to find the Mighty fallen, by whom Israel stood, and the Shield of
Saul, which was his Peoples Shelter, vilely cast away, 2 Samuel 1. 19. to the
end. But the Weapons of War were not wholly perished, while David yet survived,
and succeeded in the Kingdom; since it is part of his Character, That he played
with Lions as with Kids, and with Bears as it had been Lambs; that he slew a
Giant when he was yet but young, and took away the reproach from the People,
whn he lifted up his hand with the Stone in the Sling, and beat down the
boasting of Goliath, Ecclus. 47. 2, 3. So great a Man of War he was, so mighty
valiant, that he could as well put to flight the Enemies that Invaded Israel,
as the Evil Spirit that disturbed Saul; and compose the Troubles in the heart
of his Country, as the Disquiets in the Breast of his King, 1 Samuel 16. 18, 23.

But the Safety and Honor which his Country found in the great Effects of his
Invincible Courage, was afterward often lost and laid in the dust, by the want
of that Virtue in many of his Successors: Which may suffice to show how fatal
this Defect in a Prince is to his People.

But in no Miscarriage of the King, is the Misfortune of his People so great,
as in his Impiety and Disregard of God; for besides the Grievances of his Evil
Reign, and the Mischiefs they suffer from himself; the Wickedness of a King
brings Afflictions from Heaven upon his People, in that his Example generally
prevails with them to deserve them.

Thus when Rehoboam forsook the Law of the Lord, all Israel did so with him, 2 Chronicles. 12. 1. And though at the Preaching of Shemaiah, they Repented, and were
delivered from Destruction, yet were they not exempt from Spoil; For Shishak
King of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, and took away the Treasures of the
Lord's House, as well as of the King's, Verse. 9. and the People were made his
Servants, that they might know Gods Service better, Verse. 8.

Thus Ahab's Wickedness provoked God to shut up the Windows of Heaven, 1 King.
17. 1. and to withold from Israel the common Mercies of Dew and Rain, which
he usually bestows alike on the Just and Unjust, Mat. 5. 45. so that there was
a sore Famine in Samaria, 1 King. 18. 2. and the People wanted their daily
Bread, because their King had forsaken Him, who alone fills all things living
with Plenteousness, Psalm. 145. 16.

Thus Jehoram's working that which was Evil in the Eyes of the Lord, caused the
Revolt of the Edomites and Libnah, not only from under his hand, but the hand
of Judah: And it is assigned for the reason of this Defection, Because he had
forsaken the Lord God of his Fathers. For which Impiety of his, his People are
threatened with a Plague, 2 Chronicles. 21. 10, 14. To die an Untimely Death, for the
Irregularities of his Life.

Thus Ahaz's wicked Reign exposed his People as well as himself, to the hand of
the King of Syria, who not only smote him, but carried away a great multitude
of his Subjects Captives to Damascus, 2 Chronicles. 28. 5. And afterward he was
delivered into the hands of the King of Israel, who smote him with a great
slaughter, so that there were slain in Judah in one day 120000, which were all
valiant Men; and the Israelites carried away captives to Samaria 200000 Women,
Sons, and Daughters, with much Spoil, Verse. 6, 8. And as if this had not been
enough, the Philistines also invaded, and took no less than six of the Cities
of Judah, whom the Lord brought low because of Ahaz; for he made Judah Naked,
and transgressed sore against the Lord, V. 18, 19.

Since then the Sin of an Evil King is often the Reproach and Ruin of his
People, Prove. 14. 34. How great a Blessing is a good King to his Subjects,
because he not only frees them from this Misfortune, but is Instrumental to
procure and promote their Happiness? Which occasioned that saying of the
Psalmist, of such a one, Thou have set him to be Blessings for ever, Psalm. 21.
6. for so it is in the Original; signifying that a Good King is the means of
conveying many Blessings to his People. And this Truth has been proved by a
Cloud of Witnesses, Heb. 12. 1. How did Judah enjoy the Benefit of Asa's Piety?
The first ten years of his Reign the Land was quiet, 2 Chronicles. 14. 1. and he had
no War, because the Lord had given him rest, Verse. 6. so that the People built
and prospered, Verse. 7. And when Zerah the Ethiopian came to disturb their
Peace, he did it to the Ruin of his own, Verse. 9. for the Men of Judah
overthrew and spoiled him, Verse. 13. and had no War unto the five and thirtieth
year of the Reign of Asa, Chap. 15. 19. This Tranquillity his People had,
because he did that which was good and right in the Eyes of the Lord his God, 2 Chronicles. 14. 2. And they, after his Example, had entered into a Covenant to seek
the Lord God of their Fathers; which as they had sworn with all their heart,
they performed with their whole desire. Chap. 15. 15. And Jehoshaphat
succeeding to his Father's Piety, as well as to his Throne, continues his
Peoples happiness. The Kingdom was not only stablished in his hand, so that he
had Riches and Honor in abundance, 2 Chronicles. 17. 5. but the fear of the Lord
fell upon all the Kingdoms of the Lands that were round about Judah, so that
they made no War against Jehosaphat, Verse. 10.

And when afterward the Children of Moab and Ammon came against him to Battle,
they were destroyed; but his People returned to Jerusalem with Joy; and his
Realm was quiet, because the Lord had given him rest, 2 Chronicles. 20. 30. So
certain it is, that when a Man's Ways please the Lord, he makes even his
Enemies to be at Peace with him, Prove. 16. 7.

For this are Good Kings called, The Breath of their Peoples Nostrils, Lam. 4.
20. who live Safe under their Shadow, and enjoy Peace and Prosperity by their
means. And since it is by God that Kings Reign, Prove. 8. 15. it must needs be
an Evidence of his signal Favor to that People over whom he places a Good
King, whose Excellent Qualifications establish their Felicity, and whose Great
Example teaches them the Practice of that Righteousness which exalts a Nation,
Prove. 14. 34.

Since then Solomon had not only brought Plenty to his People, in making Silver
as common at Jerusalem as the Stones, 1 King. 10. 27. but Peace and Splendour
too; the Queen of Sheba might very reasonable conclude, that, Because God loved
Israel, to Establish them for ever, therefore he made him King over them. And
as his love to Israel made him bless them with so Good a King; so his taking a
delight in Solomon, induced him to make Choice of him, to set him upon his
Throne, to be King for the Lord his God; since he found in him those
Excellencies and Perfections which endear a King to God, and render him a
Blessing to his People. For the Virtues of Justice, Prudence, Temperance,
Fortitude and Piety, (the want of which in a King, I have already shown to be
of pernicious consequence to his Subjects) were so signally Eminent in Solomon,
that his People could not desire a more Accomplished Sovereign to complete
their Happiness: Justice, which is a constant and perpetual Will to render
every Man his Right, or rather a habit of so doing upon all occasions, was the
Rule of all Solomon's Administrations. This was Judah's and Israel's Security
in the Possession of their Rights and Properties, and gave every Man a safe
Enjoyment of his own Vine, and his own Figtree, all the Days of that Righteous
King. And this could not but be well-pleasing to God, as giving Man a near
Resemblance of himself, who is Righteous in all his Ways, Psalm. 145. 17. And
being advantageous to his People, in keeping them from Injuries and Oppression,
and securing them in the Possession of those Acquists to which they had just
Right and Title. Thus, A Divine Sentence is in the Lips of the King, when his
Mouth transgresses not in Judgment, Prove. 16. 10. and by it he establishes
the Land, Prove. 29. 4.

But to do Impartial Justice, requires a Solid Prudence; which being a True
Habit of Acting with Reason, in respect of those things that concern the well
or ill being of Men, must therefore be a Requisite Qualification for Kings, on
whose Management the Happiness or Misery of their Realms must necessarily
depend.

The Consideration of this, prevailed with Solomon, when God left it to his
Option to ask what he should give him, to desire an Understanding Heart to
judge his People, that he might discern between Good and Bad, 1 King. 3. 9.
Which Choice, was an Argument that he was in great measure endued already with
what he so judiciously desired: And God was so well pleased with his Petition,
that he not only gave him what he asked, but an Overplus of Riches and Honor,
Verse. 13.

Now how signal his Prudence was, and how great the Benefits thereof, appears
from his Celebrated Decision between the Harlots, who contended for the living
Child, ver. 27. Which proves it as much the Happiness of a People, as the
Honor of a King, that he should be able to search out a matter, by so nice a
Scrutiny, Pro. 25. 2. And since the Wisdom of God was in him to do Judgment, 1.
King. 3. 28. it must needs please him to see the Stream retain the Pureness of
its Fountain, and he would Love him for this, as much as all Israel Feared him.
Nor did Solomon permit his Justice to be perverted, or his Prudence baffled, by
any manner of Intemperance, but as those Virtues were his Peoples Safeguard
against Injuries and Outrages from one another, so his Temperance was their
Defense against all Oppressions and Severity from himself. But, when magnified
in the noblest part and demonstration of it, Clemency; it freed them from the
Just Punishments they had deserved, and provoked him to inflict on them, by
their Crimes.

This was evident in his dealing with Adonijah, whom though he had set up a Title
to the Crown, he pardoned; and assured that if he would show himself a worthy
man, there should not an hair of his Head fall to the earth, 1 King. 1. 52.

Nor was it less visible in his proceedings with Abiathar, who promoted the
Usurpation; for though the King declared him worthy of Death, yet he contented
himself with deposing him from the Priesthood, and confining him to his House
at Anathoth, 1 King. 2. 26. Thus by his slowness to Anger, did he render
himself better than by all his Might; and greater in Ruling his Spirit, than in
the Government of Judah and Israel, Pro. 16. 32. and as it was his Glory, so it
proved his Peoples Safety; and God, who his is slow to Anger and of great
Goodness, could not but be delighted with Qualities so resembling his own, and
choose him for the Representative of his Power, as fittest to Rule Others, who
had so great a Government over Himself.

But if Judah and Israel were thus obliged to their King for their Domestic
Ease and Enjoyments, they were no less indebted to him for their Protection
from Foreign Ravages and Incursions,

Fortitude, which is a Mediocrity between Fear and Confidence, was so eminent
in Solomon, that it left him no Famous Opportunities of exerting it, more than
in the Methods which took the occasion from him. It led him to strengthen
himself with all the necessary Provisions of War; at Land, with a powerful
Army, 2 Chronicles. 1. 14. By Sea, with a sufficient Fleet, 1 King. 9. 26. Which
supplied him with Gold from Ophir, to support the charge of both, ver. 28.

So that he kept his People in Peace Forty Years, a Blessing which needs no
other recommendation than the Terrors and Calamities of War.

Their young men were not slain with the Sword, nor their Cities wasted; there
was no desolation in their Fields, nor complaining in their Streets; but Judah
and Israel were many, as the sand which is by the Sea in multitude, eating and
drinking, and making merry; 2. King. 4. 20. There was no one durst attempt to
disturb or trouble them, but their Tranquillity was firm and unshaken as the
Resolution of their King; who could not have manifested his Fortitude so much
in subduing Enemies, as he did in preventing his having Enemies to subdue; and
keeping his People in so perfect a Peace, that it was preferable to the
greatest Victories. And as God, who was always loving to Israel, and desirous
of their Establishment, had reason to be delighted with that Courage, which so
highly contributed to it; and to place the Owner of it on his Throne, to be
King for the Lord his God; so he found in Solomon another Virtue, which crowned
the rest, and rendered them more Amiable and Advantageous; and that was Piety,
or the Love and Fear of God. I shall not trouble you with many Instances of
this, but let one suffice for all, I mean that Everlasting Monument thereof,
the Temple at Jerusalem. Which Work, as it received Gods Extraordinary
Approbation, when it was finished, 1 Chronicles. 7. 1, 2, 3. So it remains upon
Record, in sacred Writ, as an Evidence of its Founders Zeal and Reverence for
his Worship, Acts 7. 47.

And since the concurrence of these Virtues in a King, tend to Complete and
Establish the Prosperity of his People; it is unquestionably certain, that God,
by giving any Nation a Prince in whom they are Eminently Visible and United,
does thereby give the most convincing Evidence of his Favor and Affection
toward them, and of his being highly delighted in the Person who is so much
after his own Heart, 1 Samuel 13. 14. So qualified to be his Vicegerent. And this
certainly requires the most Extensive Gratitude and Acknowledgments of that
People, for whom God makes such a happy Choice, in admiring his Goodness which
designed, and applauding their Sovereigns Excellencies, which concur with it,
to effect their Establishment and Security: That having a King like Solomon,
they should say as much to him, as the Queen of Sheba to that Great and
Glorious Monarch, Blessed be the Lord thy God, etc.

And if ever People had reason to Adress their God, or their King, on such an
account, and in such a style; We certainly of Great Britain and Ireland, lie
under as great, and as many Obligations to Both.

For our Almighty Sovereign Above, has blessed us with a King Below, sufficiently
furnished and enriched with all those Virtues that are requisite to make us as
happy a People as we can propose to be in the largest extent of our own Wishes.

So Just he has proved in the Administration of his Government, that he has not
only eschew'd the Evil of incroaching on our Liberties and Properties, but he
has done the Good of Securing us in those Rights of Englishmen, with which all
who are truly such, should as obstinately refuse to part, as Naboth with his
Vineyard, since we have the same reason to alledg, That they are the
Inheritance of our Fathers, 1 King. 21. 3. But so careful our Sovereign has
been to oppose the Fence of our Ancient Laws and Privileges against all
Encroachments from Himself as well as Others, that nothing has been laid upon
us in all his Reign, to which we have not first consented by our
Representatives. Nor could we fear he should offer any Violence to our Laws,
who came to us on purpose to Maintain them, when he saw an Arbitrary Power
ready to throw down that hedge, and lay us open to its Devastations.

This quick and happy foresight of the Storm that then was gathering, and ready
to discharge its fury on us; to Crush us with the weight of Lawless Power, and
Poison us with the Venom of Popish Principles; and the Timely as well as Happy
Prevention of those Calamities, have sufficiently magnified his Prudence; so
that whether we consider him on the Throne, swaying the Regal Scepter, or in
the Camp, weilding the Martial Sword, we must confess he has guided us by the
Skillfulness of his Hands, Ps. 78. 72.

And as his Wisdom has made us Safe, so his Great Temperance and Moderation
(Sufficiently known to all men, Phil. 45. even to his greatest Enemies) has
rendered us Easy too, under his Government: No Indulgence either to his Palate,
or his Passion, has disturbed the Evenness of his Temper.

Tho he has often been provoked to be Vindictive, by horrid Designs of
Barbarous Assassinations, yet he has shown as little Inclination to Revenge, as
Fear; and has spared to shed Their Blood, whose Thirst was Insatiable after His.

Nor should it seem strange he should be so tender of his Subjects Lives, for
whose Safety he has frequently exposed his Own; and that in the greatest
Instances of an Unparalleled Fortitude; in Doing and in Suffering things
almost incredible.

Perhaps never any King made his way so often through the Sea, even among those
who claim the Sovereignty and Dominion of it; and that not only in Calm and
Temperate Weather, when the Winds were Still, and the Ocean Smooth; but even
when Tempests Roard aloud, and the Waves Raged horribly: Nay when they were
Congealed to Rocks of Ice, by the Coldness of the Climate and the Season.

Yet as he engaged in these Difficulties, with an Undaunted Constancy and
Resolution, so he under went them all with an Invincible Patience, and an
Unwearied Perseverance: Though he knew he was to run these Hazards only in
pursuit of Greater, and went to expose his Life to an Host of Enemies; among
whom, there neither wanted some who had Gallantry enough to attack it Bravely
and with Vigor; nor others, whose Malice led them to attempt it Basely by
Assassination.

His Generous Courage prompted him to press with greatest Eagerness, where he
saw the most imminent Danger in his way: So that he was in Labors abundant,
and in Deaths often; in Perils in the City, and in Perils on the Sea; in
Weariness and Painfulness, in Watchings and in Cold, 2 Cor. 11. 23, 26, 27. And
all this he endured for us, and for our Establishment; to perfect which, he has
added Piety to his other Qualifications; and expressed as much Fear and Reverence
of God, as Slight and Contempt of Dangers. His Precepts and Example have all
along contributed to bring Religion into Vogue and Countenance; and to make us
rather Sincere in the Practice, than Noisy in the Profession of it; that we
might reap the Fruit of Righteousness, dwell in a Peaceable Habitation, and in
quiet Resting Places, Isa. 32. 17, 18. And that he might as happily Complete,
as he gloriously Undertook the Restoration of our Peace.

And this, Thanks be to the God of Peace, he has Accomplished, and Settled
upon such a Foundation as may by the Blessing of the same Power, prove a firm
and lasting Tranquillity to Europe.

And now since War is ceased in most part of the World, Psalm. 46. 9. so that
Nation does not lift up a Sword against Nation, but instead of Military
Discipline, make Agriculture their Employment, break their Swords into
Plowshares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks, Mic. 4. 3. Will not this tend
to Wealth and Plenty? Shall not our Pastures be clothed with Flocks, our
Valleys covered with Corn? And while we eat in safety the Fruits of our
Labors, shall we not shout for joy, and sing? Psalm. 65. 13. And what Songs
will so well become us, as Songs of Praise and Thanksgiving to our God, who by
giving us so excellent a King, does build our Jerusalem, strengthen the Bars of
her Gates, bless her Children within her, make Peace within her Borders, and
fill her with the finest of the Wheat? Psalm. 147. 13, 14.

And if we desire still to see Peace within her Walls, and Plenteousness within
her Palaces, Psalm. 122. 72. let us walk in the Name of the Lord our God for
ever, Mic. 4. 5. Offer Sacrifices of sweet savor unto him, and pray for the
Life of the King, Ezra 6. 10. That he may live to Rectify Corruptions and
Abuses, effectually to Discourage Profaneness and Immorality, and employ his
Thoughts in Advancing the Happiness and Flourishing King's Speech to Parliament.
Estate of all his Kingdoms; that he may so preserve our Laws and Liberties
Entire, and leave them so to Posterity; that nothing may be left for his
Successors to do, but that which has been already done, Eccles. 2. 12. to
continue them as they find them.

And let our Gratitude to him, who next to God has been the happy Instrument of
conveying these Blessings to us, make us so quiet and peaceable under his
Government, that he may rejoice in the Pains he has taken for us, and be a
Sharer in the Benefits that accrue to us by them. And let no Factious
Malcontents be displeased with him, in whom it is Evident God Delighted, to set
him on his Throne; and whom, because he loved us, he made King over us, to
Establish us.

May it please him therefore to continue the Mercy to us, in giving our
Defender a long and prosperous Reign; that though we incessantly Commemorate with
Thanks the Blessing of this Day, we may never in our time have a Second
Occasion of Thanksgiving for the Conclusion of a General Peace. Which God, etc.

FINIS.

