THE Arraignment, Confession, AND CONDEMNATION OF Alexander Knightley; FOR THE
Horrid and Execrable Conspiracy TO Assassinate His Sacred Majesty, K. WILLIAM,
in order to a French Invasion of this Kingdom: AT THE Kings Bench Bar,
Westminster ON THE 30th of April, and the 20th and 25th of May.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Heyrick at Greys-Inn-Gate in Holbourn, and Isaac
Cleave at the Star, next to Sergeants-Inn in Chancerylane. MDCXCVI.

De Termino Pasche Anno Regni Regis Gulielmi Tertii Octavo, In Banco Regis.
Die Jovis Tricesimo Aprilis, Anno Domini 1696.
THIS day the Keeper of Newgate brought to the Bar of the Court of Kings Bench,
Alexander Knightley, by virtue of a writ of Habeas Corpus, issuing out of that
Court for that purpose, to be Arraigned upon an Indictment of High Treason
found against him at the Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, holden for the County
of Middlesex; which Indictment by Writ of Certiorari was removed into the Kings
Bench. The Return of the Habeas Corpus was delivered, and then the Prisoner was
Arraigned thus:

Clerk of Arraignment. Alexander Knightley hold up thy hand (which he did).
Thou stand Indicted by the name of Alexander Knightley, late of the Parish
of St. Paul Covent Garden in the County of Middlesex, Gent. for that you not
having the fear of God in your heart, nor weighing the duty of your Allegiance,
but being moved and seduced by the instigation of the Devil, as a false Traitor
against the most Serene, most Illustrious, and most Excellent Prince, our
Sovereign Lord William the Third, by the Grace of God of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. your supreme, true,
rightful, lawful, and undoubted Sovereign Lord, the cordial Love and true and
due Obedience, Fidelity, and Allegiance, which every Subject of our said Lord
the King that now is, toward him our said Lord the King should bear, and of
right ought to bear, withdrawing and utterly to extinguish, intending and
contriving, and with all your force purposing and designing the Government of
this Kingdom of England, under him our said Lord the King that now is, of right
duly, happily, and very well-establish'd, altogether to subvert, change, and
alter, as also the same our Lord the King to death, and final destruction to
put and bring, and his faithful Subjects, and the Freemen of this Kingdom of
England, into intolerable and most miserable slavery to Lewis the French King
to subdue and inthral, the Tenth day of February, in the seventh year of the
Reign of our said Sovereign Lord the King that now is, and diverse other days
and times, as well before as after, at the Parish of St. Paul Covent Garden,
aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, falsely, maliciously, devilishly, and
traitorously you did compass, imagine, and contrive, purpose, design, and
intend, our said Sovereign Lord the King that now is, to slay, kill, and
murder, and a miserable slaughter among the faithful Subjects of our said Lord
the King, throughout this whole Kingdom of England to make and cause; and your
said most wicked, most impious, and devilish treasons, and traitorous
compassings, contrivances and purposes aforesaid, to fulfill, perfect, and bring
to effect, you the said Alexander Knightley afterward, to wit, the same tenth
day of February, in the year abovesaid, at the Parish aforesaid, in the County
aforesaid, and diverse other days and times, as well before as after, there and
elsewhere in the same County, falsely, maliciously, advisedly, secretly,
traitorously, and with force and arms, with very many other Traitors to the
Jurors unknown, did meet, propose, treat, consult, consent, and agree, him our
said Lord the King that now is, by lying in wait and deceit, to assassinate,
kill, and murder, and that execrable, horrid, and detestable Assassination and
killing, the sooner to execute and perpetrate, afterward, to wit, the same day
and year, and diverse other days and times at the Parish aforesaid, in the
County aforesaid, traitorously you did treat, propose, and consult with those.
Traitors, of the ways, manner, and means, and the time and place, where, when,
how, and in what manner, our said Sovereign Lord the King, so by lying in wait
might be slain and killed, and that you did consent, agree, and assent with the
same Traitors, that forty Men on Horseback, or thereabouts, of whom you the
said Alexander Knightley were to be one, with Guns, Muskets, and Pistols,
charged with Gunpowder and Leaden Bullets, and with Swords, Rapiers, and other
Arms, armed, should lie in wait and be in ambush, the same our Lord the King in
his Coach being when he should go abroad to attack, and that a certain and
competent number of those Men so armed, upon the Guards of our said Lord the
King him then attending and being with him should set upon, and should fight
with them and subdue 'em, whilst others of the same Men so armed, him our said
Lord the King should assassinate, kill, slay, and murder; and you the said
Alexander Knightley, your treasons and all your traitorous intentions, designs,
and contrivances aforesaid, to execute, perform, fulfill, and bring to effect,
afterward, to wit, the aforesaid tenth day of February, in the seventh year
abovesaid, at the Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, diverse Horses, and
very many Arms, Guns, Muskets, Rapiers, and Swords, and other Weapons,
Ammunition, and Warlike things, and Military instruments, falsely, maliciously,
secretly, and traitorously, you did obtain, buy, gather together, and procure,
and to be bought, obtained, gathered together, and procured, did cause with
that intent to use, employ, and bestow them in and about the detestable,
horrid, and execrable assassination, killing, and murder, of our said Lord the
King that now is, as aforesaid, and the same premises, the more safely, and
surely to execute, ^o, and perform, you the said Alexander Knightley, with one
Edward King late for High Treason, in contriving and conspiring the death of
our said Lord the King, that now is, duly convicted and attainted, by the
consent and assent of diverse of the Traitors and Conspirators aforesaid, the
said tenth day of February in the seventh year abovesaid, traitorously did go
and come to the place proposed, where such intended assassination, killing, and
murder of our said Lord the King, by lying in wait should be done, performed,
and committed, to view, search, and observe, the convenience and fitness of the
same place for such lying in wait, assassination, and killing, there to be
made, performed, and committed, and that place so being seen, and observed,
afterward, to wit, the same Day and Year, your Observations thereof to some of
the said Traitors and Conspirators, you did relate and impart, to wit, at the
Parish aforesaid, in the County aforesaid, against the Duty of your Allegiance,
and against the Peace of our said Sovereign Lord the King, that now is, his
Crown and Dignity, and against the Form of the Statute in this Case made and
provided. How say thou, Alexander Knightly, art thou guilty of the
High Treason whereof thou stands indicted, or not guilty?


Knightley. Not guilty.


Cl. of Arr. Culprit, how will you be tried?


Knightley. By God and my Country.


Cl. of Arr. God send you a good deliverance.


Knightley. With submission to your Lordship, I did not expect in this weak
condition that I am in, to be brought at this time to the Bar; That having
taken me off extremely from the application that I should have otherwise made
of my self to my Defense; but seeing there is no Mercy to be had here, I will
endeavor to have Patience, and undergo my Fate as well as I can.


L. C. J. Holt. Mr. Knightley, you have no reason to find fault; for when I was
acquainted you were ill, and desired a Physician, I ordered one to be sent to
you; and yesterday in the Afternoon you sent word you were so sick that you
could not be brought hither to day; but your Doctor was with me last night, and
upon Discourse with him I did apprehend you were not so ill, but that,
especially considering the weather, you might very safely be brought to the Bar
to day.


Knightley. The Gentleman that brought me the Copy of the Indictment found me
very ill, and I have been ill ever since this day sevennight.


L. C. J. Holt. Well, now let us see what time we shall appoint for the Trial.


Mr. At. Genesis When your Lordship pleases to appoint.


L. C. J. Holt. I think you cannot try it till Wednesday fortnight.


Mr. Clark. That day is free, my Lord.


L. C. J. Holt. It being upon a Certiorari, the Venire facias must be
Returnable upon a common day; and there must be 15 days between the Test and
the Return.


Mr. At. Genesis May it not be Tuesday then, that the Jury appear?


L. C. J. Holt. You cannot have it before Wednesday, for that is the Return-day.


Mr. Clark. Tuesday fortnight is appointed for the Trial between Pride and the
Earl of Bath.


Mr. At. Genesis Then it must be upon Wednesday, for there must be 15 days
between the Test and the Return.


L. C. J. Holt. Well, take back your Prisoner; and bringing him here again on
Wednesday fortnight, you shall have a Rule for it.


Then the Prisoner was carried back.

Die Mercurii Vicesimo Maij, 1696. In Banco Regis.
Dominus Rex versus Knightley.
THis day being appointed for the Trial of the Prisoner, he was brought to
Westminster Hall, and the Jury were called over as soon as the Court appeared
in the Hall, and the Defaulters recorded; and about 11 of the Clock the
Prisoner was brought to the Bar.

Cl. of the Crown. Alexander Knightley, Hold up thy Hand. (Which he did) Those
good men that thou shall hear called, and personally appear, are to pass
between our Sovereign Lord the King and Thee, upon the Trial of thy Life and
Death: If therefore thou would challenge them, or any of them, thy time is to
speak unto them as they come to the Book to be sworn, before they be sworn.


L. C. J. Holt. Mr. Knightley, I perceive you have a Desire to speak something;
let us hear what you have to say.


Knightley. I humbly beg your Lordship's leave, that I may speak before the
Jury be called. What I have to say, I beg I may have your Leave to read,
because I have a bad Memory.

(Reads.) MY Lord, I hope to save the Jury and the Witnesses against me a great
deal of trouble, and design to take up very little of your Lordship's time: But
in the first place I think my self obliged to Thank your Lordship for your
great Indulgence, in granting me so much time between my Arraignment and Trial;
the greatest part of which I have employed to appear before the great Tribunal
of Heaven.

I speak in the face of the World here, That I am convinced I cannot hope to be
happy hereafter, without a just Abhorrence of, and a sincere Repentance for
that Crime for which I here stand Indicted.

And since Confession is an essential part of Repentance. I do acknowledge I
was to have been concerned in some part of the Barbarous Assassination, and was
unhappily surprised into a Consent to Act in it, though in my heart I did
abominate the Fact as much as any man living; but under some Honorable and
Fair Pretenses I was drawn in at first, and then of a sudden became so far
engaged, that by a mistaken Notion of Honor, I thought I could not retreat
without the Infamy of Cowardice.

My Lord, I humbly crave your Lordship's Permission, to acquaint you, how that
some time since I was brought before some of the Lords of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, where I do assure your Lordship I did freely own and
fully discover my being concerned in that horrid Design; and I here openly
confess the same with that Sorrow and Repentance as becomes a man of Honor and
Conscience.

My Lord, There is one Circumstance particular in my Case, I most humbly beg
leave to insist upon, and urge to your Lordship in my behalf, which is, That it
was upon my Confession (as I conceive) that Mr. Harris, now a principal
Evidence against me, was first discovered; so that my own Confession has been a
great means to take away my Life.

I expect after a few words now in this solemn Court to receive from your
Lordship the Sentence due upon the Conviction, from my own mouth, of a Crime
for which I cannot in modesty hope, so much above my Deserts, the King's most
Gracious Pardon; yet the greatness of my Offense does not rob me of all
thoughts of Mercy, whilst I throw my self absolutely and entirely at His
Majesty's Feet for it; and I humbly beg of your Lordship as a Privy Councellor,
That you would represent my unfortunate Case to their Excellencies the Lords
Justices of England, as an Object of His Majesty's Favor.

And now, my Lord, I shall not detain your Lordship and the Court any longer,
but my next words Convict and lay me under the Just Sentence of Death: So to my
Indictment I beg leave to plead Guilty, and throw my self entirely upon the
King's Mercy, and do desire my former Plea to my Indictment may be withdrawn.


Cl. of the Crown. Thou haft been Indicted and Arraigned of High Treason, in
Compassing and Imagining the Death and Destruction of the King; how say thou
Alexander Knightley, art thou Guilty of the High Treason whereof thou standst
Indicted, or Not Guilty?


Knightley. Guilty, my Lord.


Cl. of the Crown. Art thou content to withdraw thy Plea Not Guilty?


Knightley. Yes Sir.


Cl. of the Cr. Do you plead to the Indictment Guilty or Not Guilty?


Knightley. I am Guilty.


Mr. At. Genesis Then my Lord we desire, since he relinquishes his Plea of Not
Guilty, that you will Record his Confession; and since he has Confessed the
Indictment, we have nothing more to do but wait the Judgment of the Court.


L. C. J. Holt. We shall not give Judgment now.


Mr. At. Genesis If the Prisoner have any thing to say for himself, your
Lordships I suppose will hear him to it.


L. C. J. Holt. But I say we cannot by the course of the Court give Judgment
now, for after a person is Convicted here, whether by Confession or Verdict, he
ought to have four days from the time of such Confession or Verdict, to move in
Arrest of Judgment, if there be so many days of the Term remaining, if not,
then the longest time that can be had in the Term is allowed: In Staley's Case
it was otherwise practiced, Judgment was given the same day, that was in the
time of the Popish Plot, and is a Case not to be imitated, because not
justified by any President before that time or since, but it has been always
observed to have four Juridical days for moving in Arrest of Judgment, if so
many remain of the Term.


Die Lunae Vicessimo Quinto Die Maii An. Dom. 1696.
Being the last day of the Term, the Prisoner was brought from Newgate to the
Kings-Bench-Bar.

Mr. At. Genesis If your Lordship please, I desire the Judgment of the Court to
be pronounced upon Mr. Knightley upon his Conviction.


Cl. of the Crown. Alexander Knightley hold up thy hand; (which he did) thou
have been Indicted and Arraigned for High Treason in Compassing and Imagining
the Death of the King, and adhering to the Kings Enemies; what can thou say
for thy self, why Judgment should not be given against thee to dye according to
the Law?


Knightley. I have nothing more to say, my Lord, than what I have said.


Cl. of the Crown. Crier, make Proclamation for Silence. Which was done on both
sides the Court.


Crier. O Yez: Our Sovereign Lord the King straightly charges and commands all
manner of persons to keep silence while Judgment is in giving, upon pain of
Imprisonment.


L. C. J. Holt. Mr. Knightly, You are by your own Confession convicted of High
Treason in designing the Murder of the King and the Subversion of the whole
State of England, in promoting an Invasion from the French, its most ancient
and inveterate Enemies.

It has appeared before your Arraignment, not only by the Evidence that has
been given at former Trials; but even by the signs of the times and the manner
of some men's actings, that there has been for some years last past a Train of
Plots and Conspiracies against this Government, and when the various means
which the Conspirators did project among themselves for its ruin proved
ineffectual, it was at last resolved among some of the Conspirators to
assassinate the King, as the most certain way of accomplishing their end.

In which design you were deeply engaged, and was an active instrument in the
carrying it on, being sent to view the ground on both sides the Water, and with
others that were sent with you reported your opinion, which was the most
convenient place to attack the King and his Guards.

And tho you did the last time you were at the Bar, urge by way of extenuation
of your crime, that you being engaged in the Interest of the Late King, and
thereby supported, you was surprised into this barbarous design, which being
proposed to you, you thought your self obliged in Honor to engage in it; which
is so far from an extenuation, that it is an high aggravation: For Men of
honorable Principles, tho most zealously disposed to the advancement of any
particular Interest, yet always detest the use of base and vile means.
Therefore when the Assassination of the King was proposed, you had an
opportunity to have retreated with Honor, and might have refused to be further
concerned; but you rather pursued this wicked enterprise with great Zeal.

And tho you are by your Profession a Roman Catholic, and may for that reason
think that your crime is mitigated, because you acted in the behalf of a Prince
of your own Religion, which you hoped thereby to introduce. Notwithanstding all
which, your offense is highly aggravated in respect of the ingratitude and
folly with which it is attended. For there is no English Papist that is Master
of any property, but it is interested in the preservation of this Government,
to which the whole Party of them has been, and still are continually obliged
for its Moderation and Justice; for instead of being exposed to the Severity of
those Laws to which they are obnoxious, they have had the same indulgence in
the enjoyment of their Religion, and the same protection, and as much benefit
in the destribution of the Common Justice of the Realm, as any other of the
Kings Subjects; therefore none of them could ever expect to mend their
condition under a French Domination. But the contrary is foreseen by all
considering Men; For the English Papist, as well as Protestant, would have been
reduced to a most dismal stare if you had obtained your end.

For it is against all the Rules of Reason, and the Experience of all Ages, to
imagine, that the French King would spare English Papists more than
Protestants; for it is not Zeal to Religion, or Affection to the Interest of
the Late King that has excited him to invade England, but it is his Pride and
Ambition to conquer the three Kingdoms, and to reduce this to be a Province to
France: Indeed the pretense of restoring the Late King, and introducing the
Popish Religion, may serve to delude some warm and unwary Zealots to engage in
his assistance, who do not consider, that if they should be successful would be
as certainly destroyed as others, but with more disadvantage to themselves. For
after they shall have survived the Liberty of their Country, have embrued their
own hands in their Countrymens Blood, they will be at the Mercy of the
Conqueror, who can never think it his Interest to trust them, but will despise
them for being such villainous Traitors to their own Country. Nay rather, these
Englishmen, who by their courage and resolution shall endeavor to defend their
Country, tho they should be unfortunately vanquished, will meet with a much
better reception, for they will have given assurances that they may be confided
in, when the others have by such a wicked Treason given a demonstration to the
contrary.

There being then nothing to be said that can palliate such a crime as that of
which you are convicted; but you having taken a different course the last time
you were at the Bar from what you took at first, you have relinquished your
Plea of No^ Guilty, and have confessed the Indictment; I wish out of charity to
your person it was as sincere as (I think it) it was prudent in you; for after
several Convictions of others that were your Accomplices, you could not be a
stranger to the Evidence upon which they were grounded, you must therefore in
all probability have expected to have undergone the same fate. If your
Confession be a real effect of your Repentance, you will reap the advantage of
it in the next world, but what confequence it will have in this I cannot say,
For the heart of the King is in the hand of the Almighty, which as the Rivers
of Water he turns whithersoever he will. Live therefore for the time to come
in expectation of a speedy Death, and prepare your self to appear before
another Judgment Seat; to the making of which important preparation I shall
dismiss you, first discharging the Court of the Duty now incumbent upon it, in
giving that Judgment which the Law has appointed. And the Court does award,
That you be conveyed from hence to Newgate, the Prison from whence you came,
and from thence you are to be drawn upon a Hurdle to Tyburn; where you are to
be hanged by the Neck and while you are alive to be cut down, your Privy
Members are to be cut off, and your Bowels to be cut out of your Body and burnt
in your view; your head is to be cut off, and your Body is to be divided into
four parts, and your Head and your Quarters are to be disposed where his
Majesty shall appoint.

And I pray God to have mercy upon your Soul.


Knightley. My Lord, I am truly sorry for what I have done, and I humbly thank
your Lordship, and the rest of the Judges for your favor to me.


Then the Prisoner was carried back to Newgate.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT
THE Trials of Charnock, King, Keys, Sir William Parkins, Sir John Friend,
Ambrose Rookwood, Cranbourn and Lowick, for the Horrid and Execrable
Conspiracy, for Assassinating In Sacred Majesty King William, and for
encouraging a French Invasion; are all Sold by the Order of the Lord Chief
Justice Holt, for Samnuel Heyrick at Gray's Inn Gate, Holbron; and Isaac Cleave,
at Serjeants-Inn Gate, Chancery Lane.


