ARTICLES OF High CRIMES AND GRAND MISDEMEANORS Exhibited against Lt. Col. Tho.
Kelsey, governor of Dover Castle, Lately Major General of Kent and Surrey.

The which will be proved and made good against him by sufficient Witnesses.

LONDON: Printed for Livewel Chapman, at the Crown in Pope's Head Alley 1659.

Articles exhibited against Lt. Colonel Kelsey, Governor of Dover Castle.
First, Howsoever he took the Engagement ser forth by the Long Parliament,
against King and House of Lords; yet he had a great hand in the very change of
the Government from a Commonwealth to a Single Person. For, 1. He was at a
Meeting of the Officers of the Army when the Government was presented to them
in writing for their approbation; and he himself did alter something therein,
and gave his consent, professing it to be his Judgment and conscience. And
also, he persuaded many of the Little Parliament to give up their power to the
usurping Protector. 2. In the prosecution of the usurped Government by a Single
Person, he went to the Fleer at Portsmouth, December. 1653. and carried with him
the Paper of the new-intended Government in writing, with a Blank in that
Article where the name of a Protector should be inserted. Now in this he most
grossly dissembled, and abused the people: for it was known and declared before
he came there, that Oliver Cromwell then General should be the man; and yet he
carries a Blank, as if nothing had been done or intended about nominating the
Person.

Secondly, That the said Kelsey is a man disaffected to the Government of a
Commonwealth, and against the Liberty and Rights of the people, is most
apparent by his actions from time to time. For 1. When he was in the
Parliament, not only were his Votes always for a single person, but the
Succession to be Hereditary: Nothing then would serve his turn, but an absolute
Monarch, and the People all Slaves. 2. Such as did manifest any good affection
to the Commonwealth and the good old Cause, his manner was, to discourage them,
and basely to abuse them. As for instance: When the Judge in a public Sessions
of the Peace, giving the Charge to the Grand Inquest, justified the Authority
of Parliament, in opposition to a Single Person, Kelsey could not bear it, but
very much rebuked the person for speaking in the behalf of the Commonwealth.
Again, when a Member of Parliament had asserted the Peoples Liberty, and
Privileges of Parliament, against the Usurpation of a Single Person, Kelsey
was so much discontented at it, as that he sharply checked the good Man for it.

Thirdly, When he took upon him to be major General, his Actions were most
arbitrary, and unchristian like, especially toward such-who stood
well-affected to the Good Old Cause, and bore their Testimony against a Single
Person. He publicly threatened the People of GOD, in these words, That
whosoever amongst them should oppose the present Power, (though usurped) under
what pretense soever, he would sheath his sword up to the hilt in his Bowels,
though he were his Brother. And for such as did suffer for bearing their
Testimony against the late Usurper, he was not ashamed to declare that it was
just upon them, and that they suffered as evil doers. Besides, he sent
Soldiers to some honest faithful Persons to quarter upon, because they would
not pay illegal Assesments. Neither was this enough, but in a hostile manner,
from others he takes away by his soldiers their Corn, kills their sheep, and
carries away 4 or 5 l. more then they were assessed at; and from others took
the value of 30 s. for Soldiers, for a day and a nights quarter, besides
Assesments.

Fourthly, That the said Kelsey has been a great favourer and encourager of
those that aided and assisted the late King, and men disaffected to the
Commonwealth; as is most apparent by the following particulars. 1. He preferred
some to places of eminent trust, who served in Offlice in the last Insurrection
and Rebellion in Kent; one of which retaining the same spirit, says, He has a
black Book for the Roundheads. 2. He has declared, that such kind of people
as are known Enemies, are the fittest persons to be presented for Magistrates
in the Town of Dover. And in order thereunto, he by his Agents did invite such
to have their free Vote in the choice of Burgesses. Insomuch as the honest and
well affected of the town were put out of a capacity to be serviceable to the
Commonwealth in choosing to places of trust, Persons that are qualified
according to the Order of Parliament, being hindered by those so encouraged as
aforesaid. 3. When complaint was made to him of a Malignant Minister in the
Wild of Kent, although the matters against him were of high concernment, yet be
would not receive the prooss that were brought to him, by many well-affected
persons in the Wild, but in contempt and scorn put them off, saying, They were
giddy-brain'd Fellows.

Fifthly, That Kelsey has been an open Enemy to the Good Old Cause, and a
great discourager of such as stood well affected to a free Commonwealth,
appears thus: 1. After he was made Major General of Kent and Surrey, such
persons as had formerly adhered to the Parliament, and born their Testimony
against the usurpation of a single person, were put out of their Commissions of
Justices of Peace, as men not fit to Act any more in their places. 2. Because
several honest persons in Dover would not give their Votes for him to be a
Parliament Man for Dover (having lost it at Pickenden Heath in Kent) as knowing
him to be a corrupt person, and an Enemy to the Commonwealth; he complains of
this in a Letter which he writes to his Deputy in Dover Castle, and brands
these honest men for disaffected persons to the Government. Whereupon his
Deputy drew up a Letter of Recantation, unto which he would have those honest
men subscribe: but they altogether refused it, as being firmly principled for a
Commonwealth; and no way would comply with such a treacherous person to the
freedom and rights of the people, as they knew him to be. 3. When the
Freeholders of Kent were at Pickenden Heath choosing the Knights of the Shire,
Kelsey did what he could to dissuade and hinder all honest men from giving
their Vote for Sir Henry Vane, Calling them Rascals that cried up Sir Henry
Vane, saying, That he was not fit to be chosen, because he was disaffected to
the Government of a single Person: or words to that effect. 4. Howsoever he
has made a seeming profession, as if he did own the Principles of the
Independents, and Baptized Churches, in preaching as a Gifted Brother without
Ordination, Yet that his hypocrisy might be known to the world, he has
declared that he prefers the choice of Malignants before Sectaries to serve in
Parliament.

Sixthly, Besides what is charged upon him, he is guilty of great Oppression,
not to mention his Partiality: for thus was his practice, when he took Bond of
those that aided and assisted the late King, it was usually from those of the
inferior rank, letting the great ones go free. From the meanner fort, whom he
forced to give Bond, he would force them also to pay some five shillings, some
ten shillings a piece for their own Bond, and half a crown for their servants;
besides other gifts wehich he took from them which were not bound.

Lastly, That the said Kelsey is an enemy to Parliamentary Government (and
therefore not to be trusted by Parliament) his actions first and last do show
it: When the personal Treaty was with the late King in the Isle of Wight, he
did at Oxford Openly declare, that he was for the Personal Treaty, and did
endeavor to obstruct a Petition, then in Agitation in the Regiment against the
said personal Treaty, The which Regiment was then, and is against a single
Person. When the old Protector died, he did sadly complain, and said, The glory
was departed from Israel; and did a little after ride in the head of the
Proclamation, when his son Richard was proclaimed.

FINIS.

