ARTICLES OF HIGH TREASON Drawn up in the Name of all the Commoners of England
against One Hundred and fifty Judges, Lawyers, and Attorneys: Together with the
Charge exhibited against them; And a Declaration to the People, showing the
Grounds and Reasons thereof.

ALSO, Eight Propositions, to the Inhabitants of each respective County,
throughout England and Wales, and the Method, and particular Laws, to be
established.

LIKEWISE, The manner of administering Justice; and in case any Lawyer shall
take either Money, or Bribes, to dye as a Traitor to the Commonwealth; and the
Government to be established, as the Commonwealth of Israel was, in Mose's time.

feb: 21 Published by Authority.

London, Printed for George Horton, 1652. 1651

A DECLARATION OF A glorious Reformation; and the Resurrection of the Law: etc.
THe Government of a commonwealth is the uniting of the people of a Nation
into one heart and mind; And blessed is that People, whose Earthly Government
is the Law of common Righteousness. When Israel was under a commonwealths
Government, they were a terror to all Oppressing Kings in all Nations of the
World; and so will England be, if this righteous Law become our Governor: But
when the Officers of Israel began to be covetous and proud, they made a breach;
and then the Government was altered, and fell into the hand of Kings like other
Nations, and then they fled before their Enemies and were scattered. But if we
look upon the customs of the Law it self, it is the same it was in the Kings
days, only the name is altered; as if the Commoners of England had paid their
Taxes, Free Quarter, and shed their blood, not to reform, but to baptize the
Law into a new name, from Kingly Law, to State Law; by reason whereof the
spirit of discontent is strengthened, to increase more Suits of Law, then
formerly was known to be: And so as the Sword pulls down Kingly power with one
hand, the Kings old Law builds up Monarchy again with the other. And indeed the
main work of Reformation lies in this, to reform the clergy, Lawyers, and Law;
for all the complaints of the Land are wrapped up within them three, not in the
person of a King; And for redress of these intolerable and Infidel-Tyranny, a
Charge of High Treason is drawn up against 150 Judges, Lawyers, and Attorneys,
in the name of all the commoners of England, and consists of these Heads, viz.
1 That they sit in the Norman chair. 2 That their arbytrary Wills are
Tyrannical Rules above the letter of the Law. 3 That many Cases and Suits are
lengthened to the great damage and vexation of the poor Clients, and to the
lodging of their Estates in the purse of the unbounded Lawyer. So that the
course of the Law and Lawyers has been a mere snare to entrap the people, and
to pull their Estates from them by craft; for they do uphold the conquerors
Interest, and the peoples slavery. But now if the laws were few and short, and
often read, it would prevent those Evils: As Moses laws in Isreal's
commonwealth: The people did talk of them when they lay down, and when they
rose up, and as they walked by the way; and bound them as bracelets upon their
hands: so that they were an understanding people in the laws wherein their
peace did depend.

As for the Commonwealths Government, it is the Restorer of ancient Peace, and
long-lost Freedoms (if it be right in power, as well as in name) and so becomes
the joy of all Nations, and the blessing of the whole Earth. Therefore all you,
who profess Religion and spiritual things, now look to it, and see what spirit
you do profess, for your profession is brought to trial. If once Commonwealths
Oovernment be set upon the Throne, then no Tyranny or Oppression can look him
in the face and live.

O ENGLAND; ENGLAND, would thou have thy Government sound and healthful? then
cast about, and see, and search diligently to find out all those burdens that
came in by Kings, and remove them; and then will thy Government arise from
under the clods, under which as yet it is buried, and covered with deformity.

The Freeborn People of this Nation have humbly remonstrated their earnest
Desires for Liberty and Freedom, to his Excellency the L. Genesis Further
declaring themselves in these words, That God has made you a successful
Instrument to cast out the Conqueror, and to recover our Land and Liberties
again, by your Victories, out of that Norman hand. That which is yet wanting on
your part to be done, is this, To see the Oppressors power to be cast out with
his person; and to see that the free possession of the Land and Liberties be
put into the hands of the Oppressed Commoners of England. For the Cr^wn of
Honor cannot be yours; neither can those Victories be called Victories on your
part, till the Land and Freedoms won be possessed by them who adventured person
and purse for them. Now you know Sir, that the Kingly Conqueror was not beaten
by you only as you are a single man, nor by the Officers of the Army joined to
you; but by the hand and assistance of the Commoners, whereof some came in
person, and adventured their lives with you; others staid at home, and planted
the Farth, and paid Taxes and Free Quarter to maintain you that went to war. So
that whatsoever is recovered from the Conqueror, is recovered by a joint
consent of the Commoners: therefore it is all Equity, That all the Commoners
who assisted you, should be set free from the Conquerors power with you. And
now you have the power of the Land in your hand, you must do one of these
things: First, either set the Land free to the Oppressed Commoners, who
assisted you, and paid the Army their wages; and then you will fulfill the
Scriptures and your own Engagements, and so take possession of your deserved
Honor. Or secondly, you must only remove the Conquerours power ont of the
Kingly hand into other men's maintaining the old Laws still: And then your
Wisdom and honor is blasted for ever; and you will either lose your self, or
lay the foundation of greater slavery to posterity then you ever knew. You have
the eyes of the people all the Land over, nay I think I may say all neighboring
Nations over, waiting to see what you will do: And the eyes of your oppressed
friends, who lie yet under Kingly power, are waiting to have the possession
given them of that Freedom in the Land, which was promised by you, if in case
you prevailed. Lose not your Crown, take it up, and wear it. But know, that it
is no Crown of Honor, till Promises and Engagements, made by you, be performed
to your friends. And it is our desire, That the Commonwealths Land, which is
the ancient Commons and waste Land, and the Lands newly got in, by the Armies
Victories, out of the Oppressors hands, as Parks, Forests, Chases, and the
like, may be set free to all that have lent assistance, either of person on
purse, to obtain it; and to all that are willing to come in to the practice of
this Government, and be obedient to the Laws thereof.

Propositions for such a Method of Laws, whereby a Commonwealth may be
governed.
1 The bare letter of the Law established by Act of Parl. shall be the Rule for
Officer and People, and the chief Judge of all Actions. 2 He or they who add or
diminish from the Law, excepting in the Court of Parl. shall be cashiered his
Office, and never bear Office more. 3 No man shall administer the Law for money
or reward; he that does shall die as a Traitor to the Commonwealth: for when
Money must buy and sell Justice, there is nothing but Oppression to be
expected. 4 The Laws shall be read by the Minister to the people four times in
the year, viz. every quarter, that every one may know whereunto they are to
yield Obedience. 5 No accusation shall be taken against any man, unless it be
proved by two or three Witnesses, or his own confession. 6 The accuser and the
accused shall always appear face to face before any Officer, that both sides
may be heard, and no wrong to either party. 7 He who raises an accusation
against any man, and cannot prove it, shall suffer the same punishment the
other should. 8 He who strikes his Neighbor, shall be struck himself by the
Executioner blow for blow, and shall lose eye for eye, tooth for tooth, limb
for limb, life for life; and the reason is, that men may be tender of one
another bodies, doing as they would be done by.

FINIS.

