ARTICLES OF Instruction for Enquiry, Exhibited to the Churchwardens and
Sidemen Within the peculiar Jurisdiction of the King's Free Chapel OF S.
MARY'S in SALOP.

LONDON: Printed in the YEAR 1690.

Canon CXIX. Convenient time to be assigned for framing Presentiments.
FOR the avoiding of such Inconveniences as heretofore have happened by the
hasty making of Bills of Presentiments, upon the Days of the Visitation and
Synods, it is ordered, That always hereafter, every Chancellor, Archdeacon,
Commissary, and Official, and every other Person having Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, at the ordinary time when the Churchwardens are sworn, and the
Archbishop and Bishops, when he or they do summon their Visitation, shall
deliver, or cause to be delivered to the Churchwardens, Quest-Men, and
Sidemen of every Parish, or to some of them, such Books of Articles, as they
or any of them shall require for the Year following, the said Churchwardens,
Quest-Men, and Sidemen, to ground their Presentiments upon, at such times as
they are to exhibit them, in which Book shall be contained the Form of the
Oath, which must be taken immediately before every such Presentment, to the
intent, that having beforehand time sufficient not only to peruse and consider
what their said Oath shall be, but the Articles also whereupon they are to
ground their Presentiments, they may frame them at home both advisedly and
truly, to the Discharge of their own Consciences, after they are sworn, as
becomes honest and godly Men.

The Tenor of the OATH to be administered to the Churchwardens and Sidemen of
every Parish.
YOU shall swear truly and faithfully to Execute the Office of a Churchwarden
within your Parish, and according to the best of your Skill and Knowledge,
present such things and Persons, as you know to be presentable by the Laws
Ecclesiastical of this Realm. So help you God, and the Contents of this Book.

ARTICLES OF INSTRUCTION FOR ENQUIRY, etc.
TIT. I.
Concerning Churches and Chapels, with the Ornaments and Furniture thereunto
belonging.

I. IS your Church or Chapel, with the Chancel, in good Repair, and decently
kept, as becomes the House of God?

II. Is the Furniture of your Church or Chapel, as Bells, Communion-Plate and
Cloths, Minister's Surplice, Pulpit-Cloth, Hearse-Cloth, with other usual
Ornaments duly provided and looked after.

III. Have you a fair Bible, Book of Common Prayer, Books of Homilies, and
Canons, Register of Births, Burials, and Marriages, and is the said Register
duly kept, and the Transcript returned every Year into the Official's Registry?
Have you also a Registry of such Strangers as are admitted to Preach, and a
Book for the Entry of the Churchwardens Accounts? And are the said Books
carefully looked to, and made use of?

IV. Is the Churchyard sufficiently fenced and preserved from Anoyance,
Encroachments, and Waste?

TIT II.
Concerning Ministers and Parishioners.

I. DOes your Parson or Curate, constantly, reverently and regularly officiate
on the Lord's Day Holy Days and the Eves of them, as also read the Litany upon
all Wednesdays and Fridays weekly; and observe Rogation and Ember days
according to the Order of the Church; and so perform all Offices, without
Addition or Diminution?

II. Are there in the Parish any Persons known or reputed to be Jews,
Heretics, Papists or Schismatics, and are they studious to pervert the
Orthodox, or insolent toward them for doing there Duty?

III. If there be any Assemblies for Religious Worship in your Parish, besides
the Parish Church or Chapel; Have the Places of such Meetings been certified
according to the Statute? Do any upon that pretense, and who, wholly abstain on
Sundays from coming to any public Place where there are Prayers or Sermons,
but spend their time in Alehouses or Houshold-Affairs

IV. Are any of your Parish known or suspected to be guilty of Incest,
Adultery, Fornication, or any other enormous Crimes? Do any profane the Lord's
Day, or other great Holy Days, or the Name of God, or are irreverent in the
Church, or neglect the respective Duties incumbent on them in reference to the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper, and other Rites as of Catechizing,
Confirmation, Marriage, Thanksgiving after Childbirth, Burial of the Dead, or
the Censures of the Church?

V. Are the Wills and Testaments of the Dead in your Parish, or the
Administration of their Goods duly taken out and executed? Have any Lands,
Legacies, or charitable Gifts bestowed on your Parish, or any other good uses,
been embezled, or unduly bestowed? Has any Money belonging to the Fabric of
your Church, or other charitable purposes, been employed to other uses?

TIT. III.
Concerning Parish-Clerks and Sextons, Schools, Schoolmasters, Physicians,
Chyrurgions and Midwives.

I. HAVE you belonging to your Church or Chappelry a sufficient Clerk, or
Sexton, and does he faithfully and diligently execute his Office?

II. Does any one within your Parish or Chappelry keep School without License
from the Official; or if Licensed, neglect to teach the Youth committed to him
the Catechism of the Church, and to bring them to the Service of the Church?

III. Does any within your Parish or Chappelry practice Physic or Chyrurgery,
or do the Office of a Midwife, without Approbation and License from the
Official?

Advertisement.
THE Curate of every Church or Chapel may join in Presentment with the
Churchwardens and Sidemen, and if they fail to present, the Ministers
themselves (who have the highest Obligation to endeavor the suppressing of
Impiety and Disorder) may and ought to do it.

JOHN HARWOOD, L, L. D. Official.
FINIS.

