AN ACCOUNT of the Seizing, OR Apprehending, Behavior, Confession, and
Commitment to Newgate. OF MARY St. DVNSTAN, ( Born near Temple Bar) The Bloody
Midwifes Servant, Committed by Warrant from the Right Honorable, Sir John
Fleet, Knight, Lord Major. With an Account of Reasons for the Midwife's
Poisoning of her self in Newgate.
Licensed According to Order. 13. Sept. 1693.

SInce the taking and commitment to Newgate of Mary Compton the Bloody Midwife
of Poplar, all the care and industry imaginable has been used by the Masters of
the Parish of Poplar, the Beadles of St. Dunstans and other Parishes for the
Apprehending of Mrs. Mary, the Servant of the said Midwife; She laying all her
Crimes on the said Maid. By the Industry of the Searchers some small
Intelligence was got of our Mrs. Mary some days since by which She was so
traced, that yesterday being Monday Sept. 11th. She was apprehended by Thames
street near London Bridge, and by Constables carried before the Right
Honorable the Lord Mayor, and before his Lordship, She was Examined, where She
continued very obstinate and impudent, her Mistress having taught and tutored
her in all her Paces; His Lordship asking her, her Name, all that She would
confess, as to that particular, was, that her Name is Mary, and by no means She
could be brought to any other, saying, She knew no other Name She had, or ever
was called by; which is not improbable, considering that this Creature has
lived with the Midwife from a Child, and the Neighbors where the Midwife
forme^ly lived, looked upon this Maid to be some By-blow or Bastard; and as
it is supposed preserved and brought up by her Mistress on purpose to be an
Instrument and Confederate with her in her horrid Practices: During her being
before the Lord Mayor, several Affidavits were taken by his Lordship, on the
Account of her being Confederate with her Mistress the Midwife, in murdering
diverse young Children (as the following Narrative treats off) upon which She
was committed to Newgate by Warrant or Mittimus, under his Lordships Hand and
Seal.

In Newgate She is kept apart from her Mistress, then not being suffered to
converse with each other.

Postscript. Since her being in Newgate her right Name is known, being Mary St.
Dunstan, by which Name She was Christened, being a foundling of St. Dunstan's
Parish in the West, by whom She was put out to the Midwife, about Sixteen years
since; She is about Eighteen years of Age.

We shall now proceed to our Narrative of the Midwife, Mary Crompton, who many
years since having the Acquaintance of an Eminent Midwife, was by her
Instructed, and has Practiced the same for a long time; and for many Years She
has also used to take Children, always making her Bargain to have so much Money
in hand for the bringing them up; what Nurse She proved to them, the following
Account Relates: Her real Practice as to laying of Women with Child has ^een
very Inconsiderable, She lived for a considerable time at Wolwich by Greenwich,
where She kept an Alehouse and Chandlers-shop, and there She made pretensions
to Midwifry the better to manage her damnable Designs on Children. She came to
live at Poplar, which is near Stepney, about Two Years since, taking a large
House, where none but Persons of considerable Rank had li-ved before, bringing
with her at first only a Maid Servant, going for a Midwife of great note to
Persons of Quality; here she had not continued long, before she was observed to
have several Children of diverse Ages; but all the time of her living in this
Place has been very private, not in the least associating herself with any of
the Neighborhood, or coming to Church, etc. but her Maid Servant would often
be in Discourse with some of the adjacent Neighbors Maids, being always very
inquisitive with them, but she would never communicate any thing of her
Mistresses Domestic Affairs. The Midwife herself was scarce ever seen in the
Neighborhood, not so much as to stand at the Door, but steping into the Coach
early in the morning, and coming home in a Coach in the Night, and seldom or
never were any Visitants seen to come thither, but only some Gentlemen and
others often in the Evening or Night, except it were some of the Parish for the
Kings Taxes, the Ministers, Poor or other Duties, which generally, if she hapen
to be at home she readily paid them at the Door, or sent the Maid to them with
the money and many complesant Words; she was observed to be often from home for
several days together, yet so much was her maid servant her Confederate and
Creature, that the Affairs of the House was kept so private and obscure from
the Neighbors, that they could not tell how many Children she had in the
House, or how often changed, or otherwise disposed of: Mrs. Crompton is between
Fifty and Threescore Years of Age, and her maid has often declared upon several
Occasions, That her mistress has been a Midwife above Thirty Years; and it is
generally said that she she has followed this barbarous Infant murmurdering
Trade so long, the truth of which is best known to the Omnipresent God, the
searcher of Hearts, who can bring the most hiden Things of Darkness to light,
and from whom no Secret is hid, who for Reasons best known to his Providence,
permits some Persons Sins to go before to Judgment, that is to be punished in
this Life, and others to come after, that is, reserved to the Tribunal of the
great Day.

Mrs. Crompton going out of Town the beginning of the last Week, on Friday,
pretty early in the Morning, the Maidservant (no doubt by the Order and
Appointment of the Mistress) left the House likewise, leaving at home a
Boyabout Seven Years of Age, and a Girl about Six Years Old, with a little
Infant in the Cradle, leaving with them for Food only a piece of Cheese and
Water, not any Beer or Bread, but bid the Boy, in case the young Child cried,
to give it some Water, and she would return in a little time; all which the Boy
has since related: The Children continuing in the House alone most part of the
Day, and no Maid returning, grew very impatient, and particularly for want of
Sustenance, etc. and the Boy bringing of it into an outward Room next the
Street, a Neighbor's Son passing by, and hearing the Child cry, called to the
Boy to know what was the matter; to whom he declared, after some time, the
Reasons: That they were left all day alone in the House, without Victuals, and
that the young Child was almost starved; after which, Neighbors being called,
the Constable and Masters of the Parish were sent for, some of whom coming and
entering the House, examined the two Chilgren, who declared as before mentioned;
and farther, besides the Infant in the Cradle, the Boy declared there were two
more that lay Dead in a Hand-basket upon a Shelf in the Cellar; another lay
Buried in the Garden, and a Fourth in the Cellar: Upon present search, they
found the Two Children in the Hand-basket as the Boy had said, they being most
lamentable Objects of Humane Misery, looking at first sight, were liker the
Carcasses of Catts or Dogs than Humane Creatures, all their skin being off, as
likewise their Eyes and part of their Flesh eat with Vermin, stinking in a
lamentable manner.

On Monday being 21st. Instant, the Coroners Inquest were Impanell'd, and
coming to the House where the Dead Bodies lay in the Basket, after viewing of
them, they ordered some Laborers (according to the Words of the Boy) to Dig in
several soft places of the Cellar where they perceived the ground had been
broken, where, after some time, they Dug up six several Skeletons of Children
of several Ages; upon which Night coming on, the Coroner Adjourned the
Jury-till the next Day, resolving to have the ground in the Garden likewise to
be broken up before they brought in their Verdict, many of the Spectators took
several of the Bones and carried them away, some of which are now to be seen at
the Ben-Johnson's Head, near St. Brides Church by Fleetstreet.

Who were the Parents of these Children, or upon what account this Midwife had
the keeping of them, is not certainly known, though it is generally conjectured,
and that not without a great deal of Reason, that these were those commonly
called By-bl^; or Bastards, which she undertook, for a certain Sum of Money
agreed on, to ease the Parents of, by keeping them as long as they lived. P. S.

On Tuesday, August 22. This Day the Coroner's Inquest met again, but were
adjourned till Monday, on the Account that they had not done digging in the
Garden, and other ports for Children, and for other Reasons. This Day likewise
about One in the Afternoon, our Madam Compton, alias Norman, was Apprehended
near Covent Garden, and with the Assistance of the Constables and Beadles,
being led between two Men, attended with a numerous Crowd of People; she was
carried to the Petty Sessions of Bloomsbury, where she was Examined before
their Majesty's Justices of the Peace there sitting; who likewise took several
Affidavits, by which she is vehemently suspected (if not positively charged) to
have Murdered several Children that were put to her to Nurse; upon which she
was from thence Committed to Newgate, by the Warrant or Mittimus signed by the
Worshipful Justices of the Peace then on the Bench.

When our Doughty Midwife was first seized, all the way she went to the
Justices, and when she came before their Worships, she was observed to carry
her self with a great deal of Confidence, not seeming in the least concerned,
or much denying the Fact.

At her first being in Newgate, She behaved her self very very impudently,
which grew afterward into a fullenness; and just before the Sessions that She
expected to be Tried, She fell ill: She was brought to the Old-Bayly tied in a
Chair, and carried on a Man's back, but the Court finding her very ill, the
Trial was put off till next Sessions: She continues still in a very languishing
Condition, and several Physicians and other Ingenious Men that have been to
visit Her, give it as their Opinion, that they verily believe She has given her
self a Dose of lingering Poison, as a French Midwife of Paris, did, on the like
occasion some years since.

Printed for John Wallis near the Green Dragon T^vern in Fleet Street.


