THE TRIAL OF Squire Lottery.

THE ARRAIGNMENT, TRIAL, AND CONDEMNATION OF Squire Lottery, ALIAS Royal-Oak
Lottery.

LONDON, Printed, and Sold by A. Baldwin near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane.
1699.

THE Trial and Condemnation OF Squire Lottery, etc.
Die Lunae vicesimo die Martii School/9 Anno Regni, etc.
AT the Time and Place appointed, came on the Trial of Squire Lottery, alias
Royal-Oak Lottery, for abundance of intolerable Tricks, Cheats, and high
Misdemeanors, upon an Indictment lately found against him, in order to a
National Delivery.

About ten of the Clock, the day and year aboversaid, the Managers came into
the Court, where, in the presence of a vast confluence of People of all Ranks,
the Prisoner was ordered to the Bar, and required to hold up his Hand; as he
did accordingly.

Proclamation being made, and a Jury of good Cits which were to try the
Prisoner being sworn, the Indictment against Squire Lottery, alias Royal-Oak
Lottery, was read.

The Jurors Names.
Mr. Positive a Draper in Covent Garden. Mr. Squander an Oilman in Fleetstreet.
Mr. Pert a Tobacconist, ditto. Mr. Captious a Milliner in Paternoster Row. Mr.
Feeble a Coffeeman near the Change. Mr. Altrick a Merchant in
Gracechurch-street. Mr. Haughty a Vintner by Gray's Inn, Holborn. Mr. Jealous a
Cutler at Charing Cross. Mr. Peevish a Bookseller in St. Paul's Churchyard. Mr.
Spilbook near Fleet-bridg. Mr. Noysie a Silkman upon Ludgate Hill. Mr. Finical
a Barber in Cheapside.
Cl. of Ma. Squire Lottery, alias Royal-Oak Lottery, you stand Indicted by the
Name of Squire Lottery, alias Royal-Oak Lottery, for that you the said Squire
Lottery, not having the Fear of God in your Heart; nor weighing the Regard and
Duty you owe, and of right ought to pay to the Interest, Safety and
Satisfaction of your Fellow Subjects; have from time to time, and at several
times, and in several places, contrary to the known Laws of this Kingdom, under
the shadow and coverture of a Royal Oak, propagated, continued, and carried on
a most unequal, intricate and insinuating Game, to the utter ruin and
destruction of many thousand Families: And that you the said Squire Lottery,
alias Royal-Oak Lottery, as a common Enemy to all young People, and an
inveterate Hater of all good Conversation and Diversion, have, for many years
last past, and do still continue, by certain cunning Tricks and Stratagems,
insidiously, falsely and impiously, to trepan, deceive, cheat, decoy, and entice
diverse Ladies, Gentlemen, Citizens, Apprentices, and others, to play away their
Money at manifest Odds and Disadvantage. And that you the said Squire Lottery,
alias Royal-Oak Lottery, the more secretly and effectually to carry on and
propagate your base, malicious, and covetous Designs and Practices, did, and do
still encourage several lewd and disorderly Persons, to meet, propose, treat,
consult, consent and agree upon several unjust and illegal Methods, how to
ensnare and entangle People into your delusive Game; by which means you have,
for many years last past, utterly, entirely and irrecoverably, contrary to all
manner of Justice, Humanity, or good Nature, despoiled, depraved and defrauded
an incredible number of Persons of every Rank, Age, Sex, and Condition, of all
their Lands, Goods and Effects; and from the Ruins of multitudes built fine
Houses, and purchased large Estates, to the great scandal and reflection on the
Wisdom of the Nation, for suffering such an intolerable Impostor to pass so
long unpunished. What say thou, Squire Lottery, art thou guilty of the
foresaid Crimes, Cheats, Tricks and Misdemeanors thou standst Indicted of, or
not Guilty?

Lottery. Not Guilty. But before I proceed to make my Defense, I beg I may be
permitted the assistance of three or four learned Sharpers to plead for me, in
case any Matter of Law arise.


This was agreed to; and the Crier having made Proclamation, according to form,
one of the Managers addresses himself to the Jury.

1st Manager. Gentlemen of the Jury, the Prisoner at the Bar stands Indicted,
for propagating, abetting, and encouraging a most unequal, scandalous and
dangerous Game; a Game, that if the common Report that passes upon it be true,
has ruined more than a hundred thousand Families. I need not tell you he is an
old Offender, or indeed use any expressions, or spend any of your time to
aggravate his Crime: if we can prove the Matters he stands charged with in the
Indictment, I suppose you will be sufficiently satisfied you ought to find him
Guilty.

2d Manag. Gentlemen of the Jury, the Prisoner, Squire Lottery, alias Royal-Oak
Lottery, stands charged with Crimes so very high and notorious, that I cannot
name 'em without astonishment; the debauching our Youth, the deluding our
Wives, Servants and Apprentices, the destruction of whole Families, and the
yearly ruin of incredible Multitudes, are all of that dangerous Consequence,
that a Man that has any regard or feeling for his Country, cannot name 'em
without the deepest concern and dissatisfaction. But, Gentlemen, that I may not
seem in any respect to whet the Edg of Justice, I will forbear to make any
further Reflections, and so we will call our Witnesses; and if we can prove the
matters of fact set forth in the Indictment, which we do not doubt, then you
are to find him Guilty.

Cla. of Man. Call Captain Pasthope.

1st Man. Sir, Do you know Squire Lottery, the Prisoner at the Bar?


Pasthope. Yes, I have known him intimately for near 40 years; ever since the
Restoration of King Charles.


1st Man. Pray will you give the Bench and Jury an Account what you know of
him; how he came into England, and how he has behaved himself ever since.


Pasthope. In order to make my Evidence more plain, I hope it will not be
judged much out of form, to premise two or three things.


1st Man. Mr. Pasthope, Take your own method to explain your self; we must not
abridg or direct you in any respect.


Pasthope. In the years 60 and 61, among a great many poor Cavaliers, 'twas my
hard fate to be driven to Court for a Subsistence, where I continued in a
neglected state, painfully waiting the moving of the Waters for several months;
when at last a Rumor was spread that a certain Stranger was landed in England,
that in all probability, if we could get him the Sanction of a Patent, would be
a good Friend to us all.


Man. You seem to intimate as if he was a Stranger; pray, do you know what
Countryman he was?


Pasthope. The report of his Country was very different; some would have him a
Walloon, some a Dutchman, some a Venetian, and others a Frenchman: indeed by
his Policy, cunning Design, Forethought, etc. I am very well satisfied he could
be no Englishman.


Man. What kind of Credentials did he bring with him to recommend him with so
much advantage?


Pasthope. Why, he cunningly took upon him the Character of a Royal Oak
Lottery, and pretended a mighty Friendship to antiquated Loyalists: but for all
that, there were those at Court that knew he had been banished out of several
Countries for disorderly Practices, till at last he pitched upon poor easy
credulous England for his Refuge.


Man. You say then, he was a Foreigner, that he came in with the Restoration,
usurped the Title of a Royal Oak, was established in Friendship to the
Cavaliers, and that for disorderly Practices he had been banished out of
several Countries; till at last he was forced to fix upon England as the
fittest Asylum. But pray Sir, How came you so intimately acquainted with him at
first?


Pasthope. I was about to tell you. In order to manage his Affairs, it was
thought requisite he should be provided with several Coadjutors, which were to
be dignified with the Character of Patentees; amongst which number, by the help
of a friendly Courtier, I was admitted for one.


Man. Oh! then I find you was a Patentee. Pray, how long did you continue in
your Patentee's Post? and what were the Reasons that urged you to quit it at
last?


Pasthope. I kept my Patentee's Station nine years, in which time I had cleared
4000 l. and then, upon some Uneasiness and Dislike, I sold it for 700 l.


Man. Pray, Captain, tell the Court more fully what was the Reason that
prevailed with you to relinquish such a profitable place.


Pasthope. I had two very strong Reasons for quitting my Post; viz. Remorse of
Conscience, and Apprehension of consequent Danger. To tell you the truth, I saw
so many bad Practices encouraged and supported, and so many persons of both
Sexes ruined; I saw so much Villainy perfected and projected, and so many other
intolerable Mischiefs within the compass of every day's Proceeding, that partly
through the stings of my Mind, and the apprehensions I was under of the Mob,
with a great deal of Reluctance I quitted my Post.


Man. Captain, I find you're nicely qualified for an Evidence, pray therefore
give the Court an Account what Methods the Prisoner used to take to advance his
business.


Pasthope. The way in my time, and I suppose it is the same still, was, to send
out Sharpers and Setters into all parts of the Town, and to give 'em direction
to magnify the Advantage, Equality, and Justice of his Game, in order to decoy
Women and Fools to come and play away their Money.


Man. Well, but sure he had no Women or Fools of Quality, Rank, or Reputation,
that came to him? According to the common Report that passes upon him, there is
none but the very Scoundrels and Rabble, the very Dregs and Refuse of Fools,
will think him worth their Conversation.


Pasthope. Truly, he had 'em of all sorts, as well Lord-fools and Lady-fools,
Knight-fools and Esquire-fools, as Cit-fools, Bully, Bawd, or Whore-fools, or
any other sort of Fools: and indeed he made no difference between 'em neither;
a Cobler-fool had as much respect as a Lord-fool, in proportion to the money he
had in his Pocker; and pro hac vice had as extensive a Qualification to
command, domineer, and hector, as the best Fool of 'em all.


Man. Did you never observe any of these Fools to get any money of him? I cannot
imagine what it could be that could influence 'em to embark with him, if there
was nothing to be got.


Pasthope. There was never any body that ever got any thing of him in the main:
now and then one by chance might carry off a small matter; and so 'twas
necessary they should, for otherwise his Constitution must dissolve in course.


Man. It Is a great mystery to me, that so many People should pursue a Game
where every body's a Loser at last: but pray Captain then, what are the odds
the Prisoner is reputed to have against those that play with him?


Pasthope. No body can tell you their Advantage; it is a cunning intricate
Contexture, and truly I very much question whether the original Projector
himself had a perfect Idea of the Odds: at a full Table and deep Play, I have
seen him clear 600 l. in less than an hour.


Man. What are the Odds he owns himself?


Pasthope. Only 32 Figures against 27, which indeed is Odds enough to insure
all the money at length. But this, it seems, was an Advantage that was allowed
him, that he might be able to keep a good House, relieve the Poor, and pay an
annual Pension to the Crown or the Courtiers.


Man. You say, by his original Agreement he is to keep a good House: pray, after
all, what sort of House is it he does keep?


Past. Why, he dines at the Tavern, where any body that has 40 or 50 l. to play
away with him in the Afternoon, may be admitted into his Company.


Man. What, does he entertain none but those that have 40 or 50 l. to lose?


Past. He never converses with any Person that has no money: if they have no
money, their Company's burdensome and ungrateful, and the Waiters have
Directions to keep 'em out.


Man. Does he do this to the very Persons he has ruined, and won all they have?
That, methinks, is a pitch of Barbarity beyond the common degree: I hardly ever
read or heard of any thing so exaltedly cruel and brutish, in all the Accounts
of my Life.


Past. I have seen abundance of Examples of this nature, one in particular,
which I shall never forget; a poor Lady, that had lost 350 l. per annum to him,
beside two or three thousand pounds in ready money, basely and inhumanly haled
out of doors, but for asking for a glass of Sack.


Man. You were mentioning his Charity to the Poor too; is there any thing of
reality in that?


Past. For my part, I never heard of one good Act he has done in the whole
course of his Life: secret Charity is the most meritorious, it is true; and
perhaps it may be that way he may communicate his, for indeed I never heard of
any he did in public.


Man. You were mentioning too an annual Pension to the Crown; what is it he
pays to the Crown?


Past. Indeed I cannot be positive in that: to the best of my remembrance it is
four thousand pounds per annum: in compensation for which, beside the general
liberty he has to cheat and abuse the World, he has the sole Privilege of
Licensing all other Cheats and Impostors, commonly known by the Name of
Lotteries.


2d Man. You were speaking something, Captain Pasthope, just now, as if the
Prisoner was entrusted with these Advantages for the benefit of some poor
Cavaliers, which were to be the Patentees, as you call 'em. Pray tell the Jury
what kind of Cavaliers these Patentees were.


Past. That was all but a Blind, a pure Trick to deceive the World: the
Patentees, in the main, were either Sharpers or broken Tradesmen, or some such
sort of Vermin, that had cunningly twisted themselves into the business under
the shadow of Cavaliers.


Man. Pray, what Opinion had the World of the Prisoner when he first came to be
known in England?


Pasthope. The same that it has of him now: all wise men looked upon him as a
Cheat, and a dangerous Spark to be let loose in public among our English
Youth: and indeed I have heard a great many sober men pass very sharp Censures
upon the Wisdom of the Court for intrusting him with a Royal Authority.


Man. What kind of Censures were they that they past? do you remember any of
them particularly?


Past. Yes, I remember several things that I am almost ashamed to mention. I
have heard 'em often reflecting what an intolerable Shame and Scandal it was,
that a whole Kingdom should be sacrificed to the Interest of two or three
Courtiers, and three or four scurvy mercenary Patentees; that so many thousand
Families should be ruined, and no notice taken of it; that so many Wives should
be seduced to rob and betray their Husbands, so many Children and Servants
their Parents and Masters, and so many horrid Mischiefs transacted daily under
the shadow of this pretended Royal-Oak Lottery, and no manner of means used to
suppress it.


2d Man. But Captain, Did you never hear of any Person that got money of the
Prisoner in the main?


Past. Not one. I defy him to produce one single person that is a Gainer,
against a hundred thousand he has ruined. I Am confident I have a Catalogue by
me of several thousands that have been utterly undone by him within the compass
of my own Experience.


Man. What does the Town in general say of him?


Past. The Town, here-a-late, is grown so inveterate and incensed against him,
that I am very well assured that if he had not been called to account in the
very nick, the Mob would have speedily taken him into their correction.


Man. Well, Sir, you hear what the Witness has said against you; will you ask
him any Questions?


Lottery. Only one; and leave the rest till I come to make my general Defense.
Sir, I desire to know whether you was not one that was turned out upon the last
Renewal of the Patent?


Past. No, Sir, I was not. You might have remembered that I told you I saw so
much of your Falsehood and Tricks and so many innocent People daily sacrificed,
to support a Society of lewd, debauched, impertinent, and withal imperious
Cannibals, that I thought it my best way to quit your Fraternity, and pack off
with that little I had got, and leave you to manage your mathematical Balls,
etc. by your self.


Man. I suppose, Sir, you will ask him no more Questions, and so we'll call
another Witness.


Lottery. No, Sir, I have done with him.


Man. Call Squire Frivolous the Counselor: Sir, do you know Squire Lottery the
Prisoner?


Frivolous. I have been acquainted with him several years, to my great Cost and
Damage.


Man. Pray, will you inform the Court what you know of him?


Frivolous. I know him to be a grand Deceiver, a common Enemy to the Public, a
Snare to our Youth, a Scandal to the Kingdom, a notorious Impostor, a Wretch
without parallel, and beyond description.


Man. You seem to be very angry with him, Mr. Frivolous, pray, how long have
you been acquainted with him? and where did you contract your first Familiarity?


Frivolous. The first time I had the misfortune to know him, was at an Act at
Oxford about twenty years ago; where among abundance of other young Fools that
he enticed to sell their Books for Money to play with him, etc. I was one.


Man. What, I hope, he was not so barbarous as to decoy the poor young
Gentlemen out of their Books?


Frivolous. Yes, out of every thing they had, and out of the College to boot:
For my own part I have reason to curse him, I Am sure; He flattered me up with
so many Shams and false Pretenses, and deluded me with so many chimerical
Notions and cunning Assurances, and urged me so long from one deceitful Project
to another, till at last he had trickt me out of all I had in the World, and
then turned me over to the scorn and laughter of my Friends and Acquaintance.


Manag. But I hope, Mr. Frivolous, he has been kind to you since, and used you
like a Gentleman.


Frivolous. He has used me as he does every body else when he has won their
Money, ordered his Janisaries to keep me out of his Office; or if I did crowd
in, he treated me with so much contempt and scorn, and so much haughtiness and
indifference, that I could not forbear wishing my self out again.


Man. Have you ever been in his Company at London? if you have, pray tell us
what Observations you made?


Frivolous. I never observed any thing in his Conversation worth a Remark,
unless it was the perfidious Stratagems and Tricks he proposed, to draw in
Bubbles and Fools; and with what joy and satisfaction he was wont to express
himself upon the entangling a credulous Woman, or some ignorant young Coxcomb
of much Money and little Wit.


Man. What sort of Tricks and Stratagems are they that he commonly makes use of
two draw in his Women and Coxcombs?


Frivolous. Why, he has commonly a Gang of mercenary Dependants, both Men and
Women, that he treats and encourages to hunt the Town for Novices and
Properties of both Sexes.


Lottery. I desire he may produce some of the Names of these mercenary
Dependants he speaks of; for my part, I disown every thing of that nature.


Man. He Is upon his Oath, Sir, and therefore that must be left to the
discretion of the Bench and Jury, whether they will credit him or not; but for
naming of Names, I Am of opinion he is not obliged to do that.


2d Man. He is not bound by any means to name Names; That will consequently
betray him to several Inconveniences; you have those belonging to you, that in
such a case would not stick to cut a Man's Throat: besides, Sir, you ought not
to interrupt the Evidence.


Man. Can you give the Bench any particular Names of Persons he has ruined?


Frivolous. I have a Collection of Names in my Pocket, which I Am sure he cannot
object against, that have lost fourteen or fifteen thousand Pound per Annum,
within my own Knowledge and Acquaintance.


Man. That Is a round Sum: But, pray, Mr. Frivolous, for the satisfaction of the
Jury, mention a few of their Names.


Frivolous. I suppose, Squire Lottery, you must remember the Kentish Squire in
the Blue Coat, that you won the six hundred Pound per Annum of, in less than
five months. You remember the Lord's Steward that lost an Estate of his own of
three hundred Pound per Annum, and run four thousand Pound in Arrears to his
Lord beside. You remember, I suppose, the West India Widow, that lost the Cargo
of two Ships, valued at fifteen hundred Pound, in less than a month. I know you
cannot forget the honest Lady at St. James's, that sold all her Goods, Plate,
and China, for about seven hundred Pound, and played it all away to you, as near
as I remember, in three mornings. I know you cannot forget the three Merchants
Daughters that played away their whole Fortunes, viz. fifteen hundred Pound
apiece in less than two months. You remember the Silkman from Ludgate Hill; the
young Draper in Cornhil; the Country Parson; the Doctor of Physick's Daughter;
the Lady's Woman; the Merchant's Apprentice; the Marine Captain; the Ensign of
the Guards; the Coffee-man's Niece; the old Justice's Nephew; and abundance of
others which I have in my Catalogue that you have cheated out of large Sums,
and utterly ruined.


Lottery. I desire that he may be asked, what it was that influenced him at
first to make such a Catalogue?


Man. He desires to know upon what account it was that you made this Collection
of Names?


Frivolous. I had once a design to have him called to an Account, and forced to
a Restitution; in which case I thought the Names of these Persons might be of
some use to me.


Man. What Method did you propose to your self to bring him to a Restitution?


Frivolous. I had a Notion, that if I drew up the Case, and got it recommended
to the Honorable House of Commons, they would have thought the Prisoner worth
their correction: But this he got intelligence of, and employed one of his
Agents to make up the matter with me.


Man. What, I suppose you mean he bribed you with a Sum of Money to decline the
Prosecution?


Frivolous. Truly you have hit of the very thing; he knew that I was poor, and
he was guilty, and so compounded with me for a few Guineas to let the thing
fall: And indeed, if I am not misinformed, his Art of Bribing, etc. has guarded
him so long from the Punishments which the Laws of the Land, and common
Justice, have provided for such notorious Offenders.


2d Man. Well, Mr. Frivolous, we will not spend too much time neither upon such
unnecessary Reflections; and so, unless the Prisoner will ask you any
Questions, we will call another Witness.


Lottery. I design my Defense shall be general, and therefore I shall not ask him
any Questions, but submit it to the discretion of the Jury, Whether a Person so
highly prejudiced, may be properly deemed a good Evidence?


(...). of the Man. Call Monsieur Cringe the French Refugee.


1st Man. Sir, do you know the Prisoner at the Bar, Squire Lottery?


Cringe. O, Monsieur Lottery, are you there? me know you very well; me know you
to be on very great Cheat, me think de greatest of all de English Cheats.


Man. Sir, you must speak to the Court, and not to the Prisoner; you must tell
the Court what you know of him.


Lottery. I protest I don't know Monsieur Cringe; to the best of my knowledge I
never saw him, nor heard of his Name.


Cringe. For what you say, you never saw me, dat been one damned lie; but now
me tink on it, you never knew no body after you have won all dear Money; you
been one damned impudent Cheat, Monsieur Lottery, you know me very well.


Man. You must give good words, and direct your Discourse to the Court, I tell
you.


Cringe. Me can no give good words, he bin so great a damned Cheat he deserve
no good words, he bin de grand Cheat of the whole World; give good words?


Lottery. I desire he may be asked of what Religion he is? and what occasioned
him to leave his own Country?


Cringe. Me no tell dat, me be one French English Evidence, and dat be enough
for my Religion; me leave my Country, because me could stay dear no longer, and
dat bin enough for dat dat too.


Man. His Religion, or the Reason of leaving of his Country, signifies little
to his Evidence; pray tell the Jury the Cause that makes you so very angry with
the Prisoner, Mr. Cringe.


Cringe. Very good; why den me will tell you, About four week after me came to
London, me valkt to Islington, where me met one English Whore, she carry me
into the Company of de Prisoner; he tice a me to play at his Game, he treat a
me, de Whore wheedle a me, till me lose all my Money, and den both the Squire
and de Whore forsake a me.


Man. Do you know this Whore again if you should see her?


Cringe. Me know her very well; she bin one Citizen's Wife, dat first played
away all her Husband's Effects, and now bin Whore in ordinary to de Squire and
his whole Family.


Man. Pray, Mr. Cringe, what did you lose in all?


Cringe. Me lose too much, me lose four hundred Pistol in tree morning; me pawn
my Sword, my Cloak, my Linen, my Peruke, my All; and yet, Monsieur, you no
know me.


2d. Man. Monsieur Cringe, have you no Lotteries in France? I mean, have you no
Lotteries established by Authority?


Cringe. No, Sir, de French Authority suffer no such ting; de French have too
much Policy, and too much care of dear Country, den to suffer her to be exposed
at dat rate.


Man. Well, Sir, I think we have nothing more to do with you, unless the
Prisoner will ask you any Questions.


Cringe. But den me have something to say to you; Pray, who must pay me my
Money if Monsieur Lottery be hanged?


1st Man. That Is material Question indeed, Monsieur Cringe, but we cannot stay
to resolve it now, Let the Widow Turbulent and her two Daughters be called in.


2d Man. Madam, the Court's informed that you can give material Evidence
against the Prisoner at the Bar, Squire Lottery, alias Royal-Oak Lottery; be
pleased therefore to tell the Court what you know of him.


Turbulent. I know him to be a Cheat, I know him to be a Whoremaster,
Fornicator and Adulterer: I know him to be a deceiver of the People; I know he
has ruined me, debauched my Daughters; and I know he ought to be hanged out of
the way, and made a speedy Precedent of Justice.


Man. Pray, Madam, how came you to know him to be a Whoremaster in the first
place?


Turbulent. I must be excused for coming to particulars: I Am upon my Oath, and
I tell you again, upon the Oath I have taken, I know him experimentally, to be
both a Whoremaster and an Adulterer: And as for his being a Fornicator, I leave
that to my Daughters to prove.


Man. Young Ladies, what say you? do you know him to be a Fornicator? But,
pray, remember you are upon your Oaths.


Eldest Daughter. For my own part I must declare, I know him to be a grand
Fornicator; and I Am confident, Sister, you know that what I say is true, as
well as my self.


Youngest Daughter. Yes, Sister, I know him to be that very well; and if I had
thought on it, I could have brought several of our Neighbors Wives and
Daughters, that all know the thing as well as our selves.


Man. Madam, we have spent a great deal of time about the Prisoner already, and
therefore must beg you to be as brief as you can; if you have any thing of
moment to urge, go on; if not, we have done with you.


Turbulent. Well, Mr. Manager, for all your haste, I hope I may tell you this,
without being thought impertinent, that between the Prisoner at the Bar, the
Patentees, and the hangers on upon his Office, there is more Cits instal'd in
the noble Order of Cuckoldom, more young Women debauched, and more Fools
undone, than all all the Play Houses, Bawdy-houses, Musick-houses, Ordinaries,
Booths, Balls, etc. within the sound of Bow-Bell.


Man. We have other Witnesses which we might call, if the thing required it;
but, Gentlemen, having so effectually proved the Tenor of our Indictment, we will
leave it here.


2d Man. Look you, Squire Lottery, we have done, and now you may speak, and say
what you will in your own defense, and call what Witnesses you have to
vindicate your Innocence, and to prove your self not guilty of the things you
stand charged with.


Lottery. Sir, I intend to spend as little of your time as I can: I perceive,
that let me say what I will, you are prepared to other-rule it, and so I Will
only say a few words, and call three or four Witnesses to prove my Reputation,
and then leave the good Men and true of the Jury, upon whose Verdict I must
stand or fall, to use me as they shall best judge the nature of my Case deserves.

I know, Gentlemen, the tide of Prejudice runs very fierce against me; so that
let say what I will, I Am satisfied it will be all to very little purpose; an
ill Name to a Person in my condition, is certain Death, which indeed makes me a
little more indifferent in making my Defense.

But, Gentlemen, look upon me, I am the very Image of some of you, a married
Protestant; upon which account I Am confident I may rely upon a little of your
Justice, if not your Favor.

The Crimes I am charged with are indeed very great, and what is worse, there is
some of 'em I can never expect to evince. But then, Gentlemen, I hope you will
consider, that whatever I did, was purely in the prosecution of my Occupation;
and you know withal what Authority I had for it; so that if by chance, in this
long tract of time, every thing should not be so nicely conformable as you
expect, I hope you will take care to lay the Saddle upon the right Horse.

You all know, that Covetousness and Cheating are the inseparable Companions of
a Gamester; divide him from them, and he is the most insignificant Creature in
Nature. And, Gentlemen, I appeal to your selves, if a little useful lying and
falsehood be not (in some cases) not only tolerable, but commendable. I dare say
you will agree with me in this, that if all the Knaves and Cheats of the Nation
were called to the Bar and executed, there would only be a few Fools left to
defend the Commonwealth.

But, Gentlemen, as I told you before, I will not spend your time, and therefore
I Will call my Witnesses. Call Captain Quondam.


Crier. Call. Capt. Quondam.


Lottery. Sir, I desire you would give the Court an account what you know of
me, as to Life and Conversation.


Quondam. I have known the Prisoner for several years, and have been often in
his company upon particular Occasions, and never saw any thing that was rude or
unhansome by him.


Man. Pray, noble Captain, what Countryman are you?


Quondam. Sir, I am a West Country man.


Man. An English West-Country, or a West India Man? or what?


Quondam. I am a West-Country Man of his Majesty's own Dominions, of the
Kingdom of Ireland, in the County of Cork, and Parish of Durrus in the Barony
of West-Carbury, near the great Bogg of Longuar, Gent.


Man. You're a West Country man with a Witness. And, pray, how long have you
been in England?


Quondam. Ever since the last year of my Sovereign Lord King James.


Man. And, pray, how long have you been a Captain?


Quondam. I was born so; my Father, my Grandfather, great Grandfather, and most
of my Kin, were all Captains before me.


Man. You say you have been often in the Prisoner's Company; pray, where have
you been in his Company, and upon what account?


Quondam. I have been in his Company at Epsom, Tunbridge, Lambeth, Islington,
and at several other places both in Town and Country.


Man. Well, but you ha'nt told what was the occasion that brought you so often
into his Company.


Quondam. He desired me to go along with him to help him to divert and
entertain his Guests, especially the Ladies that used to visit him.


Man. I suppose you're one of his Dependents: had you never no Salary from him?


Quondam. I have had several Favors from him, and I must own I love him very
well; and, by my Shoul, I believe he is a very honest Man, and a good Christian.


Man. Who Is your next Evidence?


Lottery. I desire Mr. Scamper may be called.


Cry. Call Mr. Scamper.


Lottery. Pray, Mr. Scamper, give the Court an Account what you know of me as
to my manner of living and behavior in the World.


Scamper. You know, Squire Lottery, your Acquaintance and mine is but of a late
Date; I never saw you till last May at Lambeth-Wells, and then 'twas but by
accident too; you remember the occasion still, I believe; the two Female Cits
that lost all their money, and pawned their Lockets: I must confess you tip'd
me a couple of Guineas and a Wink, under the notion, I suppose, that I should
bring 'em again, etc. And this is all I know of you of my own Experience.


Man. I think you might as well have left out this Witness: Well, have you any
more that you will call?


Lottery. Only one, and I have done. I desire Madam Allport may be called.


Cry. Call Madam Allport.


Lottery. Madam, I would beg you to do me the honor to tell the Court what you
know of me.


Allport. I know the Prisoner to be a person of unquestionable Courage, Vigor,
and Performance. I have known him in the Capacity of Maid, Wife, and Widow, and
never found him otherwise than a man fit for business in all points.


Man. What have we to do with his Courage, Vigor, and Performances. Do you
know him to be an honest man, and a Friend to the Commonwealth of England?


Lottery. Yes, Madam, tell 'em what you know as to my Honesty and Reputation;
for those are the only things that are insisted upon here.


Allport. I know you to have as much Honesty and Reputation as the best of 'em.
It Is very hard, methinks, that a Man must not make the best of his business,
but he is in danger to be hanged for it.


Man. You must make no Reflections upon the Court. If you have any thing to say
in the Prisoner's Defense, you must speak it without Passion or Reflection. But
since you're so hot, Madam, where do you live, and what Occupation do you
follow?


Allport. I am not ashamed to let you know where I live: I am a substantial
Housekeeper of the Parish of St. James Westminster; and there is never an
Officer belonging to the Marshal's Court, but will take my Bail in an Action of
39 s. as soon as the best Neighbor I have.


Man. But what is this to the Prisoner? Can you say any thing in his Reputation?
But since you're so good at that, pray what Function are you of? I asked you
the Question before.


Allport. I sell Coffee and Chocolat; and, tho I say it, I have as good
Conveniences to entertain both Men and Women, as any one of the Trade.


2d Man. Mistress, this is all foreign to the matter: what signifies it to us,
that you sell Coffee? and that you have good Conveniences? This is all but
trifling, and spending the time of the Court to no purpose. If she has nothing
to urge but such loose Tattle as this, let her be taken down. Sir, you don't do
well to trouble the Court with such Impertinence.


Lottery. I beg pardon of the Court for all this trouble: I am upon my last
legs, and without offense, I hope I may be allowed to make the best of my
Defense. I am no Lawyer, and therefore if I am a little mistaken in point of
Form, I hope it will not be made use of to my Disadvantage. All that I have
more to say is, only two or three short words with respect to the Witnesses,
and I have done.

As for Captain Pasthope, he is acted purely by a Spirit of Malice and
Prejudice; besides, he is a rank Tory, a mere Jacobite, a Cavalier of the last
Edition, upon which account I Am persuaded the Jury are not bound to give any
great credit to his Evidence.

For Mr. Frivolous, he is a Witness of the same species, an old musty Pretender
to Loyalty, a person that I Am told has neither taken the Oaths nor signed the
Association, which with submission seems to me to be a strong Testimony against
the validity of his Evidence; nay, I (...) told that he and Steadfast are both
Povishly affected; and then, Gentlemen the Law says they cannot be good
Witnesses against a Protestant.

Then for Mr. Cringe the French Refugee, I think I am not at all concerned to
answer his Impertinence. What business have Refugees with Whores and
Gaming-houses? It is highly inconsistent with the Character of a person in a
state of Persecution, to venture his money upon any account. Gentlemen, I
suppose you all take the thing as well as my self, and therefore I shall not
spend your time in useless Aggravations or Reflections.

And for the Widow Turbulent and her Daughters, her Evidence does no way affect
my Life: if they will own themselves Whores, I don't think it worth my trouble
to go about to disprove them. Upon the whole, I don't perceive any thing that
either of them have swore against me that can affect my Life: but that I am
bound to leave to you and the Jury to consider.


Youngest Man. Gentlemen of the Jury, it comes to my turn to sum up the
Evidence that has been given against the Prisoner Squire Lottery, alias
Royal-Oak Lottery. I Am certain he cannot be so unjust, to say that he has not
had a very fair and equal Trial: and for my own part, I shall take particular
care he shall have no reason to complain of me.

I suppose you all heard the Indictment that was read against him; First, That
contrary to the known Laws of this Kingdom, he has falsely, devilishly, and
maliciously, under the shadow and pretense of a Royal. Oak, carried on a
cunning unequal Game, to the utter Ruin and Destruction of many thousand
Families. Secondly, That he was a common Enemy to all young People, dangerous
and destructive to all good Conversation; and that for many years last past he
had continued to trepan and deceive diverse Ladies, Gentlemen, Citizens, and
others, to play away their money with him at manifest odds and disadvantage.
Thirdly, That he the said Royal-Oak Lottery, the better to carry on his base
Designs, did encourage diverse lewd Persons, under the Notion of Patentees, to
meet together, in order to propose illegal methods, the better to entangle
ignorant People. Fourthly, That for many years last past, by such cunning
Stratagems and Devices and false Pretenses, he had utterly ruined an incredible
number of Persons of both Sexes. And Lastly, That he had been the occasion of
Scandal and Reflection upon the Wisdom and Justice of the Nation.

This, Gentlemen, was the Substance of the Indictment: for the proof of which,
we have produced several Witnesses; and had many more ready if there had been
any necessity.

The first Witness we called was Captain Pasthope, a Person that had been
formerly one of the Patentees. He gives you first an Account how the Prisoner
came into England at the Restoration of King Charles the Second; that he was
entrusted with a Royal Authority under the notion that he was to be a Friend to
poor Cavaliers: but then he tells you a little while afterward, that that was
all but pretense, and that the Patentees were in the main a Gang of Sharpers or
broken Tradesmen, that had thrust themselves into the Business under the
umbrage of Cavaliers.

He tells you likewise, that he had been disgracefully kicked out of several
Countries for irregular Practices, till at last he forced himself upon poor
credulous England (as he expressed it) for Sanctuary.

He also acquaints you, that he kept his Patentees place nine years, that he
gained 4000 l. in the interim, and after all, sold his Place for 700 l.

He tells you too of the Methods that he generally makes use of to betray and
trepan persons, viz. by sending out Bullies, Sharpers, and Whores, into every
corner of the Town, to magnify the Justice and Equality of his Game; by which
means, Fools of all sorts were seduced daily to come and be undone.

He gives you an Account of his Advantage, and shows you that it is impossible
that any body in the main should win any money of him.

He tells you, That his Housekeeping and Charity are both Pretense, and makes
some Reflections upon his Cruelty to the Persons he has ruined; and seems to
intimate too, that the Pension he is to pay the Crown is rather paid to some
Courtiers to stand in the gap for him in a time of danger.

And lastly, he informs you that all sober men look upon him as a Cheat, and
are apt to pass sharp Censures upon the Wisdom of the late Court, for
intrusting him with a Royal Authority. He tells you, that the Town is at last
grown very angry with him, and seem highly dissatisfied that so many thousand
People should be sacrificed to the Interest of two or three Courtiers, and
three or four haughty Patentees, upon his account.

The next Witness we produced was Mr. Frivolous, a Person of great Honesty and
Moderation. His Evidence is exactly of the same piece with the Captain's: he
gives you a long and fair Account of all his base Practices and Proceedings;
and withal produces a large Catalogue of the Names of several considerable
Persons he has utterly ruined: and moreover, tells you he had once a Notion to
draw up his Case, and get it recommended to the Honorable House of Commons: and
then he tells you it is his Bribery, or something like it, that has defended him
so long from the Correction of the Law.

Our third Witness is Mr. Cringe, a French Refugee; and he swears he was
decoyed into his Company by one of the Whores in ordinary that ply at his
Office; that he sharp'd him out of 400 Pistols in three Mornings; that he
treated and caressed him till he had got all he had, and then barbarously
turned him off with Scorn and Contempt.

Gentlemen, This is a very strong Confirmation of the Evidence given against
him by Captain Pasthope and Mr. Frivolous, especially of that part of it that
relates to his Rules and Methods of trepanning, and his Cruelty to the Persons
he has ruined.

The last Witness is the Widow Turbulent, and her two Daughters: The Widow
deposes, she knows him to be a common Cheat, and withal, flatly charges him,
upon her own experience, with Whoredom and Adultery. The two Daughters swear
him to be a grand Fornicator; and for a farther proof of their Evidence,
declare that they could have brought several of their Neighbors Wives and
Daughters to have confirmed their Testimony.

Gentlemen, These were all the Witnesses we thought proper to call: we had
multitudes in a readiness, if there had been any occasion for 'em; but these,
I Am confident, in the sense of the Law, are sufficient to prove our Indictment.

The Prisoner in his Defense tells you, he perceives the Tide of Prejudice runs
very high against him; that he is a married Protestant: and seems to insinuate,
that whatever he did, was in the prosecution of his Office, and under the
Shadow of Authority.

He tells you further, that Covetousness and Cheating are the inseparable
Companions of a Gamester; and then appeals to your selves, if a little useful
lying and falsehood be not in some cases both tolerable and commendable. He
further insinuates, that if all the Cheats and Knaves of the Kingdom were
called to the Bar and executed, there would be none but a few Fools left to
defend the Commonwealth.

Besides this, he calls three Witnesses to prove his Reputation.

The first is one Captain Quondam a West Country Gentleman, as he calls
himself, of his Majesty's own Dominions, of the Kingdom of Ireland, etc. He
tells you he is a Captain born, and came over to England the last year of his
Sovereign Lord King James; he says he has been often in his company at
Tunbridg, Epsom, etc. And for a conclusion, swears by his Soul, he believes him
to be a very honest Man, and a good Christian.

But, Gentlemen, this is all but Irish Testimony: He cannot deny at the same
time but he is one of his Dependants; and so upon the whole, I think there is
very little regard to be given to what he has swore.

The next he calls is one Mr. Scamper; and he truly tells him, he has known him
but a very little time, and gives him an unlucky Memorandum into the bargain;
upon the account of his being in company with two Female Cits, while they lost
all their Money and Jewels: He tip'd him the wink, and a couple of Guineas he
says; and that is all he can say of him from his own experience.

The last Witness was one Mrs. Allport a Coffee-woman; and she swears she
indeed knows him very well, to be a Person of wonderful Vigor and Performance;
she has known him in the capacity of a Maid, Wife, and Widow it seems, and
swears too, he is as honest a Man as the best of 'em all, and thinks it is very
hard that he must not make the best of his business, but he is in danger to be
hanged for it.

This, Gentlemen, is the substance, both of the Evidence against him, and his
Defense. Now, Gentlemen, if from the whole you don't think the Prisoner at the
Bar Guilty of what he is accused, then you're to acquit him: if you do, you're
to bring him in Guilty. And so I Will give you no farther trouble upon the
Subject.

Then the Jury withdrew, to consider of their Verdict, and an Officer was sworn
to keep them, according to Law, till agreed: and about a quarter of an hour
afterward they returned into Court, and the Prisoner was brought again to the
Bar, and found Guilty according to the Indictment.

The next opportunity he was brought to the Bar again, to offer what he had to
say for stop of Judgment; and afterward received Sentence, together with Mr.
Auction and Dr. Land-Bank, who were both Tried, Convicted, and Condemned; and
their Trials will be published with all possible speed.


FINIS.

