Articles of Impeachment Exhibited against Col. ROBERT GIBBONS AND Cap. RICHARD
YEARDLEY, Late Governors of the Isle of Jersey;

WHEREIN The several Impeachments, notorious Actions, high Misdemeanors,
Abominations and Oppressions, are laid open, detected, and made public to the
Admiring World;

AS ALSO, A Remedy for the People, against the Heavy Yoke of such Tyrannical
Oppressors, in this Juncture of Miraculous Restoration, after so long a
Bondage, wherein the Little Finger of some appeared heavier then the whole
Loins of others.

London, Printed for G. Horton, living near Cripplegate, 1659.

SIR,
I Have taken the opportunity, by a Boat now going for England, with Mr Pemell,
the Surgeon of this Garrison, who is sent with an Address of the Soldiery
here, to the Lord Fleetwood, and Council of the Army, to let you know, that
without difficulty, you cannot imagine how much the dejected, almost dying
spirits of the well-affected people of this Isle have been revived, and the joy
they have had by that unexpected, and almost miraculous restoration of the
famous long-Parliament, to the exercise (once again) of their supreme trusts,
from which they had been so long interrupted. And that which has added to
their joy and content, is the Advice we have received from London, which does
intimate to us, that there is very great probability, that the people of this
poor Island (after their long bondage and misery,) will be delivered from the
heavy yoke of their present oppressors, to wit, from Col. Robert Gibbons, and
Captain Richard Yeardley his Deputy, who, we are credibly informed, appeared in
London, and elsewhere, notorious enemies to that happy restoration. It is here
affirmed, that Lieut. Col. Mason, is in nomination to be our Governor: we hear
a very good report of him, and that he is a professed enemy to Tyranny. In case
he does take care to have Officers under him, that may be thus qualified, it
will be an honor to him, and great satisfaction to all the faithful of this
place, who have very much suffered under the others; and would have imfallably
suffered in a higher degree, in case this sudden alteration of things had not
happened: the Bailiff and others being very much threatened, and that only for
having signed a Procuration here to some of their faithful Patriots in London,
which tended only for the good and safety of the whole Island. Benjamin
Dumaresy, the late Protector's Attorney General in this Isle, was very active
against the said Bailiff, and others well affected, in opposing the same in the
behalf (as he pretended) of his Master the Protector, and the said Gibbons and
Yeardley, to whose service he was very zealous against the public good.

Having seen by diverse good things published in print, that there are yet (after
so long Apostasy) some hopes of just liberty, it has encouraged me to send you
here enclosed, those Articles of high misdemeanors against the said Gibbons
and Yeardley, who (in the life of the old Protector, so called) were sent to
the President of his Council; but nothing being done therein, it is judged fit,
not only by my self, but by several other honest people of this Isle, that
they might be made public; for the performance of which, I leave it to your
Judgment and Discretion, remaining

Honored Sir, Your affectionate Friend and Servant, A. B.
Jersey 24. of June 1659.
Articles of misdemeanors, exhibited against Col. Rob: Gibbons, Governor of
the Isle of Jersey.
1. THat contrary to the ancient Charters and Privileges of that Isle and
Ordinances made and practiced thereupon, directing the manner how the
quantities of Wool, Leather, and other Commodities granted to the Island and
Castles, ought to be distributed, to wit, by the said Governor, Deputy,
Bailiff and Jurats, who thereby are strictly enjoined to see that all Bills or
Licenses granted, and Returns thereupon may be registered in the Court of
Jersey, by the Clark, paying for each only 10 pence; but contrary thereunto,
the said Col. Gibbons, (without the privity of the Bailiff and Jurats, or
keeping any Registring thereof) has granted Licenses for the said Commodities,
to whom he pleased, reserving for himself, Allies, and particular friends, not
at all related to the Island or Castles, the greatest quantity: all which
illegal and unjust proceedings, are very much to the prejudice of the State,
and to the Merchants and others of that Island: to the State, because none
could control nor check him, either in the granting and disposing of the
quantities of the said Commodities, although 20 times more then is allotted to
the Isle and Castles, nor in the Returns which he has made; so that any part
or parcel of Wool or Leather, has been transported or connived at by him, to
be transported into France for his advantage; being impossible to question the
Transporters. To the Inhabitants, because many of them are denied the benefit
of any part of the said Licenses: And most of those that have any, it is but by
very small parcels, as 6, 7, 8, 10, 12, 15, 20, 25, 30, Todds of Wool, and
other Commodities proportionably; for which he has suffered his Clarks to
extort from the people one Crown for each License, and for the least, half a
Crown, which amounts to a considerable sum of money, amongst the poor
Inhabitants.

2. That the said Governor, in order to satisfy his unsatiable avarice, did
contrive another unjust way by fleecing the poor Inhabitants, in extorting from
those that trade out of the Island six d. per head for a Pass: which Pass,
was to continue but for five days; and then, if (by contrary winds) they were
stayed, the said Inhabitants were forced to come to the Castles, and there take
another Pass, and pay as they did for the former; and so consequently, if the
wind had not served in a month or more, having extorted the like from all
Boats that went but a fishing, or fetching at Sea, weed (called Vrack) with
which the Inhabitants do soil their Lands: which exaction is contrary to the
Charters and Privileges of that Island.

3. That besides those forementioned extortions, he the said Governor found
out a new one, and that very unjust, and dishonorable; ( viz.) by appointing
some of his Servants and Soldiers to drive away the sheep of the poor
Inhabitants to Mount-Orguil Castle, there committing the poor innocent
Creatures prisoners, upon pretenses of having trespassed by entering the Medows
of the State. And that in the Winter season, and when there is no grass, and
that all the Cattle is, by the ancient Laws and Customs of that Isle, known
not to be kept in at that time, all being then Common, except enclosures, which
are kept by strong senses: the said Servants and Soldiers keeping those poor
Creatures, (contrary to Law, Customs and Equity) prisoners in the said Castle,
till the owners did release them, by paying a Ransom for each head, except for
those that were fat, which the Inhabitants could never find nor redeem again,
only the Skins of some, having been found, thrown over the walls of the Castle
of Mount-Orguil.

4. That it is so apparent, that the said Governor has no other respects or
care, but to advance his particular gain and profit, showing the same very
openly, upon a Market day in the Island, when he had the flesh of two, or
three, or more, fat Oxen to be sold that day in the Shambles: the Butchers came
to him, hearing of a great quantity of Fish taken the night before, which was
coming to the Market, telling him, that in case he should suffer the said Fish
to be brought and sold that day, he would lose a great deal upon the sale of
his Beefs: whereupon, the said Governor understanding which way the Cart which
brought the said Fish, did come, commanded some of his Soldiers to stop it
from coming to Market, upon a seeming pretense, that one third part thereof
belonged unto him; but as soon as the Market was over, he released the said
Fish, which was a very great loss to the owners thereof.

5. That, contrary to Law, and by combination, the said Governor has taken
money of persons in that Isle, to release Leather, which he had caused to be
seized from them; upon pretense, it was to be transported for France: and
without any legal proceedings, either in declaring it to the Exchequer, or in
the Court of that Isle, according to the ancient Custom, has of his own
Authority, freed the said Leather, which afterward was transported into
France. And namely, from one John Anquetill he received 20 Crowns, or
thereabouts. And to release Shones and Boots, which his Soldiers had seized
from one John Liscam, twelve Crowns, and afterward the said Boots and Shoos
were transported into France.

6. That about September. 1655. the said Governor combined with the owners of a
great quantity of Tanned-Leather, which came in a Barque from Waymouth into the
Road of the Isles, to defraud the State (by pretending the said Leather came
from Ireland, and was to be transported to St. Maloes;) but one Scouel Searcher
in that Isle hearing of it, went aboard the said Barque, and finding the said
Leather to be English, made seizure of the same, and presently acquainted the
said Governor therewith, who did check the said Officer for making seizure of
Leather, which (as he said) came out of Ireland: whereupon, the said Scouel
went again aboard the said Barque, carrying with him skilful persons, who knew
the difference between English and Irish tanned Leather, who, after a strict
search and visit, found the said Leather to be English; and although the said
Scouel returned back to the said Governor, acquainting him what further
assurance he had, that it was English Leather; yet the said Governor persisted
to be more offended at the said Officer's diligence, and threatened to lay him
by the heels; and thereupon the said Scouel desisted, and the said Barque with
the said Leather, went for St. Maloes, without any further examination, soon
after the said Scouel was by the said Governor, put out of his place of
Searcher: at which proceedings, the said Scouel was much discontented, and gave
out, that he would come into England, to complain of the unjust actions of the
Governor; but he fearing, lest the said Scouel should complain, did reimplace
him again in his place of Searcher.

7. That the said Col. Gibbons, notwithstanding his said extortions; and that
he is allowed pay of Governor, of Captain of Horse, and Captain of Foot in
that Island, and pay of Colonel, and of Captain of Horse and Foot in England;
besides several gifts and grants of his late Highness, of other beneficial
things in Kent, unto him made and granted; and that he receives his said
several Salaries out of the Treasury in England: yet so great is his insatiable
avarice and covetousness, that he is not satisfied with the same, but has
received out of the public Revenue of that Island in money, Wheat, Rents and
profits of diverse medows and Pastures, since the time he first came thither, to
the value of about 2000 l. sterling; for most part of which sum, he has not
accounted at all; and if he has accounted for any part thereof, he has had it
again allowed unto him out of the Exchequer, upon some pretended disbursements,
for Reparations made to Elizabeth-Castle in that Island.

8. That the said Governor, forces the said Inhabitants of that Isle, (at his
will and pleasure) to come and work at the Castle, called Elizabeth: which
Castle is surrounded of the Sea, and the coming in and going out of the said
Castle, very dangerous, unless the Tides are well observed, and that for no
Salary; and about needless Reparations and Fortifications, which have always
been pretended necessary by the form^r Governors, as has been by him: but,
indeed and in truth, it is only to have opportunity, to finger the
States-money, which has always been observed, to be pocketted up by them so
that the State is put to great waste, and needless charges, and the poor people
to a great deal of trouble and hazard, by forcing them to work in the Castle,
(as if they were absolure slaves) and that beyond the time used by the worst of
the former Governors, which was only during one Tide; so cruel beyond them,
has the said Governor been against the poor people; and particularly against
those of St. Laurence Parish, whom he caused to be kept in at work, during the
space of two Tides, it happening thereupon, that when they were going out of
the said Castle, in a very obscure night, five of them were drowned with some
of their Cattle: the death, or rather the murder of those persons, having not
so much as been examined, or enquired after, although it be evident, their
death was occasioned by the said Governor; and some of the Cattle of those
poor people, having escaped drowning, were found next morning by the Castle
Walls, and seized by his Soldiers as wrack.

9. That the said Governor, contrary to the Laws and Customs of that Island,
and the Rules of Wars, and by his Arbitrary will has bastonaded and
miss-used, (to the indangering of their lives) several of the Inhabitants,
committing them close prisoners, keeping them at his will and pleasure; and
when seems good, releases them again, and that without the consent or
knowledge, either of the Jurisdiction of that Isle, or Council of War. And
amongst others, one Mr. Clement Gallys, high Constable of St. Savior, of above
60 years of Age, and one Abraham Beeket Merchant: both which persons have very
much suffered for their affection and faithfulness to the Commonwealth of
England, by the losses of their Estates, long exile, and imprisonment; and
several others.

10 That upon an Order coming to the said Isle, to procure Seamen; and the
Inhabitants knowing, that anciently, upon mature considerations had by the
Kings of England, of the situation of that Isle, with the necessity of raising
and maintaining Fortifications, and Bulwarks round about it, and the constant
Guards by day and night, that the people are obliged at the said Isle, being so
obnoxious to a potent Neighbor, did upon these and other weighty
Considerations, by several Charters confirmed in the third year of the late
Kings Reign, and since; by the Council of State-free, and excuse the
Inhabitants of that Isle from pressing. And some Soldiers coming to the Parish
of St. John's, to press, one of the Inhabitants, by name Francis Marret, who in
a civil manner, asked the said Soldier, By what Order they would press the
said Inhabitants: whereupon one of the Soldiers answered him, he would
presently show him his Warant, which was by Pistolling him through the head;
(saying, This was his Commission, or words to the same effect) whereof he
presently died. And then fell with his Comerades upon the rest of the Company,
cutting and slashing them. Notwithstanding such inhumane murder, proceedings,
and cruelties, the said Governor made no more inquiry or examination of the
fact, than if the said Soldiers had killed and slashed so many Toads, which
indeed was their boasting afterward.

11. That diverse Soldiers and Seamen pretending to have Order to Impresse
persons, went about the Island and seized upon several young People of good
Families, making them believe they should be sent to Jamaica; but in case they
would give them so much money as they demanded (or rather ransomed them at)
they would release them: which their Parents and themselves not daring to ask
them, by what Order they did such things, lest they should be dealt withal, as
the said Maret and others had been: Therefore did choose rather to part with
their money to redeem their Children, then to Complain. Which Barbarous and
unchristian actions, the said Governor connived act, without inflicting any
punishment upon the Offenders, although they knew as well the said evil
practices as the former.

12. That about the month of January 1655, the Barque Bonadventure of Iersey,
John Ahier Master, was taken by an Ostendor near the said Isle. The said Ahier
rather then suffer the loss of all, and to be carried with many Passengers
then aboard Captives, did agree with the said Ostendor for the Redemption of
his Vessel and Goods; whereupon he was set on Shore in the said Isle, to
procure the money agreed upon, and to return with speed, which he did, and
carried it aboard, and thereupon his said Vessel, Passengers, and so much of
the Goods as were left, were freed and brought into the Island; where no sooner
he was arrived, but the said Governor sent for him, calling the said Ahier
Traitor, because he had carried money to the enemy, without first acquainting
him therewith, which he could not do by reason it was night when he was put a
Shore, and the Tide up, that none could get into the Castle where the said
Governor was; and being obliged to return with speed, the said Ahier having by
his diligence redeemed four times more then he carried, notwithstanding the
said Governor to revenge himself of the said Ahier, has refused to give him
Certificats as he does to others, of the Landing of such Goods as were not
Rifled by the enemy, into the Island; although the said Ahier has showed him
Certificats of the Bailiff and Jurats of the Isle, and of the Searcher there
concerning the truth thereof: which injustice tends only to endeavor the ruin
of the said Ahier: who upon the lading at Hampton a quantity of Wool and
Leather, has given security and bonds of great Sums of money for the Delivery
of the same in Jersey, the said Ahier being in danger that the said Bonds, for
want of such Certificats, will be put in prosecution against him at the
Exchequer Court.

13. That the said Colonel Gibbons being appointed by the late Protector and
Council one of the Commissioners for compounding with the Inhabitants of that
Island, and likewise Receiver-General, did contrary to his Instructions, and
most inhumane-like, as soon as the poor Inhabitants had submitted to Compound
for their small estates, which (of most of them) did not consist of above 8,
9.10.12.15.20, pound per annum, He the said Gibbons would send to them to bring
and pay their fine, which many could not perform at the very instant,
whereupon the said Gibbons would not give them further time, but would
presently send such a number of Troopers to their houses, and there to abide
upon free quarter till the poor people had paid in their money, that in several
houses the said Troopers did eat and spoil more then the fines of the parties
amounted unto. And when the sufferers went to complain to the said Gibbons of
their heavy burdens, he would tell them that his son and another Soldier
would lend them money to pay their said fines, and so remove the said Troopers,
provided they would enter in bond to repay the same within such time as they
should limit, and pay him Use for the same, which proffer many of them were
forced (rather than to be utterly ruined) to accept, although the same were
with such horrid extortion as never was heard to have been practiced amongst
the worst of Barbarians, to wit, 20.25. and 30. per centum, for each month, and
yet the said money so lent, was none of his but of the public, which he then
had in Cash, or those appointed by him.

14. That the said Gibbons knowing such Tyrannical proceedings, were directly
contrary to all Law, Justice, or Equity, and apprehending that the same would
be represented in England, did forbid that any person should depart the Isle
without his Pass, or any to send or carry Letters without first bringing them
to him to peruse. And besides, the said Gibbons caused all Vessels to be
searched for Letters which were bound for England, upon which search one Letter
of Mr. Philip Maret was intercepted as it was sending into England, directed to
a Captain that has always been in the Parliament Army, and a great assertor
of the Good Old Cause, which Letter was occasioned by reason of the notorious
Tyrannies of the said Gibbons, therein fully detected, but particularly of his
unjust dealings against several well-affected persons of that Island, who
although innocent he did not exempt from compounding no more then the said
Maret who had very deeply suffered under the enemy, by being declared Traitor
by them, and who seized and sequestered his Estate, by reason the said Maret was
in the Parliament quarters, at, and after the late King was put to death; for
the Redemption of his Estate he was forced to pay to the Enemy a considerable
sum of money. Upon which interception the said Gibbons committed the said Maret
close Prisoner in Mout-orguill: Castle, where he kept him 16 months together
(most part of the time) without Pen, Ink, or Paper, or communication with his
Friends, being there used very B^rbarously: After which time the said Gibbons
released him upon Bayl, and then the said Maret came for England, to complain
and endeavor to have redress: which the said Gibbons discovering, told the
said Maret if he would refer the whole business to him, he would free him
from his troubles, which the said Maret accepted, by reason he observed the
said Gibbons to be very potent at Court, but in lieu of doing according as he
had engaged, he the said Gibbons attempted by sureptitious ways to have the
Estate of the said Maret to be forfeited, who for two years together has
waited in London upon the said Gibbons, being thereby very much damnified as
well in his bodily health as estate, which Imprisonment and troubles has
almost brought his ancient and weakly Mother to the grave.

Articles of misdemeanors, exhibited against Cap. Rich. Yeardley, Deputy
Governor of the Isle of Jersey.
15. THat the said Captain Richard Yeardley as Deputy Governor, has for these
late years, contrary to the privileges granted to the people of that Isle,
taken upon himself to dispose of the Licenses of Wool, Leather, and other
Commodities granted and allotted to the said Isle, to whom he seems good; and
for his particular gain and advantage, does ingrosse a great part of the said
Commodities to himself, by granting Licenses to his Servants, Allies, Factors
and others, not in the least related to the said Isle, to the great prejudice
and damage of Merchants and others Inhabitants of that Isle, amongst whom, and
of right, the said Licenses ought to be distributed; by which unjust
proceedings, several of the said Merchants and Inhabitants, are forced to buy
the said Licenses from the said strangers, at very high rates; it being
evident, and of certain truth, that a great quanting of the said Commodities,
are for his Accounts, and of his Factors and Agents, transported into France,
which cannot be hindered, by reason that none can, or dare control him, either
in the disposing the said Licenses, or in making and giving Returns for the
several Commodities as he does, and seems best for his advantage, all being
at his arbitrary will and disposal; But directly contrary and against the
ancient way practiced in the disposal of the said Licenses; which are to be
distributed in the presence of the Bailiff and Justices there, and registered in
the Court by the Clark, and that for ten pence per License, whereas the said
Yeardly suffers his Clark to take of the poor Inhabitants five shillings, or at
least two and six pence for every License, although but for five todds of wool.

16. That the said Yeardly contrary to the Law and ancient privileges of the
said Isle, and contrary to the Law of War, has by his arbitrary will and
pleasure Imprisoned, and afterward released diverse of the Inhabitants, namely,
one Mr. Ph. Richarson, and lastly, the High Constable, and other Officers of
the Parish of St. Brefade, only for executing the Duty of their places, in
searching a suspected House of the Parrish (where lived one of his Soldiers)
for diverse Sheep, and other things that had been stolen from some of the
inhabitants: And that only by reason that it was a Soldier's House; as if
Soldiers houses were Sanctuaries, and not to be searched.

17. That the said Yeardly very well knowing that by the Establishment of
Jersey, and for the defense thereof, there ought to be kept twenty Troopers
furnished with Horses, for which number there is constant pay allowed from the
Commonwealth; and yet the said Yeardly (Commander in Chief there) connives and
suffers the Commonwealth to be defrauded, (and the Island endangered) by not
keeping above twelve Troopers that have Horses serviceable. Some of the
Troopers which are in pay having never a Horse, and others that have are no way
serviceable; suffering Servants and Children of eleven years of age to be
mustered, and Pay allowed to their Masters for the said Servants and Children.

18. That the said Captain Yeardly to the very much indangering the safety of
the Castles, and of that Isle so considerable to the Commonwealth, does suffer
Soldiers to be lifted in foot Companies that were in actual war in that Isle
against the Commonwealth of England.

19. That the said Captain Richard Yeardly, Deputy Governor of the said Isle,
contrary to the Laws of War, and to the great Scandal of the Government of the
Army, and godly people in that Isle, and ill example to others, does keep
constant Company with the most notorious Cavalliers of that Isle, going often
to their houses there to play at Cards, to feast and drink healths in such
excessive manner, that several times the said Yeardly has been observed to be
so much distempered with Liquor, and so drunk, that he could not scarce go or
stand.

20. That the said Yeardly has several times vowed, if he should remain in the
said Isle, he would take such course that all the Anabaptists there should be
banished the Isle.

21. That it is here credibly informed that the said Captain Richard Yeardly
before and since the dissolving of the late Assembly, did appear very much
disatisfied of the proceedings of those called Commonwealth men, then sitting
in the said Assembly, saying, that they were all for Charles Stuart. And after
the said Assembly was dissolved, he did appear very much discontented and
dissatisfied of the same, muttering against the proceedings of the Army, and
pleading openly against them and their actions; and for the late Protectors
Government, with whom he was the night before the said Dissolution.

22. That the said Captin Richard Yeardly is such a Countenancer of Notorious
Cavaliers in that Isle, that when any well-affected persons have a Suite or
Action at Law against them in any thing considerable, then the said Yeardly
upon the day of trial or hearing of the Cause was sure to come to the Court,
and so effectually countenanced the Cause of such Cavaliers against the
well-affected, yt by his high words and threathings, he did awe the Court in
such manner that the well-affected persons could not have Justice: And
particularly, about the month of October last, he appeared for one grand
Malignant whom he calls Sr. Ph. Carteret, against two known well-affected
persons, (by name) Mr. Thomas Roberts, and Mr. John Ricard, who both of them
have much suffered for their affection, to the renowned long Parliament of
England, who did then sue the said Carteret in Court, by virtue of a certain
Ordinance of Parliament dated the 16th of September 1645. The said
well-affected persons being then railed against, and accused as if they had
been guilty of high Treason, to plead against the said Delinquent; and the said
Roberts then Lieutenant of the Train Band of St. Owens Parrish, and the said
Ricard Ensign, were both dismissed that day from their Commands, by the said
Yeardly; for no other offense (known to them) but for pleading against a
Notorious Malignant.

23. That the said Captain Yeardly being Authorized in that Isle a Commissioner
to have an inspection upon such persons as should be made choice of by the
People to be Justices: He the said Yeardly would rather admit, and cause to be
admitted, some that had been in Arms against the Parl. to the place of
Judicature, then to permit those which had bin chosen, and had bin great
sufferers for the Parliaments Interest, to be admitted in the said place of
Judicature.

24. These high Misdemeanors committed and connived at by the said Col. Rob.
Gibbons, Governor as aforesaid, and the said Yeardley his Deputy, with more of
that nature, can be sufficiently proved, in case certain persons of integrity
and honesty, (having neither relation to the said Gibbons, nor to the Isle, and
such as the said Governor may not be a terror to, as he is to the poor
innocent people there) might go thither with power and authority, not only to
examine the truth of the said Misdemeanors, but likewise all other grievances
of the people: and either to authorize them to reform the same, and see that
the Offenders may receive condign punishment for those enormous and foul
Crimes, according to the Laws and Customs of that Isle; or at least, to make
their Report upon the whole matter formerly, as upon such complaint, was
practiced in Cases of the like nature.

FINIS.

