ARTICLES Concerning the SVRRENDER OF Newark To the Commissioners of both
KINGDOMS: And sent from Colonel General POYNTZ to the Honorable William Lenthal
Esquire; Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons, by Lieutenant Colonel Carleton,
his Adjutant General.

Which Articles were read in the House of Commons, May 9.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That these Articles be
forthwith Printed and Published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
May 11. 1646.

Articles Agreed and Concluded the sixth day of May, 1646. between the
Commissioners hereunder named, Authorized by the committee of both Kingdoms of
England and Scotland on the one part, and the Commissioners hereunder named,
Authorized by the Right Honorable John Lord Bellasyse Governor of Newark,
Lieut: General to His Majesty of the Counties of Nottingham, Lincoln, and
Rutland, and Governor of the Town and Castle of Newark of the other part;
touching the Surrendering of that Garrison, and the Castle, Forts, and Sconces
thereunto belonging, to the Committees of both Kingdoms, for the use of the
Parliament of England.
1. THat the town and Garrison of Newark, with the Castle, Forts, Sconces,
Ordnance, Morter-pieces, Arms, Ammunition, Provisions and Necessaries of War
(not hereafter excepted) be Surrendered on Saturday next by ten of the clock,
into the hands of the Committee of both Kingdom, or whom they shall appoint
for the use of the Parliament of England, without imbezelling any of them.

2. That the Governor of the said Garrison, the Lord Bellasyse, shall march
away with his Servants. Horses, Arms, and their proper Goods, to any Garrison
he shall name, not Besieged or Blockt up, or to his own house, there to remain
unmolested (submitting to all Ordinances of Parliament) and also that the said
Lord Bellasyse shall have liberty upon desire, any time within three Months to
pass beyond Sea, and to have Passes granted for himself and his Servants
accordingly.

3. That all Officers in Commission, or that have formerly been in Commission,
shall march away with their Horses, Arms, and their proper Goods, the Common
Soldiers Horse and Foot, with their Money, Clothes and Swords, to any Garrison
not Besieged or Blockt up, or to their own Houses, as they shall make choice
of. And those that havenot money, to have free Quarter in their March, and not
to march above ten miles in one day, unless they please, and to have Convoys
and Carriages provided for carrying away their Goods; Hostages being given for
the return of the Convoy and Carriages: And such Goods as cannot be removed,
the owners shall have three Months liberty to dispose of them.

4. That all such Officers and Gentlemen now in the Garrison, who shall desire
to depart this Kingdom, shall upon signifying thereof to the Commissioners of
both Kingdoms, any time in three months, have passes for that purpose for
themselves and Servants, engaging themselves during their stay, to do no
disservice to the Parliament.

5. That all such Officers and Soldiers, as by reason of sickness, wounds, or
otherwise, are not able to march out at the time appointed, shall have liberty
to stay in the Town, or some other convenient place, till they be recovered;
and such as are not able to provide maintenance for themselves, shall have care
taken of them.

6. That all Noblemen and Gentlemen in the said Garrison, shall have liberty to
march forth of the same, with their Horses and Arms, and their known menial
Servants, with their Horses and Swords to their own Houses, there to remain
unmolested, submitting to all Orders of Parliament; and to have liberty to
carry away their own proper Goods then, or at any time within three Months, or
to have Passes for themselves and Servants to go beyond Sea, upon desire within
three Months; and in the mean time to engage themselves to do nothing to the
disservice of the Parliament.

7. That all Clergymen in the said Garrison, shall have liberty with their
Horses, Servants, and their own proper Goods, to march to any Garrison unblockt
up, or not besieged, or to their own Houses, there to remain unmolested
(submitting to all Ordinances of Parliament).

8 That the Mayor, Aldermen and Inhabitants of the said Garrison, shall not be
molested in their persons, Privileges, Goods or Estates (submitting to all
Ordinances of Parliament) but to enjoy the same liberties, and to have the same
protection as all other Towns have which are under the power of the Parliament.

9. That the Ladies, Gentlewomen, Wives, Widows, Children and Servants,
belonging to any of the persons mentioned in the former Articles, or any
others, shall have liberty to march forth of the said Garrison, with their
Coaches, Horses, and proper Goods, as in the sixth Article. And if any of them
by reason of sickness, or any other just reason, cannot march forth then, they
shall have liberty to stay there till their recovery, and then to depart
unmolested.

10. That all prisoners now in the said Garrison, Castle or Forts, or any other
Prisoners of War taken by either party since the Siege began, shall forthwith
upon Signing these Articles be set at liberty, unless they be detained for
criminal offenses, charged upon them not as Soldiers.

11. That all persons comprised within these Articles, grounded upon the
Summons of the 27 of April, which begat this present Treaty; be recommended to
compound with the Parliament for their Estates, as coming in before the first
of May; so as they do effectually prosecute such Compositions within two
Months next ensuing the date hereof.

12. If any of the persons above mentioned shall violate any of these Articles,
or any part of them they shall loose the benefit of all the said Articles.

13. Lastly, That for the performance of these Articles, Hostages be mutually
given, and that a Cessation of Arms be continued by both sides, till the time
of Surrender according to these Articles. And that Guards and Convoys be
appointed to protect the Gentlemen, and Soldiers in their march from violence.

Signed by us, Authorized by the Commissioners for both Kingdoms.

Alexander Popham. Fran. thurnhaugh. Jo. Hutchinson. Walter Scot. Hen. Gray.
Rich. Thornton. Gilbert Carr. Philip Jurfleton. F. Douglas. Jo. Archer.


Signed by us Commissioners for the Lord Bellasyse. Marm. Darcy. Ger. Nevil.
Tho. Ingram. Bry. Palms. A. Air. J. Atkins. Anth. Gilby. Simon Fanshaw. Hugh
Cartwright. Edw. Standish.


FINIS.

