ARTICLES Concluded and agreed upon by the Society of the White-Writing and
Printing paper Manufactory of Scotland, in a general Meeting at Edinburgh the
Nineteen day of August One Thousand Six Hundred and Ninty Five Years, in the
Terms whereof Partners are to be assumed.
PRimo, That the Stock already advanced for carrying on the said White paper
Manufactory, with what is yet to be Subscribed for, making up in whole five
Thousand Pound starling; and that the same be divided into Fourteen Hundred
Shares: And that in respect of the great Charges and other Contingencies, which
the Founders and those who have already subscribed have been put to, those who
shall hereafter subscribe are to make payment of four pound starling for each
share, and that by and attour Fighteen shilings starling of Subscription Money,
which by the first Articles was provided payable to Nicholas Dupin late Deput
Governor of the Paper and Linen Manufactories of Scotland, England, and
Ireland, and Denis Manes Esquire, and is now assigned by them to the Joint
stock, in respect of an Liquid Sum obliged to be paid to them, and which they
have accepted of in satisfaction for their said subscription Money.

2 do. That all those who shall hereafter subscribe as Partners shall at the
time of their respective subscriptions, pay in to Alexander Clark present
Thesaurer to the Company, One pound six shilling eight pence sterling, as the
just equal third part of the foresaid sum of Four pound sterling for each
share, that they shall happen to subscribe for, together also with the foresaid
sum of Eighteen shilling sterlings of Subscription Money for each share they
shall happen to subscribe for, or to any other Thesaurer who shall hereafter be
named by plurality of Votes of the General Meeting for receiving thereof, and
the remaining two parts of the said shares, to be paid to the said Alexander
Clark or his Successors in Office, how soon and whenever the same shall be
judged necessary by the General Meeting, or a Committee of seven persons to be
chosen out of their Number for that effect; and that upon twenty one days
Advertisement, to be given by the Thesaurer for the time being, to the
subscribers personally, or at their dwelling places, if they be Residenters in
Scotland, and to the Agents Residenters in Edinburgh for such Englishmen, or
Residenters in England as have already subscribed, or shall hereafter subscribe
as Partners, and who shall be paid by the English Subscribers, and upon their
paying in of the first Moety with the subscription Money as a foresaid, and
subscribing the Articles here engrossed, the said Alexander's Receipt thereof
to be produced at an General Meeting at Edinburgh, shall give the subscribers
as full Interest in the said Manufactory effeiring to their shares, as if they
had originally subscribed the same.

3 tio. That albeit the first Moety and subscription Money aforesaid be paid
in by the subscribers, yet if they shall hereafter fail to pay in like manner
the remaining part of their shares, they shall be subject and liable to pay
Three shilling sterling Monthly for each third part of the share whereof they
shall happen to fail in making due payment being required as aforesaid: And in
case they fail for the space of three Months thereafter to make payment of the
said remaining shares and penalty, then and in that case their respective
shares is to be disposed of by the foresaid society for the use of the Stock;
and they are in all time thereafter to forfeit and amit any interest therein.

4 to. That there shall be two Books prepared by Robert Henderson our present
Clark, or Secretary to the society, and his successors in Office, who are to be
chosen at the General Meeting of the Company, in which all the Actings are to
be Recorded; one whereof is to be still retained by himself while he is in the
Office at Edinburgh, and thereafter delivered up with the grounds and warrands
thereof to his Successor in Office, and the other thereof to be delivered by
him to any person whom those who Reside in England do entrust therewith, to the
effect that from time to time the Partners in England, may be by him certiorat
of the proceedings of the Company: And which Clerk and person Entrusted by
these in England are to be obliged not to remove these Books out of the Kingdom
without warrant from the Company, under the penalty of One hundred pounds
sterling, each.

5 to. That no advantage shall be taken of survivancy, but that the share or
shares of the party or parties Deceased shall fall and belong to their Heirs
and Executors, and also that he or they shall have liberty to sell and dispose
thereupon to any person or persons who will give most for the same; and their
Assigneys shall bruik and enjoy the same privileges and Emoluments as their
Authors might have done, they always producing their assignations and
dispositions thereto at the first or second General Meeting after the purchase,
which are to be recorded in the Registers or Transser. Books of the Company.

6 to. That at the first General Meeting every year there shall be chosen by
plurality of Votes Thirteen persons of their own number, who shall have power
to nominate and choice and Preses or Chairman to the Meeting for the ensuing
year out of the said Thirteen, whereof always the principal Agent for the
English and Residenters in England is to be one if he be present, and which
Thirteen whereof seven is declared to be ane Quorum the Preses always being one
of them by plurality of Votes are to order and determine in all their Meetings
anent the Affairs relating to the Company, and to make all Contracts and
Bargains relative thereto, and to give all necessary orders to the Thesaurer
for debursements, and which Thirteen are to pass under the name of the Common
Council or Assistants to the Company: As also the General Meeting is to make
choice of Five persons out of the said Thirteen (the Preses or Chairman and the
Agent for the Residenters in England being always two of them) as a Committee
of Trade, and whereof any two with the Preses are to be an Quorum (the said
Agent being likewayes advertised of the Meetting) and which Committee and their
Quorum shall have power, and are Authorized, to keep correspondence betwixt the
English Partners and them, anent the Patterns and sale of Paper, and to settle
and agree upon the manner of remitting the Money arising either from the
product of the Joint Stock or Subscriptions in England, to the Thesaurer of the
Company that presently is or that shall happen to be at Edinburgh, for the time
and which Committee are also to be warranted and empowered in case any of the
Subscribers do not pay in their shares as a foresaid, to sell the same to any
other person at the same price, as they were first suscribed for, such
Purchasers and all other singular Successors being always subject to the whole
Laws and Acts of the Company already made or to be made.

7 mo. That the four general meettings of the Company be kept at Edinburgh,
annually upon the days following viz. The first diet upon the first Monday of
November, the second upon the first Monday of February, the Thirdupon the first
Monday of May, and the Fourth upon the First Monday of August, and that in case
the foresaid Assistants find it necessary to have general meetings kept more
frequently, or upon other days, that then the same shall proceed and be holden
Intimation thereof being given to all Parties concerned by affixing placads
upon the Market Cross and Exchange of Edinburgh, and upon the Entry's to the
Exchange at London, bearing the day upon which the meeting is to begin, and
that Twenty days before the same, to the effect those Concerned in the Scots
white-writting-Paper Company may give timous Instructions to their Agent or
Agents residing at Edinburgh there anent.

8 vo, That the Thesaurer to the Company at present and in time coming shall be
obliged to make their Accounts once every four Months anent what they have
received in, what they have paid out, what debt is due to the company, by
whom, and where Lodged, and upon what security, and what is in their hands of
Money and effects. As also by advice of the plurality of the English
Subscribers ane Cash-keeper or Thesaurer in England, is to be appointed who may
receive in the Effects of the Manufactorie and Product thereof, and Money of
the Several Subscribers there and be obliged to hold Count for, and remit the
same to the Thesaurer of the said Office in Scotland once every three Months,
and both of them are to give sufficient Security for that Effect.

9 no. At all general Meetings of the Company each Party if present (or his
Agent if absent) shall have on Vote for ilk five Shares he subscribes for but
in Committies they are only to have one Vote what ever their Interest be,

10 mo. The Books for receiving in of Subscribers are not to be closed until
the whole Fourteen Hundred shares be filled up without consent of the plurality
of Votes at a general Meeting.

11 mo. That no Subscriber shall have liberty to subscribe for more than Twenty
shares, without an Act of the general Meetting.

12 mo. That the Milnes shall be Built and all Expenses defrayed out of the
Stock of the Company: As also the buying of Rags and all other materials
necessary and the hyring of work men and mantenance of them and Prentices fit
for the work, but it being already determined by such of the Company who have
already Subscribed, that there shall be two Milnes instantly Built, whereof one
at Yester and another near Edinburgh whereof the said Nicholas Dupin, and
Denis Manes, are to have the oversight, in respect of the subscription Money
allowed to them by the former Articles, and liquid sums now promitted to be
paid to them in lieu thereof, the said Nicholas Dupin and Denis Manes, are to
attend the Building of the said Milnes, and to oversee the buying of all
materials fit for the same on their own proper Charges, the Work Men and
Materials being all paid out of the joint Stock as aforesaid, and to teach
Prentices the Art of making the said Paper, and not to desert the work until
these Prentices be able to manage the same, and teach others so to do, conform
to an Contract past betwix the said Nicholas Dupin, and Denis Manes on the one
part, and an Committie of the said company authorized for that Effect on the
other part

13 tio. In case any difference arise anent the carrying on of the said work
and managing of the Stock, the same is to be determined by plurality of Votes
of all the whole Proprietors or their Agents who are present at the first
general Meeting there after.

14 to. That it shall be in the power of the Proprietors or their Agents, by
plurality of Votes to make such Laws for the Government of the said Paper
Manufactorie as they shall think expedient at any General meeting, providing
they be not repugnant to, or Inconsistent with the General Laws of this Kingdom.

Lastly. That whoever shall subscribe and take Share in the said Manufactorie,
or who shall Suceed there to buy any title whatsomever shall be subject and
liable to all the Rules of the Society made or to be made.

Here follows a List of the Members who have already Subscribed to the above
Articles.
JOHN Marquis of Tweeddale Lord High Commissioner of Scotland George Lord
Viscount of Tarbat. Sir James Stewart His Majestes Advocat. Sir George Campbel
Knight, Alexander Clark Merchant. Andrew Barclay Writter. Andrew Johnston of
Knock hill, Andrew Duffe Merchant, Archibald Scot Merchant' David Robertson
Writter, Denis Manes Esquire. Francis Borie, George Bell. Merchant George
Lawson Merchant. George Livings;ton Merchant. George Mosman Book Seller, Herman
Le Dru, Mr James Bailie Writter to His Majesty's Signet James Hamilton
Merchant, James Montgomery Merchant at Glasgow, James Stephans Mr. James Young
Writter, Mr. John Buchan Advocat, Mr. John Dickson Secretary to the Lord
Chancellor, Mr. John, Inglis Writter to His Majesty's Signet, John Learmond
Merchant. John Lethem Smith, Mr. John Meineis Advocat, John Raitt Merchant,
John Trotter Merchant. Laurence Wright Writter, Mrs. Mary Flood Nicholas Dupin,
Esquire, Patrick Farmer Merchant Piter La Fite Robert Henderson, Thomas Butler
Esquire Thomas Noake Merchant, Thomas Shelton Linen Draper, Thomas Spence
Writter, William Hume Master of the Gray Paper Mill at Ayton' Willam Spence
Warden to His Majesty's Mint,

