THE Legislative Power IS CHRIST'S PECULIAR PREROGATIVE.

Proved from the 9th of Isaiah, verse. 6. 7.

By W. A.

LONDON, Printed for Livewel Chapman, at the Crown in Popes head alley. 1656.

To the READER.
COnsidering it is the duty of all that love the truth to bear witness
thereunto, every one according to the grace received; and this being an age
wherein the Kingly power of Christ is much controverted, I thought it my duty
to cast in my mite, and to contribute what the Lord has imparted to me, for
the public good. Which consideration has moved me to publish this small
treatise, and to expose it unto the view of others, that they may weigh and
consider the matter-subject thereof. Wherein I have endeavored with as much
brevity and evidence of truth as I could, to vindicate the Sovereign power of
the Lord Jesus, as well intemporal as spiritual matters. In order whereunto, I
thought it meet to open this portion of Scripture in Isaiah, which does so
expressly speak of that subject. And though I cannot apprehend that all men, no
nor all the Saints and faithful Servants of Christ, will assent unto every
Iota; yet I doubt not but they will allow unto me, as I also account it may
duly to allow unto them, a latitude; Not thinking it meet to lie up all men's
Judgments in every scruple, to be of the same mind. However, I am confident of
this, that so far as they see any light of truth appearing, they will be of the
same mind, and that is all I do desire, leaving each one to the liberty of
their Judgments, until fuller light break forth. And let me request this, that
none may take occasion of stumbling, because in some passage I say, that we
find no mention of Juries in Scripture, it having been an ancient received
custom in England, and, as many apprehend it to be, a matter of great
privilege to the conservation of the subjects liberty and free passage of
Justice. For if it may be granted, that these Jurors are indeed Judges of the
causes brought before them, and be men qualifyed and chosen according to the
Rule, and be obliged to give in their Verdicts and Judgments according to the
perfect rule of the Word of Truth; and that in every circuit, whether town,
hundred, or shire, such known fit persons may be constituted, I disallow it
not: it is not the name I take offense at, for I would not strive about words,
though it were desirable we might in our words and speeches learn to speak the
language of Canaan, I mean Scripture Language.

And though I mostly insist upon the Judicials of Moses, as the Rules of
Judgment in all cases, Capital, Criminal, or Civil; yet my intention is not to
bind up all Rules of Judgment, in every case, to that scantling, but withal to
take in the whole Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, which do give light
and direction to the right understanding and application of those rules, unto
each particular case. For my intention is not in this small tractate to
Judaize, but to show the perfection of the whole Word of God, to direct in
matters of Civil Judgments, as well as in Church affairs. And if I sometimes
rebuke sharply, and blame the usurping power of Princes and States, in assuming
the Royal Prerogative of giving Laws unto the people, without Commission from
Christ; you may bear with me, for they are worthy to be reproved. It is not
want of due respect to Magistrates that makes me so bold, but my faithfulness
and love to them moves me to advertise them of the danger. I descend not to a
particular application of those obliquities I touch upon, unto any particular
persons or states, because I see not a clear ground to carry me forth therein,
except they should require it at my hands. It suffices me to show them the
truth, and leave it to themselves to make application, and to all the Saints to
be judges, who shall in fine judge all the World. I should have rejoiced that
some more able would have undertook this task. But when I perceived a deep
silence (I mean as to willing) and many cried out against fifth Monarchy men,
as they are called, that they make a great noise and clamor against this and
that Government, and know not what Government they would have, or at least do
not publish it to the World, I thought it a duly incumbent upon me, to remove
that Calumny, by holding forth the most perfect rule and platform of all
administratians in civil States. If yet it be said, that I have not digested
the whole Fabric and Model of Government into a perfect form; nor projected
meet expedients, whereby it might become practicable amongst us, I confess I
may fall short of expectation in that particular, and in so weighty a case it
would be necessary for the ablest and strongest parts to assist. Yet though the
case be difficult, and our Nation and Government reduced to extremity of hazard
and danger, I doubt not but something might be done, (through the Lords
assistance) in order to our establishment in truth and Peace, would it please
the Lord to open the hearts of the Rulers and people to accept and embrace
wholesome and seasonable Counsel. And then I should look at it as my du^y ^o
communicate my poor weak apprehensions the^e abouts, if I were thereunto
called. But if proposal of the sweetness and amiableness, the Peace and
righteousness of Christ's Government, shall not find so much acceptance, as to
incline the peoples hearts to make experiment and proof of the same, by a
professed subjection to his Royal Sovereign power, it is because the Lord has
more breaking work for us, ere we can be fit to bear his Yoke, whose yoke is
easy and burden light; Especially when we compass it with the heavy yokes of
men. And in such case as this, it would be in vain to attempt any thing of that
Nature. You may consider what the Lord has written of some Country (whether
England or some other Islands, I determine not,) Isai. 24. 13, 14. that there
must be a vintage and pressing of them, like as grapes are pressed, ere they be
fit to be new-moulded. Which I fear may be our case. Accept therefore in good
part what I have here in love and faithfulness tendered; and let every one
improve it to a right end. I know full well that God has reserved the chief
honor of setting up the Kingdom of Christ in it is full luster and beauty, unto
his own people the Jews, to them shall come the first Dominion, Mich. 4. 8. Yet
something we might do, (and I believe we shall, after this breaking work is
over,) in order to the setting up of this Kingdom of Christ in England,
according to the Divine light of the Word of truth, as it is written, Isai. 24.
15. Wherefore with URIM (or Divine light) do ye glorify Jehovah in the Isles of
the Sea: the name of Jehovah the God of Israel. The word Urim, is written with
a short vowel, (...) to intimate that the heavenly light which those Saints
shall have, is far short of that fullness of light, which will shine forth when
Christ comes in person to set up his Kingdom; for he will come with (...) or
fullness of heavenly light and perfection, as Zorobabel intimates in his speech,
Ezr. 2. 63. Which never yet was fulfilled, nor never will ^e till Christ come
again. Yet since there is a Prophecy that the Saints in that Island shall
glorify God with Divine and heavenly light, in order to a reformation of their
civil State, let it be an encouragement and provocation to the Saints in
England to breath after it, and to their utmost to endeavor the same; which is
the Scope the Author aims at.

Farewell. W. A.

That the Legislative Power is Christ's PREROGATIVE.
ISAIAH 9. 6, 7. For unto us a child shall be born, unto us a son shall be
given, the GOVERNMENT shall be upon his shoulder: And his Name shall be called
WONDER, Counselor, The Mighty God, The Everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace.

Of the increase of his GOVERNMENT and Peace shall be no end; upon the Throne
of David, and upon his Kingdom, to order it, and to support it with Judgment
and Justice, from henceforth even for ever: the zeal of the Lord of Hosts will
perform this.


IT is worth our consideration, to take notice of the time when the Prophet
took up this Meditation. It was at a most troublesome season, in the latter end
of Ahaz Reign, a most wicked and Apostate Prince, whom the Lord had set a brand
of perpetual infamy upon, This is that King Ahaz. At which time also, Rezin
King of Syria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah, and the Nations round about, came
against the people of God with open mouth to devour them. In this exigence, and
at this time, the Prophet takes up this Meditation of Christ, and of his
Kingdom, for his own and the Churches consolation in those gloomy days. And
what is it of Christ, that he does (now in this case) fix the eye of his Faith
upon, for the support of his Spirit, now the Church is encompassed with enemies
from abroad, and afflicted with an Apostate Prince at home? Verily, he now acts
his Faith upon the Kingly Office of the MESSIAH, not only as a Savior, to
deliver them from sin and hell (for that was not their present complaint) but
upon his Sovereign Power as a Prince; that, being the most suitable Object for
Faith to work upon in this case, to support their drooping spirit^ in this time
of calamity. And in the Name of the Lord he does assure the people of God, That
in the Lords appointed time they shall have such a Son born unto them, as
should in Gods way, and in Gods time, take upon him the Royal Power over the
Throne and Kingdom of David his Father, and then he shall deliver them from all
their enemies, and from all such fears and tyrannies under which they now
complained. To us (says he) shall a Child be born, unto us shall a Son be
given, and the Government shall be upon his shoulder: And therefore let not
your hearts be dejected, be not despondent. As who should say, This shall not
always be your condition; and be you comforted with the thoughts of this
MESSIAH, and of his righteous and peaceable Government. The connection therefore
of these words with the former, may afford us this Instruction: That the
Meditation of Christ, is a most special Cordial for Christians, in Observe.
the most gloomy, darksome, and calamitous times, that may befall themselves in
particular, or the Churches of Christ in general.

This we see was the Prophets practice here, and so have the Saints done in all
Ages. I might give you many instances, but let one serve for all. Behold David,
a man of Meditations, and never more, then when he was hunted up and down as a
Partridge upon the Mountains; and when he was thus persecuted in the Wilderness
of Judah, he says, Psalm. 63. 5, 6. My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow
and fatness, and my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips: When I remember
thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night-watches. And again he says
in Psalm. 104. 34. My meditation of him shall be sweet: I will be glad in the
Lord.

I may say of these Meditations, they are a Christians Sweets: They are sweet
at all times, and yield to the soul most ravishing consolations, but most
especially in times of sad calamity and distress. For then, when the soul has
found her Beloved, Oh how she hugs him in her arms, and will not let him go!
Cant. 3. 4. And so it was with Jacob, when he had met with Christ in a time of
deep distress, he would not let him go; He knew not how to part with him, if
the Lord had not left Jacob, and given him a new Name, and a Blessing together
with it. But I only give a touch upon it by the way, because it is not the
subject I principally intend to insist upon at this time. Yet let it provoke
Christians at all seasons, but specially in sad hours, when clouds of darkness
and obscurity encompass them round, then let them be take themselves to this
heavenly exercise of Meditation. And whatsoever the matter of your complaints
be, see that you meditate upon something in Christ, that may be a suitable
support in such a case: For it pleases the Father, that in him all fullness
shall dwell; and he has Cordials of all sorts. Are your Rulers turned back,
and become Apostates? Have they broken Protestations, Engagements, and Oaths?
Are your Deliverers become a Snare to you; and are you in danger to be
swallowed up of enemies both at home and abroad? Then remember, Christ shall
reign in Righteousness and Peace; and be assured, deliverance will come, and
the time is now at hand. And let this Meditation be a Cordial to your drooping
spirits: He is such a gracious and righteous Prince, that he will not cast the
servants of God into Prisons, and rent them from their relations, and shut them
close Prisoners, when he has nothing in matter of Fact that may be charged
upon them: No, Christ will not so do, he will not rule over you with rigor, as
Pharaoh did over the Israelites, fear ye not. Spiritual-hearted Christians
Exodus 1. 1^.
may improve this point many ways for their own comfort and support, when they
are in deep afflictions, either inward or outward, in their bodies, in their
names, or in their estates, at sea or at land: Still let this be considered,
There is enough in Christ to help all: And the Meditation of that in Christ,
which answers your condition, will yield you comfort, and make way for your
deliverance. But I pass it over, and come to the words of the Text, which in
the first place I shall open by way of Paraphrase.

Unto us a Child shall be born, unto us a Son shall be given,] Unto whom shall
this child be born? Surely the Prophet here personates the Church of Christ,
and by Us, he means the Church of the Jews, according to what is spoken Isa.
42. 6. and 49. 6. I will give thee for a Covenant to the people, (to wit, the
Jews) and for a Light to the Nations. So that his meaning is, God will give to
the Jews such a Son, as shall sit upon the Throne of David, to execute
Judgment and Justice. It is the promise of a blessing then to come: And the
phrase Unto us, or For us, or Of us a Son shall be born, implies, That the
Messiah here promised (according to his Humane Nature) shall be born and
descend of the Jewish race; And that in the first place, he was given for them,
they then being the only Church of Christ in the world.

And the GOVERNMENT shall be upon his shoulder.] The conjunction argues, That
it was already on his shoulder, in regard of one of his Natures, and shall in
Gods appointed time be laid upon his shoulder in regard of his Humane Nature
also. The word translated (...)
Government, is not elsewhere to be found in Scripture, and therefore it is more
difficult to judge of the proper sense thereof. But it has a near affinity
with two other and (...)
words, which signify Princely Rule and Dominion; according to that of Isa.
32. 1. Princes rule in Judgment; And, By me Kings rule, Prove. 8. 16. And it is
such a power, as Princes, and Conquerors do put forth, (...)
as may appear by the use of that Root, Genesis 32. 28. And when the Prophet
says, That this Government shall be upon his shoulder; it implies, That it is
so weighty, as none but the shoulder of the MESSIAH was able to bear.

And his Name shall be called WONDER, Counselor, The Everlasting Father, The
Prince of Peace] The word which our Translators render Wonderful, is never so
translated by them, but in this place. But it is a Substantive, and not an
Adjective, and properly signifies a WONDER: A new and strange thing, that a
Virgin should conceive, Isa. 7. 14. And that the Power of the Most High should
overshadow a Virgin, and that she should conceive without the help of man: This
is a WONDER indeed.

Counselor,] This word (...)
is generally spoken of such Counselors as are about Princes and Civil
Magistrates; such as were Jonathan and Achitophel in David's time, 1 Chronicles. 27.
32, 33. and such were Azur, Peletiah, and Benajah, in Zedekiahs time, whom we
commonly call Privy- Counselors, or Counselors of State. And this argues,
That the Government here spoken of, is to be understood of Civil-Government.

The Everlasting Father,] Christ is so called in a double respect: 1. Because
he begets us through the Gospel administered by his Servants, 1 Cor. 1. 15.
And hence it is, that Conversion is called a new birth. 2. Christ is the
Everlasting Father, in regard of Creation; He is the God of the spirits of all
flesh, Numb. 16. 22. Moreover, Christ is called, The Prince of Peace; or, as
the Apostle calls him, He is first King of Righteousness, (typified by
Melchisedeck, Genesis 14 18.) and then King of Peace, Heb. 7. 1, 2,

The extent of this Government, is expressed by an unusual form of writing the
word Increase; which here, and nowhere else, that I remember, is written with
Mem finale, in a quadrangular form, to show that this Government (...) ( d)
should spread it self into all the quarters of Heaven, East, West, North and
South: So extensive should the Government be, and so also should be the peace
of the same: And for durance, it should have no end, so long as the world
indures.

The Subject or Object of this Government, about which it should be conversant,
it is not said, Upon Zion, but Upon the Throne and Kingdom of David; to show,
that he means not a Government over the Church in an Ecclesiastical way, but a
Government over the Commonwealth in a Civil way.

The effects of this Government are these two, to order and to support it,
amplified by the means of this Support, Judgment and Justice: For by Justice
the Throne is established, Prove. 16. 12. Thus have you the words briefly
opened. I shall only raise one Observation from the same, as that which I
conceive to be chiefly intended, and shall lay down as a firm Position, which
all the Powers in the world shall not be able to overthrow: That the Power of
Civil-Government is laid upon the shoulder of Jesus Observe.
Christ, the MESSIAH, the Son of David, and to him it does of right belong.

This I take to be the chief scope of the words, and the great Promise here
held forth, That there should come a time, when the MESSIAH should exercise
Rule and Dominion, as a Prince, over all Nations of the world, as well in
Temporal or Civil things, as in Spirituals. Now that I may the better clear
this Truth, consider, That there are three kinds of Government, and they are
all laid upon the shoulder of the MESSIAH.

1. There is an Universal Government, over all the Creation and Workmanship 1.
Universal Government.
of God. The parts of which Government (that I may so speak) are two: 1. The
Law-giving part, which Christ exercised in the Creation, giving unto every
creature a Law, and imprinting the same upon them, or putting the same within
them. And this we commonly call the Law of Nature; whereof we can give no
reason, but the will and pleasure of the Creator. Hence springs those secret
Virtues in the Magnet, and many precious Stones, Herbs, and Minerals; the
ebbings and flowings of the Sea, which Philosophers ignorantly and absurdly
attribute to the Moon, putting the Effect before the Cause. Hence it is, that
Fire burns, and Water quenches, and all things act according to their
several Natures, which is none other, but the Law given them by the Lord Jesus
in the Creation. For we must understand, that the worlds were made by him, Heb.
1. 2. and without him was not any thing made that was made, Joh. 1. 3. And the
same day that he created them, he gave them a Law: To the Heavens he gave their
Motions, the first day, Genesis 1. 1. And on the fourth day he gave the Sun, and
Moon, and Stars their Motions: So that as David says, Psalm. 19. 1, 4, 5. The
Sun like a bridegroom comes forth of his chamber; and rejoices as a strong
man to run his race. And on the fifth day he gave a Law to the Herbs, Trees,
Plants, Fowls, Fishes, Beasts, and every creeping thing, to produce their like,
for propagation of their kind. And as Jeremy says, Chap. 8. ver. 7. The Stork
in the heavens knows her appointed times; and the Turtle, and the Crane, and
the Swallow observe the time of their coming. It was the MESSIAH that appointed
a vicissitude of Seed-time and Harvest, Cold and Heat, Summer and Winter, Day
and Night, Genesis 8. 22. He also set bars and doors to the Sea, saying,
Hitherto thou shall come, and here shall the pride of thy Waves be stayed, Job
38. 11. Thus you see Christ gives a Law to all the Creatures, according to
which they shall act, and cannot do otherwise, without a countermand from him.
And this he does, by his absolute Sovereignty over the Creature, expressed by
the Potters power over the Clay, as Jeremy says, Chap. 18. ver. 6. We are the
clay, and thou our Potter; we are all the work of thine hands. But let none
mistake me, as if I did exclude the other Persons, when I ascribe this Power to
the Son, as Paul also does in the place aforealledged.

The second part of this Government, you may call Providential; I mean, that
Power, whereby he guides and rules all things which himself has made; acting
the Creatures, sometimes besides, and sometime contrary to the first Law given
them. Now this part of Universal-Government, he does exercise, sometimes by
himself alone, and sometimes by the Ministry of his holy Angels.

I shall give some instances, for better explaining of my mind: 1. Christ
exercises this Power himself immediately, in two sorts of actions. As first,
in things that seem casual and accidental; as when he provided a Ram for a
Sacrifice, in stead of Isaac, Genesis 22. 13. And therefore Abraham calls that
place, Jehovah-jireh. So when a man heweth wood, and the Ax falls from the
helve, and kills a man, Deuteronomy. 19. 5. this is attributed to God, Exodus 21. 13.
Secondly, in such things as are above the power of all created Natures, or
contrary to the first Law of Nature given to the Creature: Such are all the
great Miracles which Christ Jesus wrought; The blind receive their sight, and
the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised up,
and the poor receive the Gospel preached unto them. And the restraint which he
puts upon the Creatures, whereof you may read Job 38. 26, 31. He binds up the
sweet influences of Ple^ades, etc. And in the days of Joshua, he caused the
Sun and Moon to stand still, and all the Celestial Motions together with them:
and in the days of Hezekiah, be made them all go backward: He darkened and
eclipsed the Sun at noonday, when the Moon was at full, Luke 23. 44. He also
divided the Sea, and caused his people to pass through; and made the waters to
stand as an heap: In the daytime he led them with a cloud, and all the night
with a light of fire: He clave the Rock in the wilderness, and caused waters to
run down like rivers, Psalm. 78. 13, 14, 15, 16. And which yet may add unto the
Wonder, he made the Rock to follow them, 1 Cor. 10. 4. It was he, that wrought
those Wonders in Egypt, Psalm. 78. 12. and divided the Waters of Jordan, Psalm.
114. 4, 7. and many instances more might be produced of like nature. He
stirs up the Princes of the earth one against another; as it is said, Isa.
64 8. I have raised up one from the North, and he shall come, from the rising
of the Sun shall he call upon my Name: And he shall come upon Princes as upon
mortar, even as the Potter treads clay: He spirits them for such services.
All these, and many more, are the acts of Providence, which he puts forth
immediately by himself. But secondly, Christ often puts forth his acts of
Providence, by the Ministry of his holy Angels, as Officers and Ministers to
him, especially for the good of his chosen people. In regard whereof, this
present world is subjected unto Angels, as the Apostles words imply, Heb. 2. 5.
Thus he used the Ministry of Angels, to deliver the Law upon Mount Sinai,
whilst he revealed himself face to face unto Moses for the space of forty
days together, Heb. 2. 2. Gal. 3. 19. So also, he appoints some of them, to
negotiate the Churches affairs in Princes Courts, Dan. 9. 21, 23. Others to
fight against the enemies of his people, as it is said Dan. 10. 20. Now I will
return to fight with the King of Persia: And 2 Kings 19. 35. one Angel slew in
the Camp of the Assyrians in one night, one hundred eighty five thousand. Let
Swordmen consider what they do, for whom they fight, and against whom they
fight; for Angels go forth to War, and Swords and Bullets cannot pierce them:
They are ministering Spirits, sent forth for the good of them that are heirs of
Salvation. Therefore, offend not one of these little ones that believe in me;
for I say unto you, That in heaven their Angels do always behold the face of
my Father which is in heaven. The Angels have a special charge to keep them;
and as David says, Psalm. 34. 7. The Angel of the Lord encampeth about them
that fear him. Remember here the mad attempt of the King of Assyria against
Elisha, the Lords Prophet, and the guard of Angels that was about him, 2 Kings
6. 16, 17, 18. They keep watch about them, and in time of assault, they turn
aside many a Bullet, and many a thrust from the Saints. And as they are for
protection and defense to them; so they will be an offense to such as do them
wrong. They direct the weapons of Christ's Servants to do execution, and add
strength unto their hands. And if this be not enough to deter
Fourth-Monarchy-men from meddling with the Servants of Christ; then let them
know, That they have not only an Host of Angels to encounter with, but Christ
himself, who rides forth upon his White Horse, with a Vesture dipped in blood,
Rev. 19. 11, 13. Isa. 63. 2. And he is a man of War, and regards neither
Troopers nor Footmen, Exodus 15. 3. At his appearance, the stoutest Captains
shall cry out to the Mountains, and to Rocks, to fall upon them, and hide them
from the wrath of the Lamb, Rev. 6. 16. Isa. 2. 19. Remember, that in the days
of his Flesh, the Soldiers and Officers that came to meddle with him, gave
back, and fell to the ground, at one mild word of his, I am he. What then will
you do, when he comes with his Power and great Glory? Let this be considered,
of those that smite their fellow servants, and evil entreat his Messengers,
that wait for the coming of this glorious Day of the Lord; and know, That you
have been forewarned. Furthermore, Christ improveth the Ministry of holy
Angels, for provision, as when Elijah wanted meat, 1 Kings 19. 6, 7. And for
Instruction, Dan. 8. 16. and 9. 21. And for Direction of our course, Genesis 21.
17, And sometimes for Correction of his own Servanrs, 1 Chronicles. 21. 15. Yea,
Christ makes use of evil Angels for punishment of wicked men, Psalm. 78. 49.
and sometimes (but very rarely) for the trial of his own Servants, Job 1. 12.
Thus you see the vast extent of Christ's Government over all the Creatures;
which is such, as all men will confess it is too heavy for any, but the
shoulder of Christ to bear. But this is not the Government which is principally
intended in the Text: for this is not restrained to the Throne and Kingdom of
David, as in the Text; nor could it be foretold as a matter then to come, for
Christ has exercised this his Sovereign Power and Government over the whole
Creature, even from the beginning of the world. And all men will confess, That
this Power of Government, is too weighty for any but the shoulder of Christ to
bear.

2. There is another Government, which Christ exercises over his Church, as
King of Saints, Rev. 15. 3. And this we call Church Government: Which
Government appertains also unto the MESSIAH. In respect whereof, he is sometime
called King of Zion, Joh. 12. 15. sometime King Jesus, Act. 17. 7. sometime the
Head of his Church, 1 Cor. 11. 3. Ephesians. 5. 23. sometime, The Bridegroom, Joh. 3.
29. Mat. 9. 15. All which expressions do hold forth the Sovereign Power and
Government of Christ over his Church. And this Government has also two parts:
1. The Lawgiving Power. 2. The Ministerial Power. First then, Christ Jesus the
MESSIAH has the Power to give Laws unto his Church, and to appoint Officers
and Censures. And this Power belongs only to him, as is generally acknowledged
of all that are not grossly Popish and Antichristian. Which Power is so weighty,
that no shoulder is able to bear it, but the shoulder of Christ. He both gives
them Laws, and appoints Officers, and qualifieth them with gifts fit for their
several Functions; and for that end he ascended up on high, Ephesians. 4. 8.
Secondly, there is a Ministerial Power, which Christ has committed, first, to
his Church, to choose their own Officers, Acts 6. 3. Which Officers are of four
sorts, Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons, resembled by the four living
Creatures, Rev. 4. 6, 7. Secondly, Christ has more especially committed the
Power of Ministry unto these Officers. And in respect of this Power and
Government over the Church, Christ is called That Prophet, by way of
excellency, Joh. 6. 14. and 1. 21, 25. Acts 3. 23. Of whom Moses prophesied,
Deuteronomy. 18. 18. But yet this is not the Government principally intended by the
Prophet Isaiah.

But 3. there is another kind of Government, such as Rulers and Princes
exercise over their Subjects, which we commonly call Civil-Government. This
Government is conversant about the Bodies and Estates of men, and the well
ordering of the Commonwealth in Justice and Judgment: And this is that
Government, of which the Prophet does here principally speak, as may appeat
both from the Text it self, and from other Scriptures also, that speak of this
Kingdom of the MESSIAH.

Now from the Text you may take notice of four things principally, that argue
this Government to be spoken of Civil-Government. As 1. The Name or Style given
to the Government. 2. The Names given unto the Messiah or chief Governor. 3.
The Subject or Object of his Government. 4. The Acts of Government which he
puts forth.

1. For the Style given to this Government, it is called Hammisrah, which we
translate Government, or Principality. This (...)
word is never used in any other Text save this, and it is derived from a (...)
word, which signifies such a Princely and Prevailing Power, as Combatants put
forth to gain the Conquest; as you may read Genesis 32. 28. Hos. 12. 3. where
that word only is used, speaking of Jacobs wrestling with the Angel for
victory. Now Wrestlers or Combatants, do not put forth any act of Church Power
one against another, in their Conflicts, but Civil Power. Now because the word
is so rarely used, it is more difficult to give the proper genuine sense of the
same: Yet we may judge of it, partly by two other ( g) words, which have a near
affinity with it, both in writing and (...) From (...) comes (...) a Prince,
and (...) a Princess, the name of Abraham's wife.
signification. Which words do both of them signify Dominion, Rule, and
Principality, such as Kings and Princes do exercise; according to that of Isa.
32. 1. Princes rule in judgment; and Prove. 8. 16. By me Princes rule. Now all
men will grant, That the Power of Princes and Judges, is a Civil Power; it
appertains not to them to intermeddle with Ecclesiastical Power. Wherefore we
may conclude, That the Government which is here prophesied of, that it shall be
upon the shoulder of the Messiah, is Civil Government.

2. The Names here given to the Messiah, do argue, That the Government here
spoken of, is to be understood principally of Civil Government: For first, he
is not called, The great High Priest; or, The Priest over the House of God: nor
is he called, The Bridegroom, nor The Head of the Church, which are Titles that
import his Sovereignty over the Church: But he is called Counselor (...)
: A Title never given to Church Officers, but to Civil Officers, such as attend
upon Princes; as Jonathan and Achitophel, 1 Chronicles. 27. 32, 33. So also Azur,
Peletiah, and B^najah were Counselors to Zedekiah, Ezekiel. 11. 1, 2. Such
Counselors as these, we use to call Privy-Counsellors, or Counselors of
State. Again, Christ is here called, (...)
The Prince of Peace: and the word Prince is derived of such a word, as
signifies Kingly Rule and Dominion, as was showed before. Wherefore the Apostle
says of this Messiah, that he is first King of Righteousness, and then King of
Peace, Heb. 7. 1, 2. The Prophet does not call him King of Zion, or King of
Saints, (for that would have implied, that the Government spoken of had been
Ecclesiastical) but Prince of Peace: For Peace is the proper effect of his
Wisdom and Counsel, and the Concomitant or effect of Judgment and Justice.
Wherefore it must necessarily be understood, that the Government spoken of in
the Text, is chiefly meant of Civil Government.

3. The Subject or Object of this Government, does argue as much. It is a
Government upon or over the Throne and Kingdom of David: And that cannot be
understood of any other Government, but that which we call Civil. Had it been
said, Over Zion, or Over Zion mine holy Hill, or Over Zion the City of our
solemn^ties, we might well have understood the Government spoken of to be
Ecclesiastical. But the Throne and Kingdom of David, is never put for
Ecclesiastical Power, in all the Scriptures that I remember.

4. The Acts of this Government are such, as do declare it to be meant of Civil
Jurisdiction: For Judgment and Justice are Acts of Civil Power, and they are
the Support^rs of the Royal Throne, as Solomon shows, Prove. 16. 12. Whereas
Holiness, is the main Supporter of Church Government, according as it is said,
Psalm. 93. 5. Holiness becomes thy House for ever.

Thus you see it cleared from the Text, That the Government there spoken of,
must necessarily be understood of Civil Government. Let me now produce some
Arguments of the like nature, drawn from other Scriptures, that speak of the
Kingdom of the Messiah: And they will demonstratively prove, That Civil
Government and Jurisdiction, do of right belong unto the Messiah, the Son of
David, our Lord Jesus Christ, that blessed and only Potentate, 1 Timothy 6. 15.
These Arguments I shall reduce to six Heads:

1. The Style given to the Government of the Messiah, argues that it is not
Ecclesiastical but Civil. It is called an Absolute (...)
Sovereignty, Dominion, or Sultanship, Dan. 7. 14. Hence the Turks derive the
Name of their chiefest Lords, whom they call Sultans. This is such a power of
Government, as cannot be applied to Church Government, but is always attributed
to earthly Princes Power, in reference to men's persons and estates, and
ordering of the Commonwealths Affairs; which is a Power that was never allowed
to Churches or Church Officers. And David speaking of that Power which the
Messiah should put forth, says, Psalm. 72. 8. He shall have dominion from sea
to sea, and from the river to the ends of the earth. The word there used for
(...)
Dominion, does signify such a power as is inconsistent with Church
Government: It is such a Dominion and Rule, as Masters do exercise over their
servants, Levit. 25. 43. Thou shall not rule over him with rigor: or, as Adam
did exercise over the fishes of the sea, and fowls of the air, and every thing
that moves upon the earth, Genesis 1. 28. where the same word is used. And who
can with any pretense or color of reason suppose, That that should be an
Ecclesiastical Power? Yea, it is such a ruling power, as Princes exercise over
their enemies, Psalm. 110. 2. Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies. Wherefore
we must needs conclude, That Civil Government does of Right belong to Jesus
Christ, unless we shall willingly shut our eyes against the clear light of
Truth.

2. The Titles given to Christ do argue, That Civil Power belongs to him. He is
called, The GREAT KING, in reference to Jerusalem, or the Commonwealth, Man. 5.
35. He is called also, King of kings, and Lord of lords, Rev. 19. 16. Now in
the Churches there is but one King, and one Lord. Sometimes I alleged also 1 Timothy 6. 15. and applied those words, The blessed and only Potentate, unto
Christ; as if the Apostle had spoken immediately of Christ. Lest any therefore
should mistake the place, as I also did, till I looked into the Original, I
thought it good to advertise every one, to examine duly the words in their
proper tongue, ere they rely upon any interpretation given. But yet the
mistake is not great, because that which is spoken of the Divine Nature, may
also by communication of properties be attributed to the Humane Nature united
to the Second Person. He is the King of kings, and Lord of lords, as has been
showed.

3. We may fetch another Argument, from the Royal Seat of the Messiahs
Government, or the place of his Throne and Court; which is not here said to be
Zion, or the Church; but Jerusalem: and Jerusalem, in Scripture Phrase, is
frequently put for the Civil State. And for that cause, it is called, The City
of the great King, Mat. 5. 35. Swear not by Jerusalem, for it is the City of
the great King. Why? were not Hebron, and Samaria, and other Cities of Israel
and Judah, his Cities? Yea verily, but they are not the Royal Seat of this
great King, or the place of his Court and Throne, the place of his residence.
That will be at Jerusalem: For, There do the thrones of Judgment remain, (or
sit) the thrones of the house of David, Psalm. 122. 5. Whence it is, that most
of the Prophecies concerning the Kingdom of the Messiah, do still ^un upon
Jerusalem: I will create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a praise; and, I
will rejoice in Jerusalem, Isa. 65. ^8, 19. and Isa. 62. 7. Ye that are the
Lords remembranc^rs, keep not silence; and give him no rest, till he establish,
and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the midst of the earth. And in the 3d
Verse of that Chapter, he says, That Jerusalem shall be a Royal Diadem; as if
that were the Royal Seat of this great King, the MESSIAH. And Zachary
prophesying of the Kingdom of this great King, bids Zion (that is, the Church)
rejoice, not only for the presence of the Lord in his Church, but also because
the Lord Jesus, the Messiah, would again choose Jerusalem to be his Royal Seat,
Zech. 2. 10, 12. and Zech. 14. 16, 17. And it shall come to pass, that every
one that is left of all the Nations which came against Jerusalem, shall even go
up from year to year to worship the King, the Lord of Hosts, and to keep the
feast of Tabernacles: And it shall be, that whosoever will not come up of the
families of the earth to Jerusalem, to worship the King, the Lord of Hosts,
even upon them shall be no rain. This King, undoubtedly is King Jesus, the
promised Messiah, of whom the Angel speaks to Mary, Luke 1. 32. He shall be
great, or shall be called the son of the MOST HIGH: and the Lord God shall give
unto him the Throne of his Father David: And he shall reign over the house of
Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end. And Thrones and
Kingdoms are always put for Civil Jurisdiction and Power, not for Church Power.
And l^st any should be mistaken, to think that all the Scriptures which speak
of Christ's Kingdom, are to be understood of his Spiritual Government over his
Church, the Prophet Isaiah tells us, That he shall reign as King both in Mount
Zion, and in Jerusalem; that is, both in Church and Civil State, Isa. 24. 23.
If any shall say, That this will necessarily ^nferre Christ's Personal reign for
a thousand years: I answer, That it will not necessarily follow. But that is
not my subject at this ^a^e to discuss. Possibly there may be a mistake, both
in them that avouch the thousand years Personal reign, and in them that deny
Christ's Rule and Government in Civil things. But whether he will Personally
reign on earth a thousand years, or no, doubtless he will Personally appear,
and will assume his Kingdom, and order the same. And it is one thing to appear,
and to order and constitute Government; another thing to reside and exercise
the same. But I shall conclude nothing positively as to that particular.

4. The Acts of Judgment and Justice which are put forth in this Kingdom of
the Messiah, are such as appertain to Civil, not unto Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction. Let me instance in some Acts, and I shall begin with that which
David mentions, Psalm. 72. 14. He shall judge thy people with justice, and thy
poor with judgment: He shall redeem their soul from sorce and violence: which
Churches cannot do by Church Power. And Psalm. 76. 12. He cutteth off the spirit
of Princes. And Psalm. 110. 5, 6. He strikes through Kings in the day of his
wrath: He shall judge among the Nations, he shall fill [them] with dead bodies;
he shall wound the Heads over many countries. And Rev. 19. 15. Out of his mouth
goes a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the Nations: and he shall
rule them with a Rod of iron. And Daniel speaking of this Kingdom of the
Messiah, and the little Stone cut out of the Mountain without hands, says,
Dan. 2. 35, 45. Then were broken in pieces (as one) the iron, the clay, the
brass, the silver, and the gold, and they became as the chaff of the summer
threshing-floors, and the wind carried them away, that no place of them was
sound: and the stone that smote the Image, became a great Mountain, and filled
all the earth. And ver. 45. he says, that the Stone cut out of the Mountain
without hands, it brake in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver,
and the gold. Now how disproportionable is it unto Church Power, To rescue men
from force and violence; to behead Princes; to strike through Kings in wrath;
to judge Nations with such a Judgment as fills them with dead bodies; to
wound Captains and Rulers over many Nations; to smite the Nations, and rule
them with an iron Rod; yea, to break them, and make them as the dust of the
Summer threshing-floors? These are such acts as do not become Churches to
exercise as Churches. Should it be put unto Princes and Rulers to judge,
whether it be fit to allow Churches such a power; I trow they would answer in
the Negative. They will tell you, That the Acts aforementioned appertain to the
Jurisdiction of Civil Princes and Potentates. And if so, how can it be denied,
that this Civil Power belongs to the Messiah, who is King of kings, and Lord of
lords; or whom, David, Daniel, and John did prophecy, in the places
aforementioned?

5. The Acknowledgements which the People, Nations, and Languages, yea, and
Kings themselves, do tender unto this great King (the Messiah) and to his
Government, are such, as do plainly argue, That Civil Jurisdiction belongs to
Christ Jesus, the Messiah. Let me instance in two particulars: 1. Homage and
Fealty is due to Christ, as you may read Dan. 7. 14. All People, Nations, and
Languages shall serve him, or do Homage to him. And Psalm. 72. 11. All Kings
shall bow down to him; all the Nations shall do him homage. And ver. 9. They
that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him; and his enemies shall lick
the dust. 2. Tribute: Not that this King Jesus will put upon them Taxes,
Impositions, Customs, Excize, No Customs or Excize in the days of the Messiah.
or the like (that is contrary to his nature, and the sweetness of his
Government) but the Nations come freely, and offer gifts: His people are a
willing people in the day of his power. And thus it is said, Psa. 72. 10, 15.
The Kings of Tarshish, and the Isles, shall bring an offering; the Kings David
seems to be a Fifth Monarchy man.
of Sheba and Seba shall offer a gift: Yea, he shall live, and to him one shall
give of the gold of Ophir. Oh! how would the Priests and Shavelings of our Age
leap for joy, if. such honor might be done to them by the Grandees of the
World, and by the vulgar sort also? If they should come and bow to them; but
most of all, if they would come and bring them all manner of costly
Merchandise, and the gold of Ophir too! Oh how would their hearts skip for joy!
But it is much to be feared, if this should be the condition of the carnal proud
Clergymen (as they are called) they would do, as sometimes good Aaron did,
make Calves to please the people. Indeed, such free offerings and gifts may
well beseem the Royalty of Christ's Kingdom, (when the Jews shall be called) to
support the vast expense, which the Rulers must necessarily and inevitably
undergo, in reparation of their Cities and houses, and entertainment of their
own Countrymen, which will be daily flocking, as Doves to the Windows. And
also, for the honorable entertainment and accommodation of the Messengers and
Ambassadors, which will be sent unto them from all the Nations in every Quarter
of the World. And also, as a thankful acknowledgement unto the Messiah, who by
this time will have turned their Swords into Plow-shares, and their Spears into
Pruning Hooks, so as they shall never learn war any more. No marvel then, if
the mercenary Soldiers of this Age, cannot endure to hear of this Kingdom, or
Fifth Monarchy; for then away goes Swords and Spears, and Courts of Guard,
which is now their livelihood and maintenance. But there will be no need of
such things then.

6. Jesus Christ has formerly exercised Civil Power. He has given Laws,
Statutes, and Judgments, and granted Commission unto meet Officers to execute
the same; and therefore the power of Civil Government does belong to him of
right. Now that Christ has exercised such a power, is manifest: Witness all
the Laws, Statutes, and Judgments, given to Gods people by the hand of Moses,
when he brought them out of the Land of Egypt. And that Government he
exercised for the space of many hundreds of years together, until the
Babylonish Captivity, when Nebuchadnezzar, the Head of Image-government,
wrested it (as I may say) out of Christ's hand. But Christ has promised, That
as formerly he did exercise this power, so he will assume this power again,
when he has broken down all Image-government; and then he will restore Judges
unto his people as at the first, and Counselors as at the beginning, Isa. 1.
26. And then shall his people have no Laws nor Judgments but his; as the
Prophet says, Isa. 33. 22. Jehovah is our Judge, Jehovah is our Lawgiver,
Jehovah is our King, he will save us. From all which Arguments laid together,
we may undoubtedly conclude, That the power of Civil Government does of right
belong unto Jesus Christ, the Messiah; and that he will again resume this
power, and the exercise thereof, when he has broken those powers that have
Outed him from his Inheritance; and then will he reign most gloriously. This
was the Opinion of David and Isaiah, and all the Prophets, as has been showed:
And this was the Opinion of the eleven Apostles, as may appear by the Question
they put to our Lord Jesus after his Resurrection, Acts 1. 6. Lord, will thou
at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel? A Kingdom then they did expect.
And mark Christ's answer; He does not deny, that such a Kingdom should be,
(which in faithfulness he would have done, to undeceive them, had their
judgments been erroneous) but he tells them, their Question was unseasonable:
It is not for you to know the times and seasons, which the Father has put in
his own power. Belike then, the Lord Jesus was of the same judgment too, as
well as his Apostles and Prophets of old: only it was not then a The Fifth
Monarchy is an ancient Opinion
fit season for them to inquire about it, nor sor him to answer. He had another
manner of Kingdom to instruct them in, those forty days which he was
conversant with them; being now about to abolish the old Paedagogie of the
Jewish Administrations, and to institute more Spiritual and Gospel-like
Ordinances in the room. And it was as necessary to take up those forty days
to principle them in all things that concerned that Kingdom, as formerly to
instruct Moses: and therefore he supersedes that inquiry for that time. But if
you mark it, you shall find, that after the pouring forth of the Spirit at the
day of Pentecost, Peter preaches this Kingdom, and calls it the time of the
restitution of all things, spoken of by the mouth of all the holy Prophets
since the world began, Act. 3 21. And the word (...).
Restitution, does signify a setting of a thing in its right and ancient
estate, as those who understand the Language do well know: And it is the same
word which the Apostles used, when they asked that Question aforementioned.
This therefore is no new or singular Opinion, but such as the godly people of
those times were generally taken with; us does also appear by the request which
the Mother of Zebedees children made to Christ, in behalf of her two Sons,
James and John, that they might sit, the one on his right hand, and the other
on his left hand in his Kingdom, Mat. 20. 20. To whom Christ answers, and tells
her* That that special favor was to be conferred on such, for whom the Father
had prepared it: Which does infer, That such a Kingdom as they expected, should
in due season be; wherein the Lord Jesus should be honored as a King in his
Kingdom, and it should be the special honor of some or other to sit next him
upon his Throne, both at his right hand and at his left. But he blames them for
their ignorance and ambition, and tells them, there must be a time of ministry
and of suffering first; and sets his example before them for a pattern: Secretly
implying, That as the Father puts excelling honor upon the Son above all
others, in regard of his low and voluntary abasement of himself, Phil. 2. 9. So
those that pledge him deepest in that Cup, shall be honored with that favor
which they requested, to sit next unto him in his Kingdom: which may encourage
Christians to be willing to suffer for Christ cheerfully; they shall be no
losers by it. I may close up this Point with one New Testament Argument. Our
Savior says, All power is given to me, Mat. 28 18. And Paul says, That the
Civil Magistrate is some part of power, Romans 13. 1. Whence the Conclusion
naturally arises, That Civil Power belongs to Christ, by gift from the Father.
And Paul tells Timothy, that God, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the
King of kings, etc. will make an open show of Christ Jesus our Lord at his
appearing. And what show is it, that the Father will make of Christ at that
day? Doubtless, he will make a show of him in all his Glory; but especially in
this part of his Glory, as Sovereign Lord and King over all the Princes of the
World, as those words without doubt do import. For else, if the Apostle had
meant only or principally to advertise Timothy, that the Father would have
made a show of Christ as Head of his Church, he might have styled him, The
Father, King of Saints, or King of Sion, as well as King of kings. John
therefore calls him, King of kings, and Lord of lords, Revelat. 19. 16.

So that if Christian Gentiles, in this peevish and perverse generation,
toward the end of Antichrists reign, were not wilfully blind, and in this
respect worse then Jews, they would not deny this part of Christ's Royal Power.
For, as the Prophets and Apostles, and Primitive Christians, yea Christ himself
were of this judgment, That there should be a time when Christ should reign as
a King in this World, and those also that have suffered with him, Rev. 5. 10.
So the Jews at this day believe it, and wait for it: Only God has not yet
opened their eyes to see, and their hearts to believe, That that Jesus which
was born of Mary, of the Seed of David, in the days of Herod, is that promised
Messiah, whereof the Prophets do speak. Yet some of them do confess, That since
the days of their Fathers, there has not been any so like the Messiah, as
this Jesus, which we Christians do profess. Of whom Josephus gives a very
honorable testimony, doubting whether he might call him a mere Man, in regard
of the Divine Majesty that appeared in him. Oh! that their eyes were once
opened to see him, whom they have pierced, as Zachary prophesies; they would
then acknowledge, That Civil Power, yea All Power, does belong to him. And
truly, such Christians as deny it, do declare themselves to be Antichristian.
But let them beware of siding with Antichrist, and using Christ, as Hanun did
the Messengers of David, cutting off half of his hair, and half of his
garments; I mean, half of his Royalty, lest it cost them as dear, as it did the
Ammonites and their Abettors. I have been the larger in proof of this Truth,
which is the persecuted Truth of this Generation; forasmuch as some carnal
Christians, who mind their own pomp and glory, more then the Kingdom of
Christ, do deny that any such thing shall be, or say that it is yet afar off,
and make a scoff at such as they call Fifth Monarchy m^n, who long for nothing
more, then the coming of this Kingdom. And if the world were not besotted with
a love unto old Customs and vain Pomp, they would see reason to be willing of
this Kingdom, wherein there will be no Taxes, Customs, Excize, nor any such
thing: Swords then will be turned into Plow-shares, and each man may live in
peace and quier, enjoying his own Right. They shall not then be hurried to
Prisons, and shut up strait Prisoners, and rent from their relations, when
there does appear no matter of Fact to be charged upon them. Such servitude
will not be heard of in that Kingdom. Wherefore, methinks, worldly men, upon a
civil account, should be willing of such a Government, as this Kingdom of
Christ will be.

Having now proved, That all Power belongs originally unto God How Christ
came by his Kingly Power.
the Father, and to Jesus Christ his Son; and that the Power of Civil
Government and Jurisdiction, in special belongs unto Jesus Christ, it will be
necessary to inquire, how he came by this Power. For clearing of which, we are
to consider, that Royal Power may be obtained three ways: Either by Lineal
Descent from the Father to the Son; or by Gift, or by Conquest. The Question
then will be, By which of these ways the Messiah obtained his Kingdom? I
answer, Not by Descent, because the Father ever lives: Nor by Conquest, for
that were the highest point of Disloyalty and Treason that could be imagined,
for the Son to rise up against his Father, and to wrest his Power out of his
hands.

Filius ante diem Patrios inquirit in annos. But Jesus Christ obtained his
Power and Sovereignty by Gift from his Father: Psalm. 2. 8. Ask of me, and I
will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost ends of the
earth for thy possession. And Dan. 7. 14. There was given him absolu^e
Sovereignty, and Glory, and a Kingdom, that all People, Nations, and Languages
should serve him. Thus you see in what way he obtained this Power and Dominion,
to wit, by free Gift from the Father: Even as Solomon (a Type of the Messiah)
obtained the Kingdom by the gift of David his father, whilst he yet lived, who
caused the Crown to be set upon his Sons head, 1 King. 1. 32, 34. He does not
usurp it, as Adonijah would have done.

Now this having been proved, That the Messiah has all Power in heaven and
earth, and by consequence all Civil Power, and that in a most just and
righteous way, to wit, by free donation from the Father: It will be requisite,
to show what part of this Sovereign Power he reserveth unto himself, and what
part he has made over to his Vicegerents, the Princes and Rulers of the
Earth; that so Christ may have his due, and Caesar also that which appertains
to him. Take therefore these two Positions for a certain Truth.

1. That all Power is given to Christ, Mat. 28. 18. and by consequence, all
Civil Power of making Laws and Judgments, and executing the same: Jehovah is
our Judge, Jehovah is our Law giver, Jehovah is our King, he will save us, Isa.
33. 22. 2. No Man nor Angel may arrogate or wrest out of Christ's hand, that
Power which the Father has given him, nor any part thereof, except they have a
deputation or delegation from him; but it will be Sacrilege and High Treason
against the Kingly Power and Government of Christ.
Antichrist indeed has challenged such a Power in Spirituals; but his
arrogance begins daily more and more to be exploded. And the ten Kings or
Kingdoms of the Fourth-Monarchy, have exercised such a Juridical and Judicial
Power, but quo jure, by what right, it will be spoken of by and by. Let us
first therefore consider, what part of Power the Messiah this great King, has
reserved to himself, as his peculiar Prerogative.

For clearing of which point, let it be considered, That there are two parts of
Civil Power, to wit, a Lordly Commanding Power, and a Ministerial Power: or the
Power of giving Laws, and the Power of executing the same. The former, namely,
The power of giving Laws, or the Legislative Power, which is a Lordly Sovereign
Power, Christ has reserved to himself, as his peculiar Royalty. This glory he
will not give to another; No created Being in heaven or in earth being capable
of such a Power, saving he that is God-Man. It is too weighty for any shoulder,
but the shoulder of the Messiah to bear; as I might instance in the three
kinds of Government, Universal, Ecclesiastic^l, and Civil. And it is generally
granted of all, that none but he can give a Law to the whole Creature. None but
he can give Laws to his Church. Only the dispute is, whether he only has
this Sovereign Power to give Laws and Judgments in Civil Matters. For answer
whereunto, take that of Isaiab before-alledged, Jehovah is our Lawgiver. And
that this Power belongs to him only, will better appear, if we consider these
two things: 1. What Law is. 2. What are the intrinsecal properties of Law.

For the 1. What Law is? I answer, That Law is a prescribed Rule, for What Law
is.
the well ordering of men's Conversation, whether in Church or in Commonwealth:
And Laws may be distinguished into two sorts, Moral and Judicial. As for the
distinction of Laws into Moral and Civil Laws, it is of little use: For what
are Civil Laws, but such as concern the Manners of men, and their conversation
one toward, or with another? So that Civil Laws (rightly so called) are no
other, but Moral Laws: only Moral Laws are of a larger extent, and do
comprehend the duties we owe to God, as well as man. But this I say, That there
is no Civil Law, but is comprehended within the Decalogue, which we call Moral
Laws. Now all men will confess, That it is Christ's Prerogative only, to give
Moral Laws, as you may read in the 20 of Exodus, etc. And that he only has
this power, will appear upon these Grounds or Reasons: 1. Because he is our
Creator, and has made us, Isa. 43. 7. Every one that is called by my Name, I
have created him for my glory, I have formed him, yea I have made him. And who
can give a Law to the Creature, but the Creator? 2. He is our Redeemer; and for
this reason he gives Laws to his people, Exodus 20. 2. because he brought them
out of the land of Egypt. 3. The truth of this may appear, from the
intrinsccal properties, that ought to be in all Moral Laws and Judgments,
(such as the Laws of Christ's Kingdom are) and they are these three:

1. It is requisite, that Laws and Judgments should be perfectly righteous,
The properties of Law.
and by consequence unvariable; Such as do bind all Persons, in all Ages, and
in every Nation. 2. Laws and Judgments (rightly so called) according to
Scripture, are such as cannot be dispensed with by any created power. 3. Laws
of Righteousness and Judgment (such as all Christ's Laws be) do bind the
Spirit and Conscience, as well as the outward man.
These are the intrinsccal Properties of Law and Judgment, and they are
incommunicable to Humane Acts and Edicts, which are many times unrighteous,
often mutable, and always imperfect: They neither bind all Persons, nor in
all Ages, nor in every Country. 2. They are dispensible, as the experience of
all Ages does testify: Sometimes Higher Powers dispense with them against
Justice; sometimes Justice does require they should be dispensed with, because
the Laws themselves are unjust. 3. Humane Laws and Sanctions, do not reach the
Spirit and Conscience, as all the Laws of Christ do. Indeed, when the matter
they command, is the same which Christ has commanded before, or not contrary,
then we are to be subject for Conscience sake, Romans 12. 5. Yet then, it is the
Law of Christ, and the homage we owe to him, that obliges Conscience. But if
they command that which is contrary to Christ (as oftentimes they do) then, as
Peter and John said, Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto
such (Commands and Commanders) more then unto God, judge ye, Acts 4. 19.

From these Arguments we may safely conclude, That the Lordly Sovereign Power
of giving Laws and Judgments, belongs only to Jesus Christ, the Messiah. This
Law-giving Power is such, as Christ will not give to another. I may call this,
and not unfitly, Gods Right Hand: God never said unto any of the Angels (nor
unto any Man, Christ only excepted) at any time, Sit on my Right Hand, Heb. 1.
13. to wit, the Right Hand of the Power of God, Luke 22. 69. Now the greatest
and most Sovereign Power, is, The Law-giving Power: It is not a Power fit for
holy Angels, much less for sinful men, to have; for that were to set them, as I
may say, at Gods Right Hand.

And though the Nations of Europe, since the rise of the Beast, and their
reception of power from the Dragon, will not be persuaded to hearken unto, yet
the very Pope of Rome will one day rise up in judgment against those which are
called Christian Princes and States. I shall therefore recite an Epistle of
Eleutherius the Pope, unto Lucius King of Britain, as I find it recorded in
Mr. Fox Book of Martyrs. And well was it placed in his Book of Witnesses, for
it is a strong witness which that Bishop bears for Christ, and for the
perfection of Christ's Laws, against the imperfect Laws of Men.

The Epistle of Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, sent to King Lucius.
ANno 169. a passione Christi scripsit Dominus Eleutherius Papa Lucio Regi
Britanniae, ad correctionem Regis, and procerum Regni Britanniae, etc. As
follows in English.

YE require of us the Roman Laws, and the Emperors, to be sent over to you, Ex
vetusto codice regum antiquorum.
which you may practice and put in ure within your Realm. The Roman Laws and
the Emperors, we may ever reprove; but the Law of God we may not. Ye have
received of late, through Gods Mercy, in the Realm of Britain, the Law and
Faith of Christ: Ye have with you, within the Realm, both parties of the
Scriptures. Out of which, by Gods grace, with the Council of your Realm, take
ye a Law, and by that Law (through Gods sufferance) rule your Kingdom of
Britain. For you are Gods Vicar in your Kingdom; according to the saying of the
Psalm, Deus judicium tuum regi da, etc. that is, O God, give thy judgment to
the King, and thy righteousness to the Kings Son, etc. He said not, The
judgment and righteousness of the Emperor; but, Thy judgment and justice;
that is to say, of God. The Kings Sons, be the Christian people and folk of the
Realm, which be under your Government, and live and continue in peace within
your Kingdom, as the Gospel says: Like as the hen gathers her chickens under
her wings, so does the King his people. The people and folk of the Realm of
Britain be yours; whom if they be divided, you ought to gather in concord and
peace: To call them to the Faith and Law of Christ, and to the holy Church; to
cherish and maintain them; to rule and govern them; and to defend them always
from such as would do them wrong, from malicious men, and enemies. A King has
his name of Ruling, and not of having a Kingdom. You shall be a King while you
rule well; but if you do otherwise, the Name of a King shall not remain with
you, and you shall lose it: which God forbid. The Almighty God grant you so to
Rule the Realm of Britain, that you may Reign with him for ever, whose Vicar
you be in the Realm.

This Eleutherius writ this Epistle, in the beginning of the third Century,
before the Beast arose, whilst yet they retained some of the Primitive
simplicity. And his judgment is clear in this point, That the Laws of Christ
are perfect; and the best Humane Laws (for such were the Roman Laws) are
imperfect. And we are not to expect righteous Laws and Judgments from the
Emperor, or any other Prince or State, but from Christ: Whom he owned as a King
and Prince, to rule and govern his People by his Laws. Wherefore he alleges
that saying in the Gospel, and applies it to the Civil Magistrate, who should,
like the Hen, gather, and guide, and protect his People, according to the Laws
of Christ, contained in the Old and New Testament. Oh! what account will the
Rulers of Britain give to Christ, for neglecting such wholesome counsel as
this? Possibly Lucius that then reigned, and some others after him, might give
heed to that spiritual advice: But since the Beast arose (which was not much
above a hundred years after) and the Kings of Britain, and the other Nations,
received their Power from the Dragon, the Devil, they have not regarded this
counsel, but assumed a Power of making Laws unto themselves.

Object. But you will object Gal. 3. 19. That the Law was ordained by Angels,
in the hand of a Mediator.

I Answer, That the word (...).
there used, does signify such an Ordination, as when a householder sers all
things in due order in his house, and appoints each thing its fit place: Or
as a Captain does marshal his Soldiers, appointing them their proper order and
service. So then I may say two things in answer to the Objection: 1. That the
Angels might have charge from Christ to prepare two Tables, whilst he revealed
himself face to face to Moses, for the space of forty days, revealing the
whole pattern of his Worship to him, as afterward he did to his Apostles: Or 2.
The Angels might have command from Christ, to put these Tables into the hands
of Moses, as it is said, they were ordered, or set or put into his hands by
Angels. But all this amounts not unto a Law-making Power, but rather a
Law-ordering Power: For, this Law-giving Power, it is the highest point of
Sovereignty that can be. And I may say of it,

It is the fairest Flower, the choicest Gemme
That sparkles most in's Royal Diadem.
If Kings or Keisars, or if States dare touch
This Orient Pearl, which Christ does prize so much;
He Will break their Governments with iron Mace, Rev. 19. 15. Dan. 2. 44. Psalm.
2. 10, 11.

And set another Kingdom in their place.
Be wise therefore, be learned: Kiss the Son;
Else you and eke your Kingdoms are undone.
It is good therefore, that States and Princes would be persuaded to A
seasonable warning to Fourth-Monarchy-men.
yield unto Christ his due. It would be the stability of their Thrones and
Governments, from one generation to another. This is the controversy which
Christ now has with this present generation, and for which he has drawn so
much blood already in many Nations. But most terrible and dreadful will that
time be, (and it is not long to come) when Christ shall come to tread the
wine press of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God, and cry to the Angel
that had the sharp sickle, saying, Thrust in thy sickle, and gather the
clusters of the Vine of the earth, for her grapes are fully ripe. And the Angel
thrust in his sickle into the earth, and gathered the Vine of the earth, and
cast it into the great wine press of the wrath of God. And the wine press was
trodden without the city, and blood came out of the wine press, even unto the
horse-bridles, by the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs, Rev. 14.
18, 19, 20. In regard whereof, Christ is said to be clothed with a garment dipped
in blood, Rev. 19: 13. No marvel then, if the greatest Captains and stoutest
spirts cry out unto the Mountains and Rocks, to cover them, and to hide them
from the wrath of the Lamb.

Let no man therefore invade this Royal Power of Christ, but acknowledge
themselves and Kingdoms subject unto him, who is the King of kings, and Lord of
lords.

Object. 2. But have not the Princes of the Nations exercised this Lawgiving
Power? And do they not so to this day?

I Answer. True, de facto, they have done so, and they do so at this day, in
all the ten Nations of the Roman Monarchy: but quo jure, by what right do they
exercise such a power? Let them show their Commission from Christ, if they can:
I am sure we read not of any such power delegated to the best and wisest
Princes that ever reigned; neither to David, nor to Solomon, nor to any of the
rest of the Kings of Judah; and how then can it be imagined, that Wicked and
Antichristian Princes should have such a power granted unto them by Christ? And
if not from Christ, whence then have they received their power? We heard
before, that Jesus Christ received his Power by Gift from the Father: But lo^
these Antichristian Princes receive their Power by Gift from the Dragon, Rev.
17. 12. The ten Horns which thou saw, are ten Kings, which have received no
Kingdom as yet, but receive power as Kings one hour with the Beast. And who
gave the Beast his power, and the ten Horns, or Kingdoms, theirs? Read you the
13th of the Rev. ver. 2. and you shall see, That the Dragon gave the Beast his
power, and by consequence he gave the ten Horns or Kingdoms their power also,
for they both received their power together. This Dragon, as we may read in
the 12th Chapter of the Revelation, is the Devil. And he did indeed make his
boast unto Christ, that he had such a power, to give all the Kingdoms of the
world, and the glory of them, to whom he pleased, Luke 4. 6. In respect whereof
he is called, The god of the World, Joh. 12. 31.

Thus you see the unsafe Tenure, by which the ten Antichristian Kings and
Kingdoms hold and exercise their power. They have not received it by Gift from
heaven, but from the Prince of Darkness: And how then should it be otherwise,
but as they have received their power from Satan, so they must act for him,
against Christ, and against his Witnesses, all the days of Antichrists Reign?
Me thinks the consideration of this Original of their Power, might be a strong
Motive or Argument to such of the ten Kingdoms of the Empire, as know most of
Christ, yea unto them all, to throw away, and to renounce all that Power and
Authority which they have received from this Red Dragon, the Devil, and accept
their Governments a new from Jesus Christ, under the Broad-Seal of Heaven. I
doubt not but I may say of some that have been chief Rulers of this Nation,
that had they had such men about them as would have been faithful, to show them
the Diabolical Rise of their Power and Jurisdiction out of the Word of God,
they would soon have renounced all such power, and have submitted themselves
and their Kingdoms unto Jesus Christ, and received their power a new from him.

2. There is a Ministerial Power, which is none other, but a power derived by
Commission from Christ, to act and execute the Laws of Righteousness and
Judgment given by him. And this power is committed unto States and Rulers, and
all sorts of Officers, both of higher and lower rank. For this great King, the
Messiah, has many Officers and Ministers under him, to act and execute
righteousness in his Name, and according to his will; and upon them he has set
a special character or image of his Mighty Power, calling them Gods, Psalm. 82.
1, 6. Genesis 1. 26.

Now that I may the better express the full latitude of Ministerial power, or
the Authority which Men and States do or should exercise by Commission from
Jesus Christ, the great King; Let it be considered, That all Magistratical
Power may be distinguished into these two kinds, Deliberative, and Active. The
former, to wit, Deliberative Power, belongs unto the great Council or
Representative of a State or Nation, who are be trusted by them, to deliberate
about all Matters that concern the Public Tranquillity and Peace of the State;
To negotiate with Foreign Princes and States; To conclude of Peace and War; To
order the Militia; To empower fit Officers for the service of the Commonwealth,
and to limit their Power; To call all Officers, higher or lower, to an account,
and if there be just cause, to displace them. Of which you may read more at
large in Mr. Collons Abstract of Laws and Government, Chap. 1. Sect. 2, 3. This
Council or Representative, are to be chosen by the Saints in all the Tribes or
Shires of the Nation, according to the Rules prescribed in the Word, as
appears Deuteronomy. 1. 13. compared with Exodus 24. 1. Numb. 11. 24. Now what the
Number of these Counselors shall be, or whether one shall be President or
chief amongst them, I do not find it strictly determined; nor is it greatly
material, so be it they be qualified according to the Rule. This Council or
Representative, being the highest Power in the Nation, they have Power to
direct, and determine, in hard and difficult cases of Judgment, such as may be
transmitted to them from inferior Judicatories, Deuteronomy. 17. 8. and 1. 17. This
Power, though it be a Lordly Ruling Power, and highest in respect of the People
and Subjects; yet it is a Ministerial and Subordinate Power, in respect of the
Messiah, the Law- giver.

2. There is in every Commonwealth an Active Power, which is to execute
Judgment and Righteousness: And this also is a Lordly Ruling Power, but
subordinate to the former. And such is the Power of all Judges and Justices,
and other inferior Officers, both of higher and lower rank, who in their
several Offices and. Stations, are to do and execute their several Trusts,
according to the Laws and Rules of the Great Lawgiver. And Christ has
promised, That this shall be the state and condition of his people in the
Last-times, when the Messiah shall reign, Isaiah 60. 17. I will also make thine
Officers, Peace; and thine Exactors, Righteousness.

Now for the further clearing of the Magistrates power, it would be necessary
to inquire into these particulars following.

1. From whom they receive their Power, and how. 2. What manner of persons they
be, or should be, that officiate this Power; and the latitude of their Power.
3. The manner how they exercise their Power. 4. The scope and end of their
Administrations.
Which particulars being cleared, we shall the better discern between that
Government which is of Christ (committed by him to his Vice gerents on earth)
and that which is of the world, and proceeds from that bloody Dragon.

And first of the first:

1. First then, I shall show you, that Rulers and Magistrates (rightly called,
according to Christ's appointment, and by the suffrage of the people) receive
their power from Christ, and have a just and warrantable ground for the
execution of their several Functions; whether they be Supreme, as Counselors;
or Subordinate, as Judges and Officers, of higher and lower rank. This is
evident from that remarkable Example of Moses, Deuteronomy. 1. 13. Give for your
selves wise men, and understanding, and known amongst your Tribes, and I will
place them for Rulers over you. Moses knew, That Magistracy (I mean, that part
of Government which consists in ordering the people, and executing the Laws of
Judgment and Justice amongst them) was an insupportable burden; and therefore
finding it too heavy for himself alone, he guides the people in a right way, to
be supplied from time to time, with fit Rulers and Judges, after his decease:
knowing full well, that it was not to be expected, that all Officers should
have an immediate call from God, as himself had. Therefore he appoints them to
choose, and present fit persons to him, and he would empower them. And this he
did, not upon his own head, or by the advice of his Father in Law Jethro,
without direction from Christ: For, Numb. 11. 16. Jehovah said to Moses, Gather
unto me seventy men of the Elders of Israel, whom thou know to be the Elders
of the people, and Officers over them, and bring them unto the Tabernacle of
the Congregation, that they may stand there with thee: And I will come down and
talk with thee there; and I will take of the Spirit which is upon thee, and I
will put it upon them, and they shall bear the burden of the people with thee,
that thou bear it not thy self alone. This is Christ's method: The people first
choose the men, then Moses (the Supreme Power in that Commonwealth) approves
and impowereth them; and Christ Jesus qualifieth them with suitable Gifts, and
spirits them for their places. And how does Christ do that? Behold, when the
people have gone as far as they can to Elect, and the Supreme Power has
approved the peoples choice, and granted them Commissions; Then these Officers
(be they higher or be they lower) they must be presented solemnly before Christ
and his People, in their solemn meeting (when Christ comes to talk with them)
either upon the Lords days, or upon some other day, set a part for that
occasion in chief; and the face of God is to be sought, that he would pour out
of his Spirit, to qualify his Servants with Gifts suitable to their Calling,
Christ having received gifts for that end.

And in this way Christ does confer Magistratical Power, and suitable Gifts,
upon Counselors, Rulers, Judges, Officers, and Exactors, from the highest to
the lowest; training up his people unto a daily dependence upon him, both to
call them forth to Office, and to qualify them for it.

But how contrary to this, is the practice of the Antichristian Nations, which
have received their Power from the Dragon? As may appear, Rev. 17. 12, compared
with Rev. 13. 4. What? from the Dragon, you will say? Is not all power of God?
Rev. 13. 1. True, all power, as power, is of God; yea, it is an Ordinance of
God. To beget children, is a power from God, Genesis 30. 2. and it is an Ordinance
of God: But to beget children upon any, saving a man's own wife, is of the
Devil. Even so in this ^ase; All power, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, is
from God: But to receive this power from any hand but Christ's, and in any other
way, is from the Devil. And therefore John concludes, That all the ten Horns,
or Kings or Kingdoms, under the Fourth Beast or Monarchy, received their Civil
Power, as well as the Beast received his Ecclesiastical Power, from the Dragon;
because they received it in the Dragons way, by Tyranny, Oppression, and
Usurpation, as all the other Monarchs had done before them. And hence it is,
that the Devil says to Christ, Luke 4. 6. All this power will I give thee, and
the glory of them; for that is delivered unto me, etc. And Christ does not deny
it. It seems therefore, the Devil has a Commission granted him over the
Kingdoms of the World, as sometime he had over Job and all his estate: And this
seems to be given him, from the first setting up of these four great
Monarchies, to punish the unthankful world, that would not submit themselves
unto the quiet and peaceable Government of Christ, to be ruled by those
wholesome and perfect Laws which he then had given by Moses, but utterly
overthrew that Polity and Form of Government, when the Jews were carried
Captive into Babel. And ever since that time, the Dragon has challenged and
exercised this power over the Nations, and they receive their power (both
Supreme and Subordinate) from him, and he spirits them for the work: And they
oftentimes choose carnal and wicked men, persecutors of the Saints, or at best
but civil, or seemingly religious (but seldom such as are sincere) and being
so chosen, commend them to the higher powers. And when they are chosen, and
have obtained their Commissions from the Higher Powers, do they then present
themselves before the Lord and his people, to look up to Christ, to pour out of
his anointing upon them? Nay, rather if they know where such an Assembly of
people be, they will either persecute them as Conventicles, or else they will
come to catch the poor servants of Christ, and to entrap them in their words,
if they can; especially, if they be such as preach up the Kingdom of Christ:
For, that is so contrary to the Dragon, that it cannot be endured. As for
qualification, they think they have enough, if they can but get a Commission
under the Seal of Authority. Thus you see a vast difference, between Civil
Governments that receive their power from Christ, and those that are empowered
by the Dragon.

2. Let us consider, what manner of persons they be, or should be, that are to
be be trusted with Magistratical Power; and what the latitude of their Power
is. The persons chosen to Office (especially of highest Trust) ought to be thus
qualified. 1. They must be such as are in society Qualifications of Magistrates.
with some of the Churches of Christ rightly constituted: How else should it be
expected, that they will act for Christ? And therefore Moses says, Deuteronomy. 17.
15. From among thy brethren shall thou set a King over thee. And Jer. 30. 21.
Their Nobles shall be of themselves, and their Governor shall proceed out of
the midst of them; and I will cause him to draw near, and he shall approach
unto me. Now Moses and Jeremiah both of them, do speak unto the Church of
Christ: which argues, That only such as are in fellowship with the Church,
ought to be appointed Officers. 2. They must be godly men; or, as it is said,
Exodus 18. 21. Men fearing God: Wise men, Deuteronomy. 1. 13. For, the fear of God is
the beginning of wisdom. 3. They must be able men, Exodus 18. 21. or, men of
power and courage, and such as may be bulwarks to the people, as the word does
signify. 4. They must be men of Truth, Exodus 18. 21. such as will neither
speak lies themselves, nor give ear to lies and false tales, Prove. 29. 12. 5.
They must be intelligent, knowing, and discerning men, Exodus 18. 21. 6. They
must be haters of Covetousness, no Bribe-takers, Exodus 18. 21. 1 Samuel 12. 3. 2 Chronicles. 19. 7. Amos 5. 12. No companions of vain and wicked persons, Psalm. 26.
4, 5. 7. They must be just Job 29. 17.
, 2 Samuel 23. 3. He that rules amongst men, must be just, ruling in the fear of
God. And they must be impartially just in distributing Justice; they must
neither accept the face of the poor, nor of the rich, Lev. 19. 15. Exodus 23. 2,
3. 8. They must be of a liberal, bountiful spirit, given to hospitality, Job
31. 17, 18, 19. I have not eaten my morsel my self alone, and the fatherless
has not eaten thereof, etc. 9. They ought to be pitiful; they should be eyes
to the blind, feet to the lame, a tongue for the dumb, and a father to the
poor, Job 29. 15, 16. Prove. 31. 8. 10. They must be men of Tempeoance, not
given to Wine and Women, Prove. 31. 3, 4, 5. 11. They must be men of meek
spirits; such was Moses, Numb. 12. 3. and such should all Magistrates be, Zeph.
2. 3. Wherefore God promises his special guidance unto such, when they come to
sit on the Judgment Seat, Psalm. 25. 9. A man of a hasty, rash, headstrong
spirit, is often misled in judgment: And if you read Psalm. 45. 4. you shall
see, that David reckons Meekness amongst the qualifications of a Ruler or
Prince.

Thus you have seen the qualifications of such as should be called forth unto
highest place of Trust in a Commonwealth, and to the execution of Judgment
among the people. And truly, the like qualifications are required in every
Officer of lowest rank; saving that they may be chosen out of a lower rank of
men, who are not of the like quality and estates. And who will not grant, that
such men as these, are fittest to be be trusted with Power and Office in a
Commonwealth? But behold! how contrary hereunto is the way of the world? They
mind not so much the aforesaid qualifications; but if they be such men as can
make friends to those in higher Power, and such as can temporize, and please
the humors of the Prince, or chief Ruler of the State, and such as will cry up
their Lords Interest with open mouth, wherever they come; then are they fit
Officers for the Nations: and so it has been ever since they received their
Power from the Dragon. They little care for Saintship; they had rather have
them such as will Brow-beat the Saints, and discourage them; such as will rule
over the people of God with rigor, like as the Egyptians did over the
Israelites.

Thus you see a broad difference, between the Government of Christ, and the
Government exercised by the Nations, in respect of the Ministers and Officers
of the State, from the highest to the lowest. But ere I pass to the next
point, consider the latitude of their power. For be they of higher, or be they
of lower rank and place, they may not go beyond the Rules and Laws which Christ
has given. Their commissions are only to do and execute Justice and Judgment,
every man according to the quality of his Office: Each man must do that, which
the just Lawgiver has given him in charge. But now for the Officers of the
Nations, they are not bound to the perfect righteous Laws of Christ, but to the
unperfect (and many times unjust) Laws of men; and according to them they must
act, though never so contrary to the Laws of God. Yea, and many times they do
act, and must act, according to the wills and pleasures of their Lords, from
whom they receive their power, though quite contrary to the Laws of the Land
established. Thus you see a palpable difference in respect of the latitude of
the Officers power in Christ's Kingdom, and the power of those that are Officers
in those Kingdoms that have received their power from the Dragon. The one has
the will of Christ for their limit, and the other the will of sinful men, or of
Satan.

3. Come we to consider the manner of their administrations, and how The manner
of their administration.
the Officers in Christ's Kingdom do execute their power, which I shall show in
four particulars. First, when they come together in their Judicatories or in
their Councels, they begin with prayer and seeking the face of God, for his
presence to be with them, and to go along in all their administrations. They
know that God will be sanctified in all that draw near to him, Lev. 10. 3. They
know that every thing is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer. And as good
Jehosaphat, when he sent forth Magistrates, prayed for them, The Lord be with
the good, 2 Chro. 19. 11. so they think it meet to pray for themselves, that
God would be with them in their Councels, and in their Judgments, and
administrations. And knowing that they are not to judge for man, but for the
Lord, 2 Chro. 19. 6. they begin with God. They know it is a heathenish
practice, whether for persons, or families, or Governments and Judicatories,
not to call upon the name of the Lord, Psalm. 79. 6. Jer. 10. 25. And therefore
in New England, they do always begin their Courts, and Councels, and their
Military exercises, with invocation of the Name of the Lord. Secondly, when
they have begun with Prayer, like Christians, and such as depend upon God for
guidance and direction, then they do hear with all gravity and meekness, the
causes brought before them, as men that are willing to know and understand the
truth of the matter, ere they conclude or judge of the same. Therefore
meekness, is coupled with truth and righteousness, Psalm. 45. 4. They do not
break jests, to make the carnal multitude merry, nor do they threaten men, and
call them out of their names: But patiently hear the cause, and attend to the
witnesses, who give in their Testimony upon oath, (especially in weighty
cases,) Deuteronomy. 10. 20. And this is done by lifting up their hands to Heaven,
Dan. 12. 7. And swearing by him that lives for ever; And not by laying down
the hand on a book, as the practice of Antichrist has been. And Thirdly, at
the mouth of two or three witnesses, the Judges do determine the matter, Deuteronomy.
17. 6. and 19. 15. We have not one word of a Jury of twelve men, in all the
Scripture; but the Judges having heard the cause and the Testimonies, they give
Judgment according to the Law; and the party or parties are to sit down with
this Judgment, as proceeding from Christ, who sits upon the Throne amongst
the Judges. And if any matter prove too difficult for the Judges to determine,
then are they to repair unto the great Council, and to advise with them
concerning the Law and the Judgment; and the parties must submit unto that
determination, Deuteronomy. 17. 19, 12. There was no appeal allowed, for that would
have been a dishonor to Christ, to suppose his Judgment changeable, like as
men's minds and places are. The first rise of such a practice, seems to spring
from Balak, who when he could not get the Lord to curse Israel from one place,
thought by changing the place of audience, to change the mind of the Lord. And
when that would not prevail, he makes another remove. Nam. 23. and 24.
But it is not so in Christ's Kingdom: When Christ gives Judgment, all men are
to submit unto it, and sit down with it.

4. And lastly, Christ's Officers, whether they be Counselors, Judges or
Military men, etc. they do conclude their administrations with praises, and
Prayer to God. And thus many of Christ's worthies, in our late wars have done,
in their Military expeditions; They have first begun with Prayer, and concluded
with praises. And this is the constant practice of the Saints in New England.
When they begin their Courts (whether they be for Council, or for Judicature)
they first seek the face of God by invocation of his Name, and conclude in the
same manner. So also do the Military Officers, in their exercises. In like
manner do the Ministers and Ambassadors of Christ in their administrations. For
in this way, it pleases the Lord to train up all his Servants, (yea those
which have attained the greatest parts) to depend upon him, that he may act
their Gifts, and make them both serviceable and acceptable to himself, and to
his people.

But now behold! the great difference between Christ's Government, and the
Governments of those Nations that have received their power from the Dragon.
For 1. When they come to their Councels or Judicatories, they do not begin with
Prayer to God: But as Swine which come and gather acornes under the tree, and
never look upwards; so do they come, and sit down upon their Judgment-Seats, it
may be under the Arms of the Prince or State, which has empowered them, (and
from whence those have received their authority, has been already showed,) and
all persons must stand bare before them; and in stead of Prayer, it may be they
begin with an O yes. 2. In the management of their power, you shall oftentimes
see, in stead of gravity, much levity; The Judges now and then breaking jests,
to make the carnal auditors to break out into laughter a which does ill beseem
the Judgment Seat. Sometimes again they fall into such passionate expressions,
calling men Varlets and Knaves, etc. and threatening to make them examples to
all others, that a man would wonder what is become of that meekness, which
ought to be in righteous Judges. 3. They do not always proceed to Judgment at
the mouth of two or three witnesses, but oftentimes admit scores of witnesses,
unto one particular, to satisfy the lusts of the plaintiffs and defendants, and
to increase the Courts fees. Whereas in Christ's Government, every matter is
judged at the mouth of two or three witnesses at the most. And it is an old
Maxim, Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora: it is needless
to use many, when fewer will serve the turn. And it were good to be considered,
how it can be excused from taking the Name of God in vain, if multitude of
witnesses be sworn. And lastly, as they do not begin with God, so neither do
they end and close with God: They sought not his presence when they began, nor
do they seek his blessing, nor bless his name for any thing which has been
done. Such is the disproportion between the Governments of the Nations, and
that Government which Christ has set up.

Saints; Nor is it the custom of the Nations, to pray in their
Councel-Chambers, or upon the Bench of Justice.

I Answer. It Is oftentimes too true, that Counselors and Judges, etc. are not
Saints, more is the pity. They are not Saints by calling, nor do they walk in
fellowship with any of the Churches of Christ. It may be they pray not at home
in their Families, or in their closets, and how then can it be expected, they
should pray upon the Judgement-Seats, or in their Counsels? It may be they
cannot pray at all, ( quoad verba) unless they should Mumble over a company of
beads, as the Popish manner is. And whereas the Objection says, it is not the
fashion of the Nations to pray upon Judgment-Seats, etc. I Answer, It is the
more shame for them: But yet no wonder, that in those Nations which have
received their power from the Dragon, Prayer unto God should grow out of use,
for that would not turn to the Dragons advantage. 2. As it is a shame for them,
so it is to be pityed and lamented, that Nations who profess Christ, should
have such Officers, as are difused to pray, and either cannot or will not call
upon God. 3. I say, that though Rulers in other Nations do not make it their
business to seek the Lord, both first and last, in all their public
administrations; Yet New England, which has been better principled, (and let
it be remembered for an everlasting praise unto them, in the generations yet to
come,) they make this their constant practice, to begin and end their Courts
with prayer. And me thinks the Counselors and Judges in all the Nations, that
profess to know Christ, should be willing without much provocation, to take up
such a Holy, Necessary, and Christian practice. For if Masters be counted
irreligious, that pray not with their Families; and Ministers also, that pray
not with their Congregations; shall not such Magistrates be worthily counted
irreligious, that do not sanctify Gods Name by Prayer and Praises, on their
Judgement-Seats? As for such as cannot pray, they are unworthy (me thinks) to
sit upon Gods Seat of Justice. It were fit to thrust such dumb Dogs that
cannot bark, such Idol-Shepherds, from the Judgment-Seats, as well as out of
the Churches. I speak now of them that are the worser sort of Rulers and
Magistrates, in the ten Kingdoms of the Roman Monarchy, which in regard of
their constituting parts, are mixed, part iron, part clay; and have received
their Authority from the Dragon. And truly, the better part will find, that
they will not be able to Act valiantly for Christ, so long as their power is
founded upon such an unsafe bottom, as has been showed. 4. Consider the scope
and end of Magistrates administrations, under the Government of Christ, and
under the Governments of the Nations; and the difference betwixt both. The ends
of Christ's Government The ends of Christ's Government.
are righteousness and holiness, that we may live in all Godliness and honesty,
1 Timothy 2. 2. For the righteous Lord loves righteousness, Psalm. 11. 7. Christ
appointed Magistrates for encouragement and protection to them that do well,
and for terror to them that do evil, Romans 13. 3, 4. But Worldly Rulers have
contrary ends in their Government: They oppress The ends of Worldly Rulers.
the poor, and crush the needy, Amos 4. 1. They countenance false Prophets,
Mich. 2. 11. and such as speak smooth things, Isai. 30. 10. But they prohibit
the Prophets of God, and will not suffer them to speak out, Amos 7. 13. and
sometimes they mock such Prophets, and misuse them, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. yea
sometimes they threaten them, 2 Chronicles. 25. 16. Forbear, why should thou be
smitten? Sometimes they also imprison them; as Ahab imprisoned Micaiah, 2 Chronicles. 18. 26. The Princes imprisoned Jeremie, Jer. 37. 15. and 38. 6. Herod
imprisoned John Baptist, and Peter, Mat. 14. 3. Act. 12. 4. The high Priests
imprisoned Peter, Act. 5. 18. The Magistrates of Philippi imprisoned Paul and
Silas, Act. 16. 23. Or else they whip them as they did Paul and Silas, Act. 16.
23. and the Apostles, Act. 5. 40. Sometimes they cast them into the Lions den,
as the Princes did Daniel, Dan. 6. 16. And sometimes they kill them, as Herod
did James, Acts 12. 2. And as for these worldly Rulers, they have other ends in
the administration of their power, respecting themselves; namely, to fill their
purses: For so it is said of Festus, that he hoped money should have been given
him of Paul, that he might loose him; Wherefore he sent for him the oftener, and
communed with him, Acts 24. 26. Yet he detained Paul above two years in the
Prison. From whence we may by the way take notice of the Romish practice, of
keeping the Saints in Prison, under pretense of high Offenses; neither bringing
them to a Legal trial, nor yet releasing them: Which sometimes springs from
covetousness, because they expect a bribe. And such a covetous distemper Hosea
complains of in the Princes of Israel, Hos. 4. 18. Her rulers with shame love,
Give ye; So our Translators read the words. The word translated Rulers, (...)
does properly signify shields or bucklers for protection. As if he should have
said, those that should have been your Protectors, love gifts. Or, you may
render the words thus, Your shields love, Give ye shame: Showing, that those
who should have been Protectors and shields unto the Subject, affect to cast
shame and contempt upon those, that will not run awhoring with them. Take it in
whether sense you will, and it manifests an ill disposition in those Worldly
Rulers toward their Subjects; who should have been a protection to them, but
were not. I never read this title Protector, or shield, given to any just and
righteous Magistrates in Scripture; but to such as these wicked Rulers, that by
their Military power imbondaged their Brethren: Which may be the reason of
their name: For sometimes they take away the Subjects propriety by force;
because it is in the power of their hand. So did wicked Ahab, and some of the
wicked Princes of Judah that followed his steps, Mich. 2. 1, 2. They covet
fields, and take by violence; and houses, and take them away; So they oppress
(or defraud) a man, a man and his heritage. And Isai. 5. 8. Woe unto them that
join house to house, that lay field to field, till there be no place, that they
may be placed alone in the midst of the Land. In mine ears, says the Lord of
Hosts, Of a truth many houses shall be desolate, even great and fair without an
inhabitant. Sometimes again these Worldly Rulers do improve their power, more
for their own ostentation, then to relieve the oppressed, Act. 25. 23. And on
the morrow when Agrippa was come, and Bernice with great pomp, and was entered
into the place of hearing, with the Chief Captains and principal men of the
City; at Festus commandment, Paul was brought forth. But what Justice was done
the poor Prisoner? We read not a word of that. Festus commanded him again to
Prison, when he saw Paul came not off with a gift.

Thus you see a vast difference between the Rulers of this World, under the
Prince of darkness, and the Rulers which Christ has instituted. Both in the
Power, the exercise, and in the Author of their power, and in the quality of
the persons exercising that power, and in the latitude of their power, and in
the manner of their administration, as also in the Scope and end of the same.
It will not be amiss, to show briefly the effects of these Governments; and
the stability of the one, and instability of the other, before we come to
consider of the Laws of Christ's Kingdom.

The effects of Christ's Government, are briefly, yet fully, expressed by the
Prophet, Isai. 32. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Then Judgment shall dwell in the
Wilderness, and righteousness in the fruitful field. And the work of
righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of righteousness, quietness and
assurance for ever. And my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in
sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places; When it shall hail plentifully
upon the forest, and the City shall be thoroughly humbled. Blessed are they that
sow besides all waters, that send forth the feet of the Ox and the Ass. And
Isa. 65. 25. The Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together, and the Lion shall eat
straw like a Bullock, and dust shall be the Serpents meat. But now behold! the
effects of worldly Governments, and their unrighteous administrations. They
make the Servants of God to cry to him, because of their bondage and servitude,
Exodus 2. 23, 24. and if they do but groan and sigh, God hears it. The Souls
from under the Altar cry, How long O Lord! Holy and True, do thou not judge
and avenge our blood them that dwell upon the Earth, Rev. 6. 10. Yea, the
imprisonments of the Saints do cry aloud to God, and he loses the Prisoners,
Psa. 146. 7. And if men will not do it, when they have power in their hands,
God takes it very ill, Isai. 14. 16, 17, etc. Is this the man that made the
earth to tremble, and did shake Kingdoms? that made the World a Wilderness,
and destroyed the Cities thereof? that opened not the house of his Prisoners?
All the Kings of the Nations, even all of them, lie in glory, every one in his
own house: But thou art cast out of thy grave, as an abominable branch, as the
garment of those that are slain, and thrust through with the Sword: that go
down to the stones of the pit, as a carkastrodden under feet. Thou shall not be
joined with them in burial, because thou have destroyed thy Land, slain thy
people: the feed of evil doers shall not be renowned for ever. Prepare
slaughter for his Children, for the iniquity of their Fathers: they shall not
rise, nor possess the Land, nor fill the face of the world with cries Heb.
Watchmen, or Courts of guard.
I know this Prophesy is spoken firstly against the King of Babylon; but they
are of weighty consideration, unto all the Princes and Rulers of this World,
especially unto those, that are parts and members of mystical Babylon, in case
they lift up themselves against the people of God, and cast them into Prisons,
and detain them there, as sundry Saints have been amongst us of late.

Thus you see unrighteousness in Government fills the Land with cries, and that
unsettles the Government, and at length will overturn it. It first makes
division, and division brings desolation: As we may see in the Story of
Abimelech and Rehoboam, Judge. 9. and 1 King. 12. 16, 18. Whereas on the
contrary, the righteousness of Christ's Government works peace and quietness,
and from thence becomes permanent and durable, or as Isaiah says, it has no
end.

Come we now to consider the Laws of Christ's Kingdom what they be; the
perfection of them; the unchangeableness of them; and the Spiritualness of
them; together with the difference betwixt these Laws and humane Laws: And so I
shall conclude with a brief word of application. First then, I shall briefly
recite the Laws, I mean the Laws of Judgment; Whereof some do appoint Capital
punishment; some, corporal punishments; some, pecuniary punishments.

Capital Laws, punished with death.
1. Blasphemy. When men deny the essence or being of God, or his attributes (as
his omnipresency or omnipotency) which is a boring of Gods name, Lev. 24. 16.
And he that boreth the name JEHOVAH, shall be surely put to death; all the
congregation in stoning shall stone him: as well the stranger as he that is
born in the Land, when he boreth that name, he shall be put to death: see 1
King. 20. 28, 42.

2. Cursing God, Lev. 24. 15. which is a degree of Blasphemy.

3. Idolatry, or worshipping God in a molten or graven Image, such as was the
sin of the Israelites, when Moses was in the Mount, Exodus 32. 23, 27.

4. Inticors to Idolatry, such as persuade men to forsake the Lord, and worship
other Gods, Deuteronomy. 13. from verse. 1. to 11.

5. Witchcraft, whether such as foretell things to come, or have a familiar
Spirit, Exodus 22. 18. Lev. 20. 27. Deuteronomy. 18. 11, 12. or consult with witches,
Lev. 20. 6.

6. Wilful profaning the Sabbath or rest of the Lord: or any that will
transgress any other Command with an high hand, Numb. 15. 30, 31, 32, 35.

7. Cursing a man's Father or Mother, and also wilful disobedience and
Rebellion, after due course of chastisement used, Exodus 21. 17. Lev. 20. 9.
Deuteronomy. 21. 18, 19, 20, 21. And cursing the Rulers of the people, Exodus 22. 28. 2 Samuel 19. 21.

8. Wilful Murder, which destroys the being of a man, Genesis 9. 6. Exo. 21.
12, 13, 14, 20, 29. Numb. 35. from verse. 16. to 24. and false witness against a
man's life, Deuteronomy. 19. 16, 21. And under this head is comprehended all Treasons
against the State, and Chief Rulers in the same. But if it be not a wilful and
premeditated slaying, then it is not punished with death, Deuteronomy. 19. 5. Exodus
21. 13. and 22. 2. Number. 35. 11. Jos. 20. 3.

9. Unnatural Copulations, whether Sodomy or Buggery, Lev. 20. 13, 15, 16.

10. Adultery, which is the defiling of the marriage-Society, of what kind
soever it be, Lev. 20. 9, 11, 12, 14, 17, 19, 20, 21. Deuteronomy. 22. 22, 23, 24, 25,
26, 27. But a betrothed virgin is excused, if she be forced in the field, Deuteronomy.
22. 25, 26, 27.

11. Whoredom of a maid in her Fathers house, Deuteronomy. 22. 20, 21.

12. Man-stealing, Exodus 21. 16. Deuteronomy. 24. 7.

Under these few heads, may be comprehended all the Laws that concern the life
of a man. I have not omitted any, that I do remember, for which there is an
exact word of Christ. I confess there be more in Number, reckoned up in Mr.
Cottons Abstract of Laws; but some of them fall under the aforementioned heads,
and some are doubtful to me, whether they be Capital or no, as in Chap. 7.
Sect. 7, 8, 9, 20. which I shall refer to the examination of the judicious
Reader.

Some Crimes are punished by whipping or by fine, but not with death.
1. Rapes are punished by stripes, and by a fine (not unto the Court, Rapes.
but unto the Father, who suffers wrong,) and by marriage of the party, Deuteronomy.
22. 28, 29. But in case it bring death to the party forced, then it falls under
the Law of murder, and is punished with death.

2. Fornication is punished with settling a dowry upon the Woman, paying
Fornication.
a fine to the Father, if he utterly refuse to give his Daughter, and marriage
of the party, Exodus 22. 16.

3. Maims and wounds that are not mortal, are punished with loss of Maims.
member for member, or valuable recompense, together which charge of his cure,
and restitution for the loss of his time, Exodus 21. 18, 19, 22, 23, 24, 25.
Lev. 24. 19, 20. And if a Master hurt his Servant, the Servant is to be free of
his service, Exodus 21. 26, 27.

4. A Thief is to be punished with double restitution, Exodus 22. 4, 7. Or Theft.
if he be not able, then to be sold, Exodus 22. 3. But if he break a house, or a
ship, or the like, in the night, and be slain, no blood shall be shed for him,
Exodus 22. 2.

5. If a man raise a Slander against his Wives chastity, he shall be punished
Slanders.
with stripes, and with a fine also, in case the Slander bring damage, Deuteronomy.
22. 17, 18, 19.

6. Trespasses which are yet of a lower nature, and not commonly reckoned
Trespasses.
amongst Crimes, I may reduce to these six cases.

1. If a man act, or if any appertaining to him do act, either mediately or
immediately, to the detriment of his Neighbor, he shall make full restitution,
either in kind, or at least in value, Exodus 22. 5, 6. and 21. 33, 34.

2. If a man's Ox or beast, gore, bite or kill a man's Son or Servant, the beast
shall dye, and the owner (in case he knew his beast was wont to do so) shall
either be put to death, or pay such fine as shall be laid upon him by the
Judges, with consent of the party wronged, Exodus 21. 28, 29.

3. If a man's beast shall kill another man's beast, and the owner knew that his
beast was wonted to push, then shall he make full restitution in kind, or at
least in value: else the parties shall each bear a share in the loss, Exodus
21. 35, 36.

4. If a man take hire for goods committed to him to keep, and they be stolen
or gone, he shall make restitution, Exodus 22. 12.

5. If a man borrow ought of his Neighbor, and it miscarry, (the owner
present,) Or if it were hired, he shall not make it good; but if the owner be
absent he shall make it good, Exodus 22. 14, 15.

6. If a man gain any thing by force, fraud, or unfaithfulness, he shall
restore the principal, and one fifth part more, Lev. 6. 5.

These are the principal cases which I find in Scripture: but if any other be
found which is here omitted, let the ingenuous Reader add it to the number. As
for Common swearing and drunkenness, I find not an express punishment; yet
being brutish sins, as also common whoredom is, they are punishable with the
usual punishments of a beast. And if they prove incorrigible, then there is a
Law to cut them off by death. Now the perfection of these Laws of Christ's
Kingdom appears, 1. By the equity of them, they are most just: 2. By the
comprehensiveness of them; for though they be but few in number, yet may be
extended in the application of them, by way of proportion, unto all cases and
actions, that do or can fall out, at Sea or at Land; all circumstances being
duly weighed, and rightly applied. 3. By the extent of them, which reaches all
persons in all ages, and in all Nations. For unrighteousness, is
unrighteousness, as well in one person, as in another; as well in one age and
in one Nation, as in another. And by consequence, as unrighteousness is one and
the same, so also must the Judgment and the punishment be: And the reason
thereof, springs from the unchangeable Nature of Christ, who is the same to
day, Yesterday and for ever.

Again, these Laws and Judgments, cannot be altered or changed, by any created
power; in regard of the Divine Original of them. Whence also it comes to pass,
that they have a binding power over conscience.

I should now come to compare the Laws of men, with these Laws of Christ; and
to show the righteousness and equity of the one, and the unrighteousness and
iniquity of the other. But if I should enter into particulars, I should both
weary my self and the Reader. Let it suffice to give a taste of some few.

Christ's Law makes it death to worship Idols. Men's Laws make it death not to
worship Idols. And how many faithful Servants of Christ, have suffered
Martyrdom, even in these Nations, upon this Account?

Again, Gods Law says, a Thief shall make double restitution unto the party
wronged, or be sold. Men's Laws say they shall be hanged. And what equity is
there in it, that the life of a man should go for thirteen pence half penny, or
a greater sum? Or what recompense will that be to the party wronged? Christ's
Law says, If a man lie with a married Woman, he and she shall dye. Men's Laws
say they shall stand in a white sheet. Or if they do make it death to commit
adultery, yet they must be found (as they use to speak) rem in re, which cannot
well be proved, unless the parties will confess against their own lives.
Again, Christ's Law allows any of the Sons of men, to live in any place,
provided they commit not some capital sin, that deserves cutting off: But Men's
Laws (at least in some places) do make it death for a Jew to live amongst them:
When yet Jesuits, and Seducers to Idolatry, and worshippers of strange Gods,
can find allowance. Moreover, Christ's Law gives all the Sons of Adam a kind of
Lordship over the Creature: But Men's Laws restrain that liberty, making some
kind of fowls, the Kings game only; forbidding others to meddle with them,
under such and such penalties. Again, Christ's Law gives the eldest Son the
birthright of inheritance, and allows him a double portion: But Men's Laws
sometimes give the youngest Son the birthright, and sometimes allows all the
Sons to inherit alike; And sometimes again gives all the Lands unto the eldest,
and puts off the younger Children with small and inconsiderable portions, to
make the eldest Son a Gentleman. Furthermore, Christ's Law is very tender of the
subjects liberty, and imprisoneth no man, but only for matter of fact, and that
to secure them, (where other security cannot be had) until the first
opportunity of hearing and trial, which was not to be delayed: But men will
imprison others without matter of fact, as we see Joseph was imprisoned in
Egypt: So also was Paul (when yet the Rulers confessed, he might have been set
at liberty, for any matter of fact that they could charge him with,) and there
he was kept in durance for two whole years and more. Again, Christ's manner was,
to proclaim war before he make war; but the Rulers of the World, can begin war,
and proclaim it afterward. Now what a wo^ul depravation of Magistratical power
is this, that carries it in such a contrary stream to Christ? I might instance
in many more particulars. And such as are better acquainted with the Laws and
customs of the Nations, may pick out many more pregnant instances, I suppose,
then I am able to allege, being no^ versed in those ways. But these few may
give occasion to such as have power in their hands, to consider how things may
be best regulated, and to prune off all such Laws as are most obnoxions, and
point blank against the Royal Law of Christ. For much might be done, in this
respect, and as I conceive safely, if it were meet for me to speak. But I shall
briefly wind up all in a few words of application in the general, as my Method
is.

Tillinghast) it is a most glorious truth. For Daniel tells us that in the
days of the fourth Kingdom or Monarchy, especially toward the end of the
same, God will raise up such a Kingdom as cannot be destroyed, which is that
Kingdom of Christ, or World to come, wherein Christ shall reign as King, and
his Saints together with him, for above a thousand years: compare Dan. 2. 44.
and 7. 27. Rev. 20. 4. 7. Now if the four Kingdoms or Monarchies must be
destroyed, and another Kingdom succeed which shall never have an end whilst the
World lasts, what is it else, but a fifth Kingdom in number and order?

If any pinch upon the word Monarchy, as not a Scriptural expression; they may
please to consider, it is not words we do desire to contend for, but for the
truth. The word Monarchy, is a Greek word, and expresses no more then a
Kingdom, where one Rules as Chief. And this may suite well enough with this
fifth Kingdom, or Kingdom of Christ. For he shall ^e King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, and that shall be his style, Rev. 17. 14. and 19. 16. And Zachary
speaking of the same time, says, Jehovah (to wit, Christ) shall be King over
all the earth: and in that day there shall be one Jehovah, and his Name one.
And what is this, but a Monarchy? Yea Christ above all others, is most properly
called a Monarch, and his Kingdom a Monarchy. But I would not contend for a
word or a name. The word Kingdom is good enough, and does fully express the
Doctrine and matter held forth.

As touching the time, and some other circumstances, I know good men do differ;
and they may without Offense to a good conscience, or to the Truth, allow to
each other their different apprehensions. What mine own thoughts have been
touching those things, I have already in some small Treatises upon that
subject, expressed, with submission to better judgments, and shall forbear to
say any more to that, in this place. Only, I shall propound some few Questions,
and give a brief and modest answer to them; because I know there be some
mis-apprehensions touching this truth, and some are very apt to calumniate
fifth Monarchy men (as they are called) as if they were adversaries, not only
to this present Government, but in General to all Government; whereas in truth,
they are the constant assertors of Government.

Whether will Jesus Christ appear personally, when he assumes this his Kingdom,
at the end and expiration of the fourth Kingdom or Roman Monarchy.

Answ. These Scriptures satisfy me, that Christ will personally appear, Zach.
12. 10. They shall look upon me whom they have pierced, etc. Speaking of this
very time: and Rev. 1. 7. Behold he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see
him, and they also which pierced him. Which places are not to be understood of
the last and great day of Judgment both of quick and dead, but of Christ's
appearing in his Kingdom, whereof the Apostle writes.

For at the last day, when quick and dead shall be judged, there will be no
more mourning after Christ, nor solemn days of humiliation; No more Fountains
opened for sin, and for uncleanness after that day. And when Christ thus
appears, he will come to reign as a King over all the Nations, Rev. 11. 15.

Whether shall the Saints that are then asleep, arise? and whether shall all
the Saints arise, and come with Christ, and reign with him?

Answ. It is evident that when Christ comes from Heaven to take possession of
his Kingdom, his Saints shall arise and come, and reign with him, Rev. 20. 4,
5. And I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and
for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, neither his Image,
neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands, and they
lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years. But the rest of the dead lived
not again, until the thousand years were finished. This is the first
resurrection. Whence I gather, that all such Saints as have worshipped the
beast or his Image, or received his mark upon their foreheads or in their
hands, and have not renounced communion and compliance with Antichristians, and
wiped off that blot by repentance before their death; such Saints, though they
do remain in a safe and blessed condition, yet Christ will not put that honor
upon them to reign with him, or for him, during the thousand years. This rising
of the Saints is called the first resurrection, Rev. 20. 5. And these shall dye
no more, Rev. 20. 7. but shall reign with Christ.

Some think that all the Saints shall arise and come with Christ, according to
what we read. But I understand [ all] in that place, to be meant of all such as
have not complied with Antichrist, according to that in the Revelation, an^
none else, according as it is written, but the rest of the dead lived not
again; Namely, the rest of the dead Saints lived not again till the thousand
years were expired.

Whether shall there be any more conversion of souls during this Kingdom of
Christ? Whether any marrying and giving in marriage, any increas^ by natural
generation?

Answ. I conceive there will be conversion of souls during the time of the New
Jerusalem, and the means of conversion, and persons to be conve^ted. For you
may read that Christ the tree of life, shall yield twelve manner of fruits,
every month of the year; and the leaves of that tree, (to wit, the Ministry of
the Gospel) shall be for the healing of the Nations. So that there will be need
of healing, and there will also be means of healing, and such means as is
compared to the leaves of a tree, properly expressing the Ministry of the word,
to beget faith for the saving of their souls. And Zach. 14. 18. God will smite
the Nations, that keep not the Feast of Tabernacles: Tabernacles there, being
put for the whole worship of God, as appears by comparing it with the 16th
verse. And the word Tabernacles implies, that the very same worship shall be
continued in the New Jerusalem, which Christ did institute in the time when he
Tabernacled amongst us, and not their old Levitical worship.

As for marrying, eating, drinking, and other civil and natural Actions, it
seems clear to me, there will be a continuation of them, as long as the World
lasts both amongst carnal men, and amongst Saints also, setting apart the
Saints that arise again and come with Christ, who neither marry nor are given
in marriage, but are as the Angels of God. They have no need of meats, and
drinks, and trade, and traffic. But as for the Saints that never dyed, they
will build and plant, and beget Children, such as shall be the blessed of the
Lord, Isa. 65. 20, 21, 22, 23. and 60. 4. and 49. 22.

Whether will there be civil Officers, Magistrates, and Ministers of Justice in
the time of Christ's Kingdom?

Answ. Yea, doubtless; for so Isaiah says, I will restore thy Judges as at the
first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning, Isai. 1. 26. And thine Officers
shall be peace, and thine Exactors righteousness, Isai. 60. 17.

Whether may not Christians, that wait for this Kingdom of Christ, submit unto
Civil Powers under the 4th Monarchy, and also act under them?

Answ. Doubtless, they both may and ought to be subject; and also they may act
under them, any act of righteousness, though the Princes be, for their persons
wicked, and for their callings usurping Tyrants. So did Joseph under Pharaoh,
Genesis 41. 40. Obadiah under Ahab, a wicked Prince, and an usurper, 1 King. 18.
3, 4, 13. Daniel under Nebuchadnezzar and Darius, Dan. 2. 48. and 6. 1.
Nehemiah under Artaxerxes, Neh. 2. 1. Mordecai under Ahasuerus, Esth. 8. 2, 9,
15. Cornelius under the Roman Emperor, Act. 10. 1.

Yea, there were Saints in Caesar's house, Phil. 4. 22. All which places do
evidently show, that Saints may officiate, under wicked and Profane Princes
and Rulers. And the reason is clear; For there is no Power but of God, Romans 13.
1. And God would not have his Servants so straightened in their Spirits, as not to
Act righteously, under an unrighteous Ruler, so long as they may Act for him
and for his people; or not against them. Besides, it may be greatly to the
honor of God, and for the good and comfort of his people, that such are
advanced: As we see, in those examples of Obadiah, Daniel, Nehemiah and Joseph,
who honored God by their faithfulness, and did many good Offices for the
people of God. And experience has learned many wicked Princes, that there be
none so sit for public trust, none so faithful, as they. Which redounds much
to the honor of God.

Object. But I know some godly minds may scruple this point, out of a Holy fear
and jealousy, lest they should partake with evil Rulers in their sin,
especially now, that Romish Babylon is shortly to be destroyed.

Answ. This tenderness of Spirit, (which some out of malignancy, count
frowardness, or worse) ought not to be discouraged by any, in higher or lower
rank. For it proceeds from a good principle; namely, faithfulness to God. And
truly none so fit, nor any so like to be faithful to men, as those who are
faithful to God. Therefore to remove the occasion of their stumbling, let me
commend this to their consideration, That it is not my acting by their
Commission, that makes me communicate in their sins, but compliance with them
in Acts of unrighteousness; according as it is written, The Soul that sins
shall dye: the Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father, neither shall the
Father bear the iniquity of the Son; the righteousness of the righteous shall
be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him, Ezekiel. 19. 20,
25. God does neither impute the sin of Chief Rulers unto them that are
subordinate, nor the sin of subordinate Rulers unto those that rule in chief,
so be it they do not allow, or imitate, the sins each of other. The Lord does
not judge that equal. And should it be otherwise, it would not be safe for any
in any age, to Act in higher or subordinate place. This was the Judgment of
those good men aforementioned. Yet if you may not Act just and righteous
things without engagements, such as will expose you to participation in their
wickedness, then separate from them, and have nothing to do with them.

And whereas the bearing of Office under usurping powers, especially now that
Antichrists Kingdom is about to expire, may seem to be an upholding of
Antichrists power, and a retarding of Christ's work, which is the deliverance of
his people out of Babel; I conceive it is a mistake: for a man to act, or
Officiate righteously in his place, cannot possibly uphold Babel, or hinder
Christ's work. Daniel did bear office not only under Nebuchadnezzar, but also
under Belshazzar a most debaushed Prince; yea, at such a time, when Babylon was
to be destroyed and ruined, Dan. 5. 29. And who more fit to be advanced, then
he; when Cyrus and Darius came to deliver the People of God from Tyranny and
oppression? The rule and power he did bear, was so far from upholding
Belshazzars Tyrannical power, or retarding the deliverance of Gods people out
of Babels that it rather furthered the same. Thus much I thought good to write,
partly for satisfaction of such godly and tender consciences, as may scruple
the Lawfulness of acting under Antichristian and Tyrannical Rulers; and partly
to vindicate those, who are Assertors of the fifth Monarchy, from the Calumny
cast upon them, as if they were ill principled men, and such as were
adversaries, to this, or to that Government. Whereas the contrary is most true,
that they are the best and truest friends unto Government, and count it their
duty to be faithful unto their trust, be the Rulers what they may, or the form
of Government what it will. Only they take themselves bound in Conscience to
rebuke sin, and bear witness against unrighteousness, in any person, of what
quality soever, and in any form of Government whatsoever. And for that cause,
they are aspersed by evil minded men, who willingly and wittingly pervert their
honest and upright meanings, that so they may insinuate themselves with Rulers
and Governors in States, to gain favor and promotion, which is the scope they
aim at, and so trample the Servants of Christ under foot. Yea, sometime those
that have cried up the Kingdom of Christ, and decryed all Tyrannical
oppressing powers in their public declamations, do face about; and fall
bitterly upon fifth Monarchy men, comparing them to John of Leiden, and the
Anabaptists at Munster, and to Quakers, and Ra^ters, to make them odious. But
let such as can turn about to the times, and change their Doctrine and
Judgment, as men do their apparel, consider what Council Solomon gives his
Son, Prove 24. 21. My Son, fear thou Jehovah, and the King; and middle not with
them that are given to change. For their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who
knows the ruin of both? They pretend the fear of God, and honor of the
Magistrate; but in conclusion, they find acceptance neither from the one, nor
from the other.

Instruction. In the next place therefore, let it serve for a word of
instruction in this truth, That the power of giving Laws belongs properly and
peculiarly unto Jesus Christ the Messiah. For if the Father has laid this
power in a special manner, (as has been proved) upon the shoulder of his only
begotten Son, as a weight and a burden too heavy for any in Heaven or in Earth
to wield, besides Christ; then it will undeniably follow, that it is his
peculiar right. Indeed Christ has be trusted many of his Servants, (as his
Vice^ gerents and Deputies,) with the Executive part of civil power, as has
already been showed, (and might have been more at large manifested,) in the
Government of the Jewish Nation; which continued from the days of Moses, for
the space of nine hundred years and upwards; but the Law-giving power, he never
allowed to any of the Sons of men.

Genesis 49. 10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from
between his feet, until SHILOH come? And Numb. 21. 18. The Princes dug the
well, the nobles of the people dug it by the direction of the Lawgiver with
their staves. And Psalm. 60. 7. and 108. 8. Judah is my Law giver. And do not
these places prove, that the Lawgiving power has been granted unto some
others, besides Christ?

For Jehovah is our Lawgiver, as has been already showed, Isai. 33. 22. And
James tells us, there is but one Law giver which is able to save and to
destroy. Now to save and to destroy, will be granted, is such a power as never
was given to Moses, or to the tribe of Judah, or to any man, but only to Christ
Jesus the Messiah.

But 2. I shall answer more particularly and fully to the Objection, in opening
the Scriptures alleged: Which upon due consideration, be so far from weaking
this truth, that they will fully prove the point, that the Law giving power
belongs unto Jesus Christ alone.

For the first, (and indeed the Chiefest place that can be objected) cut of
Genesis 49. 10. it proves the point most strongly, that the Law-giving power
belongs only to Christ, and to none other. Indeed our translation reads it, the
Scepter shall not depart; but the words ought thus to be rendered, The tribe
shall not depart from Judah, nor the Lawgiver from between his feet, till Shilo
come. I confess the (...)
word does sometimes signify the Royal Scepter, or power of Government; but I
do not find it used in all Scripture above five or six times in that sense. And
it is but a borrowed speech, alluding to the custom of Princes, who bear a rod
in their hand as an Emblem of their power and authority; which we call a
Scepter, to distinguish it from other Rods. But commonly that word is rendered a
Tribe, and in the plural Number it is never used otherwise. Now Jacobs meaning
in this Prophecy, is not to speak of the Royal Scepter, and power of
Government, as appears from hence: For 1. he says it shall not depart from
Judah. Which implies, that the thing of which he Prophesied had a Being at that
time when he spoke those Words. But we find no such ruling power in the hands
of that tribe, when Jacob spoke the Words of this Prophecy; but rather in the
hands of Joseph, who was Ruler over them all. Nor did Judah obtain this ruling
power, for many hundred years after. Whilst they continued in Egypt, they were
all Servants.

Afterward, Moses of the tribe of Levi, ruled; and Joshua, of the tribe of
Ephraim. Gideon and Abimelech, of the tribe of Manasseh. Tola, of the tribe of
Issachar. Jephte, of the tribe of Manasseh. Ibzan and Elon, of the tribe of
Zebulon. Sampson, of the tribe of Dan. Eli and Samuel, of the tribe of Levi.
And only Othniel (of all the Judges) was of the tribe of Judah, that I
remember. So that the ruling power was never seated in that tribe until David's
time; and that continued not much above four hundred years. For after the
Captivity, the Scripture mentions not any one of that tribe that I remember,
that had the Government, but Zorobabel. Judas Macchabeus was of the tribe of
Levi.

2. As Judah obtained no such ruling power, (above the other tribes) until
David's time, so neither did that Regal power continue with that tribe until
Shiloh came. And therefore that cannot be the meaning of Jacob in his blessing,
that Judah should hold the Scepter until Christ came. But Jacobs true meaning
is, that God would take such a special care of that tribe, above all others, to
preserve them from mixture and confusion (as it befell the ten tribes long
before the coming of the Messiah) to the end that it might be truly discerned,
how Christ Jesus descended lineally of the Seed of David, according to the
flesh, his Mother Mary being of the Royal Seed.

And when Jacob says, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, till Shiloh come,
he strongly denies all Law-giving power unto any that should be born of that
tribe, until Shiloh, to wit, the Messiah did come. For that is the meaning of
that phrase from between his feet; As you may preceive by the use of the same
phrase, (...)
from between the feet, Deuteronomy. 28. 57. And toward her young one (or afterbirth)
that comes out from between her feet, and toward her Children which she shall
bear. Which argues that (...)
none of Iudahs sons, that came from between his feet, and were born of that
tribe; neither Othniel, nor David, nor Solomon, nor any other, should have a
Law-giving power, until Christ himself should come.

This phrase from between his feet, does also imply, that the Messiah the
Lawgiver, should descend of the tribe of Judah by the Mother, and not by the
Father. For had he been to be born after the ordinary manner of generation, he
would have said, out of his loins, as Genesis 35. 11. and 46. 26. Exodus 1. 5. 1
King. 8. 19. Heb. 7. 5.

As to that place, Numb. 21. 18. it rather proves Christ himself to be the
Lawgiver; as indeed he was, when he gave the Law to Moses his Servant, on
Mount Sinai. For here at Beer, the Lord spoke to Moses, Gather the people
together (says he) and I will give them water. It was Christ that appointed
them, and appointed his Servant Moses, to call the people together for that
purpose; yea, Christ himself wrought with them, and they dug with him. Else,
had not Christ been Chief in the work, they might long have dug with their
staves, and sung unto it with their voice, saying, Spring up, O Well! if Christ
the Lawgiver, had not given such a Law unto the Water to spring up there. As
for those places in the Psalms, where Judah is called the Lawgiver, they only
show, that the Messiah, the Lawgiver, should descend of that tribe. Therefore,
as James says in the place fore-alledged, so I also do conclude, that there is
one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy; and none else but one. For
as the Lord says in a case not much unlike, reasoning against Idols, to prove
them no Gods; Let them declare things past and things to come, and then let
them be owned for Gods, else not. And he counts it a strong plea, or convincing
argument, Isai. 41. 21, 23. So may I say in this case, let there be produced a
man, or a State, that is able to save and to destroy, and let him have power to
give Laws; Else let it lie upon his shoulder only, upon whom the Father has
laid it. And me thinks rectifyed Reason might convince us, that there can be
but one Lawgiver. For should there be imagined, two Lawgivers or more at the
same time, their Laws must either be one and the same; and then what need of
two? (For, frustra fit per plura, quod sieri potest per pauciora,) Or else
those Laws given by them, will differ, and (like two lines that are not
parallels) they will thwart each other at length; and that is contrary to the
very nature of righteousness; which is always right, and nowhere crosses or
thwarteth with it self. I would not have added this Use, but that there be so
many, that do claim a part with Jesus Christ, to make Laws. But if they will
grant him power to make Moral Laws, which Universally oblige all the Sons of
men, why should not he have a like power and right to make Judicials?

2, If the power of civil Government be laid upon the shoulder of Jesus Christ,
and none can have any Lawful power except it be derived from him, as it has
been fully proved: Then this shows us, that all the Governments in the World,
especially those ten Kingdoms under the Roman Monarchy (whether they wrest it
out of Christ's hand by force, or receive it from the Dragon,) are all of them
Antichristian; that is, they are adversaries and enemies unto the Royal power
and dignity of Jesus Christ; and cannot be otherwise: For as their Constitution
is against Christ, so must needs their execution of that power be. And
therefore we may not wonder, that ever since the reign of Antichrist, the ten
Nations of that Empire, have been for the most part, enemies unto Christ's
sincere Servants, and have persecuted them from post to pillar, torturing them
with most exquisite torments, as Stories do plentifully testify. Yea, the very
best Governments and Governors that have been, have done many bad Offices to
the people of God, and sometimes been cruel and bloody. We may rather wonder
that they have been no worse: For if Christ would have permitted the Dragon to
have had his will, he would have rooted out the very name of Israel from off
the earth, long ere this. But, though Christ (for the punishment of the
unthankful World, that would not submit to his Government) has given the Devil
permission to rule as the God of the World, until the end of Antichrists reign;
yet still, Christ has limited and restrained his rage and wrath; Partly, for
the preservation of humane society; but chiefly, for the good of his chosen
people.

Hence it comes to pass that Christ sometimes raises up such Rulers, as
become more favorable and propitious to his Churches; as Constantine, and some
others after him. And in these Nations, we have had Edward the sixth, and
Elizabeth, who for the most part were favorable to the Saints. Yet now and
then, the very best of them, have proved as broken reeds, and been as goads and
pricks in the sides of Holy men, to show some tang of the Dragons poison, from
whom they did receive their power at first. And now in our days, when the
little horn is beheaded, and we have nothing left but a stinking Carcas; we
need not wonder that the Saints are imprisoned, and worse dealt withal then in
the days of the most wicked and profane Princes. For what can be expected
from a rotten putrefying Carcas after the Soul or Life is departed, but noisome
filthy smells and savours? Yea, thus it will be, and it cannot be otherwise,
until this Carcas be reduced unto dust, and become as the dust of the Summer
threshing-floor. There is no hopes of purging a dead and putrefying Carcas,
till it be resolved to dust. The consideration whereof, may give just occasion
to all Governments in the World, that have any spark of love to Christ, to be
very careful whom they improve, in place of power and authority: That the
persons be godly, and qualified as has been before declared, according to the
mind of Christ; Else, they may be sure, they will neither be friends to Christ,
nor to his people; but the more power they have, the more mischief they will
do. And though they be select and choice men, yet (whilst the old foundations
be removed, and a new one laid, to wit, Jesus Christ, as King and Lawgiver in
the Commonwealth as well as in the Church,) they will not be able to act
vigorously for Christ.

Again, as the Governments of the World are not friends, but enemies to Christ,
and his Kingdom; so neither are they good friends unto Justice and judgment;
nor indeed can be. For when Rulers and Governors are unrighteous, and the Laws
by which they Govern are unrighteous also, or at the best imperfect; how can
it be expected, that Judgment and Justice should find a place in the World? We
may rather expect (what in experience we find to be true,) that there should be
all manner of unrighteousness, either done, or suffered to be done in all
Nations of the World, both about Meum and tuum, men's private interests, and
public interests of States also. So that if Christ did not overruled the
Rulers and Governments of the World, (even the worst of the Nations,) in the
exercise and use of their power, (out of a respect unto his chosen ones) men
would undoubtedly become as Bears and Lions, Wolves, Tygres and Leopards,
renting, tearing and deavouring one another. Such is the miserable depravation
of mankind, and such is the wrath and rage of that old red Dragon, who has
given his power unto the Nations, and for the most part, unto carnal and wicked
men, that it would be no living in the World. Me thinks if this were duly
considered, and weighed in the Scales of sound reason, it might be enough to
persuade all the Sons of men, that desire to enjoy their own proprieties
without exactions and oppression from higher powers, to be willing to submit
unto the righteous, quiet and peaceable Government of Jesus Christ; Whose Laws
are all righteous and perfect, and his Judges and Officers Holy and righteous,
when chosen according to his mind and will, as has been showed.

Let this suffice for information: and if it were my place, and that I had a
calling thereunto, and if men's ears were opened to hear, I might apply it
profitably for exhortation and admonition also. For though it be not to be
expected, that any of the Nations will set up this Kingdom of Christ in the
glory thereof, until the Jews be called, to whom it is promised, Mich. 4. 8.
that unto them shall come the first Dominion; yet much might be done by the
Gentile Nations in order hereunto, as preparatory to such a glorious work, and
that without detriment unto the public peace and tranquillity of the State, if
God were pleased to give hearts unto men in Chiefest place of power, to set
their hearts and hands unto the work: But because it is hard to speak without
Offense in these evil days, which will not endure wholesome reproof, I shall
forbear, because I know God has a purpose to destroy them; and leave it unto
them, to whom it belongs, to consider what Christ calls for at their hands, and
to make more particular application of this truth, for their own quickening unto
the work. And so I come, in the next place, to a word of examination.

Dragon, it will behove them that are in place of power, to examine, whether
the power they exercise, be from Christ, or from Satan: For which end, I shall
lay down some discoveries of both. First therefore, let it be examined, whether
the power you exercise be of Christ; Which you may discern by these two
things. 1. By the manner of your reception of your power. 2. By your exercise
of the same. For the first, to wit, the reception of your power, you are to
know, that Christ deriveth power and authority unto his Servants these three
ways. 1. By immediate call from Heaven: Come, and I will send thee, says the
Lord to Moses, Exodus 3. 10. So he said to Gideon, Go in this thy might, Jud. 6.
14. In like manner the Lord said to Samuel, Arise, anoint David, 1 Samuel 16. 13.
Which being granted to David by way of inheritance from the Lord, 2 Samuel 7. 12.
his posterity do succeed in his Throne, without any further express call from
Christ. 2. Christ deriveth power and authority to his Servants, by the free
election of his people; and so were the Rulers and Judges chosen, Deuteronomy. 1. 13.
And 3. when his people are oppressed and spoiled, and cry to God, then he is
pleased to raise up some instrument or other to deliver them, Judge. 2. 16. And
this God does by Spiriting them for such a service, at such a time; as it is
said, of Othniel, Judge. 3. 10. And the Spirit of Jehovah was upon him, and he
judged Israel, and went out to war. Sometimes, and I conceive ordinarily, the
people of God do call them hereunto, as we see in the example of Jephthath,
Judge. 11. 6. They said unto Jephthah, Come and be our Captain. They are not
chosen by a private Juncto of their own creation, which (when they have
contrived a mush-room Government of their own) will say and do any thing for
their new Lords, that they may do for them again. This is not Christ's Method;
but he allows his people a free choice of their Rulers. And these are all the
ways that I find in Scripture, by which Christ deriveth power and authority
unto men: Indeed, the bounds and limits of this power, (I mean the subjects of
this Jurisdiction) may be enlarged by a Lawful war, which is always defensive,
as that of the Israelites, against Sihon and Og, Numb. 21. 23. and that of
David, against the Ammonites, 2 Samuel 10. 7, 17. Secondly, you may discern
whether the power be of Christ, by the actings and exercise of your power. If
you protect the people of God from the injuries put upon them by carnal men,
and defend the poor and fatherless, and deliver the poor and needy, Job 29. 12.
Psalm. 82. 3, 4. Job 31. 31. then you act for Christ, and rule for Christ; and
it is a real demonstration that you received your authority and power from him.
But now on the contrary, if you receive your authority and power from the
Dragon, and act against the Saints, it is manifest, that you have not received
your power from Christ. Which will the better appear, if you consider the
manner of your reception of power, and Satan's way of conveying power to men;
which I find constantly recorded in Scripture, to be either by force and
violence, quite contrary to Christ's Method, or by slye and subtle insinuatious
and specious pretenses, or by both. And thus you shall find that all Tyrants
have, by this way, arrived to the height of their power. Nimrod a mighty hunter
vi and armis by the length of his Sword grasped the power into his hand, and
erected a Kingdom and Government, according to his own mind, Genesis 10. 8, 9, 10.
In like manner the four great Monarchs threw out their predecessors, by the
power of the Sword. And as they obtain their Kingdom by force, so also by
flatteries, fair promises, protestations and the like, as did that vile person,
Dan. 11. 21. which I conceive to be Nero, that cruel Tyrant, who by fair and
sly insinuations to his Militia, gained their assistance to obtain the Kingdom;
which being once gotten, he then showed himself a most bloody Persecutor of the
Saints. I might instance in the Kings of these Nations also, and all the ten
Kingdoms of the Empire, or horns of the great Beast, how they have obtained
their power by force of Arms. So did Bastard- William the Conqueror the head
of the Succeeding Princes. And John tells us, ( Rev. 17. 12. compared with
Chapt. 13. 2.) that they all of them received their authority, ( viz. civil
power) from the Dragon, the Devil. Indeed that power and authority, which the
Parliament put forth, as the representative of the Nation, in rooting up the
race of those Tyrants, was derived to them in Christ's way, not in the Dragons
way. They did not obtain their places by the Sword, but were called thereunto
by the Suffrage and vote of the people of God. For though the Saints might be
the lesser number of votes in point of Election, yet they were the better part,
and by their instant prayers, and Chiefly by the intercession of Christ, it
pleased God to order the Election so, as such men were chosen for that service,
as should carry the work on effectually. And they took not up arms till they
were forced for their own just defense. And indeed, to take up arms for
repressing an usurping Tyrant, is not an offensive, but defensive war. Yea,
were it to curb and restrain a Lawful Ruler, when he begins to Tyrannize, it
has been approved of God, as in the case of Amaziah: Much more when like
Athaliah they aspire to Government, and cut down Parliaments, or whatever
stands in the way of their ambition, as she cut off all the Kings Seed; or at
least endeavored the same.

But 2. Let higher powers consider, how they act, and for whom: For suppose
they had received their power and authority in Christ's own way, (which yet may
not be acknowledged; because John says, they had it from the Dragon) yet if
they take the Dragons part, and cast out floods of persecution against the
Saints, and brow-beat them, and shut them up in Prisons, renting asunder all
relations, The Hushand from the Wife; denying them so much liberty, as to
Minister one to another (a cursed and Divellish Tyranny) putting them asunder
whom God has coupled together; Renting also the Shepherd from the flock, and
murdering the Souls of such persons (as far as in them lies) for whom Christ
has shed his most precious blood; then let such powers know, that the
authority they exercise, it is not from Christ, but from the Dragon, and
rightly called Antichristian. Ah! what a gloomy black day will it be to such
Rulers, when Christ shall send his Sergeant or Messenger, ( Conscience) to
arrest them, and shut them up close Prisoners, for imprisoning his Servants,
and show them the handwriting upon the Wall, MEAN, MEAN, TEKEL UPHARSIN, God
has numbered thy Kingdom, and finished it; thou art weighed in the Balances,
and sound too light, and thy Kingdom is divided, and given to others. How will
their countenance, their splendour, be changed, and the bindings of their loins
loosed; and their knees smite one against another, and all their Lords stand
astonished! Then will not all their Court Chaplains, the Astrologers and the
Soothsayers be able to comfort them. And then if they send for Daniel, he will
read a most dreadful doom upon them. It were good therefore for such
Persecutors of the Saints, to beware what they do. Let them remember what David
says, Psalm. 50. 16. What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou
should take my Covenant into thy mouth? Seeing thou hate instruction, and
castest my Words behind thee. When thou saw a Thief, then thou consentedst
with him, and have thy portion with adulterers. Thou give thy mouth to evil,
and thy tongue frames deceit. Thou sit and speak against thy Brother;
Thou slanderest thine own Mothers Son. These things thou have done, and I kept
silence: thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self: but I
will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes. Now consider this,
ye that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver. It
were better to give God glory; For, whosoever offers praise to God, and
confesses his sin, gloryfieth me: and to him that disposes his way aright, I
will show the Salvation of God.

But you will say, May not Rulers and Magistrates, punish and imprison the
Saints, if they speak against the Government, or against the Governors? May
not a Father, and by consequence a Ruler, or Father of the Commonwealth,
distinguish of the actions of his Children, what is righ and what is crooked,
and chastise the obliquity of their actions, and yet not reflect upon the
action, which is good in it self?

calling good evil, contrary to the Rule, Isai. 5. 20. and so discouraging the
hearts of their Children, contrary to another Rule, Col. 3. 21. 2. In such case
parents had need to take heed, their displeasure be moderate, and such as the
Word of God allows; lest they provoke their Children, contrary to that rule,
Col. 3. 31. Fathers, provoke no^ your Children: Do not exasperate them, by
disgraceful speeches or actions. Correction should be moderate, lest a Brother
seem vile in our sight, D^ut. 25. 3. Else it will provoke, rather then cure the
Spirit.

But to speak more particularly to the Objection, I answer; 1. That Saints may;
yea, they ought to discover the corruptions of all Image-Governments, and the
righteousness of Christ's Government, that they may convince the World, and
specially Rulers, of their sin, in not submitting themselves to the quiet,
peaceable and righteous Government of Christ; and for so doing, Rulers may not
punish them. Yea, they may reprove the evil of Rulers, and denounce Gods
Judgments against them, and against the State, as Isaiah, Jeremy, Ezechiel,
Jehu, Oded, Amos and other of the Prophets, yea, Christ himself; and yet they
are not to be accounted disturbers of the State, nor may they be punished as
such. For the Lord forbids it, Psalm. 105. 15. Touch not mine anointed, do my
Prophets no harm. 2. I answer, that we read not of any godly Prince that fell
foul upon the Servants of Christ upon this account, but Asa; and he paid dear
for it. For God smote him with an incurable disease. 3. I Answer, that sundry
wicked Rulers, yea heathens, have had so much patience, that they would suffer
the Servants of Christ to deliver their Message, and to rebuke the evils of
their persons and Government, and to make particular applications to them; and
yet have not charged them as disturbers of the State, or ill-affected to the
present Government, much less have they imprisoned them, and detained them in
durance, for so doing. Jehu threatened Baasha, to take away his posterity, and
the posterity of his house, and that the Dogs and fowls should deavour them, 1
King. 16. 3, 4. Oded reproves Ahaz, for his rage and cruelty; yet Ahaz did not
imprison him, but hearkened to his Counsel, 2 Chronicles. 28. 9. Isaiah calls the
Rulers of Judah, Rulers of Sodom; and the people, people of Gomorrha: and
charges them all with Apostasy, Isai. 1. 2, 4, 10. Jeremy speaks against
Coniah, a despised broken Idol, and threatens he shall be childless, Jer. 22.
28, 30. Ezechi^l calls Zedekiah, a profane wicked Prince, whose day is come,
that iniquity should have an end; and threatens that God would remove the
Diadem, and take off the Crown, etc. Exodus 21. 25, 26. Amos tells Jeroboam, he
should dye by the Sword, and Israel should be carried Captive out of their
Land, Amos 7. 11. Micah charge the Princes of Israel, to hate the good, and
love the evil, to pluck off the skin from the flesh, and break their bones, and
chop them as for the pot, Mich. 3. 2, 3. Zephany, who lived in Josiahs time,
charged the Princes, to be like roaring Lions, and her judges Wolves of the
evening, that gnaw not the bones till the morning, Zeph. 3. 3. Jonah preaches
against Nineveh, that they should be destroyed in forty days: Yet none of
these were arrested, as disturbers of the State, and cast into Prisons, for all
their plainness. And what can any of the Saints say more, then has been spoken
by these Prophets before them?

Wherefore unless Rulers will declare and publish to all the World, that they
are acted by the Dragon, and that with more malignity, then many wicked, yea,
some heathen Rulers have been, and that their Government is indeed none other,
but Image-Government, by the terribleness of their visage; it would become them
to forbear such hard usage of Christ's Messengers, who in very faithfulness,
dare not but deliver their Message, though it be somewhat harsh and unpleasant:
Yea, let their callings be supposed to be never so good, yet undoubtedly such
kind of exercise of their power, is Antichristian and Satanical.

Therefore if Princes would not hear reproofs, from the Servants of Christ, for
mal-administration of their power, the best way is to reform the errors of
their Government, and then the Saints will have no occasion to blame them.
Otherwise it is in vain to imprison them; for the Word of God is not bound. And
if they should proceed not only to imprison, but condemn them, it would prove
but like the cutting off of Hydra's head. The blood of the Martyrs, and the
imprisonments of the Apostles and Christians, have redounded to the increase of
the Church, and furtherance of the Gospel, Phil. 1. 12.

Truth, that the Government is laid upon the shoulder of Christ, may yield
strong consolation unto all the Saints, especially unto those that do or shall
suffer hard measures from the hands of Worldly Rulers, because of their
Testimony unto this Royal power of Jesus Christ. Be not you dismayed or
discouraged, but be ye cheerful and comfortable; for the Father has laid the
power of Civil Government upon the shoulder of Jesus Christ. The Lord reigns,
let the earth rejoice: let the great Islands be glad at it. Clouds and darkness
encompass him round about: righteousness and judgment are the establishment of
his Throne. A fire shall go before him, and shall burn up his enemies round
about, Psalm. 97. 1, 2, 3. All his enemies shall become his footstool, Heb. 1.
13. And ye shall reign as Kings on the earth, Rev. 5. 10. Christ your King has
said, Ezech. 21. 26. Remove the Diadem, and take off the Crown; This not This,
exalt him that is low, and abase him that is exalted. Or, I will make it face
about, face about, face about.
Overturn, overturn, overturn it; yea, This shall not be, until he come to whom
the Judgment [doth belong] and I will give it him. God will overturn all forms
of Government, and make them face about; he will remove this and that Diadem
and Crown; He will overturn This, but not This; that is, he will overturn That
which is not of his own institution, but received from the Dragon; but not That
which is of his own institution, and by him made over to the Saints. And
therefore when you see Governments face about, then know that Christ's
Government and Kingdom is not yet come. But when you see them face about a
pace, as it is in the text, then know that Christ is at hand, whose right it
is. For Judicial power (of which the Prophet speaks) cannot rest, till it
rest upon Christ's shoulder. It is like a stone, that falling from on high,
tends to its center; and the nearer it does approach, it is carried with the
more vehemence; even so it is in this case. Therefore as our Savor says; When
these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up your heads, for
your redemption draws near, Luke 21. 28. For the Rod (or Scepter) of the
wicked shall not rest upon the Lot of justified ones, Psalm. 125. 3. And if you
consider the reason, why Christ does thus overturn Governments, you shall see
great cause of rejoicing. For, for you sakes (says Christ) I sent to Babel,
and fetched it down: Even so Isai. 43. 14.
will the Lord deal with mystical Babel, and all her Supporters. For your sakes
he will pull them down. The blood and the imprisonments of his Servants, make a
loud cry in Christ's ears, Rev. 6. 10. How long, O Lord! Holy and true, do
thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? This is
the cry of the blood of those that have been slain for Christ, and for his
cause. But suppose you only suffer imprisonment for the Testimony of Jesus your
Lord and King, will he not regard to relieve you? Yea, verily. He is tender of
your liberties, though men be not.

He would have men that have power in their hands, to set open the Prison
doors; and takes it ill if they do not: but if they will not, either he will do
it himself, Psalm. 146. 7. or he will be a fellow-Prisoner with you, and you
shall have his Company for your comfort, Mat. 25. 43. Isai. 43. 2. He was
Companion with Shadrach, Meshak, and Abednego, in the fiery furnace, Dan. 3. 25.
And he delights to walk with them, and gives them many sweet greetings; his
left hand is under their heads, and his right hand imbraceth them. Oh! if the
implacable adversaries of Gods people knew what they did, they would not cast
them into dungeous, and irons, and Prisons, as many times they do.

It may be your adversaries are potent, and you poor weak Creatures, in
comparison of them. But let not that trouble you; For they are but grasshoppers
to Jesus Christ, your Prison-fellow; Yea, they are nothing, yea, they are
counted less then nothing and vanity, or Tohu. And what can nothing do? Or
what can that which is less then nothing do? They shall not be planted, yea
they shall not be sown; yea, their stock shall not take root in the earth, and
he shall blow upon them, and they shall wither, and the whirlwind shall take
them away as stubble. Therefore, cease from man whose breath is in nostrils:
for wherein is he to be accounted of? The Phrase is very observable, and you
may read the same, 2 Chronicles. 25. 16. and 35. 21. The meaning is, as if you
should say, forbear and meddle not with such men, for they are frail
Creatures, and God will take a course with them. If you have spoken to them,
and they will not hear a word from Christ nor from you in his Name, let them
alone: God has a purpose to destroy them; Yet do you pray for them, that God
would not charge their sin upon them. So did Stephen, Act. 7. 60. And it is
thought, that that prayer was a means of Paul's conversion; for he was the great
Persecutor of the Saints at that time. And the witnesses laid down the cloths
at Saul's feet, Act. 7. 58. So that you may be instrumental, to do good unto
your Persecutors, unless the decree be gone forth against them. Yea, though
they despitefully use you, and persecute you, yet pray for them, Mat. 5. 44. If
they sally out upon you with rage and despite, if they calumniate your good
conversation in Christ, and fall upon you with insultation and scorn, as the
word (...).
signifies: Or if they persecute you, and incessantly pursue you and give you
no rest, but with force will assail you in your persons, or in your names, or
estates, yet pray for them. If God convert their hearts, you will have double
cause of rejoicing. If not; your prayers shall return into your own bosoms.

What if the old Serpent, the Accuser of the Brethren, stir up wicked
instruments, as he did against Jeremy, to smite you with the Tongue? Jer. 18.
18. Who said, Come let us devise devices against Jeremy: for the Law shall not
perish from the Priest, nor Counsel from the Wise, nor the Word from the
Prophet: come, let us smite him with the Tongue, and let us not give heed to
any of his words. And this may be the case of the Servants of God now. Be it
so: Yet you have a safe receptacle to retire unto, Psalm. 31. 20. Thou shall
hide them in the secret of thy presence from the Heb. The liftings up the
swellings, or Gibbosities of man. Jer. 18. 21.
pride of man: thou shall keep them secretly in a pavilion from the strife of
tongues. So that you shall be safe enough. But ah, and alas! for the sad doom
and destiny of those catchpoles, those false Accusers and Witnesses against
the Brethren. Christ will deliver up their Children to the famine, they may go
a begging: And themselves come to an untively death; he will pour them forth
upon the edge of the Sword. And their wives shall be deprived both of Children
and Husbands, and their Servants put to death, or slain by the Sword in War.
Poor encouragement for such men to serve such Masters! And that which may add
to your Comfort, and terror of such Accusers, is, That great acclamation which
will be in Heaven, when such false Accusers, are thrown down, as from a steep
place or praecipice, Rev. 12. 10. And I heard a loud voice, saying in Heaven;
Now is come Salvation, and strength, and the Kingdom of our God, and the power
of his Christ: Why? What is the matter that all Heaven rings with the noise of
it? The Apostle gives answer? For the Accuser of our Brethren is cast down,
which accused them before our God day and night. I conceive the meaning is,
that Satan by his instruments, did accuse them before the Churches and before
the civil Magistrates, (both which are Gods tribunals:) for neither does God
afford him nor yet his instruments, any other presence of his, where they may
prefer such accusations. And when it is said, I heard a loud voice saying in
Heaven, etc. It argues that there is certain and speedy intelligence carried to
Heaven, of Occurrences and transactions here. Not that God has any such need
of intelligence, but the Saints and Angels in Heaven have need of such
intelligences, that they may know the better how to make their applications
unto Christ for their fellow-brethren, and for the ruin of the implacable
enemies of the Churches. And what is the ground of these Accusers ruin? The
Reason is, Christ reigns.

But what if they do not only smite you with the tongue, but also cast you into
Prison? And what if they keep you in prison for many months and years, (which
is an Egyptian and Romish custom) and never call you forth to a Legal trial,
nor release you? Yet you may with Paul and Silas sing in Prison, and be more
merry in your hearts, then all your Presecutours, and sleep more quietly. And
rejoice for this; that though you may imprisoned, the Word of God cannot be
imprisoned, 2 Timothy 2. 9. Nay, they have not so much power as to imprison your
Spirits. Thank Christ for this.

It may be the occasion pretended for your imprisonments, is, that you are not
Caesar's friends, or discontented persons, and disaffected to the State, such as
would turn the World upside down; for so the Apostle Paul and Silas were
accounted, because they preached one King Jesus, Act. 17. 6, 7. If this be, the
case; yet you may rejoice that your sufferings are or King Jesus, and that you
have no worse consorts then Paul and Silas. And I dare be bold to say of them,
they had neither Swords nor Pistols about them, (saving the Sword of the
Spirit) nor never had any hand in any plot or insurrection against Caesar. And
blessed be God that has kept his Servants, in all the great Commotions and
plottings against the Peace of the State, that they have never had their hands
in any of them all, but have constantly born witness against the same. Ah! what
a comfort is it to Christ's suffering Servants, that they have the Testimony of
a good conscience, that in simplicity and Godly sincerity, not with fleshly
wisdom, but by the grace of God, they have had their conversation in the World,
2 Cor. 1. 12. It is not for Blasphemy, or murder, or whoring, or ranting, or
the like; but for a good conscience, and for preaching of Kings Jesus. Bless
his name for that, and know Christ reigns.

Suppose you have been content to forgo many outward comforts for Christ, and
many worldly pleasures and preferments? yet be comfortable, for you shall
receive an hundred fold, with persecution; That is, when you are rent and torn
away by violent persecution, and hurried from one place to another, as the word
signifies, for the sake of Christ, then shall you receive an hundred for one,
Mar. 10. 29, 30. Take for instance Moses; Who for the sake of Christ his Lord,
refused to be called the Son of Phara^hs Daughter, and chose rather to suffer
affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season, Heb. 11. 25. It is a choice example, and worthy due consideration. But
why does the Apostle couple these two together, To be called the Son of
Pharaohs Daughter, and, the pleasures of sin? Are courtly honors the pleasures
of sin? Or had it been (in it self) a sin for Moses, to have been called the
Son of Pharaohs Daughter? For mine own part, I do not think it had been simply
a sin, for Moses to have been so reputed. But yet, to have accepted such an
honor in Pharaohs Court, and his brethren to be in slavery to the lust of
Pharaoh, would have been a sin in Moses, and therefore he refused it. For
though Moses had outlived Pharaoh, and had come to the Crown of Egypt after
Pharaoh, and when he had sat at the stern might have eased his brethrens
burdens; yet his brethren still lay subject and exposed to the Tyranny of such
as might succeed, and therefore he judged it a sin to accept such an honor.
Besides, Moses knowing well the guise of the Court, and sinful pleasures which
Courtiers were drowned in, might justly suspect the danger and hazard, which he
would be exposed unto, if he had accepted thereof. He knew it would be a hard
matter to touch pitch, and not to be defiled with it. And in that respect also,
might decline those flattering pleasures of the Court, and prefer the
afflictions of the people of God, before them. And what did Moses lose by all
this? Or rather, what did he gain by it? He forsook the honor of being reputed
Pharaohs Daughter, and if he had been so accounted, it may be a question
whether he should have outlived Pharaoh: And if he had, yet it might be a
further question, whether he should have attained the Crown. But by denying
himself in this uncertain hope of honor, Christ advances him unto true honor
indeed, and made him the Deliverer of his brethren, and King in Jeshurun, Deuteronomy.
33. 5. He lost nothing by his self-denial, and forsaking the honors of the
Court. Indeed when Christ shall come to reign in righteousness, you may attend
the Court then without danger: There you shall see nothing, but Holiness to the
Lord, upon the Horse-bridles, and upon Zach. 14. 21.
the cups, and upon every cup in Jerusalem. There is no luxury, nor riot; no
ra^ting, swearing, and uncleanness, to be heard of there. Oh! what a blessed
time will that be? Then may it be said, as David says in another case, One day
in thy Court, Oh King of Saints, is better then a thousand elsewhere, in any of
the Worldly Princes Courts. And it may be a comfort to you, to think of such a
time, when this blessed King of righteousness, shall redress the corruptions
of Princes Courts.

But to conclude, let this comfort your hearts, that the Lord Jesus will
shortly appear in his Kingdom, Rev. 22. 7, 12. Beheld, I come quickly, and my
reward is with me, to give to every man as his work is. For yet a little while,
and he that shall come, will come, and will not t^^ry. And David gives Heb. 10.
37.
you a sign of the near approach of this day of Christ's reign, which you wait
and long for, Psalm. 102. 13, etc. Thou shall arise, and shall have mercy upon
Sion, for the time to favor her, the set time is come, or coming. Why? How did
David know that? Or by what sign shall we know that it approaches? For, (says
he) thy Servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust thereof. When
this comes to pass, therefore, that Christ puts it into the hearts of his
people to look for and pray for it, and they pray much for grace unto the
ancient people of God the Jews, then you may conclude (says David) the season
and the time appointed is now at hand. This sign he gave for our sakes,
according as you have it, verse. 18. This shall be written for the generation to
come: that the people which shall be created may praise the Lord. And as the
context seems to hold it forth, the imprisonments and sufferings of the Saints,
who hope and wait for this coming of Christ, is an other argument of the near
approach of the time. For says he in the words following; Christ looks from
Heaven, and hears the sighings of his Prisoners, etc. And truly it seems to me,
to argue strongly, that Christ is nigh, even at the doors. For it is not many
years ago, since Mr. Mede, Mr. Archer, and Mr. Tho. Goodwin, might preach of
this fifth Monarchy, and no offense was taken at it: beause it was then a
little more remote. But now, it is matter of offense or scorn, to speak of such
a Kingdom. And what should be the reason of the difference? The truth is the
same then, and now. But the imminent approach of the time, and the publication
of it, does now terrify carnal Spirits, that would still wallow themselves in
sensual pleasures and pomp, which they think the Holiness of Christ's Kingdom
will not allow. These fears are like the hornets, which God sent amongst the
Canaanites; and it may be, those hornets were the fears that did possess the
Spirits of the enemy, and operated more to their ruin, then the Swords of the
Israelites: Wherefore Joshua says, I sent the hornet before you, which drove
them out from before you, even the two Kings of the Amorites, not with thy
Sword, nor with thy Bow, Josh. 24. 12. So then, lay all these reasons together,
and they strongly argue the near approach of Christ's Kingdom, and the
deliverance of his Prisoners. And let this be a comfort to Christ's suffering
Saints, that his HIGHNESS, does look from the Highness of his Sanctuary, to
take special notice, (from his high prospect) of poor Prisoners for his cause.
You have his HIGHNESS eye, and his HIGHNESS ear: Why then should you not be
cheary? I shall add but one argument more of Christ's day approaching, and that
is, the strong opposition which Satan makes against it, as if he were now come
to the push of pike, being loath to lose his Kingdom. And for (...)
this cause he is called Satan, a malicious accuser and opposer, as the word
signifies (and you may read it so used, Ezr. 4. 6.) Now the God of Peace shall
bruise Satan under your feet shortly, Romans 16. 20. Therefore when the old
Serpent begins to work after this manner, and to send forth a company of
pick-thanks and hirelings to raise up malicious accusations in Emperors and
Princes Courts, it is a sign his Kingdom begins to shake, and then Christ will
bruise him shortly.

Let this suffice to be spoken by way of comfort and encouragement unto Christ's
suffering Servants. I know not whom this may concern, nor into what hands it
may come; I am not acquainted with the varieties of temptations which the
Servants of Christ meet withal, and therefore draw my Bow at adventures, and
leave it to the guidance of the good Spirit of the Lord to direct my Words
aright unto such as are concerned therein. I have only picked here and there,
some sweet smelling flowers, to present the sufferers for Christ withal; You
may take them as a Nose gay, to refresh and cheer you Spirits in the places of
your sufferings. For though you have received a full portion of the Heavenly
Unction, which will instruct and comfort you, as with Apples and with Flagons,
in your darksome Cells; and have no need of any thing which may be presented
from so slender a hand: Yet take it in good part, if I do as the little Child
did, that brought the Lady Elizabeth a Posy of flowers to her Prison-chamber to
smell at. Accept it as an expression of my love to you for the sake of Christ,
for whom you suffer. Who knows, but such a poor present, bedewed with love,
and dipped in the blood of the Lamb, may yield much spiritual refreshing,
though it proceed from a mean hands? And the Lord that comforts Sion, comfort
your hearts with many sweet embraces of his love, and fill you with joy
unspeakable and full of glory. And the Spirit of God and of glory, rest upon
you that are reproached and suffer for his Name. Amen.

Come Lord Jesus come quickly.
LAst of all, let this serve for exhortation to Princes and Rulers, to deal
kindly with the people of God, and to advance them unto places of trust. For
they are the most fit men to be improved, and will approve themselves most
faithful. Their study will be, to advance both truth and peace; and by the
sweetness of their Government they will so pacify the Spirits of men, that it
will conduce more unto the establishment of peace, then whole legions of armed
men with all their Militia; according to that of the Psalmist, the Mountains
shall bring peace to the people, and the little Hills by righteousness, Psalm.
72. 3. They will he like rain upon mowne grass; and as great Showers that
water the earth. The experience of this has induced heathenish Princes to be
propitious and favorable to Godly m^n. Pharaoh advanced Joseph, Nebuchadn^zzar
advanced Daniel, Shadrach, Meshek and Abednego; Ahasuerus advanced Mordecai,
and Darius the Mede advanced Daniel, Artaxerxes also advanced Nehemiah; Which
instance is very remarkable. For that Artaxerxes was the longest-lived Prince
of all the Persian Monarchs. Whereas on the contrary, Christ takes it very ill
at the hands of Rulers, when they deal unkindly with the people of God in
general, or with some of them in particular, especially when his people are
forced to cry to him. Oh! then Christ is quick of hearing; He heard the cry of
Abels blood, Genesis 4. 10. And when Israel groaned under their taxes Christ heard
it, Exodus 2. 24. The continuation of taxes and burdens lost Rehoboam ten parts
of twelve of his Kingdom, 1 King. 12. 10, 14, 15. The imprisonment of Hanani an
eminent Christian, cost Asa dear, 2 Chronicles. 16. 10, 12. Ieroboams arm was dried
up for stretching it forth against a good man, 1 King. 13. 4. and if they do
but touch them, Christ will rebuke the greatest Princes in the World, Ps. 105.
14, 15. Yea, If they do but taunt and jeer them, Come sing us one of your songs
of Sion, and fall to drinking and carousing in the plate which they have
plundered from Gods people, (which men at arms are apt to interpret as a Divine
gift, because providence permits it, etc. but God counts it rapine and spoil)
then behold they cry to God in the bitterness of their Spirits, My violence, or
the violence done to me and to my Jer. 51. 33.
remnant, be upon Babel, etc, and lo then whilst the adversaries are quaffing
it, and feasting it, Christ sets conscience as a Sergeant to arrest the King in
the midst of his jollity. Oh! then what agonies and angish, what torturing
terrors and Pannick-fears seize upon their hearts, when they see the
handwriting upon the Wall against them! These things weighed and considered, it
will be good for Rulers, especially such as profess themselves servants to
Christ, to use the people of God kindly. 2. Let Rulers be exhorted to take
their Laws from Christ, as the most perfect platform to model their Government
by. It will be more safe, and their Governments more permanent and peaceable,
then if they contrive a Government according to the most curious Artifice of
politic Statesmen. The Pattern of the Altar at Damascus may please carnal
hearts, but the Pattern showed in the Mount is far better. Thus much I thought
it my duty to speak unto the Rulers of the Nations, especially our own, as a
witness for Christ against all Image-Government.

FINIS.

