ARGUMENTS AND REASONS To prove the Inconvenience and Unlawfulness Of Taking
the New Engagement: Modestly propounded to all Persons Concerned.
The words of the Engagement are these: I Do declare and promise that I will be
true and faithful to the Commonwealth of England, as the same is now
established without King, or House of Lords.
THe known and (by words and actions) declared sense of the Imposers of this
Engagement, is, (I conceive)

That they that take this Engagement should oblige themselves not only to
preserve the remaining Rights and Privileges of the Commonwealth, (as some
fancy,) but also to do nothing directly or indirectly against the present
Government; yea, to be true and faithful to it. Which words, being frequently
the words of the Subjects Oaths to their Kings and Queens, were intended to
oblige the Subjects to their utmost to oppose all the Enemies of their Persons
and Government, and do likewise now bind us to oppose the King and House of
Lords, yea, the Majority of the House of Commons (which legally, in case of
division, are the whole House) and not to admit their Government again, no
though they should more really and manifestly, in our apprehensions, promote
the ends of our Solemn Covenants, and the public good of this Kingdom, then
the present Powers do, or shall do.

Which being premised, the Inconvenience, Uncertainty, Inconsistency,
Unsatisfactoriness, yea, Unlawfulness of Taking the said Engagement seems
evident. 1. The Scripture commands obedience, and forbids resistance, to lawful
Magistrates, Romans 13.1, 2. and charge us to render to all their dues, honor
to whom honor, tribute to whom tribute is due, Verse. 7. I may not do wrong to
a public or private person, though I never swore or promised to do him right:
now both the Laws and our own Consciences tell us, the King, Lords, and Commons
are the Legal Governors of this Kingdom, and that there are dues belong to
them, (though we had never sworn or promised any thing to them,) of which they,
and the Kingdom in them, and in the abolition of her fundamental Government,
are injuriously deprived; and that this Engagement tends to the establishment
and continuance of that injustice, and to the resistance of them, when they, or
any of them, shall require their Right.

2. It is a meddling and engaging with and for those that are given to change,
contrary to Prove. 24.21. and to the Duty of good Subjects, and to the Dictate
of Reason, which allows us not, for some supposed or real miscarriages of a
King, and some Parliament men (which are the faults of Governors, not of the
Government) to abjure or engage against regal Government, (which the very
Jesuits, as Azorius, Courzenius, and others, though no great friends to
Monarchy, have acknowledged to be the best Government, in the opinion of the
wisest Statists) and against former Parliamentary Government, under which this
Kingdom has so long and happily flourished.

3. It is a Justification, an abetting, or owning (at least in part) of all
those irregular and horrid acts, which have been committed for the bringing
about of this change; as suppose Ahab should have required Eliah to have been
true and faithful to him in the possession of Naboths Vineyard, against his
Heirs and Successors, could Eliah have done it without justifying, in some
measure, the hypocritical, illegal, oppressive, bloody means used by Ahab and
Jezabel for procuring of the said Vineyard? and so he had been partaker of
other men's sins, and had fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness,
contrary to 1 Timothy 5.22. Ephesians. 5.11.

4. It is uncertain, First, What is meant by Commonwealth of England; for if
by those words Monarchical and Aristocratical Government be excluded, and the
Supreme Power and Authority placed in the Community, and such as they trust
with it, there is not now de jure, nor de facto, such a Commonwealth of
England. For a small party of the Parliament and People have thrust out the
Lawful Rulers, and have assumed of themselves, and to themselves, the Supreme
Authority of this Nation, without the Election, Appointment, Approbation, or
Consent of the People, yea, against their Consents; and do only palliate their
Usurpation and Tyranny (which is a ruling over People against their wills)
under the name of the Commonwealth. Secondly, It is uncertain, in what sense,
or on what foundation, the present Government is said to be established; Seeing
there was (says Mr Broughton in his consent of Scripture) a kind of
Interregnum in Judah for eleven years, between the putting to death of Amaziah,
and the reception of Vzziah, and an Usurpation in the time of Athaliah for six
years, yet neither the one nor the other (much less the present Government of
this Kingdom, which is scarce one year old) could be said to be established
upon any good Foundation, Divine or Humane, and therefore upon the appearance
of their lawful King they vanished away.

5. This Engagement (I conceive) is inconsistent with it self: For first, A man
may be true and faithful to the Commonwealth of England, and yet endeavor that
it may be otherwise better established, possibly without a Council of State,
and with a fuller and freer House of Commons, or in more faithful persons then
those in which it is said to be now established, which possibly may be a
self-advancing, self-enriching party, over-awing and oppressing the
Commonwealth. Secondly, A man may be faithful to the Commonwealth of England
(in a good sound sense) and yet endevor to recover the Fundamental Laws and
Government thereof by King, Lords, and Commons, as we were faithful thereunto,
when, in the former Oaths, Protestations, and Covenants, we promised and vowed
the preservation and maintenance thereof.

6. It is against the known sense of the Honorable Houses of the Parliament of
England (the most Legal Authoritative, and by all true Englishmen most highly
esteemed Suffrage within this Nation) which did very often, and with much
detestation, declare and vote against the Alteration (much more the Abrogation)
of the Fundamental Government of the Kingdom; particularly one Declaration of
the Commons, Apr. 17. 1646. was for the satisfaction of the People (who then
begun to suspect such dealings) enjoined to be published, set up and fixed in
every Parish Church, and so would the said Houses (as may be presumed) still
declare and vote, if they were not by illegal violence restrained from
convening with freedom and safety.

7. It also against the common and general Vote of the People of this Nation
collectively taken (without which it is neither convenient nor lawful for one
or a few to engage in the alteration of the public Government, especially for
those which assert, That the People are the Fountain of all Just Power,) as may
sufficiently appear by their unwillingness to engage therein, (though
non-engagers be by the late Act denied that protection of the Laws, that
Blasphemers, and vilest of engaging persons, may enjoy,) and would more
manifestly appear, if those that stand for the Engagement would lay down their
over-awing and menacing Arms, by which (as also by promotions and rewards) they
prevail over facile and servile spirits, and suffer the Nation (as in duty they
ought) to vote and act freely, without danger or damage, according to their own
sense, as well against it as for it.

8. It is also apparently contrary to our former Oaths, Protestation, Solemn
League and Covenant, according to the common sense and understanding of the
words; the sense declared by the Imposers, and received by the Takers,
agreeable to the occasions and ends of the said Covenants: For this Engagement
(as was at first premised and declared) is against our bearing faith and true
allegiance to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, and defending them
against all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against
his, and their Crown and Dignity, and against defending the Jurisdictions,
Privileges, Preeminences, and Authorities united and annexed to the Imperial
Crown of this Realm; it is not for the honor and happiness of the Kings
Posterity, nor for the Power and Privileges of Parliament, seeing it excludes
both the personal and politic capacity of the King, and preserves only one of
the Houses, and not one neither, the far greater part being excluded; nor is it
for the Rights and Liberties of the People, for it keeps out some
Representatives of most Counties, and all of some Counties, and extinguisheth
the Rights of the Lords, which are the nobler parts of the People; it tends to
divide perpetually between the Prince and People, the union of whom was so much
desired and endeavored by the Parliament, when they were (confessedly) most
free from corruption, and to make factions and parties amongst the People,
while they shall be distinguished by the names of Engagers, and non-Engagers;
and in all probability to divide the Kingdoms one from another, contrary to the
Solemn League and Covenant; and these Covenants do not only bind us to preserve
this Government, and their Power and Privileges, and the Subjects Rights and
Liberties from violation (as some now expound them) but according to our
abilities and opportunities to endeavor to restore and recover them when
violated or taken away, as they were in a great measure when we took the
Protestation and Covenant, and therefore in that case we were bound to endeavor
to bring Delinquents in that kind to condign punishment; nor does the
Obligation of the said Oaths cease, because the King and his Heirs are wholly
annihilated, (as T. B. fancies,) for though the King be dead, his Heirs are not
annihilated (there being so many of his, and his Sisters seed) no more, no not
so much as the Royal Seed was in the forementioned Interregnum of Judah, or the
time of Athaliah's Usurpation, who called it Treason, Treason, to set up Joash
in the Throne. His other pretenses, That the common Consent of the People, by
which they were Kings, has dethroned them, and that the Covenant contends only
for that Government which is suitable to the Law of God, and Reason, with both
which this is exactly correspondent. The insufficiency of them is sufficiently
discovered partly in the foregoing Treatise, and partly by the Author of the
Book called, An Exercitation concerning usurped Powers: And the said T. B. his
concession, That this Engagement is contrary to Oaths and Engagements of an
higher nature, stands as a blur upon it, unwiped off. Finally nothing can be
more against the Power and Privileges of Parliament, and lawful Authority, and
against the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, then to engage and swear to
them as a Parliament, and as the Supreme Authority of England, that are not so.
The inconsistency of this Engagement with the former Oaths and Covenants, seems
to be the reason why the Grand Engagers do (as much as in them lies) repeal,
annul, make void, or by some exposition (newly found out to serve a turn) evade
or elude them.

9. This Engagement is also inconsistent with our first Parliamentary
Principles, in defense whereof so much blood and treasure has been spilt, for
it is real Malignancy, and so declared by Parliament, to subvert the
Fundamental Laws and Government of the Kingdom, to violate the Privileges of
Parliament, and the ancient Course of Parliamentary Proceedings; and for the
doing of these things, yea, for but endeavoring to do these things, Tho: Earl
of Strafford, and William late Archbishop of Canterbury, were put to death;
yea the violation of the Privileges of Parliament, and some illegal
Innovations and Oppressions, and the late Kings not bringing, or not suffering
the offenders to be brought to condign punishment, was the ground of the late
War, not against the King (as we were then told and believed) but for the
removing of the wicked from before the King, that his throne might be
established: And though we fought against the Forces raised by the King, and
amongst which sometimes he in person was, yet it was only to rescue him from
amongst them, that he might return to his Parliament, as our allegiance bound
us. The fighting against the E: of Leicesters Forces, where King Henry the
third was in person, and carried about for the countenance of his actions, and
the rescuing of him, though he was unawares wounded in the rescue, was by the
Parliament judged to be legal and faithful service, and yet we always accounted
it Treason, hateful to God, and all good men, to kill or wound the King
intentionally or purposely, to dis-inherit the Royal Progeny, to alter the
fundamental Government of the Kingdom. Now if we did conscientiously and not
factiously oppose the gross evils of Oppression, Usurpation, Innovations, and
Arbitrary Government in the late King, or his Agents, we cannot engage to any
Powers whatsoever that are guilty of greater Usurpation, and equalize (if not
exceed) them in the other enormities, without evidencing of damnable Hypocrisy
or Apostasy, and in a sort bringing upon our own heads the guilt of all the
blood that has been shed in this Kingdom.

10. The taking of this Engagement does not at all secure the present
Government (which is pretended to be the end of it,) for if men, for
preservation of their offices, livelihoods, and privileges, will break their
former solemn and sacred Oaths and Covenants, and break all the bonds of
obedience to lawful Magistrates antecedent to, and only confirmed, not created
by the said Oaths and Covenants, by taking this Engagement, they will
(doubtless) make no conscience to break this new Engagement by renewing the old
Covenants, or taking others, or acting contrary to it when occasion is offered.

11. This Engagement (as is feared) may be a means not only to hinder the
bringing of some Delinquents to condign punishment, and to keep the Purse and
Power of the Kingdom in those hands in which it now is, but also to hinder all
possibility of peace and settlement upon a right Basis, to necessitate the
keeping up and augmenting the Army, and the continuance or increase (for the
maintenance thereof) of the Taxes and Impositions on this already sore
impoverished Nation, to betray the most conscientious friends of the Parliament
which dare not engage, to ruin in their Estates, Rights, and Liberties, which
are their birthright, yea to bring the Protestant Religion, and in it the most
glorious Name of the Lord our God and the English Nation into reproach, and to
make our savor to stink in neighbor Nations, that they may never trust
Parliament or People of England any more, whatsoever Declarations, Promises,
Protestations, Oaths, or Covenants they make to beget credence, which cannot be
more sacred and solemn then those which are at once knapt in pieces by this
Engagement,

12. Though this Engagement is intended to be obligatory, and therefore it is
called an Engagement. 2. A Declaration, (I declare.) 3. A Promise, (I promise,)
and subscription is required thereunto, and some are called to swear to it,
with intent they should be strongly obliged by it, yet in deed and truth it
does not oblige in foro Dei or Conscientiae to the performance of it. First,
Because the matter of it is injurious and sinful, as if I promise or swear that
I will not render to lawful Magistrates, or private men, that which is their
right from me, but will transfer it to others to whom it is not legally due,
this is an injurious and sinful Oath and Promise, and so is void, for rei
illicitae nulla est obligatio, Juramentum non est vinculum iniquitatis, what is
unlawful to be done, is unlawful to be sworn or promised.

Secondly, Latter Engagements, Declarations, Promises, yea (suppose) the most
solemn Oaths, contrary to former lawful Oaths and Covenants, are ipso facto
void and non-obliging, Iuramentum posterius non tollit obligationem prioris; it
is with contrary Oaths and Promises as with contrary Bargains and Sales
(caeteris paribus) the first is good in Law, and the latter void; not as it is
with contrary Wills and Testaments, the last does stand: and although sundry of
laxe principles take this Engagement the more willingly, because they conceive
it does not oblige them, yea, with an intention not to be bound by it, as they
themselves profess; yet religious and godly men will make Conscience of what
they engage in, declare for, promise, subscribe, (much more) swear unto, and
dare not take Gods name in vain, abuse his Ordinance, delude God or men, by
seeming to engage in, or swear that in which they do not really engage, or
which they know beforehand will not oblige; knowing that it is a
transgression, yea perjury, to take such a sinful and contrary Engagement,
though the taking of it, by reason of its sinfulness and contrariety, be no
obligation to the keeping of it; and though this do not tie the Conscience of
the Taker, it will trouble it; though it do not bind, it will burden it; qui
vadit plane, vadit sane.

FINIS.

