AN ACCOUNT OF THE TRIALS OF SEVERAL Notorious MALEFACTORS For Murders,
Felonies, and Burglaries. Holden at the Sessions House in the Old Bailey, for
the City of London and County of Middlesex. AND JAIL-DELIVERY OF NEWGATE.
Which began on Friday the 24. of this Instant February, and concluded on
Saturday the 25.

With the other most Remarkable Proceedings.

Where were many Notable Proceedings, as the Trial of George Pie, the Bailiff,
who killed the Butcher, and Alexander Younger, who swore Treason against Mr.
Harvy, with several others.

FEbruary the 24th. This day the Sessions began at the Sessions House in the
Old Bailey, where the most Remarkable Trials, and other Proceedings were thus:

John Clark took his Trial for robbing Margaret Wing's House, in the Parish of
St. Mary Matt-peller, otherwise, White Chapel, of two Silver Tankards, on the
9th. of January. The Commitment of the Robbery being thus; He and two more of
his Fellow-Thieves, coming, in, and calling for a Room, were showed up Stairs,
into a Chamber, where a Cup-board stood, in which the Tankards were, which they
perceiving, picked the Lock in the Servant's Absence, and departed with their
Prize, as appeared by the Oath of the Maid, who said there was no other Persons
in the Room from the time the Tankards were there, till such time as they were
missing; but she not being able to chare him positive, he was acquitted of that
Felony.

A Second Indictment was preferred against him, for breaking open the House of
one Mrs. Danfield, and taking from her, in Rings, broad Pieces of Gold, and
pieces of Plate a great value; which things, upon Search, being found in his
House, he fled, and could not be heard of, till about two Sessions since. To
this Indictment, he pleaded Not Guilty, and endeavored to lay the Crime upon a
Kinsman of his, that was hanged some time since; but his Plea was in vain; for
upon the whole matter, the Jury found him Guilty.

John Smith took his Trial; for that he becoming a Servant to an
Alehouse-keeper, in St. Bartholomews, about the 12th. of January, 1682. robbed
his said Master of Thirty Pounds in Money, several Silver Seals, Rings, and
other things, as appeared in his Indictment; some of which being taken upon
him, the Jury thought fit to bring him in Guilty.

John Butter, a Baker in Drury Lane, was brought into Court, and there put upon
the Jury; which done, the Court proceeded to try him. His Indictment was for
stealing Silver Spoons, one having been found, as the Witnesses gave Evidence,
where he had sold it; but several people appearing to give Testimony of
(...)ife and Conversation, he was acquitted.

George Pie, the person who killed the Butcher in Hungerford Ma^ket in the
Strand, on the 11th. day of this Month, had a Bill of Indictment preferred
against him, by the Widow of the Party killed, for the Death of her Husband;
whereupon several Witnesses were called for the King, who gave Testimony, that
the person now tried, being a Bayliff's Assistant, or Follower, came up to him,
telling him he had a Writ against him, for three pounds, or such a Sum, and bid
him yield Obedience to the same; but he on the contrary, taking up his Carver,
bid them stand off; where, upon some Offers to seize him, he cut at him, and
taking the Baily (who was Father to the Prisoner) a Stroke over the Wrist,
whilst he strove to save himself, he cut the Bone shere in two, upon which he
fell down; and the Butcher pursuing the Follower wounded him, who drawing his
Sword, ran the Butcher into the Body, of which Wound he then and there
instantly died; but the Court giving the Charge, the Jury brought it in Se
defendendo.

John Belzer was put to his Trial for stealing Bever Hats from a Haberdasher in
Holborn, on the 18th. of January, with which he was taken going out of the
Shop; but the man that took him being a Quaker, and refusing to swear, the
Prisoner was acquitted; but the Quaker's Recognizances for prosecuting
Estreated.

Thomas Stockdale was prosecuted for stealing a Box and twenty Shilings in it
from Mary Rhodes in St. Giles Cripplegate, and upon proof of the Fact,
convicted of five Felonies.

Jane Bunt, a famed Shoplift, was put to her Trial, for taking Silk Ribbons and
Stuffs out of a Shop in Fleetstreet; and part of the things being taken upon
her, she was found Guilty.

Thomas Mardelue, an Outlandish Man, who at first pretended to be ignorant of
the English Tongue, was brought into Court, and there put to his Trial, for
stealing Plate to the value of four pounds, which being made plain by the
Evidence, he was Convicted.

Edmund Markham was tried for a Felony and Burglary, committed in the House of
John Midd, and taking Goods to the Value of Five Pounds; the House being left
alone the Thieves cut a Ladder that lay in the Yard, and setting it up to the
Window, entered the House, and breaking open a dozen Doors, took Table-Linnen,
and Chairs, and Racks; whereupon suspecting the Prisoner, who was a Tenant to
the person robbed, who searched his House, and some Goods found, which were
pretended was lost; but the Prisoner proving he lawfully bought them, the Jury
found him Not Guilty.

James Clarke was tried for stealing a Silver Tankard out of a Victualling
Bouse in St. Martins in the Fields, which he afterward sold to an Usurer in
Cloth Fair, the Tankard upon Trial was found to be stolen, and especially upon
his own Confession, so that he was found Guilty.

Alexander Younger, the person who swore Treason against Mr. Harvey, and was
the last Sessions fined for his unwarrantable taking away Goods, under pre^^^ce
of their being Uncustomed, or Prohibited, was this Sessions Indicted for a
Trespass, for taking away Stone Buttons Diamonds, and Shoe-Buckles, from a
French Merchant, and was found Guilty of the same.

John Williamson took his Trial, for that he on the 18th. of January last,
going into a Victualling House in Westminster, stole thence a Silver Tankard,
prized at 3 Pounds, whereupon he was pursued, but for that time made his
Escape; he not long after was taken by the Watch, and carried to the
Round-House, where the party found him that was robbed: Upon the Examination,
he denied that he knew any thing of the matter, and said much in his own
Justification; insomuch that no positive Proof appearing, to charge him home
with the manter, he was acquitted.

This Sessions Mr. St. John's pleaded His Majesty's Most Gracious Pardon, for
killing Esquire Styles in Chancery Lane.

Jane Robinson was tried for having two Husbands, but only one Marriage, which
was the former, being able to be proved, she was acquitted.

John Plat, being indicted for a Robbery committed in White Chapel, pleaded
Guilty to that, and all others under the Benefit of Clergy, it being an Ancient
Plea, usual to such as are Proficients in Newgate.

Richard Treebarfoot was tried for stealing a Silver Tankard in Cornhil, under
pretense of Drinking, and making Love to the Maid of the House, who had
formerly been his Acquaintance, by reason of going to School with him; but the
Tankard being afterward found where he had disposed of it, he was found Guilty.

Two persons were likewise tried for robbing a House in Holborn, but no exact
Proof being made against them, they were acquitted.

An Indictment was brought against Nalt. Thompson, in relation to his
publishing a scandalous Report about the Murder of Thomas Thin Esquire which,
together with the Pamphlet, being presented to the Grand Jury, they brought it
in Billa Vera.

The French Doctor that was tried the last Sessions for poisoning one Morgan, a
Life-Guard-man, appearing upon his Recognizance, was, by reason of his
threatening such as appeared against him, caused to find good Sureties.

William James, Thomas Andrew, and Bryan White, were tried for robbing one
James Watkins on the 6. of August last, upon the King's Highway; which upon
Evidence, proved to be thus:

The Persons indicted having a Writ, with which they had taken him into
Custody, and somewhat roughly used him, swore Felony against them: but the
Evidence being but weak, and thought to be done out of Malice, the Jury
acquitted them.

William Ship was indicted for stealing a Silver Salt, to the Value of seven
Shillings; which being proved to be in his Custody, was found guilty.

James Turner was Tried for robbing Sir Jonathan Raymond, on the 2. of
February; and taking thence five Pieces of Gold, and forty Shillings in Silver,
his Indictment was for Felony and Burglary; the latter not appearing, he
confessed the former.

John Price, the Person condemned to the Press the 24th of this Month, was this
Morning brought again to the Court; and at his earnest Request, after some
Denial, pleaded Not Guilty, to two Indictments; one for robbing of James Bennet
of a Drying Pan, to the Worth of three Shillings, and another for stealing of a
Copper, the which, he sold for sixteen Shillings; both which Indictments being
proved, he was found guilty.

At this Sessions, John Maiden, and John Clark, received Sentence of Death,
nine persons. were burnt in the Hand, one reprieved before Judgment, upon
promise to make Discovery, two to be transported, four to be whipped.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Langley Curtis, 1681.


