THE Sword of the Lord DRAWN, And furbished against the man of sin: OR
Something in answer to a Paper set forth by three of the chief Priests of
London, whose names are Thomas Goodwine, and one Nigh, and Sydr^ch Sympson,
which they have put forth to the prepagating of the Gospel, signed by him that
is the Clerk of the Parl. whose name is Henry Scobell, with their deceits and
deceitful actings laid open and cleared from Scripture, that they have no
example in Scripture for their practice.

Therefore I was moved by the Lord God of life to lay open their deceit By the
Spirit of Truth, as it was made manifest in me from the Lord, that the simple
might not be deceived by them, but might have the knowledge of the Truth, from
that which is for ever, and shall not change nor fade away.

By one whose Name in the flesh is, Christopher Atkinson, who am one that the
world does scornfully call a Quaker.

London Printed, and are to be sold by Giles Calvert, at the Sign of the
Black-spread-Eagle at the west end of Paul's. 1654.

The Sword of the Lord drawn and furbished against the Man of sin.
THere coming a paper unto my hands, put forth by three of the Chief Priests of
London, whose names are Tho. Goodwin, one Nigh, and Sydrack Simson, called the
Principles of Faith, put forth to the Committee of Parliament, for the
propagating the Gospel, as they call it, and finding them out of the Apostles
rule, and the Prophets rule, acting those things which they have no example
for, therefore am I moved of the Lord to lay open their deceits, and to declare
the living truth of God, as it is made manifest in me, and to declare what
faith we own and practice, and what we do deny, to that end, that the simple
may be informed, and the way of truth cleared, from such deceivers, who are
perverters of the Scriptures, who would constrain people to follow their
immaginations instead of truth, as these men have done, whose names are
subscribed: and now a few words in answer to that you call your first Principle.

First Principle: That the Scriptures is the rule of knowing God, and living
unto him, which who so does not believe, but betakes himself to any other way
of discovering God instead thereof, cannot be saved.

Answ. The Scriptures are not the Saints rule of knowing God, and living unto
him, but that which was before the Scriptures were written, by which all the
holy men of God knew him; and here ye have made your selves manifest, that ye
have not the rule which Moses had, which is the Spirit of light, by which he
made himself known unto the sons of men; and ye that teach people to walk in
another rule, are those, that put light for darkness, and darkness for light,
showing forth the spirit of error: and here ye pervert the Scriptures, and
Moses words, which prophesied of Christ: Moses bad not the people walk by the
Scripture, neither did he tell them, that living therein was the rule of
knowing God, but he directed them to the Life, without which all their
profession was abominable: but ye are not come to walk in the letter, whose
lips and practice does not concord with it, who are found acting those things
which it declares against, Math. 23. who are called of men Master, stand
praying in the Synagogues, which our Lord Jesus Christ cried woe against, and
here your Faith, and your Principle is also that the rule whereby the Saints
are guided, is that which was before the Scripture was: (first, it is professed
generally in this Nation, that believing in the Scriptures is the knowledge of
God, and that the Scriptures is the rule of knowing God; this have you preached
for doctrine among the people, and yet the way of God is hidden from their
eyes, who are found acting in the abominations of the Heathen, as does plainly
appear by the sins of this people, nay, what sin is there that is not
committed amongst this people, which have professed the Scripture to be their
rule, and you that pretend to be their Teachers, are the greatest examples of
their wicked practices, crying peace, peace unto them, when there is no peace,
one building a wall, and another dawbing it with untempered mortar, but ye
shall proceed no further, but your folly shall be made manifest to all men) our
rule is that which Moses walked in, and Abraham, and David, and all the
Prophets, which is Christ Jesus the light of the world, which whosoever
believes not in him has not God; Moses walked in him, Abraham believed in
him, and David delighted in his Law which is perfect; and here we deny you, who
deny that rule in which the holy men of God walked in.

Second Principle: That there is a God, who is the Creator, and Judge, and
Governor of the world, and is to be known by Faith.

Answ. The Saints God ye are ignorant of (who put light for darkness, and
darkness for light) and before him ye cannot stand in judgment, who are
found working wickedness, making people believe, that believing in a thing
without them will bring them to the knowledge of God, which none can know or
understand but through death, and if ever ye come to know this God whom the
Saints worship in spirit and truth, ye must witness a day of vengeance to
pass through; therefore stop your mouths ye proud and lustful ones, the day
of recompense is come, in which ye shall receive double for all your
wickedness: The Lord is our Judge, our Lawgiver, and our King, and this we
witness, though we had never seen the Scripture; and here we deny you and your
Principles, which is no more than that which the world professes; therefore be
ye ashamed ye wicked and ungodly ones, who live in the beastly nature, who
knows no more of God than what you have without you in the Scriptures, which
they spoke forth that witnessed him before the Scriptures were written, him we
own and witness to be our King, and by him are we redeemed out of your
generation, glory to his name for ever, who has made himself manifest in us,
and has brought us to that which was before the Scripture was.

Third Principle: That this God, who is Creator, is eternally distinct from all
other creatures in his being and blessedness.

Answ. God ye know not, neither can ye see him, but are found persecutors of
him, who would divide him from what he is by your heathenish inventions, which
arises out of the corrupt, sensual part, which never shall inherit the
Kingdom (the being of God is not distinct from them that are begotten by him,
for as the Father and the Son are one without distinction, so are they that are
begotten by him; and here you perverters of the truth are shut forth from God,
with all your distinctions and immaginations, which arises out of the dark
mind, by which ye have all this while deceived the people: woe unto you ye
enemies of God, your foundation, your compass, and your end is made manifest
unto the children of light, who would divide God from his children, whom he
has begotten unto himself through the word of faith, in which we live and
abide for ever: and here I challenge you before the Lord to produce one
Scripture, which speaks of God being distinct from them that are begotten by
him, and if you cannot prove your words by plain Scripture, let shame cover
your faces, and stop your mouths for ever.)

And for your fourth thing, that God is three persons or substances, this is
also another of your lies, never such a word is declared of in Scripture, and
thus have you made your folly manifest to all men, and have cleared your selves
from the Scriptures: God is a mystery, in whom the foundation of all things
stands, and he is but one in all, though ten thousand times ten thousand. Woe
unto ye, you perverters of the truth, who blinds the eyes of the simple,
making them believe your immaginations and conceivings instead of truth, and
this you run to the powers of the earth to propagate, ye men of sin, did ever
the Prophets declare of such Gospel as this, or did ever the Apostles preach
any such Doctrine as this, which ye would compel people to believe, and would
have the powers of the earth to propagate; here I challenge you again to prove
your example by Scripture, and where ever the holy men of God did divide him
into three substances, and if ye refuse to prove the same, I proclaim, as in
the presence of the Lord, that ye are perverters of the Scripture, and of the
right way of the Lord, and your propagating the Gospel, and your principles,
are accursed from God, having no example in Scripture.

Fifth Principle. The fifth is, That Christ is the Mediator between God and Man,
without the knowledge of whom there is no salvation.

Answ. Him we witness made manifest in us, who is the Mediator, but what have
you to do to speak of his Name, or to profess his words, who are found in the
steps of the Scribes and Pharisees that put him to death, who are called of Men
Master, have uppermost rooms at Feasts, stand praying in the Synagogues, as
they did that Christ cried woe against, Math. 23. Thus you are separated from
Christ, who are not found in his Doctrine, and are found among the Heathen,
whom the condemnation of God is upon, and the Scripture bare testimony against
you, that you are not in the Doctrine of Christ, but are found to be liars, 1
John 2.22. and the acts of your father you are found acting.

And in the sixth you say that Christ is the true God, here you be witnesses
against your selves, that you divide the Father from the Son, who you say, is
three distinct substances, but the Lord will make you manifest, ye that
blindfold the simple, by your subtilty and witchcraft, making them believe lies
instead of Truth, and would divide that in which there is no division, for he
that has the So^ ^^th the Father also: This Man Christ Jesus who was made with
an Oath, the everlasting Covenant, the Oath of God is not divided from him in
whom the foundations stands; for without this man Jesus was nothing made, and
as he was, so he is, he that has an ear to hear let him hear, and here sottish
minds, your imagined God beyond the stars, and your carnal Christ which you
would make appear through your heathenish Philosophy, is utterly denied and
testified against by the Light which comes from Christ, which ye resist as your
foref^thers have done. And in your seventh Principle ye are laid open, 1 John
4.2. Hereby know we the Spirit of God, every Spirit that confesses Christ come
in the flesh, is of God, and this is he that is one with the Father, even Jesus
Christ, the Man of God who was given for a Covenant, but him ye are enemies
unto. And whereas you say, in the eighth, that this Christ the man of God, is
God and Man in one Person; it is a lie, he is not divided from what he was
before the foundations of the hi^s were laid, but him ye knew not, but as ye do
imagine, and the Heathens do, and here you are shut forth from the Scriptures,
and from Christ, and the new Man, which is witnessed in the Sons of God;
therefore stop your mouths for ever, who would make people believe that
believing in those words which are decl^red from the Life without the same
Spirit, as they had that spoke them forth, will bring them to the same
knowledge of God: And thus in your ninth you have also showed forth your
Ignorance, and telling people that Christ has paid a ransom for sin, this is
witnessed by the children of Light, but what have you to do to take these words
into your mouths that never yet came to repentance for sin; and if ever you
witnese him a Redeemer, you must witness the vengeance of God which is upon
the Man of Sin, but you Men of sin, who live in your filthiness, shall receive
your recompense from the hand of the Lord, and this ye shall eternally
witness, whether you will hear or forbear. And as for the eleventh, that
Christ being the only God, and Man in one Person, remains for ever a dictinct
person from all Saints, and Angels, notwithstanding their union and communion
with him: your words are utterly denied, and detested, and your distinctions
are abominable; I challenge you from the Lord to prove such a thing in
Scripture, or else stop your mouths for ever, for Christ Jesus is but one in
all, and not distinct, and you that would divide him, and them that are
begotten by him are enemies unto him. As for the the twelfth, That all men by
nature are dead in trespasses and sins, this is fulfilled in you, and ye shall
receive the wages of it, the Men of sin whose ungodly practices are laid open
and discovered to the children of Light, who have obtained the victory, and I
tell you plainly that vengeance of God hangs over your heads, and the
recompense of God shall be doubled upon you that live in your sins; except ye
repent ye all likewise perish; and whereof ye say ye are justified, and saved
by Grace, ye are they that have turned the grace of God into wantonenesse, and
holds the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of Persons, as is made
manifest by you daily.

And in your last you say, That to continue in any known sin under what
pretense soever, is damnable, here be you witnesses against your selves, that
ye are proud, and that ye live in the practice of the world, which is sin, and
seek for your gain from your Quarters, which is sin, and the Lord sent his
Prophets to declare against such, and the same woe from God, is upon you that
act the same things, Isaiah 56.11. And here your practice and Example is found
among the false Prophets of Israel, which the Lord sent his true Prophets to
declare against, which received his Word from his own mouth, for which they
were both persecuted and stoned by your Generation, which professed that in
Words which they persecuted in the Saints, who witnessed the life and power of
what they spoke. Thus have ye brought shame upon your selves ye deceitful
workers who are professing that cutwardly in words which ye are enemies to the
Life of, so from the Scriptures ye are razed out; and your bottom and
foundation is made manifest to the children of Light, and your deceits are made
manifest by them that walk in the Light, at which you are stumbling as your
forefathers did, though you profess the words declared from the Light. Thus
have I returned an answer to your confused Paper, lest you should boast your
selves in your folly, and blind the eyes of the simple by your heathenish
inventions, as ye have formerly done and have laid your shame open unto the
simple minded, that they may discover and see your confusion.

And now a word unto you from whom this Paper was put forth: Your Spirits and
your actings are contrary to the Spirit of Christ, as having no example from
him nor his Apostles for it. Be ye ashamed, and stop your mouths from
professing godliness, who are found in the pride and in the wickedness of
this world, out of which the Ministers of Christ were redeemed. Now can ye but
deny the Truth, when as ye act those things which the Ministers of Truth were
sent to declare against. Therefore let shame cover you, and let your mouths be
stopped in the dust for ever professing Christ or his Gospel, who are found
enemies to it. And now ye covetous Priests, who seek for your gain from your
Quarters ye may be ashamed of your profession How often have ye declared
against the covetous practice of the world in words outwardly and yet your
selves are found acting in them in covetous^esse and extortion, as is daily made
manifest by you; and is contrary to the practice of the Apostles: For shame ye
covetous Priests give over your wicked practices, and your beastly actings,
lest the Lord rip off your coverings, and lay you naked to all men: Thus have I
cleared my conscience to you and to all the world in the presence of the Lord,
whether you will hear or forbear.

One who is called by the world a Quaker, whose name in the flesh is,
CHRISTOPHER ATKINSON.

FINIS.

