An Account of THE TRIAL OF WILLIAM CLAMP, Boatswain of Their Majesty's Ship
the York, and his Mate William Griffin, together with Sergeant Vallune; Before
the Honorable Sir Francis Wheeler, Admiral of the Mediteranean Squadron, and
Reer-Admiral of the Red: And the Right Honorable The Earl of Danby,
Reer-Admiral of the Blew. On Board Their Majesty's Ship the Carlisle. The Two
Former for Cheating the King, in Embezeling Their Majesty's Stores: The Latter
for Killing his Fellow Soldier: Who being Convicted and Condemned, were
Executed on Board at Portsmouth on Friday the 24th. of this Instant November
1693. With their Behavior at the Execution.
Published by Authority.

SIR Francis Wheeler, Admiral of the Mediterranean Squadron, and Rear Admi^al
of the Red of their Majesty's ^leet, hoisted his Flag on Board their Majesty's
Ship Carlisle, on ^he 24th. Ultimo: and on the ^6th. following, made his Signal
^or a Council of War, upon which ^he Right Honorable the Earl ^f Danby Rear
Admiral of the Blew, and Captains of the Fleet ^s usually, came on Board, where
^eing Set, William Clamp and his Mate William Griffin where brought before the
Honorable Board, and Four Evidences, Robert Fielding, Daniel Browse, Henry
Seagood, and Thomas Chandler, likewise belonging to the York, by Mathias
Budwel, Provest Marshal of Their Majesty's Fleet. The Evidence for the King
Swore, That Boatswain Clamp receiving some Stores a shore, instad of bringing
them on Board the York, put them on Board a Ketch, and sent his Mate a shore a
day or two following to receive Money for them, which Money the Evidence Swore
they saw them telling over in the Mates Cabin: The Boatswain and his Mate both
denied the Fact, and said they were brought on Board, and alleged that the
Evidence had Threatened to be Revenged of them, because they had beat them for
their Laziness on Board, however this Insinuation did not prevail, for the
Unanimous Vote of the Board declared them both Guilty; upon which they were
confined to the Boatswain's Cabin of the Carlisle, where they bewailed their
Misfortune with great Penitence, continuing to assert their Innocence,
particularly the Mate, owning they had been Tardy sermerly.

Every day of the last Week, the Chaplain of the St. Michael came on Board to
Visit them, and Instruct them to prepare for a better World. On Thursday last
he told them they must despair of a Pardon, and direct their Petitions to
Almighty God, and beg Pardon for their Sins, by making an open Confession of
them; the Boatswain told him, he had been a great Sinner, and had two Wives
Living, One at Chatham, and another at Portsmouth, that he deserved Death, but
denied the present Fact. The Mate forgave the Evidence very heartily, and
thanked them for the kindness they had done him, hoping by their wrong
Accusation, he might enjoy Heaven, and seemed very well pleased at his Change.
On Sunday the 19th. they received the Sacrament, and within two hours after
were carried on Board the St. Michael, Guarded by the Provest Marshal,
Corporal, and Musketeers. This morning a Council of War was called on Board
the St. Michael, (where the Flag now is) and about Eleven a Clock they were
both Hanged, the Boatswain at the Starboard fore Yard-Arm, and his Mate at the
Larboard fore Yard-Arm.

John Valune a Switzer, had been in the Service ever since the War, formerly a
Soldier in France, and Barber Chyrurgion by Profession; one Night on Board the
Berwick, he and one William Pike an Irish man being both drunk, they could not
agree about a piece of Candle, and falling out; they fell to Blows, upon which
Vallune gave him a Cut from his Far to the end of his Mouth with hi^ Knife,
upon which he was secured, and Pike taken into Cure and set a shore, where he
dyed in a Fortnights time of that Wound, as the Doctor Swore; he was likewise
Tried by the foregoing Honorable Board on the same day as the Boatswain, and
having nothing to say for himself, he was found Guilty of wilful Murder; From
which time, till he was Executed, he Repented very heartily of Sins, That he
had been guilty of Whoring and Drinking, and Irreligious Life, and hoped that
God would have Mercy on his poor Soul. He was Hanged this morning with the
Boatswain and hi^ Mate, at the Starboard main Yard-Arm.

London, Printed for R. Lyford in Holborn, 1693.


