At a general Meeting of the Committee for Arrears, the 13th. of September,
Anno Dom. 1648.
FOrasmuch as that by several former Precepts awarded in pursuance of several
Orders of Common Council, and in particular by the Precept dated the Fourth of
this instant September; It was ordered, That on this day return should be made
to this Committee, of the Names of all persons that are in Arrear upon any of
the Assessments, in such manner, and to such purpose as therein was expressed.
And whereas also by the same Precept, the Collectors in their several
Divisions were required to be active and diligent in the collecting of the said
several Assessments; and that the Collectors within a certain time therein
prefixed, were to make up their Accounts concerning the same, with the Deputy
and Common-councell-men in their said several Divisions, and pay in the Money
then remaining in their hands to the Treasurers at War: And that return should
by the Deputy Common-councell-men and Collectors be made to this Committee, of
the Names of such persons within their Ward, as have not paid their said
Assessments, and the sums by them owing, and the reasons why they pay not the
same; And if any of the said Collectors should be remiss that then their Names
were to be this day also returned; and thereupon (according to an Order of the
honorable House of Commons) to be certified to a Committee of Parliament, as
in and by the said Precept, relation being thereunto had, may more at large
appear: All which nevertheless, and although the said Committee this day
expected Returns to have been made, according to the same Precept; but the said
Service being (as it now seems) neglected, It is therefore Ordered, That time
be given for the doing the matters and things contained in the former Precept,
by the said Deputy, Common-councell-men, and Collectors, and every of them,
until Tuesday next at Two of the clock in the afternoon; with this intimation
also, That if the said Returns are not by that time made, that then the
Deputies and several Common-councell-men do make return of such of the said
Collectors as either obstruct or neglect the Work, or fail in doing any thing
of them required, whose Names are by this Committee to be then returned to the
said Committee of Parliament; or in default thereof, the said Deputies and
Common-councell-men are to be returned to the said Committee of Parliament,
there to be dealt withal according to their demerit: with this also, That
further time or favor is not to be expected. And it is hereby further ordered,
That the Returns shall be made by this Committee of the said Defaulters at the
time aforesaid. And all Parties concerned therein, are to take notice hereof.

Tho. Lathum Cler. Comiss. praed.


