An ACCOUNT OF THE TRIALS OF SEVERAL Notorious MALEFACTORS. For Murders,
Fellonyes and Burglaries, Holden at the Sessions House in the Old Bailey, for
the City of London and County of Middlesex. AND GOALE-DELIVERY, Of NEWGATE.
Which began on the 16. of this Instant January, and ended the 17. With the
other most Remarkable PROCEEDINGS.
But especially the. Trial of Mr. St. John, for Killing a Gentleman of Lincolns
Inn, and Elizabeth Crossman, for Murdering her Apprentice with a Chiss^l, as
likewise the Debate held about sending the Condemned Popish Priests to the Isle
of Scilly. Together with the Names of the Persons Condemned to Dye, Burnt in
the Hand, Transported and to be Whipped.
JAnuary the 16. This day the Sessions for the City of London, County of
Middlesex, and Goal Delivery of Newgate, began at the Sessions House in the
Old Bailey, where the proceedings were as follows.

Elizabeth Scot was Tried for stealing two silver Perfuming Pots, two silver
Cups, half a dozen of Spoons, and some other pieces of Plate, on the 29 of
December, from one Anthony Comizary a Jew, living near Aldgate, she being taken
as she was bringing them down stairs in her Apron; her Plea was, That she was
Drunk, and knew not what she did, but upon the Evidences possitive swearing to
the Fact, she was found Guilty.

Robert Huckle took his Trial, as a Confederate with a Servant lately living at
Mr. William Bethels in Cornhil, and assisting her on the 4th. of December last,
to Rob her Master of three Diamond Rings, ten pieces of old Gold, eighty
Guinies, half a dozen of silver Spoons, two standing Cups, and several other
pieces of Plate and Rings, in all to the Value of 300 l. the Robbery being
committed when all the Fam^^ that servant excepted, were gone to Church, and
upon her being charged with it, she Confessed it, and declared that the
Prisoner enticed her to break open the Cup-board where the Treasure was, and
helped her away with it, and he, upon his being Apprehended having two ten
shilling pieces of old Gold, a Guinny, an half Guinny about him, and as the
Evidence swore, having Confessed the same, the Jury brought him in Guilty.

George Emerson was Tried for stealing a silver Tankard, specified in the
Indictment to be worth six pound, the Felony being committed on the 12 of
January, at the House of one Merfield, at the three Black Birds in Warwick
Lane; the Witnesses which were the Woman of the House and her Daughter, who
swore positive to the Fact; and on the other side the Prisoner endeavored to
clear himself, by bringing several people to testify where he was at the time
the Felony was committed, the which he produced, but the Court being
dissatisfied with the Testimony of one of them, by reason he lived in White
Friars, the Prisoner was found Guilty.

Robert Mason being Indicted for stealing Hens and a Cock, in the Parish of St.
Giles Cripplegate (as some suppose to complete the Turkey Feast lately held in
Smithfield,) he was found Guilty to the value of 10 d. and so is like to have
but sour sauce to his Hollow Bits.

John Johnson and William Ashbott were Tried for the Murder of Lucy Co^k, on
the tenth of December last, in the Parish of Cripplegate, by driving a Cart
over her head, of which bruise she instantly dyed, several VVitnesses were
produced, who swore, that the Horse brushed her down, and she falling under the
wheel, the Cart being heavy Laden with Dung, it went over her before the Horses
could be stopped, and that a Coach at the same time coming by might hinder the
Carter from saving her, so that it appearing not to be wilfully done, the
Prisoners were acquitted, but the Cart and Horses fell to the Kings Almoner,
etc.

Humphry Bennet of St. Clement Danes, was Tried for assaulting William Sellwood
in the street, about 10 of the Clock in the Evening, and after having struck up
his Heels, taking from him his Hat and Cravat, the latter being found about him
by the Constable of the Watch that apprehended him, and he not being able to
give a good account of himself, he was found Guilty.

Robert Cundell of St. Katharines was Tried for Stealing a Cloak from George
Willet, the which upon Enquiry was found in his House; he Pleaded, That he
Drinking in the House where it was taken from, by an oversight wrapped it up
amongst his own things, but that being looked upon as a frivolous Excuse, he was
found Guilty.

John Smith of the Parish of Stepney, was Tried for entering a House in Stepney,
and taking thence a Carpet and some wearing Apparel, the which when he
perceived he could not conveniently carry away, he dropped; so that the
Evidence not charging him to have had them about him at the time he was
Apprehended, the Jury acquitted him.

Rowland St. John having three Indictments preferred against him for Killing
Mr. Styles of Lincolns Inn, viz. one for Murder by the Grand Jury, another by
the Corroner upon his Inquest, and the third upon the Statute of Stabbing; the
Evidence were sworn to them, and Deposed as follows, That the Prisoner and
the Deceased having been at several Taverns, and by that means somewhat
overcome with Wine, they at last came to the Three Crowns in Chance^y-Lane,
where they fell to hot Words, insomuch that the Deceased laid his Hand upon his
Sword, upon which the Prisoner drew, and e're he could be prevented, run him
two Inches into the Body, of which in three days he dyed, viz. on the 10 of
December, but there appearing no former Malice, he was found Guilty of
Manslaughter.

Mr. Thomson, a Council, moved the Court in the behalf of the Sheriffs, That an
Order of Court might be Granted for sending the Popish Priests, now Prisoners
in Newgate to the Isle of Scily, alleging, That then they might be fully
VVaranted in what they did, having already received his Majesty's Order for
that purpose; upon which my Lord Chief Justice Pemberton told him, That it was
not a matter that concerned the Court, but that, if his Majesty was pleased to
Reprieve them, and Order them to be sent thither, they must send them; and
Sentence of Death being awarded against them, the Court had no further to do in
it, and that no Order of Court could be granted in that Case; upon which Mr.
Sheriff Pilkington stood up and told his Lordship, That he was very willing to
deliver them in obedience to his Majestys Warrant, but all he desired was, that
he and his Brother Sheriff might be Indemnified.

It was moved by a Councellor sent from Mr. Attorney General, that if any Bills
of Indictment were brought against any of the Kings Evidence they might not be
preferred to the Grand Jury, before Mr. Attorney had notice of them; upon which
the Court gave Order, That if any such were brought, that the Clerk should wait
upon him with them, adding, That the Kings name could not be used against any
person contrary to His Majesty's Pleasure.

Elisabeth Sims, being Committed for Robbing William Gresham of St. Martins in
the Fields Confessed the Robbery before the Justice that Committed her, and was
upon her Trial, found Guilty of Felony.

Thomas Knight; a Foot Soldier was Tried for killing a Lifeguard man, at
Kings-Gate, about two miles on this side Chelsey, on the 17 of December; but it
appearing, That the Lifeguard man pursued him with his Drawn Sword, and cut
him over the Head and Arm, and that he was forced to Draw to Defend his Life,
he was found Guilty of Manslaughter likewise.

Elizabeth Crosman, of St. Martins in the Fields, had a Bill of Indictment
preferred against her for Murdering John Bret, her Apprentice, the matter of
Fact thus; she being at an opposite Alehouse, where having taken a Cup too
much, she came home and found the Young man at Play with her Son, took up a
Stick to beat him, of which, after she had struck him a blow or two, he
disarmed her, whereupon taking up a Carving-Tool that lay upon the Bench (her
Husband being of that Trade) she struck it into his Body, 3 inches deep, just
under his Left Pap, and there left it sticking, and after that threw another at
him, which cut him on the hand; saying, She had often said, she should be
Hanged for him, and now her saying was come to pass; after the Youth had
received the Mortal Wound, he cried, O Lord forgive me my Sins, for I shall
Die; and with that, going down Stairs, got into a Neighbors House, where he no
sooner sat him down, but expired; She alleged upon her Trial, That he gave her
several provoking Words, but not being able to prove any such thing, she was
found Guilty of wilful Murder.

Alexander Younger, the person who swore Treason against Mr. Harvy, was Tried
upon a Trespass for forcibly entering the House of Albinus Spencer, and under a
pretense of searching for prohibited Goods, taking thence 2 Silver Sword Hilts,
valued at 4 l. He having been Tried for a Felony the last Sessions, and
acquitted; but had no such good luck this: But after a full hearing of the
Evidence he was found Guilty of the Trespass, and Fined Ten Mark, and to
continue till next Sessions. There were produced in Court no less than Ten
Commitments by which he had been committed to Newgate and other Goals for
Felony and Misdemeanors, and it was objected, That he had not only
Counterfeited the Hands of the Five Commissioners of the Customs, but likewise
the Kings Seal; and yet this was one of Loyal NAT'S intimate acquaintance.

Paul Rutter, a French Doctor, was Tried for Poisoning. R^bert Morgan, a
Lifeguard man, in the Parish of St. Martins in the Fields, on the 10 of
November last, the manner thus; The Doctor keeping the Deceased's Wife as his
Miss, and there being an Estate of 50 l. per annum in the Case, after the Death
of her Husband, the Doctor takes an occasion to meet him one morning, and in
all kindness desired him to take his Mornings Draught with him, after which the
Deceased went home and fell exceeding Ill, Vomiting up black matter,
complaining the Doctor had Poisoned him, and so continuing for the space of 4
days, Died; and upon his being opened, a black Potion was found settled in his
Stomach; but after the Examination of about 20 Witnesses on both sides, the
Jury being half French and half English, he was Acquitted; but upon the Courts
being dissatisfied, forced to give in Security for his Good Behavior.

Hester Lemore was Tried for Robbing a Gentlewomans House in Covent Garden, of
a Necklace of Pearl valued at 23 l. two Silver Candlesticks laid at 13 l. six
Silver Spoons, etc. the Evidence swore, That she having Lodged in the House,
went up Stairs under pretense of speaking with Monsieur Moses, a Gentleman that
Lodged there; and that the Plate was in the Chamber when she went up, but
missed presently after she was departed, upon which they followed her to a
place she used to frequent, and made search, but found nothing, so that they
not being able to prove it positively, and she bringing a great many French
People with whom she lately fled out of France for Religion, to Testify that
she was Descended of a good Family, and had lived honestly, she was Acquitted

At this Sessions 7 persons received Sentence of Death, 1 Man and 6 Women, viz.
Humphry Bennet, Elizabeth Scot, Elizabeth Crosman, Ann Dixon, Joyce Love,
Martha Huckle and Elizabeth White, 3 Burnt in the Hand, 3 to be Transported,
and 5 Whipped.

Alexander Younger Fined for a Trespass 10 Marks, and kept in Prison till next
Sessions. And Mr. St. John brought his Majesty's Warrant for staying his being
Burnt in the Hand: and about 7 Indicted for Recuzancy. And so ended this
Remarkable Sessions,

Pr^nted for Charles Leigh, 1682.


