THE Heavenly Trade, OR THE Best Merchandising: The only way to live well IN
IMPOVERISHING TIMES. A Discourse occasioned from the decay of earthly Trades,
and visible wastes of Practical Piety in the day we live in, offering Arguments
and Counsels to all, toward a speedy revival of dying Godliness and timely
prevention of the dangerous issues thereof impending on us. By BARTHOLOMEW
ASHWOOD Minister of the Gospel.

Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for that meat which endures unto
everlasting life, Joh. 6. 27. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, and all these things shall be added to you, Matthew. 6. 33. Ne
nimium operae consumas in rebus levissimis, fugax aetas, and vitreares
valetudo, non quibuslibet est impendenda: quaedam despicienda sunt, and animus
ad magna est erigendus, Eras. (...). Isocrat. London, Printed for Samuel Lee
near Pope's Head Alley, over against the Church in Lombard Street, 1678.

To my honored Friend Mr. Jeremy Holwey, Merchant in BRISTOL.
SIR,
BOth Equity and Interest do give you a peculiar claim to this offspring of my
weak Labors, it being born in your House, and drawing its first breath in your
famous City. 'Twas with you I had the occasion, and from your Self the
practical encouragement to treat on this Subject; while under your roof I
enjoyed for diverse weeks the advantage of your converse, and beheld in your
expressions and conversation a fair display of this Heavenly Trade. This
cherished my hopes that a discourse of this nature might find or help to make
more such Traders in your August and Merchandising City: A place (among its
many Ornaments) made happy with Gospel enjoyments, and the lovers of Truth and
Peace. It Is Religion is the honor and prosperity of a People, It lays their
foundation with Agates, and makes their borders of pleasant stones, Isa. 54.
It Is like the Crown of Solomon, with which his Mother crowned him in the day of
his espousals, and in the day of the gladness of his heart, Cant. 3. 11. This
gives them Peace within their walls, and Prosperity within their Palaces, Psalm.
122. 7. It brings down a blessing on their Basket and Stores, fills their
Chambers with all precious and pleasant riches, Prove. 24. 4. And decay in this
Heavenly Trade, is doubtless one reason of those wastes in men's earthly Trades:
There is no such way for men to thrive in their own interests, as to be
faithful to God's interest; As 'twas said of Caesar, that by setting up
Pompey's Image, he established his own, whereas a decay of Godliness brings a
Moth on men's earthly Trades also: Hos, 5. 11, 12, Ephraim is oppressed and
broken in judgment, because he willingly walked after the Commandment,
therefore will I be unto Ephraim a Moth, and to the house of Judah as
rottenness. Gregory gives this reason why Dives was tormented in his Tongue,
because he talked much of Religion, but practiced little, Verba legis in ore
tenuit quae opere servare Contempsit. We live in an age of much talking of God,
but of little walking with God; Men's tongues are tipped with Heaven, but their
hearts and feet sunk into the World, and are full of Pride, Vanity, and Deceit.
What was said of Diogenes Synopensis, That in Opinion he was a Stoic, but in
Conversation an Epicure, may be sadly reflected on many Professors in this Age,
who espouse strict Principles, but lead loose Lives, and only Treat for Heaven,
but Trade for Earth. But Sir, You have not so learned Christ, or received this
Spirit which is of the world; but that which is of God, 1 Cor. 2. 12. Your
devotedness to the Lord making your earthly Interests subservient to things
above, with your Zeal, Courage, and Constancy in the way of God, and natural
care for the things of his Glory, do bespeak you to be a Trader of another
Country, whose work and wages are above; And certainly whatever men think, a
walking with God in his appointments, and a conscientious care in every thing
to please him, will one day appear to be the greatest interest even in their
eyes who now despise it; neither is there at present any thing in the ways of
God which Souls have cause to be ashamed of, however clothed with Calumny and
Scorn by men; nor can they who walk in them in Truth, be deprived of any real
interest by the utmost severity of those that would run them down, And were
there no other Argument to persuade men to the choice and persuit of Godliness,
this were sufficient, even that relief gracious Souls find from a reflection on
their Vprightness, to bear them up under their greatest sufferings; yea, that
serenity, peace, and sweet acquiescence of Spirit which sincerity affords them
under the most dreadful issues which divine pleasure may allot them here. It
must needs set Religion above all other Interests (its Enemies themselves being
Judges, if they would be rational) that the worst things of Holiness, even then
when Believers are under the saddest Circumstances, are chosen and preferred by
them above the best things of the world; yea, they are thought a good bargain
when purchased with their greatest Sufferings. Surely humor will not engage
such who know the usefulness of earthly Comforts, and have least reason to be
prodigal of them, to expose themselves, and their dearest concerns in the world
unto ruin, but for what they are persuaded, is far better. Hebr. 10. 34. Nor
can it be thought obstinacy or hypocrisy in those who know their own hearts,
and the terrors of the Lord, to persist in those ways that would cost them
their earthly All, and lay them open to divine wrath too, should they be false
and disobedient. Certainly, did not prejudice and passion blind men's eyes, the
calm exercise of their own light would restrain them from such an uncharitable
censure of those that desire to fear God, though they walk in some ways
different from their understanding, while they labor to approve their
integrity to God and men, and are found faithful to that measure of light they
have received. But possibly this Piece may not fall into such hands, or be
permitted long under their eye: My hopes, at least my desires are, that it may
prosper with those who profess better things; And if it shall please the Lord
(who sometimes uses clay and spittle, and Goats hair, and counts the things
that are not as if they were) to make this of any service to your Self and
Family, and unto those who profess his Name in your City, for whom I have so
high respect in the Lord, it will abundantly compensate the labor, and answer
the design of him who is and desires to approve himself

SIR, Your Servant in Christ Jesus Barthol. Ashwood.

TO THE READERS, ESPECIALLY Those who are the more peculiar Objects of my Care,
Love and Labors.
NOtwithstanding the high Pretensions to Light and Wisdom in the Times we live
in beyond some former Ages, there is no small measure of Soul darkness fallen
upon us in this Evening-part of our Gospelday, Isa. 42. 19, 20. Who is blind
but my servant? or deaf as my messenger that I sent? who is blind as he that is
perfect, and blind as the Lords servant? seeing many things but thou observest
not: opening the ear, but he hears not. Were not a Veil on men's minds, could
it possibly be that CHRIST should be so little precious in this Day of
revelation and Land of visions in which we live? Was there ever a Nation in the
World to whom Christ has been so unveiled and manifestly held forth Crucified
before their eyes? and yet not to know the Day of their visitation and the
things of their peace, be-speaks shameful Ignorance. Is not this a manifest
Evidence of men's Darkness and folly, to be fondly taken with Airy Notions and
vain Speculations, and all the while neglect that Wisdom which makes wise to
salvation, to leave the Fire of the Sanctuary, and sit down by Sparks of their
own kindling: That having a Kingdom before them which cannot be shaken, and an
Inheritance that fades not away reserved in the heavens; they should turn
again to the beggarly Elements of this world, loathing their Manna and Angels
food, and longing again for the Onyons and Garlic they had vomited up; to
leave tried Gold for that which perishes; to let Heaven drop out of their
hands, and hugg the World in their hearts; to neglect that Merchandise which
brings in unsearchable riches, and drive a Trade for such Goods whose fashion
passes away: Do plainly argue Ignorance and folly. Are not the silver streams
of Jordan better than the muddy waters of Assyria, and our Rock above the
worldlings Sandy bottoms (they themselves being Judges?) and yet to lose those
pleasant streams for that filthy puddle, is folly indeed. Will Eagles stoop to
Flies? Can Souls who have ascended into the light of the Lord, and seen the
things that differ, and had acquaintance with things above upon choice, come
down again and prey upon the Carrion Comforts and Interests of a dying World? O
no. Can a Maid forget her Ornaments, or a Bride her Attire? Oh foolish people
and unwise to be unmindful of the Rock that begat them, to leave the Snow of
Lebanon, to let down such a gainful Trade as Holiness is, that they may pursue
a Soul-cheating, starving, damning World: demonstrates folly and madness in
such as have the knowledge or hopes of better things: are ye so foolish having
begun in the spirit; are ye now made perfect by the flesh? Gal. 3. 3. To
obviate or retrieve this folly is the design of this ensuing Discourse, which
comes not in the gaudy Dress of curious Art, or in the Excellency of man's
wisdom, but in the plainness and demonstration of the truth as it is in Jesus.
I am not ignorant that Books have their Fashions as well as men, and Discourses
that come not forth in the Modish Garb laced with Elegancy and stuffed with
Lofty strains, scarce meet with a Look except of Scorn and Contempt from the
Wits of this Day: But I love not to follow them who darken counsel by words,
and by their sublime Speculations and abstruse Notions, lead men into Clouds of
their own creating, and while they show Themselves lose their Readers. There
are many tricks and devices (says Mr. Dod) that some men use in Preaching,
(which we may apply also to Writing) but it seldom does good; the pure Gospel
and that Preaching which the World counts foolishness, is that which works most
kindly. Christ's own Weapons are the fittest for his own service, and when
there is least of man in Gods work, then usually does there most of God appear.
The business of this Book is not to feed thy Curiosity, but to find out thy
Conscience, and the likeliest way to That is through the plains of Intelligible
truth. I cannot expect that Discourse should lead others toward Heaven, that
has not its self drained and refined from Earth: Expect not in this any thing
that may please thy carnal mind, but what may profit thy teachable and obedient
Soul; and before thou ascendest the Throne to judge it, take the Balance of the
Sanctuary and weigh it: Be advised to go beyond such Readers who only view the
Title, read the Epistle, glance a little on the Book, and if they find not
something singular and pleasing their curious Fancy, lay it aside; this shows a
full Stomach but an empty Soul, and is a Practice that overturns the Writers
pains and the Readers profit; be persuaded to read it thoroughly and
impartially, and weigh it seriously, and thou may find something that
concerns either thy Understanding, Affection, Conscience, or Conversation.

I have chosen to prosecute the Metaphor of ( Trading) throughout this
Discourse, having a principal respect to that sort of persons in the design of
this Book, and the better to insinuate into the mind of ordinary Christians the
knowledge of heavenly things, of men's duties, neglects and backsliding. If thou
art one who never made a profession of God farther than blindness, formality
or superstition might lead thee; and a stranger to this great pleasant and
gainful Trade of Godliness, here thou may find Arguments to persuade thee to
this rational and necessary Undertaking in order to Life and Salvation, Grace
and Glory, with Counsel and Instructions how thou may attain to this high
and heavenly Calling.

If thou be one who drivest furiously after the World, pursuing thy earthly
Interest with greediness, neglecting the things that concern thy peace, and
subjecting the Concerns of Heaven and thy immmortal Soul to the poor and
perishing Trifles of this World; here thou will find reasons to convince thee
of that folly, and helps to loosen thy heart from that ensaring Soul ruining
bondage.

If thou meetest with Rebukes upon thy earthly Interests, and crosses on thy
Affairs and undertakings in the World, this Book will help thee to find out the
Cause of thy Disappointments, and those consuming Moths on thy Estate, and
Instruct thee to get Honey out of these Rods, good from these evils, and how to
Comport with Divine ends, and thy own Advantages by such Dispensations.

Have thou made a Profeossio of Godliness, and formerly driven this Heavenly
Trade to Advantage, but art now fallen back and decayed in thy Spiritual
substance, and become poor in thy Inward man and toward God? here may thou
find the Discoveries and Evidences of a backsliding Soul, with the Causes of
it: thou will also meet with Awakening Considerations to Affect and Afflict thy
heart with the sense of thy evil Case: Here also may thou know whether thy
Decays are cureable, and what course thou may take to get out of thy
languishing estate.

Art thou one that do profess this Heavenly Trade? this Piece will tell thee
what thy work is, and wherein this Employment lies; what are the Important
duties of Piety to be driven on every Day, with Directions and Rules about it.

If thou art one who keep up this Trade for Heaven and thrivest therein,
here have thou marks of a Prosperous Trade in Godliness, and several Doubts
cleared up about thy Soul-thrivings, with those Important Duties opened which
this Peculiar Mercy calls for: Gather out of this Garden what Physic or Food
thou need, and Apply and Improve it, praying for the Assistance of that
Spirit that has been frequently and solemnly begged both for the Forming and
Blessing of this Discourse unto all that read it.

You who have been Hearers of this Subject, though in somewhat different
Expressions suited to your Capacity and Advantage in the Delivery of it, have
reason above others to Receive and Improve this: Message Twice sent unto you.

But you Especially my dear Friends, the Care of whose Souls is upon me, for
whose sake chiefly these Truths were at first Delivered, and are now made
Public have the most obliging reasons to get them Copied out upon your Hearts
and in your Lives. To you Firstly, more Especially, yea, most Affectionately
was and is this Word of salvation fent and presented again to your View, that
you might have these things abiding with you, and that they might live in your
Eye which have founded in your Ear, and be speaking to you when I shall be
removed out of your sight, and be beyond all Capacity to serve your precious
and immortal Souls, that when I can plead no more for God or with you, I may in
this be speaking to you and others in the behalf of Christ, and glorious though
despised Holiness. This has been the prevailing Argument with me to discover my
weakness to the World, and expose my self to the censure or scorn of some.

I have the greatest reason to expect from you the Entertainment of these
Truths, who have chosen and received me in the Lord, to declare the Gospel of
his Son to you: You also have known my Labors, Infirmities and Afflictions
with you and for your sake; that for Twenty years space I have served you in
the Gospel, in reproach, wants, weaknesses; dangers and sufferings, neither
count I my life dear unto my self, so that I may finish my course with joy, and
the Ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel
of the grace of God: yea. being so affectionately desirous of you, I have been
willing to have imparted to you not the Gospel of God only, but also my own
Soul. Because you were dear unto me, you know and have acknowledged the
suitableness of this Subject unto your own Cases, and how evidently the
condition of most of you is opened here and suited, by the convictions,
counsels, reprehensions, and consolations of this discourse; there are some
among you that I am jealous of with a godly jealousy, lest I should have
labored in vain for you, and your minds be corrupted from the simplicity of
the Gospel through the temptations of this present world: I have often cried
aloud in your ears against the sin, and have warned you of the danger of an
earthly spirit and conversation, and do tell you now even weeping, that such
are enemies to the Cross of Christ, who mind earthly things, until you are
crucified to the world, you have no saving benefit of the cross of Christ, or
can ever behold the face of God in heaven, until you are redeemed from the
earth; all your Profession, Parts, Duties and Enjoyments will be but so many
Witnesses against you, if after all you are lovers of this present World:
Coveting to be rich will also make your Souls poor, and deprive you of the
refreshments of his presence and consolations of his blessed spirit, and will
be a manifest evidence that you have little of those pleasures that are from
above. 'Twas faid of pious Mr. Bain, That he sought not great matters in the
World, being taken up with comforts and griefs to which the World was a
stranger. The more a Soul converses in heaven and lives upon the first fruits
of the other world, the less will he be taken with things below: when Abraham
came to live by faith, and in a view of that City whose Maker and Builder is
God, the Plains of Sodom and Spoils of Canaan were to him but mean things; I
never cared much for the world (says one) since I came to know better things.
You have tasted that the Lord is gracious; you have fed on the fat things of
his house, and have found a day in his Courts better than a thousand elsewhere,
and must be self-condemned if you prefer not God above Ten thousand Worlds, and
count the enjoyment of himself riches enough; yea, if you esteem not the
reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt. 'Twas a brave
speech of that noble Galeatius when he had left his Honor, Interest and
Relations for Christ and the Gospel sake: I have says he, riches honor and
joy enough while in this Cottage I may live in the Church of God, enjoy his
Word and People, and have time to converse with God by holy meditation, and
with my Friends about Gods great goodness to me in my Conversion, cursed for
ever be that Religion which weds men to the World, and divorces them from God.

There are others of you (I fear) fallen back in your spiritual state; former
days were better than now, and the shadow gone back some degrees upon the Dial
of your hearts, who it may be have left your first love, have lost your
spiritual taste, more dead to the things of God, Cold and Formal in Duty;
possibly you have hid your face from God, and he has compassed himself with a
cloud before you. You have neglected your walks with God, and he has withheld
converse with you: For the recovery of such from whence they have fallen to
their first love and labors, is part of this Discourse framed; hear what the
Spirit says therein, Attend and Obey those Counsels, return to your first
love, and do your first works, least the Lord take the Candlestick out of his
place, and leave you in that wilderness into which you wander.

Some of you who are fearers of God yet walk in darkness, and see no light,
have your continual Exercises and frequent Complaints, that he who should have
comforted your souls, is removed far from you: My Advice to you is, to walk in
the light when you sit in darkness, and wait for the light when the even
shadows are upon you. It Is but a little while and he that shall come will come,
and will not tarry; the Son of righteousness is upon his journey toward you,
and 'twill not be long ere it be risen upon you.

Are there any of you who have better days, does your Bow abide in strength,
are your Affections warm toward your Beloved, and your hearts sometimes burn
within you while he is talking to you in his Word? Do you long for his
Appearance, and delight in his Presence, and press hard after him in his
Appointments,? Do you love the Word of his mouth more than your necessary food?
Can you be content to let your own things sit, that you may seek the things
that are Christ's? and sit at his feet, when others are in the marketplace,
and abroad in the crowd of their earthly affairs; Are you alone with Christ in
a corner? If so, your Mercy is singular, and your Obligations strong to be
entirely the Lords; to be no more your own, but wholly devoted to his fear, to
live a life of praise and welpleasingness uno God, to think well of Christ, and
bear his pleasure; to be patient in tribulation, continuing instant in prayer,
to long for the Wellhead of your mercies, and to be beginning a life of glory
while you are here in a life of grace. I shall close up this Discourse with a
few words of general Advice to you all.

First, lay the foundation sure on which you build all your Temporary labors
and your Eternal hopes: You cannot be too certain, in that on which depends
your all. Consider how often Satan has battered down; yea, your own hearts
have disputed away those Evidences on which you could sometimes have adventured
your Souls, and yet the strongest Assaults are to come, and the greatest Forces
of Hell reserved for the last Battle. Bottom not your hopes on any thing short
of a Crucified Christ, not on your Frames, but on his Favor; not upon your
Duties, but his Righteousness; nor upon any kindnesses received from him short
of a saving union with him; rest not till your Convictions be clear, deep and
distressing, such as discover sin to be the greatest evil in its nature and
fruits, and its residence and indwelling in you, a burden intolerable; such
Convictions as will not admit of after favor or reconciliation to the least
known or most beloved sin; that can make your heart to bleed afresh upon every
new touch of it, and never at rest till the whole kind of it be destroyed out
of your Souls: Labor to see such a Beauty in Christ, as may render all Created
Glory as dross and dung in your Eye; stop not till you come to the Excellency
of the knowledge of Jesus Christ as your Lord; till you can discern such a
worth in the Person as well as Purchase of Christ, as will make you content to
throw all over board, to take in him, and be sick of love till you enjoy him:
be sure your close with Christ be right with his whole Person, Will and
Designs, to be one with him upon all his own terms. And that this union be not
in Judgment and Consent only, but in Heart and Will from your whole Souls,
finding an inward likeness and love to him in your renewed nature.

2ly, Go on toward perfection, press after nearer and more complete Conformity
to the Nature and Will of Christ every day: Think how short your highest
measures do come of perfect holiness in the sight of God; set the Pattern
before you every day, that you may be the more ashamed at your present
seize in Grace, and more provoked to higher Aims and Achievements;
compare your selves with them that are above you, with the Rule of
Righteousness, and with all your Obligations, Time, Means and Mercies, to keep
you humble in your own eyes; look upon your Wants as well as Enjoyments, that
you may be as poor in spirit as in condition; that which is wanting in you
cannot be numbered: Who am I and what is my people that we should be able to
offer so willingly after this sort? 1 Chronicles. 19. 14. Keep low thoughts in your
selves under the greatest services you do for God, and the highest honor you
receive from God. Alas (said the Lord Du-Plessis to one that commended him for
the improvemt of his Talent) What is there of mine in that Work? say not that
it was I, but God in me. I know more (says another) by my self to abase me,
than any man could know to extol me. So much humility a man has, so much grace
he has and worth and no more: Dr. Har.

3ly, Keep up a life of faith upon Christ in the promises: As the first
quickening of a Christian is by faith, so his whole life is maintained by
believing; no longer than you believe can you live: Gal. 2. 20. Your life is
hid with Christ in God. Draw fresh Influence thence by faith upon your Hopes,
Comforts and Graces under every want, fears and deaths within you; make not
your graces or duties the grounds of believing, but encouragements to Faith;
study more the nature, freeness, fullness and unchangeableness of redemption
grace, and get acquaintance with the promise and persuasions of the truth of
them in Christ: To live only by faith (says Dr. Harris) and a bare Promise
without a pawn, and to give all to free grace and to Christ alone, are mighty
works; and some of those things he found most difficult.

4ly, Walk in Love as Christ has loved you: This is the life of Heaven, and
beginning of that Excellent glory which shall never be removed; there is
nothing does make thee more like to God, more near and dear to him, and more
fit for his use than this Grace of Love: Let your Affections be extended as
large as the objects of them; unto God, his Word, Ways and People; love God to
obey him; his Ways to walk in them, his People to delight in them, to
sympathize with them, to mourn over them in their sufferings, to help them in
their necessities, to rejoice with them in their consolations, counting their
mercies your own, which is no easy part of your duty. It is far harder (says
one) to adopt another Comforts than his Sorrows, and to hold ones self exalted
in another exaltation.

5ly, In the enjoyment of the World, get above it, and while you live in it, be
daily dying to it; so much as you get above the World, so near are you to God
and Glory, and no nearer. Covet not another Goods, the World is none of your
Portion, if God be your part. Oh how much beneath the Extraction, Dignity and
Duty of Saints is the love to, and life upon this low and dirty World: leave
not Childrens bread to feed on such Carrion doggs-meat, and filthy excrements,
with which Satan feeds his Laborers. But having spoke largely of this matter
in the Book, I advise your Eye and Heart thither for Conviction and Counsel
herein.

6ly, Make much of the Time and Means of Grace while you have them; your Glass
runs, your Sun hastens, and the Wind blows when and where it lists. O make
use of Time while you have it: God who made nothing in vain, has work for
every hour of your short Day; work as hard as you can, you will find something
to do when you come to die. Loss of time (says Dr. Harris on his Deathbed)
sits very near upon me; work, work apace, assure your selves nothing will more
trouble you when you come to die, than that you have done no more for that God
which has done so much for you. Wait upon and walk in the light while you have
it; if Grace thinks it not much to spread a Table for you, don't you think it
much to spare time to sit down at it: You that find so many things to do when
God calls for your Company, will shortly find that God has other things to do
than to mind you when you need his Cordials; how glad would you be of enjoying
time to hear the voice of peace when you are entering upon Eternity, who are not
at leisure now to hear Divine precepts while in the possession of time: neglect
not hearing praying seasons, which are your Seed-time for Glory O that every
day (says one) were a Sabbath or a Fast Day, for then I should be well. Buy
not your ease or earthly interest at so dear a rate as the loss of salvation,
time and helps: Evidence your love to God by your valuation of his Presence in
his Ordinances; How can you long for the enjoyment of God in Heaven, who care
not for his company on Earth, or his glorious appearances in his Sanctuary.
Stick at nothing that may yield him delight or give him glory, how expensive
soever it be on your dearest Comforts and Interests: When one told Du Moulin in
his sickness that he wronged himself by speaking so much; It Is true, said he,
but I will die glorifying of God. A Soul that supreamly loves God, will count
nothing too much to do, part with or suffer that may bring him glory.

7ly. Rest not in your enjoyments of means, without improvement of them: What Is
a full Table if thy Soul abide empty, and frequent feeding, if thy inner man
languish: it is a time of dying and secret waste in most Christians; O covet
earnestly the best gifts, that you may flourish in the Courts of God, and grow
as the Cedars of Lebanon; that you may be thoroughly furnished to every good
work, and your profiting appear to all men: Be deeply sensible of your little
Fruit under great dressing, and be humbled; take heed of spiritual pride, and
puffings up in your apprehended Excellencies or Privileges; it is the humble
soul is the most thriving soul; keep your Hearts pure, and Lives unspotted: As
sound bodies, so sincere souls are most growing: pare off luxuriant branches as
they sprout out, and lay the Ax to the root of them every day; keep up Faith in
the Promises of Soul-prosperity to them that serve him in sincerity, Psalm. 92.
12, 13. and stay on Christ by Faith for help: when you see nothing but
Discouragements in your selves, and when you are afraid to apply the Promises,
even then bless God for them. These Promises, said a doubting Soul, are none of
mine, yet I am glad that God has made them, and for their sakes that shall
partake of them; Mr. White.

8thly, Neglect not secret transactions between God and your Souls, to which I
fear some of you may be too great strangers: no wonder that Intimacy between
God and Souls does fall, when they are seldom together in retirements. Oh take
heed of passing by thy Closet or secret corners one day, Matthew, 6. 6. or
posting out of them before God and your Souls have some Converse together; and
be not only constant in it, but careful to please God in the spiritual
performance of it: Let not Custom or Formality deprive thee of the sweetness of
that bread eaten in secret. You are in this Book more fully called upon to
these Duties of secret Prayer, meditation, heart-searching, and watching-work,
to which I refer you.

9ly; Make conscience of every Duty you owe toward others, in your Relations,
Places and Callings; keep up Family duty, or write Heathen upon thy doors, that
the World may know thee: If you neglect Gods service, he will not be your
Sanctuary; Prayerless houses have broken walls and doors, and no defense
against the least evil: If you will not give God your breathings, how can you
think he will give you his blessings: It Is sad that any, especially such whom
God has taken into his house, should shut him out of their doors; or give him
such pitiful service as some do, scarce ever reading the Scriptures in their
Families from one Lord's Day to another; only send him a little hasty fruit,
some short and shuffled prayers once a day: no wonder that salvation come not
to their houses, or converting grace into their families, but a flying Roll is
over their habitations, and the black marks of Ruin on their Children and
Servants: think it not strange that God makes thy pleasant Roses pricking
Briars and Thorns to thee, who have made them Spears and Swords to him. Oh keep
with God in every duty of his service, your Relation, Calling and Employments.

Lastly, in every condition walk with God, and wait for God; if he lead you in
ways of mercy, follow him in ways of duty. If you have Comforts take heed of
doting on or abusing of them: when he sends you Afflictions receive them; be
not fainting nor froward under them, but sanctify God in them, and by their
hand return to him; do not over-love your mercies, or over-fear your troubles:
prepare for Changes, but live upon Immutability, and be settled under all your
unsettlements; count nothing strange but sin, and nothing hard to bear, but the
absence or anger of a gracious God: lose not your fears in times of peace,
neither cast away your confidence in the day of trouble: let your Lamps be
always burning, that you may see the way of your duty in the Night of your
danger; and how to get in Comfort in your Adversity; and let your loins be
girt, that you may be ready both to do your work and to meet your wages; and be
always looking and waiting for the coming of your Lord, who will welcome you in
the Acceptance of your Duties, uncloath you of your sins and sufferings, and
crown your sincerity and faithfulness with a Come ye blessed of my father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for you; which is the longed for Fruit of all his
Labors with you, and the subject matter of his daily prayers for you, who is
in him that was and is, and is to come,

Your Affectionate Labourer, Fellow Servant, and Brother, Barthol. Ashwood.

THE Heavenly Trade, Opened and improved from
Proverbs 3. 14. For the Merchandise of it is better than the Merchandise of
silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold.
THAT Religion is under a very great declension in the day and place wherein we
live, is too evident to serious observers; but too little laid to heart; or the
prodigious effects, which usually follow such expiring godliness, duly trembled
at. The character of the last and perilous times has over taken us; men having
a form of godliness, but denying the power of it, 2 Timothy 3, 5. Nos non
eloquimur magna s^d vivimus. Minut. Foel.
A lamp, a name to live, notions parts, external privileges and duties, make
up the Religion of the greatest part of professing Christians this day, while
the vitals of Christianity visibly languish; Christianos non dici, sed ess^
oportet. Ignat.
where is that ancient Faith, Love, Zeal, Faithfulness, Courage, Patience,
Self-denial, Mortifiedness to the world, Justice, Charity, Heavenly-mindedness,
holy Converses, with that universal Piety and Unity, which made the Saints so
famous in former generations, and had so great an influence on the enlargement
of Christ's Kingdom, notwithstanding Pagan and Antichristian force against it?
In the room of which, now pride, contention, formality, selfishness,
hypocrisy, with the general gangrene of an earthly spirit, eats out the life
and power of true holiness: The affecting sense of this dangerous evil gives
occasion to this ensuing discourse, whose errand into the world, is not to
plead for notion or faction, but to advocate for despised godliness; to help to
awaken this sleepy age, and contribute a weak hand with abler shoulders, to
give a lift (if possible) to fallen piety.

Amongst the many Advocates for piety, Solomon the Penman of this book has
done worthily, and laid out much strength of reason to attach the minds of men,
and regain them to the knowledge and fear of God. This chapter is a systeme of
those motives which he more largely prosecutes throughout this book, to
persuade men unto a thorough pursuit of holiness. Diverse are the considerations
he proposes to this end: taken

First, From the happiness of those that obtain and improve this pearl of
grace, verse. 13. Happy is the man that (...) Labor sibi paravit; involvit
praeviam inquifitionem.
finds wisdom, and the man that (...) Profert in lucem, effundit.
gets understanding: (though with greatest labor and cost) and having
gotten it, does put it to its due use and improvement for the good of others;
they, whoever they be, are blessed men and women, in regard of that profit,
pleasure, peace, honor, safety and life (with the durable and eternal
possession thereof) ensured to those that thus make Religion their business,
from verse. 13, to 27.

Secondly, From the evil estate and end of those that pursue the ways of sin,
which is in its nature vile and abominable to God, and as to its products, its
shameful, cursed and destructive in the end; verse. 23, 32, 33, 34, 35.

The Penman knew that few would deal in those commodities and trade about
divine things (all men seeking their own, and few the things of Christ) and
therefore sets forth those wares with greatest commendation to buyers, that
they might off the better. He begins with the gain that comes by godliness; a
popular argument, and that which in other things puts men on great adventures,
and restless labors toward their enjoyment. The hope of advantage (says
Chrysostom) Lucri spes omnia difficilia facit juncunda. Chrysostom. de Sacerd. 3.
lib.
makes all difficult things easy. What will not the Merchant do or suffer to
get a little profit? a fit metaphor to set forth the diligence of a Christian
in his race, and to insinuate the worth of those eternal things he is in chase
of. The merchandise of which is better than the merchandise of silver, and the
gain therethereof than fine gold.

In the words, for methods sake, you may observe,

First, The subject, wisdoms merchandise, and the gain thereof.

Secondly, The Predicate, Better than silver, than fine gold.

Wisdome] Divine Wisdom, which in this book, (not to mention all its
acceptations:)

First Is put sometimes for the Lord Jesus Christ, the (...), the word, and
increated Wisdom of God, or the wisdom who is God; who is made to us of God,
Wisdom, as well as Righteousness; the light of the world; the bright morning
Star; the Sun of Righteousness, from whom are derived all those beams which
irradiate the dark minds of men; and that Wisdom which makes wise to
salvation; in whom are hid all the treasures of Wisdom: This is that shining
Diamond, that Pearl of price, which outvies all the beauties of the world; the
costly gemms, and whole treasures of nature, in whom are unsearchable riches,
the enjoyment and use of whom is soul enriching.

Secondly, For the Word of God, which is, sure, making wise the simple; pure,
enlightening the eye; and more to be desired than gold, yea than much fine
gold; called the Light of the Lord, Isa. 2. 5. Come ye, and let us walk in the
Light of the Lord; the discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, Heb.
4. 12. which are able through the Spirit's illumination, to make one wise to
salvation; and in this sense the Jews usually take Wisdom for the Word and Law
of God: In keeping of which there is great reward, Psalm. 19. 11.

Thirdly, By it is held forth a true and saving knowledge of God, part of that
Original beauty which man lost by his first fall, and is regained by a second
edition, and impress of the Spirit, when renewed in knowledge after the image
of him that created it: this knowledge is called (...), not an idle
speculative, but a lively operative knowledge, which consists of an
illumination of the mind, and an infusion of faith and spiritual knowledge.
Parisiensis calls it, Portam vitae per quam Deus primo ingreditur ad mentem
humanam. Parisiensis.
The gate of life through which God first enters into the mind of man. In this
Wisdom and Knowledge of God as the souls last end, with the way that leads
thereto, and felicity that results from it, enlightened minds see greater
luster than in fine gold, and all the bravery of this lower world.

Now this Wisdom is not only speculative, taking in the notion of truth, and
pleasing the mind with refreshing views of things excellent; but practical,
which disposes the soul to a fruition of God, so revealed to the eye of
Wisdom, and to the obedience of all those counsels opened in order to it.
Hence Davenant counts it an error in the Schoolmen to restrain Wisdom and
Understanding to a contemplative life, Cum utraque ex aequo etiam spectat
activam.
when both have their equal reference to an active practical life and
conversation: In regard of it is essence, it is an intellectual virtue; but in
respect to the matter and use, it is practical and moral; and therefore he
defines Wisdom to be Est igitur sapientia infusa cognitio illorum quae ad
fidem and bonam vitam pertinent cum affectu pio inclinante ad applicationem and
praxin eorundem. Daven.
an infused knowledge of those things which lead to faith and a holy life, with
a pious affection, inclining the soul to the application and practice of the
things it knows. This the Scriptures hold out to be that true Wisdom, which
God requires of men: And to man he said, Behold the fear of the Lord, that is
Wisdom, and to depart from evil, that is understanding, Job 28. 28. Job having
spoken of the wonderful Wisdom of God in the works of Creation, beyond all the
searches of humane understanding, he tells them what is that Wisdom which God
requires of man, not to screw into those unfathomed deeps and mysteries of
divine works in the Creation; not to feed on abstruse notions of things that
concern them not; but this is true Wisdom, to fear God, to serve and obey him,
and to depart from iniquity; So Deuteronomy. 4. 5, 6. Behold I have taught you
Statutes and Judgments, keep therefore, and do them, for this is your Wisdom
and understanding in the sight of the Nations, which shall hear of all these
Statutes, and say, Surely this great Nation is a wise and an understanding
people. Wisdom from above (says the Apostle) is pure, peaceable, gentle,
easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, James 3. 17. that is it
makes men holy and fruitful in good works. So the Psalmist describes Wisdom,
by holy walking; I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way; Psalm. 101. 2.
and Ephesians. 5. 15. Walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise. Holy walking
is both the fruit of Wisdom, and the way to Wisdom. Col. 1. 9, 10. You may be
filled with the knowledge of his will, in all knowledge and understanding; that
you may walk worthy of the Lord to all well-pleasing, being fruitful in every
good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God. And so the Wise man
understands it in this book. Prove. 1. 7. The fear of the Lord is the beginning
of Wisdom. That Quantum ad effectum initium sapientiae est nnde sapientia
incipit operati. Aquin.
says Aquinas) from whence Wisdom begins to be operative. Chap. 4. 11. I have
taught thee in the way of Wisdom, and led thee in right paths. Wisdom has
its way, and feet to walk in it; and this way of Wisdom is a right path; or,
right-holy-actions (says Piscator) so the Ancients take Wisdom. Cicero calls
it, The Sapientia quae ars vivendi putanda est non expeteretur si nihil
efficeret. Ciccro de finiv.
Art of living. That Wisdom which does nothing, is worth nothing. Omnis
sapientia hominis in hoe uno est ut Deum cognoscat and colat. Lact. de Inst.
lib. 3 cap. 30.
All Wisdom lies in this one thing (says Lactantius) That we know and worship
God. In sapientia religio, in religione sapientia est, Lact. lib. 4. cap. 3.
Religion is wrapped up in Wisdom, and Wisdom in Religion. The Cujus vis and
officium in eo vertitur ut contemptis terrestribus quibus antea tenebamur
fragilibus servientes and fragilia serviente, and fragilia concupiscentes ad
aeterna coelestis thesauri praemia dirigamur, Lact. de Inst. cap. 27.
work of Wisdom lies in this, that contemning earthly things, by which we were
formerly held, serving and desiring these frail perishing things, we may now be
directed to seek after the eternal reward of a heavenly Treasure: (So says
Aquinas) Sapienti^ secundum nos non solum consideratur ut est cognoscitiva Dei,
sed etiam ut directiva humanae vitae secundum rations divinas. Aquin. 22ae. q.
19. 7. c.
Wisdom is not to be considered only as it leads to a knowledge of God; but
as it directs and orders the life according to divine Rules: And in this sense
I take Wisdom here for true Holiness; that Wisdom which is manifested in a
heavenly, gospel conversation, the merchandise of which is so advantageous.

The Merchandise thereof: Objectively considered: The trading for this Wisdom,
or Merchandising about; so the Septuagint renders it: (...), To merchandise, is
to buy and sell to get in, and put off goods, to take in, and lay out: this
Wisdom is better than to get in gold, or any thing that gold can buy, (...)
from (...), The word is, to go up and down here and there as Merchants do, to
buy and vend their goods, to travel abroad now in one place, then in another;
to be full of distraction, tumbling up and down to get and put off their wares:
So busy a work is merchandising, which takes up men's thoughts, time and
labors to follow it, that they might get some advantage in the world. And such
is the work of Religion; it is an active work, that calls for the heart, time
and strength, if ever souls think to turn it to any account: And they that do
thus, that make Religion their work, that lay out themselves and their all in
pursuit of Heaven and spiritual things, whatever cost and pains they are at, if
they can but gain these treasures of godliness, and obtain Wisdoms wares, they
make a good bargain; for the profit that comes by these is far better than
silver yea than fine gold: The Septuagint has it: (...).
Than to get the treasures of silver and gold; yea the best gold, beaten gold.

There is another sense that one gives the words, taking Wisdom for the price
by which those great and eternal things are got: (I rather like the instrument
than the price) spiritual things are freely given, not bought, Isa. 55. 1. but
those that lay out, and improve their Wisdom to gain grace, to promote
godliness, and further salvation, make a better bargain: than they that lay out
their treasures of gold and filver to buy the best goods on earth: In either
sense it is a truth, Wisdome's merchandise is the best merchandise; to trade
about spiritual things, grace and glory is incomparably the best trade: Whence
observe this Doctrine or Position,

Doct. The Heavenly Trade is the best Trade; no Merchandise like Wisdom's
Merchandise, and traffiquing about spiritual and eternal things. This Truth
will evidently appear, if you consider,

1. The nature of those things about which Wisdoms Merchants trade. 2. The
Person they deal with. 3. The Terms they trade upon. 4. The gain that comes by
it.
Reas. 1. First, The things about which this Heavenly Trade is taken up, are in
their nature things of greatest worth; wares which all the worlds treasures
cannot purchase or compare with; they are all great, glorious and excellent
things; nothing mean, contemptible and useless, among all the goods that
Wisdom proposes to souls choice and reception: The favor of God: Redemption
from Hell: Pardon of sin: Peace with God: The graces of the Spirit: Communion
with Father, Son and Spirit, with Saints and Angels: Walking with God:
Spiritual blessings: Joy in the Holy Ghost: Heavenly Treasures: Assurance of
Glory: These are all things of incomparable value, and the things that heavenly
Traders deal about: And are not these far better in their nature, than the low,
dirty, fading things of this world? No Onyx, Saphir, Crystal, Coral, Pearl,
Topaz, Rubies, or the most costly pieces of nature, can compare with this pearl
of price; this stone cut out of the mountains, or those spiritual treasures
which are the subject of this Heavenly Trade: Let those be Judges who know the
worth of things; call in Wisdome's Lapidaries, let God, Saints and Angels speak
in this matter, their verdict will be, Wisdome's wares weigh down all, as to
their innate excellency: I shall only propose three evidences to determine
this case, and they are of unquestionable verity, and a sufficient proof of
this truth. They are,

1 Scripture. 2 Experience. 3 Reason.
First, The Scriptures will tell you, there are no wares like heavenly wares,
Deuteronomy. 32. 32. Their Rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being
Judges. His loving kindness is better than life, Psalm. 63. 3. And the light of
his countenance, than the increases of corn, and wine, and oil, Psalm. 4. 6, 6.
The Law of thy mouth is better to me than thousands of gold and silver, Psalm.
119. 72. Tried faith much better than gold that perishes, 1 Pet. 1. 7. One day
in God's Courts better than a thousand elsewhere, Psa. 84. 10. None in Heaven
like to God, nor any on earth in comparison of him, Psalm. 73. 25. To make
provision for the soul is the one thing needful; to enjoy Christ and spiritual
things is the better part that shall never be taken away, Luke 10. 42. The
Kingdom of God is the chiefest thing to be sought for in the first place,
Matthew. 6. 33. first in affection, and first in time: Multitude of testimonies
might be produced from Scripture to attest this truth, the Heavenly Trade is
the best Trade; no goods like heavenly goods: what do you trade for here? is it
for more than life you plot, you work for? you gain no more here than meat,
drink, raiment, money, land, credit, and the like, which only tend to life;
but the favor of God is better than life: one gracious look, one whisper of
peace from God, weighs down all those: riches, pleasures, honors, do not make
a happy man or woman; the Scripture never reports such blessed as have the
abundance of these things, but rather miserable and unhappy, obnoxious to more
snares and dangers; but godliness makes a blessed man, and pardon of sin a
happy man, in God's account, Psalm. 1, 1, 2. and 32. 1. whose testimony is truth
it self, and to be relied on beyond all the grounds of blinded opinion, and
false hopes.

Secondly, Experience assures men of this truth; that heavenly things are the
best things: come to a Soul that has tried both; one who has had all that the
World could afford on the one hand, and has also experienced the favor of
God, and spiritual things, and he will tell you of spiritual things, as David
did of Goliah's Sword: There is none like them 1 Samuel 21. 9. And as Solomon of
the virtuous Wife: These things above excel them all, Prove. 31. 29. And wisdom
is much better than Gold, and to get understanding rather to be chosen than
Silver, Prove. 16. 16. This was Solomon's experience, who had the largest trial
of any man, he had Houses, Vineyards, Gardens, Servants, Silver, Gold, the
peculiar treasures of Kings; Greatness, Pleasure, Music, and whatsoever his
eyes desired: and upon all gives this verdict; That wisdom excels folly as
far as light excels darkness, Eccles. 24, 13.

Piety transcendeth Pravity; Heaven the World: Purity out-passeth Pleasures, as
Light does Darkness: When he speaks of things below, he tells you; These are
all vanity and vexation of spirit; he that labors for these, labors for the
wind, Eccles. 5. 16. and what he seeks, finds not; but when he speaks of
wisdom, and spiritual things, he is as one that wants words to express their
worth: Wisdom is better than Rubies, and all the things that may be desired,
are not to be compared to it, Prove. 8. 11. David was a man who had tried
various conditions in the World, he knew what trouble and comfort was, what
youth and age was, what poverty and riches were; he had pleasures, honors,
treasures, with the hearts of his people, and command of a Kingdom, and yet he
tells you, he had seen an end of all perfection: and that the light of God's
countenance was better than all, and to be a doorkeeper (a mean place) in the
house of God, was more eligible, than to abide in the tents of wickedness:
Psalm. 119. 96. Ps. 4. 6. and 84. 10. He chooses it as his one thing; To dwell
in the house of the Lord all the days of his life, to behold the beauty of the
Lord, and to enquire in his Temple, Psalm. 27. 4.

Moses knew what honor was, and the pleasures of sin, and yet upon choice,
preferred poverty with godliness, on the side of truth, before all the
treasures of Egypt; He refused to be called Pharaoh' s Son, rather choosing to
suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season, esteeming the reproach of Christ, greater riches than the
treasures in Egypt, Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26. He knew the Nobles of Egypt, and
grandeur of Pharaoh's Court, and yet could value a poor persecuted people, that
owned God, and cleav'd to him, beyond them all: Happy art thou, O Israel! who
is like to thee? Deuteronomy. 33. 20. He counts God the nonesuch; Who is like to
thee, O God? Ex. 15. 11. and Religion the best interest; Set your hearts unto
all the words, I testify; for it is not a vain thing for you, for it is your
life, Deuteronomy. 32. 46, 47.

Ask of Paul, and he will tell you what the fruit of sin, and driving furiously
against Christ and his interest was, when the Lord Jesus came to reckon with,
and to pay him off in the way to Damascus, Act. 9. 3, 4. whose blow he felt
many years after, in Conscience twitches now and then, 1 Timothy, 1. 13, 15. And
upon the sense of that change Grace made on his heart and condition, he tells
you, that whatever he counted gain before, he saw now to be loss for Christ,
Phil. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. There was a time when he thought his letter-knowledg,
blind zeal, birthpriviledges, legal duties, popular applause, Rulers favor,
and protection by Power, to be great things; but now he alters his reckoning,
and values the knowledge of Christ and interest in him, and grace derived from
the power of his death and resurrection, to be an excellency that stained all
his former glory.

The Jailer once thought it his greatest interest to swim with the stream, and
sail by the compass of the times he lived in, to run down the ways and servants
of the Lord Jesus, to obey his warrant, and secure the Saints feet in his
stocks, Act. 16. ver. 24, to 34. but when once Grace takes him in hand, and
plucks him through the strait-gate of conscience, terrors, and repentance, into
a state of regeneration, then he corrects his errors, and sees it his chiefest
concern to espouse Christ, and to come over into the way of persecuted
godliness; then to believe in the Lord Jesus, to be kind to his servants, and
to drive the Trade of despised Christianity; he thought upon most mature
consideration to be worthy of his choice and pursuit. What treasures more rich
or precious (said Agerius, when a prisoner for Christ at Venice) than
everlasting life? where be greater riches or dignities more honorable than in
Heaven? here droppeth the delectable dew, here flows the pleasant Nector,
here runs the sweet milk, here is plenty of all good things; I have found a
nest of honey in the entrals of a Lion, in the deep, dark Dungeon; I have found
a Paradise of pleasure; where others do weep, I do rejoice; when others do
shake and tremble, I do find plenty of strength, and boldness; in strait Bonds,
and cold Irons, I have rest: Fox, Vol. 2. page 181. Come to sinners also when
they lie under Conscience, terrors, and the armed troops of death and hell
invade their guilty hearts, and enquire their opinion concerning the goodness
of their choice, the advantage of that bargain they have made, in parting with
God for the World, in rejecting Christ for the Flesh, in turning their backs on
holiness, for the service of sin; and their dejected countenances, their ghastly
looks, their unquiet jestures, their cries and groans, will soon tell you the
sad resentment of their folly, and bad Trade they have driven in the ways of
sin and death.

Thirdly, Nay, Reason it self rightly exercised, must needs grant, that
heavenly wares are the best wares upon a fourfold consideration.

1 Of their Rarity. 2 Their Price. 3 Their worth. 4 Their Duration.
First, Heavenly things are rare, and therefore excellent; scarcity enhaunceth
the price of things; Diamonds and precious stones are dear, because scarce, and
more rarely had; plenty usually beats down the price of things, when rarity
makes them costly; and such are Heavenly wares; they are the greatest rarity in
the world; they are less known, more hardly come by, and seldomer enjoyed than
any thing this earth affords; there are few parts of the world where Wisdom's
goods ever come: How many Countries are there where the Gospel is not known? or
any sights of God, or things eternal ever had, but such as are discernable by
the dini light of nature; and of those coasts which this days spring has
visited, to how few have the brightness of this light appeared? few places have
the mysteries of the Gospel opened, or the deep things of God purely, fully and
powerfully preached. It has been the privilege of this Nation above many, to
have a peculiar share of Gospel discoveries and truths, more spiritually and
practically disclosed; and yet how few here, or in other parts, have any
acquaintance with these glorious secrets? or arrive to this excellency of the
knowledge of Christ, and Divine Mysteries? what a veil is there on the minds of
most, under the purest administrations of the Gospel, that seeing, they see
not; understanding, and yet not affected with the things they know; the
spiritual beauty, and inward worth of them being hid from their eyes. Most
hearers (like Balaam) see heavenly goods with eyes half opened; and hence it is
they no more value and pursue them: Could these poor, beggarly, dirty things of
the world, be so preferred in men's affections and embraces, and so much time
consumed upon them, with neglect of God, and things above, if the worth of
Wisdome's Treasures were truly known and believed? no certainly, we may without
breach of charity complain, Who has believed our report? and to whom is the
arm of the Lord revealed? Isa. 53. 1. They are rare, in that they seldom
appear in their own worth and excellency to the view of men: few know and
believe the worth of heavenly things.

They are also goods that few trade on. It Is a rare thing to see men much
versed about heavenly things, and to drive a trade of godliness: There are
diverse possibly that barter for some of Wisdome's goods, for knowledge, peace,
comfort, parts, external duties, etc. but few that carry on a full trade of
godliness: An Enoch, a Noah, a Caleb, a Joshua, a Job, a David, a Paul, a
Barnabas; here and there one in their several ages, that are thorough with God,
and universal in the duties of godliness, heart purity, godly simplicity,
universal holiness, converse with God, meditation on things above, tenderness
of conscience, self-denial, mortifiedness to the world, heavenly-mindedness,
spiritual converses, are commodities that few deal about this day. A
thorough-paced Christian is the Phoenix of the place he lives in, and more
seldom seen than a sparkling Diamond in the dark night we live in; few seek
these goods in earnest, as they do the world and their own things, and fewer
obtain them, Phil. 2. 21. Few I fear do live in the daily exercise of their
graces, the warm breathings of their souls after God and spiritual things: few
that find the white stone, that live in the view of their pardons, and sensible
enjoyment of divine grace; and therefore these heavenly goods are rare things,
seldom discovered, seldom known, seldom pursued, seldom enjoyed; and being
rare, are excellent and desirable.

Secondly, Heavenly things are the best, because the most costly; this argument
will not hold in all things: men may buy their desired comforts too dear, and
give more for the world, pleasures, and their particular goods, than they are
worth; but none can be deceived in Wisdoms wares; the glory of God, the
salvation of souls, the enjoyment of grace and spiritual blessings, cannot be
too dearly obtained; their price bespeaks the greatness of their worth, they
being realities and things excellent in their nature and use; and if they are
valuable according to their price, they must needs be transcendent; for the
purchase of them cost God dear; he has been at the expense of eternal counsels
of manifold wisdom, of unknown love, of the gift and blood of his own Son, to
procure these great things for Believers; and it has cost him mighty power and
patience to fit Believers for them, and maintain (...), with an honorable
price, 1 Pet. 1. 18. 19. (...), aequale redemptionis pretium, Gomar.
their enjoyment of them: Ye are bought with a price, not with corruptible
things, as silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb
without blemish, and without spot. He gave himself a ransom, an equal price,
sufficient to purchase Believers to himself, with grace and glory for them: He
so loved the world as to give his only begotten Son, to give him to death, to
the death of the Cross, to unspeakable torments, and all to procure these
glorious and blessed treasures for Believers, Joh. 3. 16. O costly wares! O
dear bought goods! for which the pearl of price was sold, and the treasures of
Heaven emptied out.

And as these stand the purchaser dear, so they are costly to the receiver
also: The preparation for an interest in these treasures, is many times dear to
Believers: O the wounds and launcings, the bleeding and heart-prickings, the
pangs and throws that lead the van to this banner of love, which
redemption-grace spreads over saved souls; these are the stormy tempests, the
bloody skirmishes, that go before the Believers reception of purchased peace:
Besides, the terms on which this good bargain is offered, though infinitely
beneath its worth, yet as to the souls capacity are high, it is no less than a
throwing of all its former treasures overboard, a parting with its nearest
interests, and dearest comforts that lie in the way of its enjoyments; a
plucking out a right eye, and cutting off a right hand; a denying (O hard
saying!) of a man's own beloved self; a not only bearing when laid on, but a
taking up not the Cross of Christ alone, but his own Cross too, whatever his
own sins, or the hand of men and Devils may make for him; and in this plight
not to sit down, or stand still, but to go on and follow Christ up the hill,
through thick and thin, through scorns and thorns, day and night, through every
change, in every state, home to the grave: No easier terms are given to the
enjoyment of these riches, than a hearty consent to these proposals, which may
expose the soul to an actual loss of his earthly all, and undergoing unknown
trials, troubles and duties in the way: This bargain, though blessed in it
self, yet is thought so dear by some, as that they break upon these very terms,
and think God, grace and glory, too chargeable for their acceptance: This then
sets off the worth of heavenly things, that they cost so much upon choice, and
upon the highest reason and deliberation.

Thirdly, As their price is high, so is their worth great; they are good in
themselves, and good to those that have them. Hearken diligently unto me, and
eat that which is good, and let your souls delight it self in fatness; earthly
things are not so, if good in themselves, yet they may not be good to those
that have them: Riches are snares and swords to the owners thereof, and
oftentimes do pierce them thorough with many sorrows: They are not only good,
but absolutely good; other things are not so; earthly things are but
conditionally good, when God sees them good, and makes them good, so long as he
does bless them, and let out something of himself through them, manna, food,
raiment, nether springs, are so far good as God is pleased to convey out some
spiritual good thorough them, or make them some way subservient thereto; these
things cannot make men hapyy, or prove them so. Nebuchadnezzar's greatness
could not secure him from grazing amongst the beasts, and bedding with them in
open fields, and under wetting dews, Dan. 4. 33. Belshazzar's pleasures could
not guard him from the handwriting against the wall, Dan. 5. 5. Dives was in
the midst of plenty and honor one day and the next in hell. These lower things
are but as cisterns and pipes, that signify nothing, except some waters be
conveyed through them; no more do these, unless God let out his love, and
promise through them. These heavenly things are not only absolutely good, but
every way good; good for every man, in every state; good for poor and rich, for
young and old, for all persons, all things; Godliness is profitable for every
thing, 1 Timothy 4. 8. There is no person or condition, but grace and spiritual
blessings are good for, and can convey good thorough: There may be such a case
in which nothing of this lower world can help: Riches make them wings and
profit not in the day of wrath. In times of trouble and divine wrath,
instruments of music carry no sweetness in them but spiritual mercies, they
help to comfort in the day of trouble: In the multitude of sad thoughts within
me thy comforts refresh my soul, Psalm. 94. 19.

Fourthly, Their duration proves them excellent, they are lasting wares; time
works no change upon these, the Heavens will wax old, and as a vesture they
shall be changed; but heavenly things never perish with the using: indeed our
measures and sense of these may change, we may not always have the same degrees
of grace or comfort; but this alteration is not in these things, but in us; as
God; so grace and spiritual things, are in themselves the same, yesterday, to
day, and for ever; good in prosperity, and good in adversity; good in life, and
good in death: mutability mars all earthly comforts, they are things of no
continuance; we may have them, but cannot hold them; like the fleeting Islands
about the Tenariff, which persons see at a distance, but when they come near
them, they vanish away: The things that are seen are temporal, 2 Cor. 4. 18. We
may Ostenduntur istae res non possidentur and dum placeant transeunt.
have them, (faith Seneca) but cannot possess them; and they no sooner please
us, but pass from us: but unseen things are eternal: His love is everlasting;
the graces of his Spirit abiding: 1 John 3. 9. Whosoever is born of God sins
not, for his seed remains in him: The joys of the Holy Ghost are lasting:
That my joy might remain in you: Jer. 31. 3. Joh. 15. 11. Isa. 59. 21. Heb. 10.
34. 1 Pet. 1. 4. Indeed acts of grace may fail for a time, but the habit of
grace is never lost; frames, and streams of comfort may ebb, but the Fountain
of Joy is never drained dry; Justification is immutable, Pardon of Sin is
irreversible, the Saints treasures in Heaven are enduring, and can never fade
away: Men may outlive their Treasures here, and see all their Portions go
before them; but heavenly Interests, and immortal Souls, are of like
continuance, and this greatens their value: Men estimate a little Land beyond a
great Estate of uncertain continuance; and such are Wisdom's wares, there is no
rotten goods among them.

Reas. 2. Secondly, The heavenly Trade is the best Trade, in regard of the
Trader these Merchants deal with: Much of the comfort, safety and advantage of
men's Trades, lies in in the persons they trade with; if these be able, honest,
affectionate, it conduces much to the thriving of those they deal with: What
mischief comes to Traders, when Sellers are cheating, cruel, and extortioning?
and when Buyers are false, and deceitful, and fail of their word? But none of
these hazards can heavenly Traders be exposed to, from those they deal with:
Indeed Wisdom's Merchants have to do with many, in the pursuit of their
heavenly Trade, both by way of taking in, and letting out; but yet there is one
great Merchant, with whom they principally deal, as to the management and issue
of their whole Trade, in this Merchandise; they converse with God, Saints and
Angels, but all is done through a Mediator; the Goods they receive is upon his
interest; they deal with God through him; all their wisdom to trade, and rules
to act by, come from him; the good and advantage of all their Trading, is
secured by him; and though they may be concerned with many persons and things,
(with all that duty and providence calls them too,) and, with the Chemist, are
to extract some good from every thing they deal with; and, like the Be, gather
Honey from weeds; yet this good they get from persons and things, is not in
them, but conveyed through them from the great Purchaser with whom they deal;
good from every thing, to these heavenly Traders, and Heirs of Salvation is
made over in the propromise; ( All things shall work together for good to them
that love God, and are called according to his purpose,) Romans 8. 28. and shall
in due time, through these Conduits, be emptied out to Believers, by the hand
of Jesus: So that it is properly, and strictly, but with one great Merchant
those Traders have to do with for the goods they lay out, or take in; all other
things and persons are but ways and instruments of his appointment, through
which it shall be delivered; and this makes Wisdom's Trade so good, that the
advantage of it is not depending on those secondary Agents, they have to do
with but upon one, that is more excellent, both great and good, able and
faithful to answer both his promises, and the expectations of those that deal
with him. As to his Quality, and personal Grandeur, he is above all, and over
all, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: He has a vesture on his thigh, whereon
is written, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19. 16. He is the Majesty on
high, the Glory of Heaven and Earth; he has Angels to worship him, Thrones and
Principalities under him, all creatures in Heaven and in Earth to serve him. O!
how honorable is it to deal with him, to whom Kings and Potentates pay their
tribute, and to whom Men and Angels yield their homage? It Is taking with Men,
to converse with those that are above them, and to manage concerns with Persons
of Honor, and Greatness: but here is one (Souls) that offers to trade with you,
from whom all creatures receive their glory.

Yea, his Goodness answers his Greatness, and sweetly tempers his personal
converse for the encouragement of the meanest Soul, that has occasions with
him: Greatness without Goodness, rather checks than relieves the hopes of those
that are beneath it; but such is the sweetness of Christ's nature, as that his
Glory does but render his Goodness the more amiable; and his Goodness
represents his Glory the more desirable; he values no man by his own worth, nor
despises any for their low estate; the meanest Soul has as easy access to him,
and as gracious a reception, as persons of highest reputation with men: I dwell
in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble
spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the
contrite ones, Isa. 57. 15. He is of a sweet and gracious temper, of a free and
generous spirit, good to all, especially to those that seek him: this renders
persons desirable, who would choose to deal with men of ugly natures, and
churlish dispositions: affability and sweetness do strongly invite men to
converse with such; and none like to Jesus for excellent goodness and loving
kindness, for pity and bounty; goodness is his nature, mercy his delight; he
takes pleasure in doing good; none that trade with him, but he will see them to
be the better for it.

He is also able as well as good; Some men have excellent natures, but
straightened capacities, they are willing to do good beyond their power; but it is
not so with the Saints friend; He has all power in Heaven and Earth, Mat. 28.
18. and can do whatever pleases him; he has all creatures at his command;
all the treasures of Heaven at his dispose; he is infinitely rich, and has all
that good that Souls can need or desire; he has goods of all kinds of supply
his Customers with; it is not so with men, no Merchant can furnish his Traders
with every thing they need; but one sells this ware, another that; here men
sail to one Country for one Commodity, and to another Country for other
Wares; they ransack Nature's treasures by Sea and Land, borrow something from
every Nation, that has a peculiar excellency, to make up their supplies, and
furnish all their occasions, and pleasures: but the Lord Jesus has all that in
him, and at his dispose, which you need; he can supply all your wants, having
all fullness dwelling in him, Phil. 4. 19. He has that in him which your Souls
want, and the command of that you need for your Bodies also: He can give you
the desires of your heart, Psalm. 37. 4. He is able to make all grace abound
toward you, that you always, having all sufficiency in all things, may abound
in every good work, 2 Cor. 9. 8. Here Is no less than five Alls, that flow from
the ability of Christ to Believers; All grace abounding in them, All
sufficiency enjoyed by them, All ways, in All things, for All good works: Did
Souls but believe the all sufficiency of Christ, they would not so perplex
their spirits when in wants, with, what shall I eat? and with what shall I be
clothed? and how shall I get this? and the other mercy I want, when all is
offered to Wisdom's Merchants freely? for godliness has the promise of the
life that now is, and of that which is to come; and these promises are in the
hand of Jesus, for all that come to God by him: All things are delivered to me
of the Father, Matt. 11. 27. The Lord Jesus is not only able to give you all
that you ask according to his will, having all things delivered to him for that
end; but he can keep it for you, and secure it to your use: I am persuaded that
he is able to keep that good thing I have committed to him, against that day, 2 Timothy 1. 12. This allsufficiency of Christ, is argument enough to
new-Covenant-federates, for a calm and quiet dependence on him, and holy
walking before him, Genesis 17. 1.

And that which is exceeding pleasing to Traders also, he is faithful as well
as able; he is one of his word, that makes good all his promises to a tittle,
to those that by Faith deal with him: The holy one of Israel cannot lie, or
alter the word that is gone out of his mouth; has he said, and shall he not do
it? has he spoken, and shall he not make it good? Numb. 23. 19. and Rev. 1. 5.
He is the faithful witness; faithful is his name. And he that sat upon the
Throne was called faithful and true, Rev. 19. 11. And faithfulness is his
nature, in comparison of whom every man is a liar: Let God be true, and every
man a liar, Romans 3. 4. If the Lord Jesus were not faithful to his word and
undertaking, the Father would not have trusted him with all the concerns of his
glory and people in the world; neither had he been a fit person for the Elect
to have committed unto him their souls, and all that is dear to them: Men
promise one thing and do another; affirm a thing that is not, and this undoes
many, the unfaithfulness of those they deal with; but it is not so with Christ,
you may trust on his fidelity; Heaven and Earth shall sooner fail, than one
tittle of all that he has spoken: And therefore excellent is that Trade which
is carried on with so excellent a Jesus.

Reas. 3. Thirdly, Weigh the terms on which this Trade is offered unto souls,
and it will appear to be incomparably the best Trade. For to such as will set
upon this Trade,

1 Goods to trade upon shall be freely given. 2 Wisdom to manage them shall be
fully imparted. 3 A blessing on the due improvement of them shall be ensured. 4
To him shall the glory of all be rendered.
First, Wisdome's wares are freely tendered to all that will receive them,
without money, and without price: Come buy wine and milk without money and
without price, Isa. 55. 1. To him that is a thirst will I give to drink of the
waters of life freely, Rev. 21. 6. Here Merchants cannot get or put off goods
at that rate; there is no going to the world's markets without money or credit;
they that will have men's goods must pay for them, and many times have deat
bargains; but the Lord Jesus imparts his treasures freely, he paid dear for
them, they cost his heart blood, but he spares them freely; no silver or gold
will pass in those bargains. Simon Magus had his offered gold, for the Holy
Ghost, thrown back with detestation and destruction to boot, Acts 8. 18, 19,
20. The terms on which this trade is driven are free; it cannot stand with the
design of redemption grace, which is to advance the praise of the glory of
grace, and to cut off all boasting, that every mouth may be stopped; to admit
of any thing from fallen man that might look like a compensation of salvation
mercies; neither is there any thing beneath Christ's merits, that can equalize
the worth of heavenly things; and alas what have they to part with who have
lost themselves? and to give to God, who have nothing but what they receive
from him? It must needs therefore be altogether freely given, whatever is
received in order to salvation: O blessed news to poor traders, that their
poverty is no bar to this employment; the poorest may receive of Wisdome's
wares, as well as the rich, seeing it is a free trade; and whatever makes a
difference on the creatures part, is laid aside in the dispensation of
spiritual mercies: Here are no Monopolies, or hard impositions upon this trade;
no restraint from setting up, or selling out of Wisdome's goods, in any parts
of the world. Cities have their enclosures, Corporations their bars to keep out
strangers from their privileges; but in this trade all persons, be they who
they will that will come over to Wisdome's Merchandise, have right to carry on
this work of godliness in all places wherever they are. The heavenly trade is
a free trade, goods freely given, and liberty to set up in all places, and to
all persons.

Secondly, As goods to trade upon are freely given; so wisdom to manage them
shall be fully imparted: This is a privilege which sellers on earth will not
afford; you may have their goods at their price, but not instructions how to
dispose them to your advantage; but this great Merchant in Heaven, with his
wares, gives skill to use them: I am the Lord thy God which teaches thee to
profit, which leads thee by the way thou should go, Isa. 48. 17. If thou
seek her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasure, then shall
thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God: For the
Lord gives wisdom, out of his mouth comes knowledge and understanding: He
lays up sound wisdom for the righteous. Then shall thou understand
righteousness, and judgment, and equity; yea every good path, Prove. 2. 4, 5,
6, 9. The soul that seeks for Wisdome's wares, shall with it find instruction
how to use them: I will instruct thee, and teach thee in the way which thou
should go; I will guide thee with my eyes, Psalm. 32. 8. He will be eyes to
the blind, and feet to the lame, Job 29. 15. The Lord Jesus will find all in
this heavenly trade, goods, and tools, and skill, and strength, and all: Surely
shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength.

Thirdly, A blessing on the due improvement of these shall be ensured to all
his traders: The wayfaring man shall not err, Isa. 35. 8. His workmen shall
not labor in vain, 1 Cor. 15. 58. For his blessing is upon his people, Psalm.
3. 8. Thou shall decree a thing, and it shall be established unto thee, and the
light shall shine upon thy ways, Job 22. 28. The book of the Law shall not
depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day and night, that
thou may observe to do according to all that is written therein, (this is
the heavenly trade, to fulfill after God, and such shall prosper,) for then
thou shall make thy way prosperous, and then thou shall have good success,
Josh. 1. 8. No Merchant will undertake to make their dealers prosperous; they
must trade at great uncertainties, and run the adventure as to the issue of
all: Blessings come not out of earthly shops, but from a divine hand, let come
what will in the way: Blessings will surely come at the end to those that cast
out at Christ's biding, and trade by his instruction in Wisdome's Merchandise,
let men curse, let devils vex, let North-winds blow, and blow down too their
earthly comforts, yet God will bless them that fear him, every one, Psalm. 115.
13. He will bless them in life, and bless them in death; and is not this good
trading, to be sure of blessings in the way, and blessedness at the end? 1 Pet.
1. 9.

Fourthly, Another Condition in this Trade is, That God shall have all the
glory, but they that trade with and for him shall have all the good that comes
by it: This is the head Rent which the great Lord reserves to himself, and will
not part with to another: My glory will I not give to another, Isa. 48. 11.
This is his great design in all works of his hands, and gifts of grace, that he
may be glorified: The people shall be all righteous, the branch of my planting,
the work of my hand, that I may be glorified. This is God's great end in
bestowing redemption mercies, to have all the glory to himself, who works all
things after the counsel of his own will, that we should be to the praise of
his glory, Ephesians. 1. 12. Christians, the Rent must be the Lords, the fruit
shall be yours: Whose keeps the fig tree shall eat the fruit thereof, Prove.
27. 18. All the sweetness of the Vine is for those that possess it, and the
herbs of the earth for them by whom it is dressed, Judge. 9. 13. Heb. 6. 7. The
righteous shall eat the fruit of his doings, Isa. 3. 10. The present comforts
of holiness are not mean; Great peace have they that love thy Law, and nothing
shall offend them, Psalm. 119. 165. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all
her paths are peace. Religion is the most pleasant trade; no delights like
those that are in God, and fetched from him: God gives the world the bones, and
keeps the marrow for his laborers; the godly feed on the wheat, the wicked
have but the bran; look whatever good, comfort, credit and happiness Religion
can afford here, and to all eternity, is their part that trade upon it: Who
planteth a Vineyard, and eats not the fruit thereof, 1 Cor. 7. 9.

Reas. 4. Lastly, The Heavenly Trade must needs be the best trade, because it
is the most profitable trade: The advantage that comes by godliness, makes it
the best employment in the world. We use to say, three things make traders
rich, all which are found in the way of godliness.

1 Great Returns. 2 Sure Returns. 3 Quick Returns.
Now nothing turns to more account than a thorough pursuit of piety; whatever
men think, Religion is the most thriving way, in regard of the

Excellent Fruit of it. Abundant Fruit of it. Durable Fruit of it.
First, Great returns will soon make traders rich, when the time and labor
they expend is abundantly compensated, and the things they part with, bring in
far better: so is it with this heavenly trade; there is no proportion in their
adventures to their returns: their duties are poor imperfect things; when they
have done all, they are unprofitable servants, but their reward is great and
glorious; their afflictions light and momentary, but the issue, a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 1 Cor. 4. 18. It Is great profit indeed,
when some weak works of faith, and labors of love, a little patience,
obedience and duty for a time, shall be rewarded with eternal rest, pleasure
and glory: there is no equality between the race and price, this striving and
crowning: What Is a cup of cold water, to a river of pleasures? a Crown of
thorns, to a Crown of Glory? the worlds srowns, to divine smiles?
conscience-troubles, to the consolations of God? a few tears, fears, watchings,
faintings, duties, afflictions, to the joys of the Lord into which they shall
for ever enter?

It Is a great bargain to part with base things, for excellent; beastly lusts,
for the beauties of holiness; an unclean, for a clean heart; vile affections,
for virtuous dispositions; filthy rags, for fair garments; a body of death, for
a spirit of life. To let go the world for God, fellowship with devils, for
communion with Christ, to lose guilt, and to gain righteousness; to escape
Hell, to obtain Heaven; this is great gain. To swap away old things, for new;
rotten things, for sound; hypocrisy, for sincerity; lies, for truth, is a good
bargain. To exchange empty things, for satisfying; things that are not, for
things that are; goods that perish with the using, for things that wax not old;
fading trifles, for eternal treasures, is a thriving trade indeed; and such are
the incomes of this Heavenly Trade, they are incomparably great and excellent;
there is nothing mean, no low price goods, that Wisdome's Merchants deal about;
all their riches are pleasant and precious: By knowledge shall the chambers be
filled with all precious and pleasant riches; precious faith, precious
promises, the precious blood of Christ, precious thoughts of God, are some of
this precious substance heavenly Traders meet with in the way of holiness.
Besides, this pursuit of godliness enters souls into an acquaintance and
converse with God, and helps them to keep an intercourse with Heaven, and to
maintain a life above and beyond the reach of all others; and is not this
advantage?

Religion also helps men to blessed experiences of the love, power, greatness
and faithfulness of God; and this constant employment about heavenly things,
makes the way pleasant and delightful, and fills the soul with much contentment
with its lot in the world, whatever the trials, losses and sufferings may be
that they are exposed to. Also the driving this Heavenly Trade secures the good
and comfort of all their other interests, and sweetens their portion, whether
more or less that Soverign pleasure allots them in the world, bringing all
their concerns under divine care and promise for their good, comfort and
sufficient supply in their passage home: And are not all these great returns?
enough to make the Heavenly Trade the greatest interest and advantage beyond
all others in the world.

Secondly, Sure returns make Traders rich: Merchants that drive gainful trades,
count if one Adventure to two or three come safely home, they get well: but all
regular Adventures in this Heavenly Trade are secured; Their labor shall not
be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58. not one of their sincere attempts in the
way of God shall miscarry; never a pious duty lost; all their sowings to the
spirit shall surely spring up into a blessed harvest, Gal. 6. 6. Though they
sow in tears, yet they shall reap in joy Psalm. 126. 5, 6. Though they go forth
weeping, yet if they bear precious seed, they shall doubtless come again with
rejoicing, bringing their sheaves with them: God is not unrighteous to forget
their work and labor of love shown toward his Name, Heb. 6. 10. God is
engaged in justice to see the Adventures of Believers safely returned into
their harbor; he has promised it, and cannot be unfaithful; neither does it
consist with his honor, to put Believers on an unprofitable service: He never
said to the house of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain, Isa. 45. 19. Ingenuous men love
to see their servants thrive: Will Christ, think you, let his laborers be
losers? their works shall surely follow them into their rest, Rev. 14. 13. how
ever they may be out of sight in their passage toward it, seeing God's Word
lies at stake for it.

The blood of Christ stands engaged also for the safe returns of the Saints
Adventures, that are according to the will of God; their religious labors are
part of the travel of his soul, which he must see secured, and they are the
pleasure of the Lord, which must prosper in his hand, Isa. 53. 10, 11. He is
become a Surety for them unto God, and a Surety for the Father unto them: By so
much was Jesus made a Surety of a better testament, Heb. 7. 22. The Covenant is
called here a Testament, as relating to the Saints privileges and interests,
which by that Covenant becomes due to them, and shall be surely made good to
them upon the account of Christ's Suretiship for it; He is the Surety of this
Testament or Covenant, and every promise of it; one of which is, That what they
sow to the Spirit, they shall reap in glory; their labor shall not be in vain:
and to make all the promises good both the condition and blessing to the
foederates of this New Covenant, has the Lord Jesus laid down his precious
Blood, which cannot be lost, Heb. 9. 15. but it would be cast away, could
Believers religious duties be in vain.

Another thing that secures the Saints advantages by this heavenly Trade, is
this; that their trading is the work and product of his own Spirit; their
duties are his work: Thou have wrought all our works in us, Isa. 26. 22. It is
God that works in you to will and to do, according to his good pleasure,
Phil. 2. 13. Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any thing of our
selves, but our sufficiency is of God, 2 Col. 3. 5. They are his workmanship,
created to good works, Ephesians. 2. 10. by whose influence they are acted, and let
by the Spirit of God, Romans 8. 14. So that further than the spirit of the living
creatures move, their wheels cannot move, nor do any thing graciously, further
than their works are wrought of God, and by God, Joh. 3. 21. So that Believers
labors in this heavenly Trade, are the work of the eternal Spirit; and should
their work be lost, the Spirit of God would labor in vain, and his work cast
away; which cannot be, Isa. 45. 18.

Lastly The Lord Jesus is an adventurer with them, his Glory and Kingdom is
concerned in this heavenly Trade; when his Will is done, his Kingdom is come,
Mat. 6. 10. and 1 These. 4. 3. Holiness is his will, and a conformity to his
Law, and he is engaged to the Father, for the Saints holiness and happiness;
for their grace and glory; As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he
should give eternal life to as many as thou have given him, Jo. 17. 2, 12. The
Father has put all Believers into the hands of Christ, and entrusted him with
their graces and glory, both which are included in eternal life: ver. 3. And
this is life eternal, that they might know thee, etc. that is, this is the way
to life eternal, and the beginning of life eternal, even the grace of Faith,
and saving knowledge of God: and this grace, as well as glory, is put into the
hand of Christ for Believers, to be kept for them; and they are also put into
his hand, to be kept by him through it unto glory: and in pursuance of this
trust, the Lord Jesus is engaged, to keep his people, their graces, and the
reward of them, for them, that they be not lost; the advantages of this
heavenly Trade, are secured to Believers by the Lord Jesus, his adventure with
them, his truth, faithfulness, and glory, is concerned in their safety: so that
their returns are not only great, but sure.

Thirdly, Quick returns, if great, are greatly enriching: Hence comes that
Proverb, that light gain makes a heavy purse, it brings great custom, and that
occasions quick returns: Now, no Trade brings quicker returns than the heavenly
Trade: Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, Rev. 22. 12. The Lord
Jesus not only makes good, but quick payment; as soon as the work is done, he
promises to make good his word: Call upon me in the day of trouble; and I will
deliver thee, Psalm. 50. 15. Nay, the Lord Jesus sometimes pays beforehand: And
it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer; and whiles they
are speaking, I will hear, Is. 65. 24. Men many times are forced to stay for
their Money and sometimes lose it at last; but the Believers gain is not only
sure, but speedy.

Obj. What Is the reason then, the people of God do complain of God's not
hearing, and deferring an answer to their requests? And why are Believers
advised to patience, and long-saffering, after they have done the will of God,
if the return of their Faith and Duties were so quick? This is the experience,
and complaint of the people of God in all ages, that God seems not to regard
their Prayers, and to delay his coming to help them. Sol. 1. First, yet are the
Saints returns quick; because they are in due time; God never delays to perform
his word, when the Believer has need of it; in the needful time of trouble, he
will surely hear; My God shall supply all your wants, Phil. 4. 19. When once
the Soul comes to stand in real want, then God will surely pay him; When the
poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue fails for
thirst, I the Lord will hear them, Isa. 40. 17. When once they come to be
needy, then God will withold no longer, but will help; this he has promised,
they shall not want any good thing, Psalm. 34. 10.

Secondly, If the Lord do not pay presently, he will give use for it, they
shall lose nothing by forbearance; But when he comes, he will bring his reward
with him, Isa. 40. 10. Not only a reward of his work done by them, but a reward
of their patient waiting for his promises also, their mercy shall be so much
the sweeter, for their want of it, and waiting for it. O! how welcome are long
looked for mercies, when they come, then is every mercy double; God tried Job
long by withholding mercy, but see the end of Job; God paid double for what he
took, and withheld from him, Job 42. 10. Returns are sure always in the
needful and seasonable time; and if God delays, he will pay well for it.

To which I might add this also; Many times Wisdom's Merchants are the cause of
these delays, by their unfaithfulness in their trade, or their unfitness for
their returns: The diligent hand makes rich, Prove. 10. 4. Souls that are active
and faithful in the whole of Religion, shall have no cause to complain of God's
slack payment.

So much by way of demonstration of the point, That the Heavenly Trade is the
best Trade; no Merchandise like Wisdom's Merchandise.

Now, to come to some improvement of the Point.

USE I.
First, If the heavenly Trade be the best Trade, then it is strange that so few
do set upon this Trade; persons that are to enter upon some course of life, and
would fain live in the World, are willing to take the best Trade that is
attainable by them, if they can but reach it, and have wherewithal to carry it
on: who would spend his time and strength in low, sordid and mechanic
services, which cannot maintain, or enrich him; if a brave, generous and
wealthy Calling did offer it self, and might be compassed? and yet such is the
folly of most under the Gospel, who are ready to choose any thing but
Godliness, and to fall in with every proposal for their employment, rather than
to engage about the work of Salvation: Men are wise in their generation, and
know in other things how to choose the best bargains, only in the things of
their Souls are foolish, and can be content to pursue shadows, and let go the
substance; to lay out all their desires, hopes and labors about a life that
perishes, neglecting the vast concerns of another World, and the welfare of
their immortals Souls: Is not this folly? Poor Sinners, let me reason a little
with you, if possible to recover your lost understanding: come, be your own
judges; Is it your interest (think you) to adventure your All, for things that
cannot abide with you when obtained, nor satisfy you if they stay? things that
can but bring you to your Grave, and accompany your bodies to the House of
Mourhing, and there leave you; unless they show you the way to Hell also. Is it
not madness to adventure your Souls for a trade, pleasures and treasures of so
short continuance, and little advantage? things that you will shortly be as
weary of, as now desirous; and throw them to the Bats and Moles of the Earth,
that you may go into the Rocks to hide you from the fury of a Sin-avenging God?
Will you spend all upon time, and lay up nothing for eternity? Or, is it
rational to think that you should reap where you never sowed, and possess the
benefit of that Trade you never drove? Gal. 6. 7, 8. Can you think to reach
Heaven hereafter, and never walk one foot in the way to it here? Certainly,
what men sow, that they shall reap: Can you imagine the things of Heaven to be
so cheap, as to be had without looking after? Alas, things far inferior cannot
be so easily obtained; it may cost some of you many tuggings, much sweat,
labor and expense to get but a little of this World; and do you think to find
this tried Gold without buying, and digging for it? and is it a wise bargain
(think you) to purchase your desirable Comforts with the loss of your Souls?
and that you may gain but a little of the World, to part with a possibility of
having Heaven? What will it profit you to get the World, (were you sure of
every part of it) and to lose your Souls? Mat. 16. 26. And what if you miss of
your hopes in this, and fall short of Heaven too? never have what you looked
for on Earth, nor a place in Heaven neither; will not your case be then
dreadful? O! foolish Souls! that may be happy, but will not; that may get into
such a course of life as would enrich you here, and for ever; but refuse it,
preferring a poor beggarly life before a rich and noble state; choosing rather
to trade with Devils than God; to swap away your delightful time, for doleful
eternity; your salvationprizes, swinish pleasures. O sad exchange for! to be
bewailed, but not remedied: What? to barter away strength for weakness; desires
for emptiness; labors for vanity; hope for despair; precious souls for
perishing shadows; an open door of grace for a shut door of glory; mercy for
misery; earth for hell? O fools in grain! to let go such a bargain, as being
had, would for ever make you; and being lost, may never be regained; but in the
room of it, an eternity to repent your time of folly; when tears and cries will
be too late, when mercy shall have no repentings for you, bowels themselves no
roulings over you, nor everlasting arms any help for you, Mat. 25. 10. This is
your danger, (Sinners,) this may be your case, who refuse wisdom's counsels,
choosing death rather than life: you that would have none of Wisdom's wares,
nor work; but have rather valued the Devil's Counters, before Christ's Gold;
and the pleasures of sin, that are but for a season, before the treasures of
grace and glory, that are eternal; walking after the flesh, and serving diverse
lusts, till your trading time for Heaven be almost over. Alas, Sinners, there
may be, for any thing you know, but few Merchandising hours left for you in
this World; it may be scarce a Sabbath more between some of you, and hell: in
what a case then are you like to be, who never set upon this heavenly Trade to
this very day? and should you now go out of this World strangers to this
employment, in what a doleful state will your Souls be for ever? when you come
to possess the eternal fruit of your bad bargain, then could any lay their ears
to Hell gates, and listen at your cries, they would hear such language as this
from your trembling lips, Folly, Folly, Woe, Woe, Eternity, Eternity.

USE II.
Secondly, This calls to mourning over the great decaies of this Heavenly
Trade, in the times and places wherein we live: Loss of Trade is easily
resented as an evil case, a matter of trouble. Men use to be affected with hard
times, when a death lies on their interests, and their earthly concerns are at
a loss; and this is the case of most men this day; all places are full of
complaints about their affairs in the world; there is a moth in men's labors and
dealings, and it is easily seen and felt; the heavy looks, and heartless
carriages of many, do plainly demonstrate a sense of their temporal wastes, and
their mouths vent such-language: The times are hard, and the trade of the
Nation gone: But alas! where are the mourners of Sion? and who is afflicted at
the decaies of godliness, and death on this Heavenly Trade? Though there is
nothing more visible and lamentable than the faling back in Religion; yet who
lays it to heart? and who is rightly affected with this important evil?

Now toward the cure of this insensibleness, and to awaken our hearts to a due
apprehensiveness of our evil case, by reason of the decaies of godliness; I
shall

1 Lay down some symptoms evidencing it to be our case, that there are real
and great decaies of this Heavenly Trade in the time and places wherein we
live. 2 Show why this should be for a lamentation.
First, That this Heavenly Trade goes back and decaies, is so evident, that he
is a stranger in our Israel, and has too much of a spirit unconcerned in these
matters, who does not plainly see Religion, and the power of Godliness dying
and languishing in most places and persons. Now the better to evince this sad
truth, I shall proceed in a plain and familiar method, keeping to the metaphor
in the text, and the usual symptoms of decayed Trading.

Six things usually show the decaies of earthly Trading, all which are
conclusive of the point in hand, and discover bad times for piety, and great
wastes of Religion.

First, When the price of things is much fallen, and the rates very low, and
goods are worth little or nothing; then men say, it is bad trading: So is it now
in this Heavenly Trade; the rate and value of divine things is much abated;
Wisdom's goods seem little worth to many: There was a time when Heavenly Wares
were highly prized; the Word of God was precious to souls, far better to Saints
than thousands of gold and silver; they could have parted with all the world,
to enjoy God in Ordinances: estate, ease, credit, were nothing to a place in
God's house; and one view of his countenance was better than life: Oh how sweet
were the words of his mouth? much sweeter than the honey and honeycomb: Men
could let their own ploughs stand still, to set their hands to God's plough;
with Mary, they could neglect any business to sit at Christ's feet, Luke 10.
39. leave their appointed food, and most pleasant delicacies, for one draught
of Sanctuary-waters; yea but for one sip of divine sweetness, they could break
their rest, leave all for Christ's company; bear frowns, threatenings, losses,
sufferings, with wonderful ease, for some fellowship with God and his people;
they would not lose a praying or hearing hour, whatever it cost them; they
would stick at no hardships; price should never break between Christ and them;
subscribe any terms, and count it a cheap bargain too, if at any rate they
might obtain grace, and some spiritual good to their souls. But alas! now the
case is altered; few will bid much for the precious things of Sion; even they
that could have plucked out their eyes, and have given them to the Messengers
of Christ, now think it too dear to pluck their hands out of their bosoms to
open the door to Christ himself: Now soulpriviledges are worth little or
nothing; Sermons, society of Saints are scarce counted worth the parting with a
little time, ease, business, or friend, to enjoy them. A shop, a market, is
better than the solemn Meeting with most: few can step over a straw, and
forbear to gather a little stubble, though it be to get the unsearchable
treasure of Christ: This is the sad temper of most Professors this day, they
have lost their estimation of Christ and spiritual things; they do not value
(let men talk what they will) God, above the world; Christ, above rest; one day
in his Courts, above a thousand elsewhere; his precious Word, above their
appointed food: most think it more advisable to take seasons for the world,
than for Heaven; rather to baulk many Sermons, than lose a little profit and
opportunity, though but of very small advantage in the world: Men are full, and
rich, and have goods enough; they think they know enough already; have heard
enough, prayed enough; they feel no want of, nor see worth in spiritual things;
and therefore offer so little for soul-advantages; and this bespeaks manifestly
the decay of this Heavenly Trade.

Secondly, Fewness of buyers argues bad trading: Among men, when Chapmen are
scarce, few take off any goods; wares lie on men's hands, and will not off; then
men say, Trade is fallen: Thus it is in this Heavenly Trade; there are few
buyers of Wisdom's Wares; choice goods lie on sellers hands, and will not off;
may not the Lord Jesus complain as formerly Wisdom did, Prove. 1. 24. I have
called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my hands, and no man regarded; you
have set at naught all my counsels, and would have none of my reproof. And as
the Servants of God in the parable, Mat. 11. 17. We have piped unto you, and ye
have not danced; we have mourned, and ye have not lamented. Markets are full in
many places; the Lord Jesus has much goods exposed to sale, and there are many
Chapmen, but few buyers; persons come to Religious Assemblies and Sermons, as
many do to Fairs, to see, and be seen; to gaze on goods, but not to buy; few
will take Christ's wares on his own terms, and come up to the selling-price;
God, grace and glory, are too dear for many men's money; they like some goods,
but the price is too high; some could be content to have Christ; but to deny
themselves, take up their Cross, leave all, and follow Christ; that they think
is too dear, and break for price, Mat. 16. 24. Heaven is desirable at last, but
the world at present; they could be content to take Heaven in reversion, when
the lease of their worldly interests is expired; and to receive their portion
there, when all is gone here; but to trade above now, and transport their
earthly treasures to Heaven, while they enjoy them on earth, that is too hard
for them; such goods, such overtures will not off; persons will not receive the
Word of God as the Word of God; they will not take threatenings to fear them,
warnings to regard them, promises to believe them, precepts to obey them. May
not most Ministers complain, Who has believed our report? and to whom is the
arm of the Lord revealed? Isa. 53. 1. Most like and commend sermons, but few
receive and obey them; it is lamentable to consider how little of a Sermon is
carried away, remembered and practiced: This is the sin of Professors, and some
that pass for more than ordinary, and yet are guilty of this careless,
forgetful and unprofitable hearing; persons entertain truths, as they do their
acquaintance; when they meet them on the way, shake hands and embrace them; be
exceeding glad to see them, and then bid them farewell; that is the reason the
Lord Jesus carries back so much goods from Markets; his wares will not off; men
buy not: And hence it is also that Christ turns back their duties; he will not
receive the goods of such neither, and this makes bad trading for Heaven.

Thirdly, Want of employment is a sign of bad trading: When Trade is good,
every man's hand is full of work; but when men are out of employment, and have
nothing to set their hand to, but stand idle in the Marketplace, this shows a
decay of Trade: And is it not so with Wisdom's Laborers now? Persons
professing God were once active in Religion, but are now grown slothful in
spiritual business. Where are the works of faith, the labors of love, the
fruits of the spirit among Christians this day? who is fervent in spirit?
Ephesians. 6. 18. who strives in prayer, watching thereunto with all perseverance?
Joh. 6. 27. where are they that labor even unto weariness for the bread that
endures? Heb. 12. 1. running even unto fainting in the race that is set before
them? Rev. 7. 15. Serving God day and night in his Temple, and being diligent
that they may be found of him in peace, 2 Pet. 3. 14. What Pharaoh charged on
the Hebrews, when attempting liberty to serve God, may be with much more
justice reflected on those that profess to serve God; and though they may, yet
do not: Ye are Idle, ye are Idle: and hence it is men's hearts go a whoring
after the world, and the flesh, with the lusts thereof; it is because they are
slothful in spirit; a death is upon their hearts, and this causes the work of
God to cease, Neh. 4. 11. It is but little work most do for God this day; how
cold, dead, formal, slighty, are many in duty, doing the work of God
deceitfully, their own consciences being Judges? Jer. 48. 10. few labor with
their hearts before they come to hear, in hearing, and after hearing, to get
some soul-good by it: Men are usually pleased with a Lamp, though there be no
oil in it; cannot be contented without some duty, but well pleased with bare
duty: To be nothing in Religion troubles them; but to be something, though
never so little, satisfies them: and if this be Popery to rest in the work
done, how many Papists have we amongst us this day? Certainly Professors are
generally asleep, or slumbering; they do their work so badly and heartlesly,
their work falls out of their hand, as things do from men asleep; active for
the world, as if they could never do enough; but soon tired in the work of God;
dispatch but little of heavenly work from day to day, from one Sabbath to
another; little heart-searching, soul-watching work is done; little in-door
employment is carried on; the exercise of faith, hope, humility, patience,
zeal, self-denial, seems a stranger to a great many this day; not for want of
occasions or encouragements to work, (the Lord is still calling upon his
Laborers to make haste) but for want of hearts to work: And this spiritual
sloth proves that the Heavenly Trade is much lost.

Fourthly, The poverty of Traders plainly shows Trading is not good; when a
Trade does not maintain the Trader, but he still goes back, and becomes poorer,
then surely trading is not good: The diligent hand makes rich, Prove. 10. 4.
When trading is good Traders usually thrive, and live well upon it, but when
they waste and become poor, then trading decaies: So is it with Heavenly
Traders, when they drive a good Trade for Heaven they grow rich apace toward
God, and in their own souls: Wisdom's wares are soul-enriching wares: My fruit
is better than gold, yea than fine gold, and my revenue than choice silver,
Prove. 8. 19. Men account those to be rich who have much of gold and silver; but
Wisdom's fruit is better than gold, and therefore must needs be enriching: they
that have this gold cannot be poor: Hence it is Christ counsels Laodicea to buy
of him gold tried in the fire, that she might be rich, Rev. 3. 1. But alas how
poor in spirituals are persons generally this day! Therefore I said, Sur ly
these are poor, they are foolish, for they know not the way of the Lord, nor
the judgment of their God, Jer. 5. 4. Unacquaintedness with the way of God,
when men walk wide from Religion, and lose their strict and close walking with
God, they soon become poor and foolish: And this is the case of many every
where; they give a carnal liberty to themselves, and indulge a freedom to walk
after the fight of their own eyes, and not by rule; and where this is, there is
soulpoverty, which is too visible in most this day. Christians, do but observe
your own hearts and others, and you will find this spiritual poverty abounding
every where. Little thrivings appear under the best of means, choicest
Privileges do little more than keep up a name to live; they convey but little
quickenings to the soul: A show of Religion, and a mere skeleton of profession,
is the common fruit of Ordinances in most places, whereas all the while decaies
are on the vitals of Christianity; abatements in grace appear every day, and a
visible alteration in the whole frame, and internal vigor of the soul, faith,
love, humility, patience, self-denial, and every grace becomes weaker every
day; Former days were better than now, Eccles. 7. 10. Speak Christian, are not
matters worse with thy soul, than they were? and abatements appear in every
part.

There was a time when thy mind was beamed over with Divine Light; the Candle
of the Lord did shine in thy tabernacle: Thy eye was quick to discern good and
evil; thou could once see an excellency in the knowledge of Christ; O how
choice were sermons! privileges were to thee the uncasking of Jewels, and the
opening of hidden glory; thou did dwell in the Land of Visions, and still
some new discoveries of light and grace did meet thee in thy affectionate
attendance upon God. But now it is not so; thy Candle burns dimly, and thy
right eye is darkened; now thou see but little beauty in grace, or
desireableness in truth: things under thy feet the other day, that seemed
nothing compared with Christ; now through the multiplying-glass of thy deceived
mind, seem great and lovely.

Formerly thy affections were warm and lively after God, his word and ways: O!
how precious were his appointed Feasts, and his Tabernacles amiable? thou
could delight in approaching to God, and talk of a blessedness in his
presence. O the pleasure, sweetness and joy thy heart did find in thy Closet,
in spiritual Converses, and Duties, and public Ordinances! thou could weep
over sin, and bedew thy prayers with tears, and find thy heart burn within thee
while Christ was speaking, and melted under the warm beams of divine love. But,
alas, now it is not so; now thy affections are dead, thy heart as cold as a
stone; all the while thou art speaking to God in Prayer, or God speaking to
thee in his Word, thou find no more savor in Ordinances, Duties, and
Christian Converses, than in the white of an Egg, Job. 6. 16. Thou find not
that delight in God as formerly, and the night of thy pleasure is turned to
fear unto thee, Isa. 21. 4. This is Soul-poverty.

Again, there was a time also, when thy Will, like the great Wheel in the
Clock, could move regularly after God; thou could choose God for thy chiefest
interest, and Christ for thy only treasure; preferring an interest in him above
ten thousand Worlds: thou could have voted for communion with God, before thy
meat and drink; and one hours fellowship with Christ, beyond all the delights
on Earth: thou could choose the things that please God, and deny thy own
pleasure to give content to him: thou could once stick to thy first choice,
and find the purpose of thy heart cleaving to God, Act. 11. 23. Thou could
once resolve, and keep thy resolutions; 'twas easier to take thy heart out of
thy body, than to gain thy consent to part with Christ, his presence and ways.
But now thy will is hardly drawn after pure and constant enjoyments of God in
his ways: O! how difficult a thing is it to persuade thy will to let go all for
Christ, to leave every thing to attend on God, to part with the world and self
to wait on God, to throw all overboard to take in Christ! How hard is it now,
to consent that Christ shall have all the command of thy Soul, and dispose of
thy dearest interests! now thou find it a work above thee, to keep thy heart
in order one hour, or to perform the purposes of thy Soul to God and Godliness;
thou resolvest, and changest every day; thou vowest, and breakest thy vows
continually; there is no stedfastness in thy spirit: this also bespeaks thy
Soul-poverty.

There was a time also when thy Conscience was tender, thy heart could smite
thee for the least sin; thy Conscience could hold thee to the greatest duty,
and bind thee to thy good behavior: thou could not go against the light and
checks of thy regulated Conscience, were it to gain the whole World. But now
it is dead and quiet, it can bear the sharpest strokes of the two edged Sword,
and not feel it, or bleed; it makes little or no bones of sin against knowledge,
and mercy; sins that were before troublesome, now go down easily; it can digest
threatenings and terrors with little trouble, and sleep while the arrows of the
Lord's wrath fly about its ears; it can let go mercies without regarding, and
truths to pass away without entertainment: this is Soulpoverty.

This thou can say too, there was formerly an activity in thy Soul for God,
and the spring of thy heart was strong, and it set every wheel a going: thou
could run, and not be weary; walk, and not be faint: no religious duty was
tiresome to thee; no commands of God were grievous, 1 John 5. 3. no journeys
seemed long that led to God, nor Sermons tedious that spoke of God: thy spirit
was all life, when in holy company, and work: did any say, Come, let us go up
to the mountain of the house of the Lord, Zech. 8. 21. thou would say, I will
go also: If God did but say, Seek thou my face, Psalm. 27. 8. thy heart would
presently answer, thy face, Lord, will I seek. But now a deadness seizes upon
thee, and slothfulness gathers in over thy whole Soul: thou art soon weary of
well-doing, and can not hold out with God in conflicts and difficulties, as
heretofore: thou art not so diligent to prepare thy meat in Summer, Prove. 30.
25. nor to lay in provision for a Winter spending-season: thou turnest on thy
bed as a door on its hinges, and take little pains with thy heart and
conversation: thou losest many an opportunity and advantage for thy Soul
through thy deadness and indisposition to good works: And does not this bespeak
Soul-languishing, and poverty?

There are decays and poverty in thy life also, as well as spirit: how
unprofitable is now thy conversation, to what it was? there was a time when thy
bow did abide in strength, thy lips did disperse knowledge, Prove. 15. 7. thy
steps did drop fatness: it was good to be in thy company, few came from thee
but were bettered. But, alas! now, how dwindling is thy light? how jejune and
sapless is thy converse? thy company little lovely, thy communications little
profitable; thy words eat as does a Canker, it sears as a hot Iron, and deadens
those that hear it; thy breath freezes all that come hear it, so unprofitable a
burden is thy company. We turn all Religion Mr. Sedgwick' s Christ's counsel to
his languishing Church.
(says one) into a discourse, censure or dispute: We can eat, and drink, and
talk, and sin as freely. This is a sad case indeed, and bespeaks great decays
of godliness, when persons become more poor, and impotent in their Souls.

Fifthly, Small adventures in Traders, do usually bespeak bad Trading; when
times are hard, and Goods go not off, Sellers buy but little, and drive a less
Trade when improvements fail; men are loath to adventure the principal, but
presently contract their Trade, and lessen their dealings. So it is in this
spiritual Trade, when Souls begin to decay in it, and Trading is bad, they
narrow up their Trade, and lay out less of their heart and strength about it;
little of their Soul goes out after God, and things above; they cannot
adventure for God, as formerly; nor spare time for prayer, hearing, reading,
holy conference, as once they could; the stream of their affections begins to
run another way; now they are all for the world, self, and vanity; business and
interest eats up all their time; or at least, they say to Christ, as David did
to Mephibosheth, (Thou and Zibah divide the Land;) So, thou and the world, thou
and pleasures, thou and reputation divide my heart, time and strength: this is
too evident; God has not so much of men's hearts, desires, love, delight,
faith, hope, zeal, as heretofore: it is low waters all the year long with many;
no heart to duty, as the Prophet complains; Whoredom and Wine take away the
heart, Hos. 4. 11. So lust, sloth, the world, and self, take away the heart;
few breathings after God, when absent; or delight, when present; indisposed to
duty, cold, formal in duty; put off God with any thing; keep the best of the
flock, the prime of their strength for themselves and the world; and turn off
the Lord with a corrupt thing, the residue of their wasted affections and
strength, Mal. 1. 14.

Sixthly, Breaking shows bad Trading, when men can hold it no longer, but are
forced to give over; they go back, and waste so fast, that at last they shut up
shop, and are gone. The times we live in are a manifest instance of this truth;
men breaking ever and anon, now one, then another; declares plainly Trading is
bad. And thus it is with Wisdom's Merchants this day; how many that have driven
a brave trade of Profession, made a great show of Religion, were famous in
their generation for Parts, and seeming Piety; but are now come to nothing,
quite fallen and gone; great apostasies from the truth, sad shipwracks of Faith
and Conscience can these late times speak of! Men that seemed like Stars, to
give a blaze for a while, and then turned to falling Meteors at last: or, with
the Sun, that rises in a splendor, and sets in a cloud: The visible apostasy,
and gross debauchery of men professing God in these latter times, is great; but
the secret degeneracy, and backslidings of heart, are much more: many break,
but more do warp. It Is far easier to observe, than to be affected with men's
great declensions in Religion; some in principle, but most in practice; some
with the fallen Angels have left their habitation, and fallen from their first
state; others faulter in their profession, and are fallen in their station:
some with stormy winds are shaken down; others fully ripe, and gotten to the
height of their profession, loosen by degrees, and drop away: some fall from
the tree, others rot where they hang; some trees have lost their fruit, others
their very leaves, and are become twice dead: where can you cast your eye, and
not see fallings away either from Faith, or faithfulness? Men take up notions,
and as easily leave them; most build upon the sand, little rootings in the
truth: how easy is it to draw men from their opinions? little stedfastness in
love: how soon does the labors thereof cease? a little trouble makes men let
go their profession, others lose their strictness in Religion, and grow more
remiss and lame in duty, leaving their first love, and close walks with Gods:
And are not these such manifest symptoms of decaying godliness, that he who
runs may read, and see that the Heavenly Trade is almost come to nothing this
day?

2 And this is cause of mourning, and to be greatly laid to heart; who can see
these things and not be affected: If there be any quick flesh, how can it but
bleed? if any waters are left, surely our eyes should run down tears, and we
pour out waters in Mispah before the Lord abundantly, for wasting, gasping
piety, that is even giving up the ghost: For where this Heavenly Trade decaies,

First, There is a growing strangeness between God and such souls: While Trade
is kept up among men, there is much acquaintance, converse and intimacy between
them; there are ever and anon occasions of writings, meetings and discourses
while trading holds; but when once that is let down, then communion cease;
they have little business one to another; no more letters pass, or visits
given; seldom see one another, and so at last grow out of acquaintance with
each other: And thus it is between God and souls; when once this Heavenly Trade
is let down, a strangeness begins between God and them, they are seldomer in
his company, neither are there such enquiries after God as before: There is
none that calls upon thy Name, that stirs up himself to take hold of thee;
for thou have hid thy face from us, and have consumed us because of our
iniquities, Isa. 64. 7. They were strange to God, they did not call upon him as
they use to do; and if they did, it was in such a general, cold way, that it
signified little; they did not take hold of him: The word signifies, To (...),
Apprehendere retinere.
hold with all their strength, as men do that are drowning that will not let go
what they hold: it signifies also ( says a Learned Critic) not only to hold
a thing, but faster and faster to wax strong in the holding it: But alas! they
did not so take hold of God, as such who were like to perish without him: They
did not stir up themselves: They did not waken and rouse up (...), Evigalare
vel excitare seipsum occultavit ne videatur.
themselves: (as the word imports) They were grown more remiss in duty; they
did not strive with God for help as they did: And God was strange to them; he
hid his face from them; he concealed himself, that he might not be seen, (as
the word signifies) he seems not to care for their company: This made the
Prophet cry out, Why should thou be as a stranger in the Land, and as a
wayfaring man, who turns aside to tarry but for a night? Jer. 14. 18. Seldom
visits, and short stays, shows strangeness in them that have been intimate;
and so it is between God and such who neglect this Heavenly Trade; the Lord
seldom visits them, nor has such warm converses with them as before: And is
not this cause of mourning, when such a friend as God has been to his people,
and one on whom all their hope lies, and in whom all their help is, shall look
strange upon them, and take no notice of them? This is enough to break an
ingenuous heart, and one that knows what it is to enjoy God: Neither is it
only the present want of God is their suffering; but by this means they are in
danger of losing him quite: The Lord is with you while you are with him; and if
you seek him, he will be found of you; but if you forsake him, he will forsake
you, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. Hence the Prophet, when he apprehended a change in God's
carriage toward Israel, the next thing he fears, is his departure from them;
he no sooner complains of God's strangeness, but presently prays, Leave us
not, Jer. 14. 9. When once it came to a straitening, and loathing between God
and his people, then terrible judgments follow; My soul loathed them, and their
soul abhorred, me, Zach. 11. 8, 9, It Is in the Original, My soul was straitened
in them: God's heart was not toward them as formerly; he could not bear with
them as formerly: And then, I will not feed them, that that dies, let it die,
and that that is to be cut off, let it be cut off; he matters not what becomes
of them: Do but think in what a case are such a people: This should be for a
lamentation.

Secondly, Soul-poverty, and wastings of their spiritual interests, do usually
attend neglect of this Heavenly Trading. When men come to spend upon the stock,
and have no comings in, they must needs waste apace: So it is where trading for
Heaven is neglected; such have no recruits of their wasted graces, nor supplies
of their impoverished souls, when the fountain is shut up, and all
communication of grace withheld; no intercourse between God and them; he will
not receive their goods, nor impart his treasure but all ways of relief are
blocked up; then they must needs waste apace in spirituals, and become poorer
every day. The way to be rich, is to have store of Christ's tried gold: I
counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may be rich,
Rev. 3. 18. Laodicea was poor, because she wanted Christ's tried gold, the real
graces of his Spirit; and this she lost by letting down her Spiritual Trade;
she did not buy of Christ; she did not come to, and deal with Christ in his own
ways, and upon his own terms, and that made her poor: And so it is with every
soul that neglects this Heavenly Trade; he soon comes to know what soul-wants
are: Once let down a life in godliness, and presently poor in graces, poor in
experiences, poor in comforts, poor in hopes, want strength, and want peace,
fare hard, lodge badly, cast out from among men; as Job describes poor and mean
persons: Who cut up mallows by the bushes, and Juniper roots for their meat,
Job 30. 4 5. 6. Very mean fare; little pleasing or nourishing food; bitter and
salt herbs: some take them for nettles, poor food; Herbas amaras and salsas.
Merc.
and yet the usual feeding in those parts, of those that were low in the world;
neither was their lodging better: They dwelt in the clefts of the Valley, in
caves of the Earth, and in the Rocks: Suitable also was their reputation; They
were driven from among men, they cried after them, as after a thief. Such is
the condition of poor persons full of straits, and meanly esteemed; and so it is
with such as decay in their Heavenly Trade; they have lost their sweet morsels,
and marrowy bits; their pleasant fare, and soul-refreshments they once had, and
feed on dry bones, and sapless Ordinances: They are not maintained at that rate
of comfort and experience they once had: They have hard lodging also; lose that
sweet rest and peace they sometimes found in Christ, and in their sincere
walkings after him: Fallen in reputation too; neither God nor good men think so
well of them as once they did. This is the case of such as fall back in
Religion; they soon fall into such poverty, and spiritual wants come upon them,
as armed men: In the fullness of their sufficiency they are in straits, Prove.
24. 34. Job 20. 22. And this is cause of mourning; wants and poverty do fill
men with trouble, perplexity and grief: Oh the distractions and distressing
thoughts that straits commonly beget! and no straits like to soul-straits;
Christians, you your selves be my Judges.

Thirdly, Neglect of Trading for Heaven will blast all other Trading, and breed
a moth to consume even your temporal substance: When Israel began to let down
their Heavenly Trade, and to mind their own concerns and houses above God's,
presently God blasts their temporal interests; he makes holes in their
moneybags, and blows upon their increase: All their tuggings in the world (with
neglect of God and his Worship) came to nothing; they sowed much, and it
brought in little; looked for much, and it came to little; wrought hard, earned
great wages, laid up money, but it fell out again, through some secret hole in
their bags, which divine jealousy opened, consuming their substance, to let
them know, that men may make more haste than good speed; and they that reckon
without God, must reckon twice. And may not this be one thing that cuts this
Nation short in their outward interest this day, because they have forsaken
God, neglected his service, lost the power of godliness? certainly though
outward prosperity be no token of God's favor, nor any Gospel-promise to his
people; yet when the Lord does fight against a people by successive rebukes,
and send in a secret mildew, wasting and consumption on their interests, and
this becomes general and national, it shows displeasure in God, and should be
laid to heart; the want of which is set forth as an additional aggravation to
such a peoples sin: Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? did
not he against whom we have sinned? for they would not walk in his ways,
neither were they obedient unto his Laws: Therefore he poured upon him the fury
of his anger, and the strength of battle, and has set him on fire round about,
yet he knew not, and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart, Isa. 42. 24,
25. It was the not walking in the way of God, neglect of obedience and
practical holiness, a letting down the Heavenly Trade that brought those
ruining judgments on Israel; losses on their interests, verse. 21. They were
robbed and spoiled, firing their houses, verse. 25. It has set him on fire
round, it burned him. Now in this miserable case there was yet a greater
judgment on them, a strange stupefaction and insensibleness of spirit; they
did not see God's anger in it, yet, Yet he knew it not; (viz.) Whence it came,
and who did all this; they looked to Chaldeans, and enemies, but 'twas God did
it; and yet they laid it not to heart; they were not rightly affected with all
these desolations, and their near approach to ruin: And is not this our case?
God has warned us by his Word this many years, threatened us by prodigious
signs in Heaven and Earth, begun to execute them already, by Plague, Sword and
Fire, dreadful wastes in the great City, and many other places, to the undoing
of many families, made a breach upon the Trade of the Nation, to the
impoverishing of the whole Land; and yet we are as insensible as Pharaoh and
the Egyptians were, as if the Lord had sent the spirit of slumber upon us;
impoverished, yet fell it not: This should be for a lamentation.

Fourthly, The decay of this Heavenly Trade, if not cured, is the ready and
certain way to ruin: The destruction of the poor is poverty, Prove. 10. 15.
Men's poverty fills them with consternation and dejecting fears, and does also
expose them to many evils, and take down their external defense from injuries,
being made a prey to their oppressors. The rich man's wealth is his strong
City, Prove. 18. 11. Rich men protect themselves from injuries; their riches are
Advocates for them to men; but poor men lie open to all invasions; when men
grow poor every man treads upon them: So is it when the Heavenly Trade decaies,
and soul-poverty springs out of its ruin; then destruction makes haste to such
places and persons: For this the Lord Jesus threatens to take the Kingdom from
a people, because they bring not forth the fruit of it, Matthew. 21. 43. they did
not render to God the fruit of all his dressings and waitings on them:
Barrenness and decaies in Religion uncured, are a certain forerunner of
Desolation, Luke 13. 7, 9.

Before the Lord brought in that cruel Nation, the Vandals on Africa; the
Christians in Spain were much degenerated from their former purity (as Salvian
complains) and the power of godliness was much decayed; he tells us, they had
nothing left but the name of Christianity, to which their conversation was most
unlike. Quid est in quo nobis de Christiano nomine blandiamur? Cum utique hoc
ipso magis per nomen sacratiffimum rei simus qui a sancto nomine discrepamus.
Salvi. de Gubern. lib. 3. page 95.
What is it (says he) to please our selves with the name of Christian, when
the very name does greaten our guilt, in that we are so unlike to it? Before
the Massacre at Paris (says Mr. Clark in his Martyrol.) such a general
stupidity seized upon the Protestants, that their minds were very wavering, and
few there were that showed themselves zealously bent to Religion; but all, both
great and small, were intent upon worldly matters, building to themselves
goodly Castles in the air. It was observed by some, that before the change of
Religion and Martyrdom in Queen Mary's days, there was great unprofitableness
under the Means of Grace. What the issues of these great decaies in Religion
may be amongst us, we know not; but such symptoms have usually foregone great
changes, and severe strokes, on such persons and places: And is not this matter
of lamentation? Physicians use to cure a Lethargy by a Fever; the one has been
our disease, O that the other, if no means else will do, may be our cure.

Fifthly, At the best decaies in this Heavenly Trade will render the Traders
account heavy in the day of Christ. Into what straits did the sense of an
abused trust put the Prodigal Steward, Luke 16. 13? He had been unfaithful in
his place, wasted his Masters goods, and now was in danger of being turned out;
a reckoning was called for, and he unable to render it; and in perplexing
thoughts how to give in his accounts, and to secure his future welfare: And
this will be the case of such as are negligent and unfaithful in their Heavenly
Trade; it will expose them to soul-trouble one day, how to answer it before
God: First or last God will call for an account how his goods have been
improved: He has given you a stock to trade upon for him: Light, Grace, Parts,
Capacities, Gospel-priviledges and Opportunities, Liberty, Peace, Experiences,
with many mercies and afflictions, which are all your Lord's goods, and must be
accounted for; upon the passing of which depends your eternal state, or much of
your soul's peace: The Lord Jesus has a double audit, or accounting with his
servants: In this life in the Court of Conscience; and in the Judgment-Day at
the bar of God: In the first your present peace and soul comfort is much
concerned, and your eternal welfare in the last: Alas! how will you answer
conscience now when that book is opened, and the Lord Jesus brings in his bill
of so many mercies expended, with skill and capacity to improve them; and such
a charge of debt issuing thence: So much due for such goods, and for other
wares; for Sermons, Sacraments, Graces, Comforts, Frames, Prayer Returns,
Gracious Providence and Protections; so many personal mercies, so many family
mercies, so many bodily mercies, so many soul mercies, so many Church mercies,
so many National mercies, sickbed mercies, health mercies, journey mercies,
habitation mercies, caring mercies, sparing mercies, giving mercies, forgiving
mercies, seen mercies, unseen mercies; and little or no return yet made for all
these: How can the conscience stand up under such a charge, or lift up his face
without spot, when it sees its guilt in all, and cannot answer one of a
thousand? How shall man be just with God, if he contend with him? How shall he
answer him one of a thousand? And if you cannot carry it in the Court of
Conscience here, where God reckons by a Proxy; and it may be does give but a
general charge, what will you do at the bar of God, where the Lord will judge
righteous judgment, and determine your eternal state, as you are approved or
disapproved in that day? What think you souls, will not so much neglect of
duty? such decaies of grace? so frequent breach of Covenants? so great
unfaithfulness in your places and relations? so many days and weeks, and not a
stroke of work for God? so much bad work, so much waste of goods; will not all
this look wistly upon you, and without repentance and a sealed acquittance,
render your case dangerous at the judgment seat? And if so, is it not matter of
lamentation? O lay this to heart!

USE III.
Thirdly, If the Heavenly Trade be the best Trade; then this reproves men's too
greedy and inordinate pursuit of their earthly Trades and Interests, to the
great prejudice and hinderance of this Heavenly Trade: And oh that I could here
dip my Pen in tears, as well as gall; and not only write against, but weep
over this earthly spiritedness, the great, the common, the uncur'd disease of
men; almost of all men, of good men, this day! With what earnestness, strength
of affection, and indefatigable labors, do men pursue after the things of this
world, as if all their pleasure, happiness, yea life and eternal welfare lay
wrapped up in these things. Jehu did not more furiously drive after a Crown, then
men do this day after crumbs. There was a time to some when godliness was
counted gain; but now gain is valued beyond godliness. Trade is the great Diana
to which most men sacrifice: Profit the wheel within the wheel, which sets all
a going: The salt that seasons all things; nothing savours well that has not
this in it. Advantage in the world, is like the blood in men's veins; the soul
in the body; that quickens their desires, puts life into their dead hopes;
makes the blind to see, the lame to leap and run, the deaf to hear, the lips of
them that are asleep to speak. Gain is the whetstone to men's wits, the
loadstone to their affections, the spur to their actions: this is the object of
men's quickest senses, the center of their liveliest motions. O! the projects,
cares, tuggings, sweats, rowings, ridings, restless labors, that are engaged
about this enquiry: Who will show us any good?

Quest. But how may we know when men do inordinately pursue their earthly
business and concerns? Answ. 1. First, When they engross too much of their
time: this was Israel's sin, saying, When will the New Mood be gone, that we
may sell Corn? and the Sabbath, that we may set forth Wheat? Amos 8. 5. They
were not contented with their own time but they must entrench on God's time
als. they thought the time long till they were at their worldly work, and hoped
to get advantage from God's institutions, for their earthly interests; and that
the Jubilee-Sabbath, when men must cease from tillage, would help to heighten
the price of things, and so further their advantage: therefore the Lord
reproves them for their undue diligence about the World: Frustra illos mane ob
vile lucellum expergisci ad opus, etc.
It is in vain for you to rise up early, and to sit up late to eat the bread of
sorrows; for so he gives his beloved sleep, Psalm. 127. Here (says Piscator)
he does, by this sudden Apostrophe, inveigh against those covetous Tradesmen
and Merchants, telling them; Artifices qui diluculo ad labores evigilant. Rab.
Solo.
It Is in vain for them to rise up so early to their work, and sit up so late in
their shops, for such poor and contemptible gain: So Rabbi Solomon renders it
for Artificers, who rise early to their labors. Excessive pursuits of the
World in point of time are here reproved as vain and sinful, while hereby they
deprive themselves of time for God and their Souls.

Secondly, when they lay out their Hearts on the World; If riches increase, set
not your hearts on them, Psalm. 62. 10. The danger of a disease lies in its
seizure on the heart: Earthly things, under the hand are a duty; but in the
heart, a disease. The heart is Christ's Royal Fort, to which the Devil, the
World and Flesh lay siege; and if that be taken, all is gone: Earthly things
are briars and thorns, and therefore dangerous to come near the heart: the
least prick at the heart is mortal; the heart is Christ's nuptialbed, into
which Christ retires; the World is the Saint's servant; now to admit a servant
into the Lord's bed, is adulterous: the heart is God's Seat, Pavilion and
Throne, into which none must come but himself; like the gates of the Sanctuary,
into which none must enter but God himself: This gate shall be shut, it shall
not be opened, and no man shall enter into it; because the Lord, the God of
Israel has entered into it; therefore it shall be shut, Ezekiel. 44. 2. Such is
the heart of Believers, to be kept for God only; to take in creatures into
God's room, is intolerable boldness; to let out thy heart to the World, Trade,
Interest, Creatures, is to invert the order of nature, as well as grace. In
creation, God sets man uppermost, and puts all things under his feet: Thou
made him to have dominion over the works of thine hands; thou have put all
things under his feet, Psalm. 8. 6. Now, to place those things over thy heart,
which God has set under thy feet, is to turn the World upside down, and to
overturn the whole course of nature. This is the great sin of this day, men's
letting out their hearts on the things of this World: were persons but serious,
and willing to be searched, and to know their own state, many that think well
of themselves, might find, that notwithstanding all their shows, and seeming
hopes, they are in a woeful and dangerous case, in that their hearts are not
right with God, but are set on other things, on earthly things more than on God.

Six things discover this, that the heart is set too much upon this World.
First, When the desires are inordinately let out after it: this is one symptom
the Prophet gives of an unsound, covetous heart; such a one has greedy,
unsatisfied desires after the World; Who enlarges his desire as Hell, and is
as Death, and cannot be satisfied, Hab. 2. 5. In the former verse he tells us,
a carnal unbelieving heart, is a rotten unsound heart: His soul which is lifted
up, is not upright in him: but the just shall live by Faith. A carnal heart is
all for himself, and his own carnal interest, and not for God; he lives by
sight, and not by Faith; and this was an evidence of it, all his desires were
for carnal things. Desires are the breathings and outgoings of the heart, and
as the heart is, such are they; where the desires are earthly, the heart is
earthly; such a one is never satisfied with any portion of earthly things: as a
person in a Fever, always thirsty; so is an earthly heart, always coveting more
and more: They join house to house, and lay field to field, till there be no
place, Isa. 5. 8. As long as there is any place left, they covet it: A Field, a
House, a Living, is but a morsel that stays a hungry stomach for the present,
as soon as that is digested they long for more: this is a certain sign that
heart is on the World, whose desires have never enough of it: and alas! where is
the person that will say with Jacob, I have enough? Where the heart is set on
God and things above, a little of the World will content that Soul; food and
raiment, with godliness, is enough; but it is never satisfied with its measure
of Grace, and enjoyment of God; the more it enjoys of God, the more it longs
for further fellowship with him; one duty does but edge the stomach for
another: the more he has, the more he desires of God and spiritual things: and
so it is with a heart that is altogether earthly, the desires are earthly also,
never satisfied with what he has, but still longing for more.

Secondly, A worldly heart has worldly thoughts; there the mind is wholly
taken up about earthly things; thoughts are to the heart as the beams are to
the Sun, the streams to the Fountain, which are homogeneous, of the same nature
with them; our Lord Jesus tells us, that it is out of the heart that evil
thoughts proceed, Mark. 7. 21. They come immediately from the heart, (says Mr.
Fenner,) nothing comes between the heart and them; other sins (says he) come
from the heart, but it is at the second, third and fourth hand; but thoughts
come immediately from it: And nothing does more discover the heart, than the
usual, habitual, delightful thoughts of a man do: They are the univocal acts of
the heart, which show what the heart is, as shining does the light; Mr. Fenner
of the misery of earthly thoughts. Where are thy thoughts mostly? thy pleasing
and delightful thoughts? there is thy Heart: They that are after the flesh, do
mind the things of the flesh, Romans 8. 5. As soon as they awake, thoughts of
their business (as friends) come to visit them; they drive out other thoughts
of God and heavenly things, they vanish and disappear at the presence of
earthly thoughts, as Clouds do at the rising-Sun; as when a Master comes in to
take his seat, Servants rise up, and go their way: no sooner does thoughts of
God come in, but earthly thoughts drive them away, as the Shepherds did
Jethro's Daughters, and there is no Moses to stand up and help them, Exodus 2.
16, 17. An earthly man from morning to night his thoughts are upon the World,
as the Dog follows his Master all the day long: In company, alone, at home,
abroad, in journeys, in duties; his thoughts are usually about his Trade,
Interest, House, Field, Work, and the like; it may be sometimes good thoughts
may be cast into the mind, and these make amends for all other thoughts,
feeding the deceived heart with conceits that all is well, because good
thoughts come in now and then; whereas the main bent of their thoughts have
been about earthly things: these thoughts grow out of the heart, they are
in-dwellers; but good thoughts are only guests and strangers that don't stay
long; they give a visit, and then are gone, and must give way to earthly
thoughts again, which are home-born, houshold-servants and inhabitants: thy
thoughts of God are but occasional, now and then extraordinary, when some
special mercy or affliction is upon thee, but thy earthly thoughts are fixed,
stated and continued: thy good thoughts are like rainwater, that fall upon
thee, or as pump-water that must be drawn out; but thy carnal thoughts are as
wellwater, that runs freely, and springs up from within thee: thy good thoughts
are but thy recreation, when thy mind is tired with other things; but thy
earthly thoughts are thy work and employment; when men have done their work,
they sometimes walk abroad; such are thy seldom thoughts of God and divine
things, when thou have drudg'd away the strength of thy mind on the World, and
thy own things, then, to quiet conscience, and recreate thy mind, thou give
thy thoughts leave to walk abroad, and give a visit to better things: thy
heavenly thoughts are gentle, easy, weak and sickly, and carry out little of
the strength and vigor of thy heart with them; but thy thoughts of the World
are strong and lively, the firstborn and strength of thy heart; they are
spending thoughts, working, plotting, carking, studying thoughts: Ah souls!
deceive not your selves with fancies of your good estate, from some fits and
good moods in you (which hypocrites may have) and all the while the strength
and bent of your hearts, the constant, lively, prevailing thoughts of your
souls are carnal, selfish and earthly.

Thirdly, Persons restless labors after the world, plainly show their hearts
are upon it: Where the heart is set upon a thing a person is restless till he
has it; he leaves no stone unturned; sets wit, hands, friends, and all on work
to get it. When Shechem's heart was set on Dinah, Jacob's daughter, he sticks
at no proposals so he might but obtain her: Let me find grace in your eyes, and
what ye shall say unto me, I will give; the Land shall be before you, dwell and
trade therein, and get you possession therein, Genesis 34. 10, 11. No terms were
counted too hard; take up profession, undergo painful duties, punishing
circumcision; part with any thing so he might but have the desire of his heart,
What hardships did Jacob undergo for his beloved Rachel? twice seven years
service, consumed with drought in the day, and frost in the night, and his
sleep departed from his eyes: Thus have I been twenty years in thy house; I
served thee fourteen years for thy two daughters, and six years for thy cattle,
and thou have changed my wages ten times, Genesis 31. 40, 41. And yet all this he
could bear to enjoy the object of his love.

So it is with earthly minded men; all their capacities are engaged about
earthly things; their chiefest strength is laid out about their Trades,
callings and businesses in the world, seldom minding soul-concerns, little
employed in religious duties; now and then hear, read, pray, as may stand with
interest; cold, sleighty, formal, sleepy in duty; but all life when about the
world; ready to complain prayer is too long, preaching tedious; too much time
spent in duty; what need this waste? Matthew. 26. 8. All seems lost to flesh and
blood which is spent on Christ and his service, [Mr. Trap:] But all too little
for the world; weary themselves for very vanity; stick at nothing that will
help them to their desired interests; undergo any hardships; turn the back on
any duties; adventure health, reputation, the displeasure of God, with all
their spiritual mercies; yea and the eternal welfare of their souls also,
rather than lose an advantage in the world: This is the spirit of too many this
day: Men that seem to be somewhat, bid fair for salvation, with the young man
in the Gospel; like the terms well; come up to every thing but this; cannot
part with the world for Christ; come up to every thing, only with Naaman, must
be pardoned in this, that they have a Rimmon to bow to, 2 Kings 5. 18. In every
thing else they will consent to follow Christ, but in this they must be spared:
when their farms, their merchandise and profit calls for them, then the
concerns of Christ and their souls must stand by; and affections like a flood
run over all that lies in their way; take no notice what Scripture or
Conscience say; deaf to all arguments that thwart interest: This is the case of
a worldly heart; his chiefest strength is laid out about earthly things; these
must be followed and sought after, whatever becomes of the soul and spiritual
things. What is that so great hope (says Seneca) what so great necessity, that
stoops man who was made upright, to contemplate Heaven, and buries and drowns
him in the deeps of the Earth, to get out that gold which is not got with less
danger than it is kept, Sen? A little strength for duty will serve the turn; but
a great deal of time, care and labor must the world have: Surely the world
rules that heart that comes and goes at its bidding, and can leave all to
follow it Quae tanta spes fuit, quae tanta necessitas hominem ad sidera erectum
incurvavit, and defodit, and in fundum telluris intime mersit ut erueret aurum
non minore periculo quaerendum quam possidendum. Sen.
at the command of interest. You will judge him another man's servant, who,
whatever he is doing, will leave it all when his Master calls him, and follow
him. Let men think what they will, God has no part for the present in that
soul that can do more to enjoy the world, than God; and counts any thing more
necessary than to converse with, obey and serve him.

Fourthly, The delight and pleasure men take in earthly things, declare that
their hearts are let out upon them: Where the heart is, there will the delights
be. Cordis vita est amor.
Love is is the very life of the soul, Alsted. Theol. nature. p. 613. When
Jonathan's heart was knit with the heart of David, 1 Samuel 18. 1. as an evidence
of it: Chap. 19. 2, Jonathan Readiness Son delighted much in David: Delectatio sit
quies quaedam appetitus considerata presentia boni delectantis quod appetitui
satisfacit. Aqui. 12. 9. 31. 1. 2. M.
Delight is the rest of desire, in the fruition of that good the heart is set
upon, which satisfies the desire; [ Reynolds of the Passions, Cap. 19. Page
197.] One calls it, the Sabbath of our thoughts, and that sweet tranquillity of
mind which we receive from the presence and fruition of that good whereunto our
desires have carried us: If then men's delights in the world exceed their
pleasure in God, it is a sign the world is their chiefest good. Wicked men
delight in their abominations, and that proves their ways to be of choice. Isa.
63. 3, They have chosen their own ways, and their soul delights in their
abominations: Try thy heart by thy pleasure; what is sweetest to thy taste, God
or the World? What is most delightful to thee, to wait on God, though with the
loss of the world, or to pursue the world, with the want of God? Men cheat
their own Souls, when they say the enjoyment of God is better than the world;
and yet for every trifle, and smallest advantage, can upon choice, baulk the
enjoyment of God in his appointments, and cannot adventure the least loss and
prejudice to their interest, though it were for the nearest fellowship with
God: certainly that which is the Souls greatest pleasure, that will it make
after when left to its liberty: Can thou leave the snow of Lebanon for the
waters of Assyria? Pass by a walk in Christ's gallery, to sit down and solace
thy self on the dunghil-comforts of this life? then are not thy chiefest
delights in God: Psalm. 27. 4, One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I
seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life,
to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his temple: If the
beholding of God in Ordinances be thy delight, it will be the one thing in thy
desires and endeavors; also all other things are nothing to that: If thy
chiefest pleasure be in God, then nothing but a conviction of duty can make
thee upon choice decline an opportunity of waiting on God; and even then also,
when obedience to God sets thy hand to the world; delight in God will engage
thy longings after him, and make thy greatest comforts thou art then pursuing,
a weight and a burden to thy soul, because they stand between thy heart and
communion with God. Thy affections will be like the Kine that drew the Ark to
Bethshemesh, that lowed after their Calves as they went, 1 Samuel 16. 12. When
thou art constrained to draw in the Cart of thy duty-employments, even then
will thy desires belowing after the comfort of thy relation-interest in God.
How is it soul? speak; Is not a good Fair and Bargain sweeter to thee, and does
more affect thy heart, than a sermon and a duty? Do thou not use to follow
the world with thy back on fellowship with God and Saints, and not the least
regret in thy spirit, or cloud on thy comforts? if so, thy heart is not yet
supremely set on God.

Fifthly, Lothness to part with thy earthly comforts and interests tells thee,
thy heart is too much upon them. Jacob's unwillingness to part with Benjamin,
was a sign his heart was too much set upon him. Judah tells the Governor of
Egypt, That his Father's life was bound up in the Lad's life, Genesis 44. 30. The
Spouses affection to her Beloved was seen in this, that when she found him, she
held him, and would not let him go, Cant. 3. 4. I found him whom my soul
loves, I held him, and would not let him go. Such is the testimony, that if
men's hearts are on the things of this life, they hold them fast, and will not
let them go: Most men are too tenacious of their interests, to be dead to them:
close hands argue cleaving hearts to the world. Alas! with what reluctance do
men that have the abundance of this worlds goods, lay them out again for God!
how hard is it to draw any proportions of charity from them that have this
worlds goods? what arguments and reasons will men be pleading for their
sparingness in parting with the Mammon of this world? and how much beneath
their measure do most men expend their earthly things upon the calls that God
gives them? This shows plainly, their heart is bound up in the fruition of
these things. Covetous men will sooner part with their flesh, than their gold
(says Augustine) shall I take my bread, and my water, and my flesh that I have
killed for my shearers, and give it to men whom I know not whence they be? 1 Samuel 25. 11. (says covetous Nabal.) Covetous persons cannot endure to part
with what they have. Avarus tenendo divitias tenetur a divitiis, and dum vult
esse praedo fit praeda. Aug.
The covetous man, while he holds fast his riches, is held fast by them; and in
preying on others, he himself becomes a prey, August. They are like a net,
which takes in all the fish that comes at it, but lets out none again, except
some small ones that are little worth: Earthly minds are seen in nothing more
than in their tenacity, and close keeping of what they have; like dying men,
whatever they take hold of, they let not go: This is the temper of many, they
cannot scatter for God, nor honor him with their substance: There is that
withholdeth more than is meet, Prove. 11. 24. That Is the character of one whose
heart is on the world. Non solum avarus est qui rapit aliena, sed ille avarus
est qui cupide servat sua. Aug.
He is not only covetous that takes away other men's goods (says Augustine)
but he that covetously withholds his own, and will not let them go when God
has use for them: Certainly, if Believers themselves are not their own, then
they will one day know their estates and interests are not their own, but the
Lord's, and to be at his dispose. How will the owner of that Colt Christ sent
for, rise up in judgment against many! no sooner did the Disciples say, The
Lord has need of him, but straightway they let him go, Luke 19. 33, 34, 35.
Shall one that pretended not so much to Christ (for ought we know) readily part
with so much at the first request; and they that profess much love to Christ,
refuse to lay out lesser things for him? This does manifest the world is dearer
to such than Jesus Christ.

Lastly, Then are men's hearts upon the world, when their trust and dependence
is upon earthly things. We are apt to put confidence in friends, and therefore
the Lord cautions Israel against such dependencies, as false deceiving things:
Trust not in a friend; put ye not confidence in a guide, etc. Micah 7. 5. The
Spouse came leaning upon her Beloved in the wilderness, Cant. 8. 5. No sooner
had the rich man store of goods, but he places his confidence in them, Luke 12.
19. I will say to my soul; soul, thou have goods laid up for many years, take
thine ease; eat, drink and be merry. It Is natural to men that choose the world
for their treasure; to choose it also for their trust: They that dare adventure
their supreme affection on things, dare also take up their dependency on them.
Men choose not a tree they think will rot, Isa. 40. 20. If riches be thy choice,
thou think them worthy of thy relyance; or thou actest irrationally. Men
that have wealth, have inward thoughts that their houses shall continue for
ever, and their dweling places to all generations; they call their Lands after
their own names, Psalm. 49. 11. It Is hard to have the good things of this life,
and not to expect too much from them; so inviting is their appearance to a
dependency on them: Earthly things are fair in promise, but false in
performance; like quagmires covered with grass; men think them firm ground, but
when they tread upon them, they soon become their graves. The Evangelist calls
all that glorious pomp with which Agrippa so amused spectatours, but a mere
show, Acts 25. 23. When Agrippa was come, and Bernice, with great pomp, it is
with much fantasy and (...).
external show: All the glory of this world is but a pompous show, that cheats
beholders, and allures them to a deceived expectation: They that have much
visible comfort in creatures, live little by faith. How rare is it for men that
have estates and riches for their posterity, to commit them to divine care, by
an act of pure recumbency on the promise, and to believe upon a naked word for
all their supplies and needed comforts: Such is our expectation whither we flee
for help, Isa. 20. 6. An earthly heart is known by carnal trust and dependency
on earthly things. Ah souls! put your hearts into this scale, and see whether
they do not press down to this present world: Speak soul, who shall shortly be
weighed for eternity in the balance of the Sanctuary; are not thy desires, thy
thoughts, thy restless labors, thy delights, thy close adherence to, and
dependency, all engaged about the things of this life, with the neglect of God,
and heavenly things, thine own heart being Judge? And if so, then

Thy State is dangerous.
And thy Folly great.
First, Thy State is dangerous; thou have not a dram of true grace in thee:
Love not the world, nor the things of the world; if any man love the world, the
love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2. 15. Do not flatter thy soul into
perdition; if thou love the world, thou do not love God: For the friendship
of this world is enmity against God: Whosoever therefore will be a friend of
the world, is the enemy of God, James 4. 4. He whose heart and mind is set
after the world; he that will be rich, the bent and design of the heart is for
it; that is the Butt he levels at, whatever he professes; That Is his great
business and project: Thine eyes and thy heart are not but for thy
covetousness, Jer. 22. 17. He makes haste to be rich, Prove. 28. 20. drives
furiously after the world; his heart is reconciled to all the means and ways
that lead to it (be they never so clashing with soul-advantages) that man, be
he who he will, is a friend to the world, and an enemy to God, let him make the
highest profession possible: So did Judas get into the Church of God; so did
Demas pray, preach, and so may hypocrites for a time; yea make many prayers,
Isa. 1. 15. Does he profess love to God? so did the Jews; and yet their hearts
went after their covetousness, Ezekiel. 33. 31. Is he of a lovely spirit, and
unblameable conversation? so was the young man in the Gospel; his great desire
was to inherit eternal life, Mark 10. 17. that was his business to Christ; he
desired to know how he might be saved; he seemed to be all for Heaven; his life
also was unblameable: All these have I observed from my youth up, verse 20. He
was of a sweet, lovely spirit: It Is said, Jesus beholding him, loved him, verse
21. and yet could not part with the world for Christ; had his heart knit to
earthly things all the while, and went away sorrowful; he could not consent to
sell all and give to the poor, ver. 22. no marks will serve that Soul's turn,
whose heart is glued to the World, and cannot give up all to Christ's dispose:
God and the World cannot dwell in that Soul, godliness and gain cannot keep
house together: where the grace of God comes in truth, it teaches men to deny
worldly lusts, Tit. 2. 11, 12. He that has no power to deny the cravings of a
worldly heart, never yet received the grace of God in truth. Grace (says one)
may stand with some transient acts of naughtiness, but never with covetousness:
Adams on the 2 Epist. of Pet. p. 9. 16. Noah was once drunk with Wine, but
never with the World: Lot twice Incestuous, never Covetous: Peter denied his
Master thrice; it was not the love of the World, but the fear of the World
brought him to it; for he had denied the World before he denied his Master:
Once David was overcome with the Flesh, never with the World. Why did not these
purge themselves from Adultery, Anger, Contention, and the like? because into
these sins the infirmity of a Saint may fall; but if once into Covetousness,
there is nothing of a Saint left, not the very name. Luther acknowledges there
was scarce a sin to which he had not been tempted, save to the sin of
Covetousness. The Lord Jesus tells us that his Disciples are not of this World:
some derive the word, Holy, from Earth, and a privative (...).
particle, in that redemption from the earth, is the great work of holiness:
All they that partake of the Cross of Christ, are crucified to the World, and
the World to them, Gal. 6. 14. Not a jot of the benefits of Christ are
treasured up in that Soul where the God of this World dwells; and if without
Christ, without hope; thy case is desperate if thy heart be earthly, under the
ruling power of this World; thou art yet in a graceless state, and no grace, no
glory; if thou mindest earthly things, destruction is thy end, Phil. 3. 19. If
thou art one of this World, whose heart is after thy covetousness, thy portion
is in this World, Psalm. 17. 14. All thy Heaven is on this side the Grave: For
this ye know, that no Whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is
an Idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God, Ephesians. 5.
5. It Is joined with the most abominable sins, Thievery, Drunkenness, Adultery,
Idolatry, Extortion, for which things sake, the wrath of God comes upon the
children of disobedience, Col. 3. 5. 6. The Scripture calls covetous men,
cursed children, 2 Pet. 2. 14. An heart they have (...), exercised as Wrestlers
are, who contend for victory with all their Might, being trained up to it by
long exercise, (...):
exercised with covetous practices, cursed children; really cursed with a
detestation, such whom God abhors, Psalm. 10. 3. And the wicked blesses the
covetous, whom God abhors. A woe is pronounced against them, Hab. 2. 9. Woe
to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house, that he may set his
nest on high, that he may be delivered from the power of evil: One would think
this a duty, or at least very commendable, to provide for our Family, and get
what we can for our children, and to endeavor to secure our houses from any
suffering and calamity; but if this be men's end, to set their nest on high, to
get great things for themselves, and so to manage their affairs, as to avoid
all Malum hic notatis, quod homines vulgo pro malo habent, and quod fugit and
horret caro, nimirum crucem, humilitatem, ac persequutionem.
sufferings for God, there is a dreadful woe hangs over their heads, and
disappointment of all their design in the issue; for instead of honor, they
are brought to shame in the end: Thou have consulted shame to thy own house,
and sinned against thy own soul, verse. 10. They are unworthy of any society
with men: I have written unto you not to keep company; if any man that is
called a Brother, be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Idolater, or a Railer, or
a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such a one, no, not to eat, 1 Cor. 5. 11.
and shall be cut off from communion with God to all eternity: Know ye not that
the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God: be not deceived, neither
Fornicator, nor Idolater, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor
Revilers, nor Extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9. 10.

Secondly, as thy state is dangerous, if thou art one who love this present
World; so thy folly is great, to set thy heart upon the World.

After thou have been convinced of the evil of such a spirit and practice, and
have felt the smart of it in thy own soul.

After thou have been arraigned at the bar of thy Conscience, and condemned in
thy own heart for this Sin, (as every truly convinced Soul is,) if ever the
spirit of bondage has been at work in thy heart, (as thou have confessed) then
have thou found this sin more bitter than death to thee; and now to return
again to such courses as will break thy bones again, and put thy soul to
greater torture than ever, (as all relapses do,) this is folly indeed.

After thou have chosen God for thy portion, Christ for thy treasure, Godliness
for thy gain, the inheritance with the Saints for thy Land, a mansion in Heaven
for thy house, Christ's tried Gold for thy Money, a conversation in Heaven for
thy Trade, the Father, Son and Spirit, for thy All here, and for ever, (as thou
have done, or fearfully belied thy profession,) that after all this thou
should turn again to these beggarly elements, and exchange God for the
world, a Crown for crumbs, a Throne for thorns, a Dowry in Heaven for a
dunghill on earth; an eternal weight of Glory for a burden of thick clay;
fellowship with God for defiling converse with dirt and bespotting trash; a
Burgeship in Heaven for a name written in the earth; is not this folly, folly?
Not that one who had real interest in God and things above, can ever fully and
finally forfeit them, and lose them again; (for, once in Christ, and ever in
Christ) but those things thou did once seem to choose for thy chiefest
interest, and have professed hopes of a certain title to these supreme
treasures; and now, to sell thy hopes of God and Glory for that Speciosa
supplicia and fortunae vomitus.
vomit thou had spewed up, and mire thou had been washed from, this is
madness indeed.

After you have seen so often the vanity and uncertainty of these things below,
that they are empty, and will not satisfy; they cannot quench thy thirst, or
fill thy hungry soul; cannot afford the least rest to thy weary heart; but are
still short of thy expectations; thou look for peace, and behold they give
thee trouble; thou think to gather Roses, and they prick thy fingers; and
when thou hopest to find rest in them, and say, Soul, take thy ease in thy
full bags, and fair estate; thy pleasant house, near relations; then they prove
swords to pierce thee, or briers to rend thee; or at the best, but wind that
does but swell, not nourish thee. Thou have also found them fading things, that
will not stay, rare ripe, fruit that soon rots; a moth, an Eastwind take off
all; they are a pleasing gourd one day, and withered the next, Jonah 4. 7. God
prepared a worm when the morning rose the next day, and it smote the gourd that
it withered. A sickness comes and takes away thy child, and all the hopes of
thy house perish with him: Thy Customers break, and thou art impoverished: The
fire burns down thy house, and thou art undone: Thy Heir it may be proves a
Prodigal, and all thy gatherings are scattered; so uncertain, empty, perishing,
are these things, and thou know them to be so, and have found them such, and
yet thy heart runs after them; and with the Dog Mundus perit and tu Mundana
quaeris.
in the Fable, thou leavest substance to catch at shadows; neglecting unseen,
sure, sweet, satisfying and eternal things, for things that are not; and is not
this madness? [The world perishes, and yet thou seek after the things
thereof, Petrarch.]

After you have found better things, and tasted the sweetness of them, you have
experienced the light of God's countenance to be beyond all corn, and wine, and
oil; his loving kindness to be better than life; a day in his Courts to be more
eligible than a thousand elsewhere, Psalm. 4. 6, 7. O how sweet has his Word
been to thy taste, sweeter than the honey and the honeycomb! how often has God
cheered, quickened and strengthened thy heart in thy approaches to him, that
thou have said (as David of Goliah's sword) there is none like this: And as the
Disciples when with Christ in the Mount, it is good being here; Lord evermore
give me this bread: and yet after all this, that thou should upon choice,
leave these for the world, and prefer thy shop, thy trade, thy field, house,
money, before these divine and approved treasures: This is madness.

After so many confessions of this sin before the Lord and his people, and so
many prayers and cries to God against it, and for grace to subdue thy earthly
heart with many promises, and declared purposes to turn no more to this folly;
that thou should so easily, so speedily be reconciled to the world again,
and reassume thy affections to these old lovers after all; this is madness, and
will exceedingly greaten thy guilt and torment, when the Lord shall make
inquisition for these things; when thy convictions, prayers and vows shall
return as so many Sergeants upon thy back, to arrest thy guilty conscience, and
as so many witnesses to prove God's charge against thee; that at such a time
and such a time, in thy closet, in the Congregation of the Lord's people, in
days of humiliation and preparation-seasons, on thy sickbed, under such a
word and rod, thy heart did melt over thy sin, and thou did solemnly renew
thy Covenant against it; and now to have thy prayers, and tears, and promises;
yea, and God too against thee, for thy Apostasy after such Lovers as thou thy
self wilt loath another day, and be ashamed to own in the presence of God,
Saints and Angels; this is folly, folly.

Now when God is punishing thee for this very sin, by stripping thee of thy
Idols, and pouring out the vials of his wrath upon this Euphrates, thy riches,
interest, trade, and earthly comforts, over which thou have carried away thy
heart from him, that now while the Rod is upon thy back, thou should hold
fast thine iniquity, and refuse to return; this is desperate and incorrigible
folly. And this is the practice of most this day; God blows upon their trades
and interests for following them, and letting his house lie waste; and yet they
pursue them still: The Lord takes out the bottom of their bags, and yet they
put in more money into them. God smites men for the iniquity of their
covetousness, and yet they go on frowardly in the way of their heart, Isa. 57.
17. God is hedging up the way of men's Lovers, and yet they break thorough to
overtake them: So it was with Israel, God had hedged up her way, made a wall
that she should not find her paths; and yet she followed after them. Hos. 2. 6.
And she shall follow after her Lovers (O incorrigible wickedness!) but (says
God) she shall not overtake them: The Lord is plucking down men's bricks, but
they build with hewn stone; the Sycamores are cut down, but they change them
into Cedars, Isa. 9. 10. Providence pulls away unduly pursued interests, but
men catch at them again: This is daring wickedness, and a telling God to his
face, they fear him not, neither will they return. Jer. 5. 3. Thou have
stricken them, but they have not grieved, Quid miserius misero non miserante
seipsum? Aug. What Is more miserable than a man in misery not pitying himself.
thou have consumed, but they have refused to receive correction; they have
made their faces harder than a Rock; they have refused to return: This is our
case, and should it not be for a lamentation?

Lastly, when nothing but ruin and destruction is before our eyes; manifest
danger of losing all, even Interest, Gospel, Life, and all that is dear to us
seems to be a going; and yet to pursue these things, with neglect of our souls,
is madness beyond parallel, and a dangerous symptom of approaching ruin. If
men are not given up to a spirit of blindness, they must needs see that wasting
destructions are upon us; gray hairs are here and there, and we see it not,
Hos. 7. 9, 10. Strangers have devoured his strength, and he knows it not;
yea, gray hairs are here and there, yet he lays it not to heart; and the
pride of Israel does testify to his face, and they do not return to the Lord
their God, nor seek him for all this. Sentit quidem dolores sed non agnoscit
causam and fontem sui mali; Confirmat esse Israelem desperatum and incurabilem
quia convictus non tamen redit ad Dominum. Zanch.
They felt the pain, but did not acknowledge the cause and fountain of all those
evils, (says Zanchy;) and this showed they were desperate and incurable, in
that they were convicted of their evil case, and yet would not return to the
Lord. No spot more dangerous than continuance in sin under utmost means of
reformation and confessed danger of ruin. If our transgressions and sins be
upon us, and we pine away in them; how shall we then live? Ezekiel. 33. 10.

USE IV.
If the Heavenly Trade be the best Trade, etc. Then this offers counsel and
exhortation to five sorts of persons.

1. To such as are strangers to this Heavenly Trade.
Counsel 1. Such as are strangers to this Heavenly Trade; you that never were
acquainted with this high Calling, but have spent all your time about things
that perish, trafficking about Hell and Damnation. Be you exhorted to set about
this choice, rich, and blessed Trade.

There are four Arguments that usually sway with rational persons in their
choice of earthly Callings, which are also weighty inducements unto all not yet
concerned to speed upon this Heavenly Trade.

Arg. 1. First, Necessity puts men on employments, and none are greater than
theirs who are without this Divine Calling. Sinners, you that are yet without
God in the World, you are miserably poor, and ready to perish; you are worth
nothing but sin and misery; He is a poor man that has nothing to live upon;
and such are you, while without this line of communication, and strangers to
these supreme concerns: You are spiritually poor, and have nothing (as yet) for
your Souls to live on here, or to all eternity, Rev. 3. 17. And know not
that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Poverty
is one of the miseries of all unchanged souls; and that which aggravates it, is
this; that they think themselves rich, and yet have nothing; no Food to fill
them, but empty husks, and swines meat; no Raiment to cover them, but filthy
rags, and confusion, no House to shelter them from the storms of Divine wrath;
or any Habitation to receive them, but an infernal Lake of Fire and Brimstone,
and a receptacle with damned Devils; not a friend to help them; not an eye to
pity them; There are none so poor in the World but they have something or
other to help them, something in hand, or something in hope; something of their
own, or something of others: if they cannot dig, yet they can beg; if they have
not interests to maintain them, yet they find pity to relieve them: But a
Christless Sinner has nothing to supply his immortal part; nothing in hand;
nothing in hope; nothing of his own; nothing of others, that can contribute the
least good to his undone Soul, whatever he lives on, is nothing but wind and
emptiness; He feeds on ashes, a deceived heart turns him aside, Isa. 44. 20. He
crams his starved Soul with filthy dung and excrements, (so loathsome are all
the pleasures of sin he lives on,) Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel,
strangers from the Covenants of Promise; having no hope, and without God in the
World, Ephesians. 2. 12. This is your condition, Souls, while without this Heavenly
Trade; you are miserably poor, whatever you have in the World, you have
nothing in God; whatever your Bodies and Families have, your Souls have
nothing: Vniversa inutiliter habet qui unum illud quo universis utatur non
habet.
It Is little profit to enjoy all things, and miss that one thing by which only
we come to use them; Aug. You labor for vanity, and lie down in sorrow; and
have you not reason to look out after some course to help you, and to embrace
this overture of a Calling that will maintain and enrich you here, and for
ever? The Lepers case is thine; if thou sit still in thy condition, thou die:
In the World's fullness is famine; in thy security and false hopes, is death
also: If thou adventure an offered grace, it may save thee; however, thou
can but die, 2 Kin. 7. 3, 4.

Again, you are not only poor, but Bankrupts; your poverty is of your own
procurement, and the issue of your prodigality; you had once a fair Estate, but
lost it; God, Grace and Glory was yours by the first Covenant, Luke 15. 30. but
you have trifled it away for forbidden-fruit, and spent all you had on Harlots;
you have consumed your Lord's goods also in riotous living, and wasted a large
stock committed to your trust, and now must give an account of your
Stewardship; were it only your personal wants that your folly has brought upon
you, (though that be heavy,) yet it is comparatively tolerable; but restitution
must be made, and that is unconceivably distressing. A dreadful word, sinners,
lies against you! (how can you bear it? how can you eat, drink, talk, or sleep
in peace? much less rejoice when the handwriting is against the wall?) it is
this, Give an account of thy Stewardship, Luke 16. 2. A review of thy past time
must be expected, by what means thou did reduce thy miserable Soul to this
low estate, and an account of thy Stewardship will be required; and then when
too late, thou will say with the Steward, What shall I do? ver. 3. and is it
not more advisable now to take this counsel of Eliphaz, to acquaint thy self
with God, and be at peace, thereby good shall come unto thee, Job. 22. 21. to
return to that Trade which thou have left, and recover the Treasure which thou
have lost, that so thy account may be comfortable in the day of Christ?

Nay further, you are not only poor, and bankrupts; but deeply in debt; debtors
to God, to whom you owe your selves and all that you have, by the Law of
Creation and Covenant-obligation, but never yet discharged that due to this
very day. You are in debt to God for all your mercies in Creation and
Providence, patience-mercy, preservation-mercy, preventing-mercy, bounty-mercy;
there is never a moment but God is laying out some new mercy upon thee, of which
thou have never made retribution to this day.

Debtors to the Law of God, which has its full and just claim on you, a Law
that is just, righteous and good, and to which you owe obedience by just and
unquestionable ties, and yet have never yielded any right subjection to it all
your days, but have violated all its righteous commands every day and moment of
your life, both in thought, word and deed; For he that keeps the whole Law,
and yet offends in one point or iota, is guilty of all, Jam. 2. 10.

Debtors to Conscience, whose Law is in force against you, and by which you
shall be judged. Romans 2. 14, 15. These having not the Law, are a Law to
themselves, which show the works of the Law written in their hearts; their
Consciences also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing,
or else excusing one another; and yet you have broken these Conscience-bonds,
casting its cords from you: how many ties has Conscience laid upon you which
you have broken, going against the light and dictates thereof!

Debtors to all the World, to whom, in some respect or other, you are obliged.
There are duties you owe to all men, to love them, and pray for them: to all
your neighbors and acquaintance, to do them good as you have opportunity, and
to seek and endeavor their Salvation to your power, which you have not done to
this day. There are duties you owe to your relations, friends and family, which
you have neglected, and have been increasing your Original debt, by running on
new scores every day, which can never be cancelled, or a power obtained to
discharge your duties acceptably, till you come to Christ, and enter your souls
into his new and everlasting Covenant, setting upon those great and Evangelical
duties of it.

Your slavery is also great till you come over to this blessed work: You are in
bondage unto Satan: Know ye not, that to whom ye yield your selves servants to
obey, his servants ye are whom ye obey, Romans 6. 16. You serve incomparably the
worst Lord; a cruel Lord who has no mercy, but delights in the misery of fallen
man; A roaring Lion that goes about seeking to devour, 1 Pet. 5. 8. A cursed
one cast out from God, cursed above all creatures; reserved in everlasting
chains under darkness to the judgment of the great day, Genesis 3. 14. Jude, verse
6. Thine implacable enemy that hates thee with a perfect hatred: An Accuser,
that never speaks well of any: A Murderer he was from the beginning, Rev. 12.
v. 10. and the original cause of all the destruction in Earth and Hell: A false
and deceitful creature, that never kept his word with any: A Liar, and the
Father of Lies, Joh. 8. 44. one that will be too hard for you, and cheat your
souls into destruction: A miserable poor creature; one that has lost all his
glory and excellency, and has nothing to give you for all your service, but
some of the same flames in which he must fry for ever: This, sinners, is your
Lord, whom you have chosen and served all your days: And as you serve the
worst Lord, so you do the worst work; base, filthy, shameful, cursed work: Such
are all thy actions whiles in an unchanged state; you do hard work; no service
like it; you work, and have no food to refresh you, which is the cruellest
bondage: Israel in Egypt wrought hard, and yet had fleshpots, Onions and
Garlic to relieve them; but you have nothing to feed your hopes and
affections, but lies and vanity; you work, and have no raiment to cover you,
all your employment makes you naked; you labor, and have no rest; weary and
heavy laden, and yet feel it not, Genesis 3. 7. Other Laborers have their
successive quietudes, but you have none; the hireling has his shadow; the
labourer has his evening to give over his work; his bed to sleep on; but your
work admits of no rest; it is never done; you do the Devil's work day and night,
waking and sleeping; nay, while you eat and drink your work still goes on; O
sad servitude! You work and have no wages: All earthly Laborers have their
penny, something or other to compensate their pains, money or maintenance; but
you have nothing in hand or hope, here or hereafter, but death and damnation;
the fruit of your labors here, is more bitter than death; and the wages at the
end of your day, wrath and vengeance, worm and There can be no mirth (says
Latimer) where weeping is served in for the first course, and gnashing of teeth
for the second.
fire, Mark 9. 44. And is not this bad employment? and is it not time sinners,
to change your calling, and to accept this offer made you of this excellent
Trade?

Arg. 2. Secondly, The danger that attends your present state should put you on
a timely relinquishment of it: You are poor, and that exposes you to scorn and
contempt, to oppression, treading down, and crushing, to devouring and
destruction; you are not safe from ruin one moment; the next knock at thy door
may be a call to Judgment Prove. 17. 5. Amos 4. 1. Hab. 3. 14. Prove. 10. 15.
When thou lie down, thou may make thy bed in Hell; when thou awakest, thou
may see God on the Throne, thy Soul at the Bar, thy Accusers at thy right
hand, the Evidence in thy own breast, the Sentence written in capital letters,
Go ye cursed: Under thy feet a bottomless lake of fire and brimstone; round
about thee cruel Devils ready to seize upon thee, and lodge thy guilty
condemned soul in thine eternal home, Matthew. 24. 51. You have been Prodigals
wasting what is not your own, and are in danger every day of a charge against
you.

You are deeply in debt, and in danger of an arrest every hour; when you go
forth, death may be at your heels; when you return, destruction may enter with
you: O the uncertainty of thy time sinner! the danger of thy eternity, the
absolute ruin of thy immortal soul, if thy reckoning begin before thy work:
and have thou not reason then to hasten about thy great concern, and to burn no
more daylight in works of darkness?

Arg. 3. Thirdly, Thy duty should quicken thy undertaking in this great
employment: Religion is not your Liberty, but your manifold debt: The Law of
Creation binds you unto God; you will confess you were made by him, and God
will profess you were made for him, Isa. 43. 21. This people have I formed for
my self, that they should show forth my praise. Your fall from the Covenant of
Works, is not your liberty from the essential duties of it; neither is your
incapacity to perform it, a dispensation of your obedience: it is still your
duty to return from whence you fell; to take the Lord to be your God, to love
him with all your heart, and with all your might; to trust in him; to fear and
obey him. A draught of these Covenant-duties did God place in your conscience
by which you shall be judged, Romans 2. 12. 15. though the counterpane you have
defaced; yet the Original Deed is with God, and will be brought forth in the
day of Christ against such as have not taken the Lord for their God.

You are also maintained by God, and that obliges you to him: 'Twas the
argument the Apostle urged to the Masters of Reason in that age, why they
should seek the Lord, because 'twas from him they had their subsistence, Acts
17. 28. For in him we live, and move, and have our being. If God maintains you,
it is rational he should have the use of you: 'Twas the reason Moses used to
prove God's right to Isreal's all, Deuteronomy. 32. 9, to 15. The Lord's portion is his
people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance; why? He found him in the desert
Land, in the waste howling wilderness; he led him about; he instructed him; he
kept him as the apple of his eye: As an Eagle stirs up her nest, fluttereth
over her young, spreads abroad her wings, takes them, bears them on her
wings; so the Lord alone did lead him, and there was no strange God with him:
(And therefore no reason they should leave him for strangers.) He made him ride
upon the high places of the earth, that he might eat the increase of the field;
and he made him to suck honey out of the Rock, and oil out of the flinty Rock:
Butter of Kine, and milk of Sheep, with fat of Lambs and Rams, of the breed of
Bashan, and Goats, with the fat of kidneys, of wheat, and thou did drink the
pure blood of the Grape. Mercies are cords and bands by which the Lord obliges
men to himself: I drew them with cords of a man, and with bands of love, Hos.
11. 4. All thy life (sinner) has been full of these constraints of mercy and
love, to take the Lord to be thy God.

The Gospel of Grace which you profess to own and receive, binds you to seek
first the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, Matthew. 6. 33. to do
the work of God, to labor for that bread which endures to eternal life; to
work the works of God, Joh. 6. 27, 28. to be no more your own, but the Lord's,
1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. Cease to call or think your selves Christians; tell the world
you do not believe or hope to be saved by a crucified Christ, or else come over
to him, and be disposed by his sacred Will. This is your duty.

Arg. 4. Fourthly, Weigh the unspeakable gain that will surely accrue to you,
if you set up this Trade of Godliness. I have already shown in the
demonstration of this point, the great profit that this Heavenly Trade will
turn unto, to all that deal thoroughly in it, to which I advise you to cast
back your eye, and take three or four considerations more, to convince your
understandings that Religion is eligible on grounds of greatest interest: For,

First, Religion will maintain you in the hardest times: So will not other
Trades; there may be seasons when earthly employments will turn to no accounts:
You have heard that riches profit not in the day of wrath; and some of you have
seen the time, when they that work could yet scarcely eat; but God's work is
meat and drink, when daily bread fails, Joh. 4. 30. I have meat to eat that you
know not of. Godliness has the promise of the life that now is, and of that
which is to come. 1 Timothy 4. 8. God cares for the righteous; and when the Lions
lack, and are hunger-bit, they that fear the Lord shall want no good thing,
Psalm. 34. 10. They shall be sure to be provided for, whoever wants: God has
past his word for it: All things are theirs by purchase, who are Christ's by
choice; that is (says Piscator) Omnes res terrenae vestris usious, and vestrae
saluti a Deo destinatae sunt.
All earthly things are designed of God for your use, and the furtherance of
your salvation: Not as if the Saints had a right to other men's interests. The
Apostle does not speak here (says Pareus) of civil possessions, but of that
divine order by which all things ought to serve the good and advantage of the
Church of God. The Earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof; all which is
given into the hands of Christ for the good of his people: And has put all
things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the Church,
Ephesians. 1. 22. The whole Earth is but God's Kitchen, for the maintenance of his
house; and if he will feed his servants and slaves, much more his children: He
gives to all their meat in due season, and satisfies the desires of every
living thing: Much more will he care for, and give food convenient to his
living in Jerusalem. Indeed Believers are not of the world, and therefore have
not their portions in the world; they are the Heirs of Heaven, and have no
promise of more on Earth than will comfortably carry them home, and suffice for
the discharge of those offices assigned to them here: They are Servants, not
Heirs, who carry the cloak-bags in their journey. Persons of grandeur bear no
more about them than for present use: Surely, were earthly treasures good for
heaven-born souls, he that gives better things would not deny these: But God
knows enough is as good as a feast; and so much the Saints shall have in their
passage home. No man sends his servants a journey, but he allows them enough to
carry them thorough; and so will God to his: If he maintains idlers and
enemies; much more will he feed his faithful servants and laborers: He has
promised to supply all their wants, Phil. 4. 19. and is able to make it good:
If he thinks it not much to give them a Crown, he will not deny them Crumbs: If
God should let his workmen, want, his work would cease; his own interest, as
well as his promise, obliges him to look after such; his Love, Truth, Glory,
with all his Attributes, are concerned to maintain his people in his work; and
therefore nothing more sure than daily bread, and sufficiency in all things to
such as serve and obey him.

Secondly, Godliness will secure you in dangerous times, Prove. 3. 23. Thou
shall then walk in thy way safely, and thy foot shall not stumble; when thou
lie down, thou shall not be afraid; yea thou shall lie down, and thy sleep
shall be sweet, v. 24. For the Lord shall be thy confidence, and shall keep thy
foot from being taken. The way of duty is the way of safety: whatever men
think, the greatest security is in the boldest Adventures for God (if regular;)
where his Sun does guide you, there his shadow will cover you; who shall harm
you if you are followers of that which is good? 1 Pet. 3. 13. Men may threaten
you, but cannot injure you; they may spoil your estates, imprison your bodies,
but cannot do you any real harm; while men keep with God, God will abide with
them; his presence shall fence them, his favor shall shield them, his Angels
shall encamp about them; all his Attributes shall guard and secure them: God's
people that cleave to him in duty, are as the Hebrews in Goshen, as Israel in
the wilderness, as Noah in the Ark; they only are safe from ruining evils,
when others are exposed to destroying judgments.

Thirdly, Nay, Holiness will not only maintain and secure you; but it will
also enrich you, and fill you with the best Treasures, the true Riches, Luke
16. 11. the tried gold that cannot be corrupted or defrauded, Matthew. 6. 20. It
will furnish you with the unsearchable riches of Christ: the world has its
treasures; and so has Christ his precious substance, to bestow on all that
trade with and for him; as has been already shown.

Fourthly, Piety will cheer and delight you; no comforts like theirs who walk
with God in truth: This was Hezekia's cordial when under a sentence of death,
Isa. 38. 3. Remember O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in
truth, and with a perfect heart: And Paul's rejoicing, that in all simplicity
and godly sincerity he had his conversation in this world, 2 Cor. 1. 12. The
purest pleasures flow down from the Throne, and steam in thorough
Sanctuary-waters into the soul: Alas! what are those drossy comforts that run
thorough the worlds channels, which only leave a slime behind, and then empty
themselves into the dead Sea of perdition, perishing in their using, Col. 2.
22. Carnal mirth has a pleasant entrance, but an ill farewell, Prove. 14. 13.
Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is
heaviness: But Religion breeds the best contentments, and most satisfying
pleasures, Psalm. 36. 8. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of
thy house, and thou shall make them drink of the rivers of thy pleasures.

Fifthly, Wisdom's Trade will make you truly great and honorable, and give you
a place to walk among those that stand by, Zach. 3. 7. That is (says Junius)
Constituam te in eadem dignitate qua sunt Angeli Dei in Coelo, and inter
ipsorum Myriadas in eadem Ecclesia conversaberis.
I will place thee in the same dignity the Angels of God enjoy in Heaven, and
thou shall dwell in the same Church among those Myriades, Prove. 4. 8. Exalt
her, and she shall promote thee; she shall bring thee to honor when thou do
embrace her. V. 9. She shall give to thine head an Ornament of grace, a Crown
of glory shall she deliver thee. How contemptibly soever the world looks on the
ways of Godliness, and those that espouse them; yet all true greatness lies on
the side of piety. All the world's glory is but a Pageant, a mere show of
honor, compared to that which is on the head of every true Believer: Saints
have the noblest extraction, born of God; the highest dignity, made Kings and
Priests unto God, Rev. 1. 6. Ye shall be unto me a Kingdom of Priests, Exodus
10. 6. Clothed with the richest Ornaments, perfect through divine comeliness,
Ezekiel. 16. 10, to 15. appointed to a Kingdom that is everlasting, assured of
Thrones and Crowns with Christ for evermore. Rev. 3. 21. To him that overcomes
will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am sit
down with my Father in his Throne. A sure Throne shall Believers have above, as
certain as Christ is now upon his Fathers Throne; and the same Throne that the
Father gives to Christ, specifically, though not gradually: A Crown fitted to
their heads; indeed Saints cannot wear the Crown Christ does; his is the
Redeemer's Crown; theirs the Redeemeds, made of the same glory: Joh. 17. 24.
Father I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me, that they may
behold my glory which thou have given me, 2 Timothy 2. 12. If we suffer, we shall
also reign with him. O blessed glory, and greatly to be longed for! whose
measure is incomprehensible, whose duration is undeterminable.

Now, Sinners; If these Arguments convince you that it is your necessity,
interest and duty to set upon this great employment, and you find your hearts
really willing to come up to the proposed terms of this high Calling, and
embrace any counsels that lead thereto. Prima sanitatis pars est velle sanari,
A willingness to be healed is the first part of health. Sen.
Then;

Direct. 1. First; You must get a capacity for so excellent an undertaking:
Heavenly work is too high for earthly natures; and special service for common
endowments: They that are in the flesh cannot please God, Romans Vltra posse non
est esse.
8. 8. No creature can act beyond its being, it is above the sphere of unchanged
nature to carry up the Soul to things above, there must be a spiritual
principle before there can be a heavenly operation; you must first be God's
workmanship before you can do his work; and be created to good works before you
can walk therein, Ephesians. 2. 10. It Is a sad thing (says Mr. Caryl) to see a bad
Caryl; Nature and principles of Love.
man do that which is bad; yet it is a sadder sight to see a bad man continuing
in his state, to go on doing good; this is the acting of the new creature's
part in the old creature's state, and what will that avail? To set upon
Religion in an unregenerate state, is labor in vain; the dumb may as well
speak, the blind see, the dead walk, while they remain such, as they that are
evil do good: Can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit? Mat. 7. 18. Or a
Fountain send forth at the same place sweet water and bitter? Jam. 3. 11. No
more can an unsanctified Soul do holy work. The person must be gracious before
the work can be good; God had first respect to Abel, and then to his Offering,
Genesis 4. 4. The ungraffed Cherry-tree brings forth but harsh fruit, let the soil
and dressing be never so good; so is the Soul under the highest privileges and
performances without implantation into Christ: The root must bear the branch
before the branch can bear fruit; a breaking off from the wild Olive with a
participation of the fatness of the good Olive Tree, is absolutely necessary to
true faithfulness, Romans 11. 17, 18. Four things are needful to make an action
Evangelically good; a good Principle, Matter, Form and End: neither of which is
consistent with a man in his natural state: It Is dangerous also as well as
vain, for persons to set upon doing good, and never care to become good; for
this deceives their own Souls, making them think their condition safe when they
are wretched, miserable, poor, blind and naked, Rev. 3. 16. and not only feeds
an error in their state, but strongly hinders the cure, while these
unprofitable duties consume Salvation-time, and destroy Salvationhopes; despair
is usually the issue of presumption; and they that conceit too soon that all is
well, shall conclude when too late, that it shall never be better: This then is
your first work, (Souls) To be sanctified and made meet for your Masters use,
and prepared (...), fashioned as a Vessel: the meaning is (says Dr. Preston)
that then a man is good when his heart is fitted to good works.
to every good work, 2 Timothy 2. 21. Labor to get your natures changed, and
hearts quickened; you must be born again, or cannot see the Kingdom of God: Be
looking to Jesus to create in you a new heart, a renewed mind, will and
affections, to have a saving principle put into your hearts, and a disposition
of Soul toward the whole will of God: Cry mightily for the Spirit, and wait
for his movings upon the face of Sanctuary-waters, and for a mighty power of
God in the Gospel upon your Souls: Get under the healing-wings of Christ, and
rest not looking unto Jesus till virtue go out from him to heal your Souls: If
this be thy restless desire, thou can not let Christ alone, running after
him, crying, Jesu, thou Son of David, have mercy upon me; he will turn again,
and have compassion, and give the holy Spirit to them that unfeignedly and
incessantly ask him, Mark 10. 47, 48, 49. Luke 11. 13.

Direct. 2. Secondly, cease from your own works. Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto
the Lord, and he will have mercy: The first step in returning to God, is
departing from sin and self; Nihil nobis cum Deo esse potest nisi a nobis
discedamus. Calv.
Neither can we (says Calvin) hold converse with a holy God, till we be
estranged from our unholy self. When the Apostle advises the Ephesians to put
on the new man, Ephesians. 4. 24. He first exhorts them to put off the old, with his
whole conversation: verse. 22. That ye put off concerning the former
conversation the old man, which is corrupt: Grace builds not on an old
foundation, neither does it adorn, but reform the former conversation of called
Saints; there is no clothing upon in regeneration-work, the old garments must
off before the new will come on: Religion is not a covering for, but a
stripping off a sinful life, neither can you be free to set on God's work till
you leave your old works. Romans 6. 20. For when you were the servants of sin, ye
were free from righteousness: You had nothing to do with holiness, you had no
freedom to do God's work while you were Sins servants: He speaks of their
actual liberty from grace, not their legal freedom, Libertas hic de facto non
de jure intelligatur.
says Paraeus;) you are not at liberty to do the work of holiness, while under
the command of sin. No man can serve two Masters: Mat. 6. 24. that is, two
contrary Lords, How can the same man Quomodo poterit unus idemque homo pietati
se quantum opus est impendere and simul circa divitias quaerendas servandasque
perpetua solicitudine distrahi? Grot.
(says Grotius) follow godliness as his work, and at the same time be
distracted with cares about getting and keeping earthly things? It Is a vanity
for persons to dream of a compliance between sin and holiness, whose work is
too inconsistent for one Soul at one time; ruling iniquity and grace, are two
contrary states, which cannot meet in one person and time: Never think of
setting up on the Heavenly Trade, till you are freed from hellish servitude,
and invested with the liberty of the Sons of God, a freedom from the love and
service of every sin. Godliness calls for the whole of a man's heart, strength
and time, and requires a person void of any inconsistent obligations; resolve
to break from every way of death, if ever you think to enter into the way of
life.

Direct. 3. Thirdly, Make over your selves to the Lord in an Everlasting
Covenant; they that will be Masters of a Trade, must first be bound to the
service of it, and resign up their persons, wills, capacities and time to the
instruction and government of another in order to their fitness for such a
calling: And so must souls that will learn Wisdom's Merchandise, they must bind
themselves to the Trade, and make over themselves and their all to God in
Christ, to be taught and enabled to set up this excellent work. Jer. 50. 5.
They shall ask the way to Sion with their faces thitherward, saying, Come and
let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant that cannot be
forgotten. Sin had made a separation between their God and them, and brought a
death upon their mercies and Templeenjoyments: but now the Spirit of Prophecy
breathing on these dry bones, moves them to a vital union with the fountain of
life, (the only regular way to their new work and mercies) they must first be
joined to the Lord, before they can be rejoyned to one another, and reenjoy
their lost privileges; and this union lies in a hearty acceptance of offered
grace, a taking hold of God in Christ, and a Covenant-surrender of the whole
soul and its All to him again: [O for arms to embrace him, says Mr.
Rutherford!] This is called a giving up of ones self to the Lord, 2 Corinthians. 8.
5. But this they did not as we hoped, but first gave themselves to the Lord,
and unto us by the will of God: They exceeded our hope: We only expected some
part of what was theirs, but they gave themselves first to God, and to us (to
be directed and governed by the will of God, to be placed in the fellowship of
his Gospel) as well as their interests to the service of his people: It Is also
a giving away of ones self to the Lord wholly, unreservedly and perpetually, to
be no more his own, 1 Cor. 6. 19. And ye are not your own. This surrender of
your selves to God (souls) must be in judgment, understandingly, and arises
freely on choice; universally, without the least reservation; absolutely,
without any limitation or conditions of our own; eternally, without any
expiration and term of this grant, and to be attested by all overt acts within
your power, Isa. 44. 5. One shall say I am the Lord's; another shall call
himself by the name of Jacob; another shall subscribe with his hand unto the
Lord, and surname himself by the name of Jacob. Whatever may most fully ensure
and express an absolute devotedness unto God, must be done by those that ever
expect to thrive in grace and godliness. Verse 3, 4. I will pour water upon him
that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground; I will pour my Spirit upon thy
seed, and my blessing upon thy offspring, and they shall spring up as among
the grass, as willows by the watercourses. When once this implantation into
Christ is dispatched, then will the Lord give prosperity to that soul; then are
you in a sure way to success in all your holy undertakings, and like to speed
well in this Heavenly Trade when you become entirely the Lord's in order to it:
O be not satisfied till God be yours: [ The King's Son or no Husband,
Rutherford.] The rational soul (says Augustine) being capable of God, can be
satisfied with nothing but God.

Direct. 4. Fourthly, Come over into the family of Christ, if you would drive
on this Heavenly Trade to purpose: Apprentices are household servants,
up-rising, and down-lying; and so must Wisdom's Traders be; they must be
members of Christ's family, and dwellers in the house of God. Psalm. 65. 4.
Blessed is the man whom thou chusest, and causest to approach unto thee, that
he may dwell in thy Courts; we shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy
house, even of thy holy Temple. Those whom God chooses for himself, he brings to
himself, and makes them dwellers in his Courts: Such In ejus familiam
recensitus, ut fide integra inter sanctos coeli cives vitam degat. Buc.
a one is entered into his family, that he being a sound Believer, may spend
his life among the holy Citizens of Heaven. Those whom the Lord takes into
Covenant, he takes into communion; not only with himself, but with his people.
Jer. 3. 14, 15. I am married unto you, and I will take you one of a City, and
two of a Family, and I will bring you unto Sion, and I will give you Pastors
according to my own heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and
understanding: This was intended of Gospeltimes and Churches: When all the
Nations shall be gathered to the Name of the Lord to Jerusalem, verse 17. And
the house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel, verse 18. which began
to be fulfilled upon the breaking down of the partition wall, and the bringing
in of the Gentiles unto Christ, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15, 19. When Believers should be
no more strangers, (...).
and foreiners, but fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the household of
God. The Apostle has reference to the 12th verse, where souls out of Christ
are said to be aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, strangers to the
Covenant of Promise; but now having access to God by one Spirit, verse 18. Ye
are no more strangers and foreiners. ( a) In respect of the Church of God you
are no longer strangers (says Zanchy) but fellow-citizens with the Saints; and
in regard of the Covenant of God, you are no more foreiners, but of the
household of God. In whom all the building fitly framed together (that is, every
stone in the building) grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord, verse 21. The
Church of God is his Temple where he is rightly served, Rev. 7. 15. Therefore
are they before the Throne of God, and serve him day and night in his Temple:
which is his Church (says Mr. Durham) here begun by fellowship in his
Ordinances and in ( f) Respectu Reipublicae Israelis (i. e.) Ecclesiae concives
sanctorum: respectu foederis cum Deo esse domesticos Dei.
Heaven completely. Ezekiel. 20. 40. For in my holy Mountain; in the Mountain of
the Height of Israel (a type of Gospel-Churches) says the Lord God; there
shall all the house of Israel, all of them in the Land, serve me; there will I
accept them, there will I require your offerings: Plainly intimating that God
has no acceptable service, but in the Churches of his Saints; I mean as to
public worship: Persons cannot give God his full instituted worship, till they
come into fellowship with his people, seeing Church Fellowship is it self an
institution of Christ. Matthew. 28. 19, 20. Acts 2. 41, 42. 1 Cor. 12. 28. Mat.
18. 17, 18, 19. The Church of Christ is his body, where he has set his
members, 1 Cor. 12. 18. That being fitly joined together, they might increase
with the increase of God, Ephesians. 4. 16. Col. 2. 19. His Vineyard where his work
lies, and into which he sends his Laborers, Isa. 5. 7. Matthew. 20. 1, 2. His
Garden where his Lillies and Beds of Spices are. Cant. 6. 2. His Family where
he feeds and instructs them; where he guides and governs them. 1 Timothy 3. 15.
Ephesians. 3. 15. His Sanctuary where he hides and secures them. Psalm. 78. 69. His
Galleries where he walks, and is held by his Saints. Cant. 7. 5. His
Goldencandlesticks where his Lamps are burning: The Firmament and Heaven where
his Stars are shining, and the Sun of Righteousness arises with healing in his
wings. Rev. 2. 1. There Is his Granary where he lays up his provisions, his
manna, marrow, fat things, and spiced wine: Isa. 25. 6. There Is his School
where he instructs his Disciples, and makes them wise to salvation. Isa. 54.
13. All thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace
of thy children: There are his Oracles and Secrets. Romans 3. 2. The Adoption,
the Glory, the Covenants, the giving of the Law, and the Service of God, and
the Promises, Romans 9. 4. There Is his Nursery where his tender plants are set to
grow, where he brings in those that shall be saved. Acts 2. 47. And the Lord
added to the Church daily such as should be saved. His converting the Gentiles
is called a persuading them into the tents of Shem, that is the Church of God,
Genesis 9. 27. Yea the House of God is the gate of Heaven. Genesis 28. 17. This is
none other but the House of God; this is the gate of Heaven. Per portam
Ecclesiae in portam Paradisi.
By the gate of the Church (says Augustine) we enter into the gate of
Paradise: How goodly then are these Tents of Jacob? How amiable are those
Tabernacles of Israel? As the valleys they spread forth, as gardens by the
Rivers side, as the trees of Lign-aloes which the Lord has planted, and as
Cedar-trees beside the waters, Numb. 24. 5, 6. To your Tents then O Israel, 2 Samuel 20. 1. Fly to your windows O ye Doves, Isa. 60. 8. Love the habitation of
God's house, and the place where his honor dwells, Psalm. 26. 8. Where are such
pleasures, treasures, light, life? where are your chiefest interests, your
privileges, your work, your Lord, the first fruits of your eternal glory? if
you have taken Christ for your Teacher, you must take his Church for your
School; you must dwell where he dwells, where you may sit at his feet, and
receive his Doctrine.

Direct. 5. Fifthly, Be mortified to this present world; get your hearts loose
from things below. No man that warreth (...), tricis and laqueis implicatur
entangleth himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please him that
has chosen him to be a soldier, 2 Timothy 2. 4. He does not lay ties and snares
about his feet, which throw him down, and hinder the course he engages to
follow. Christianity is a Warfare, and Race; earthly things in the heart are as
entanglements about the feet, which hinder this undertaking; you will have no
liberty to heavenly things, till redeemed from the Earth; nor can run the race
toward glory, till you lay aside the weights that press you down, and the sin
that does so easily beset you, Heb. 12. 1. If you will set your affections on
things above, you must first take them off from things beneath, Col. 3. 2. He
that sets his face toward Heaven, must turn his back upon the world, Phil. 3.
13. Forgetting those things that are behind, and reaching forth unto those
things that are before: The world is one of those things Christians must leave
behind them, if ever they think to reach Heaven Debebamus magno animo
contemnere vitam and mundum and pleno pectore anhelare ad futuram gloriam
aeternae vitae. Luther. in Genesis
We should (says Luther) with a certain greatness of mind contemn this life,
and world, and with a large heart breathe after the future glory of an Eternal
Life. Till you are brought to a contempt of this world, and can count it as
dross and dung, you can never value Heaven, or pursue things above with an even
and uninterrupted heart. That soul which designs to make Religion its work,
must be ready to attend it at all times, and to have the heart composed and
fitted to all the instructions that lead to it, which an earthly heart cannot
do: A light and mutable spirit, now for God, and then for the world, is unfit
for this great employment. He that puts his hand to the plough, and looks back,
is unmeet for the Kingdom of God, Luke 9. 62. And such is a heart under the
command of earthly things; it is never steadfast with God: the things of this
world fill the soul with wind, and make it light and trifling about the things
of God: The heart of man is like that Jewel (I have read of) that one gave to
Alexander, that while it was kept bright, weighed down the choicest gold, and
most precious stones; but if once it fell into the dust, and took rust, it was
lighter than a feather: And so is the heart, if it falls into the dusty things
of this world. The Church clothed with the Sun, has the Moon under her feet,
Rev. 12. 1. The more a soul is filled with the pure knowledge of God, and
shining in its conversation, the more it is lifted up above the world: The
nearer Heaven, the farther from Earth. The more separate from the world (says
Mr. Greenhill on Ezekiel. 3. 23.) the more fit for communion with God: Ezekiel
must leave his house, and go into the plain, and there the Lord will talk with
him. The King's daughter must forget her own people, and her Father's house,
ere the King would greatly desire her beauty, Psalm. 45. 10, 11. And Abraham
must leave his Country, and pleasant habitation, before he could get into a
way of frequent communion with God; and so must a soul in heart and affections
sit loose from the ensnaring things of this world, if ever he thinks to drive
this Heavenly Trade. Tanto magis adhaeret Deo quilibet quanto minus diligit
proprium.
By so much the more (says Augustine) does any one cleave to God, as he ceases
from loving his own interests.

Direct. 6. You must resolve on this also, To submit to all the instructions
the Lord Jesus gives you; to go thorough all the labors, and bear all the
burdens that this Heavenly Trade calls you to; every Art and Calling have their
principles and rules, by the knowledge and obedience of which they are attained
to; and so has Religion: And as Piety is the highest and noblest profession;
so are its principles more pure and mysterious, and with greatest difficulty
attainable. Acquired knowledge furnishes men with light sufficient for all
earthly undertakings; but to this Heavenly Trade both infused and acquired
understanding is needful; both rules, and an eye to discern them must be given,
if ever this Art be obtained: For this end the Lord Jesus is given, for a light
of the Gentiles, to open the blind eyes, that they may see, Isa. 42. 6, 7. and
for a Prophet, to teach and instruct them the way they should go: and to hear
and obey him as such, is the absolute duty of all that have given themselves up
to his conduct and government; Acts 3. 22. A Prophet shall the Lord your God
raise up unto you of your brethren like unto me, him shall you hear in all
things whatsoever he shall say unto you. He has undertaken to inwise them that
obey him, and to show them what they must do, Acts 9. 6. And if they go on to
know, they shall know the Lord: if they sit at his feet, and hear his Word,
Deuteronomy. 33. 3. he will shine out to them, and send out a fiery Law for them: In
order to which instruction your duty is to hear him, to watch daily at his
gates, and to wait at the posts of his house, Prove. 8. 34. when he calls, say
with Samuel, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears, 1 Samuel 3. 10. And whatsoever
he says (said the Mother of our Lord) unto you, do it, John 2. 5. Slight no
directions, stick at no difficulties in comporting with his pleasure, it is for
the life of your souls; obedience is so necessary in the Disciples of Christ,
as that without it no true knowledge can be attained here, John 7. 17. (if any
man does his will he shall know the Doctrine) nor salvation hereafter, Heb. 5.
9. (he became the Author of eternal salvation to all them that obey him:) His
yoke is easy, and his burden is light, Prove. 8. 5, 6. Prove. 3. 17. He enjoins
you nothing but what is needful, profitable, excellent, and pleasant: Hear and
your souls shall live, Isa. 53. 3. Shall the servants of men come, go, do this
or that, when they are bidden? Matt. 8. 8. Yea, shall the Devil's slaves do the
greatest drudgeries, run most desperate adventures; throw themselves from
pinacles; yea damn their souls at his bidding? and the servants of Christ so
disobedient (when it is for their own concerns, their mercies and advantages are
wrapped up in it) and that to so rational and easy injunctions? The
consideration of this prevailed with a Heathen to obedience, when against his
inclination. 2 King. 5. 13. His servants came near and said; My Father, if the
Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou not have done it?
(seeing it is for thy life and health) how much rather then when he says to
thee, wash and be clean? If his commands seem grievous, let love sweeten them:
If his yoke seem heavy, let his rest at the end of it render it easy: when
duties seem burdensome to flesh and blood, his burdens heavy, losses for the
Gospel's sake great, think thus; better smart once than ever; to undergo
troubles in the way, than at the end; to have my bad things here, rather than
be tormented hereafter, Luke 16. 25. and what pains and hardships will men
undergo for gold that perishes, 1 Pet. 1. 7. yea for counters that cheat them;
and shall not I for an inheritance that fades not, reserved in Heaven, 1 Pet.
1. 5? What strivings have some to obtain a Crown that is corruptible; and shall
I be weary that am in pursuit of one that is incorruptible? 1 Cor. 9. 25.
without labor, no rest; without bearing the heat and burden of the day (when
called thereto) no penny at the end, Matt. 20. 12, 13. without striving
lawfully, no crowning, 2 Timothy 2. 5. without doing the commandment, no eating of
the tree of life, Rev. 22. 14. without enduring to the end, no salvation, Mark
13. 13. comfort your selves with this, that Heaven will make amends for all;
when your wet and weary sowings shall end in a pleasant and eternal harvest.
Gal. 16. 9. Let us not be weary in well doing, for you shall reap in due time,
if ye faint not: Be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord, forasmuch as you know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor.
15. 58.

Direct. 7. Lastly, What you do, do quickly: Time waits not your leisure. There
are but twelve hours in the day, and how many of them have been slept and
sinned away, and how few of them may be before you, who knows? What if your Sun
should set at noon day? or a summons meet you in the midst of your work: Give
account of thy Stewardship, for thou shall be no longer Steward Luke 16. 2.
What will you then do? Some of you are in your afternoon, and what time is that
to set forth such a long journey as the way to Heaven is? and yet will you gain
(by your delays) some of this time also, for the Devil, World and Flesh? others
of you are in your morning, (the best time to put forth in your travel toward
glory:) O! lose not your season for eternity: Make much of time, (says
Aquinas) especially in the weighty matter of Salvation: O! how much would they
that now lie frying in Hell, rejoice, if they might have the least minute of
time wherein they might get God's favor: the young man has death at his back,
the old man before his eyes, and that is the more dangerous enemy that pursues
thee, than that which marches up to thy face: Christ's work admits of no
delays, his injunction allows not of too morrow, but while it is called to day:
Heb. 3. 7. To day if you will hear his voice, verse. 13. To day, lest any of you
be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin: Seek the Lord while he may be
found, Isa. 55. 6. [Haste, haste, the tide will not bide, Rutherford.] It Is now
or never, while the Light shines, the Lord knocks, the Angel moves on the
waters, while the Lord delays his coming: Salvation-work is quick work, God's
racers must run, his Doves must fly, his Servants be diligent, that they may be
found of him in peace, 1 Cor. 9. 26. Isa. 60. 8. 2 Pet. 3. 14. You that have
stood idle in the marketplace all your day hitherto, hasten into the Lord's
Vineyard, Matt. 20. 6. [Love is sick to hear tell of to morrow: Mr.
Rutherford.] What Jonathan said to his Lad when David's life was in danger, let
me advise you: And Jonathan cried after the Lad, make speed, haste, stay not, 1 Samuel 20. 38. I rue nothing (said precious Mr. The fulfilling of the Scriptures.
Welsh when on his sickbed) but that I was so long in beginning: O, says
David, that I had wings like a Dove, for then would I fly away, and be at rest:
I would hasten my escape from the stormy wind and Tempest, Psalm. 55. 6, 8.
Sinners, you are in danger of stormy tempests while in your unchanged state; O
hasten to your strong holds ye prisoners of hope. When Brentius was like to be
given up to the enemy, one writes him this note; Fuge Brenti cito citius
citissime: Fly Brentius quickly, more quickly, most speedily. Souls, it is for
your lives, make all possible haste about the work of your Salvation: And you
that are entered on this heavenly work, double your diligence that you may
finish your course before God finishes your time: methinks the word of God, and
his providence this day; yea, every thing seems to thrust you forward, and do
to you as Pharaoh's Taskmasters did to Israel: Exodus 5. 13. And the
Taskmasters hasted them, saying, fulfill your work.

To Professors.
Counsel 2. Secondly, if the Heavenly Trade be the best Trade; then you that
profess this Calling, be you exhorted to follow it; keep up and improve your
Trade for Heaven: what is an employment without improvement? the most profitable
Calling not followed, turns to little advantage: The day we live in gives men
sensible experience of this truth, that they who intend to live in the World,
must attend their employments: The idle person suffers hunger; they must be
careful and diligent in their business, that think to make any thing of their
earthly interests: and so it is in this Trade of godliness; they that will be
saved, must work out their Salvation. A Trade is a man's business, and course
of life, which he pursues and carries on from day to day; it is the subject of
his thoughts, counsels, and considerations; of his time and strength, and daily
work; where he ends one day, he begins the next, and contributes his utmost
wisdom, parts and labors to the most vigorous prosecution of it: And so must
it be in this Heavenly Trade, (Christians,) it must be the impending business,
and principal concern of your whole life; that which commands your thoughts,
purposes and capacities; which engrosses your time, care and strength, and to
which every other business must give way, and every occasion and occurrence
must be subservient: it must be followed, and driven on every day, in every
thing, place and company; whatever is neglected, that must go on, and give no
place to intermissions, no, not for a moment: You must not say to godliness, as
Felix did to Paul; Go thy way for this time, when I have a more convenient
season I will send for thee, Acts 24. 25. Stops in the way of God are not
easily recovered; one days neglect brings all out of order: Prosperity in
Religion admits of no Parenthesis in its work, or consists with allowed
interruptions; Piety must be as the blood that runs through every vein of your
life, and affair in the World: In eating, drinking, talking, thinking, buying,
selling, you must be still driving on Wisdom's Merchandise. Christians, follow
your work, or lay down your Trade; it is vanity, yea, the way to beggary, to
profess a Calling, and not pusue it.

Quest. But wherein lies this Heavenly Trade, which I must so make my business?
what do you drive at by all these Arguments for Heavenly Trading? What I intend
by this metaphor, I shall open to you under these seven general Heads, as the
main duty of a Christian, and to be carried on in the whole course of his life.

1 To have and keep up a heavenly spirit.

2 To secure your interest in heavenly things.

3 To get in more and more of heavenly Goods.

4 Every day to drive on heavenly work.

5 To be heavenly in your thoughts and meditations daily.

6 To keep up heavenly converses every day.

7 To improve every thing you have, meet with, and do, to heavenly ends and
advantages.

First, If you will drive on this heavenly Trade, you must have and maintain a
heavenly spirit; this is the spring of all heavenly actions; as is a man's
spirit, so will his thoughts, words and conversation be; look what way the
spirit of a man goes, that way the man goes: They that are after the flesh, do
mind the things of the flesh; and they that are after the spirit, the things of
the spirit; That is, they that are altogether Carnis auctum sequentes.
led by their carnal affections, (says Willet) following the ducture of the
flesh, (says Paraeus,) who are governed by a carnal spirit, they mind and
pursue carnal things; and they that are after the spirit, who are under the
rule and government Qui se spiritui regendos dedunt. Parae.
of the spirit, who are spiritually minded, these do savor and make after
spiritual things. What the Prophet Ezekiel speaks of the motion of second
causes according to the direction and influence of the first cause. Ezekiel. 1.
20. Whithersoever the spirit was to go, they went; (that is the wheels,) for
the spirit of the living creatures was in the wheels: The same may be said of
the actions of men, that they are according to the motion of that ruling spirit
that is in them: they that live in the spirit, walk in the spirit, Gal. 5. 25.
Caleb's fulfilling after God, was the fruit of that other spirit he received,
Numb. 14. 24. It Is said of those that builded the house of God, Ezra 1. 5. that
God (...)
had raised up their spirits to the work, as birds stir up their young to fly.
Then rose up the chief of the Fathers of Judah and Benjamin, and the Priests
and Levites, with all those whose spirit God had raised up, to go up to build
the House of the Lord which is in Jerusalem. They that set about the work of
Religion, must be persons of raised spirits, capable of ascending to things
above. The reason why no more do set upon this Heavenly Trade, is, because they
want this heavenly spirit, their spirit is earthly, and that (as leaven)
seasons their whole souls, and makes their conversations earthly: It Is contrary
to nature, for a carnal mind to savor spiritual things; Such are not subject
to the Spirit of God, neither indeed can be, Romans 8. 7. It Is as natural for the
stone to ascend, and waters to run back, as for an earthly heart to love and
pursue heavenly things. A heavenly spirit suits heavenly things, and does as
naturally incline the soul to things above, as the fire moves upward, and the
water carries all that is in it to the Ocean. A heavenly spirit savours
heavenly things, and stirs up heavenly desires and motions to divine things. A
heavenly spirit conveys out heavenly influences and strength to the soul, and
is as good blood and spirits that strengthen the body. A heavenly spirit is
influenced by heavenly arguments, and prevailed with by heavenly motives taken
from the love of God, the excellency of Christ, the sutableness and advantage
of spiritual things to the nature of the soul, the pleasing and glorifying of
God; all which signifies nothing to an earthly and carnal heart, which only
understands, savours, and is acted by carnal reasons and considerations. It Is
therefore a principal part of a Christian's business in this Heavenly Trade,
(and that which is leading to all other duties) to take heed to his spirit,
May. 2. 15. to get and keep that pure and heavenly. If the fountain be corrupt,
the streams cannot be good: Get your minds beamed over with heavenly light, to
discern heavenly things, their nature and worth; this Paul begs for the Saints
at Ephesus; Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father
of Glory, may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge
of him; the eyes of your understanding being enlightened, that you may know
what is the hope of his Calling, and what is the riches of the glory of his
inheritance in the Saints. There are great hopes and glorious riches made over
to Believers in the Gospel, the knowledge of which is necessary to cheer the
heart, and engage the soul with all its strength to make out after them. One
thought of Christ (says Mr. Ball) reaching the heart, is more to be valued
than all Creature-contentments whatsoever, though they should be enjoyed in
their fullness for a thousand years without interruption: 'Twas this kept alive
the Apostles hearts, under the dyings of the Lord Jesus in their bodies, and
filled them with such courage and joy, that they had an eye to see glorious and
eternal things. 2 Cor. 4. 10. 13. 16. 18. While we look not at the things which
are seen, but at the things which are not seen; for the things which are seen
are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal. And this was their
great work by the Gospel, to make men see what is the fellowship of the mystery
which from the beginning of the World was hid in God, who created all things by
Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3. 9. And having got this spiritual eye, a Christian's duty
is to keep it open, and fixed on things above, to preserve it from the injury of
Sin and Satan, to take heed of the vapors of a carnal heart, and the dusty
motes of this lower World, that they fall not in and weaken this sight: to get
eye salve from Christ, and pure annointings of the spirit on it every day, that
they may see things invisible, and those great things of the other World they
are engaged about: The most discerning eye on this side the everlasting Hills
sees but darkly through a glass, and knows but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 9. 12. How
carnal are the minds of most Christians in this World? the very Disciples
(though their eyes were blessed with peculiar sights,) Mat. 13. 16. yet had
carnal apprehensions of spiritual things, even after the Lord Jesus had spent
all his pains about them. Acts 1. 6. Lord, will thou at this time restore again
the Kingdom unto Israel? knowing souls have sometimes their eyes held that they
cannot see Jesus, Luke 24. 16. nor bear discoveries of his glorious truth, Joh.
16. 12. that the Lord Jesus may say to all in this life; O fools, and slow of
heart to believe, Luke 24. 28. David, after he had been long a learner, yea,
after he was wiser than his teachers, yet cries out for more light. Psalm. 143.
8. Cause me to know the way wherein I should walk. Psalm. 119. 18. Open thou
mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy Law. We may sail here
(says Mr. Hooker) in daily search, and when we know, there is something still
beyond our Hooker on 17 of John.
knowledge, as men that travel in the main Ocean, they see nothing but water,
and yet see neither side nor shore, brim nor bottom, and there is more water to
be seen. All the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hid in Christ, and he
keeps the keys in his own hand and bosom. Be often looking unto Jesus for
clearer sights of him, and the things freely given of God, with the way to
them. Knock often at the treasury-door, till he answer and open, and send you
away enriched with the knowledge of him: this is part of your Trade, to know
Goods, and the worth of them, and how to buy and sell to best advantage. Alas,
to what purpose is it to deal in Commodities that men know not? and heavenly
things are hidden things, beyond the search of Men and Angels. 1 Pet. 1. 12.
Which things the Angels desire to look into; (...), limis oculis vel in
transitu, and quasi per transennam aspicere. Bud.
They bowed and stooped down to pry into those hidden secrets, and as it were
to peep into the mysteries of the Gospel; as the word signifies; to look
a-squint with cross eyes, every way, and with quickest observance, as through a
Casement at one that passes by; and this they did with an earnest and restless
(...).
desire. The Apostle alludes to the Cherubims placed over the Mercy-seat, with
their faces looking toward the Mercy-seat, and through it to the Ark (a type
of Christ and Gospel-mysteries) Exodus 25. 20. as things worthy, and yet hard to
be known, which call for an inward and spiritual eye under fresh anointings
every day. Christians, this is your daily work, to follow on to know the Lord;
to be much with the Sun of Righteousness for healings and beamings on the eve
of your mind, that you may be more capable to understand the whole counsel of
God concerning you. This is a Heavenly Spirit or Mind enlightened with Heavenly
Wisdom to eye and understand heavenly spiritual things.

Another property of a Heavenly Spirit is this; It Is a Spirit that savours as
well as sees heavenly things; it tastes a sweetness in divine things; there is
nothing in all the world that so pleases a spiritual mind, as spiritual things:
so much is included in that word, Romans 8. 5. Do (...).
mind the things of the flesh: that is, do savor and relish them; so it is
rendered, Matthew. 16. 23. For thou savourest not the things that be of God; it
includes the affections as well as understanding. A heavenly spirit takes
delight in heavenly things, and is an active principle that carries out the
soul after God and things eternal: And that is your work too, to get and
maintain a delight in God, and divine things; to cherish breathings after
heavenly things, and preserve your spiritual senses in exercise, that your
souls may be ever quick in seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling and feeling, the
joys and pleasures that are in things above: By this means Religion will be
desirable, Christ's yoke easy, and his ways pleasant, and his commands not
grievous, This is one of the most difficult pieces of Christianity, to maintain
the inward principle and spring of holy actions pure and lively: It Is far
easier to set on any external duty, than to keep the heart in a fit active
frame for God, which is apt to languish and grow out of order every moment, if
not kept and maintained by continued supplies from above. Prove. 4. 23. Keep thy
heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of Life. Now if you
would keep up a heavenly spirit:

First, Beware of those things that weaken it: A Heavenly Spirit is a very
tender thing, and must be charily kept, or will soon suffer loss; it is like the
apple of the eye, that is liable to injury from every dust or stroke that comes
nigh it; or like a Venice-glass, that is down and broken with every little
touch. You cannot be too choice and tender in watching and guarding this Spirit
from every thing that is contrary to it.

Take heed of carnal lusts, these stand between God and the soul, and these
resist the Spirit, Gal. 5. 17. and fight against the soul. 1 Pet. 2. 11. Dearly
Beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts,
that war against the soul. Water is as consistent with fire, sickness with
health, death with life, as unmortified lusts with a heavenly spirit; and you
may as safely dwell with thieves and bloody murderers, as suffer fleshly lusts
to harbor near your hearts: These suffered to hover in the soul, will devour
your sacrifice; and like water, quench this sacred fire; and with the Ivy, eat
out the nourishment of this heaven-born spirit. When Alexander asked Diogenes
what he would desire of him; that you (says he) would stand aside a little
from between me and the warm Sun: so a soul that knows what the views of God
are, will desire nothing more than the remove of what stands between him and
the warming sight of this heavenly Sun. Carnal lusts are as venomous breath,
that soon seize on, and weaken the vitals of godliness: Never expect peace or
welfare to the spiritual seed, till the bondwoman and her Son be cast out. How
soon have excellent frames been all lost, and the candle of the Lord well-nigh
put out by these filthy damps that ascend from the deeps of unclean and
unmortified affections. This wrought such changes in Israel; now they sang his
praises, and then presently forgot his works, Psalm. 106. 12. Those divine
raptures could not abide, and what was the cause? why 'twas unmortified lusts
that had dominion over them. V. 14. They lusted exceedingly in the wilderness,
and tempted God in the Desert, and he gave them their requests, but sent
leanness into their souls. This soon brought the Jews from being conquerours,
to captives, that they did not pursue their victories, and drive out the
Canaanites out of the valleys, as well as the mountains, Judge. 1. 19. chapter 2, 3.
This want of mortification in Believers is the cause that their corruptions do
so often give check to their graces, and make their choice heavenly frames so
short-lived and mutable. [O cursed pleasures! O damnable ease bought with the
loss of God! Rutherford.] O Christians! guard your spirit from those filthy and
fleshly lusts, as Physicians do fortify the spirits against malignant vapors,
if ever you will maintain a gracious and heavenly spirit.

Earthly things also admitted too near the heart, prove the bane of a heavenly
spirit: these, like a stone at the bird's leg, pluck it down when it attempts
to be upon the wing: Worldly affections, when they exceed their bounds, are
like waters that overflow the banks; they carry down all heavenly motions
before them. Earthly things are the Devils lure to professing Christians, which
draw down their lofty meditations, when they are in chase of things above; as
the Fowler allures down the towering Lark when hovering aloft in the gentle air.
The Devil deals with earthly men, as Naturalists say men do with Bees; when
they swarm and are flying away, they throw up dust, and they scatter again: So
does Satan when their thoughts are up upon heavenly things; he casts in the
dusty thoughts of this world, and they scatter them again. Demas has forsaken
us, having loved this present world, 2 Timothy 4. 10. Earthly things draw away the
heart from God, his work and interest: How often do those interrupt, if not
countermand the most serious thoughts of gracious souls? and where they cannot
as a Master command, they will as neighbors be often coming in, and hinder the
soul in its most weighty business, if the door be not locked against their
unseasonable visits. Worldly lusts must be denied, as well as ungodliness, by
those that intend to live righteously, soberly and godly in this present world,
Tit. cap. 2. v. 11, 12. Earthly things are good servants, but bad Masters;
useful in their place; as fire in the hearth is profitable, but in the thatch
dangerous; and as unruly Servants, and untamed Colts are serviceable when
reduced to their place, and kept under government. Worldly thoughts are as some
roots that must be often trod down, or they will spill up and seed in our
hearts. Christians, have a special strong guard against the encroachments of
your earthly affairs, if ever you will secure the thrivings of a heavenly
spirit,

Take heed also of grieving the Spirit of Grace, which maintains and relieves
this heavenly spirit: As the spring is to the streams; so is the holy Spirit to
this heavenly spirit in Believers, that feeds and supplies it from his own
nature: Now to grieve this Spirit, is to provoke him to withhold his gracious
communications to the soul. Ephesians. 4. 30. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God
whereby you are sealed to the day of redemption: Which implies, that this
Spirit of Grace being grieved, suspends its comforting sealing influences
toward the souls of Believers. This Scripture is taken from Isa. 63. 10. But
(...)
they rebelled and vexed his holy Spirit, therefore he was turned to be their
enemy, and he fought against them: They grieved his Spirit, as the word
signifies; and this broke that amicable accord between the Spirit and them,
that he became their enemy, and cut off all succors from them; yea, comes
forth against them: And that which grieved the Spirit of God was, the the abuse
of its kindness. V. 9. In all their afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel
of his presence saved them; in his love and in his pity he redeemed them, and
he bare them, and carried them all the days of old. Nothing does more grieve
the Spirit of God, than the abuse of his kindness and tender mercy to his
people; when the Lord has been opening the bowels of his pity to souls in
saving and redeeming-mercy, and has been shedding abroad his love upon them,
bearing with, and carrying of them for a long time; and all this is slighted
and contemned, and the soul takes no notice of all this grace, but still
perseveres in its evil course; this grieves the Spirit, and causes him to
withhold his tender mercy, and quickening influence from the soul, and it
becomes weak as water, and withers in all the leaves of her spring, Ezekiel. 17.
9. Psa. 104. 29. As the member languishes when it can no longer receive
influences from the head; and the branch withers when the root communicates no
sap to it: so is it with the soul when the spirit ceases from all its gracious
communications, as it does when grieved by those he loves and labors with; not
as if the Divine Spirit could be capable of passions and perturbations, as
creatures are: But then may the holy Spirit be said to be grieved, when
gracious souls do that which is enough to grieve one that tenderly affects us,
and by all means seeks our eternal good. Now two things usually grieve such a
one: First, Injuries from a friend. Secondly, The sufferings of a friend.
Unkindness from those we love, does usually sit nearer our hearts, than any
injuries from strangers or enemies: we usually expect more regard from such,
and therefore are more troubled at disappointments: And such is the tenderness
of the Spirit to Believers, that want of love, or injury from such is more
abusive, and carries in it all that which in its nature is grieving. Again, we
usually grieve at the evils of those we love; and such are the sins of
Believers, they are injurious to themselves, and enemies to their own souls:
This the Spirit of God sees that gracious souls, by their carnal affections,
and sensual passions, by their corrupt communications, and fleshly lusts, do
not only resist him, and frustrate his work in them; but these also injure and
endanger their own souls; by these they lose many a mercy, and draw upon them
many afflictions and fatherly displeasure from God against them; and this
grieves the Spirit to see; and this removes his presence, and hinders his
comforting, quickening operations, by reason of which their spirits fail, and
become cold and weak to every heavenly action, Your work Christians, is to be
tender of the Spirit; to take heed you be not unkind to his person, that you do
not undervalue his gracious communications, or resist his internal operations:
Take heed of unthankfulness for his kindnesses, of slighting his counsels, of
unsuitable walking to his rules and mercies, if you would not grieve him, and
so deprive your selves of his quickening influences on your spirits. That Is the
first: Beware of those things that weaken this heavenly Spirit.

Secondly, If you would maintain a Heavenly Spirit; get all the nourishment you
can for it: As the body is nourished by food, and the animal spirits by
contributions of joy and contentment; so is this Heavenly Spirit by all the
means and helps God has appointed to this end, 1 Timothy 4. 6. nourished up in
the word of (...).
faith, and of good doctrine, whereunto thou have attained. The Word and
Ordinances are to the inner-man, as nourishing food to the outward, which
strengthens the spiritual part, and maintains its vigor and activity. Timothy
had imbibed the Doctrine of the Gospel together with his milk (says Calvin)
and had made continual progresses in the same to that day, which did so greatly
strengthen and nourish him in his faith and graces. The Word of God is suited,
sent and commissioned to the service and advantage of your graces; it is the way
by which the Lord Jesus maintains and increases spiritual life and growth in
the newborn soul. 1 Pet. 2. 2. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of
the Word, that ye may grow thereby. Attend upon all the Ordinances of God,
where they are purely and powerfully administered: Be much in reading the
Scriptures, and such help (...) the Lord gives you for your instruction and
quickening. 1 Timothy 4. 13. Give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to
doctrine; meditate upon these things; give thy self wholly to them, that thy
profiting may appear to all. V. 15. (...), Hisce te exerceto jugiter constanter
vehementer. Buc.
Be thou in them: as the words are; that is, exercise thy self with these
continually, constantly, and with all thy might; let not a day pass without
reading, meditation, and secret prayer, that the inner-man may have all the
recruits that are needful and Whilst thou do not follow the directing light
of the Spirit, thou shall never have the quickening, cherishing beams of it.
Culver.
appointed for its strengthening. Your bodies can better want their appointed
food, than your souls their daily bread: The want of constant feeding, and
sound digestion of spiritual provisions, is one cause of that soul-leanness,
and spiritual languishing that abounds every where this day.

Thirdly, If you will keep up a Heavenly Spirit; be much in communion with the
Father of Spirits. Fellowship with God puts a stamp of Heaven upon the soul,
and leaves an impress of the Divine Nature on it. 2 Cor. 3. 18. But we all with
open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the
same image from glory to glory by the Spirit of the Lord. Views of God, though
but through the glass of Ordinances, have an assimulating virtue, and do
transform the mind into his own likeness. When Moses was taken up into a
nearness to God, he gets some abiding beams of his glory upon him, and comes
off with divine shines on his countenance, Exodus 34. 35. When the Lord Jesus
was got on to a high Mountain apart, and had more near fellowship with Heaven,
it is said: He was transfigured, and his face did shine. Nearness to God does
wonderfully warm and quicken the heart, as approaches of the Sun do the body.
With thee is the fountain of life; in thy light shall we see light, Psalm. 36.
9. As the being of spiritual Life lies in union with-God in Christ by faith; so
is its well being maintained by communion with him in the Spirit, who supplies
the soul with quickenings, as the fountain does the vessel that is put under it,
with waters: God is in himself the Essential Life, and to his people the
fountain of Life. Tu Domine es vita per essentiam and sons vitae per
communionem, a te omnis vita effluit ac incessanter proflait. Jo. Paul. Palant.
Thou Lord (says one) art life by thy Essence, and the fountain of Life by
communion; from thee all Life flows out, and runs down uncessantly. In
fellowship the Lord Jesus lets out Himself, Love and Spirit; and this attracts
the heart after God, and strengthens the soul's motions after him. Every act of
fellowship with Christ here (says Mr. Reyner) is a step Heavenward: By it the
heart is raised after God, sweetly refreshed and strengthened with spiritual
strength. To live in fellowship with God (says the same Author) is to live at
the highest rate under Heaven, next to Heaven; yea as in a corner of Heaven, to
live in the highest Region of Christianity, -- it is the Life of Paradise, an
Evangelical, yea Angelical and Celestial Life, in comparison whereof the most
men and women are dead. Communion with God does wonderfully nourish the
Heavenly Spirit, and fatten the spiritual part of Believers: Such (says
Reyner) suck a honeycomb, eat fat things full of marrow, and drink wine on the
lees well refined, spiced wine. O Christians; press after nearness to God in
Ordinances and Duties; rest not in highest privileges without spiritual
converse with God in them, and communications of his Love and Life through them.

Fourthly, Cherish heavenly motions in your hearts, and be tender of all the
breathings of the Spirit upon you. It may be the Lord comes in upon the heart
with some Spiritual Light or Life, in a Sermon, or in a Duty, or when alone,
stirring up thy desires, and warming thy affections, making some offers of
grace, and help to thy dull and languishing soul; take heed now how thou
slightest or stiflest these: this is one step to the quenching of the Spirit,
and impeding its gracious assistance, and vital operations on thy soul: 1 These.
5. verse. 19. Quench not the Spirit. He that will kindle a fire, gathers up
every little coal, and makes the most of the least spark. The shavings of gold
are gold, and the smallest breathings of the Spirit are to be highly prized: He
that checks the first motions of the Spirit, may never meet with the second;
and he that slights the least gifts of grace, may forever miss of its larger
doles. O to what a height might grace come in thy soul, if every stirring of it
were improved! God despises not the day of thy small things; how unreasonable
is it thou should overlook his! The Lord Jesus (Christians) does nourish and
cherish the least good that is in you, Ephesians. 5. 29. O be tender of whatever
communications come from him to you! This will abundantly help on the
enlivenings and enlargements of this Heavenly Spirit.

Fifthly, Dwell much in the meditation of Heaven; this will heavenlize your
spirit: 'Twas this made the Apostles persons of such heavenly spirits; they did
often look to things above. 1 Cor. 4 18. While we look not at the things which
are seen, but at the things which are not seen. No affliction could discourage
them from owning and professing Christ; nor earthly comforts allure their
desires and delights from Christ; and that which so strongly guarded their
hearts from either of these dangers, was a firm persuasion of an interest in
future glory, and a diligent observing eye upon this glory: a levelling look at
this mark does wonderfully raise the heart toward it, and put in a new spirit
and life into the soul, strongly engaging all its attempts toward the
enjoyment of it: Frequent contemplations of Heaven do much wean the heart from
this Earth. If thou remembrest thou art not of this world, earthly things shall
only be admitted into the Court of the Temple, not into the heart, which is
the Holy of Holies, Burg. on 17. Joh. How contemptibly did those Worthies of
old look on this world, when once they got sights of Heaven! Heb. 11. They
counted themselves strangers and pilgrims on the Earth; were not mindful of
their own Country; went out from it; would no more return to it; sought an
heavenly Country; were persuaded of those great and glorious things above, and
embraced them; laid hold of them by faith; and made after them: and that which
did so powerfully work over their spirits to these things above, was their
believing sights of them. V. 13. These all died in the faith, not having
received the promises, but having seen them afar off; that is, the things
promised, (viz.) heavenly things, of which Canaan was a type. So Tria
participia refero ad promissionis rem significatam Patriam Coelestem quam unice
desiderabant.
Paraeus refers the participles here to the things signified of the promise,
that heavenly Country which they only desired. Things nearest Heaven (says
one) take least care of the Earth: The Fowls of the Air neither plow nor sow.
The glory of the world seems little to one that dwells much on the believing
views of Heaven. It Is said of Fulgentius, That when he beheld the splendor and
joy of Rome, the glory of the Roman Nobility, the triumphant pomp of King
Theodorick, he was so far from being taken with it, that it raised up his
desires after heavenly joys the more, saying, How beautiful may the Celestial
Jerusalem be, when terrestrial Rome so glittereth! If such honor be given to
lovers of vanity, what glory shall be imparted to the Saints, who are lovers
and followers of truth! Serious thoughts of Heaven will inflame the desires
after it: Our Conversation is in Heaven (says Paul) whence also we look for
the Savior, who shall change our vile bodies into the likeness of his glorious
body, Phil. 3. 20. We wait, hope for, and expect Heaven, to be where this
blessed Country is; the breadth and length of which we now look into by faith.
If your thoughts be much on Heaven, your longings will be much for Heaven. I
have read of one being in his journey toward Jerusalem, thought he saw famous
Cities in his way, and met with many friendly entertainments; yet would often
say, I must not stay here; this is not Jerusalem: So will thy heart say (if
thou conversest much in Heaven now) when thou meetest with the most desirable
comforts of this life; yet this is not Heaven; my affections must not stay
here. Allow time every day to take some turns in the upper world, and to get
thy heart held in the galleries above; where are the sweetest delicacies, and
most delighting views to take thy heart, and sublimate thy affections to these
pure and eternal things?

Sixthly, If you would keep up a Heavenly Spirit; be much exercised in heavenly
actions: As is men's employments they are mostly versed about, so usually is
their spirit: Actions strengthen habits: Men that are much taken up about
earthly things, are earthly-minded; their spirits being tinctured with the
things they have much to do with: Such are heavenly actions to gracious souls;
they draw forth and exercise their graces: use makes men ready, and adapts
their spirits to their work. The Apostle makes this an evidence of strength in
grace, that such are much in the exercise of it. Heb. 5. 14. Strong meat
belongs to them who are of full age; even those who by reason of use have
their senses exercised to discern both good and evil. The more you are
conversant about holy things, the stronger will be the bent of your spirit to
them; the more facile and pleasant will Religion be, and the indisposition of
your spirit to it more abated. Prove. 10. 29. The way of the Lord is strength to
the upright. The more you walk in it, the less weary will you be; the more
pleasure will you find in it, and the more propense will your spirit be to it.
This is the first work in Wisdom's Merchandise; to get and keep up a Heavenly
Spirit.

Secondly, Another piece of your Heavenly Trade is, to secure your interest in
heavenly things. This is part of men's business in the world, to secure their
interest in the things they have: they mark their goods, and brand their
cattle, and set their names on the things they have, that their interest in
them might be known: And this is the great concern of Wisdom's Merchants also,
to make good their claim to, and prove their propriety in the things of Heaven
and Glory: These are worth the securing, being things of infinite moment, and
eternal duration; other things are not. O what folly is it to strive for
shadows, and lose the substance; to get and secure Houses, Lands, and
Reputation for your Children, and to lose your souls! As he that complained
when he was to dye; That he must burn in Hell for ever, for geting an estate
for his Son, and neglecting his own soul. What will it profit a man to gain the
whole world, and lose his own soul? Matthew. 16. 24. To make all things else
sure, and leave God, Grace and Glory to an uncertainty. As Caesar Borgia
bewailed when too late, saying when he was near death; I have endeavored to
secure me against every danger but death; and having never thought of death,
must now dye. Things eternal will then appear the greatest when men come to
dye; then an interest in God, pardon and salvation will be valued beyond ten
thousand worlds: And is it not worth the looking after now?

And what can compensate the loss of that soul, who miscarries in his All, and
has nothing left but the tormenting sense of what he has lost, and the
intolerable burden of what he has found, as the fruit of his often cautioned
folly? It Is a dreadful thing to be disappointed of salvation-hopes: What if
thou should miss of glory at last, and thy end should be to be cut off, and
to have thy portion with Hypocrites in that Lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, where the worm never dies, and the fire is never quenched? Mark 9.
44. How could thou bear, if when thou think to enter into the joy of the
Lord, then in a moment to be thrust into the place of torment? and when thou
dreamest of carrying up into Abraham's bosom, where is eternal pleasures; to
fall into the hands of God, who is a consuming fire? this is fearful.

And yet this may be thy case. Think how possible, nay how easy it is for men to
be deceived in lesser matters, and that they who have had the highest
confidences of a future blessedness, have been mistaken at last, and all their
hopes have expired as a falling Meteor, and come to nothing, Job 27. 8. For
what is the hope of the hypocrite though he has gained much, when God takes
away his soul? Men may think themselves to be something, and yet be nothing,
Gal. 6. 2. Come with confidence to the Bridegroom's doors, and demand an
entrance as the foolish Virgins did, and yet rejected. Mat. 25. 11, 12.
Afterward came also the other Virgins, (that is when the door was shut) saying,
Lord, Lord, open to us; but he answered and said; verily I say unto you, I know
you not. They may seem to have some reason for their claim, and produce
evidences of their hope, and yet be turned away as workers of iniquity. Mat. 7.
22, 23. Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? have cast out Devils? and in
thy name have done many wonderful works? And then will I profess to them, I
never knew you, depart from me ye workers of iniquity: The heart is deep and
deceitful, who can know it? none but he who searches the deep things of God
can reach this bottom, and bring to light the hidden things thereof: The work
of grace is a secret full of mysteries, that none can open and fully know, but
the eternal Spirit that formed it in the womb of a Believer's heart: Seeming
grace has so near a resemblance to saving grace, that it puzzles the most
curious and searching eye (if not enlightened with a beam from Heaven) to
discern the difference: besides, the slender measures of the Spirit that most
have attained to in this life, with the subtle insinuations, the false
representations, and treacherous prevarications of that bloody and
irreconcilable enemy of mankind, all which conspire to put a cheat upon the
professing Christian, and render his Salvation exceeding doubtful. And suppose
thy state should be safe, yet how perplexing and full of anxiety is it, to have
the least suspicion of thy unsoundness? To have the life of thy precious soul
hang in suspense, and to be unresolved in that great case, whether thou must
live or die to all eternity! O! how tormenting and heart-sinking is this! An
awakened Soul that cannot rest in sin, nor yet hope in grace, or upon any
Scripture-warrant come to a determination about his real interest in God, and
things eternal, is like a troubled Sea that cannot rest; Instruments of Music
cannot allay its disquietude, no Creaturecomforts can charm its heart to a
peaceful composure: who does in reallity but suspect his eternal welfare, and
but think he reads this handwriting on the wall: Mean, mean, tekel upharsin:
Thou art weighed in the balance, and art found wanting, Dan. 5. 25. 27. Nothing
in all the World can be a Plaster broad enough for such a wound, no Cordial
can cheer that heart, till Grace decides the controversy, and assures the Soul
of an unquestionable title to the Heir of all things, and to the inheritance
with the Saints in light: And have you not reason then to be restless till your
propriety in these glorious treasures be attested; which, though difficult, yet
is possible and feasible to all that follow Wisdom's counsel in order to it?
The eternal truth has opened a way to the decision of this question, whether I
have eternal life or no, and laid down certain marks of a Soul entitled to
things above. 1 John 5. 13. These things have I written to you that believe on
the name of the Son of God, that you may know that you have eternal life; Verse.
12. 19. Chap. 3. 14. The Lord has charged this to be the duty of all that
profess their hopes of glory, to make their Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet.
1. 10. To examine themselves whether they be in the Faith, 2 Cor. 13. 5. To
prove their own work, that they may have rejoicing in themselves, Gal. 6. 4.
which he would never have done were it impossible: He has also promised the
Spirit to help them in this work, and to lead them into all truth, bearing
witness with their spirits that they are the Lords, Joh. 16. 13. Romans 8. 16.
And upon this very account exhorts them to holiness, that they might not impede
this sealing work of the Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 30. And upon the arrival to this
certainty, has ensured great consolation and advantage, 2 Pet. 1. 8. 10, 11.
All which words signify nothing, and reflect unrighteousness on the spirit of
truth, were not an evidence of right to these heavenly things obtainable.

Quest. But how may I come to the knowledge of this desirable truth; that
Heavenly Treasures are surely mine, and that I may make a warrantable claim to
God, to Christ, and these things of the other World? Sol. 1. First, By your
conjugal union with the Heir of Heaven: All things in Heaven and Earth are
Christ's, he is the Heir of all things. Heb. 1. 2. -- Has in these last days
spoken to us by his Son, whom he has appointed Heir of all things: All things
in Heaven and Earth are his by donation, purchase and inheritance juridically
conferred over to him in the new covenant, and actually put into his hand, upon
the finishing of his meritorious work and victory over death. Matt. 28. 18. All
power (...).
is given to me in Heaven and Earth: Lawful power, right, privilege and
authority, (as the word imports,) and with this is the Lord Jesus invested, and
has all things put into his hands, and all creatures under his feet, Heb. 2.
7, 8. And all right to true riches is derived from him, through union with him.
1 Cor. 3. 21. 23. All things are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is
God's: If you are Christ's, then all things are yours, not else; your title is
founded on your marriage-relation to him. Gal. 3. 29. And if you are Christ's,
then are you Abraham' s seed, and Heirs according to the promise: A title to
these glorious treasures is made over in the new covenant, which covenant is
confirmed in Christ, and made in him, and through him to all that are his: He
is the way, there is no coming to these treasures but by him; he is the door, no
entering into them but through him: He is the treasury it self, in whom all the
riches of grace, all the fullness of pleasures and satisfaction lies; you must
have the treasury before you can have the treasures; the well it self before
the waters are yours: He that has the Son has life; has him by way of
possession, as an owner and proprietor: If you have Christ, you have all that
is his, his person and purchase go together: Rebekah must consent to go and
marry Isaac before she could be invested with that substance and wealth which
was his. This new covenant which interests a soul in the Lord Jesus, and his
unsearchable riches, is a marriage-covenant. Hos. 2. 19, 20. And I will betroth
thee unto me for ever, yea I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in
judgment, and in loving kindness, and in mercies; I will even betroth thee to
me in faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord. Ezekiel. 16. 8. I entered into
covenant with thee, says the Lord, and thou becamest mine; this was a
marriagecovenant. Jer. 3. 14. Turn O back sliding children, says the Lord, for
I am married to you. If you would see your title to heavenly treasures, try
your conjugal union to the Lord Jesus the Heir of Heaven. Every relation to
Christ is not a conjugal relation. There is a general relation, as dead
branches to the tree: Joh. 15. 2. Every branch in me that bears not fruit he
takes away. A person may be in Christ as the luxuriant branch or sucker is in
the tree, that sucks the sap of privileges, and gets some nourishment of
frames, and comforts, but brings not forth fruit, it sprouts out of the stock,
as proudflesh grows on the wound, but has no right union with the root, or
nourishment from the head: Such are obtruders and hang-bies, which take the
place of children, but are strangers, who climb up as the thief to steal, but
comes not in by the door to dwell with God: they are retainers to Christ's
House, that now and then do some service for him, and have some scraps and
favors, but are no abiding members of his house; like the Apricot, that leans
on the wall, but is rooted in the earth.

There is a temporary Relation also; as of a Servant to a Master, where there
is a propriety for a time: The servant comes into the house, enjoys privileges
and protection, and does some service, is very useful for the family, and it
may be beloved too: (as a servant.) And such is the relation of some to Christ;
but this differs vastly from that union which entitles to the person and
purchase of the Lord Jesus; he is mercenary in all he does, and has by-ends in
his entrance and continuance; he does not any thing from pure love to Christ,
but for self-respects and advantage: his welfare is not wrapped up in the welfare
of the family, to stand or fall with it; to embark his All in the prosperity of
that house: he lives in the family, and upon his Lord, but to himself, and is
as the Planets which are carried about with the primum mobile; but yet have a
distinct motion and course of their own: he is in the family, but not of the
family; and as his relation is but titular, so his station is but temporary; he
abides not in the house for ever, Joh. 8. 35. And when he goes away he carries
off nothing but his own; not a jot of the inheritance is his; he has fared
well, and had a great deal of credit and comfort for a time; but goes as he
came, and is the same person as he was.

There is also a Concubine-Relation to Christ, which gives the soul some use of
his kindness, but no right to his person. Concubina a: concubo. Beza de repud.
and divort. p. 249.
A Concubine is one that is contented with ones bed, but has no conjugal love
to his person; neither does she pass into the husband's family, or are her
children counted legitimate: She is one that either by constraint or consent,
comes over into an external communion with another for his use and bed; but is
never married to his person, or has chosen him for her husband, to become one
flesh with him, to take up her delight in him, and to do all from a principle
of love to him: And as she has not the properties; so she has not the
privileges of a wife, for intimacy and entertainment, in respect of power and
maintenance. Such is the relation that many have to Christ; they consent to
have some enjoyment of Christ, but have no marriage-union with him; he is not
theirs by choice, but either for necessity or advantage, to enjoy their own
pleasures by him, and receive some profit from him: they never saw an
excellency in him, or were ever unhearted by him, as he is by his Spouse. Cant.
4. 9. Thou have ravished my heart, my Sister, my Spouse; thou have ravished
(...), Incordiastime.
my heart with one of thine eyes; with one chain of thy neck: Thou have
unhearted me, or snatched away my heart: These never consented to all his
proposals in order to union with him; they never heartily gave up themselves to
him, nor entered into covenant with him, and became his. And as they are
strangers to an espousal-state; so are they to a Spouse-like disposition; they
have not the temper and carriage of a wife, nor the privileges that such use
to have; they are not acquainted with his secrets, nor the openings of his
heart, and those amorous embracements peculiar to such a relation; they are not
invested with any Authority or Rule; they have no power over their corruptions,
nor command of their spirits and affections, that should be in subjection to
them: Grace bears no sway in them; sin and self does all in their souls;
neither were they ever enrolled in his family, or owned by the Lord Jesus as
his Hephzibah's, nor have the allowance and special provisions of the King's
Bride, and Lamb's Wife; and as to their conceptions, and those births they seem
to have by Jesus Christ, they are spurious and illegitimate, and never owned by
the Lord Jesus as the genuine products of his own Spirit. This is the case of
those that have not marriage-union with Christ; they have no right to him or
his Treasures. Try then your Espousal-relation to Christ.

Quest. How may I know whether I am married to Christ or no? Answ. 1. First, If
you are married to Christ, you are such as have special acquaintance with
Christ; you know him as none else do. The wife has the most peculiar and
distinct knowledge of her husband of any: Others may know something, yea much
of him; but none knows him so much as the wife; she has acquaintance with all
his excellencies, and all his infirmities; she has the largest tastes of his
love, and experience of his sweetness, and intimate converses with him of any
in the world. So it is with the Spouse of Christ; she dwells in his presence,
and lodges in his arms; she sees him within the veil unclothed of those
coverings that stand between him and the eyes of strangers, and conceals his
amiableness from common beholders: He puts aside his glorious Robe, and shows
her his naked breast, and lays her hand upon his tender heart: she is much
alone with him in his chambers, where he expresses intimacy with her, as Isaac
did with Rebekah, and discloses the secrets of his heart, and the greatest
unveilings of his love: He tells her what thoughts he had upon her from all
eternity; when he was in his Father's Kingdom, his heart was working after her,
and he thought the time long till he came down to see her; and no sooner did he
cast his eye upon her (though then she lay polluted in her blood, and cast out
into the field, to the loathing of her person) but his heart did burn within
him toward her; and it was the time of love: He tells her all the time of his
hard labor in the world for her, seemed but a few days; and the unsupportable
burden of her sins, and the Father's wrath upon him for her sake, seemed but as
nothing for the love he bore unto her. In these converses he assures her of his
Love, Person and Kingdom; and however he may seem in his carriages, yet his
heart is fixed upon, and faithful to her, and swears he will never, never leave
her, but after a little absence come and receive her to himself, and she shall
be for ever with him. Thus he manifests himself to her, as he does not to the
world; by reason of which she becomes so well acquainted with him, and knows
his voice, and by faith sees his sheep; she can tell by experience who, and
what her Beloved is, and how far better than other Beloveds. There Is never a
soul that is married to Christ, but has his time, when he makes out some
special discoveries of his love and self to it; and it can tell some stories of
what Christ did once say and do unto her: what slights she has had of him, and
gifts from him: such a soul can tell, how when he was dead, Christ quickened
him; when he was lost, Christ found him; when he was in prison, Christ set him
free; he washed him when in his blood, and poured in Oil into his wounds;
healed his backslidings, and loved him freely: He can say with Rebekah to her
Brother Laban; Thus the man spoke to me, and showed the earrings and the
bracelets, Genesis 24. 30. And with Judah brings forth the signet, bracelets and
staff, Genesis 38. 25. and tells with the blind man how Christ opened his eyes,
and what he said to him, Joh. cap. 9. ver. 15, 35, 37. And though by his sin
and unbelief he may lose the sight of him for a time, and be under a suspense
of his discovered kindness; yet if the Believer would be true to his
experience, he can discover such an acquaintance with Christ as no Hypocrite
ever had.

Answ. 2. Secondly, Another thing that will prove your marriage to Christ, is
your conjugal-love to him. Jer. 2. 2. I remember thee, the kindness of thy
youth, the love of thy espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness
in a Land not sown. The Lord convinces Israel of the great decay and change of
their Love to what it once was; there was a time when their affections were
high toward God, when he called them out of Egypt, took them from the
Ironfurnace, and married them to himself; then nothing was too hard for them;
they could follow God in a wilderness, where there was nothing but God alone to
satisfy them; creatures were wanting to allure them, and yet they could stick
at nothing; no difficulties should part God and them: Whence came this warmth
of their affection? why it was their neerness to God that created them: The
Lord had taken them into a marriage covenant, and carried them in his bosom;
and this inflamed their hearts after him. When the Lord brings a soul into an
espousal-state, he gives them espousal-love; and that is the greatest love: O
sweet! says Rutherford, were that sickness to be soul-sick for him; and a
living death it were to die in the fire of the love of that Soul-lover Jesus.
The Apostle makes this an essential duty of a married state, to have conjugal
affections: The Husband to love his Wife as his own flesh, and the Wife to love
her own Husband as her self, Ephesians. 5. 28. Tit. 2. 4. And the Prophet reckons
this love to God as the certain fruit of their Covenant Relation to him. Isa.
56. 6. That join themselves to the Lord, to serve him, and to love the Name of
the Lord. As soon as Paul had espoused the Lord Jesus, it appeared in his
supreme love to him; he valued none like Christ: He counted all things dross
and dung for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ his Lord, Phil. 3. 8. To
be found in him, not having his own righteousness, v. 9. To know him, and the
power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made
conformable to his death, v. 10. Conjugal love is a personal love; pure love to
Christ is set on Christ himself for himself, not for his gifts that come from
him; but for those excellencies that reside in him; it is love to his person,
not to his patrimony only; it is love springing from his love. 1 John 4. 19. We
love him because he first loved us. True affections to the Lord Jesus are the
births of his own love to us, a coal kindled from his fire.

Conjugal love is also peculiar as well as personal love; so far as it is
conjugal, it is to him, and none but him; or if to others, it is for his sake:
Espousal love to Christ affects none like him: If there be any person or thing
thou love more than Christ, or equal with him, thy affections to him are
whorish, not conjugal: He that loves Father or Mother more than me, is not
worthy of me: He that loves Son or Daughter more than me, is not worthy of me,
Mat. 10. 37. Yea, he that does not hate Father or Mother, or any thing, so far
as it is inconsistent with love to Christ, cannot be his Disciple, Luke 14. 26.
True love to Christ will let none in all the world share in that love which
Christ has; 'twill take none into his bed but himself; it is chaste love.

Again, Conjugal-love is not only to Christ, but it is such a love as longs to
be found in Christ, not in himself; it would have all his glory and excellency
in Christ; it reckons Christ for all that is truly honorable as to him; it
would get as near to Christ as possible; yea it never rests till in him: To be
found in him. It Is also such a love as conforms to Christ: Love is of an
assimilating spirit; it would be like to its peculiar object. The affectionate
wife conforms as much as may be to her Husband: so it is with the Spouse of
Christ, she would in every thing that is imitable resemble him, and it is her
great trouble she is not more like him: what would such a soul give if his
heart was like Christ's heart; if he had such a spirit and life as the Lord
Jesus had on Earth? it would be holy as Christ is holy, and cannot set up a
stand short of that: It Is true, the soul has not such a spirit as Christ had;
it is too proud, vain, carnal passionate, earthly, selfish, and that troubles
him; but it can never be quiet, till he comes nearer to the pattern in Heaven,
and to a full resemblance of his well-beloved Jesus.

Answ. 3. Thirdly, A soul espoused to Christ will leave all for Christ; that is
the condition of marriage between Christ and his Bride. Psalm. 45. v. 10, 11.
Hearken O Daughter and consider, and incline thine ear; forget also thine own
people, and thy Father's house, so shall the King greatly desire thy beauty:
for he is thy Lord, and worship thou him: As if he should say, weigh and
consider the terms on which this match is to be concluded between Christ and
you. If you will be his, you must leave all for him; you must forsake all your
other lovers, friends, interests, comforts for Christ, so far as these hinder
your love to Christ, your communion with, and serviceableness unto him. When
the woman comes to be married, she leaves her friends, Father's house,
Country, and all to come and live with him that shall be her Husband. Rebekah
left her Father, Brother, Friends and Country to go to Isaac, Genesis 24. 58. And
they called Rebekah, and said unto her, will thou go with this man? and she
said I will go. That soul that cannot consent really and considerately to part
with all for Christ, never yet came up to marriage-terms: The treaty between
Christ and that soul never went far enough for a conclusion; and if it go no
farther; if thy soul cannot seal to this, to part with all thy interests, thy
dearest comforts; yea thy self for Christ, the match must after all be broken,
and Christ and thee part at last, yea part for ever. O soul! try thy heart in
this; here lies the knot, the vertical point; this is the most difficult of all
Christ's proposals, and that the soul is longest consenting to, even the
letting go all for Christ: His person may please well enough; his estate is
desirable for a reversion; but now to take leave of, and to go with Christ,
this is the hard saying: Persons would have Christ and the world too, Christ
and friends too, Christ and reputation, peace, liberty, pleasure, and self too;
and if this will not be granted, break the bargain: but if ever Christ and you
have closed, and you are his, and he yours, you cannot count any thing too dear
to part with for him, or to let go at his bidding: If Christ calls for Estate,
Husband; Wife, Children, an Isaac, a Benjamin, a right Eye, a right Hand, all
must go; and you must part with them freely and cheerfully, as Abraham did with
Isaac. Genesis 22. 3. Abraham rose up early in the morning, and sadled his Asses,
and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his Son, and clave the wood
for the burnt offering, and went unto the place of which God had told him: Not
as Jacob did part with Benjamin; by constraint, and grudgingly, Genesis 43. 11. If
it must be so now, do this, etc. He was almost starved before he would consent
to part with Benjamin; and when he did, het lets him go last of all: he parts
with the best fruits of the Land, Balm, Honey, Spices, Myrrh, Nuts, Almonds,
double money, any thing first; at last Benjamin was screwed out too: Many must
have their comforts wrench'd out of their hands before they will let them go;
but this is not love to Christ. A soul married to Christ will say with
Mephibosheth concerning his Land; Let Zibah take all; for as much as my Lord
the King is come again in peace to his own house, 2 Samuel 19. 30. So, let God
take all my estate, strength, liberty, comforts, seeing the Lord Jesus is come
home to my soul in peace: Houses, Lands, Friends, Credit, Peace, Life, may be
dear, but Christ will be dearer if he and you are one flesh. All Bavaria (said
George Carpenter) is not so dear to me as my Wife and Children; yet for
Christ's sake I will forsake them cheerfully. Do you think me such a fool (said
Ogvier to one that tempted him with life and preferment) that I should change
eternal things for temporal. Loss of goods is great; (says Hooper) but loss of
God's grace and favor is greater? Love is never thoroughly seen till it comes
to parting: O the tuggings, holdings, shifts and reasonings that men will have
before they will part with that they dearly love: Now it will appear (says
Philpot) what we love best, for to that we love we will stick: If Christ have
most of your hearts, you will let fall every thing out of your hands to hold
fast Christ: I have (said Mr. Bale) exiled my self for ever from mine own
native Country, Kindred, Friends, Acquaintance, which are the great delights
of this life, and am well contented for the sake of Christ..

Answ. 4. Fourthly, A Soul married to Christ, stays, and lives on Christ. The
Wife casts her self upon her Husband's love and care for her supplies, and
lives on his allowance for all her provisions: it is suspicious for a married
Woman to be maintained by strangers, and to live on other men for what she
needs; it is the Husband's duty to provide for his own, and to nourish and
cherish his Wife as the Lord the Church, Ephesians. 5. 29. and it is the Wives duty to
go to and rely on his faithfulness for it: So it is with the Soul that has
espoused Christ; it is to live on Christ for all it needs: they that take
Christ aright, take him for their All, not for better or worse for richer or
poorer, as Women take their earthly Husbands, (for Christ is always best of
all, always exceeding rich, and full of unsearchable treasures,) but to take
him for their only and sufficient portion at all times, and in all estates.
Lam. 3. 24. The Lord is my portion, says my Soul, therefore will I trust in
him. Lord, (said Paulinus, when his City, Gold and Silver was taken away) let
not the loss of these things trouble me; for thou art all, and more than all
these to me; [Shaw's Tombstone, p. 33.] Christ is the Believer's All in the
way, and God his All in All at the end. It has pleased the Father that in him
should all fullness dwell, and under him all things should be put, 2 Col. 1. 19.
Heb. 2. 8. And this is for the supply, comfort and blessedness of those that
are his. Ephesians. 1. 23. Which is the body, the fullness of him who fills all in
all. Whatever Christ has (as Mediator) is the Churches for her use and profit:
If men have plenty of liquors, they fill their vessels with them; if they have
much riches, they place them in their treasury, so does Christ dispose of his
fullness for his Churches good; hence it is the Spouse of Christ comes leaning on
her Beloved from the Wilderness, Cant. 8. 5. and dares adventure her All on the
love and sufficiency of her loving and lovely Lord; she is full of failings,
but she lives on him for righteousness; many are her weaknesses, but she goes
to Christ for strength. Isa. 45. 24. Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I
righteousness and strength: She is sensible of many wants, but casts her self
on the promise; My God shall supply all your wants, Phil. 4. 19. Her
backslidings, temptations, dangers, troubles and fears are many, but she stays
on the Lord Jesus, whom she has chosen for her only friend in Heaven and
Earth, and there she lays her self down in his bosom, when wearied with
difficulties and doubts, and embarques her self in his faithfulness for all she
stands in need of, for life and godliness, for grace and glory.

Answ. 5. Fifthly, Fruitfulness to Christ proves Marriage to Christ: Hence the
Spouse is set forth by metaphors that express fruitfulness; a Garden, not a
wilderness; a well watered Garden, which is usually most fruitful, where the
Spices flow out, where the Graces of the Spirit are more operative and
abundant, and Souls become more fruitful in manifested holiness; An Orchard
planted with choice and pleasant fruits, Camphire, Spikenard, Saffron, Calamus,
Cinnamon, with all trees of Frankincense, Myrh and Aloes, with all the chiefest
Spices, which signify the preciousness, variety and abundance of grace and
holiness in those who are savingly united to the Lord Jesus: A flock of Sheep,
whereof every one bears twins, and not one is barren, Cant. 4. 12, 13, 14,
16. Chapter 4. 2. It Is compared to the Palm Tree, the Cedar, the Vine, the
Fig Tree, a green Olive, plants famous for flourishing, growth, clusters of
fruit, constant fruitfulness; it is said of the Fig Tree, it bears fruit all the
year long, and in many places they shall always find green figs on it: Such is
the Spouse of Christ, compared with the world and hypocrites fruitful and
flourishing: A good tree brings forth good fruit, Mat. 7. 17. The root of the
righteous yields fruit, Prove. 12. 12. Wherever the grace of God is received
in truth, there it brings forth fruit, Col. 1. 6. As sin brings forth fruit
unto death, so does grace unto life, Romans 6. 22. No sooner does the Lord Jesus
espouse a Soul, but he heals it of its barrenness: He makes the barren Woman
to keep house, Psalm. 113. 9. Every branch in me that bears not fruit he
takes away, Joh. 15. 2. A barren Christian is a monster in Religion, no living
member of Christ's body; indeed there are Winterseasons when fruit may not
appear, but even then it is in the seed and sap; and there is a preparative for
fruit, which appears in the season, but to be always without the fruits of the
Spirit, love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
meekness, temperance, Gal. 5. 22, 23. is a sign of one that never had
marriage-union, and intimate communion with Jesus Christ, but is the certain
mark of a fruitless Fig Tree, in danger of cutting down, and the character of
that ground which is cursed, and nigh to burning, Luke 13. 7. 9. Heb. 6. 8.
Souls, try your state, it is for your lives, your All depends upon your
marriage-union with Christ: Had you never any special acquaintance with Christ?
Have you no conjugal love to Christ? Cannot you consent to leave all for
Christ? Do you usually live and stay on other things for life and salvation,
and not on Christ? Have you been ever barren souls, that never brought forth
the fruits of the Spirit unto God? then were you never married to Christ, nor
have any true title to heavenly treasures.

Mark 2. Secondly, your interest in heavenly things is known by the naturalness
and supremacy of your love to them; Where the treasure is, there will the heart
be, Mat. 6. 21. If heavenly things be yours, your heart is there; worldly men
have the World set in their hearts, Eccl. 3. 11. Their heart is but the World
copied out: so heavenly souls have Heaven set in their hearts, which are but
the counterpane of Heaven; every thing has a natural love to his own, the
World will love his own. Joh. 15. 19. No man ever hated his own flesh: Ephesians. 5.
29. What affections have brute beasts for their young, and will venture their
lives to defend and maintain them. It Is storied of the Storks, when the Town of
Delph in the low Countries was on fire, and the Storks perceived the fire to
come near their nests, they endeavored to carry away their young, but when
they could not remove them, they fluttered over them with their wings, covering
them from the flames till they all perished together, [ Belg. Com. wealth.] So
strong is natural affection to its interest, and the natural issues of it self;
much stronger should gracious affections be to their interests: O how I love
thy Law! (says David) it is my meditation all the day long, Psalm. 119. 97.
Whence came this affection? it was from his interest in those great and lovely
truths. Psalm. 119. 111. Thy testimonies have I chosen as an heritage for ever,
for they are the rejoicing of my heart. Souls risen with Christ, and born to
the inheritance above, will set their affections on things above, Col. 3. 1, 2.
Where is thy heart, Christian, in Heaven or Earth? what things are dearest to
thee, and sweetest to thy taste? can thou prize the light of God's
countenance better than life? had thou rather be a doorkeeper in God's
House than dwell in the Pavilions of this World? Is a little of Heaven better
than a great deal of Earth? and can thy heart consent to be at any loss in the
World to enjoy God in his Ordinances, and to be enriched with spiritual
blessings in heavenly places? Then heavenly things are thine.

Mark 3. Thirdly, if heavenly things be yours, it will appear by your
heart-cares for them, and vigorous pursuits of them; how careful are men of
their interests, to secure and enlarge them? Phil. 2. 21. All men seek their
own: If the things of Heaven be yours, your greatest care will be to get and
keep them; when Kish thought his Son Saul was lost, he left caring for the
Asses, sorrowing for him, saying, What shall I do for my Son, 1 Samuel 10. 2?
Christians, if heavenly things be yours, they will lie nearer your hearts than
all the World besides; the sense or fear of losing them will more trouble you
than all losses besides; the world, relations, creature comforts will be
forgotten; when you apprehend a death on your heavenly interests, you will do
more, and part with more to get Heaven, than the World and dearest comforts of
it. Many will pretend desires for Heaven, as the young man in the Gospel; but
Christ will say to them as to his Hearers, Mat. 5. 47. What do you more than
others? Souls, you would have Christ here, and Heaven hereafter; but what do
you for it? what do you more than hypocrites and common professors, whose
portion is in this life? can you leave the world for God? can you deny your
self for the pleasing of Christ? and part with your right eye, and right hand;
throw away your Idols of gold and silver, the world, and fleshly lusts, and
honor God with your time, strength and substance? Can you let your Plough
stand still to follow God's; and stick at no pains and hardships to enjoy the
least spiritual good? Then are heavenly things yours.

Mark 4. Fourthly, Then are you interested in Heavenly Treasures, when your
hearts and spirits are suited to them; when the Lord has let in a heavenly
tincture on your hearts; and inlaid your spirits with heavenliness, and a mind
that answers to heavenly things, as face answers face in the water: When God
intends men for Heaven, he does in time fit them for it; and where he gives a
title to mercy, he gives a capacity also; where he makes over the riches of
glory; he makes that soul a vessel fit for glory. Men do not purchase Pearls
for Swine, and build Schools for brute beasts. God did not make the Heavens for
fishes, and the Sea for beasts, but suited every creature to its element: They
that are his Adoption, are his new Creation also, Ephesians. 2. 10. and when they
are designed to a blessed end, they are principled for it, and have a
disposition put into them to move toward it: They that are set apart for
Heaven hereafter, do bear the image of their heavenly Father here, 1 Cor. 15.
49. There is a stamp of glory upon the Heirs of glory, though it may be so
covered with dirt, and worn out with the rust of corruption, as not to be
easily seen at all times. Whose is this image and superscription? Matt. 22. 20.
Caesar's coin has Caesar's stamp; and the Children of Heaven have their
Father's mark upon their foreheads, Rev. 14. 1. If Christ's Treasures be yours,
you are his Treasury; though earthen vessels, yet treasures, vessels and bags
that wax not old. Do you hope for spiritual blessings? what manner of spirits
are you of? Do you savor heavenly things? What things do best suit and please
your spirits, the things of Heaven, or the things of the world; grace, or
goods; righteousness, or riches; spiritual things, or carnal? What goes down
easiest, or when down, sits easiest on your stomachs? The Heirs of Heaven are
Non-conformists to this world, but transformed into the Spirit of Heaven, and
the renewing of their minds to their new estate, blessedness and glory, Romans
12. 1. That Is a second thing wherein this Heavenly Trade lies, in securing and
clearing up your interest in heavenly things.

Thirdly, Another thing wherein this Heavenly Trade lies is this; in getting in
of heavenly goods: This is a great part of Traders business, to be furnishing
themselves with wares fit for their employmeat and advantage; the Artificer in
making; the Merchant in buying in goods that are vendible and will turn to
profit. So must Wisdom's Merchants get themselves stored with Wisdom's wares,
that they may be able to drive on her Trade: Only in this lies the difference;
earthly goods are either the products of men's labors, and effects of their
industry; or else the purchase of their money and treasures: But heavenly goods
come not in this way, as the proportionable reward of their labors, or return
of their money: Indeed heavenly bread must be labored for; but when all is
done, the Son of man gives it to them, Joh. 6. 27. Salvation must be wrought
out, as if it lay at their fingers end; and yet this very will and power to
work wrought in them. Phil. 2. 12, 13. Work out your salvation with fear and
trembling; for it is God that works in you both to will and to do of his good
pleasure. No sufficiency is found in the creature, before saving grace helps,
to embrace its overtures, no more than a dead body to receive life. Ephesians. 2.
1. You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that you
should go and bring forth fruit, Joh. 15. 16. The soul's choice of Christ is
the effect of Christ's first choosing him; and its love to God the product of
God's first loving him, 1 Jo. 4. 19. and the soul's fruitfulness is the effect
of Christ's purposing and appointing it thereunto. No man can come to me except
the Father which has sent me draw him, Joh. 6. 44. Not only morally by
persuading the will with potent arguments; but physically, by working to will,
by a powerful inclining and disposing the will to come to, and choose Christ,
through the irresistible operation of the Spirit: So then, it is not of him that
wileth, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy, Romans 9. 16.
Salvation-grace both of righteousness and holiness, is freely given to the
thirsty soul through and with Christ, Rev. 20. 6. and the inclination and power
to receive as freely bestowed also. Phil. 1. 29. To you it is given in the
behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake.
Faith it self is the gift of God, both the power and will to believe, not given
to every man alike: For all men have not faith, 2 These. 3. 2. because the
Father was not pleased effectually to bestow it. Deuteronomy. 29. 4. The Lord has not
given you a heart to perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear to this day:
Who has made thee to differ? or what have thou which thou did not receive? 1
Cor. 3. 7. If the differencing of one man from another, as to his improvement
of grace, lay in his own inclinations and natural freedom of his own will, then
there was something in the creature that made this difference, contrary to this
Scripture; and a foundation laid in a man to glory, which wholly overthrows the
design of Redemptiongrace, which is to take off all boasting, 1 Cor. 1. 29.
Romans 3. 27. and to lay all the praise and glory of man's salvation on special
grace, Ephesians. 1. 5, 6. neither is the first grace only freely given; but more
grace also, alsufficiency after (conferred for every good word and work; yea,
for every thought that is good) comes from the same grace that first called
you, which must also perfect every good work to the day of Salvation, 2 Cor. 3.
5. our sufficiency (who have grace) to think or do the least spiritual good, is
derived from the same fountain-fulness that is in Christ, Jam. 1. 16. Eternal
life, with whatever leads thereto, is the gift of God, Romans 6. v. 23. As
Christ, so all things with him are freely given, Romans 8. 32. not only the seed
of grace, but the growth of grace; not only the habit, but the act of grace;
all comes from Christ in the way of Redemption-grace. Get your hearts well
established with this grace, that nothing in you, or done by you, can merit or
procure any thing of the Father, but upon the account of Christ, and his grace,
and promise in him to all that by the Son do come unto him. Goods you need for
a daily Trade, but no money and price will pass for them, Isa. 55. 1. they are
freely given, and yet you may boldly come for them: Go you must with empty
sacks, your friend in Heaven will fill them, and return your money in your
sacks mouth. Christians, a considerable part of your work (and that which lays
the foundation to all your Trade) lies in getting your souls furnished with
heavenly wares: You will drive but a poor Trade for Heaven, if you do not often
receive goods from Heaven. Alas! what can you do in Christianity without
continual supplies from Christ? Laodicea could not do any good in Religion, for
want of goods from Christ: She had none of his tried gold, and therefore grew
soon poor and miserable: If goods fail, trade falls, and livelihood with it:
What advantages does the Tradesman miss, and what losses does he sustain, by
wanting goods to furnish his Customers? So do Christians when they want grace
to serve their occasions, necessities, temptations and duties; what advantage
might souls get, had they but grace, when they come under Ordinances and
Duties? and what losses do they meet with for want of grace, under afflictions,
trials and employments? how pitifully do they carry it under troubles, and
providential exercises, and are oft-times sadly foiled for want of grace and
wisdom to manage such trials? You have daily need of more grace, as you have of
bread for your bodies: Your occasions, temptations and work are spending, and
without fresh supplies from the Treasury, you will soon be empty and
impoverished: Neglect but your spiritual recruits one day, and you will feel
it: It Is your interest, if you are Traders, to keep your shops full, and to be
often sending for more goods: Grace will never lie long on your hands; other
goods may: You will have still occasions to exercise grace in your dealings
with God and men; you can never be over-stor'd with Wisdom's wares.

It Is your duty also to make use of Christ continually: In every thing to make
known your requests to him: To draw waters out of this Well of Salvation every
day: He is a Fountain sealed for your use; he is made of God to be wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption too; for this end, that they might
live upon him to these ends: This is to live by the Faith of the Son of God,
which is the Christians daily duty: He complains as being injured when his
people will not come unto him that they might have life, Joh. 5. 40. He is
troubled when his Children will not make use of him: Hitherto you have asked
nothing: Ask and you shall receive that your joy may be full, Joh. 16. 24.
Never was a full breast more pained for want of drawing, than the Lord Jesus
is, when his people receive not from him that fullness that is laid up in him
for their use.

It Is your advantage also to be often at Christ's door, and to be continually
fetching in supplies for your souls: This is the way to grow rich apace; to get
in more and more of the unsearchable riches of Christ, Rev. 3. 18. This is the
way to be filled with the fruits of righteousness, to be more thoroughly
furnished unto all good works, to the glory and praise of God, 2 Timothy 3. 17.
Phil. 1. 12. This is the way to do every thing better, and to abound in the
work of the Lord, and to be more complete in all the will of God, 1 Cor. 15.
58. Col. 4. 12. By this means you will become more serviceable unto others, and
useful in the place where you live, and in the Societies where God has placed
you; the more full of grace, the more able to profit others. Romans 15. 14. That
ye always are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to
admonish one another. 2 Cor. 1. 4. That we may be able to comfort them with the
same comforts wherewith we are comforted of God. They that freely receive, will
be able freely to give; and that is a blessed thing, Acts 20. 35. And till you
receive you cannot give. Christians, get in more grace every day for your own
use, for the glory of God, and the good of others: Labor to be furnished with
every grace, especially those graces which the Lord has more use of, and the
time, condition and place you are in, do more especially call for, Heb. 12. 28.
2 Pet. 1. 5.

Be sure to be well furnished with Faith; that is an useful grace at all times
(for we live by Faith, Heb. 10. 38.) but especially in evil times, in times of
temptation and affliction. Faith is an eye, a hand, a foot at all times; it is a
grace always useful at every turn; you cannot be without it and be well; it is
a working grace, and that is good for Traders; you cannot work without it, 2
These. 1. 4. A building grace, Jude, v. 3. 20. A nourishing grace, 1 Timothy 4. 6.
A soul-enriching grace, Romans 4. 12. A soulstrengthening grace, Ephesians. 3. 16,
17. But it is especially needful in evil times, it being a cheering grace, Romans
15. 13. It Is a soul-keeping grace, and that is good in dangerous times, 1 Pet.
1. 5. It Is a soul-saving grace, that saves in troubles, and out of troubles,
Psalm. 27. 5. Jam. 5. 15. It Is a heart-establishing grace, 2 Chronicles. 20. 20. A
world-contemning grace, Heb. 11. 26. A world-conquering grace, 1 John 5. 4. A
soulsecuring grace, Heb. 11. 23. By faith Moses was hid three months. It
secures a person in troubles: it is a breast plate to preserve the heart, 1
These. 5. 8. And a shield to cover the head, Ephesians. 6. 16. It leads a person
through trouble, Heb. 11. 29. By Faith they passed through the Red. Sea, as by
dry Land, which the Egyptians assaying to do, were drowned. O get in plenty of
this precious unfeigned Faith, for that is the great trading-grace of a
Christian; for it gets in, and lays out every grace. Faith is the receiving
grace; it receives in Christ, Ephesians. 3. 17. and it receives from Christ, John 1.
16. Faith is the key that opens Christ's Treasures; the hand that takes out his
tried gold: Faith is the carrying, and recarrying grace: Faith comes up to the
market-price, and never breaks with God on terms, but subscribes to all the
demands of Christ, and so never returns empty. Christians, you will never want
goods for your Heavenly Trade, if you can but keep Faith in exercise; your
shops will never be empty, as long as Faith can stir up and down, and keep up
its Journeys to Heaven: If there be any goods in the promises, any wares in
Heaven, Faith will have them down, as long as the soul needs them, and it be
for God's interest to part with them: O then get faith! Alas, what pitiful
Trade do some drive for want of Faith! Choice goods will not off; precious
promises, pertinent instructions, persuasions and encouragements lie on
Christ's hands for want of faith in them that hear.

Christians, you will make nothing of Religion without Faith, in the days we
live in; you will soon shut up shop, decay and break when troubles come to
purpose, without store of Faith. Faith will fill your storehouses, do your
work, put off your goods, get in your rights, pay your debts, and maintain you
richly on the incomes of your Trade.

Patience is another grace that will much serve you in your Spiritual Trade;
you have need of Patience to do the will of God; no working without Patience. 2
Cor. 12. 12. Truly the signs of an Apostle were wrought among you in all
Patience. Romans 5. 4. Patience works experience. Souls are apt to be weary of
well doing without Patience, and to tire in running, without this long-breathed
grace of Patience. Heb. 12. 1. Let us run with Patience the race that is set
before us. No receiving the fruit of Ordinances and Duties without Patience.
Luke 8. 15. They on the good ground are they which in an honest and good heart,
having heard the Word, keep it; and bring forth fruit with Patience. The Lord
usually tries his peoples Patience before they come to the fruit of Pomises,
and bring forth the obedience of Precepts; there is a winter between seed-time
and harvest; many wet, weeping days between sowing and reaping, ut enim
segetem in agro pluvias, nives, glacies, pruinas, grandines, and tempestates
far necessarium est antequam maturescat, and fructum ferat, ita hominem
fidelem intus and extrinsecus multa pati mala oportet. Stell. The seed must lie
long, it may may be, under ground, and when it is come up, be nipt up with
frosts, and covered with snow and hail, and bear many a storm before it ripens,
and brings forth fruit, and this calls for Patience; yea many times
long-suffering. The husbandman waits for the precious fruits of the earth,
and has long Patience for it, until he receive the early and latter rain,
James 5. 7. Patience is needful to suffer, as well as do the Will of God. Rev.
13. 10. Here is the Patience and Faith of the Saints: To endure captivity and
cruel Death for the sake of Christ, Patience to wait for the promise, Romans 8.
25. and Patience to receive it. Heb. 10. 36. Patience (says Seneca) is a salve
for every sore, that only which alleviates our burdens; without it we cannot
be men or Christians: (says another) ' it is the grace that makes a complete and
well accomplished Christian, Manton. James 1. 4. When reason is at a stand, and
hope almost at an end, and all refuge fails; Patience steps in, bears the
burden, and calms the soul.

Hope is a necessary grace to this great undertaking, reckoned among the three
Cardinal virtues that wonderfully adorn a Christian's spirit and conversation.
1 Cor. 13. 13. Now abides Faith, and Hope, and Charity: Hope is the offspring
and refreshment of Faith; it is begotten by Faith, and (says one) As a good
child relieves its father Faith in time of need. Hope is an expectation, Faith
a persuasion. Faith eyes the promise, hope the thing promised, as sure though
future, which comforts the soul under the present want of desired mercy; and
this is needful to cheer the soul under its exigencies and disappointments in
the way of its Christian conversation. Hope keeps in the fire, and keeps up the
house. Heb. 3. 6. Whose house are we if we hold fast the confidence and
rejoicing of our hope firm to the end. Were it not for Hope the house would
fall asunder; Hope keeps it together, till the Lord new build it in Heaven:
Hope anchors the soul in a storm, and makes it steady under shaking tempests,
Heb. 6. 19. Hope maintains a Christian in a hard winter, while the seed is
under clods, and till the corn come to the barn. 1 Cor. 9. 10. He that ploweth,
ploweth in Hope (that is of a good harvest) that will compensate all his
labors. Hope secures the soul from shame and disappointment under temporary
forbearance, Psalm. 34. 22. It helps it to rejoice in tribulation, Romans 5. 2.
and compasses him about with mercy, Psalm. 32. 10.

Humility, Self-denial, Goodness, Temperance, Gentleness, Love, Zeal, Holy
Fear, are all good goods that will off well, and turn to the Trader's profit,
if well improved: Get your souls well stored with these graces of the Spirit,
also if you ever think to drive a good Trade of godliness,

Get your minds filled with knowledge, as well as your hearts with grace;
that is part of the Christian's Treasure. 2 Cor. 4. 6. We have this Treasure
(that is of the knowledge of God in the face of Christ) in earthen vessels: In
whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom, Col. 2. 3. Saving knowledge is a
Treasure laid up in Christ for Believers, and to be fetched out for their use
and comfort. The riches of the full assurance of understanding, and
acknowledgement of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ, Col.
2. 2. The Gospel is a mystery, a secret, hid from the natural eye, and cannot
be known but by the revelation of the Spirit. To have an inward, clear,
sensible, experimental and certain apprehension of the glorious truths of the
Gospel, opened and confirmed to the eye of Faith, is a high attainment beyond
what any reach to, but those that have the anointings of the Spirit, and to
whom it is given by the Spirit as the fruit of prayer, and faithful attendance
on his teachings in the Gospel and Ordinances of Christ: This is called a
rooting and establishment in the Faith, Col. 2. 7. and growing in knowledge, 2
Pet. 3. 18. alluding to trees that being well planted do take deeper root in
the earth, and in time come to greater settlement and strength against
shakings: And as children that gradually grow and increase to higher statures;
so this spiritual knowledge is gradually increased; it is not the privilege of
newborn babes, of persons at their first conversion, to have this deep
fathoming of Gospel-mysteries: But of stronger Christians, who by constant
attendances on the Means of Grace, and in progress of time, by Faith, Humility,
Prayer and Attention to the Spirit, do at length come to higher measures of
this illumination, and full assurance of truth. As Gerson reports of a godly
man he knew, who at first was exercised with many doubts and fears, and
shakings of Faith; but at last through humiliation of soul, and a captivating
of his understanding to Divine Truth, together with the illumination of the
Spirit, came to a wonderful clearness in the matters of Faith, and of his
soul-estate, with such a settlement of spirit, and certainty about his
salvation, as to have no more doubts remaining in him. Christians, content not
your selves with some notions of truth, and shallow cold apprehensions of the
great mysteries of salvation; but labor to get in greater measures of
spiritual understanding, both objective, as to the Truths to be known; and
subjective, as to the discerning of them: Alas, we know as yet nothing as we
ought; there are deeps in the knowledge of Christ for Elephants, as well as
shallows for Lambs; and there are greater beamings on the souls eye to be
obtained, and more certain understanding, and familiar acquaintance to be had
with the same Truths we know. Your business, Christians, in the Heavenly Trade
is to get more Divine Wisdom, to be led farther into all Truth, and to enter
into the Mysteries of the Gospel; wading farther and farther into
Sanctuary-deeps; to know more of God, of the way to him, and the things freely
given of him, and to know better what you know: Thou have hid these things from
the wise and prudent, and revealed them to babes. There Is a secret in
Gospel Truths which the wisest men in the world can never by their greatest
Wisdom come to see, without the special revelation of the Spirit: As none can
come to see the spirits, salts, and occult virtues, in herbs and minerals, till
by Chemistry they are exstracted: Others may discern and receive the things
themselves in the gross and bulk of them, and yet never see or taste those
choice spirits hid in them: So it is with such as are strangers to a spiritual
knowledge, they apprehend Truths in the bulk and letter of them. A A carnal man
(says Hooker) may hear the sound of the Word, understand the signification;
his judgment may see the evidence of the argument, and force of reason in them;
and yet the Commentary on Christ's last Prayer.
reality and spiritualness of that Divine good never apprehended. The world by
wisdom knew not God, 1 Cor. 1. 21. There Is no proportion between a spiritual
object and a caanal eye: The carnal mind cannot discern the things of the
Spirit of God, neither can they know them, for they are spiritually discerned,
1 Cor. 2. 14. Labor to see the beauty and amiableness of Truth; to see your
propriety in Truth, to taste an inward sweetness, and ravishing pleasure in
Truth, to feel the sense of special love to your souls in discovery of light,
and to find a mightiness going out in every Truth on your souls, changing you
into the very Spirit and Image of Truth: To grow in knowledge extensively, into
all Truth; and intensively, in deeper and more sensible, spiritual, powerful
apprehensions of truth; the want of which right knowledge makes so many cold,
dead hypocrites, and barren professors in this day of light and parts.

Get also your Consciences stored with the Peace of God, which passes
understanding. This is the salt that seasons every thing, condition and duty,
Mark 9. 50. This will shoe your feet to travel through the rough and tiresome
ways of affliction, temptation and persecution you must meet with in the
pursuit of your Heavenly Trade, Ephesians. 6. 15. This will calm your hearts in
storms, and maintain a Summer within, when it is Winter without, and nothing but
tempests and troubles in the world, John 16. 33. This will preserve you when
all is going, and keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus, Phil. 4. 7.
This will guard your hearts from those slavish fears, darksom doubts, and
dreadful troubles that many are filled with this day, and make you triumph over
sin, trample upon the world, and smile in the midst of all the frowns of men
and Devils. O get and keep this rare Jewel of inward Peace, which will help you
to draw near to God with boldness, and cheerful serenity in every duty, Heb.
10. 22. Get your consciences bathed in the blood of Christ, and the evidences
of your sincerity cleared up every day; this will help to maintain a feast of
inward peace under the temptations of Satan, and the view of your daily
failings and stumblings.

Get your hearts warmed, and affections quickened with the sense of divine love
to your Souls: this is a choice part of heavenly treasures, and will abundantly
conduce to the lively carrying on of this divine Trade; affections raised by
the application of redemption-grace, will be to your Souls as spread sails to
the Ship, to carry you strongly along against wind and storm, and fill you with
pleasant gales within, and give you a speedy and comfortable passage through
the waves of this World, 2 Cor. 5. 12. It Is the Soul's wing that mounts it up
toward God, and carries it aloft above the entanglements of sin, the world,
and flesh, in the warm pursuit of God's commandments, 2 Cor. 5. 14. His
commands will not be thought grievous, or his yoke heavy, where this love of
God has left a savor on the heart, Psalm. 119. 32. Romans 13. 10. It will
exceedingly sweeten the bitter waters of Marah to you, and make the paths of
God's Providence, as well as his Precepts, pleasantness and peace.

Take in also the consolations of the Spirit, and the joys of the Holy Ghost,
these will be useful to cheer your hearts under tribulation, and strengthen and
cordial you under heartfaintings and qualms you may meet with from those ill
vapors of this lower World, and want of creature comforts, 2 Cor. 7. 4. Romans
15. 4. This spiriturl comfort will also help to drown your carnal joys, and to
prevent a surfeit with the pleasures of this World, (another danger that
Wisdom's Merchants are sometimes liable to.) Acts 2. 28. Make me full of joy
with the light of thy countenance. Spiritual joy, where it is, fills the heart,
and leaves no room for carnal delights; as the heat of the Sun puts out the
fire, so will spiritual consolation extinguish carnal joy: 'Twas the comfort
which Moses, by Faith, fetched in from the views of an invisible God, that made
him choose reproaches with the people of God, before the pleasures of sin that
were but for a season, Heb. 11. 21. 25. This spiritual comfort is a notable way
to stability in every good work, 2 These. 2. 16, 17. to help on your Souls
edification and growth in grace and holiness, Acts 9. 31.

O! what work have Christians to do, besides the World, and minding their own
things? were Religion followed to the purpose, persons would have no leisure
for sin and vanity: O! what need have gracious Souls of a diligent hand to make
them rich, and to be taking in spiritual goods every day.

Quest. But how should I do to get my Soul furnished with these heavenly goods?
If my heart deceive me not, I would fain be enriched with every grace, capacity
and accomplishment, for the discharge of my duty, the pleasing, honoring, and
enjoying of God, and for the welfare of my immortal Soul: But how to attain
this longed for mercy, I know not. Sol. 1. If you would be enriched with
heavenly treasures, and get in those goods; Then,

1. First, maintain a constant sense of your own wants and emptiness: That
which is wanting cannot be numbered, Eccles. 1. 15. Look over your souls every
day, and see your poverty; look into your understandings, and see how little
light is there; into your minds, and consider how little spirituality lies
there; how little warmth and heavenly heat in your affections; little truth and
sincerity in your spirits; little tenderness in your consciences; little
flexibleness in your wills to divine things: little faith, love, humility,
meekness, fear, zeal, life, strength, faithfulness, stedfastness in your souls:
were this really seen, and felt, and the excellency of these spiritual
perfections discerned, and the soul's great concern and interest that lies
wrapped up in them, with the absolute necessity of having every grace, in order
to duty, peace, comfort, prosperity and salvation; persons that had any life at
all, could not lie still, or be content, till utmost means were used to obtain
supplies: 'twas a false conceit of a self-fulness that kept back Laodicea from
seeking after Christ's treasures, Rev. 3. 17, 18. And that blind opinion the
Pharisees had of their good estate that so prejudiced them against the
convictions and counsels of Christ toward their cure, Joh. 8. 33. 39. 41. 48.
Had not the Corinthian Saints been so full and rich in their apprehensions,
they would not have had such sleighty thoughts of instituted means toward
their Souls good. 1 Cor. 1. 12. And have been contentious with one another,
when they should have been contending for higher measures of grace and
godliness, verse. 11. It Is the poor are the laborers in God's Vineyard, Zech.
11. 11. And they that feel their daily need of soul-relief, that will be at any
pains to enjoy it, Isa. 41. 17.

Secondly, Get a believing sight of Christ's grace and fullness, that he is able
to enrich you, and willing to help you. Heb. 11. 6. This brought Naaman to the
Prophet Elisha for cure of his leprosy; he believed his servants report, that
he was able, and cherished hopes that he was willing to heal him. 2 Kin. 5. 3.
And she said to her Mistress, would God my Master were with the Prophet that is
in Samaria, for he would recover him of his leprosy: One told this to her Lord,
and hereupon he goes and adventures: ver. 5. And he departed. A persuasion of
Christ's ability, brought the Leper to him for cleansing. Mat. 8. 2. Lord, if
thou will, thou can make me clean: He was persuaded that Christ was able,
and had hopes that he was willing, or would never have come to him. A thorough
belief of Christ's ability to help, will make a soul to cherish hopes of his
willingness also. So the blind men, Mat. 9. they believed Christ's ability to
help them; ver. 28. And they had hopes of his mercy too, that he would do it:
ver. 27. Thou Son of David have mercy upon us: and this hope made them not only
to come to Christ, but to follow after him: whatever persons pretend to a
believing in Christ's ability to save and sanctify them, they have not this
faith, who question his willingness to satisfy the longing soul, and save all
that come to God by him: you confess he is able to furnish you with all you can
want or desire; believe his willingness also to supply all your wants, who
sincerely wait upon him.

Quest. But how may I know that Christ will furnish me if I come for these
heavenly treasures? there are many come, and go without their errand: Some ask,
and have not, Jam. 4. 3. run, and receive not; strive to enter in, and are not
able, 1 Cor. 9. 24. Luke 13. 24. There are some the Lord threatens he will not
hear, Prove. 1. 28. Isa. 1. 15. Zech. 7. 13. And I have sought these spiritual
blessings many a time, and God has not answered: How may I be sure Christ is
willing to give these treasures unto me? Sol. The Lord Jesus has made an offer
of grace to all sensible Sinners, who feel their need, and thirst for supply,
Isa. 55. 1. Joh. 7. 37. and called upon them to come and receive it without
exception, Matthew. 11. 28. Now it cannot stand with his divine goodness and
truth to offer mercy, and not intend to give it; he cannot deceive, or be
deceived, who is the faithful one; nor invite his creatures to an expectation,
and then fail them. Now he has called all to come, and required no other
condition but their coming, and receiving him and the things he has offered.
He has also promised, as well as offered, to give to him that thirsts. Rev.
20. 6. I will give to him that is a-thirst of the fountain of the water of life
freely. I will give, (not sell) or let out on any terms of self-worthiness; for
if there be any thing to make the creature worthy, it is not a gift, but debt,
Romans 4. 4. [To him that is a-thirst,] nothing else is required but a pinching
sense of souls need, and an unsatisfied desire of supply. [I will give freely,]
out of no respect to any thing in the creature, but his necessity and misery;
the moving cause is his own grace and free mercy to Sinners, as Sinners. [I
will give liberally too;] let him drink freely, take as much as he needs, or is
capable to receive. [I will give sutably,] such things as you desire and need,
and such things as are capable of satisfying you, ( of the fountain of the
waters of life.) Matthew. 7. 7. Psalm. 36. 7, 8. Joh. 6. 37. Isa. 41. 17. You will
find nothing in these Scriptures required in the person, but sense of his need,
seeking satisfaction, coming, believing, and a real subjection to all God's
terms, and a pure designing of his ends. I disclaim all; the Port I would be in
at, is redemption and forgiveness through his blood; Ruth. Now, if he has
promised to give to them that seek, he must be willing to give; For the holy
one of Israel cannot lie, Numb. 23. 19. He has received all his Mediatory
fullness of purpose for the giving out to those that come unto him. Joh. 1. 12.
Psalm. 68. 18. Thou have received gifts for men, yea for the rebellious also,
that the Lord God might dwell amongst them: He is the Angel, Messenger and
Mediator of the new Covenant, the Trustee and Feoffee entrusted with that great
estate for the use of his people that need it, and come unto him for it, Mal.
3. 1. Heb. 9. 15. And therefore is said to appear in Heaven in the presence of
God for them, as an Advocate to follow their cause. The Lord Jesus is
wonderfully pleased too, in giving to his needy seeking ones. Mic. 7. 18. He
delights in mercy. Psalm. 35. 27. He has pleasure in the prosperity of his
servants: the more he gives, the more he sees of the travel of his soul, and is
satisfied. Isa. 53. 11. The more he gives, the more he receives: The gifts and
graces of God are as the rivers that flow from the Sea, and return to the Sea
again. 1 Chronicles. 29. 14. Of thine own have we given thee: The more Christ gives
to his people, the more he receives; his talents come in again with
improvements, Mat. 25. 27. The more he gives, the more he is glorified, Joh.
14. 13. Answer these questions before you doubt Christ's willingness to part
with spiritual goods freely to all that truly seek them. Do you think really
that Christ can dissemble, offer mercy, and have no mind to give it? Do you
think that the Lord Jesus can break his word, or become false to his promise?
Can you imagine he will be unfaithful to his trust? Can he delight in giving,
and yet not willing? Does he gain by giving, and yet not willing to give? Is he
glorified by giving, and yet be loath to give? then would he not care for his
own name. Suspect your willingness to receive, not Christ's to give you all
that grace you need and seek of him.

Fourthly, Another thing wherein this heavenly Trade lies, is, to carry on
heavenly work, and to be daily driving on the great business of godliness.
Religion has its work as well as the world; every Trade has its employment,
and so has godliness. Christianity is not a notion or opinion, a name to live,
and no more: It Is a miserable vanity and cheat for a person to think a bare
Lamp will light him to Heaven, and a few lazy wishes bring him to glory, though
he travel not the way to it. Alas, to espouse the principles of Piety, without
the practice of it, to get over to privileges, and be strangers to Purity, to
profess Faith without works, and love without labors, will signify nothing
toward salvation. Will Opinion make a man an Artist, or imagination enrich
him, or hunger fill him, or reading the way to a place bring him thither? No
more will affection, knowledge and profession help men to Heaven, unless they
work out their salvation, and carry on the duties of Religion that lead to it,
Phil. 2. 12.

First, Consider, a Christian has much work, and a little time; great work,
and small strength; necessary work, and many diversions; excellent work, none
like it: persons that set about salvation in earnest, will find much to do; and
the farther they go in Religion, the more busy their employment will be: every
day brings its work with it; new instructions, new mercies, new afflictions and
temptations every day, which calls for much exercised grace and duty. A child
of God has no time for idleness, or impertinent business. O the many things
that must be dispatched within the compass of this little inch of time for
eternity! Soul, if thou die, and thy work undone when thou die, thy soul's
undone; there is no rising from thy grave to do neglected work; or dispensation
at the Bar of God for the omission of Salvation-duties.

This work is necessary also as well as great; some duties are necessary to
secure thy salvation; all duties are necessary to maintain thy comforts, and
greaten thy glory. Men plead necessity for this and the other thing, to do this
work, and take that journey; to omit this duty, and absent from such a
privilege; but who is sensible of the necessity of working the work of God,
and attending soul-concerns? It may not be necessary you should have peace,
credit, plenty, riches, comforts; that you should have so much estate,
preferment and contentment in the world; but it is absolutely necessary thy soul
should be saved, and that God should be obeyed; that spiritual concerns should
be attended, (whatever is neglected) that thy debts should be paid, thy peace
with God obtained, thy hungry soul be fed and refreshed, thy title to Heaven
cleared, the presence of God enjoyed, and thy seed-time for glory improved.

It Is promised-work too, and that makes it necessary; you have engaged to be
the Lord's if you are Christians; and have given up your selves to be his, and
not your own; your time is his, your capacities his, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. what you
are and have, is from him and for him; this you have devoted to the use and
service of God when you took him to be your God, 2 Cor. 8. 5. and many a time
since you have engaged to obedience of his commands: There are sick-bedvows,
affliction-promises, engagements under conscience-troubles; yea every day, and
in every duty, you tell God you will mend your ways, redeem your time, do him
more and better work; and how can you stand before him with such flattery and
dissimulation, and under the guilt of so much falsehood and treachery, while
your work lies still undone?

Yea your work Christians is excellent work also, above all the employments of
the world; it is supernatural work, yea Angelical work, yea such work as Angels
cannot do, to believe in, love, converse with, and obey Christ, as your
Redeemer and Savior, Phil. 3. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 7, 8, 9, 12. to suffer for Christ,
and be baptized into a conformity with his death and resurrection.

It Is suitable work also you are called to in this Heavenly Trade, work suited
to your natures: If you are Saints, you have received a heavenly spirit, and
are partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. It Is as natural for you to do
heavenly work, if you are Christians, as for the world to do earthly work,
there being a disposition and propensity put into your renewed natures to new
and heavenly work, as there is a disposition in the seed to its proper fruit, 1 John 3. 9. For his seed remains in him: It Is work suited to your hopes which
are laid up in Heaven, Col. 1. 5. For the hope which is laid up for you in
Heaven, whereof you have heard before in the word of Truth. That is the
blessedness, those great and glorious things you hope for, which are laid up
for you in Heaven, as a Treasure safely kept for you: Called hope by an
Antonomasia (says Davenant) Beatitudo promissa dicitur spes nostra, id est,
ill^^ quod speramas per Antonomasiam; neque hoc praemium dicitur tantum oblatum
nobis and propositum, nam h^c spem nostram infirmaret, si certitudo rerum
speratarum penderet ex nobis, and dispositione nostra ita ut vel daretur nobis
vel negaretur promerito operum nostrorum, sed dicitur se positum nobis, id est,
quasi in deposito reconditum apud Deum Patrem nostrum. Daven.
This reward is not said to be only offered and proposed to us; for that would
weaken our hope, if the certainty of those things hoped for did depend on us,
and our disposition; so that it should be given or denied us according to the
worth of our works, graces and duties; but it is said to be laid aside for us,
as that which is deposited, and safely laid up in God our Father for us. A
Christian's choicest Treasures lie in hope, not in hand; beyond their present
view and enjoyment, and yet secured to their use and propriety, 1 Pet. 1. 4.
Reserved in Heaven for you: ((...)) kept as it were in custody, and with watch
and ward for you sure and certain, on which the hopes of Believers are firmly
laid, and to which their present work is suited: heavenly work bears a
proportion and agreement in its nature (though not in worth) to heavenly and
eternal things; it is work suited to your inheritance and wages in its kind,
though not in degree: and that is excellent work which is of the same nature
with your eternal blessedness.

Suited also to your present privileges, who sit in heavenly places in Christ
Jesus Ephesians. 2. 6. Gracious souls, though in habitation they are on the Earth,
yet in point of privilege they sit in Heaven: Through their union with Christ
they may be said Sedere fecit nos in coelestibus in persona Christi, inque
novam vitam excitavit, and ut Spiritu in coelis versemur efficit. Zanch.
(says Zanchy) to sit where he sits, as a husband or Brother absent from his
Wife, and Brethren does possess a Kingdom for them; they, though absent, may be
truly said relatively to possess it in him as members in the head, they sit in
Heaven in the person of Christ; and as the lump is sanctified in the first
fruits: Neither do they sit only relatively through their union with Christ;
but spiritually, through their communion with him. In that sense (says Bucer)
as the Apostle speaks, Phil. 3. 20. They have their conversation in Heaven.
This is a glorious privilege the Saints only enjoy; in this life to converse
in Heaven, and to have their life above, above the world, and things below, and
such should their work be also: How pleasant should heavenly work be to
heavenly souls! which Believers are and should be.

Secondly, Christians set upon heavenly work; for as is your work, so will your
maintenance be: They who do that work which the world cannot, have that meat
and drink which the world knows not, Joh. 4. 32, 34. The Lord has dainties,
and peculiar refreshments for those who are single and faithful in his work,
they have joys which strangers intermeddle not with, Prove. 14. 10. Whoever go
without, his laborers shall not lack: He keeps a good table for his workmen:
In keeping of his Commands there is great reward, Psalm. 19. 11. They eat the
fat, and drink the sweet, Neh. 8. 10. The marrow, the spiced wine, the hidden
Manna is their meat and drink (so far as they have need of it) O the sweet
bits, and pleasant sips they miss of, who are idle in God's Vineyard! They that
will not work, shall not eat, 2 These. 3. 10. Would you live high in your
spiritual comforts, then work hard in your spiritual work.

Thirdly, As is your work, so will your company be: They that do earthly work,
have earthly companions to labor with them: As is men's Trade, such is their
company. The children of the night have their fellowship with unfruitful works
of darkness, Ephesians. 5. 11. and gracious souls are companions with them that
fear God, Psalm. 119. 63. Wicked workers have wicked men and devils casting in
their lot with them, Prove. 1. 14. And so have heavenly Traders heavenly
company; they have the presence of God with them, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. The Lord is
with you while you are with him: They have the Comforter with them, Joh. 14.
16. He shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever:
Romans 8. 11. By his Spirit that dwells in you. No company like the Comforter;
friends may leave you, but if you keep with God, and do his will, the Spirit of
God will abide with you for ever; though he may not always be seen of you, yet
he will always reside with you: At the best, friends can but stay with you,
but the Spirit of Christ will dwell in you, and give you the nearest and most
intimate acquaintance with himself, (if you obey his voice, and follow him)
God's laborers have the company of Angels also: they are ministering spirits to
the heirs of salvation, Heb. 1. 14. They pitch their tents about them that fear
God, Psalm. 34. 7. and have it given in charge to take care of the Children of
God, and to carry them in their arms, that they dash not their feet against a
stone, Psalm. 91. 11. Those are lovely company indeed, such as will never hurt
you, but do you good; you shall be the better for them, Prove. 13. 20.

Fourthly, As is your work, so will your wages be to all eternity: though not
for your work, yet according to it, Romans 2. 6. Who shall render to every man
according to his deeds: (...), not (...), according to, not for their works:
The Preposition (...), noting here (says Paraeus) (...) non meritum
significat, sed mensuram ceu (...), quae praemia distribuentur indebita and
poenae irrogaountur promeritae. Paraeus. Non propter quid, sed quibus sit danda
docetur. Idem.
not the merit, but the measure, analogy or rule, by which undeserved rewards
shall be distributed, and just punishments shall be inflicted, as the word is
used, Mat. 9. 29. chapter 23. 3. And so as it refers to glory (says he) it rather
describes the person to whom this glory shall be given, then shows the cause
why it is given, as Mat. 25. 34, 35. Also the word rendered ((...)) is used for
a free reward that has no respect to desert, Mat. 20. 8. The same reward being
given to him that wrought one hour, as to those that bore the heat and burden
of the day: So that the word ( according) notes the kind of work, not the cause
of reward, reward as it refers to salvation: Suitable to that of Christ, Rev.
22. 12. Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give every man
according as his work shall be: (...). Indeed evil works have their causality,
and desert of punishment, but not good works of reward: Gryner gives three
reasons of the difference: First, Because good works proceed from God, and are
the fruits of his Spirit in us; but evil works proceed from man, and are the
effects of his own spirit and will. Secondly, good works are imperfectly good
as to degrees, and therefore cannot merit; but evil works are perfectly evil,
and therefore deserve death. Thirdly, Good works are commanded, and so are but
our duty, and cannot merit, (payment of debts are not purchase) but sins are
forbidden, and so are a breach of the Law of God, and deserve death. Luke 17.
10. The gift of God is eternal life, but the wages of sin is death, Romans 6. 23.
Death is wages due, but life is a gift altogether free. By grace ye are saved,
Ephesians. 2. 5. There can be no desert of glory in the most spiritual duties of
man: Because

First, They are not man's work, but God's in him, John 15. 5. Without me ye
can do nothing, Gal. 2. 20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me.
Holiness is called the fruit of the Spirit, Ephesians. 5. 9. Now the reward is due
by way of debt to him that works; but to him that works not, it is of grace,
Romans 4. 4, 5. and therefore reward is not due to Saints who work not, but by
strict way of justice rather to the Spirit that works in them.

Secondly, They are no way proportionable to the reward, and so not
meritorious: Their work is imperfect, they know but in part, and do but in
part, 1 Cor. 3. 9. Phil. 3. 12. The best duties as they come from the Saints
here, are spotty, and as sweet waters that come from an evil vessel, they
savor of the cask through which they come; but glory is perfect, omnibus
modis, and has no defect in it; Our works also are finite, being created, and
creature-actions; but the reward is infinite, the love and glory of an infinite
God.

Thirdly, Though our Holiness were perfect, yet it could not merit; because it
is due to God from that relation we bear to him as his creatures, and redeemed
ones, and from our promise and covenant with him to love, obey and serve him,
Ephesians. 2. 10. 2 Cor. 8. 5. Duties are but debts, not acts of favor to God: We
owe God our selves, and our all, and are indebted to Christ for his
Redemption-grace, more than we can ever pay; we cannot (though we do all we
possible can) requite the blood of Christ, and love of Christ; and till we are
out of debt we cannot merit.

Fourthly, We have nothing to merit withal, for we are not our own, 1 Cor. 6.
19. Man has nothing to give to God, who is not his own, but God's (as all
redeemed ones especially are) Believers are his servants: Romans 14. 4. Who art
thou that judge another man's servant? And a servant is not his own; his
time, strength, capacity, work, are his Masters; so are the Saints duties the
Lord's, not by way of legal compact, and requital of wages, but by way of
redemption, right and purchase, being bought out of the service of sin and
Satan to his own use; and the service of such is a due already upon a former
score; a debt of thankfulness, and cannot merit a reward: Beside, what can they
give to God, who have nothing but what they receive from God? 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who
has first given to him? and it shall be recompensed to him again: for of him,
and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for ever.

Fifthly, Were rewards due to any upon the account of his work, then man had
something to glory of in himself, and might say of Heaven as Nebuchadnezzar did
of Babylon, Dan. 4. 30. Is not this great Babylon which I have built for the
house of the Kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honor of my
Majesty? So might such say when they come to Heaven; Is not this the mansion I
prepared and deserved by my duties and graces, for my glory and blessedness?
For self-justiciaries, though they are forced to say that their grace is given
of God; yet they boast of the improvements of this grace as theirs, and glory
is due to the improvement of grace (they say) and not to the bare grace or
talent; and though they are driven to confess Christ's merit, yet they shuffle
and say, Christ merited for them, that they might merit: But that is contrary
to the Gospel, which tells us, That it is not of him that wills, nor of him
that runs, but of God that shows mercy, Romans 9. v. 16. And it is God that
works in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. And
that no flesh should glory in his presence, 1 Cor. 1. 29. And therefore God
has chosen the foolish, weak; and base things of this world, and things that
are not, of purpose to prevent this self-glorying before him, verse 17, 18. And
the Apostle makes this reason why Abraham was not justified by Works, but by
Faith, cause then he would have something to glory in; but this could not be.
Romans 4. 2. If Abraham were justified by works, he had something to glory in,
but not before God. So that the Saints, though they have a reward of their
work, yet it is not for their work; it is a reward, not of debt, but of grace;
yea of glorious grace, according to your work. (Christians) God will not give
you a jot less than the utmost of what your love and faithfulness comes to;
Your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58. He will not fail
of any of his Promises, or disappoint you of your expected end, but will be
better than your hopes: You will say in that day of compensation, Who has
begotten me all these? Isa. 49. 21. Whence is this to me? Luke 1. v. 43. When
saw we thee an hungered? Mat. 26. v. 37. Glory is a mighty thing, infinitely
above all your labors: Christians, Heaven will make amends for all your duties
and losses, and abundantly compensate, and exceed all your expenses for God in
the world: And have: you not reason to set about the work of grace, and drive
on the employments of this Heavenly Trade?

Quest. But what is this heavenly work which Wisdom's Merchants must be driving
on every day? Sol. I answer; First, in the general; Heavenly work is that work
which has a heavenly Author and Principle; a heavenly rule, and a heavenly
end: work wrought of God by his Spirit, Joh. 3. 21. Work done according to the
will of God, and by Scripture-rule, Col. 4. 12. Work wrought for God, and
designed purely and ultimately to his glory, 1 Cor. 10. 31.

But more particularly, heavenly works may be considered under these two heads.

First, Such as are heavenly in the matter of them, as well as manner and end.

Secondly, Such works, as though earthly in the matter of them, yet are done in
a heavenly manner, and to an heavenly end.

First, That Is heavenly work which is of a heavenly nature, matter, and manner,
and end; as all those religious duties are which respect God, our selves, and
others.

First, Drive on that work every day which has God himself for its first and
more immediate object, as all acts of religious worship, both natural and
instituted, moral and positive. Mat. 4. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve: This is due to God from all his rational
and intelligent creatures, both Men and Angels to worship him only, with that
reverential fear, faith, love, hope and delight which is due to him, as the
Supreme Majesty of Heaven and Earth, the great Creator and Conservator of all
his creatures; and to serve him with that subjection and obedience as their
relation to God their Sovereign calls for. This is the duty of all persons,
especially those that profess their owning of God, and choice of him to be
their God in Christ, and peculiar treasure. Deuteronomy. 13. 6. Thou shall love the
Lord thy God, and serve him, and swear by his name. Christians, to let out your
hearts upon the world, relations, self, and creatures, is to rob God of his
service, and to commit Idolatry with the creature. Think this, when my heart
runs out to things below God, and my affections, hope, trust and delight get
over their banks, and break their due bounds, and subordinacy to God: when I
fondly dote upon, and take pleasure (abstractively from God) in any creatures,
then do I deal treacherously with my God, I rob him, and give his glory to
another, Isa. 48. 11. O set habitually your hearts on God, and let out your
faith, love, hope, fear, desires, and delighting pleasures on God every day,
yea all the day long, as your chiefest good, supreme Sovereign, and last end.
Prove. 27. 17. Be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long.

Again, external acts of divine worship are part of thy every days work, which
thou owe to God, and to be duly and daily performed to him, as to pray, hear,
and read his sacred word: These are that honor, homage and service that is due
to God every day, especially morning and evening; Prove. 8. 34. Deuteronomy. 6. 7.
Exodus 30. 7. 1 Chronicles. 23. 30. Ezekiel. 46. 13, 14, 15. Amos 4. 4. 1 Chronicles. 16. 40.
Psalm. 55. 17. This is the daily burnt-offering to be prepared for the Lord;
Exodus 29. 38, 39. Morning and evening; the vows that are to be daily performed.
Psalm. 61. 8. God's mercies are new every morning, and so must your praises be
also. Lam. 3. 23. He keeps you day and night. Isa. 27. 3. And it is but
reasonable you should give him his morning and evening sacrifice: you depend
upon him for the mercies of every day, and he expects from you the duties of
every day, which is reasonable service. Romans 12. 1. You have daily necessities,
difficulties, trials, dangers and duties, in which you need his help; and is it
not your concern to be daily at his feet, and seeking his favor, counsel,
strength and blessing?

Herein lies your professed subjection to God also; slight religious duties,
and you reject God from being your God: This very reason does Moses give why
Israel should serve the Lord, and cleave to him, and swear by his name, and
give him all religious worship, Deuteronomy. 19. 20, 21. He is thy praise, and he is
thy God, who has done for thee these great and terrible things which thine
eyes have seen. Dan. 6. 16. Thy God whom thou servest continually, he will
deliver thee: It Is a contradiction to say that God is your God, and yet
withold his service from him: As soon as ever God had a people in the World,
he had service from them. Genesis 4. 26. Then began men to call upon the name of
the Lord: No sooner had Seth (who was the other seed which the Lord
appropriated to himself in the room of Abel) a Son and Family, but they had
peculiar worship for God, and were distinguished from the Family of Cain by
this, that they did serve God: This is the work of God, that every Soul is
bound to dispatch every day, in Closet and Family, in Spirit and Truth, with a
pure heart fervently.

This also is the best part of your work in the world, to attend on God; all
other service is but drudgery, compared with your serving God, and transacting
the great matters of your Souls, and your everlasting concern. This is your
interest also, to maintain nearness to God, who is the life of your souls, the
length of your days, and fountain of all your supplies; there is no such
pleasure as in the ways of God, nor profit as in keeping his commands. O the
blessedness of converse with God, and maintaining a daily intercourse with the
Father of Spirits! it is the privilege of Angels, and of glorified Saints, to be
always beholding his face, 1 These. 4. 17. Mat. 18. 10. And the peculiar honor
of the upright to dwell in his presence, Psalm. 140. 12.

There is no such advantage also as to be much with God every day. Psalm. 73.
28. It Is good for me to draw near to God: Often journeys to Heaven bring in
much profit; 'twas this way David did thrive so much in wisdom, grace and
experience, out-shining all the men of that age, and serving his generation by
the will of God; his being much with God. Psalm. 139. 18. When I awake I am
still with thee: By this nearness to the Son of righteousness did Enoch so soon
ripen for Heaven; and by his constant walks with God, did he so timely get to
his journeys end. Of all that generation, we find none so soon sent for home,
and translated to his rest, as holy Enoch; for whereas the rest lived nine
hundred, eight hundred, seven hundred years; only he lived three hundred sixty
and five years, and that which so quickened his fitness for rest, was his
activity in heavenly work: Enoch walked with God, and was not, for God took
him, Genesis 5. 23. He kept his constant turns with God in his Garden and
Gallerywalks, and then went in with him into his Presence Chamber, there to sit
down with him for ever.

This also will make you thrive in your own work, if you are faithful and
diligent in God's work; mind his concerns, and he will care for yours, Deuteronomy.
30. 9. Obey the voice of the Lord, and do all his commandments, and the Lord
thy God will make thee plenteous in every good work of thy hand; He shall make
thee to abound in the work of thy hand; (as it is in the Hebrew) (...) and
faciet superesse te, (...), excellentem efficiet te bonis.
to have more than enough, (as Montanus renders it,) He will bless thee in
every work of thine hand, (according to the Septuagint,) other Copies have it;
He will have a great deal of care of thee, etc. He will make thee excellent
with good things, (says Junius;) He will make thee to enjoy good in every work
of, etc. (says Symmachus;) He shall prosper the work of thy hand; It shall go
well with such. Deuteronomy. 4. 40. Thou shall keep therefore his statutes and his
commandments which I command thee this day, that it may go well with thee, and
with thy children after thee, Genesis 42. 18. 'Twas piety made Joseph so
prosperous in all he did, he feared God. Do this, and live; for I fear God: and
God was with him, and made all he did to prosper in his hand, Genesis 39. 3.
Whatsoever he does shall prosper, Psalm. 1. 3. The blessing of the Lord shall be
on the head and hands of such; let their condition be what it will in the
world, yet it shall be well with such as fear the Lord; if he be afflicted, yet
his afflictions shall turn to his good, and be part of his prosperity. 2 Chronicles.
31. 21. And in every work he began in the service of the House of God, and in
the Law, and in the Commandment, to seek his God; he did it with all his heart,
and prospered. The way to true prosperity leads by Heaven-gates. Christians, if
ever you will thrive in your own work, be sure to carry on God's work: begin
with God every day, the first fruits are his. Dispatch religious worship in
your Closets and Families before you enter on your earthly business: Close up
every day with him, he is the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and end, and must
have the issue as well as entrances of every day. The morning and evening
sacrifice are his, 1 Chronicles. 16. 40. 2 Chronicles. 13. 11. Psalm. 55. 17. Give God his
due, before you render to Nature its dues. Psalm. 61. 8. Pay your vows to God
every evening, before you run on score for new mercies: See all things secured
in everlasting Arms before you lie down to rest; put thy Soul and thy All into
the hands of Christ by solemn devotion and resignation every night; get the
watch set, and all things safe, before thou exposest thy self to the hazards of
the night, and enterest upon an incapacity to secure thy self from the least
danger. O precious souls! lie not down as dogs and swine, who, when they have
filled their bellies, get to their styes and kennels.

Secondly, carry on all that work daily which has a more special respect to
your own selves, and leads to the sanctifying, comforting, strengthening,
edifying, saving of your precious souls. Next to the glory of God, yea in
pursuance of it, thy own Salvation is thy chief concern; What will it profit a
man to gain the whole World, and to lose his own Soul? or what shall a man give
in exchange for his Soul? What is left, if the Soul be lost? and what is done,
if, after all, the Soul be undone? To look after others Souls, and neglect thy
own; and to secure all things else, and leave destruction on thy self, is folly
like to hers that saved her goods from the fire, but left her child to perish
in the flames. Salvation is your chiefest work, committed to your care, and to
be accounted for in the day of Christ. Phil. 2. 12. Work out your own Salvation
with fear and trembling. And it is great work also, many things must be attended
too, and several things dispatched, if ever Souls be saved.

First; You must carry on heart-work every day, and that is great work: they
that are acquainted with their own hearts, know there is much to do in and
about them: There is nothing more out of order than man's heart, and nothing in
man of greater concernment than the heart: Hence it is the strict charge the
Lord gives his people to keep their hearts, Prove. 4. v. 23. Above all keeping
(as it is in the Hebrew) keep thy heart, Proz. 23. 2. Ephesians. 3. 17. Prove. 4. v.
4. The heart is the one thing Christ looks for; the chief room he dwells in;
his warehouse, where he lays up his goods; his workhouse, where he cuts out,
and prepares his work, Prove. 16. 1. A great part of salvationwork is done in
the secret chambers of the heart: The heart is the root and spring in man
whence all aceptable duties flow, Ephesians. 6. 6. doing the will of God from the
heart; and to be especially looked after. A Christian finds a great deal of
work to do about his heart every day: There is

Heart-searching work, Psalm. 64. 6. The heart of man is deep, and not easily
fathomed; it is a long journey to the farthest end of the heart, which no man
ever yet reached in this life: The Sea is deep, and yet it has a bottom: The
World is large, and yet it has been compassed; but who has ever traveled
through his own heart, to set up his non ultra, and say, Hitherto its
wickedness goes, and no farther. It Is deceitful also above all things, and
desperately wicked, who can know it? Jer. 17. 9. A man has no such cheater to
deal with as his own heart; it has such Cameleon colors, Maeander windings;
such labyrinth turnings, subtle shifts, false pretenses, close designs, fair
promises, smooth excuses, rhetorical pleas, seeming integrity, deep-rooted
hypocrisy, that a man cannot tell what to make of his heart, or how to find it
out; and this calls for constant searchings and observings of the heart:
Besides, the Lord gives his people the balance of the Sanctuary on purpose to
weigh it in, and casts out a line of providence every day to try it by. Men
meet with occasional providence, temptations, employments, companies, changes,
mercies, afflictions; all which help to discover the heart; the issue of which
is to be observed in order to the finding out of thy heart.

Heart-judging work: When Christians have found out the evil of their hearts,
their pride, hypocrisy, etc. seen the proof and evidence clear, and how
contrary to Law and Gospel, to Equity and Mercy, to Light, Experience,
Warnings, Patience, Profession and Promises, they are then to charge these
things upon the heart, to set home the evil with all the aggravations of it,
from its nature and effects, from the quality of the person, the time, place,
continuance in it, attempts and means of cure, compared with others beneath
them for light, profession, means and mercies; and having by these arguments
convinced the heart of its exceeding evil, then to pass sentence against, and
condemn it as unworthy of any mercy, and deserving of all the threatenings in
the Word against it, until the heart come to bear its iniquity, and feel its
exceeding sinfulness, and cry out with the Apostle, O wretched man that I am!
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Romans 7. 24. This would be of
wonderful use to clear up your sincerity, to preserve the tenderness of your
spirits, to cut off all excuses, false hopes, and security in sin, and make it
more abominable when it appears with its most taking allurements, 2 Cor. 7. 11.
1 Cor. 11. 31. and this would evidence your interest in pardon, and freedom
from Divine condemnation.

Heart-humbling work. O the pride that lodges, yea lives in, and incorporates
with this little piece the heart of man! how unsearchable is it, and past
finding out! like leaven in the lump, and poison in the cup, which cannot be
separated by a humane hand; as rottenness in the bones, that cannot be fetched
out. Pride is as that lofty mountain before Zerubbabel, which must become a
plain, Zach. 4. 7. as deeply rooted trees, whose Mores are not easily plucked
up. One compares spiritual pride, to the shirt, or inmost garment, which the
Saints last of all put off; and which like the Ivy, will not be plucked out,
till the wall in which it is comes down also. O the tuggings a child of God
has with his proud heart, to get and keep it low! As the Spider, whatever it
feeds on it turns to poison: So is it with the proud heart of man; it turns all
it does, has, meets with, and sees to the nourishment of pride; proud of its
sins; proud of his graces; proud under afflictions, and proud of mercies; proud
of honor, and proud of humility; proud of God's favor, and proud under his
frowns. O what a strange disease is pride, that feeds upon the means which the
Lord gives to cure it, and gets strength from the remedy to nourish the
disease! like Ephraim's wound; when God would have healed one, another
appeared: And this helps to make a Christian's work great work indeed, which is
never done till his day be done, and his Tabernacle pulled down.

Heart-purging work: The heart of man naturally is a very sink and kennel of
uncleanness; a fountain of pollution; a running Issue full of filthiness of
flesh and spirit, Mat. 18. 19. Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders,
adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies; these are the
things that defile the man. It Is not accidental and adventitious filthiness,
for that may more easily be washed away, Jer. 6. 7. but it is innate and
connatural, and never ceases bubling forth, till the fountain be cleansed, and
the root be changed. Sin in the heart is the root and spring of all the
wickedness that defiles the thoughts, words and actions. Christians complain of
their thoughts; they are pestred with vain, unclean, distracting thoughts in
duty, and out of duty; whereas the distemper lies in the heart: Thoughts are
but the ebullitions and swarmings of the heart: He that will cure his thoughts,
must first cleanse his heart, Jer. 4. 14. The heart is the nest where these
Wasps fly out and trouble the soul; the root that feeds these luxuriant
branches, briars and thorns that wound the conscience; and the strong fort of
Sion, where these Jebusites hide themselves, and issue out to prey upon the
gracious soul: Till these nests be spoiled, the Ax laid to the root of the
tree, and this strong Tower attached, and these blind and lame removed, souls
will never be freed from irruptions of sin in their thoughts and conversations:
This (Christian) is busy and hard work, and part of thy daily employment in
this Heavenly Trade; to sweep, wash, drain and cleanse thy filthy heart, by
sound repentance and faith in the promises, death and blood of Christ.

Heart-quickening work. The heart is the primum mobile, the great wheel in the
watch that sets all a going; if that stop, all faculties are still: A lively
heart makes a diligent hand to rid away soul-work, and a nimble foot to run in
the ways of God's commands; when the heart is quickened, then every duty,
inward, outward, public, private goes on; such a soul needs no spur to quicken
it, nor pully to draw it to its duties. O what a burden are some to their
Christian friends, to keep them up, and draw them on in the way of God, and all
because their hearts are dead, and that liveliness which once seemed to be in
them is departed! The spring that at first made them so active, is weakened or
broken; the waters that set their Mills a going fail, and that temporary love,
and common grace, like standing pools having no fountain to maintain them, are
dried up by consuming lusts, and scorching temptations; so that now they wither
in all their branches, and become weak, cold, and indisposed to every work of
God and their souls. Some of these dangerous symptoms of decayed grace, are
found also in sincere souls, for not looking after their hearts betimes, and
keeping them close to a quickening Jesus, by a lively faith in the promises.
Christian, mind this also every day, to maintain thy spiritual life, by fresh
quickenings, and reviving influences, from the fountain of life, on thy weak
and dying heart, making use of all instituted helps for soul-strengthening; as
hearing, reading, meditation, holy conference, and the like.

Heart-teaching and enlightening work. A light head, and a dark heart may dwell
together; and it seems to be the condition of too many under the Gospel this
day. A spiritual eye to look into the mystery of truth, and believing
affectionate discerning of excellent things, is not easily found; even while
Christ is read, a veil is on men's minds, and their foolish heart is darkened:
And this is one reason souls walk not as children of light; it is because they
are not light in the Lord, Psalm. 40. 8. The Law of God is not within their
hearts; they have no inclination or power upon their hearts to do the will of
God they know, for want of this heart-knowledge: Be earnest with God to beam
over your hearts, to make that the Hemisphere where the Sun of Righteousness
may daily arise with healing in his wings: Cry with David, Psalm. 119. 36.
Incline my heart to thy Law: Let my heart lean and stay upon thy Law, as a man
does upon a staff tobear him up: Get a greater nearness in your hearts to
truth, that the Word may be wrought in, and incorporated into your hearts; that
it may be a Goshen, a Land of Vision, and full of the understanding of the Lord.

Heart-keeping and Heart-watching work. The heart is bent to backsliding, if it
be not kept and held fast to the Lord and his ways; it is still turning aside,
and winding off from its proper duty. The Lord complains of Israel, Psalm. 78.
8. They did not set their heart aright, and their spirit was not steadfast with
God: They did not prepare, adapt, dispose their heart to God; neither was it
constant and steadfast with him, but on every occasion did start aside: So false
a thing is man's heart, if not under a watchful eye, and strong hand, holding
it fast to God. Prove. 4. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence: Keep it as
under lock and key, bolted against sin, and bound by cords of love to every
duty: And what a hard province is this! O the work that a child of God has to
keep his heart in order one moment; to keep down sin; to keep it from the power
of corruption, and prevalency of temptation; to keep up grace in the heart; to
maintain its desires after God, and things that are excellent; to preserve its
affections to things above; to hold the thoughts on God, and things eternal,
that they start not away; to continue its integrity; to perform its purposes;
to secure its frames, experiences and enjoyments! And he that will thus keep
his heart, must watch it constantly, never have his eye off from it, or suffer
his jealousy concerning it to cease: He must be always making it over to the
Lord Jesus for security, and be still imploring help from Heaven, faithfully
following all the instructions he gives toward its securing: This is
heart-work, and the first part of this heavenly work that concerns your selves.

Secondly, You must carry on mortificationwork every day. Col. 3. 5. Mortify
therefore your members which are upon the earth; fornication, uncleanness,
inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness which is Idolatry.
The Apostle having assured the believing Colossians of their future happiness,
does thence infer their duty and necessity to press after utmost holiness here,
as the way to this blessedness: The first part of which holiness lies in this
great work of mortification: there is no greater motive for Believers putting
off sin, than wellgrounded hopes of interest in Christ and glory: if Heaven be
yours hereafter, holiness must be yours now: There is no place for sin in
Heaven, nor unclean thing can enter there. Then hasten away sin now; that is his
Argument: [Mortify your members;] Get your selves rid of sin; put to death,
weaken and destroy the whole body of sin, with all the parts and issues of it;
the head and ruling power of sin had its mortal wound before: verse. 3. Ye are
dead; habitually dead to sin, the world, and self; they have got their
deaths-wound, the stab is at the heart, and can never be healed more: but they
are not actually dead, more blood must run, and spirits be spent, and this
monster be weakened every day: Practical mortification is wanting, and must be
promoted daily. This spiritual death to sin Mors naturalis est pura privatio
nec admittit in subjecto aliquid contrarii sed mortificatio spiritualis non est
pura privatio, nam dum corpus hoc mortale gestamus relinquitur aliquid de
contrario fomite quod oppugnandum and magis magisque mortificandum est. Daven
(says Davenant) is not as the natural death; for that is a pure privation, and
admits of nothing in the subject that is contrary to it: But spiritual
mortification is not purely privative, but while we live there is something left
that is of a contrary nature to holiness, which must be daily opposed and
destroyed. Sin in Believers is driven from the royal fort of the heart upon
Christ's entrance into it, but possesses the suburbs and outworks of the soul,
from whence it must be gradually expelled also by the mortifying influence of
the spirit; like the Canaanites which were removed from the Mountains, but
could not be wholly driven out of the Valleys, that Israel might by them be
proved, and taught to war, Judge. 1. 19. chapter 3. 1, 2. So the Lord Jesus Christ
does not presently destroy corruptions from the people, that by them their
sincerity may be proved, their graces exercised, and the mighty power of his
spirit manifested: This makes a Christian's work busy, and constant, having to
do with potent enemies within and without, Ephesians. 6. 4. which must be fought
every day, and a continual war maintained with them during life: without
fighting, no conquering; without striving, no crowning, 2 Timothy 2. 5. It Is with
a child of God, as with Israel when fighting with Amalek, if the hands of Faith
and Prayer be not held up, no conquest; when these are down, spiritual Amalek
prevails. O the losses that Christians sustain for want of mortification, by
reason of which their foiled corruptions rally up, and take their graces
captive! Let men neglect the constant practice of mortification, Si neglexerint
perpetuam praxim mortificationis vitia conculcata and subacta resumunt vires,
corruption abstensa repullulat and suffocata gratia spiritus sancti redit homo
ad ingenium suum. Dav.
(says Davenant) and their vices that were trod down and subdued, will soon
resume their strength; their corruption that was lopt off will bud out again,
and the graces of the Spirit in them being almost strangled, man returns to his
former temper. Hence come those dreadful fears of good souls, that the grace of
God was never in truth in them, but that they are still in a carnal state, and
shall perish at last, and all this for want of carrying on the work of
mortification in them: As a lively Faith overcomes sin, so prevailing lust
weakens Faith, 1 John 5. 4. Ephesians. 4. 2. 30. withstands the sealing-work of the
Spirit, and overthrows the work of the Soul's hopes, filling it with fears
about the unsoundness of his estate, and the miserable issue of all his
profession, experience and labor. By this ladder of unmortified sin, the Devil
scales the royal fort of Faith, throws down its Towers, and man's it against the
Soul's peace, comfort and holiness. O the mischief that Christians do to
themselves by indulging sin, and for want of a vigorous pursuit of this great
duty of mortification! which makes them like to Israel, who being once upon the
borders of Canaan, were by their unbelief, and unsubdued lusts, brought back
near the confines of Egypt again, and after a wearying unconstant life, were
consumed in the wilderness at last. So it is with gracious Souls, by their
unmortified lusts, after some accesses to grace, tastes of divine love, hopes
of glory, and fairness for Heaven, they are brought back to the borders of Hell
again, and made to spend their life in an uncomfortable and souldistressing
wilderness. Christians, it is not security enough for your peace and spiritual
welfare, that sin has lost its dominion, unless its strength and life be
impaired also: dethroned sin may bid you many a battle, and give you sore
foils, and though it may not recover the Scepter, yet it may keep the Sword;
and when it cannot mount the Throne, may get into some strong hold, and put the
soul to much trouble e're it be beaten out again. Neither is it safe to
acquiesce in some temporary truce with thy corruptions; bloody overthrows have
been oft-times the events of a cessation of war for a season: Joab blew the
Trumpet, and all the people stood still, and pursued after Israel no more,
neither fought they any more, (i. e. for that time.) 2 Samuel 2. 28. And yet it is
said, chapter 3. 1. Now there was long war between the house of Saul and the house
of David; but the house of David waxed stronger and stronger, and the house of
Saul waxed weaker and weaker: Sin may seem to yield, and trouble thy soul no
more for a time, but carry it quietly with thee, as Joab did to Abner, and on a
sudden smite thee to the ground, though not to death, 2 Samuel 3. 27. Nor is it
enough that sin be in chains, and under restraint through the present strength
of overcoming grace, unless it be hanged up in chains as a dead malefactor.
Secured lust may break prison, and escape from under thy hand (as Benhadab did
from Ahab) to thy greater hurt, 1 King. 20. 42. What mischief have chained
Bears and Lions done when broken loose? Believer, thy condition is not safe
till thy sin be dead: what Saul said to Jonathan, 1 Samuel 20. 31. may be applied
to thy case; As long as the Son of Jesse lives upon the ground thou shall not
be established, nor thy Kingdom; wherefore now send and fetch him to me, for he
shall surely dye: So can thy Soul obtain no stability in grace, but be always
full of ups and downs, and have wars and changes against thee till thy
corruptions be subdued.

Quest. But how shall I do to get sin mortified? I am convinced it is my duty,
but find it not my capacity: After all my strivings, prayers and hopes, I am
still foiled, and fear I shall one day perish by the hand of these Saul's. O
when shall the Kingdom be restored to Israel? When shall the deliverer come to
my soul? What shall I do to get these mountains a plain before Zerubbabel? and
these Thieves crucified with my Lord Christ? Sol. If ever thou meanest to get
the death of thy sins, take these directions.

Direct. 1. First, Do nothing that might tend to strengthen sin. Romans 13. 14.
Make (...), no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the (...). lusts thereof: the
word signifies a provident care of the flesh, as men do to maintain themselves
and families: Don't take up your thoughts about it, how to feed and please your
lusts: Never think to kill your corruptions while you secretly feed and
maintain them: Many complain of their corruptions, and yet all the while feed
and strengthen them. There are several things that do contribute maintenance to
men's lusts.

First, Delightful Remembrance of former sins, do wonderfully please a carnal
heart, and stir up desires to future sins: As the remembrance of former mercies
is food to present faith. Psalm. 74. 14. Thou brakest the head of the Leviathan
in pieces, and gave him to be meat to the people inhabiting the wilderness.
Israel's deliverance out of Egypt, and the breaking of Pharaoh's power,
seriously thought on, was food to Israel's faith in the wilderness: And such
are delightful remembrances of former sins: When a person takes pleasure to
think and talk of his former evils; this does feed present desires and hopes of
sin. When Paul would help on the Romans freedom from the service of sin, he
labors to get their present thoughts of former sins embittered. Romans 6. 21.
What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end
of these things is death.

Secondly, Pleasing Imaginations, and fancying of present or future sins, do
wonderfully strengthen the habit of sin. The Lord charges Israel's sinful
actions, as the product of their wicked thoughts. Isa. 65. 2. Which walks in
a way that was not good, after their own thoughts. Sin first begins in the
head, and ends in the feet; first working thoughts of sin, and then actual
works of sin: The Devil does usually strike the first fire on the tinder of
men's thoughts, which afterward burns in their hearts and lives. Jam. 1. 15.
When lust has conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished
brings forth death. They that would avoid the birth of sin in their lives
must take heed of the conception of sin in their pleasing thoughts. They that
would help on Babylon's ruin, must prevent its propagation, and put a timely
check to their growth; dashing their little ones against the stone, Psalm. 137.
9. Leave Sit nihil in te Babylonicum.
not any thing that belongs to Babylon in thy soul, says Hugo.

Thirdly, Unbelief strengthens lust. Jer. 2. 25. But thou said there is no
hope; no, for I have loved strangers, and after them I will go, (...).
Desperatum est (scil.) cor. My heart despairs of help; I fear it will never be
better, therefore I will go on in my way. Unbelief strengthens lust, and makes
the soul a prey to it. 'Twas by unbelief Israel fell in the wilderness, both
into sin and ruin. And the Apostle cautions Christians that they fall not by
the same example of unbelief, Heb. 4. 11. 'Twas unbelieving desponding fears
had almost turned up David's heels, had not grace succored him by the Word,
Psalm. 73. 2. But as for me, my feet were almost gone, my steps had well-nigh
slipped. And whence came this weakness of grace, and strength of corruption? why
it was from the apprehended prosperity of sin and sinners; and the succesless
issues of his profession and obedience: Verse 15. Verily I have cleansed my
heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence: If this be the fruit of my
holiness, then all my labor is in vain; it is to no purpose I have followed God
all this while, if wickedness shall carry it at last. O take heed of unbelief
if ever you would get down your lusts.

Fourthly, Presumption secretly conveys in relief to sin, and succors it
against all the sieges of Word and Spirit. 2 Pet. 2. 10. Presumptuous are they,
self-willed. A presumptuous soul is a self-pleasing soul, one that
pertinaciously and wilfully seeks his own carnal contentments, (...), (as the
word imports) he will boldly adventure on the most dangerous issues of sin, so
he may but gratify his lusts, and obtain his sinful desires; he fears no
dangers, sticks at no hardships, though God and his Word be against him; it
makes the sinner go against all warnings, threatenings, counsels, with hopes of
success. Numb. 14. 44. But they presumed to go up to the hill top, verse 42.
The Lord forbad them to go, threatening his remove from them, and their ruin,
if they durst go up against his will. Nay, it was said, The Ark of the Covenant
of the Lord; and Moses went not out of the Camp; would not stir one foot with
them in that wicked enterprise, yet they would go. O take heed of Presumption,
that does exceedingly keep up sin, and pull down the sinner.

Fifthly, Carnal security is a great friend to sin, and contributes much to its
advantage, when Christians let down their watch, and lie down to slumber, then
corruptions rise up and prevails over them. When the Amalekites were spread
abroad upon all the Earth, eating, and drinking, and dancing, because of all
the great spoil that they had taken out of the Land of the Philistines, 1 Samuel
30. 16, 17. David fell upon them, and smote them from the twilight, even to the
evening of the next day, and there escaped not a man of them save four hundred
young men which rode upon Camels and fled. So it is with gracious souls after
some great mercy, either some special privilege enjoyed, some spoils upon
their lusts obtained, or token of God's favor received, they become secure,
proud and careless, letting down their watch, exposing themselves to
temptations, and soon become a prey to sin and Satan. Jer. 48, 11. Moab has
been at ease from his youth, and he has settled on his lees, and has not been
emptied from vessel to vessel, neither has he gone into Captivity, therefore
his taste remains in him, and his scent is not changed. If you would have a
change on your carnal hearts, take heed of carnal security in your hearts.

Sixthly, Self-indulgence helps to nourish sin, when persons are lovers of
their own selves; seek to please, indulge and gratify the desires of carnal
natural-self; then lusts thrive in that soul. He that feasts his body (says
Ephrem Syrus) and starves his soul, is like him that feasts his slave, and
starves his wife. 2 Timothy 3. 2. Self-love leads the Van to all the iniquities
and hypocrisies of the last times. O the troops of sin that march under the
banner of self-love, and are secured by its conduct; hence self-denial is the
first step to Christianity, Mat. 16. 24. You can never prosper in your
salvation-attempts, or decay in your soul-ruining lusts, till you learn to deny
your selves in every part of it. Take heed of a selfish spirit, if you would be
sincere souls, and see the death of your lusts.

Seventhly, Opportunity favors sin exceedingly, and helps to keep its hopes
alive, and gives it occasion for its enlargement. Opportunity is the Midwife of
lust, and helps to deliver it of its inward conceptions and pregnant desires:
'Twas opportunity that blew the coal of David's lust into a flame, 2 Samuel 11.
2. and midwiv'd out Hezekiah's pride, Isa. 39. 2. Had it not been for
opportunity, Lot might have escaped the sin of incest, as well as the
sufferings of Sodom, Genesis 19. 30 to 37. and Judah's uncleanness with his
Daughter-in-law Tamar: 'Twas opportunity that exposed Dinah to a rape, and
Peter to the temptation of denying his Lord and Master. Take heed of
adventuring into the way of temptation, and going to the borders of
soul-danger; shun the occasions of evil; turn aside out of the way of snares,
Prove. 1. 15. chap. 4. 14, 15. Temptation feeds corruption, ensnares and
entangles the feet, and (as fuel) keeps in the fire of lust. You may as safely
suffer the sparks to come near to gunpowder, as opportunity to corruption.

Eighthly, Impenitency in sin strengthens the habit of sin. Jer. 8. 6. No man
repented him of his wickedness, saying, what have I done? every one turned to
his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle. They run on furiously in sin,
as the horse does into the battle, who runs till he sweats (says Theodoret.)
So they have no end or satiety of sin; and Talis cogitatio causa fuit
pertinacis nequitiae. Idem.
this impenitency in sin was the cause of all their pertinacy in sin.
Impenitency hardens the heart, and heaps up sin on sin unto the day of wrath,
Romans 2. 5. Take heed then of all those things that may in the least maintain
and keep up sin in your souls, as ever you think to bring it down: That Is the
first Advice.

Direct. 2. Secondly, Not only shun whatever might strengthen sin, but take
heed you go not out in your own strength against sin, if ever you think to
mortify it: He that would mortify sin, must be able to master Devils, Ephesians.
6. v. 12. But humane strength is no match for Devils: If man in his pure estate
were too weak for such an adversary, then much more impotent is impure and
imperfect man: It Is not the woman, but the woman's seed must bruise the Serpents
head, Genesis 3. 15. The Saints victory is through him that has loved them, and
given himself a sacrifice to God for them, Romans 16. 20. Romans 8. 37. Ephesians. 5.
2. It must be his armor and arm too must bring salvation from spiritual
enemies: Without me you can do nothing, John 15. 5. It Is this makes souls to
fail in their attempts against sin, that they set about it in a strength
inferior to sin. When Augustine after all his strivings, vows and duties to
bring down his corruptions, found them still too hard for him? he heard a voice
saying to him, In te stas and non stas.
Thou stand in thy self, and therefore thou do not stand: Whereupon he
betook himself to prayer, and faith in the blood of Christ, and so got some
victory over them. When the Exorcists, Act. 19. v. 15, 16. went to cast out
Devils by the bare Name of Christ without the Power of Christ; both they and
their attempts soon miscarried: Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye?
and the man in whom the evil spirit was, leapt on them, and overcame them, and
prevailed over them, so that they fled out of the house naked and wounded.
Creature-strength is too weak to master that enemy which has the power of Hell
to guard it. O go not out against sin

In the strength of your purposes and promises! Peter to his own cost, found
that too weak to secure him in an hour of temptation.

Go not out in the strength of your frames and affections: How easily can Satan
beat the Saints from these posts, and cast in a flood to drown their warmest
affections! The Galatians that were high in frames and affections, and could
talk of a blessedness, while spiritual, soon felt an alteration when they
became carnal, Gal. 4. 15. chap. 3. 3.

Go not out in the strength of your duties and performances; these are too weak
without faith and the arm of Christ to charm these Serpents, and disarm
spiritual adversaries.

Go not out in the strength of your graces; these are not Christ, nor have an
Almightiness in them to bring down sin and Satan: It Is not grace in Believers,
but grace in Christ, that is sufficient to guard the soul from Satan's
buffetings, and to rescue it from his temptations, 2 Cor. 12. 9.

Direct. 3. Thirdly, Get the union between thy heart and sin broken: The life
of sin lies in that union it has with the heart; if that be broken, sin dies;
as a man then cease to live, when the union between the soul and body is
dissolved: Sin has too great a part even in a Believer's heart, which moves
for some respect and indulgence toward it: When the enlightened mind says,
Crucify it, the carnal affections cry, Spare it, is it not a little one? And
the heart (like the City of Iconium about Paul and Barnabas) is divided. Act.
14. 4. And the multitude of the City was divided, and part held with the Jews,
and part with the Apostles. So it is with the gracious soul; sin has too great
a potency in the carnal mind, which must be broken, or sin will never die: Get
the Spirit's interest in thy heart strengthened, and sins party weakened every
day.

There are seven things that have a great tendency to weaken the heart's union
with sin, and withdraw its affections from it.

First, An abiding sense of the great Love of Christ toward it; that he should
pity him, when pitied of none, left of all; love him, when wallowing in his
blood, and altogether unlovely in himself; love him, while an enemy to God, yea
to his own soul; love him so as to give himself for him; to leave his Father's
glory, and take up shame, yea taste of death for him, love him, and pass by
others; call him, and leave others: the serious consideration of this has a
great constraint on the gracious heart to hate sin, which Christ so hates, and
in love to the soul came to destroy.

Secondly; A due apprehension of the unconceivable sufferings of the Lord
Jesus, and all procured by sin: He was despised and rejected of men, a man of
sorrows, and acquainted with grief; he bore our griefs, and carried our
sorrows: he was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities;
he was oppressed and afflicted, and (that which gave an extremity to all these
sorrows) it pleased the Lord to bruise him, to put him to grief, and to make
his soul an offering for sin: This made the blows the heavier, that they came
from a Father's hand: Had an enemy done it, it might have been easier born,
(though his torments were unimaginable) but mine equal, mine acquaintance, my
familiar friend, Psalm. 55. 12, 13. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me,
Matt. 27. 46? and all this the fruit of sin: This makes a gracious soul to hate
sin, that has been so cruel to his best and only friend.

Thirdly; A believing sight of the excellency and holiness of Christ, has a
mighty power to draw off the heart from sin: when the Prophet had got a view of
the Lord in his holiness, he has presently unlovely and troublesome thoughts
of sin. Isa. 6. ver. 1. to 7. Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of
unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips; for mine
eyes have seen the King the Lord of Hosts: A sight of Christ's holiness will
make sin seem exceeding vile and loathsome, and the soul restless till
delivered from it: It Is unacquaintedness with the holiness and beautiful
perfections of Christ, that makes men fall in love with that deformed monster,
sin: the transcendent glory of Christ is his grace; and the glory of the Saints
is to be like him, Joh. 1. 14. which is obtained through the immediate views of
him. 1 John 3. 2. When he appears, we shall be like him; for we shall see him
as he is: The hope of which sight, and glory, is soul-purifying now: ver. 3.
And every man that has this hope, purifieth himself, as he is pure: No sooner
had the Apostles a sight of Christ's glorious grace, but the next thing was a
receiving from his fullness grace for grace, Joh. 1. 14. 16.

Fourthly; A sensible sight of the exceeding sinfulness and evil of sin will
help to loosen this conjunction between the heart and sin: when once Paul came
to see the exceeding sinfulness of sin, and felt the killing fruits of it in
his soul, his heart presently came to be loosened from the ruling power of it.
Romans 7. 11. 13. That which I do, I allow not; what I would, that do I not; but
what I hate, that do I. The sense of the shameful fruits of sin was influential
on the believing Romans toward their freedom from sin, Romans 6. 21. 22.
Christians, get your eye more intently fixed on the cursed nature of sin; how
contrary to God; how like to Devils; how filthy loathsome and abominable: look
upon the certain dreadful effects of sin here, and to all eternity, if not
removed; it has brought death on the Son of God, and destruction on the Sons
of Men, bondage on the creatures, a curse on every thing men do and enjoy;
enmity against God, alienation from God, robbing him of his glory, crossing his
will, spoiling his works, grieving his spirit, hindering the soul in duty,
depriving it of mercy, exposing it to judgment, necessitating it to evil,
weakening his hopes, breaking his peace, opposing his grace, and endangering
either the loss, or lessening of his glory; with other innumerable mischiefs,
injuries, cruelty and miseries that follow the heels of it; with the great
difficulty in its removal. I say; be more in the heart-affecting consideration
of these things, and you cannot choose, but with Paul, be weary of sin, loath
it, and long for a separation from it, Romans 7. 24. How can ye love that knife
that has stabbed your dearest Friend, Father, Husband; yea, your own soul? How
can you like that cloud and veil which stands between you and the Son of
righteousness, and keeps these quickening warming beams from you, which would
have cleared and strengthened your heart? How can you hug the fetters, kiss the
walls and doors that imprison your souls in bondage, and keep you from your
beloved, and from the glorious liberty of the Sons of God? what pleasure can
you take in that Thief which stole your richest Jewels, and has brought you to
a morsel of bread?

5ly, Apprehension of that high dignity and honorable state to which grace has
advanced you, and those peculiar glorious privileges which you are now
invested with, has a mighty influence on a gracious heart toward the
abhorring of sin, 1 John 3. 1, 2, 3. Oh how unsuitable are works of darkness to
the children of light! how unbecoming is vile raiment to them that dwell in
Kings Houses: A Swine's snout to a Saint's eye; thick clay, and defiling dirt
on the hands, face, and heart of the heirs of glory, and children of the
Kingdom: what an unlovely sight is it to see Kings wallow in the mire as Swine;
and such who enjoy the privileges of Angels, to do the work of Devils?
Remember that thou art Son to a King, said one to Antigonus, and that will keep
thee from base courses. O Christians! work in these thoughts upon the heart,
and see whether there can be any room left for the works of the flesh, or
affections thereof.

Sixthly; Expectations of future glory will help you to despise that abominable
thing, sin: Can you rationally look for a Throne with your Beloved hereafter,
and lodge in the bosom of your Idols and adulterous Lovers now? How can you
think that head shall wear a Crown of glory with Christ, who is always plotting
to put Crowns of Thorns on Christ's head now? To reap life everlasting then,
who sow to the flesh now? Do you hope for that time when you shall be
unclothed of sin? and can you make it your present work to put on sin, hold
fast sin? how inconsistent are desires of sin, with hopes of freedom?
Christians, don't deceive your souls, you cannot have sure grounds of
fellowship with God hereafter, and allow the least communion between your
hearts and sin now.

Seventhly, Maintained union and communion with Christ will break heart-union
and fellowship with sin: As heart-union with sin will not admit of union and
communion with God. Hos. 4. 17. Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone: I
will have no more to do with him; I Will leave, and remove from him: So union and
communion with God in Christ, will not bear union with sin. Hos. 2. 2. The Lord
would not say Israel was his Wife, until her Whoredoms were put out of her
sight, and her Adulteries from between her breasts: and no sooner did she
return to a believing sight of, and affectionate union with him, but she
presently cries out, What have I to do with Idols any more, Hos. 14. 8?
Contraries oppose and weaken each other. Psalm. 97. 10. Ye that love the Lord,
hate evil. Matthew. 6. 24. No man can serve two Masters, either he will hate the
one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the
other: ye cannot serve God and Mammon. Union with God is of an incorporating
nature. 1 Cor. 6. 17. He that is joined to the Lord is one spirit, and cannot
subsist without heart-separation from sin. 2 Cor 6. 16, 17. I will dwell in
them, and walk in them; -- wherefore come out from among them, and be ye
separate, says the Lord. Cleaving to Christ by Faith is the best way to the
relinquishment of sin. The soul that has constant fellowship with Christ, will
not care for other Lovers, Phil. 3. 8. That Is the third Direction: Get the
union between thy heart and sin broken.

Direct. 4. Fourthly, If you would mortify sin, strike at the root of it, and
get the body of this death destroyed, The life of the tree lies in the root;
lop off all the branches, yet if the root be sound, the tree lives, and the
branches will sprout out again, Job 14. 7, 8, 9. But if once the root be cut
off, the whole tree dies and ceases from bringing forth fruit. So it is with
sin, if you set against this or that particular corruption, and let the body of
death alone, not using means to weaken that, you will make but little of all
your endeavors; when you have quieted one lust, another rises: It Is but to
little purpose to lade away waters out of a ship, unless you stop the leak that
feeds them; while there is water in the Sea, it will be still running in. They
that will cure a disease, must get the cause removed: Original sin is the
source and fountain of all actual sins; as that is weakened, so will the
irruption of actual sins be abated: The way to prevent the inroads and
stranglings of a garrison, is to begirt the Fort, and not only keep them in,
but scale and attach the strong hold that secures them. This is the wisdom of a
Christian (says Mr. Buroughs) that when he comes to labor against any
corruption, he does not spend his time so much against this or that particular
corruption, but strike at the body of corruption: -- And hence is the reason
that Christians in a little time grow so much, and get so much power against
their corruptions, whereas others are a long time before they get any power at
all. It Is with a Believers heart, as with a garden overgrown with weeds; though
the tops be often plucked off, while the mores and strings abide underground,
all they do to cleanse it is labor in vain, they still spring up afresh: So is
it with men's corruptions, till the root be more withered and weakened. Now to
further this work:

First, Be deeply sensible of your sinful natures, as well as sinful actions:
This the faithful complain mostly of, even their sinful natures. Isa. 64. 6. We
are all as an unclean thing, and our righteousnesses as filthy rags. Psalm. 51.
5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me. Romans
7. 24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death!

Secondly, Apply the Death of Christ by faith to the whole body of sin in you.
Faith fetches virtue from a crucified Christ to dry up the bloody issue of sin,
Luke 8. 44. chap. 6. 19. This being the appointed way of God to bring down sin.
The foundation of a soul's redemption from sin is laid in the Death of Christ.
1 Pet. 2. 24. Who bare our sins for us in his own body on the tree, that we
being dead to sin, might live to righteousness. This death to sin is the effect
of Christ's dying for sin; this being the end of his Death, to redeem his
people from all iniquity, Titus 2. v. 14. Christ's Death for sin was not only
a pattern to Believers, but a medicine and appointed means to destroy their
sin. Romans 6. 6. Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him; that the
body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. 'Twas
by the Cross of Christ that Paul was crucified to the world, and the world to
him, Gal. 6. 14. Carry over thy old man to the Cross of Christ, and bury thy
strong lusts by faith in the grave of Christ, deriving virtue thence to kill
thy sin. Faith brings the soul into a fellowship with the Death of Christ, to
receive the benefits and energy thereof; one of which benefits is a killing
power on sin.

Thirdly, Improve Faith in the Promises. The death of sin in Believers, is part
of the New Covenant, and as sure as pardon. Micah 7. 19. He will turn again, he
will have compassion, he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will cast all
their sins into the depth of the Sea, Mat. 1. 21. He shall save his people from
their sins, Romans 6. v. 14. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. which promises are sure to all the
seed: The Lord Jesus came on purpose to perform the promises to, and in his
people. Romans 15. 8. To redeem them from all iniquity, Titus 2. 14. And to
destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. And says in these Promises is
soul-cleansing, and sin-subduing: Carry over thy unruly corruptions to Christ
in the Promises, and sue for justice upon them.

Fourthly, Implore the constant help of the Spirit of Grace, both to discover,
oppose and destroy thy corruptions: This work is too hard for flesh and blood;
nothing short of the Eternal Spirit can get a full conquest over sin, and the
power and wiles of Satan in thy soul: It Is through the Spirit Believers come to
mortify the deeds of the body, Romans 8. 13. And by the spirit of judgment and
burning, the Lord purges away the blood of Jerusalem, Isa. 4. 4. And by the Law
of the Spirit of Life, we are made free from the Law of sin and death, Romans 8.
2. Take heed of grieving and impeding the Spirit of Holiness, by which his
gracious, sanctifying influences are suspended, and thou be left to the
weaknesses of thy own spirit. Be much in prayer and fervent cries for the
Spirit's daily assistance in this great work.

Fifthly, Give no place to the least motions of sin, but maintain a constant
war against the whole powers and body of sin: The want of preventing care,
timely opposition, and constant warfare against all the corruptions of flesh
and spirit, is one thing that lays gracious souls under the entanglements and
prevalency of their lusts, James. 4. 17. 1 These. 5. 2. Romans 12. 9. We embrace
(says one) the desires of our temptations upon implicit faith, not examining
and withstanding the first entrance of temptation, nor crushing the first
motions of sin. It Is easy to crush the Serpent's Egg, but dangerous
conflicting with it when it becomes a Cockatrice. A rebellion may be with less
strength dissipated at its first appearance, than suppressed when it has
gathered head, Isa. 14. 29. The Devil's first assault (says Chrysostom) is
violent; resist that, and his second will be weaker, and that being resisted
also, he proves a coward. A Christian's wisdom and interest lies much in these
two things:

First, To take the start of sin, to strike the first blow, to be in the field
before it; yea to baracado up its way, and to fall in upon its quarters; to lay
in provision against its very rising; to fortify the heart against the least
consent to sin, by applying threatenings and promises betimes, and furnishing
the heart with sovereign and scriptural antidotes against it: The neglect of
this preventing care, deprives the soul of needful helps against its surprisal,
and so renders it weak against its first assaults. Arius at first (says
Hierom) was but a spark, but being not suppressed betimes, he proved the
incendiary of the whole Church.

Secondly, To prosecute the soul's victory over sin: Sometimes the Lord gives
his people power over a lust, by a sanctified affliction, or blessed ordinance,
which victory, if pursued, might tend to the total subduing of it; but usually
we grow secure after such successes, and do not follow the victory, but give
over too soon, as Joash in his-smiting on the ground, 2 Kings 13. 18, 19. The
Prophet bid him shoot the arrows of the Lord's deliverance, and smite upon the
ground; and it is said, He smote thrice, and stayed; and the man of God was
wroth with him; and said, Thou should have smitten five or six times, then
had thou smitten Syria till thou had consumed it. O what advantage might a
Christian get if he did but follow his victory over his corruptions, and not
suffer them to recruit and gather strength again! Give no rest to thy lusts,
nor space for reviving; no not for a moment, but keep up thy warfare every day.

Sixthly, If you would further the death of sin, keep up the life of grace: As
the life of sin weakens grace; so the life of grace keeps down and weakens sin.
Gal. 5. 16. Walk in the Spirit, and you shall not fulfill the lusts of the
flesh. Keep up grace, and sin will down. As when the house of David waxed
stronger, the house of Saul waxed weaker, 2 Samuel 3. 1. It Is written of Ephrem
Syrus, that though he was a man much given to passion in his youth; yet after
he entered into a strict course of life, he was never seen to be angry with any
man. As you cannot get power over sin, but by the Spirit of Grace; so you
cannot keep the head over sin, but by the Life of Grace: Get your graces
strengthened, and you will find your corruptions weakened.

Thirdly, You must carry on Renovation in grace, and the inward work of
Sanctification every day. Ephesians. 3. 23, 24. And be renewed in the spirit of
your minds: And that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness (...). Schol.
After the work of Mortification, the Apostle presses Christians to this work
of Renovation, or Internal Holiness; be renewed in the spirit of your minds (
i. e.) in your minds by the Holy Spirit; the mind being put for the whole man,
and internal faculties of the soul; both understanding, will, affections and
conscience; all must be renewed by the Spirit, called the New Creature, 2 Cor.
5. 17. or Workmanship of Christ transformed after his own Image in
righteousness and true holiness; and renewed in knowledge, Ephesians. 4. 24. Col. 3.
10. When the soul is truly regenerated, there is the stamp or eexmplar of
Christ's holiness, placed in the whole soul in truth; but in weak measures at
first, which must be renewed or enlarged in the soul, till it comes to the
fullness of the measure of the stature of Christ. Christians at the first
change, are compared to new born babes, 2 Pet. 2. 2. weak in grace, but under a
natural disposition and obligations to growth and increases in this grace of
God, both intensively and extensively: This is a Christian's duty by divine
command, and comports with the appointment of God in order to it, 2 Pet. 3. v.
18. 1 Pet. 2. 2. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. It Is the way by which grace becomes
glory, and is greatly necessary to perfect a soul's holiness; that so he might
come to his full stature and conformity to Christ, Ephesians. 4. 16. Romans 8. 29.
And by the increases of grace may be enabled to dispatch all his duties, bear
his burdens, and bear up under his temptations, that he might be capable to
enjoy all his mercies, to glorify the God of grace, and to be made meet for
the enjoyment of God in glory: On all which accounts it becomes the Christian's
great concern to press after larger measures of grace every day; to grow up
into him in faith and love, who is the head in all things, Ephesians. 4. 15. To
grow downward in humility and self-denial; to grow extensively in every part of
holiness, and greater enlargements in every grace; to wax stronger and stronger
in the grace that is in Christ Jesus: Perfecting holiness in the sight of God;
and pressing more and more after the price of the High Calling of God in Christ
Jesus: The want of which increases of the Spirit, does much obscure the glory
of Christ in Believers, cloud their evidences, and render them too weak for
their corruptions, their growing trials and duties. Christians, content not
your selves with the truth of grace, without daily growth in grace. Improve
your interest in the Resurrection of Christ, by believing for the dailing
quickening of your hearts, and raising of your affections to things above, and
attracting your desires and whole souls after God, grace and glory. Be much in
internal soul-work, of heart searching, soul watching, divine contemplation,
secret ejaculations, and soul breathings after God, and higher manifestations
of his light, life and love.

Be constant in every appointment of God, public and private; of prayer,
reading, hearing, holy conference, that you may get nourishment thereby
administered to your souls: Get under all the dews and showers of grace for your
fruitfulness.

Be spiritual as well as frequent in exercising grace under the means of Grace;
without this you cannot serve God acceptably, Heb. 12. 28. or receive from him
who is the head nourishment to your souls, but by these bands and joints of
faith and love, Col. 2. 19. Formality eats out that sap which should make you
green and flourishing: A dead, cold heart under the Word, can no more digest it
to nutriment, than a dead body can concoct natural food.

Maintain hungring desires after the word of grace, and appointed means to your
spiritual growth, 1 Pet. 2. 3. Hungring after food argues a good digestion, and
a sound concoction furthers nourishment: Keep up warm affection to every way of
God, living on Christ for all the good and blessing of them. Psalm. 84. 5.
Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, in whose heart are the ways of
them; who passing through the Valley of Baca, make it a Well; the rain also
fills the Pools; they go from strength to strength, every one in Sion
appearing before God. When Jehoshaphat's heart was lifted up in the ways of the
Lord, it is said he waxed great exceedingly, 2 Chronicles. 17. 6. 12.
Heart-enlargement in the ways of God is a notable help to soul-thrivings: Take
this one thing more; be poor in spirit, if you would be rich in grace: Such are
under the promise of being satisfied, of being guided in judgment, of
increasing their joy; to such he will give grace, and revivings. Humble souls
Reyner; Excellency of Grace.
(says one) are empty vessels, which God will fill; are low plants, which God
will make to grow: To be nothing in our own eyes, is the way to receive all
good things, even grace in abundance from God; Psalm. 22. 26. and 25. 9. Isa.
29. 19. Prove. 3. 34. Isa. 57. 15.

Fourthly; To keep your evidences for Heaven fair and legible, is another part
of your Salvation-work: this will abundantly comfort you under all your
tribulations, quicken you to a lively dispatch of your duties, give you a
humble boldness in your approaches to God; arm you against the fears of death,
and administer to you an abundant entrance into the everlasting Kingdom of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Beware of quenching and grieving the Spirit of
grace, by which its sealing-work is hindered: Take heed of laying blots upon
your evidences, by any allowed iniquity in your hearts, or unpurged defilement
in your hands, which will weaken your confidence in the Lord, fill you with
dejection and despondency of spirit, and give your spiritual adversary great
advantage over your souls, 2 Pet. 1. 10. 1 John 5. 13. 2 Cor. 1. 12. 1 Cor. 15.
58. Heb. 10. 22. Job 19. 25, 26, 27. 2 Pet. 1. 11.

Keep up your sincerity and truth in the innerman, be often looking to the
principle of your actions, that it be gracious; and to your ends in every thing
you do, that they be pure, singly, and ultimately aiming at God, his will and
glory in every duty, action and undertaking.

If you would evidence the truth of grace, you must be every day in the
exercise of grace, and conscionable endeavors to live up to known duties,
exercising a conscience void of offense toward God and man, not resting in any
measures of grace, but going on toward perfection, and aiming at greater
enlargements in your souls and graces continually.

Thirdly; Carry on all these natural, moral, and religious duties that concern
others. This is the will of God, and part of your sanctification. Matthew. 5. 16.
Let your light shine before men, and by your good works glorify your Father
which is in Heaven. 1 Cor. 10. 32. Walk unblamable toward all men, giving no
offense to any, lest the Gospel be blamed. Phil. 1. 10. That you may be
sincere, and without offense to the day of Christ. 1 Pet. 2. 12. Having your
conversation honest among those you have to do with; dealing justly with all
men, rendering to every man his due; doing good to all, as opportunity serves,
Gal. 6. 10. Psalm. 35. 13. and be kind to the just and unjust, seeking the
salvation of sinners, mourning over them, praying for them, instructing of
them; seeking by a humble, holy, and affectionate carriage to win them over to
the Lord Jesus, who are not won by the word, Luke 19. 41. Psalm. 51. 13. 2 Pet.
3. 1. Loving, praying for, doing good unto your greatest enemies. Virtues
separated (says Chrysostom) are annihilated; equity without goodness, is
severity; and justice without piety, cruelty: It Is better to do good than to
receive good. 'Twas said of Mr. Hooker, That he was born for the good of many,
but few born for the good of him: That you love, delight in, and do good to all
Saints, as Saints, that carry the image of God on them. That you make
conscience of your relative duties both in your own houses, and in the house of
God. Psalm. 101. 2. Walking within your own houses with a perfect heart; to be
Christians at home as well as abroad; showing the same spirit, zeal and
affection to your Families as to others; doing your utmost to keep up the
service of God in your houses, both together and asunder, morning and evening
in prayer, and reading the word of God, Acts 10. 2. 9. Josh. 24. 18. Psalm. 25.
10. Matthew. 6. 6. That you faithfully discharge those mutual duties you owe to
each other, as Husband, Wife, Parents, Children, Masters, Servants, Ephesians. 5. 22.
to the end of chap. 6. To be meek, loving, peaceable in your words and
carriages toward one another, giving that due respect as the place and
relation calls for from each other: To be holy and profitable in your
discourses, seeking the spiritual welfare, edification and salvation of each
others souls, as of your own, Deuteronomy. 11. 19. Prove. 22. 6. chapter 23. 13. Col. 3.
12, to 16. Heb. 12. 14. Genesis 18, 19. The want of which due and Christian
carriages in your houses brings up an evil report on the ways of God, renders
the truth of your grace questionable, hinders the gracious presence of God with
you, and removes his blessing from you, Ephesians. 4. 29. Romans 11. 14. You whom grace
has privileged with a place and name within the walls of God's house, do
stand obliged to fellowship-duties of love, care and faithfulness to each
other; considering one another to provoke to love and good works, Joh. 15. 12.
Heb. 10. 24. and esteem each other better than your selves: To seek one
another good as your own, serving each other in love, Phil. 2. 3. 1 Cor. 10.
24. 33. Gal. 5. 13. To sympathize with each other in affliction, Col. 3. 12.
and to be helpful to them in bearing their burdens, supplying their wants,
comforting, counselling, and supporting them in all their tribulations, Heb.
13. 3. visiting the sick and imprisoned, feeding the hungry, clothing the
naked, warning the unruly, admonishing the offenders, bearing one another
infirmities, covering their weaknesses, avoiding whatever might offend and
injure each others souls, or lessen their affections, or break the unity of
spirit and bond of peace between them; but by a sweet, humble-self denying, and
faithful carriage, to engage the heart to each other, praying for the whole
body, and every member: To be gracious and spiritual in all your communion and
converses, seeking the prosperity of Sion, rejoicing in each others graces and
good, as in your own; doing all you may toward their comfort and salvation,
Mat. 25. 42. Acts 20. 35. 1 John 3. 17. Romans 15. 1. and 16. 17. Lev. 19. 10. 2
Cor. 12. 20. Col. 4. 6. Phil. 2. 17, 18. Tit. 2. 12. 2 Cor. 13. 7. Psalm. 15. 2.
Col. 3. 9.

In your Callings, commerce and dealings with men, to be just, honest, and
faithful, doing as you would be done unto, not defrauding one another, but
speaking the truth in all your bargainings, and performing your promises,
though to your hurt. This is a considerable part of your heavenly Trade, and
that wherein the credit of Religion does eminently lie; the pleasing and
glorifying of God, the good of others, the propagation of the Gospel, the peace
and salvation of your own fouls, even in the faithful discharge of these
natural, moral, and religious duties you owe unto others.

This is the first part of heavenly work; work of a heavenly nature as well as
manner, both with respect to God, our own souls, and others.

Secondly, Another part of heavenly work is to do earthly things in an heavenly
manner: Though the things of the World are of a different nature from things
above, yet when rightly managed, they are subservient to them, and come within
the compass of this Heavenly Trade: To which three things are needful.

1 To do earthly things by heavenly rules. 2 With heavenly hearts. 3 To
heavenly ends.
First, Then is earthly work part of your Heavenly Trade, when you transact it
by heavenly rules; every Science has its Maxims; distinct Governments have
their distinct Laws: So has every Trade its rules, principles and instructions
by which it is carried on. Earthly Traders have their rules and methods by
which they manage their businesses, as may most comport with the end they
propose, and the advance of their own earthly interests; and so it is with
heavenly Traders, though they have to do with earthly things, yet they must act
about them by heavenly rules.

Now there are ten rules which heavenly Merchants must observe in the
management of their earthly affairs.
Rule 1. First, Be sure the matter of your employments be good, that your
Callings be lawful, and the things you do be just and honest in the sight of
God: Evil things can never be well done: meddle not with prohibited goods; do
nothing that either in its nature, use, or by divine Law becomes evil, 2 Cor.
13. 7. Phil. 4. 8. Ephesians. 4. 28. Let your Callings be Versetur circa id quod
licitum est in se utire generi humano and famae bonae. Ames.
lawful, of good report, and useful in your generation, not only for your own
interest and advantage, but for the service and good of others: For no man
lives to himself, Romans 14. 7. Such a calling as has God for its Author Opera
Deo placere non possunt si vitae suae institutum non est a Deo. Frid. Baldm.
being according to Scripture; and has God for its Teacher The works of that
calling cannot please God, where the calling it self is not of God.
(says Fenner) Isa. 28. 26. And as a man can manage with peace of conscience,
and be assured his work does please God, and he can pray for a blessing upon
it; which they cannot do who set on employments that tend to nourish vice and
wickedness, Romans 13. 14.

That your Recreations also be lawful; such as are free from scandal and
temptation, used by, and with persons fearing God, and such as have a tendency
to refresh the mind and body, the better disposing it to its necessary duties,
being sparingly and wisely used, so as to be no occasion of evil to others, and
religiously entered on by seeking to God for a right management of it, and
blessing on it. Such actions as come not under these characters, are not
becoming Christians, who must give an account to God for every vain word, much
more for idle actions, Mat. 12. 36. It Is part of that which will trouble souls
when their sins are bearing on them; that they have inherited lies, vanities,
and things wherein is no profit, Jer. 16. 19. Saints should be working nothing
but what has a good in it: Working with his hands the things that are good,
Ephesians. 4. 28. and which can bring some glory to God: Whatsoever you do (of
which Recreations is a part) do all to the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10, 31. But
what good to the body, foul or estate; what glory to God; what peace to
conscience in the day of Christ, can be found in carnal sports, scandalous
plays, cards, dice, lascivious dancings, and the like? which are the offspring
of chambering and wantonness, things wherein is little praise, virtue, or good
report; but rather the spots of Christianity, and bane of piety, which tend to
debauch the affections, to deaden the conscience, to nourish wantonness, and
seed a fleshly carnal mind, the end of which is death, Romans 13. 13. Phil. 4. 8.
Jude v. 12. 2 Pet. 2. 18. Romans 8. 6. For to be carnally minded is death, but to
be spiritually minded is life and peace. It is a double content to a generous
and well disposed nature, when he does good for his pleasure. Games of hazard
(says Du Moulin of Contentment.
a worthy Divine) do very much discompose the mind; they also provoke passion,
and cause much disturbance in the soul for things of nothing. Games that
consist in dexterity of body or mind, are much to be preferred before these:
Chess will sharpen the wit, but busy it over much, and toil the spirits,
instead of recreating them, which is the proper use of play: Of all gaming, the
less the better; and when it disorders the passions, the least is too much. He
that ventures much money at play, ventures with it not only the tranquillity
of his mind; but makes a certain loss of it whatever becomes of the money --
Squandring away of money in play, is not the way to make friends of that
unrighteous Mammon, that receive a man into everlasting habitations, but an
enemy rather that will turn him out of his temporal habitation; it is the way
to lose both Earth and Heaven: So then, whether we win or lose, we commit
robbery; for if we rob not our adversaries, we rob our selves, our families,
and God: We may add this also; such unprofitable Recreations devour that
precious treasure of irrecoverable, unvaluable, yea salvation-time; and uses
those hours in posting to Hell, which are too much neglected for hastening to
Heaven. O how careful then should souls that profess heavenly hopes be of their
earthly work, that it be such as may conduce to their accomplishment of them!

Rule 2. Secondly, Set upon earthly things in their proper place and order:
Seek first the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and all these
things shall be added to you, Caetera aut aderunt, aut certe non oberunt.
Mat. 6. 33. Let God have the uppermost Throne in your hearts, the fore-foot in
your walk, the first stroke in your work; give heavenly things the precedence,
both in estimation, affection and time, as things of greatest worth, and to
which you are chiefly obliged: That Is the due order and method of heavenly
Traders, to begin every day and work with God; serve God first, and then your
selves: Set apart some time for religious duties, before you set upon earthly
employments. Men will not go abroad into unwholsom air fasting: The things of
this world have a contagious breath in them: Break your fast with God every
morning, before you adventure on heart-ensnaring businesses: Labor with God
first for his presence with you, his wisdom to direct you, his grace and
strength to help, secure and bless you in your earthly labors. Antidote your
hearts with divine cordials every morning, before you get into the Pesthouse
of this world, and let something of Scripture lie nearest thy soul for counsel,
comfort, quickening every day: He (says Augustine) that has tasted the
sweetness of Divine love, will not care for temporal sweetness. Meddle not with
the thorns of this world, till you have fenced your hearts and hands by prayer,
and the sword of the Spirit: It Is more haste than good speed to run into the
world before you have spoken with God: The lawful way to earthly employments
lies by Heavens gates. Christians, God will sue you for trespasses if you take
any other way to your trades and employments in the world, than his prescribed
way of religious duties. Besides, you have need of God's eye and hand in every
thing you do: You know not the snares and deaths that lie in your employments,
and the dangers you are subject to in every step you go, and in every thing you
do: You may go forth in the morning, and never return more; some have died as
Israel did, with meat in their mouths; others have fallen down dead in their
work, broke their necks in a journey, been found dead in the way: O set on
earthly work in God's way; go not about the world till you have been with God,
and secured your All in his hands.

Rule 3. Thirdly, Keep your earthly business within the bounds of due time. He
that has allotted you your work, has allotted you your time for it: it
consists not with man's state, relation and interest, to be arbitrary in any
thing, but to walk by rule. There is a time for every thing under the Sun,
Eccles. 3. 1. A time for every purpose, and for every work, verse 17. Job 7. 1.
As there is an appointed time to man on earth; so there is an appointed time to
man for earthly things: He that has set bounds to the world, has not left
worldly employments without bounds, but has fixed men's earthly affairs within
their proper season. Psalm. 104. 23. Man goes forth to his work and to his
labor until the evening. The Psalmist acknowledges here the power and
providence of God in setting bounds to his creatures; bounds to the Sun and
Moon. Verse 19. He appointed the Moon for seasons, and the Sun knows his
going down: Bounds to the day and night. Verse 20. Thou make darkness, and it
is night: he limits the labors of wild beasts and men; the beasts have their
preyingtime confined to the night. Verse 20. 22. And it is night wherein all
the beasts of the forest do creep forth; the Sun rises, they gather themselves
together, and lay them down in their dens. Men have their working-time allotted
in the day: Man goes forth to his work and labor until the evening; that is,
to the end of their working-day, which consisted among the Jews of twelve
hours. John 11. 9. Are there not twelve hours in the day? the usual time for
men to dispatch their earthly work in. The Lord would not Providentia ergo Dei
noluit sic prolixam operandi continuationem ut hominum vires nimium atteret,
sed modum constituit.
(says Musculus) have men's labors drawn out so far as to wear out their
strength, but has set bounds to it. As the Lord would not have the world to
take up men's hearts; so he would not have it to eat out their time, or encroach
on these seasons that are due to greater concerns. God, Nature, Grace, thy own
soul, and the spiritual good of others, have their claims, as well as thy
earthly calings, to this little inch of this time. O consume not thy precious
day on things that are temporal, and neglect thy opportunities for things
eternal: do not enslave thy body beyond thy beasts, which have their times of
rest; nor exhaust that strength which better things call for, upon an empty
perishing world. Excessive labors beyond their due time, do argue either too
much desire of these things, or too little faith in God, and are reproved by
the Lord as the vanity and practice of them, who are not his beloved ones,
Psalm. 127. 2. It Is lamentable to see such as would be thought the heirs of
Heaven, so excessively taken up in enlarging their possessions on earth;
engrossing all their time early and late, about their earthly affairs, leaving
nothing but a few unserviceable minutes for God and their souls. O Christians!
Keep the stream of your earthly affections and labors within the banks of
allowed time; rob not God of his time of special service; nor nature of her
time of needful rest and refreshment: nor thy own or others souls of time for
their spiritual concerns, for such poor perishing things: Show charity to thy
redeemed body; make it not a drudge to thy earthly lusts: Man is too noble a
creature to be a vassal to this world: It Is a sad spectacle to see the
Nazarites of Heaven, like Sampson, with their heads shaven, and their eyes
plucked out to grind in the world's mill, till they pluck down the house about
their ears, Judge. 16. 21. How do men macerate their bodies, and starve their
souls, only to help them with supplies in their passage to the grave, and all
the while neglect the work of God, and their souls, leaving the relics of
their wasted strength, and the world's refuse, for the service of an immortal
God. This is not to follow earthly things by heavenly Rule.

Rule 4. Fourthly, Be diligent in the use of your working time: take heed you
waste it not upon impertinencies, or by needless diversions, or by idleness,
and unfaithfulness in your work: this is a sin against both Law and Gospel,
which requires diligence and faithfulness in men's earthly callings: Labor and
calling-work was man's duty before his fall. Genesis 2. 15, The Lord God took the
man, and put him into the Garden of Eden, to dress it, and to keep it: And
after the fall, painful labor was enjoined and inflicted as a punishment of
his sin. Genesis 3. 19, In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, until thou
return to the ground. This duty of bodily labor in men's Callings, is of equal
sanction and regard with the duties of Gods Worship, being inserted in a
positive Law, and as that which is necessary to the sanctifying of God in
Sabbaths. Exodus 29. 9, 10, Six days shall thou labor, and do all thy work, but
on the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shall not do
any work: The injunction of working in six days (...)
( says Mayer) is given in the same commanding terms in the Original, that the
injunction of not working in the seventh is: and the same reason is given for
both: the one is taken from Gods resting on the seventh day: and the other from
his working the six days: So that not to labor faithfully in thy Calling the
six days, is a breach of the fourth command, as well as the working on the
Sabbath Day: Not as if the six days labor were to exclude all religious
Worship of God on either of these days when the Lord calls to it by
extraordinary Providence, as to mourning or rejoicing, or by ordinary tenders
of Gospel-mercy, in Weekday Lectures, or the like; for this would cross his
other commands, Preaching in season and out of season, and laboring for the
bread that endures to eternal life: This diligent labor does not exclude
private worship every day, and public worship on weekdays; so far as it
consists with faithfulness in men's Callings, for which time must be redeemed,
Ephesians. 5. 16. but it requires diligent attendance on men's Callings, on the
weekdays (as opposed to sloth and sinful waste of time) without which God is
not duly served on the Sabbath: This diligence in men's Callings is also
required in the Gospel, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 10. Idleness is a Gospel-scandal, and
renders Christians worthy to be abstained from, as not obeying the Word of God;
and such must not eat, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11. such are unprofitable servants, who
improve not their talents for God, and the good of others, Matthew. 25. 30. and
are worse than Infidels, who do not by diligence in their Calling provide for
their own, 1 Timothy 5. 8.

Rule 5. Fifthly, while your hands are about the world, set a guard about your
hearts: The Believers heart is Christ's royal Fort, secure that, and all is
safe: If riches increase, set not your hearts upon them, Psalm. 62. 10. it is the
Nature of earthly things, like a Malignant Disease, to get to the heart, O how
hard is it to meddle with these, and the heart not become earthy too! when a
gracious Soul has been with God, and got his heart warmed, quickened, and
drawn out to things above; no sooner does he return to the world, but all is
gone again: such dangerous damps does this earth send unto heavenly hearts:
secure thy heart with God every day, make a new surrender of it to him, before
thou get into the snares of thy earthly business: Set a vigilant watch upon thy
heart every moment, lest the things of the world steal in and take it captive.

Rule 6. Sixthly, Attend your earthly affairs with a calm and quiet spirit,
whatever occurrence you meet with in the world; let your spirits be composed
and fixed on God: wonder not at changes in an unsteddy world, which is only
constant in unconstancy. Omnia versantur in perpetuo ascensa and descens^^.
Here have we no continuing City, Heb. 13. 14. All things here are moving,
ascending or descending: Things below are compared to the Moon, Rev. 12. 1.
which is never at a stay, but has its constant changes; and like the Sea that
ebbs and flows every day; and as the fountain of the Sun, which Pliny Plin.
Lib. 2. C. 103.
writes of, that the waters are extreme cold and sweet at noon, but boiling hot
and bitter at midnight: So mutable are the comforts of this world, then going
when they seem most likely to stay. Man's condition in this world at the best,
is like the mountain Potosi, over which there always hangs a cloud even in the
clearest day. And as it is written of a Mere or Desc. of Scotland.
Salt Marsh in Scotland, called Pochlowland, where there are tempestuous waves
raging without wind, yea in the greatest calm. Christians, be not troubled at
the tides you see in these waters of Marah. Riches make themselves wings and
fly away, Prove. 23. 5. Let none of these lower things trouble you when gone,
which cannot content you when present: but one moment of time can make them
cease to be yours. There is but one days difference Vna dies interest inter
magnam civitatem and nullam. Et quos faelices Cinthia vidit, vidit miseros
abitura dies.
(says Seneca, upon the burning of a City) between a great City, and no City:
So there may be but one day, nay but one hour, between a Father, and no Father;
a Husband, and no Husband; a man of pleasure, and a man of sorrows; a rich man,
and a poor man. Set not that at your hearts which should be at your heels: Men
do not use to sigh, look pale, and cry, when servants leave them: Earthly
things are no more; they are given you as handmaids to wait on you, not as a
Spouse to lie in your bosoms; as servants that come and go, not as children
that abide in the house for ever. When thou have lost an earthly comfort, say,
A servant is gone from me to day. Keep up a contentation of mind with the
portion God gives you here. Heb. 13. 5. Let your conversation be without
covetousness, and be content with those things that you have: Let them suffice
you, as it is in the Greek; count them enough. If an Esau can be satisfied with
his crumbs, how much more should a Jacob with the childrens bread What this and
Heaven too! (says one.) A little of the world, and much of Heaven, will well
agree. I have enough, and enough, and enough, said precious Mr. Ball, who yet
was very low in the world. When the Earl of Leicester offered Mr. Cartwright
the Provostship of Eaton College, saying, 'twas an hundred pound more than
enough, he answered, the hundred pound more than enough was enough for him.
Psalm. 37. 16. A little that the righteous has, is better than the revenues of
the wicked. There are two diminutives in the Original (a little little of the
righteous man's) let it be never so (...) little, with righteousness, it weight
down all the abundance of the worldly man's interest; be it more or less, it is
enough. O thrice fools are we, like new born Princes weeping in the cradle,
knowing not that there is a Kingdom before them, Rutherford. I have often
thought on that providence concerning Israel in the wilderness. Exodus 16. 8. He
that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little, had no lack.
Christian, why so troubled about thy proportion of these things of the
footstool? as if your Father knew not what you wanted, or cared not for you, or
could not maintain you: You shall have enough to carry you to your graves, and
you can absolutely need no more. And seek thou great things for thy self?
seek them not, for behold I will bring evil upon all flesh, but thy life will I
give thee as a prey in all places whither thou go, Jer. 45. 4, 5. You know
not what God is doing in the world: Have you but little now? you may shortly
have less: Be content with what you have: A little in Bethel, if it be but a
pillow of stones, with bread and water, is better than the rich Plains of
Sodom: A piece of blessed bread in Immanuel's Land, is sweeter, and will go
farther than all the Garlic and Fleshpots of Egypt. than a great deal of
unsanctified comforts: A small portion of the world, with soul-advantage, is
better than a great estate with spiritual losses and temptations. God can
multiply a few loaves; make the barrel of meal, and cruse of oil, to hold out,
and your clothes not to wax old, rather than you shall want enough to carry you
through your wilderness, if you will be believing and obedient. Be contented
with the talent God gives you to trade upon: Have others more than you? envy
them not; When a man grows rich (says Mr. Dod) he does but go out of a little
boat into a greater barge, but he is still on the Sea.
they have the more to reckon for; and it may be they need more, or they can
bear more than you. That (says one) would sink a small vessel which is but an
ordinary burden to a great ship. Some can better manage a large estate with
less trouble and temptation than others: Possibly that would puff up thy heart
with pride, and catch thy feet in snares that never stirs another affections,
to whom God has given a braver spirit, or greater mortifiedness to this world.
Subscribe to God's wisdom and pleasure, believe his promises, wonder at his
mercy, be thankful for what you have above many; see your All in God, and hope
to be shortly with him; and you cannot but be content with your allowance in
the world.

Rule 7. Seventhly, Follow your duty, but cast your care on God, abide in your
callings, but live above them. 1 Pet. 5. 17. Casting all your care on God, for
he cares for you. Depend not on your wisdom, labor or success in your
employments, but upon the promise, love and care of God for you: If the Lord
blesses your substance, don't you bless your selves in it: See an emptiness in
all your abundance, and shortness in these to answer your many wants. God can
soon make a hole in your money-bags, blow on your increase, turn your
prosperity into contempt, and make your expected comforts as the dream of a
night vision. Live not on large barns, but on the full breasts of promises, for
the good of what you do enjoy, or for the supply of what you want. The poor
Christian has the keeping of his purse in his Father's hand, the rich in his
own hand. If sight fail, live by faith: Faith assures you of the good issue of
all difficulties in your way, and gets advantage from the worst condition, and
sweetness to mingle with every bitter providence you meet with. It may be thou
have a great family, and little to live on; lie in debt, and have nothing to
pay it; had a little the other day, but the Caterpiller and the Cankerworm
has devoured it; this loss, and the other stroke has wasted it. In this case
thy duty is to live on God by faith, for a sanctified fruit of his hand upon
thee, and for making up this lack by his abundance: When thou can see no way
out of thy perplexing trouble, let thine eye be unto God for help, 2 Chronicles. 20.
12. 2 Chronicles. 25. 8. Go not out of God's way for relief: He that wounds must
heal; he only that casts down can raise up, Deuteronomy. 32. 30. Neither faint thou
in the day of adversity, or way of thy duty, Prove. 24. 10. Prove. 16. 3. but
commit thy way to the Lord, and he will bring it to pass, Psalm. 37. 5. Mat. 6.
v. 25. 1 Cor. 7. 32. Phil. 4. 6. Take heed of carking cares, and fretful
vexings; these cannot lessen thy trouble, but will greaten thy sins; a
provident care is thy duty, but a distrustful vexing care, both thy sin and
affliction.

Rule 8. Eighthly, In all your labors pray for a blessing: If you would live
well, you must beg as well as work; add duty to thy diligence, prayer to thy
provident care, calling on God, to thy calling in the world: As every creature,
so every condition and work is sanctified by the word and prayer, 1 Timothy 4. 15.
In every undertaking seek to God for counsel. Prove. 3. 6. In all thy ways
acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths. Christians should not set upon
the smallest matters without enquiring the will of God; not to go to this or
that place, to buy or sell to do this or that work without seeking to God for
direction, Jam. 4. 13, 14, 15. Our journeys (says one) must not be undertaken
without asking God's leave, Dr. Mant. on Jam. This would evidence a life of
dependence on God, and bring all thy affairs under divine care and blessing;
Abraham's servant begins his journey with prayer, Genesis 24. 12. 27. and
concluded it with praise, Genesis 28. 20. And so Jacob; Israel's folly in
concluding with the Gibeonites contrary to the command of God, was laid on
their not asking counsel of God. Josh. 9. 14. The men took of their victuals,
and asked not counsel at the mouth of the Lord. O the snares and disadvantages
men are exposed to in their earthly concerns, for not taking counsel from God,
and engaging his hand and blessing with them: Prayer will further your work,
sweeten your pains and difficulties in it, and secure the comfort and good of
it: When you want mercy, seek God for it; when you receive mercy, see God in
it, and return praise to God for it.

Rule 9. Ninthly, Though you live in the World, yet be dead to the World:
Heavenborn souls, though in the World, yet are not of the World, but chosen out
of it, Joh. 15. 19. and crucified to it. Gal. 6. 14. God forbid that I should
glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the World is
crucified to me, and I unto the World. This crucifiedness to the World Se
mundum cum omni suo fastu pompa gloria aspernari contemnere, quasi rem nihili,
vanam, mortuam.
(says Paraeus) signifies the contempt and despising of this World; he
intimates hereby, that the World with all its scorn, pride, pomp and glory are
despised by him, as a nothing, empty, dead thing. A soul crucified to the World
sees nothing lovely and desirable in this World but God, his Word and Works:
there is nothing in earthly things that can be taking with spiritual hearts, if
God be not enjoyed in them: all the glory of the World is no more to them than
a dead carcass, if the love of God breath not through it on their hearts; nay
the very Garden of the Lord is a Wilderness to them, if the Rose of Sharon be
not in it. A mortified Saint wonders that a rational immortal Soul can see such
worth in riches, pleasures, honors, and poor perishing things of this life,
which to him are nothing; he can easily part with all at the Lord's bidding.
And he feels no such evil neither in the bad things of this World, as to make
men startle at them; wants, losses, reproaches, torments for Christ, lose their
frightfulness to them whose hearts love to the Lord Jesus has reconciled unto
the bitterest affliction that can befall them for his sake. If Christ stand,
and do not perish, (says Luther) what matter is it if Wife and Children
perish? If liberty, estate, life and all go, so he stay: Such should thy heart
be in pursuit of these things, as one that is dead to the World, and sits loose
from all its glory, and above all its threatenings; content to have, or not to
have; to use, or want; to enjoy, or be denied, or deprived of it, as God
pleases.

Rule 10. Lastly, Do all your work within the view of death, judgment, and
eternity: transact the employments of every day, as dying persons, who are
leaving this World, and liable to a remove every moment: How would frequent and
serious thoughts of a near approaching end wonderfully check men's greedy
pursuits of this World, and help to keep their actions in a consistency with
their accounts. King Philip would have it proclaimed before him every morning,
Remember that thou art mortal: And when falling upon the Sand he afterward saw
the print of his body, said, O how little a parcel of earth will hold us when we
are dead, who ambitiously seek after the World while we are living. When
Severus was old, he called for an Urn or Pitcher in which the ashes of a dead
person were put, and looking a while on it, said, Tu virum capies quem orbis
terrae non capit? Lips.
Will thou contain that man whom the whole World cannot contain? Alas, what
will the whole World be to thee when thou come to die? let it seem no more to
thee now, who art dying every day: do every thing as strangers and pilgrims
here, Heb. 11. 9. 13. and as if you heard a voice every day saying, Awake, and
come to judgment: Jerome thought whatever he did, he still heard that voice;
Surgite mortui, and venite ad judicium; Arise ye dead, and come to judgment.
When you are traveling to this Market, and the other Fair; think, Sure I am
journeying to the grave, and I know not what dust I shall shortly be shovell'd
into: when you are about your work, think, I am hastening to eternity, and
shortly these hands must rot in the grave: When you promise your selves great
things, as the fruit of your labors, and hope for this gain and the other
comfort, say, Death may come between me and my enjoyments, and crop off the
hopes of all my labors. What can be great to him that accounts the World
nothing? or long to him that counts his life but a span? Mr. Dod, When thou
find thy heart running out too greedily after this World, ready to lie,
cheat, oppress, undermine others to greaten thy interest: think on this; For
all these things God will bring thee to judgment, and render to thee according
to all thy works.

Secondly, Then do you your earthly work in an heavenly manner, when you do it
with an heavenly heart: As is the heart, so is the action in God's account: the
Lord was much pleased that it was in David's heart to build him an House,
though he never did it, 1 Kin. 8. 18. and displeased with all that Israel did
in his service, because their heart was not right with him, Psalm. 78. 37.
Israel did many good works, they sought him, they returned and enquired early
after God, they remembered that God was their Rock, and the high God their
Redeemer, ver. 34, 35. but all this was nothing in God's esteem, because their
heart was not upright in it; they had an earthly, carnal, selfish, backsliding
heart in all they did. If thy heart be heavenly, though thy work be earthly,
yet it puts an excellency on it; but if thy work be heavenly, and thy heart
earthly, God does reject and despise it: the heart is the root of every action,
and if the root be good, the fruit will be good also, Mat. 12. 33. Romans 11. 16.
If the fountain be sweet, the streams will be sweet also; and if thy heart be
heavenly, thy work is heavenly: A heavenly heart, like the Be, turns all it
does to heavenly uses: when the Lord Jesus had put his hand upon the Spouses
heart, and left some myrrh upon her bowels, presently her hands dropped myrrh,
and her fingers sweet smelling myrrh, Cant. 5. 4, 5. A heavenly heart perfumes
thy earthly work, and makes it wonderfully taking with the heart of Christ.

Quest. How might I know when my heart is heavenly in my earthly work? Sol.
First, A heavenly heart is a heart enlightened to see heavenly things; a heart
beamed over with heavenly light, to discern things invisible: An earthly heart
is a dark heart, it sees nothing in God, his Word and Works, so as to draw up
his heart to Heaven: an earthly heart sees nothing but earth in heavenly
things; and an heavenly heart sees Heaven in earthly things. The Patriarchs saw
the heavenly City in their earthly Country, Heb. 11. 13, 14, 16. They saw the
promises (that is, the things promised) afar off, and confessed that they were
strangers on earth, they sought a Country, desired a better Country, that is
an heavenly; and all that as the product of their heavenly sight, they saw
heavenly things in earthly: Abraham had an heavenly eye to see Christ's day,
Joh. 8. 5, 6. and Moses a heavenly eye to see him who is invisible, Heb. 11.
27. A heavenly heart does not only see heavenly things, but sees an infinite
worth and excellency in them: it sees them to be the best things; it sees a
greater glory and desirableness in things above, in one glance of his eye, in
one day within his Courts, in one hours communion with him, than in all the
World besides: Mary saw more advantage in sitting at Christ's feet, than in the
many things Martha's heart was taken up about, Luke 10. 41, 42. Cursed be that
man (says the noble Marquess Galeacius) that accounts not one hours communion
with Christ above all the World.

Secondly, A heavenly heart is a heart that savours heavenly things, Romans 8. 5.
Nothing goes down so sweet with a heavenly heart as heavenly things, every
thing rejoices in its like: An earthly heart delights in earthly things; the
Merchant in his Trade, the Husbandman in his Field, Houses, Husbandry, and
fruits of the earth; the voluptuous man in his pleasures; as he that sold his
City for a draught of water; crying out when he had done, O that for so short a
pleasure, of a King I should be made a Slave! The proud man in his greatness,
Is not this great Babylon that I have built, for the house of the Kingdom? Dan.
4. 30. So does the heavenly heart relish greatest sweetness in heavenly things:
How sweet are thy words to my taste? yea sweeter than honey to my mouth, Psalm.
119. 103. His fruit was sweet to my taste; his mouth is most sweet, Cant. 2. 3.
and 5. 16. My meditation of him shall be sweet, Psalm. 104. 34. We took sweet
counsel together, Psalm. 55. 14. We talked of the mysteries of godliness (says
Ainsworth) of the exercises of Religion; (says another) which I suppose the
Prophet means by going into the House of God, as companions consulting (as it
were) how they might prepare themselves to his service.

Thirdly, A heavenly heart is a heart that longs and desires after heavenly
things: Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none that I can desire on
Earth in comparison of thee, Psalm. 73. 25. When shall I come and appear before
God? My soul thirsts for thee; my flesh longs for thee, in a dry and
thirsty land where no water is, to see thy power and glory, as I have seen thee
in the Sanctuary, Psalm. 43. 2. Psalm. 63. 1, 2. My soul longs, yea even
faints for the Courts of the Lord; my heart and my flesh cries out for the
living God, Psalm. 84. 2. Desires are the natural motions of the heart, and the
best character, and truest lineaments (says one ( y)) Reynold's Treatise of
Passion.
that can be drawn of the minds of men. Practices may be overrul'd by ends; but
desires are always genuine and natural: Hence good men have had most
confidence in approving themselves to God, by their affections, and the inward
longings of their souls after him, as being the purest and most unfeigned
issues of love, and such as have least proximity and danger from foreign and
secular ends. It is an unquestionable evidence of souls risen with Christ, and
receiving the stamp of Heaven on the heart, to set their affections on things
above: Heavenly desires are the natural breathings of a gracious heart, which
can as well live without them, as a man without breathing; a cessation of
spiritual desires, argues soul-swooning, or spiritual death.

Fourthly, A heavenly heart is known by its heavenly thoughts; it will be much
thinking of heavenly things: As is the heart, so are the thoughts usually. For
as he thinks, so is he, Prove. 23. 7. The thoughts are the firstborn of the
heart, and strength of the soul, and as natural issues of the mind, as beams
are of the Sun; if the heart be evil, the thoughts will be evil; if the heart
be good, the thoughts will ordinarily be good, Matthew. 15. 19. further than
corruptions or temptations hinder, Jer. 4. v. 14. If your hearts be heavenly,
so will your designed, habitual and well-pleasing thoughts be. They that are
spiritual, will mind the things of the Spirit, Romans 8. 5. Try your hearts by
your ordinary, quiet and delightful thoughts: Are vain, earthly thoughts your
trouble, and holy thoughts your delight?

Fifthly, A heavenly heart will be full of heavenly projects; such a heart will
be driving designs for Heaven; his consultations, enquiries and studies, will
be how to carry on and promote heavenly interests. Titus 3. 8. This is a
faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they
which have believed in God might be careful to maintain good works: (...), cum
ratione and concilio exerceri; the word is, might study, devise, and beat their
brains how they might do good: That Is the temper of earthly hearts also; they
will be plotting and contriving ways and means how to advance earthly
interests. Phil. 3. 19. Who mind earthly things, (...), Zanchy, whose thoughts
are in the earth (as the Syriack renders it,) that is, they are wholly taken up
about earthly things: So it is with a heavenly heart, it is taken up about the
things of Heaven; it lays holy plots, how to keep down the world and
corruption in the soul, and how to make the most of all it has and does for
Heaven, to secure his interest, and enlarge his possession above: So far as the
heart is heavenly, so far is it designing for Heaven.

Sixthly, A heavenly heart is acted and influenced by heavenly motives and
arguments; there is nothing sways more with a heavenly spirit than reasons
drawn from heavenly things, heavenly pleasures, heavenly honors, heavenly
treasures will do more with a heavenly heart than any arguments drawn from
things of this life. The nature of the heart is much known by the motives that
are most potent with it: A carnal heart is biased by carnal things: Who will
show us any good? Psalm. 4. 6. But a spiritual heart with spiritual things: Lord
lift up thou the light of thy countenance upon us: Lot will choose the plains
of Sodom; but Abraham will prefer walks with God, though in a Wilderness. David
values his lot, by what it has of God in it, and counts that most pleasant and
rich which helps him to most of God, Psalm. 16. 5, 6. Tell an heavenly heart how
he may be rich, great and comfortable in the World, and it signifies nothing:
but tell him how he may pitch his Tent nearest to the Ark and enjoy most of
God, how he may keep peace and holiness within, and order his conversation
aright to please God, and you will sooner win such a heart, than by all the
choicest proposals of this life. Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way?
Psalm. 119. 9. Who shall abide in thy tabernacle? Psalm. 15. 1. Who will rise up
for me against evil doers? Psalm. 94. 16. How might I do to get a better heart?
to be more rich toward God? Oh that one would give me drink of the waters of
the Well of Bethlehem! 2 Samuel 23. 15. How might I do for some fore-tastes of
the rivers of pleasure at the right hand of God? and to eat of the tree of life
in the midst of the Paradise of God, Rev. 2. 7. These are the most taking
things with an heavenly soul; his choice, his delights and transcendent
interests lie on the other side of this World, even within the borders of
Immanuel's Land.

Seventhly, A heavenly heart is a heart that lives upon heavenly things, and is
maintained by provisions fetched from Heaven, nourished up in the words of
Faith, 1 Timothy 4. 6. desire the sincere milk of the Word, that ye may grow
thereby, 1 Pet. 2. 3. My meat and drink is to do the will of him that sent me,
Joh. 4. 34. Earthly hearts are maintained by earthly comforts; like the Crows,
they live on carrion; but heavenly hearts live upon heavenly things, they feed
on the finest Wheat; and, like the Indian Bird, Vle malim, that lives upon the
dew, and of the juice of Flowers and Roses; heavenly souls prosper best on
heavenly pulse and water: Give me understanding and I shall live, Psalm. 119.
144.

Eighthly, A heavenly heart walks by heavenly Rules; it is led by the Spirit of
God, Romans 8. 14. All the threatenings of men cannot upon choice bow him from his
pathway of duty, Dan. 6. 10. nor the reason or allurements of men draw him
with full consent into the way of sin, chapter 3. 18. Whatever comes of it he is at
a point to keep the commands of God, Psalm. 119. 106. It chooses to be governed
by heavenly Laws. And we will walk in his paths, Isa. 2. 3. As for me and my
house we will serve the Lrrd, Josh. 24. 15. Such a soul is easily persuaded by
the evidence of truth; and will hear what the Spirit says: A little child
shall lead him, Isa. 61. 6.

Thirdly, Then are earthly things done in an heavenly manner, when done to
heavenly ends and purposes; to obey, please and honor God; when a person can
approve his heart to an allseeing eye, that the great and chief end for which
he takes up this or that calling, sets on any employment, is in subordinacy to
these great ends, not to please men, to gratify his own lusts, to grow great
in the world, to enjoy pleasure, ease, reputation, and interest here, but out
of obedience to the Maker, Redeemer and Governor of this world, that God in
all things might have his will and glory, 1 Pet. 4. 11. This is the ultimate
end of all Gods works, and should be of man's also. All employments run out of
their proper chanel, if they tend not to this Ocean of divine glory: As God is
the Alpha, so he must be the Omega of every action; the first cause must be the
last end. God has made all things for himself, Prove. 16. 4. To him belongs the
issues (as from death, so) of life, Psalm. 68. 20. Nothing is further good, than
it answers God's end; earthly ends spoil heavenly work, and heavenly ends puts
an excellency on earthly work. Christians, be careful of your ends in all you
do: It Is not enough to do things that are right, if you are not upright in
them: That Is unsanctified work which has not holy aims, and God for its last
end. To follow your callings, that you might live honestly in the sight of men;
that you might provide for your own, and have a competency in the world to
carry you comfortably through it, is lawful, as subordinate secondary ends, but
not as your chief and last end, to which all your actions must be directed;
that must be singly and supremely the pleasing and honoring of God as your
highest end.

Fifthly, Another part of this Heavenly Trade is driven on and maintained in
heavenly thoughts: Thoughts are the embrio and conception of actions, which
also come under the cognizance and government of Religion. It Is a common, but
carnal principle, and false assertion, that thoughts are free: They are free
indeed from the inspection of men, but not from the eye and judgment of God,
who searches the hearts, and weighs the spirits, Jer. 17. 10. and will bring
every secret thing into judgment, Eccles. 12. 14. Solomon tells us, The
thoughts of foolishness is sin, Prove. 16. 2. Prove. 24. 9. And Peter tells us,
that the thoughts of the heart need forgiveness, Acts 8. 22. not only sinful
actions, but sinful thoughts are forbidden, Deuteronomy. 15. 9. and the very thoughts
as well as words and lives of Christians, are to be brought under the obedience
of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. The Idea and platform of every considerate action, is
first drawn in the mind and inward thoughts: No work is rightly done that wants
praevious thoughts and consideration. Prove. 16. 9. A man's heart devises his
way; he weighs, considers and deliberates about the way he is to go in, and the
course of life he is to drive; he counts the time, cost, and every thing that
must go to his work. Prove. 31. 16. She considers a field and buyeth it. So
it is in this Heavenly Trade; there must be devising of the way, serious
thoughts and considerations, how to manage it to best advantage; how to get in,
and put off wisdom's goods; how to strengthen grace, to dispatch duty, to
obtain the favor of God, and dwell in his presence; how to improve mercy, and
how to ensure glory. The Heavenly Trade can never be carried on without
heavenly thoughts. Inward working thoughts about God and godliness, are of
wonderful use to further a holy life: They warm and cheer the heart under
troubles, Psalm. 94. 19. engage and fix it on God, and render his presence
desirable: Heavenly thoughts fire the heart, and inflame it to holy actions,
Psalm. 139. 17. Psalm. 39. 3. and are a choice preservative against sin, Psalm. 4.
4. It Is greatly useful to increase knowledge, and attain to deep wisdom and
understanding. Dan. 14. 4. Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall
increase: That is, their thoughts shall be working on truth, busily employed to
find out the meaning of the word, looking on one side, and on the other side
(says Mr. Fenner) and by this means shall come to a great thriving in
knowledge. Men will never be religious to purpose, or be their crafts-masters
in this Heavenly Trade, till they be more spiritual and heavenly in their
thoughts. Christians, make conscience of your thoughts; they must come to
judgment; wash your hearts from whence they come, Jer. 4. 14. and watch your
thoughts whither they go; check your thoughts when they begin to wander;
quicken your thoughts when flat; fix your thoughts when floating; spiritualize
them when carnal; exercise them when slothful; set them on their proper and
profitable objects, and hold them to their work in divine and heavenly
meditation every day, which is part of your Heavenly Trade, and has a mighty
tendency to soul-enriching, Psalm. 4. 4. Psalm. 63. 4. Psalm. 104. 34. Genesis 24.
63. Psalm. 1. 2. Psalm. 77. 12. Psalm. 139. 8.

Meditation is a calling in the thoughts from its straglings and undue
employments, fixing them on, and holding them to their peculiar work: It Is the
travel of the mind in the search of some spiritual good, from such things as
duty and providence lay before it; it weighs things and actions in the balance
of truth; it turns things up-side down, and looks on both sides, and through
them, that it may take a right estimate of them: It Is the running to and fro of
the cogitations to increase knowledge, Dan. 12. 4. Meditation sifts things and
truths, to divide the flower from the bran, and truth from errors; it helps to
a clearer and more sensible view of truth and excellency; with the Chemist, it
extracts the spirits and quintessence of things; it warms the heart, and fires
the affections, raises desires, engages the will, enlightens and enlivens the
conscience, and helps to feed the soul on divine truths, to feast it with
divine love; it draws nourishment from ordinances, sweetness from promises,
instructions from the creature, and good from providence. Without Meditation a
person cannot receive the good that is offered to him, or do the good that is
required of him. The Word preached does not profit hearers, for want of
Meditation to digest it; threatenings, promises, counsels, encouragements, don't
affect the soul, or effect their errand and message, for want of a serious and
settled consideration of them. O what profit might Christians get to their
souls, were more time spent every day in right Meditation! Believer, charge thy
heart with this duty of daily Meditation, which is as needful as Prayer,
Reading, and any acts of holiness, and allow some time constantly each day for
this holy exercise of thy serious thoughts and contemplations. To meditate on
God, his Word and Works; on the Soul, its being, immortality, duties, evils,
and interests; on the the World, its vanity and emptiness; on Sin, its nature
and issues; on Holiness, its excellency and blessed advantages; on Death,
Judgment and Eternity, with whatever might yield instruction and profit: Urge
thy conscience with the command of God, the practice of the Saints, the great
necessity, and many advantages of this duty; consider the great and usual
aversness of thy heart to it, which does manifestly bespeak its spirituality
and excellency; for the more nature is indisposed to a duty, the more of God is
usually in such a duty: think also of thy manifold losses and disadvantages
thou have sustained by thy neglect of it, and pray hard for the spirit to help
thy soul in the due performance of it; which hints I can only leave with thee
without further enlargement, lest it should swell this Volume beyond its
designed bounds.

Sixthly, If you would drive on this heavenly Trade, you must be keeping up
heavenly converses every day, and upon every occasion: much of earthly Trades
is carried on by earthly discourses, this way they drive bargains, and barter
away goods: a great many words ofttimes go to chaffering, buying and selling:
and so is it in this heavenly Trade; Religion is much advanced by a spiritual
improvement of men's talk and converses; this way did the searers of God keep
alive Religion in evil times, when other helps were wanting, Mal. 3. 16. Prove.
10. 21. By this souls come to be fed and nourished in their holy Faith, 1 Timothy
4. 6. A great deal of good or hurt comes by men's discourses. O the mischief
Christians do to each other by their vain, carnal and earthly communications
when they come together! Evil communications corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15.
33. Whose word does eat as does a canker, 2 Timothy 2. 17. This way does Satan put
off much of his wares, even by Wisdom's Merchants, making them to weaken, cool,
deaden, and corrupt one another spirits, stir up, feed and strengthen each
others corruptions, become temptations and provocations to one another to sin,
by their sinful corruptions: It Is sad to think how the work of God ceases, and
the work of Satan prospers this way: Persons come warm sometimes from a Sermon,
and are soon cooled by impertinent and vain discourses; come from secret duty,
when their hearts are quickened, and raised, and presently deadned again by
spirit-quenching discourses. O how many labors of the Saints and Servants of
Christ, and how many strivings of the Spirit are overturned, and come to
nothing by vain and rotten discourses! no wonder the Apostle tells us, The
tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity; it defiles the whole body, and sets
on fire the course of nature, and is set on fire of hell, Jam. 3. 6. Through
the organ of an unsanctified tongue does Satan shoot his fireballs of
temptation into the hearts of hearers: are you afraid of that fire which burns
down your houses? beware of that fire that burns down souls to hell. It Is no
small part of a Christian's wisdom to speak a word in season, and to order (as
his conversation so) his converses to edification: When the Apostle presses the
Ephesians to wisdom, Ephesians. 5. 17. the next thing he advises to is holy
conference, ver. 19. by men's language are they known of what Country they are;
so are persons discovered, whether Citizens of Heaven, or the World, by their
ordinary and desired language. It Is said of Augustine, he went not so willingly
to a feast, as to a conference to reduce any that erred. He that is of the
Earth, is earthly, and speaks of the earth; he that comes from Heaven is
above all; and what he has seen and heard, that he testifies, Joh. 3. 31. He
will be speaking of heavenly things, which he learnt of God: A good man out of
the abundance of his heart brings out good things; for out of the abundance
of the heart the mouth speaks: The tongue is but the index and bucket of the
heart, that tells men what things are within, and draws out of those deeps to
others; men use to find out what metals are hid in the earth by the color of
the sand which the waters wash away from the mountains: if the streams be low,
the spring is weak; an empty heart yields empty discourses; By your words you
shall be justified, or condemned: The tongue of the just is as choice silver,
Prove. 10. 20. in that it is enriching to those that are near it. The tongue of
the wise is health, Prove. 12. 18. It sends out sound and wholesome words to
the strengthening of hearers: it is said of the Spouse, that her lips did drop as
the honeycomb, honey and milk are under her tongue, Cant. 4. 11. And the roof
of her mouth like the best Wine that goes down sweetly, causing the lips of
those that are asleep to speak, Cant. 7. 9. This doubtless is one reason of the
little thrivings of Christians in communion this day, it is from their barren
and carnal communications; this starves Religion both in thy own soul, and in
those thou conversest with; it is not maintained by gracious converses, and
soul-edifying discourses. Christians, lay this to heart; how can you bear the
charge of all that decay in godliness this day upon your non-improvement of
this part of your heavenly Trade?

Lastly, Then do you carry on the heavenly Trade, when you improve every thing
to heavenly advantages, getting good from every thing you meet with, do, or
enjoy. It Is so in earthly Trades, all men seek their gain from their quarters,
Isa. 56. 11. endeavor to turn every thing to some profit: And so should
heavenly Traders be getting some spiritual good from every thing that comes
under their hand, and in their way, if ever they intend to thrive: this
comports with the great design of God in all his administrations to his people,
which is to do them good. Who fed thee in the Wilderness with Manna, which thy
Fathers knew not, that he might humble thee, and that he might prove thee, to
do thee good at the latter end, Deuteronomy. 8. 16. To this end are his providence
directed: The hand of our God is upon all them for good that seek him, Ezra 8.
22. And this leads to the accomplishment of the promises toward Believers: I
will set mine eyes upon them for good, Jer. 24. 6. I will not turn away from
them to do them good, Jer. 32. 40. All their occurrences are brought under a
promise of working for good. All things, the best and worst things of
providence, shall work for good to them that love God, Romans 8. 28. And why is
this? but that gracious souls should be expecting good from every thing, every
affliction, as well as mercy, that does befall them; and be comporting in all
their capacities with this design of God, by an improvement of all, to this
great end of souladvantage: What more good, O Lord? was the usual saying of a
godly man, when the Lord brought any new affliction upon him, with which he was
much exercised, and from which he ever got some spiritual advantage.

For this end are gracious souls made capable to use their mercies, to bear and
improve their afflictions to some spiritual good; they have a principle of
grace planted in their hearts, and of divine light into their minds; and have
received rules and instructions of purpose, that they might be able to reach
this end: They are made men of wisdom for this end, that they might hear God in
affliction, Mic. 6. 9. and see God in mercies; and are skilled in divine
Chemistry, that they might extract the spirit of providence, and good of every
condition, duty and mercy. 'Twas said of pious Mr. Dod, that he used to turn
Earth into Heaven by a wise and spiritual improvement of all earthly affairs. A
blessed metamorphosis! and an argument of excellent skill and high attainment
in this heavenly Trade, to turn Copper and Brass into Gold, and to convert
every thing, the worst things to some good. This (Christians) is your
privilege, duty and interest, so to manage every affair, condition, occurrence
and experience, as to help on your soul-enrichings.

There are nine things especially which Christians should be careful to manage
to some soul-advantage, to be getting good from them, to the furtherance of
their instruction, meditation, mortification to sin, the world, and self; to
the strengthening of their graces, raising their affections, quickening to duty,
preparation for death, and every trial in the way to it; and for furthering
their meetness for glory.
First, Privileges are one thing which Believers should be getting good from,
to these great and noble ends of spiritual good. Every heavenly Trader has
some privileges which may afford soul-profit.

There are Natural Privileges. There are Providential Privileges. There are
Spiritual Privileges.
All which may contribute some profit to the improvers of them; Parts, Youth,
Health, Strength, are part of Nature's treasure, and to be husbanded to the use
and service of the soul: These are some of those talents the great Householder
gives to his Family, (though in different measures) for improvement, and
singular mercies they are, if well used to the Donor's ends and directions. A
humble use of Parts to the good of others, and setting of wit, memory, reason,
with the choicest intellectuals, and richest endowments of the rational mind,
on the service of the soul, 3 Epist. Joh. 2. making them hewers of wood, and
drawers of water for the sanctuary of the Lord: A shaving and paring off of the
excrements and froth of wit, that they may become Israelites, and devoted to
the God of Israel, and spiritual uses, Deuteronomy. 21. 12. keeping them under the
government of the spirit, is a good improvement of them in this heavenly Trade.

You that have Parts and habilliments of Mind, do not prostitute them to the
pleasure of the flesh, and the service of sin, but resign them to the use of
the spirit; toward your enrichings with true wisdom, and increases in the
knowledge of God, which brings salvation. When sprightly Parts and sparkling Wit
are inlaid with grace, then are they as Apples of Gold in pictures of Silver,
Prove. 25. 11. O how amiable are these endowments of nature, when seasoned with
grade, when perfumed with Myrrh and Frankincense, and besprinkled with the
Powders of the Merchant, Cant. 3. 6.

Youthful time is another privilege for souladvantage; it is the morning of the
soul's day, the best and most useful part of time, when appropriated to God and
divine uses: what advantage have such for warmth of affection, and dispatches
of duty? whereas decrepit age, like an emerited Soldier, has worn out its
serviceable capacities; and as the setting-Sun, is attended with evening cold,
and shadows, and the close of working useful time. O how unserviceable is old
age for transacting the work of the new birth, when Conscience is sunk down
into the deeps of guilt! when the affections are clogged with the dirty things
of this world, and preengaged to other Lovers; and when the marrow of natures
strength has been eaten out by the wasting service of sin. So great and amazing
a work is the salvation of a sinner, that it deserves a subject of the choicest
capacities to be completed in, and transacted by: And then is youth profitably
spent, when devoted to God, and taken up in the great matters of salvation. You
that are yet in your youth and morning-time, let God have the spring of your
time, the firstborn of your strength, and first ripe fruits of your
capacities; let not youthful pleasures have the flower of your time and
abilities, leaving the bran for God and your souls.

You that have strength of body, and a healthful temper, put it to the best use
for your heavenly interest. Are you strong to labor? work out your salvation;
labor for the bread that endures; you that have legs, use them while you have
them, to carry you up and down after God. If you must eat bread in the sweat of
your brows, let it be the bread of your Father's house. If you must rise up
early, sit up late, break your rest, exhaust your strength, let it not be all
for the world, let Christ have some of your strength, before all be gone; yea,
if you have any, let Christ have all.

As there are natural privileges, so are there providential privileges also,
which are the capacities that providence dispenses to some, of doing and
receiving good beyond others, as liberty, peace, plenty, with other outward
mercies, all which are to be husbanded to the best advantage of your souls.

Have you Peace with men? improve it toward the obtaining and securing your
Peace with God: Your firmest leagues with men will hold but a little while, if
your covenant with God be broken; what can favor with men profit you, if you
have frowns from God? If men sheath up their swords, and God's be drawn, thy
case is dangerous, and full of trouble. Make this use also of thy present
Peace, to prepare for future trouble, and to be the better armed when trials
come; spend not all thy store upon thy present Peace and Comfort, but save some
fragments for times of need. God gives thee a breathing-time, that thou may
hold out the better in thy race; and spares thee a little rest, that thou
may be the fitter for approaching trouble.

Have you Liberty? take heed of yokes of bondage, Gal. 5. 1. and
soul-straitnings. If God set you at large, do not imprison your selves to the
world and carnal lusts: Is thy body out of prison? labor to get out thy soul
also, Psalm. 142. 7. Are thy feet enlarged? get thy heart enlarged also, and run
the ways of his commandments, Psalm. 119. 132. Make the most of your Lilberty
in doing service to God, in attending on his appointments, and in taking all
opportunities of doing salvation-work, and enjoying salvationhelps: Be like
your Lord, going up and down doing good, while you have opportunity, Joh. 12.
v. 35. If you have spare time, or can redeem it by double diligence from your
earthly business, lay it out for God and his people in religious duties,
Christian visits, holy conferences: The time may come you may wish for such a
privilege, and long to see one of these days of the Son of man.

Have you yet a liberal portion of the good things of this life? is your garner
full, your table spread, your cup overflowing? lay in the sense of these
mercies now, as winter-provision to warm your hearts then, when you may not
have them to warm and refresh your bodies, and lay them out to refresh those
that want them, that they may bless God for you, glorify God in you, and
procure mercy for you in the day of need: Make not thy self a slave to thy
abundance, but make thy plenteous comforts serviceable unto thee.

There are Spiritual Privileges too, the lot of some, and calls for great
improvements. There are Personal Privileges, the State and Spirit of Adoption,
justification of persons, purchased right to pardon and peace with God, freedom
from condemnation, assurance of preservation in grace unto glory, with many
gifts of grace and spiritual favors which thousands enjoy not. And there are
Public Privileges of access to God, communion of Saints, a place within the
walls of God's House, with variety of soul-provisions, an interest in the
promises of God, the prayers and graces of his people, things of infinite
worth, and purchased at no lower rate than the blood of Christ: You that are
interested in those, come under great obligations to behold them with wonder,
to hold them with trembling, and to use them with diligence and faithfulness.
You that are planted in the Courts of the Lord, Psalm. 92. 13, 14. be fat and
flourishing; content not your selves with bare privileges, with dogs to feed
on dry bones, but get the marrow, juice, and fattening virtue of all your
advantages. Do not with Lazarus, lie at the door of your rich Lord, the Dogs
licking your sores, when you may go in and be healed.

Secondly, Ordinances are another thing which Believers should be getting
spiritual good from: These are the golden pipes through which the Lord pours in
the Oil of grace into his golden Candlesticks, and Gospel-Churches, Zach. 4.
12. Showers of Manna to feed his people in the wilderness, and on this side
their own Country, Deuteronomy. 8. 16. These are the Churches breasts to fill and
nourish her children unto life eternal, Isa. 66. 11. Genesis 2. 6. 10. Ordinances
are the Mist, the River of Eden, by which God waters his Garden; Scriptures are
the Mines, Ordinances are the opening of them, to such as dig for Wisdom. A
considerable part of this Heavenly Trade is driven about these commodities; ply
them well, that you may get large incomes of spiritual blessings through them:
Take heed of sleeping at these breasts, or playing with them, lest the Lord put
them up, or put you off; lie at the pool side, wait at the wells of salvation,
and not only come, but draw out waters of life thence for your needy souls:
For which four things are needful.

Preparation. Attention. Retention. Obedience.
First, Prepare before you hear, get the room emptied, swept and garnished: For
those provisions of Christ you are called to, bring your pitchers empty and
clean, that God may fill them: Come not to clean food with a soul stomach, but
get your hearts purged by sound repentance, and washed from an evil conscience,
and renewed by the Spirit; for the new wine of the Gospel, 1 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3.
They must be new born babes, that receive the sincere milk of the Word, so as
to grow thereby, Mat. 9. 17. If a dead Christ must be laid in a new tomb; Mat.
27. 60. surely a living Jesus will not come into an old heart, and rotten
sepulcher. Spend some time before you go to hear, in searching your hearts, and
reviewing your ways, in geting a deep sense of their vileness, and the
exceeding sinfulness of your sins, that the fallow field of your hearts may be
plowed up, and you sow not among thorns: Take heed you bring not a hard heart
to hearing. When Thrasamund the Arrian read Fulgentius's defense of the truth,
he praised his wisdom, wondered at his eloquence, commended his humility; yet
had his heart so hardened, that he could not submit to the truth. To help you
herein, set prayer on work to beg down the Spirit's of assistance; bring your
hearts to Christ by prayer, that he would make them clean: If he say, I will,
be thou clean, thy Leprosy shall be cleansed. Prayer also helps you to
suitable provision, and a blessing on it: Hearers prayers help Ministers to
preach, and themselves to hear, 2 These. 3. 1. Souls never thrive better than
when Ministers and Hearers be much in prayer for the Word of the Spirit, and
Spirit with the Word. To pray well, is to study well Been orasse est been
studiisse.
Prayer (says one) is a messenger to fetch that holy seed out of the garner
above: Prayer is the former and latter rain to make it grow beneath; pray
continually if thou would grow continually. After Christ had fed the
multitude, he went up into a Mountain apart to pray. Matthew. 14. v. 23. Secret
prayer (says Mr. Trap) fats the soul, as secret morsels feed the body;
therefore it is said to be the banquet of grace, where the soul may solace her
self with God, as Esther did with Ahashuerus at the banquet of wine, and have
whatsoever heart can wish, or need require.

Secondly, Take heed how you hear, hear as for your lives, with holy attention,
with fear and trembling. Ministers (says Mr. Latimer) should preach as if Hell
were at their backs, and hearers should hear as if life or death were in every
word. Hear with holy affection; many were given up to believe a lie, because
they loved not the truth, nor received the word in the love thereof, 2 These. 2.
10. Hear believingly; the Word preached did not profit, being not mixed with
faith in them that heard it, Heb. 4. 2. It Is by faith the Gospel becomes the
power of God to salvation, Romans 1. 17. The Arm of God was not revealed on
Israel, because his report was not believed by them, Isa. 53. 1. The Spirit is
given out through the hearing of faith: Never expect to profit by hearing, till
you join faith with hearing.

Thirdly, Keep the Word you do hear; take heed of letting slip the things you
have received, Heb. 2. 1. Hold fast the truth that no man take your Crown, Rev.
3. 11. Be not forgetful hearers, but doers of the Word, Jam. 1. 25. Forgetful
hearers will never be doers: Israel's disobedience was the fruit of their
forgetfulness, Psalm. 78. 10, 11. The reason of the Disciples trouble at the
sepulcher of Christ, was said to be their forgetfulness; they had forgotten
what he had said to them when he was in Galilee, Luke 24. 6. Bad memories have
many times barren lives: Be much in after-prayer for the Comforter's help to
keep the Word for you, and bring it to your remembrance: Prayer opens the heart
to take in the Word; and prayer shuts the heart to keep in the Word: keep up
meditation of the Word, Psalm. 111. 91. This chews the cud, and gets out the
sweetness and nutritive virtue of it unto the heart and life: This way the
godly come to be as trees planted by the waters side, that bring forth much
fruit in their season, Psalm. 1. 3.

Fourthly, Obedience of the Word helps to profiting. The worth of Divine Truths
is never fully known until they are lived upon; nor its virtue felt till we
cleave to it in our conversation. Prove. 4. 6. Forsake her not, and she shall
preserve(problem) love her, and she shall keep thee. Verse. 12. When thou go,
thy steps shall not be straightened, and when thou runnest thou shall not stumble.
O the sweetness, the pleasure, the strength, the blessedness that they lose who
only look on truth, but do not live it! Strangers to a holy life meddle not
with the joy that is wrapped up in the Word and Ways of God, Prove. 3. 17. Her
ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. The Word of God
yields out but half its sweetness, until it becomes the way and walks of men,
Psalm. 10. 11. In keeping them there is great reward. My witness is in Heaven,
says Mr. William Cooper, upon his deathbed, That the love of Jesus, and his
peoples souls, made preaching my pleasure; and I had no such joy as in doing
God's work. They are blessed that do his Commandment; not only in that they
have right to the tree of life, but in that they eat the pleasant fruits of it,
and feed upon that hidden Manna unto which bare hearers are strangers.

Thirdly, Get all the good you can from Providence; from favorable
Providence, and from frowning Providence: These are the North and the South
winds, which the Beloved causes to blow upon his garden, Cant. 4. 16. that the
spices might flow forth. Providence, whether prosperous or afflictive, are to
saved souls but the fulfilling of Divine Purposes, and the accomplishment of
precious promise, which are designed for the good of Believers. Observe the
Providence of God if you would get good from thence. Observable things (says
worthy Mr. Blair) do follow them that are given to observation. Does God bring
thee under smiling Providence? get some good from them: In these the Lord
writes legible characters of his Covenant-love to his people. O read the
tenderness, love, bounty and faithfulness of God in them, and be affected! Get
thy heart to write back letters of love and thankfulness to God again;
entertain giving Providence with thanksgiving hearts, and the sacrifice of
praise, 2 Chronicles. 29. 31. Let the Lord communicate with you concerning receiving
as well as giving, Phil. 4. 15. If left hand mercies flow in upon you, take
heed lest those floods break their bounds, and carry away the banks of your
affections and circumspection. Christians, it is a safe rule to fear your
mercies as well as afflictions: There is usually less fear, and therefore more
danger of professing friends, than professed enemies. 'Twas the prayer of Queen
Elizabeth, To be delivered from her friends, as for her enemies she would take
care of them. Further, if you have now a springtide of outward mercies,
prepare for low-waters: The comforts of this world are not standing pools, but
running streams, and rolling Seas, that ebb and flow; expect not too much from
them; entertain your coming mercies as strangers, who have their time to go as
well as come: The Lord gives, and the Lord takes, Job 1. 21.

Get good also from taking as well as giving Providence; be blessing God for
them: There is more self-denial and pure love to God expressed in such
acknowledgments, than in praises for bestowing mercy, Job 1. 2. Besides, divine
grace runs as well through the empty channels, as broad streams of outward
comforts: It Is the same hand of the Father that uncloaths, which dresses his
children; the Fork as well as the Rake belongs to the Covenant of Grace and
Peace; neither is love or hatred known by these things, Eccles. 9. 1. Some have
never found more than when they have lost all: The Lord oft-times makes men's
losses their gains, and their gain of earthly things their losses: Saul lost
his Asses, and found a Kingdom: Shimei found his servants, and lost his life:
Place not then your happiness, no nor your comforts in these things: How many
prick their fingers to get a few fading Roses, which as soon wither as they are
plucked: Think well of God under scattering Providence, and believe he loves
you as much when he removes your mercies, as when he gives them: Look to God in
Providence; see whence those winds come that blow down your houses, and
scatter your comforts; enquire wherefore God contends with you, Job 10. 2. Does
not that worm which devours your gourd, breed in your security, pride,
unthankfulness, and abuse of them, while you had them? search out the cause of
God's displeasure; justify God in it, and bear his indignation humbly; come
down at his feet, kiss his rod, and hear the voice of it: This is to get good
from the worst of Providence.

Fourthly, Get good from the world, and things thereof; by seeing its wiles and
deceitfulness, its vanity and emptiness, Mark 4. 19. The world is a fading
thing, the fashion of it passes away and it is gone. Tradesmen care not for
overmuch of those goods that are soon out of fashion, Eccles. 1. 2. O care not
for the world, the fashion whereof soon passes away! 1 Cor. 7. 31. The world
is a dirty thing, it is hard to touch it, and not be defiled. Christians, be not
like Swine, who love to run into the dirt; and if you would keep your selves
unspotted, take heed of the world. The world is a heavy ponderous thing; by
faith make it portable, and more easy to be born, 2 Cor. 4. 17. that it may
not clog your feet, and stop your race toward glory: Faith will soon lessen
your burden, and mend your pace; it will turn brass, yea clay into gold, and
make it light in carriage. The world is a strange Country to the Citizens of
Heaven, get good from it, by living as strangers in the world, by making you
long the more for your own home, by converting it to the service of your souls,
and interest in glory. The Scorpions in Caria, when they sting, kill homebred
people, not strangers. Apollon. Be a stranger to the world, and it will not
hurt thee. The world is a subtle Strumpet, shun her embraces, lie not in her
bosom, stop your ears against her charms, and shut your eyes from her
allurements. The world is an enemy, beware of it; when it promises, believe it
not; when it kisses you, take heed of the sword in its hand, 2 Samuel 20. 9, 10.
when it cries peace, peace, then fear swift destruction; set thy feet on its
fair neck to keep it down; get it nailed to the Cross of Christ, and pierced to
death with the sword and spear of the Spirit. Get good from every state and
condition God puts you into, whether high or low, rich or poor: If you are
above others in place, be above them in grace; if you enjoy more than others,
labor to do more than others, Matthew. 5. 47. The higher you are in the world,
be so much the lower in your own eyes: The tallest Cedars bow most: Ships of
the greatest burden draw most water, and go deepest: Exalted Angels rejoice to
be ministering spirits: Yea the Son of God delighted in being the servant of
men: Israel was a Prince, and prevailed with God, and yet counted himself
beneath the least of all God's mercies, Genesis 32. 10. By how much the greater I
am (says Maximinus) so much the more I labor; and the more I labor, the
greater I am. Paul the chiefest Apostle, and yet in his own eyes less than the
least of all Saints, Ephesians. 3. 8. Humble your selves when God exalts you; and
when you humble your selves, God will exalt you.

Have you much of the world? take heed of puffings up; the more you have, the
more you owe; the more you have of Earth, the less you may have of Heaven: The
poor in the world may be rich in faith; and the rich in the world may be
oft-times poor in faith: If God give you much here, be fearful lest he give you
your All here. When one offered Luther much gold, he protested God should not
put him off with these things. It Is said of Gregory the Great, he could never
read these words, Son, remember thou in thy life time receivedst thy good
things, without horror and astonishment, lest having such dignities he should
be excluded his portion in Heaven. Have you little in the world? you have the
less to reckon for; you have the lesser temptations, the fewer briars and
thorns to go through. Are you mean in reputation? you are so much the safer,
and the more beneath envy. It Is more to you (said Mr. Rutherford to the
Lord Keeper) to win Heaven, being ships of great burden, and in the main Sea,
than for little vessels that are not so much in the mercy and reverence of the
storm. Are you low in the world? the more reason you have to lie low in your
own spirits; a Prince's heart, and a beggar's purse do not well agree. Are you
in want? make more use of Christ's fullness: It Is blessed misery that brings
souls to Christ for mercy: Had it not been for affliction, Christ would have
had but little company whiles in the world: The whole need not the Physician;
the sick, the blind, the deaf, dumb, and possessed of Devils might bless God
for their maladies, which were the occasions of bringing them to the Physician
of their souls as well as bodies: 'Twas well for the poor Canaanite that her
daughter was ill, for by that means she was put upon seeking crumbs, and while
she asked for them, got the childrens bread to boot, Matthew. 15. 27, 28.

Fifthly, Get good from your Callings and Employments in the world, by
preserving a sense of the snares and dangers that lie in the management of
them. If men would take a strict survey of their Calling-carriages, and be true
to their observations, they must needs confess there are many evils they are
guilty of in the management of them every day; either idleness, or excess of
labors, deceitfulness, earthliness, lying, cheating, selfishness,
covetousness, carnal-mindedness, vain discourses, multitude of words,
murmuring, unthankfulness, with many other sins of omission and commission,
which they are exposed to in the pursuit of their Employments: Now when the
experience and sense of this do keep them more humble and watchful against the
occasions and appearances of such evils; when this helps to break and melt the
heart before the Lord in prayer, fly to Christ in the sense of their weaknesses
and inability to hold up under their temptations for all their help and grace
to stand, Ephesians. 5. 15, 16. And when they labor to keep a tender spirit in all
their dealings, and a holy jealousy of their hearts in every thing they do;
exercising self-denial, and mortifiedness to the world, and things below, then
they get profit from their Callings, Prove. 41. 3. Psalm. 141. 3.

When they make their particular Callings to comport with, and subserve their
general; when men's businesses in the world do not unfit them for, but are
helpful in their religious duties, to keep their hearts in a meetness for
spiritual service, even while they are in their earthly Employments,
maintaining a walk with God in them, then they get good from their earthly
Callings, Ephesians. 6. 18. Titus 3. 1. Sometimes God blesses your Callings, and
makes your basket and store to increase; then to be enlarged in thankfulness,
and preserve the memory of God's goodness, is not only your duty, but will
sweeten the enjoyment of your mercies: With my staff I passed over this Jordan,
and now I am become two bands, Genesis 32. 10. To love him more, and serve him
better, with more cheerfulness and gladness of heart; this is profiting by your
Callings.

Sometimes God blasts your labors, and crosses your hopes, makes a breach
upon your Trade, follows you with losses one after another: In this case to
look to the hand of God, to search out God's end in all, to get good by it, to
be the more weaned from the world, and to cease from earthly stays, is a
profitable use of your Callings.

Sixthly, Be getting some good from your company you reside amongst, meet or
converse with: The Lord offers, and souls may get much good this way: O the
mercies that God deals out through men's company! 'Twas well for Rahab that ever
the spies came to her house, for by that means she obtained the salvation of
her self and family. What a mercy 'twas to the woman of Samaria, when she came
to the Well, that she found Christ there, who instead of filing her pitcher
with perishing water, by this means got her heart filled with the waters of
life, John 4. 15? What good did the Disciples get by company in the way to
Emmaus, who by that means had their cold hearts warmed, their weak faith
strengthened, Luke 25. 15. to the 32. Others have had company fatal to them:
Had it not been for Potiphar's house Joseph might have escaped temptation to
uncleanness, Genesis 39. 7. And had it not been for Pharaoh's house, he had not
learned to swear by the life of Pharaoh, Genesis 42. 15. As long as Peter kept
with the Disciples, he was faithful and courageous; but when once he fell into
evil company, and got into the High Priest's Hall, he presently fell into that
fearful sin of denying his Lord and Master, Luke 22. 55. When they sat down
together, Peter sat down amongst them. Christians, beware what company you
come into, for the peace and welfare (if not the life) of your souls, is much
concerned in it: Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
rather reprove them, Ephesians. 5. 11. Prove. 1. 15. chap. 4. 14, 15. Choose not
wicked company for advantage sake, as Lot did with the loss of his goods, and
hazard of his life, and a dreadful fall to boot, Genesis 19. 15. 36. Advantage
was his end why he chose the Plains of Sodom, but loss was the issue of his
choice: So Balaam for Balacks goods, run himself into those temptations that
cost him his life, Genesis 31. 8. Go not into wicked company except duty call you;
if you have God's warrant, you have his protection; and if by providence, or in
the way of obedience, you meet with evil men, be good with them; [ The Sun
(says Diogenes) visits kennels, and is not defiled.] either by taking an
occasion to do them good, as the Israelitish Maid did to her Master Naaman,
directing him to the Prophet Elisha for cure, 2 King. 5. 2, 3. Or by putting a
stop to their sin, as David did. Psalm. 75. 4, 5. I said unto the fools, deal
not foolishly, and to the wicked, lift not up your horn. And as Judah sought to
divert his Brethren from their wicked enterprise against Joseph, Genesis 37. 26,
27. Or by reproving their sin, as Nehemiah did the sin of the Nobles, Neh. 5.
7. Or by instructing them if ignorant, as Paul did the Athenians, Acts 17. 22,
23. But if they be such like Sons of Belial, that the thorns cannot be taken by
hand, let them be thrust away, and get your selves fenced that they hurt you
not: Take heed of the least compliance with them in their sin. 1 Timothy 5. 22. Be
not partakers of other men's sins; your own are heavy enough; silence in not
reproving, with any signs of approving others sins, make them your own.

If you enjoy good company, take heed you miss not of good, or meet with evil
from them: good men have their evils; great men are not always wise, Job. 32.
9. And it is easier to follow them down, than up the hill, and to imitate their
vices, than their virtues; diseases are more communicable than health; men may
impart their sickness, but cannot their soundness. O what advantage has sin
for its propagation, when it falls from the hands of men reputed gracious! The
errors of good men are not only examples, but arguments unto others to sin
also: If Peter play the hypocrite, other Jews dissemble likewise with him, Gal.
2. 13. and no less a man than Barnabas is carried away with their
dissimulation. If they that are strong do but eat in the Idols Temple, the weak
will eat the things offered to Idols, 2 Cor. 8. 10. O take care of the evils of
good men, which like books published cum privilegio, vend the more. An Esau's
garment will make a Jacob's voice to pass; and where good in any man is
admired, evil is there seldom feared: take heed you follow no man further than
he follows Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 11. Implicit imitation is as dangerous in
practice, as implicit faith is in judgment: weigh their actions you intend to
walk after; let no man's reputation be your warrant for imitation: Eminent
persons are File-leaders, which way they turn, the File turns with them: The
leaders of my people cause them to err, Isa. 9. 16. Men usually follow those
they commend, Quos effero, refere.
and how much the greater they are with whom we converse, (says Seneca) Quo
major est populus cum quo conversamur hoc periculi plus est.
the more is the danger. Get good from good men, else their goodness is nothing
to you: what truth you hear from them, receive; and as Mary did the Angel's
words, so do you ponder their gracious sayings in your hearts, Luke 2. 19.

When you are in the company of those that are above you in wisdom and grace,
be more swift to hear than to speak: The emptiest vessels make the greatest
sound; and I have often observed in company, such as have most need to hear and
learn, being self-conceitedly wise, will take up most of the discourse; and
instead of drawing waters from deeper wells to fill their empty vessels, they
will be pumping out that little they have: This surely does not bespeak the
modesty of such, and less becomes their profit. Origin, when a child, used to
question with his Father about the sense of the Scriptures, and afterward
became a great Scholar. It Is the observing attentive Christian is usually the
most knowing, thriving Christian; who, with the Be, gathers in the Summer, and
gets honey from every flower it meets with; and in the Winter spends it. When
you meet with empty vessels, it is your charity to be putting in, but when you
come to deep wells, it is your duty and interest to be drawing out, by asking
questions, and proposing doubts, as the young man in the Gospel did, Mat. 19.
16. and Nicodemus and the woman of Samaria, Joh. 3. 2. 4. chapter 4. 11, 15, 20. to
Jesus Christ. The enquiring soul, if it be done in truth, and followed with
obedience, will be the most flourishing soul.

Seventhly, Get good from your retirements as well as company; be never less
alone, than when alone: Sometimes in pursuance of duty you must be alone; when
thou prayest enter into thy Closet, Mat. 6. 6. Retire we must sometimes (says
Mr. Trap,) and into fit place to meet with God; solacing, and entertaining
Soliloquies with him, as Isaac did in the field, Jacob upon the way, Ezekiel by
the river Ulai, Peter upon the leads, Christ upon the mountains, Abraham in the
grove in Beersheba, Genesis 21. 33. It Is no matter (says the same Author) how
mean the place be, so it be secret: where there is a Jeremy, a Daniel, a Jonah;
a Dungeon, a Lions-Den, a Whale's-belly, are goodly Oratories. If you will not
hear me, (says Peter Moice) send me to my prison again among my toads and
frogs, which wilt not interrupt me while I talk with my Lord God; Acts and Mon.
122. O how desirable is retirement with God to a soul that has acquaintance
with him! Antisthenes being asked what good he had got by Philosophy? answered,
that I can converse with my self; much more is it thy interest to converse with
God. It Is said of that pious man Mr. William Sedgwick, that when he was young,
while the rest of the Family were at their Games and Dancings, he would be in a
corner mourning. Mr. Greenham, when at any time he was sick, would suffer no
body to sit up with him, that so he might more freely converse with God. Psalm.
119. 62. David would rise at midnight to enjoy communion with God. O the
blessed seasons that gracious souls have had with Christ in their corners! how
sweet have their stolen waters of life, and bread eaten in secret, been to
their hungry souls! Prove. 9. 17. If the walls of this house could speak (said
Mr. Hew Kennedy) they could tell how many sweet days I have had in secret
fellowship with God, and how familiar he has been with my soul; The fulfilling
of Script. p. 442. The Lord does usually unbosome himself most to his friends
when he has them alone. Hos. 2. 14. I will allure her, and bring her into the
wilderness, and speak comfortably to her, or speak to her heart, (as it is in
the Hebrew:) Upon which words Stella has this note, Vt Dominus cum anima
nostra loquatur non opus habet testibus. Quando Dominus cor nostrum solum
invenit statim coenaturus cum illo sedet --
God needs no witnesses that he might speak to our souls; when God finds our
heart alone, he presently comes in, and sups with it; and when he observes our
soul withdrawn from the cares and carking thoughts of this World, then is his
time to open his great wonders and secrets to it. Jacob was never more
prevailing with God than when alone; then was the time he got the blessing,
Genesis 32. 24, 29. Peter was alone in prayer with God when he fell into a trance,
Acts 10. 10. His soul was as it were removed from the body for a time, (says
Beza) that he might converse with God (...), quasi se moto ad tempus a corpore
animo cum Deo colloqui.
. Elijah was alone in secret prayer, when the Angel brought him that refreshing
feast, in the strength of which he traveled in the wilderness forty days, 1
King. 19. 4. to v. 9. O what am I, (said Mr. Patrick Simpson, after he had been
many hours in his Garden alone, wrestling with God for his deserted Wife) being
dust and ashes, that the holy ministering Spirits should be sent by the Lord to
deliver a message to me! telling one that overheard him, that he had had a
vision of Angels, who did with audible voice give him an answer from the Lord
of his Wive's condition; this Woman also to whom, upon importunity, he
delivered these words, as she was approaching to the place where he lay on the
ground, heard an affrighting noise of a great rushing of multitudes together,
and with it a melodious sound: Such a welcome does the Lord Jesus give his
children sometimes, when he gets them alone into his Chambers and Wine-cellar.
O the sweetness persons may find in their solitudes with Christ! Sampson turned
aside when he saw a swarm of Bees and Honey in the carcass of the Lion, Judge.
14. 8. It Is said of Jerome, that living in the wilderness, he seemed to
converse with Angels. Contemplation (says Gregory) is the clearest day of
internal light; then are their discoveries most, when in a holy silence with
God alone: Retirement (Christian) is an opportunity put into thy hand of
in-door work; it is God's call into the Mount: Exodus 34. 2, 3. Be ready in the
morning, and come up in the morning unto Mount Sinai, and present thy self
there to me in the top of the Mount, and no man shall come up with thee. It Is
his command to a holy silence and cessation from other work, that thou may
attend the most secret concerns of thy soul: Improve this time wholly in
converse with God and attending the affairs of thy soul: This is a season to
take an estimate of thy soul-state, to try the grounds of thy hope for
eternity, to be searching into the secrets of thy heart, and taking a full
review of thy past life, and former carriages, Psalm. 4. 4. Then is the time to
weigh thy mercies and duties, to call to mind God's dealings with thee, and thy
carriages toward him; to be studying the wiles of Satan, and the ways of thy
duty; the worth of godliness, the danger of miscarrying, and the blessedness of
overcoming, and such like meditations. When you are riding, or walking, or
sitting alone, invite the Lord Jesus to keep you company, to walk and converse
with you; fill up your vacant hours with secret prayer and meditation; take
heed of being at leisure from duty-employment, either in your general or
particular Calling, or lawful Employments, lest being too much alone, the Devil
strike in for company; no greater temptation can Satan find, than times of
solitude not improved.

Eighthly, Get good from occasional objects and occurrences, which are not
chance and fortune, as the blind world calls it; but the products of divine
wisdom and pleasure toward Believers for their good. Albane receiving a
persecuted Christian into his house, and seeing his holy devotion, and sweet
carriage; he was so much affected with his good example, that he became both a
Professor and Martyr; Bid. It was not by accident, but divine intention, that
Melchisedeck should meet Abraham to bless him, and Shimei meet David to curse
him; that Moses should meet Jethro's Daughter at the well in Midian, and that
David should meet the Egyptian in pursuing the Amalekites: It was God put it
into the thoughts of Readiness servant to advise his Master to speak with the
Prophet, by which means he obtained a Kingdom: 'Twas by divine disposal, that
when Joseph was cast into the pit, the Midianites should pass by, and lift him
up, and sell him to the Ishmaelites, and they to Potiphar. The Lord is carrying
on some part of his work, some piece of mercy or justice, comfort or affliction
by all these occurrences, in which his people should be coworkers with him, and
be learning something from every passage of providence they meet with, and
object they occasionally behold in their journeyings and pursuits of their
occasions in the World: What fruitful meditations had Sampson from beholding
the carcass of the Lion, and swarm of Bees in it in his journey to Timnah?
Judge. 14. 8. 14. And our Savior from seeing the withered Fig Tree in his
passage from Bethany to Jerusalem? Mat. 21. 19, to 23. What a lecture did
Christ read to his Disciples upon viewing the goodly Buildings of the Temple?
Luke 21. 5, to the end: He beheld the City, and wept over it, and improved it
to some instruction to his Disciples, Luke 19. 41. He beheld people casting in
gifts into the treasury, and makes improvement of it, Mark 12. 4. Some told him
of the blood of the Galileans which Pilate had mingled with their sacrifice,
and he makes a profitable use of it for his Disciples instruction, Luke 13. 1,
2. What Sermons has Christ preached, when he took his Text from the waters of
Samaria? Joh. 4. 9, 10. from the Manna given to Israel in the wilderness? Joh.
6. 26, 27, 31, 32. from the multitudes flocking after him for loaves?
Christians, if you would grow rich in Spirituals, make some spiritual
improvement of all you see, hear, meet with in your journeys, dealings,
converses in the World: Thou walk into thy Garden, get some instruction from
the objects that thou castest thy eyes upon: Every herb in thy Garden preaches
God to thee Qualibet herba monstrar Deum.
: Thou walk into the Field, go with Isaac's heart, to meditate upon the
creatures and providence of God thou beholdest there: Thou look to the
Heavens, let it not be only as the Pharisees, to discern the face of the Sky,
Matthew. 16. 3. but to see the glory of God, and his handiwork, Psalm. 19. 1.
with the Chemist, extract some good from every thing thou meetest with. 'Twas
said of Jerome, he knew how to gather gold out of the dunghill, and honey out
of weeds, leaving the poison for spiders. How will men dig into the bowels of
the earth, rack the creatures, spend themselves to get a few shadows, and all
the while do nothing to get the substance that endures! and this doubtless is
one reason of soul-poverty this day; we trade not with creatures and
occurrences that fall in our way to spiritual advantages: Beg spiritual skill
and faithfulness to be improving all you see, hear, do or enjoy to soul-profit.

Ninthly, Get good from your falls and miscarriages: Physicians do sometimes
make poisons medicinal, and so does the Physician of of value make the diseases
of his people turn to their health. Sin is the greatest evil, and yet
redemption-grace works good out of it. David got good by his fall, it made him
the more humble and broken in heart; drew out his heart in stronger cries after
grace; made him more watchful for the future against the occasions of sin,
Psalm. 51. 7, 8. to the 12. Psalm. 39. 1. Psalm. 141. 3. Peter got good from his
fall, by keeping an after-sense of the evil of it on his heart. Israel by their
departure from God came to loath themselves the more in their own eyes, Ezekiel.
36. 31. And Ephesus, by a sense of their evil got this advantage, they could
not bear evils in others, Rev. 2. 2. As sin abounds, so grace abounds much
more, Romans 5. 20.

Object. If souls may get good from sin, and where sin abounds, grace abounds
much more: Then why should we be troubled for sin, and watching against it? Why
may we not rather sin, that grace may abound, and do evil that good may come
thereof? Sol. The Apostle answers this objection, Romans 6. What shall we say
then, shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? God forbid; and proves by
several Arguments.

First, That it cannot be that souls interested in Christ can live or allow
themselves in sin; Because

First, They are dead to sin, and therefore cannot live any longer in sin, v.
2. dead men while so cannot live, but Believers are dead to sin no longer to
live therein, (...), amplius, never more to live in it; they may fall into it,
be overcome by it; but to allow it, to design it, to make provision for it, and
to take up encouragements upon choice in judgment, to continue in it; this
cannot consist with men dead to sin, as all souls in Christ are; for they are
baptized into the likeness of Christ's death, yea into his death, v. 3. That as
Christ died for sin once to die no more, but was raised by the glory of the
Father, v. 4. so they being really dead with Christ, should live no more in
sin, but be perpetually dead to it; for this is the very end of Christ's death,
to destroy the old man, the body of sin, the whole power and Being of sin in
Believers, to be accomplished in its time and ways, v. 6. And Christ died in
vain, and has lost the great end of his death, if they that are in him can
live any longer in sin; for he that is dead is freed from sin Jure and facto
absoluti and manumassi a peccato cujus prius premebamur imperio. Paraeus.
v. 7. (...), being put for (...), by a Synecdoche, Piscat. that is, absolved
from the obligation, servitude, dominion and guilt of sin; as an Apprentice is
by Law declared free, or set free from his Master's rule and power.

Secondly, They that are in Christ are not only partakers of his death, and
therein brought into a state of death to sin; but they are partakers of his
resurrection, and by it instated in a life of holiness, v. 4, 5. that now they
should live to God, which cannot consist with a life of sin, v. 11, 12.

Thirdly, They that are Christ's are brought under grace, under a Covenant of
Grace, opposed to the Law as a Covenant of Works, and therefore cannot be any
longer under the dominion and service of sin, v. 14. These two Covenants being
in that respect contrary, they that are under the Law as a Covenant of Works,
are in the flesh, and bring forth fruit unto death, Romans 7. 5. and for that end
are Believers set free from the Law, and brought under Grace, that they might
serve God in newness of spirit, v. 6. and no longer serve sin.

Fourthly, They are become the servants of righteousness, set free from the
service of sin, Romans 6. 18. Your time under sin is out, and you have now no
more to do with sin; you are another servant, and therefore cannot return to
the service of sin any more; for you are now servants to God, not for a time,
but for ever; you have delivered over your selves, sworn over your selves to be
the servants of God for ever, and therefore cannot now serve sin: That Is his
first answer: You cannot, if in Christ, serve sin any longer, nor continue in
sin that grace may abound: for if you can consent to live in sin, you are not
under grace.

Secondly, You ought not to do it, if you are rational; it is not your
concernment to sin, because sin is an evil thing.

First, Sin is the greatest slavery in the world, v. 16. You are servants to
sin, and to Devils; sins are the works of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. which Christ
came to destroy; sin is evil in its state; it is drudgery, and in its nature
it is filthy, abominable and shameful.

Secondly, It is attended with sad issues here; it brings forth bitter fruit,
v. 21. It makes the soul ashamed when awakened, to see what he has done, and
it fills the soul with grief, horror and torment; it breaks your loins, makes
you go halting to your grave; it makes you weary of your life, and fearful to
die; it sets your teeth on edge, and fills your bowels with wormwood and
gravel. O the dreadful effects of sin here! which makes it no way a souls
interest to sin, 2 Cor. 7. 11. Psalm. 51. 8. Psalm. 38. 4. Psalm. 119. 120. Psalm.
55. 4. Lam. 3. 19.

Thirdly, As the work is bad, and fruits are evil here, so the wages of sin is
death, v. 23. As soon as the work is done, they shall have their wages, which
is always paying, and never paid; they shall be always dying, and never dead;
whose worm never dies, and whose fire is never quenched, Mark 9. 44. This will
be the certain end of them that can choose sin, and live in sin, if God be holy,
and his Word true. And can you then continue in sin, that grace may abound? God
forbid.

O Christians! get good from your sins; to be ashamed of them, to grieve and
mourn over them, to hate and loathe them, to pray and cry against them, to
watch and strive against them, to fly to Christ for pardon over them, and
freedom from them, to shun and avoid the occasions of them, to have no more to
do with them, to seek and further the death and total ruin of them, to prize
graces, and love Christ the more, to be more attentive to his instructions, and
obedient to his commands, to bless God, and rejoice in Christ; when God does in
any measure keep you, or set you free from sin, to long for Heaven and Glory,
that you may never sin more, to keep close to Christ, and abide in his ways,
that you might be the more secured from sin, and fitted for glory, Ezra 9. 6.
Zach. 12. 10. Ezekiel. 36. 31. Romans 7. 24. Prove. 4. 14, 15. 1 These. 5. 22. Ephesians.
5. 11. Ephesians. 2. 5. 1 Pet. 2. 7. 2 Cor. 5. 8. Acts 11. 23. This is to get good
from sin, and to drive on the Heavenly Trade: That Is the second branch of
Exhortation to Professors.

3. Counsel to Earthly Traders.
The third branch of Exhortation is to Earthly Traders, who meet with breaches
and discouragements in the pursuits of their Earthly Trades. This is manifestly
the case of England this day: The Lord blows on men's interests, makes breaches
on their Trades, sends in wants as an armed man; Trade fails, a blast is on
men's labors, and the Nation becomes poorer every day: This should be for a
lamentation, but few lay it to heart; men murmr and complain; some are
dejected and sink in their spirits, others seeing God plucking their Idols
away, hold them the faster, become more close and covetous; others sink the
deeper into the world, turn more earthly and excessive in their carkings and
labors; others more griping and oppressive; but few in appearance look to God,
and make a right use of this sore stroke. Now toward a better improvement of
this providence, give me leave to propose to all such these few Counsels.

Counsel 1.
First, By your disappointments and losses in your Earthly Employments, be
convinced of the transcendent excellency of this Heavenly Trade (which you
have, it may be, in pursuit of those too much slighted:) There are no such
issues of Wisdom's Merchandise, if duly followed: Religion breeds no such worms
to devour its treasures; Riches and honor are with me, yea durable Riches and
Righteousness: My fruit is better than gold, yea than fine gold, Prove. 8. 18,
19. There are no such hazards in the ways of God, as here in my earthly
business I am exposed to: I labor hard, and can hardly live out; I sow much,
and bring in little; I eat, but have not enough; and drink, but am not filled;
I cloathe me, but am not warmed; I earn wages, but put it into a bag with
holes; I look for much, and it comes to little, and when I have brought it
home, the Lord blows upon it, Hag. 1. 6, 9. But it is not so in that Heavenly
Trade I have neglected; there are no such disappointments; they that sow to the
Spirit, in due time do surely reap; they that labor for that bread, shall have
it given to them. O how do Wisdom's Merchants prosper when I decay! their faces
shine, their basket is blessed; whatever they have in the world, it is enough for
them; they eat their bread with gladness, and singleness of heart, and are
freed from those anxious cares and fears I am almost consumed with: That Is the
best Trade, I now see it; when all fails, that holds; when others famish, that
feeds; when others undo men, that enriches them: O blessed Calling! thou
excellest them all. This is one good use of your earthly wastes, to see the
excellency of Heavenly Treasures.

Counsel 2.
Secondly, See God in these afflictions that lie upon your Earthly Trades and
Interests: Affliction comes not forth of the dust, Job 5. 6. nor promotion
from the East, or from the West, but God is the Judge, he puts down one, and
sets up another, Psalm. 75. 6, 7, 'Twas not the wind, the fire, the
Chaldeans, or Sabeans that undid Job, but it was God that took away, it was by
his permission all those losses came, Job 1. 21. This helped Job to a due
deportment under his troubles, that he saw God in it: He does not fall out with
man, or complain of the Devil; he is not angry with chance or fortune, with
stars or constellations, but looks to God in all. Is there any evil in the
City, and the Lord has not done it? Amos 3. 6. I form the light, and create
darkness; I make peace, and create evil, Isa. 41. 7. Israel decayed in their
estates, and God says, 'twas he that blowed upon them: Men usually lay it on
the times; cry out of one, and other, but few look to God, and that is one
reason men make no better use of this Rod, because they do not see it in the
hand of a holy God: You will never lay your hand on your mouths, till you cast
your eyes on God in these troubles, nor take a right way for cure before you
see the hand that smites you, Psalm. 39. 9.

Counsel 3.
Thirdly, Search out the cause of them: You will not find the remedy, till you
see the reason. Show me wherefore thou contendest with me, Job 10. 2. Wherefore
does a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sin? let us search
and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord, Lam. 3. 39, 40. The Lord may
well say to the Complainer, Friend, I do thee no wrong, Mat. 20. 13. And as
David did to Eliab, What have I now done? is there not cause? 1 Samuel 17. 29.
Has God consumed your estate, broken your Trade, brought you to a morsel of
bread? and is there not cause? There are several sins which do usually prove
wasting to men's earthly interests.

First, A letting down of Religion, and decaying in this heavenly Trade, is
usually followed with wastes on men's outward comforts and interests, as has
been already shown: Godliness has the promise of the life that now is, as well
as of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. When that flourishes, all things go
well: when Religion goes down, nothing prospers. 2 Chronicles. 24. 20. Why
transgress ye the Commandments of the Lord, that ye cannot prosper? because ye
have forsaken the Lord, he has also forsaken you. For this letting down of
Obedience did God threaten to make Israel waste, and a reproach; to send evil
arrows of Famine, and to break the staff of Bread. Ezekiel. 5. 14, 16, 17. Because
ye multiplied more than the Nations round about you, and have not walked in my
statutes, neither have kept my judgments, neither have done according to the
judgments of the Nations round about you; you have increased in abomination
more than the Heathens and Nations round about you, and have not kept those
Laws, and done that Righteousness which they have done: [Greenhill,] Therefore
behold I, even I, am against thee: -- Moreover, I will make thee waste, etc.
Falling back in holiness will make men fall back in the world too, bring a
curse on their abundance. Now this decay of Religion is the sin of this day, as
has been fully demonstrated.

Secondly, Declension in the worship of God has been followed with declensions
in men's interests: Mal. 1. 9. Israel brought to God a corrupt thing, the blind,
and lame, and sick, the worst of the flock, and departed from God's Ordinances,
and the Lord brought on them a curse; Lege talionis ut Domos ipsorum vascet qui
Domum Dei non curant.
I will even send a curse upon your blessings, yea I have cursed them already,
because ye do not lay it to heart. To give glory to God, (says Cocceius Quia
non revocatis ad animum dare divino nomini gloriam, (...), Sept.
that honor and worship that is due to him: They had corrupted God's worship,
and God corrupted their seed, Mal. 2. 3. I will destroy your fruits before they
are ripe; which Cocceius thinks was fulfilled in that great famine in Claudius
his days mentioned Acts 11. 28. They had made the service of God contemptible,
Mal. 1. 7, and God made them contemptible: Chap. 2. 9. Therefore have I also
made you contemptible and base before all the people, (...) according as you
have not kept my ways, but have been partial in my law: you have cast dung on
my Ordinances, (for such are corruptions, (...) in God's worship;) and I will
spread dung on your faces; Mal. 2. 2. Even the dung of your solemn Feasts,
excrements. Tanta copia stercorabo vos sementis loco ut fimo inquinati plane
obruamini; Jun.
I will instead of seed throw so much dung upon you, even the excrements of
your corrupt service; as the defilement thereof shall even overcome and ruin
you: For these corruptions in the worship of God, did God stretch out his hand
over Israel, and diminish their ordinary food, delivering them to the will of
them that hated them: Ezekiel. 16. 26, 27. I have cut thee short of thy allowance,
(...), demensum tuum.
I have diminished thy portion, [Greenhill] thy lawful things, Statutum cibum
tibi; Lav.
Sept. God's worship is his name, by which he is known and distinguished from
all Idols, Exodus 20. 4. his glory, Romans 1. 23. To corrupt his worship, is to
defile the place of his Throne, Ezekiel. 43. 7. and to defalcate, and cut off his
tribute and revenues from the earth: And no wonder if God blast their Trade,
who adulterate his Treasure.

Thirdly, A covetous withholding from God turns away the blessing of God on
men's labors, and tends to poverty. Prove. 11. 24. There is that scatters, and
yet increases; and there is that withholds more than is meet, but it
tends to poverty. Many think that lost which is laid out for God, and
be-think nothing but what goes to pious uses. O how sparingly do most sow, as
if they thought their seed cast away! and thence it is they reap so sparingly, 2
Cor. 9. 6. Men's former charity, rather like showers than streams, are dried up;
and therefore are God's showers withheld also: expenses for God having been
many, seems now burdensome, through men's self-love and unbelief. While
Alexander had hope for more, he never wanted a heart or hand to part with the
Frankincense and Gold he had: certainly men's Faith fails when their Charity
fades: Few in their scarcity dare, with the Widow of Zarephtah, give the first
cake to the use and service of God, 1 King. 17. 13, 14. No wonder the barrel of
Meal and cruise of Oil fails; it is Christians weariness in well-doing, and
defectiveness in scattering for God, hinders their reaping and gathering, Gal.
6. 9. This was one of those sins that brought a curse and devourer on Israel's
increase, Mal. 3. 9, 10, 11. and is still as pregnant of blastings and mildews
as ever it was.

Fourthly, Greedy desires after the World are oftentimes followed with
disappointments: Ye looked for much, Hag. 1. 9. and it came to little, (...).
Sept. To look with desire and affection. It Is mercy in God, when men's hearts
run too fast after the World, to lay some blocks in their way, to hedge it up
with thorns, that they might not overtake their Lovers Spes in oculis, luctus
in manibus; Jerome.
. Hos. 2. 6. Thorns in men's way is safer than spears in their bowels, and that
would have been the issue of such Lovers when they meet. Covetousness is the
Hydropick distemper of old aged profession: to cure which, the great Physician
has providentially prescribed abstinence, and in his holy jealousy has made
men to read their sin in their punishment. The Lord sees it dangerous for his
people to have much of this World, because it becomes a snare to their souls;
They that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare, 1 Timothy 6. 9. Earthly
things are the very bane of Religion, they entangle men's feet, and keep them
from attendance on God in his appointments. The invited guests had no leisure
to enjoy refreshments for their souls, because of their interrupting interests
of this World, Matthew. 22. 5. The things of Heaven seem light to such, compared
with their other things: They made light of Christ's invitation, and put men on
pleading excuses for neglect of God, and on justifying their omissions of holy
duties: They began with one consent to make excuse: Christ and his people would
have more of men's company, if the World had less of their hearts.

These earthly things do not only hinder men's duties, but their thrivings also
under privileges: It Is the cares of this World, and deceitfulness of Riches,
that choke the Word, and make men unfruitful, Matthew. 13. 22. They make
careless, sleighty, forgetful hearers; they hinder convictions, quench the
motions of the spirit, take away the tastes of divine sweetness, and make all
the attempts of Grace fruitless: They take away the heart from God and
spiritual things, and so nourish formality and hypocrisy in profession and
duties, causing men to draw near with their mouths to God, when their hearts
are far from him, Ezekiel. 33. 31. Isa. 29. 13. This made Judas, Ananias, Demas,
Simon Magus such hypocrites in Religion, because they loved this present World,
2 Timothy 3. 2, 5. 2 Timothy 4. 10.

This weakens faith, blinds the mind, starves the affections, rules the will,
and so man's all the royal forts of the soul against Christ; by which the
salvation of that soul becomes exceeding difficult.

And they make provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, feeding
the carnal mind, and yielding such nourishment to sin, as that it always
resists the Holy Ghost, wins the day, renders damnation sure to all that are
not by a mighty hand redeemed from these spiritual enemies; so that it becomes
in such a case needful to starve earthly desires, by a remove of those things
that feed and maintain them; and men may look upon those afflictive providence
on their interests, as the procurements of their earthly affections: Hastening
to be rich, has poverty at the heels, Prove. 28. 22.

Fifthly, Unfaithfulness in men's Callings puts them out of the way of blessing,
and ushers in wastes on their interests, Mic. 6. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. The Lord
had a controversy with his people, v. 2. and till this was taken up, all their
religious services were to no purpose; sacrifices and duties could not prevail,
or stop his displeasure, till their sins were removed, v. 6, 7. 'Twas not to
wait on God in public duties was all that he called for, but to do justice,
show mercy, and to walk humbly with him, wherein they had been defective; and
therefore had he brought a rod upon them, v. 9. he had made them sick in
smiting them, and would make them desolate, v. 13. They should eat, but not be
satisfied; and there should be a casting down in the midst of them; they
should be blasted in their labors and interests; they should sow, but not
reap; tread the Olive, but not anoint themselves with it; have sweet Wine, but
not drink it; and then comes to reckon with them, wherefore this was brought
upon them; ver. 10, 11, 12. Are there yet the treasures of wickedness in the
house of the wicked? and the scant measures that is abominable? Should I count
them pure with the wicked balance? and with the bags of deceitful weights? for
the rich men thereof are full of violence, and the Inhabitants thereof have
spoken lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their mouths. They were full of
wickedness, and among the rest, were false and deceitful; they did not walk
humbly with God, nor justly with men, but were deceitful in their Callings, had
false weights, scant measures, were injurious to others, and not just and
faithful in their dealings; some oppressed, others defrauded; such as were over
others were cruel taskmasters, exacting their labors, Isa. 5. 8. 3. grinding
the faces of the poor, eating them up as bread, Psalm. 14. 4. by defrauding them
of their due, keeping back the hire of the Laborers by fraud and injustice,
Jam. 5. 4. which they do (says one) who give them not a proportionable hire,
working upon their necessities, sucking out the strength and sweetness of the
Laborers, Dr. Manton. A sin that cries in the ears of the Lord of Sabbaths,
cries out aloud, (...), and their groans are entered into his ears, as a God of
vengeance to requite it, and to give his poor a Sabbath, and rest from their
oppressions: A sin that God will surely and severely punish; He will be a swift
witness against them that oppress the Hireling in his wages, and turn aside the
stranger from his right, and fear not me, says the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 3. 5.
Sins joined with Adultery, Sorcery, and Swearing; provocations in God's ears,
and actions that plainly show no true fear of God in such persons that dare
oppress their poor Laborers, changing their wages as Laban did Jacob's, Genesis
31. 41. These God will surely take in hand; he will be both Judge and Witness
against them; he will not delay neither, but proceed speedily to sentence and
execution against such as oppress their poor laborers: Of all oppression, the
oppression of the poor is greatest, and carries most cruelty in it, to tread on
them that are down already, and abuse them that have no helper; to take the
bread out of their mouths which are ready to starve, and to defraud them of
their wages, which is their life, and God calls it downright robbery, Levit.
19. 13. To build up their houses, and raise up estates upon the ruins of the
poor laborers, is to lay the foundation in blood, and has a woe pronounced
against it from the Lord of Hosts, Hab. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12. This is one of those
sins which bring a people down to the ground, and make them desolate: Ye have
eaten up the Vineyard, the spoil of the poor is in your houses; what mean ye
that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces of the poor? says the
Lord of Hosts. Her gates shall lament and mourn, and she being desolate, shall
sit upon the ground, Isa. 3. 14, 15, 26. This is a God-provoking, and an
estate-wasting sin, and one of the great, visible, crying sins of this day.

Sixthly, Another reason why God consumes the interests of men, and makes a
breach on their Trade, seems to be this; That by this means he might bring them
down to his foot, and bring them back to himself: Prosperity in men's interests
feeds their pride, and makes them too high for God's use and pleasure; riches
do puff men up: Thine heart is lifted up (...); thy riches, behold therefore I
will bring (...) upon thee, the terrible of the Nations, and (...) shall draw
their sword against the beauty of (...) wisdom, and they shall defile thy
brightness; th^^ shall bring thee down to the pit, they shall destroy thy
riches wherein thou gloriest, and countest thy beauty, Ezekiel. 28. 5, 7, 8. Men
are apt to glory in their riches, and to give that respect to them which is due
to God, and this he will not bear, but comes out in indignation against men's
Idols, Jer. 9. 23. Abundance of earthly interests does also unfit men for God's
use and delight, rich in goods, and poor in grace; prosperity in the world
cools men's hearts toward God, and lames their feet in his way: It Is the poor
of the flock that waits on God, Zech. 11. 11. that press his Vineyard, and bear
the heat and burden of the day, Jer. 52. 15. When men grow full, they are lazy;
and when great, they become fearful to adventure for God: Give me thy shield
(said Epaminondas to his servant, when he had got a great sum of money) for now
thou art grown rich, I am sure thou will not adventure thy self into dangers.
Smyrna was the poorest of the seven Churches in Asia, but yet was richest in
grace and serviceableness for God. I know thy poverty, but thou art rich, Rev.
2. 9. This may be one reason why the Lord makes this Nation poor, that he might
by this make them pure, he melts away our dross, that we may be the more
refined, and takes away our Lovers, that he might come in the room of them: I
will hedge up thy way with thorns; she shall follow after her Lovers, (...) not
overtake them; and she shall seek (...) shall not find them; then shall she
say, (...) go and return to my first husband, for then it (...) better with me
than now, Hos. 2. 6, 7. Men ^^om return to God fully, till stripped of other
^^mforts; nor see God to be best, till their con^^ion in the world be bad; and
therefore does God remove these mountains of earthly interests, that his people
may the better see and go after himself.

Counsel 4.
Fourthly, If God has made breaches on your Trade, get the breach between God
and your souls composed: Hos. 4. 1, 2. Hear the Word of the Lord ye children of
Israel, for the Lord has a controversy with the inhabitants of the Land,
because there is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land; by
swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing Adultery; they
break out, and blood touches blood: There Is a controversy between God and a
sinning people (and such are we:) Sinners contend with God, and God by
afflictions contends with them, and till this controversy be taken up, there is
no peace. And if ye will not for all this be reformed by me, by these things,
but will walk contrary to me, then will I also walk contrary to you, and will
punish you yet seven times for your sins, Levit. 26. 23, 24. Hear the Word of
the Lord: Lay this to heart, they that strive with him shall perish; there is
no contending with God; bow we must, or break, return, or be ruined: Wash ye,
make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings, Isa. 1. 16. Get washed away
your blood by sound Repentance; get into Christ's blood by saving Faith; set
upon a thorough reformation, personal, family, public, each one in his place,
help to carry out the uncleanness of thy heart, hand, house and land to the
Brook Kidron, 2 Chronicles. 29. 16. Get tradingsins removed, if you would have
trading mercies enjoyed: Take every man his Censer, and stand in the gap; pour
out strong cries for returning-mercy, that the Lord would cease from his fierce
wrath, and turn again, and heal our Land, and bless our substance, accept the
work of our hand, and dwell in our Land.

Counsel 5.
Fifthly, Get advantage from decaies in your Earthly Trade, to further your
Heavenly Trade; gather materials from your earthly ruins, for your heavenly
building. Christians, there is a great deal of good you may get from these evil
things in the world, to quicken your pursuit after the things of Heaven.

First, By your earthly losses you may be convinced of the vanity and
uncertainty of all things below God: Men are apt to take up too much pleasure
in their booths, till God sends a devouring worm and consumes them; and to sit
down under their shadows with great delight; and therefore does God make them
like shadows to fly away; what expectations do men raise from their
swelling-comforts, thinking their mountains are made so strong, they shall not
be moved, till the Lord by some levelling providence soon corrects their fond
opinion! and what dependencies do we usually take up on those uncertainties,
leaning so hard on our reeds, till they break under us, and send splinters into
the arm which stays upon them? O the contentment, pleasure, profit, men fancy
to be in creatures, friends, relations, honors, estates, before by some
killing stroke they see themselves to be deceived! What mercy is it then to
meet with disappointments in these groundless hopes, that we may come to see
before it be too late, what poor, empty, perishing things all the wares of this
lower world are! This way David came to have his error seasonably corrected.
And Solomon, by a serious review of past enjoyments, comes to see that all was
vanity and vexation of spirit, Eccles. 2. 1. Surely every man walks in a vain
show; they are disquieted in vain; he heapeth up riches, and knows not who
shall gather them, Psalm. 39. 6.

Secondly, Divine rebukes on men's earthly interests, help them to a discovery
of those sins that procure them, Deuteronomy. 31. 17. Afflictions are Christ's clay
and spittle to open his peoples eyes, and to bring them to see those evils that
have brought those deaths upon their comforts, and breed those worms that have
destroyed their substance. Times of correction, are times of instruction, Job
36. 8, 9. When Jacob's Sons were cut short of their provisions, reduced to
great distress, and plunged in sore dangers, then they thought upon their sin,
and wrong done to their brother Joseph, Genesis 42. 21. Then they said one to
another, verily we are guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the
anguish of his soul when he besought us, and would not hear, therefore is this
distress come upon us: Whence one has this note, Affliction is a dark
condition, yet it brings much light into the soul. Men come to read their
miscarriages best by the fire-light of affliction; then Manasseh knew that the
Lord was God, 2 Chronicles. 33. 13. Now the soul comes to see his abuse of these
mercies he has lost, his inordinate love to them, and wanderings from God, and
this helps to after-wisdom, and greater freedom from these entanglements for
the time to come, which is no small advantage to future godliness.

Thirdly, By this loss of earthly things, the soul comes to see a necessity of
looking after, and ensuring better treasures: Heb. 13. 14. Here have we no
continuing City, but we seek one that is to come. Uncertainties on Earth should
put souls the more to look after Heaven. The Prodigal never thought of
returning till all was gone, Luke 15. 14. to verse 18. The Steward never
considered how to secure his future state, till goods were wasted, and
Stewardship in danger of removal, Luke 16. 1, 2, 3, 4. Think of swiming ashore
(said Mr. Rutherford) after a shipwreck. It Is a mercy in this stormy Sea to get
a second wind, for none of the Saints get a first. This is advantage indeed,
when having nothing, you seek to enjoy all things; and when the world flies
from you, to pursue Heaven the faster. Could a Heathen say, I never gained mere
than when I lost all; because his shipwreck became the occasion of obtaining
knowledge; and will not you Christians by your earthly losses be provoked to
make after heavenly interests?

Fourthly, Losses in the world have an advantage through grace to loosen the
heart from the world. Afflictions on men's estates are like wormwood on the
breast, that tends to wean the hearts of God's children from them: Love of the
world has been the sin of this Age; and the shipwreck of worldly things is the
likeliest way to cure it; this disease is best conquered by fasting. Absence of
Lovers is sometimes the way to starve affections; and poverty with distress is
God's usual method to chastise men's wanton affections to this world.
Afflictions when sanctified, are Sanctuary-fire to purge away the dross of our
affections, Mal. 3. 3.

5ly. Soul-enlargement is another fruit of sanctified straits, and so a help to
the heavenly trade. Christians are never fit to make any speed in the way to
Heaven, until their hearts be enlarged, Psalm. 119. 32. Enlargements in the
world are oft-times bonds to the soul: He that has most of the Earth, has
usually least liberty for Heaven. When the Lord cuts short the interest of his
people, he does but knock off golden fetters from their feet, that he may bring
their soul out of prison. Afflicting Providence are God's dieting his racers,
that they may be more longbreath'd, and swift in their run toward glory. O how
imprisoned are redeemed souls in the many things of this world! they cannot
have time to pray, read, hear, confer for the entangling-affairs of this life,
till God by some deaths upon their employments sets them at liberty. Removes of
worldly treasures are but the taking off of a heavy cloak-bag from the
shoulders of Sion's Travelers, that they may the more comfortably travel to
their journeys end. Good souls, whiles crowded with earthly businesses, are
like persons in the midst of a thicket, and thorny grove, when they would be
going forward, one briar hangs in their skirts, and another thorn stops their
way; so that when God takes off their interests, he does but cut out a way for
his children to pass the more comfortably and swiftly through the brakes of
this world, and lighten the vessel that it might sail faster and safer to its
designed port; and is not this advantage?

Sixthly, Sweeter relishes of heavenly things are to Believers the blessed
issues of the world's bitterness: Harsh Providence on earthly comforts make
heavenly things the more pleasant. Men sometimes engraff sweet fruit on
crab-treestocks, and God gives honey to his children at the top of the rod,
Psalm. 94. 19. [The thorn is one of the most cursed, and angry, and crabbed
weeds, and yet out of it springs the Rose, Rutherford.] The sweetmeats of this
world do too often put Christians pallats out of taste; to cure which, does the
Lord dish out his daintiest meat with sour sauce: Heavenly things never relish
better, than when there is less sweetness in the creature. What a value did
David put upon spiritual things when stripped of all! Psalm. 63. 1.
Gospel-comforts will not down with such as are choked with the world's
delicacies; but when once the Saints are emptied of the world by cross
providence, then is Christ precius: and is not this a help to Heavenly
Traders? O then! the more crosses you meet with in the world, the more haste do
you make to your Crown. Does the world fly from you? pursue Heaven the faster.
Does gain fall? then advance godliness: And if your gettings from Earth be
small, let your layings out for Heaven be great. And thus much for the third
Branch of Exhortation.

4th. Advice to such as are fallen back in Religion.
Fourthly, A word to such as have begun this Heavenly Trade, and are fallen
back: This is the case of some, and may be of more in this hour of Temptation
and Apostasy: There are some have begun in the Spirit, and are now ending in
the flesh; who have made a fair show, seemed to be somewhat, and like blazing
comets, drew the eyes of admirers on them for a time, and then fell down to the
Earth. Some that have left the very form; others that have lost the power and
life of godliness: Many have laid down their Lamp; but more have spent their
Oil, and are almost come to a snuff: Some have shut up shop, are quite gone,
and have taken their leave of Religion, resolving to return no more, unless
safety, credit and interest return with them: Others yet stay, keep open shop,
but have little goods; decay daily, and are upon the breaking hand; a waste is
on their interests, they have lost their first love, decayed in spirituals;
faith, hope, love, zeal, delight in God, and liveliness for him are quite lost;
as has been demonstrated in the use of Lamentation. The design of this head is
only to offer some advice toward the recovery of decayed broken Traders: In
which, as hitherto, for better illustration I shall keep to the metaphor in the
Text.

Advice 1.
My first Advice to such in order to their recovery, is to be deeply affected
with their evil case.

First, Consider, it is no small change for a person that has lived well, been
in reputation with God and men, fared deliciously, been used to the dainties of
God's house, and delicacies of his love; have tasted the heavenly gift, and the
powers of the world to come; now to be brought to penury, and scarce meet with
a sweet morsel from day to day; to be put off with husks and dry bones, and the
crumbs that fall from their Lord's Table; to stand at his door, or to wait
without for some scraps, when the friends of Christ, and Wisdom's thriving
Merchants, have their marrow and fat things; this is a great change.

For such as were wont to have a place amongst them that stand by, to converse
with the Father of Spirits, to be let into the Presence chamber, and have the
visits of the Comforter, and spiritual fellowship of Saints: Now to be laid
aside, and scarcely looked upon with a divine glance from day to day, no
intercourse with God, or fellowship with the Spirit, from one Lord's day to
another, but to be only company for formalists and hypocrites, and such as are
without; this is a great change. O get thy heart deeply affected with it!

Secondly, Think also how unlovely, offensive and displeasing an object in the
eyes of God, a withered, decayed Professor is; his soul takes no pleasure in
him, Heb. 10. 38. He does not care for the company of such, they are a burden
to him, he loves no more to see them, than men do dead corpse in their houses,
and rotten trees in their garden; he bethinks the place they stand in as
cumbring the ground, Luke 13. 7. he counts them unworthy of the Kingdom of God,
having put their hand to the Plough, and then look back, Luke 6. 62. Nothing
more troubles his soul, than a lukewarm temper, that was once burning in love,
but now is neither hot nor cold; such ride on the stomach of Christ, and make
him downright sick, till he has vomited them out into the dunghill from
whence they came; and is not this matter of trouble to a sensible heart? Rev.
3. 16.

Thirdly, Such have little desirableness in the eyes of men also. Who cares to
deal with broken Merchants; or keep company with spendthrifts, that have wasted
their estates, and are come to nothing? no more do gracious souls care for
converse with backsliders. Decayed Professors are like broken vessels in whom
there is no pleasure; and as a withered hand, or broken bone in the body, which
has lost both its usefulness and beauty. A broken Trader in Religion is valued
by none; the men of the world cannot endure him, because he has been seemingly
godly; and Saints cannot love him, because he is not really gracious: Such,
like Absalom (when hung by the hair) lie between Heaven and Earth, as unworthy
of either; and as a person held in a strait passage, cannot go forward nor
backward; he cannot go far enough to keep pace with the profane, nor go back
to fill up his place with the pious; the Saints reject him, the wicked will not
receive him: In such a pitiful case is a withered decayed soul, he has no
comeliness in him for which he should be desired.

Fourthly, They are the greatest losers of any who break in Religion; for they
not only lose their own goods, but others also; their talents; graces,
privileges and experiences, are their Lord's goods, which they have wasted in
riotous living; they lose what they once had, what they seemed to have, or were
fair for; and they lose what they hope to have, Luke 16. 1. Mat. 25. 29. 2
Epist. Joh. v. 8. Gal. 3. 4. All their enjoyments, tastes, comforts, frames,
experiences, are lost: All their profession, faith, love, conscience, are
shipwrackt: All their duties, labors, sufferings, come to nothing, if they are
not recovered again to repentance. Here men estimate their losses to be great,
from the quality, variety or abundance of the things they lose; all which are
yet but temporal; but the Treasures that Professors are in chase of, and which
they shall surely have, if they be sincere and faithful to the death, are
eternal; of all which, by their backslidings (if uncur'd) they are deprived: O
who can count the sum, and value the worth of those glorious things they fall
short of, who fall back, and go down in Christianity, till they come to nothing!

Fifthly, Their case is dangerous also, and their wound hardly healed; not one
of many that fall back in Religion, if they go far, recover again. Joh. 6. 66.
From that time many of his Disciples went back, and walked no more with him.
When Judas, Simon Magus, Hymeneus, Alexander, Demas, went off from Christ, they
returned no more: John tells us of some that went out from them, and thereby
declared that they were not of them. 1 John 2. 19. They went out from us, but
they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have
continued with us. The Apostle speaks not of such as fall out of infirmity,
falling in the way, which gracious souls may do, both falling into some sin for
a time, as Peter, and fall back by some abatements of grace, as the Church of
Ephesus, yet be recovered; such he intends not here; but those that fall out of
the way, both totally and finally, these recover no more.

Quest. If persons that fall back in Religion after a high profession, may
never be recovered again; how may one know if he find decaies, and falling back
in Religion, whether he be one of those that shall never be bealed or recovered
more? This is my case, I find great declensions in my soul and conversation,
and I fear I shall never be restored, but wax worse and worse, and perish at
last. Sol. 1. First, Are not thy declensions thy choice, upon judgment and
consent, but against the standing bent of thy heart? the renewed purposes of
thy soul through Christ: Thy error is not thy aim, thou do not deliberately
contrive thy departure from God, but have a secret would-not against every
backsliding; then thy backslidings shall be healed again, Psalm. 119. v. 10.
Romans 7. 19, 25.

Secondly, Are thy backslidings and spiritual decaies thy soul-trouble, and
restless burden, because of thy distance from God as the God of grace, and
Father of thy mercies; and because of the injury thereby done to thy graces and
inner man, and from an enmity in thy nature against sin? Then there is hope in
Israel concerning this, that thy backslidings shall be healed, Romans 7. 24.
Psalm. 5. 1, 7. Luke 15. 21. Gal. 5. 17.

Thirdly, Are thy backslidings after thy Effectual Calling, and thy sincere
choice of God to be thy peculiar and alone portion? Thou can appeal to the
searcher of hearts, that thou have taken the Lord to be thy God and only
Treasure here, and to all eternity to be thy last end and chiefest good; and
have taken Christ to be the only way, truth and life, thy Lord and
righteousness; and have made a full and actual surrender of thy self and thy
All to God in exchange, to be presently, unreservedly, and eternally his, and
not thy own, to be led and governed by him only: If so, thy after-errours
cannot make void this Covenant, but are under a promise of healing; such cannot
sin unto death, because the seed of God remains in them, 1 John 3. 9. They
are undertaken to be kept, that they should not totally and finally depart from
him, Jer. 31. 18. Isa. 57. 18. Jer. 3. 14, 22. Hos. 14. 4. Jer. 32. 40.

Fourthly, Art thou restless in thy backslidings, until the Lord does heal
thee? thou can give him no rest till he establish thy soul, and be as the dew
to thy dry and barren heart: When God sets a soul a crying, it is a sign he will
hear: Jer. 30. 15, 17. Isa. 19. 22. A man (says Mr. Dod) can never be in a bad
condition, except he has a hard heart, and cannot pray? Will he delight
himself in the Almighty? Will he always call upon God? Job 27. 10. Backsliders
in heart are heartless in prayer; as they decay, so do they restrain prayer,
Job 15. 4. Ye have said, it is in vain to serve God, Mal. 3. 14. As sin becomes
more delightful, so duty becomes more burdensome, cold and formal; but a
gracious soul that shall be healed is importunate with God, and will not let
him alone, Exodus 32. 10, 11. or let him go until he bless him, Genesis 32. 6. The
worse his condition is, the more fervent his cries are; the more his piety goes
down, the more his prayers go up, Psalm. 6. 2. Such a soul shall be healed, who
would be healed; where he works to will, he will work to do.

Fifthly, Are thy vitals sound under all thy decaies? then thy consumption is
not mortal: Is thy heart sincere? thou can not hide or reserve iniquity, but
walk before God in truth; thy desires after grace are not feigned, Psalm. 17.
v. 1. Thy love to God is not pretended, liplove, but real; thy faith and love
are not wholly gone, but maintained in the truth thereof, though abated; thou
can not let God go, but have a secret rest on him, and resolved recumbence on
his grace and faithfulness. There is hope of that tree, though it seems to be
cut down, that it will sprout again, and the tender branches thereof will not
cease, Job 14. 7.

Sixthly, If under all thy decaies thou find a humble heart and contrite
spirit; thy backslidings make thee lie low before God, and to become more vile
in thy own eyes every day; thy soul-poverty makes thee poor in spirit also,
rating thy self beneath the least mercy, and judging thy self unworthy of all
that patience, privilege and mercy shown to thee; thou do not fret at
afflicting providence, nor charge God foolishly, but bear his indignation,
justifiest his displeasure, and wonderest at his forbearance; then will
revivings come again, and recovery after thy falling back, Dan. 9. 7, 23, 25.
Mat. 5. 3. Isa. 57. 15.

But on the other side, There are five dangerous symptoms of falling back that
shall hardly be restored.

First, If thy falling back be before thy falling in with Christ in truth; thy
decaies before thy quickenings, then it is dangerous: If thy building were on
the sand, and the towering heights of thy frames and profession from which thou
art fallen, were only structures of thy own raising, in which the Sanctifying
Spirit had no hand, then thy decaies are not likely to be repaired. Art thou a
stranger to the new birth, and to any inward change upon thy soul? the
principle of thy new profession and actions is is still an old heart: Thou
never did take the Lord for thy God and only Treasure, nor had to this day
any heart-union with the Lord Jesus; then thy fall is dangerous, Mat. 7. 26,
27. 1 John 5. 14. 2 Timothy 3. 5.

Secondly, A falling off from the foundation is dangerous: When men depart from
the Faith, turn to another Gospel, and deny the Lord that bought them, fall
from the Doctrine of Grace after enlightenings, to a Covenant of Works, laying
the foundation of Salvation-hopes upon creature-performances and improvements,
when they go from the Rule of Faith and Word of Truth, to natural light, and
seducing spirits, which have not their evidence and approbation from the
Scriptures. When persons at once disclaim dependency on the true foundation and
disposal by the Rule of Righteousness it is much to be feared whether such shall
be restored, Gal. 1. 6. chapter 5. 4. Heb. 10. 26, 39. 2 Pet. 2. 15. Heb. 6. 4. 6.

Thirdly, When men make Merchandise of the Truth, and sell their profession for
worldly interest, having loved the reward of iniquity, and made a swap of their
Religion for advantagesake: This is a mighty provocation to the Spirit, when
men can sell themselves to work wickedness, and value the great things of God's
Law, of his Truth and Salvation at so low a rate; to part with them for a mess
of pottage, and the dirty Cabals of this world: It Is seldom that such find
repentance, though they seek it with tears: See Judas, Simon Magus, Balaam,
Demas, Spira: What remarks of furious indignation God makes such Apostates to
be, who can part with their Religion for worldly interests! 2 Timothy 4. 10. 1
King. 21. 20. 2 Pet. 2. 3, 15. Acts 1. 18.

Fourthly, Backsliders in heart shall surely perish, and be filled with their
own ways, Prove. 14. 14. when falling back is upon choice, and with delight,
like a deceitful Bow that is then at rest when its string is broken, Psalm. 78.
57. When a man casts off Religion as one does his burden, and a beast his yoke,
Jer. 5. 5. and is glad he is rid of his troublesome work, as one that is got
out of prison, Romans 1. 32. This argues a spirit of Belial, and a dangerous
state: Many have taken up a Lamp upon constraint, for fashion, or interest, or
for companies-sake, as the foolish Virgins did, Prove. 14. 14. Psalm. 78. 57.
Jer. 5. 5. Mat. 25. 1. But when opportunity has offered it self for a fair
riddance, they have soon appeared what they were by their cheerful returns to
Egypt, and the broad way of error and looseness, falling in with other
interests, and finding pleasure in it: Now the world, reputation and pleasure
take away the heart, and they are well-pleased with other Lovers: this is a bad
sign of a desperate state, of marish-ground that shall never be healed, Ezekiel.
47. 11.

Lastly, When persons are prejudiced against the means of recovery, hate them
that rebuke them in the gate, Amos 5. 10. shun the light, and cannot endure
those that would reclaim them from the error of their way, Joh. 3. 19. their
hearts rise against any attempts to reduce them, Amos 7. 10. cannot bear them
that are good, slight and hate the people of God they formerly loved, avoiding
their company; jeer and reproach those Ministers, people and ways they once
took pleasure in: this shows a dangerous state, such a persons condition seems
desperate, and not far from the Chambers of death. O you that are fallen back
in Religion! get your hearts affected with it: do you begin to decay? you know
not where it will end: are you gone back? it is questionable whether ever you
may return, and then what will your latter end be? your last state will be
worse than your first; and if twice dead, you will be plucked up by the roots;
if after showers and dressings you decay, your end will be to be burned.

Advice 2.
Secondly, If you would recover out of your wasting decays in this heavenly
Trade, search out the causes, and get them removed. There must needs be
something more than ordinary, when men who have a good Trade, which may be
driven in the worst of times, and will ensure advantage, if followed, do
notwithstanding fall back and decay: Such is Religion, it will maintain and
enrich its followers, if they be not wanting to themselves; there must needs be
some great causes and miscarriages then that does cast back the professors of
Christianity, and bring a consumption on their soul-prosperity: some of which
may be these:

First, When they enter upon this heavenly Trade, and have not a stock to set
it up: Religion is a great thing, and cannot be carried on without a stock of
saving-grace to maintain it: Common grace is not a suitable stock for this
spiritual Trade; it may help men to transact the external part, and common
works of Religion; but cannot do the inward, secret, and choicest services of
godliness: A stranger intermeddles not with its joy, Prove. 14. 10. no, nor its
work; They that are in the flesh cannot please God, Romans 8. 8. The Kingdom of
God is not meat and drink, Romans 14. 17. it lies not in outward duties, but
righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost; which no hypocrite can reach
to. This spoils many, they take up a form of godliness without the power of it;
and being strangers to the work within, they cannot carry on the works of grace
without, which this state calls for; and so fall back, and come to nothing.
When persons get some knowledge, parts, frames, and temporary graces; they
presently take up a Lamp of profession, and get into the company of the wise,
climb up to the enjoyment of privileges, and then sit down contented, and fall
asleep; and when they come to temptations, and spiritual duties, to the work of
faith, love, patience, self-denial, mortification, and the like; having not
grace to support them, and a principle that suits such work, they fall short of
duty, and into sin, and so Trade, and fall away: Common grace is as a
standing-pool, which having not a spring to feed it, dries up when supplies
cease, and scorchings come; whereas true grace is as a well of water, that
springs up to life eternal.

Secondly, Another thing that casts back Traders, is this; when they set upon
an employment, and have not skill to manage it: Every Art has its principles,
rules and mysteries by which it is carried on: to deviate from these, is to mar
the excellency, and miss the advantage of it: Irregular actions seldom thrive;
so it is with the heavenly Trade, when persons set upon it, and have not skill
to order it to best advantage, no wonder if they prosper not, but fall back in
godliness. Solomon directing to this heavenly Trade, advises to get wisdom as
the principal thing in order to it, Prove. 4. 7. And when the Apostle would
further the Saints in holy walking, as the necessary way to it, he begs wisdom
for them, Col. 1. 9, 10. That ye may be filled with the knowledge of his will in
all wisdom and spiritual understanding: that ye may walk worthy of the Lord to
all, well-pleasing, being fruitful in every good work. Two things made David
thrive so much in his proper public work; Integrity of heart, and
Understanding, Psalm. 78. 72. He fed them according to the integrity of his
heart, and guided them by the skilfulness of his hands: Some books read it in
the plural number in the Greek; In skilfulnesses, (...), noting the great
measure of wisdom which men need who would prosper in their proper work, and
order their administrations prudently, as might most further their spiritual
welfare: The want of which wisdom and prudence in Christians to order every
thing they do in their general and particular Callings, converses, conditions
and occurrences in the World to the best advantage of their souls, is one
reason they thrive so little in their heavenly Trade: Wisdom would teach men to
prevent many snares and occasions of evil, and instruct them how to get good
from every thing they do, which would much advance their soul-profiting, for
want of which they go back in spirituals, and decay apace.

Thirdly, This also casts back Traders; when they are not diligent in the
management of their Trade: A slothful soul suffers hunger, Prove. 19. 15. and by
much sloth the building decays; and through idleness of hand the house droppeth
thorough, Eccles. 8. 10. They that will thrive in the World must be diligent,
take all opportunities to carry on their work: The diligent hand makes rich,
but by slothfulness men are brought to a morsel of bread. So it is in Religion,
when men let down their work, and do not follow it to purpose, they soon decay,
and become spiritually poor; this is the bane of many this day: Religion is not
their business; men do but little on the Lord's day, and scarce a stroke of
work is done all the week after; hear they will, and when that is done, their
work is done too: never think of what they hear, or put it to practice from one
Lord's day to another: All the week their heads, hearts, hands, feet, time,
strength, discourses, contrivances are wholly taken up about the World; and how
can they choose but go down the hill, and waste away in their soul-interests?

Religion is one continued work, which allows of no intermission, but has its
work every day, and in every thing; break but one link of this golden chain of
godliness, and it weakens the whole. O the slothfulness of Christians at this
day in their soul-businesses! every day is filled up with neglects; neglect of
prayer, neglect of reading, meditation, conference, heartwatching,
grace-cherishing-work, forget this duty; pass by another, cold, sleighty,
formal in all; this spoils the prosperity of souls. The Galatians began well,
but did not hold out, they were soon weary, Gal. 5. 7. Most men's journey to
Heaven is full of stops, and that which makes it most miserable, their lets are
of themselves: Who has hindered you? Men's stays are within in their own hearts,
they have no heart to do good, Hos. 7. 11. Love to Religion is almost gone, and
this makes men weary in these pleasant ways: while affections hold, souls are
never weary; but when the heart is gone, then every thing is a burden; such
will do no more than needs they must to quiet conscience, and preserve peace
and credit; and this starves godliness.

Fourthly, Great and frequent losses in men's Trades tend to breaking; and so it
is in Religion: Christians through their sloth, formality and unwatchfulness
sustain many and great losses of spiritual mercies, and this brings them low. A
Christian the other day, it may be, had his graces flourishing, his heart warm,
his affections quick and lively, his conscience pure and tender, his will
flexible, and fixed on God and things spiritual, 2 Ep. Joh. 8. and a good frame
throughout his whole soul: but now through his carelessness all is lost again,
Gal. 3. 4. One time he loses the favor and comfortable presence of God, Psalm.
51. 12. another time he loses a sweet serenity of spirit, and peace with God;
then light and convictions are gone; another time enjoyments and experiences
are gone; now his desires after God are lost, then his strength is devoured;
now temptations prey upon the soul, and then corruptions make a waste upon it:
come to Ordinances, Sermons, Sacraments, and after a great deal of prayer,
care, and striving, a little grace and comfort is obtained; but through want of
watchfulness all lost again: it may be before it stirs out of the place, or
recovers home to his habitation; the next company, discourse, occasion, takes
away all.

Another time God brings the soul into the fire of some great affliction,
sickness, suffering, losses; and there melts it into some holy frames,
humility, faith, love, obedience takes off some dross, puts on some beauty,
imparts some souladvantage; but immediately upon a change of the person's
condition, when new mercy, health and comfort returns, all the good is lost
again. Now through these many and great losses in spirituals, which gracious
souls sustain, they are brought very low, and come to be soon poor and beggarly.

Fifthly, Great wastes, and large expenses, help to make Traders poor apace;
when they turn spendthrifts, and prodigals, living above their estates; when
their layings out are more than their comings in, this must needs bring them
low: It undid the Steward; He wasted his Masters goods, Luke 16. 1. So it is
with Wisdom's Merchants also, when they turn prodigals of their graces,
mercies, parts, strength, time, and other goods committed to them, spending
them on their lusts and carnal contentments, then they soon find an alteration.

O, at what a rate do men live in point of time! and at what vast expenses of
their short day upon things of no value, talking, eating, drinking, sleeping,
trifling, sinning away their precious time, as if they had no employment for
it, or no better work to do: Little do souls think what a small pittance of
daylight they have allowed for their vast concerns, and multitude of great
employments; and what madness it is to be so prodigal of this little inch of
precious time. O the hours, and days, and years that professing Christians
spend to no purpose! in vain thoughts, foolish talking, impertinent converses,
unprofitable duties and labors, which when they shall be all reckoned up by
the great Creditor, and a bill of wastes put into the hands of conscience, and
the total sum of these expenses read; what amazing sense! what dreadful
impress! and fretful sting will this beget when persons come to die! As the
Queen said, If her heart were ripped open, Cales would be found written in it: So
if their hearts could then be as legible as their expressions, men might read
this there in black, and capital letters, Lost time, Lost time.

How great also are men's wastes of graces and peace, wisdom and capacities, and
all for the obtaining of some poor, empty, insignificant comforts, which perish
with the using: There are no locusts (Christians) like your cursed lusts, which
have devoured your precious things; your affections, time, strength and graces;
what convictions, resolutions, hopeful frames, conscience-tenderness, talents,
capacities, privileges, ordinances, providence, have the service of thy base
lusts, and contentment of thy carnal mind consumed! and this has brought thy
soul to such straits and distressing exigencies.

When souls live above their capacities and proportion; that is casting back,
when persons have little, and yet live high; have but a little light, and yet
spend that too in works of darkness; have but a short day, and yet so many
hours of that one day consumed in vanity; this is to live above thy estate, and
will be soon impoverishing: When men have but a little grace and strength, and
yet adventure upon great temptations, and run into soul-ruining dangers, rush
into vain company, set upon entangling affairs, and take much business on their
hands, and yet have but a little portion of Wisdom and Grace to manage them;
this is to live above thy estate in Christianity. To be low of stature, and yet
high in conceit, of little spiritual worth, and yet think highly, and speak
highly of thy self, and to expect estimation from others also, is to live above
thy estate.

To have nothing to maintain thee but what comes in by thy soul labors; no
longer work, no longer eat; thy daily bread depends upon thy daily work; so
poor, and yet in this condition to expect an easy life, to lie down to
slumber, to dwell carelessly, and set thy hand but by fits and starts to thy
work: This is to live above thy spiritual estate, and will soon bring thee to
breaking in this Heavenly Trade.

Sixthly, Great debts are breaking, and will cast men back in Wisdom's
Merchandise; when men owe more than they are worth, and know not how to pay it;
run further on book every day, till their credit will pass no longer; they have
often promised payment, but still failed, and now their word will not pass,
they can get no more goods, Creditours will not trust them, but begin to
suspect them, and threaten to take them up, then men shut up shop and break:
This also is pernicious to Heavenly Traders, when they become unfaithful to God
and men, run on score for mercy, but never pay or render to God again; are deep
in debt to God for divine goodness; receive one mercy after another, one talent
after another, and make no returns of any; God sees not principal or interest,
but they remain fruitless and unthankful under all; make promises of better
improvements, but still break them: Come to Sacraments, and renew their
Covenant with God, and go away and break it again; make promises to God under
affliction, that if he will deliver them this once, they will never grieve and
provoke him more as they have done; make large engagements, if God will hear
this prayer, and give that mercy; but when their turn is served, forget God,
and break all their vows again; be ready to pass their word on every occasion,
and then look after it no more; this begets a jealousy in the Lord of Hosts,
that he will trust them no more, Deuteronomy. 32. 21. but hold his hand. and part with
no more goods, but threatens to take them up, and to cast their souls into
prison; begins to sue them in the Court of Conscience, and to outlaw them at
the bar of Justice, to seize on what they have; then away goes peace, joy,
hope, and then comes breaking. These are some of those reasons why Christians
go back in Religion, and decay in their Heavenly Trade. O Christians! bring the
plummet to the line, and thy heart and life to the balance, and try from which
of these comes thy soul-decaies, and then get it to bear upon thy heart, till
thou art fully convinced of thy evil, and willing on any terms to obtain remedy.

Advice 3.
Thirdly, Compound with your Creditour; get your peace made with God through
Christ; make haste to prevent a seizure on your person and goods by a timely
composition. Agree with your adversary while you are in the way with him, lest
at any time he deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the
Officer, and thou be cast into prison, Mat. 5. 25. It Is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of an ever-living God, who is a consuming fire, Heb. 10. 31. chapter
12. 29. O tremble in the sense of his righteous Judgment, and force not the
Lord by thy delays to commence a suit against thee, and to make an entry upon
all that thou have; but go humble thy self, and make sure thy friend, Prove. 6.
3. Fall down before thy Creditour, and sue for terms of reconciliation; cast
thy self at the feet of mercy, confessing thy sin: Pay the debt thou can not;
go beg remission, and offer a Surety to discharge the score, even such a one as
the Father himself is well pleased with: Thy Creditour must be satisfied or
thou art undone; but this you can never do: Away to a Mediator to obtain
terms, and to procure your peace; make Christ your friend, who is able to
satisfy all the Father's demand, to cross the book and send your discharge by
the Spirit of Grace, who can witness the pardon of all your sins to your
consciences: Come to him in the sense of your folly, bearing your shame.
Forsake your wasting ways, and with the prodigal return from your harlots to
your Father's house, rating your selves beneath the least of his mercies, and
consenting to the meanest condition, so he would but take you in again, Luke
15. 17, 18, 20, 21. Subscribe all his terms, and make a new surrender of your
self and your All to Christ, to be no more your own, but more entirely his than
ever, Jer. 50. 5. Enter into a new Covenant with God in Christ, taking him for
your Surety, and fetching all your abilities to fulfill it from him, and get thy
soul more firmly bound to the Lord in it by the bond of the Spirit.

Advice 4.
Fourthly, Set up no more for your selves, but enter your selves Factors for
Christ. It may be you traded formerly for your selves, and that broke you; if
you would prevent that danger for the future, you must be no more for your
selves, but for him; trading as his Factours, not your own.

Now three things are required in a Factor, which must be observed also by
wisdom's Merchants, if ever they will drive a thriving Trade in Godliness.

1. To trade upon another Stock. 2. To be regulated by another Advice. 3. To
drive on another Interest.
First, If you will be Christ's Factours, you must trade upon his stock; you
must not only take all your goods from him, but as his; not only fetch in
your graces, abilities, skill, success from him, but use and improve them as
his, not as your own. Joh. 1. 16. Of his fullness have all we received grace for
grace. 'Twas not only part of his fullness before it was received, but it is his
grace after reception. Col. 1. 19. It pleased the Father that in him should all
fullness dwell: not only the fullness of the Divine Nature, but the fullness of
habitual grace, both which are in Christ; the latter is chiefly intended here,
which dwells in Christ as in a head, not for himself only, but for his body,
as beams in the Sun, and water in the Fountain for the use of man. The Father
has laid up all that grace that Believers need here and for ever in the Lord
Jesus, as in a Treasury, or Trustee's hand, for their use; or made it over to
him not only as a deed of gift, but as a purchase which he has bought by his
blood for the good and use of his children: It Is his fullness, right and
interest, but for their use and advantage, but so as the property and disposal
be still his. Fallen man has for ever forfeited his credit with God since his
first defection, to become any more the disposer of his interests and
inheritance, or be entrusted again with his own portion. God deals with saved
souls as parents do with prodigal children, secures their estates in the hand
of a Feoffee. Believers Treasures are laid up in Christ, that so grace as well
as glory, sanctification and salvation may be sure to them, and not liable to
forfeiture or loss; to be disposed of, and parted with by them as they please,
but be certainly and eternally theirs, that so they may come to Christ for all
they need, as heirs under age, who have no more in hand than what they want,
but must come to their Overseers for all they have use of; and not only as
such, but as Stewards also that must be accountable for what they have, and how
they bestow it.

Poor decayed souls, Would you recover your losses, and renew your Trade? then
you must come to Christ's fullness, and be beholding to his free grace for all
you need. Do you want grace for your duties, places, trials, sufferings? come
to Christ's fullness for your supplies; send to him by the hand of prayer an
intimation of all your wants: Make known your requests to him. Phil. 4. 6. Be
careful for nothing, but in every thing by prayer and supplication, with
thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to God. Cease not from following
God in the Name of Christ with requests, till the Spirit meet you with returns.
The Lord Jesus has ordained his people to receive their supplies, sallaries,
and stipends from Heaven in the Court of Requests. Matthew. 7. 7. Ask, and you
shall receive. All things whatever you shall ask in prayer believing you shall
receive, Matt. 21. 22. Seek it by prayer, receive it by faith: Go to Christ in
the promises for all you want, judging him faithful who has promised, Heb. 11.
11. God's Word is as good as present pay, and shall be fulfilled by him (who
cannot lie) to all that by faith receive it, and wait for its performance. All
his promises are in Christ Yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. Who came down from
Heaven to confirm them with his blood, and is returned to Heaven to fulfill them
by his intercession, Heb. 7. 25. You may boldly adventure on divine assurance,
and shall not be ashamed, if you sincerely roll on Christ in his Word. Be well
acquainted with the promises, clear up your interest in them by believing, and
expect their fulfilling through Christ. It may be thy graces are low, thy
corruptions high, guilt heavy, fears many, refuge fails, thy prayers not
answered, no good news from Heaven or Earth; thou prayest, hopest, waitest, but
no answer; in this case nothing but firm reliance on divine faithfulness, can
keep thy head above water.

Are you in wants? go to that promise, My God shall supply all your wants,
Phil. 4. 19. God will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withold
from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84. v. 11. Do you find changes in your
spirits, and frames, and condition? See that word, Believe in the Lord your
God, and you shall be established; believe his Prophets, and you shall prosper,
2 Chronicles. 20. 20. Are corruptions high? apply that word, He will turn again, he
will have compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, Mic. 7. 19. Sin
shall have no dominion over you; for you are not under the Law, but under
grace, Romans 6. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, Titus 2. 14. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he
might destroy the works of the Devil, Joh. 3. 8. I will save her that halteth,
Zeph. 3. 19. When thou see nothing but witherings and dyings in thy soul,
apply these promises; So will thou recover me, and make me to live, Isa. 38.
16. The righteous shall flourish like the Palm Tree, he shall grow like the
Cedars of Lebanon: Those that be planted in the house of the Lord, shall
flourish in the Courts of our God, thy shall still bring forth fruit in old
age; they shall be fat and flourishing, Psalm. 92. 11, 12, 13, 14. I will be as
the dew to Israel, he shall grow as the Lilly, and cast forth his roots as
Lebanon: they that dwell under his shadow shall return, and shall revive as the
corn, Hos. 14. 5, 6, 7. They that wait on the Lord shall renew their strength,
Isa. 40. 31. In these and such like promises, as in wagons sent of purpose to
fetch you, go over to your Joseph, and get them laden with the riches of his
Kingdom, that you may be relieved and carried on in your Trading for Heaven,
improving these not as yours, but as your Lord's goods: That Is the first, Trade
upon Christ's Stock.

Secondly, Follow his instructions, be guided by his order in the management of
your Heavenly Trade: Take Letters of Advice from your Creditour, how to lay out
his moneys, and how to dispose of his goods. Prove. 3. 5. Lean not to your own
understanding, which is the most close and subtle kind of Idolatry (says
Cartwright) Seek not after your own heart, and your own eyes, after which ye
use to go a whoring, Numb. 15. 39. Man is mightily propense since his first
defection from God, to take the Scepter into his own hand, and to become the
governor of his own ways: But this God cannot bear, as being inconsistent
with his Supremacy, and that State also into which man is by grace redeemed;
which is an absolute devotedness unto God, 2 Cor. 8. 5. Ye have likewise chosen
the Lord to be your Lawgiver and King, if you are his, and are now upon your
own consent determinable by his pleasure in every thing you do: The rectitude
of every action lies in a conformity to his will, who is your Lord and
Sovereign. And as the eyes of a Handmaid wait on her Mistress; so should
Believers on Christ for direction in all they do, Psalm. 122. 3. Christians,
your former irregularities in the prosecution of your Heavenly Trade, have
almost lost you, and cast you back: O be more observant of Divine Instructions
for the future! follow your advice, walk by Rule: As you have received how you
ought to walk, and to please God; so abound more and more, 1 These. 4. 1. Beg
Wisdom of God to know his Will in every thing, to do that which is
well-pleasing in his sight, having a warrant for every action you perform both
civil and religious; this will be your comfort now, and your peace in the day
of your accounts.

Thirdly, Drive on his interest, not your own. Romans 14. 7. For none of us
lives to himself. God can more justly say what Laban did to Jacob concerning
his children and goods; These daughters are my daughters, and these children
are my children, and these cattle are my cattle; and all that thou see is
mine, Genesis 31. 43. The cattle on a thousand hills are his, Psalm. 50. 10. with
the corn, wine, wool and flax, Hos. 2. 9. Both the improvement as well as
principal are his, Mat. 25. 27. He has right to the exercise and fruit of your
graces and duties, with all that you enjoy and do: Put Christ's mark on all
your goods; whatever you gain by his talents, put on his account, and let your
disbursments be expended to his use. Seek not your own things, your credit,
peace, comfort, interest, but in subordination to him: If the Lord by his Word
calls for any of your enjoyments, you must let them go: If by his Providence he
takes off any comfort, murmr not, say, it is the Lord, Let him do what he will
with his own, Mat. 20. verse 15.

Advice 5.
Fifthly, Follow your Trade better than you have done; remember how former
carelessness, formality, sloth, hypocrisy, have undone you, and amend. The
slothful soul is as the door on his hinges, Prove. 26. 14. that never makes any
progress in Religion, or comes to any excellency in grace. No Christian (says
Mr. Sedgwick) is so able in the habits of grace, as he who is conscienciously
frequent in the practice or exercise of grace. [ Christ's Counsel to his
languishing Church] Would you recover your state, and come to any eminency in
godliness, then make Religion your business: That sleightiness of spirit in the
way of God, which lost you at first, will never restore you. The recovery of a
faint soul (says the same Author) will never be effected by faint workings:
You did fall into your decayed state by remissive actings, and think you, that
which was not able to keep up your graces from sinking, can now quicken and
raise them being sunk. [Christ's Counsel to his languishing Church, p. 148.] If
negligence did cast you back, diligence must help to recover you: Take more
pains with your hearts; follow your work of godliness every day, and in every
place; Be early and late in your shops of duty, and in the warehouse of your
hearts: Beware of spiritual sloth, and soul-losses; take heed of unfaithfulness
with God, conscience, or others; keep touch with your Creditour; be tender of
your vows to God and men; keep from prodigality; live not above your condition;
waste not precious time, parts and grace in vain; walk strictly in the whole
course of your life, keeping your selves from iniquity, and in the Love of God.
Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and
our Savior Jesus Christ, Jude v. 21. Tit. 2. 13.

5th. Branch of Exhortation to good Traders in Religion.
Lastly, You, whoever you are that drive on this Heavenly Merchandise, and have
any good Trading in Religion, be you exhorted

Advice 1.
First, To bless God for good trading: Is it well with your souls? Does the
South Wind blow upon your Garden, and the Spices flow out? Cant. 4. 16. Does
the Fig Tree put forth her green Figs? and the Vine, with the tender Grape,
give a good smell? Cant. 2. 13. What reason have you then to be always giving
thanks? you whose trading turns to any spiritual advantage: thou can say,
It Is good to draw nigh to God; in keeping his commands is great reward: The
Lord is not a barren wilderness to thy soul; but peace is within thy Walls, and
prosperity within thy Palaces, Psalm. 122. 7. Thy glory is fresh in thee, and
thy bow renewed in thy hand: thy root spreads out by the waters, and the dew
lying all night between thy branches, Job 29. 19, His ways are pleasantness,
and his steps drop fatness to thy soul; and he commands his blessing upon thee;
and thy faith and love do grow. Is it thus in any measure with thee? O then
bless the Lord with thy soul; let all that is within thee bless his holy Name.
Make the Lord thy glory, and triumphing praise: Thou have abundant reason to be
admiring grace, and exalting divine glory. Because,

First, Soul-thriving is a great mercy at all times; a little spiritual goods
is beyond all the World's treasure; one piece of Christ's tried Gold weighs
down all the Pearls and Diamonds on earth; and whatever can be found below
grace, cannot be compared with it, Job. 28. 11, 12, 16. or named the same day
with it: The light of God's countenance, pardon of sin, participation of the
spirit, fulfilling of Promises, fellowship with the Father, Son, and Spirit;
heartbreathings after, love to, and delight in God, are things of inestimable
worth; if you weigh them in themselves, or with other things; or if you
consider the grace from whence they come, or price which they cost: Spiritual
thrivings are an evidence of sincere love to God. Judge. 5. 31. Let them that
love thy Name be as the Sun that goes forth in his might, and of special love
in God to that soul, Tit. 3. 4, 6. Ephesians. 1. 3, 5, 7. God may prosper in the
World those he hates; Esau had his fat things here, but grace and peace are
new-covenant-blessings, which spring from eternal love in the heart of God to
that soul, Heb. 8. 10. Zech. 8. 11, 12, 15.

Secondly, It Is a singular mercy at this time, a mercy that few enjoy in the
day we live in: What a rare thing is it, in this long winter, to see a green
Olive, a tender Grape appear, or Pomgranate bud? Cant. 7. 6. or one Berry in
the uppermost branch, Isa. 24. 13. It was a peculiar glory put upon the head of
Thyatira, that she was thriving when other Churches were decaying: She had
works, and works, and the last were more than the first, Rev. 2. 19. Ephesus
had lost her first love; Sardis had decayed and wasted her first strength, and
was ready to die: Laodicea was lukewarm, ready to be spued out by the Lord
Jesus, Rev. 3. 1, 8, 16. only Thyatira flourished exceedingly, and grew in the
winter; and this honor she had, to have it recorded by the Spirit for a
monument in after-ages. It Is not the lot of every one to thrive in evil times;
few Thessalonians whose faith and love did grow, 2 These. 1. 3. A single
Timothy, who had flourishing affections to the things of Christ; I have no man
like minded, Phil. 2. 20. One Gaius, whose soul out-prospered his body, 3 Ep.
Joh. v. 2. A flourishing Christian this day is like a flower in winter, an
Apple Tree amongst the trees of the wood: Surely, if there be a Soul who this
day flourishes to any height of Christianity, who lives in intimacy with God,
fares deliciously in his soul, feeding on marrow, and hidden manna; that he or
she is greatly beloved of God. Thy lot, O soul, is fallen in a peculiar plot of
mercies ground; and should not the Lord Jesus be admired of such a one, seeing
he is come to him in the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel? O bless God for
this unspeakable gift!

Thirdly, It Is an earnest of eternal mercy: They that sow to the spirit shall
reap life everlasting, Gal. 6. 8. And such as abound in holiness, shall have an
abundant entrance administered to them into the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior,
2 Tet. 1. 11. God will never throw away savoury salt to the dunghill, nor burn
up fruitful branches: Trees full of sap are the Lord's trees, which he will
transplant into his Paradise above, Psalm. 104. 16. The Lord's ripe fruit shall
be gathered, not shaken on the ground; and safely housed in Heaven. Grace is
too precious seed to be lost; Such as sow it now, though in tears, shall surely
come again, and bring their sheaves with them, Psalm. 126. 5.

Poor troubled Soul, God will not despise the day of thy small things, much
less thy soulenlargements after him; he will be tender of thy smallest
blossoms, and secure them into fruit; much more shall thy increases arrive to
the fullness of the measure of the stature of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 15. God is not
unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love, which you have shown
toward his name, Heb. 6. 10. It may be thou have forgotten many a duty and
hearty testimony of thy love to Christ, his name, people and ways; and can
see nothing in all thou have done, but art ready to say on every turn; When saw
I thee an hunger'd, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? when saw I
thee a stranger, and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee? or sick, and in
prison, and came to thee? Matthew. 25. 35. But God cannot be so unrighteous to
forget it, or let it pass so; but keeps a record of all thy meanest duties, and
will make the most of them in the day of righteous judgment. I know thy works,
and thy labors, and thy patience, etc. Rev. 2. 2. When thou wast under the
Fig Tree I saw thee, Joh. 1. 48. He takes notice of a Daniel by the river
Hiddekel; of a Peter on the housetop; of Elijah under the Juniper-tree, 1
King. 19. 4, 5. yea, of what was but in David's heart to do, and requites it, 8
King. 8. 18. Will not an Ahasuerus let the good deeds of Mordecai go
unrewarded? and shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right, and crown the
works of his own hands? Your labors shall not be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor.
15. 58. O then be blessing God for the least good he has wrought in you, and
for you, for any prosperity in your souls. There are no offerings come up with
that acceptance on God's Altar, as thanksgiving-offerings, Psalm. 69. 30, 31.
What a delightful remark did the Lord Jesus put upon the Lepers return to
praise him for cleansing, Luke, 17. 18. the more spiritual, the more rejoyeing,
Isa. 52. 8. No such thriving souls, as God-praising souls: Jer. 31. 12.
Therefore they shall come, and sing in the height of Sion; and shall flow
together to the goodness of the Lord for Wheat, and for Wine, and for Oil; and
their soul shall be as a watered Garden, and they shall not sorrow any more at
all.

Quest. How might I know whether I have good trading in Spirituals or no, that
I might have ground for rejoicing in God? Could I find this soul-welfare you
speak of, I should bless God with my whole soul; but I fear it is otherwise;
that I am one of those who fall back, and decay in my heavenly Trade. Sol.
There are seven signs of good Trading, especially in evil times; which men
usually reckon to be discoveries of a thriving Trade.

First, When men go not back in the World, but hold their own, they lose
nothing: It Is much in bad times to keep ones ground; to be savers in such a
season is a piece of gain: Try in this how it is with you; do not you go back in
your spiritual estate? is it not worse with you than heretofore? Is not your
faith, love, humility, patience less than heretofore? If you go not back in
grace, you go forward; there is no standing at a stay in Religion, men go
forward or backward in the way of Virtue; they that do not decay, do thrive in
Spirituals: Job proves his good estate by his standing fast in shaking times:
Neither have I gone back from the commandment of his lip; I have esteemed the
words of his mouth more than my necessary food: My foot has held his steps;
his way have I kept, and not declined, Job 23. 10, 11, 12. and thence concludes
a gainful issue: When he has tried me, I shall come forth as Gold. And the
Apostle reckons it good profit, in soul-conflicts, to stand ones ground; if he
cannot gain, yet not to lose: But having done all, to stand, is victory, Ephesians.
6. 13. Christians have their winterseasons, when growing is not visible; then
to keep alive, is commendable. Do you hold fast your integrity? and keep your
garments on? Do you preserve your conscience pure from the defilements and
temptations of the day and place you live in? and your hearts unspotted from
the World? your desires as warm, your purposes of cleaving to God as firm, and
your feet as quick to run the way of God's commandments as heretofore? then
have you good trading, considering the times you live in, which is an hour of
temptation, and an evening of darkness.

Secondly, If wares go off well, it is good trading; when goods vend at a good
rate, men count it thriving. Is it so with your souls? do your prayers come up
to God with acceptance? do duties turn to any profit to you? what returns have
you of your religious services? do hearing, prayer, conference, bring you any
soul-advantage? do not goods lie by you undisposed of? but your graces are
exercised, your talents, gifts, opportunities, improved; then it is good
Trading. If the Lord give you light, you lay it out for the good of others; if
he restore to you the joy of his salvation, and uphold you with his free
Spirit, you teach transgressors his ways, and endeavor to convert sinners to
him, Psalm. 51. 12, 13. When God drops in comfort to you, you pour it forth to
others, that they may be comforted also with the same comforts wherewith you
are comforted of God, 2 Cor. 1. 4. When you are come to duties public or
private, do graces go out in them? you show parts it may be, but do you lay out
grace as well as gifts, spiritual as well as natural affections? Do you pray
with the Spirit, and hear with Faith? do hope, fear, humility, holy fervency,
heavenly breathings, sincerity, go off in your religions duties? when you meet
with company, what goods do you put off to them? Do you labor in every society
to vend something of heavenly wares, to put off some holy counsel and
instruction, some gracious experience and observation, to leave something
behind you in every place and company you come, that may fasten a savor of God
on them? then is it good Trading, and you are in a soul-thriving way.

Thirdly, Men count it good Trading, when they are richer in stock, when they
have more goods, more variety, greater quantity of wares, than first they had,
and that clear too, and paid for; their shops and warehouses are fuller than
they were, and the goods their own also; this men reckon good Trading: And can
you say it is thus with your souls also? Are you increased with spiritual goods?
your graces are more as well as gifts, your faith, love, hope, fear, are more
grown, and stronger than they were, 2 These. 1. 3. Can you trust God more than
you could, and hang upon a naked promise more strongly than you could, when
sight fails? 2 Cor. 5. 7. Can you think well of God when he frowns upon you?
Can you love him when he corrects you? Isa. 39. 8, Can you stay on him when he
strips you of your visible comforts, and cleave to him when he seems to reject
you? Job 13. v. 15. Then are you richer in stock.

Is your Faith more cleansing and quickening, your Love more warming, your Zeal
more fervent, your Hope more adventurous, your Patience more bearing, your Joy
more delighting, your Humility more self-abasing? then are you increased with
goods. Have you more of every grace; it may be at first you had much affection,
but little sincerity; great desires, but little faith; much comfort, but little
patience and self-denial; you could pray, talk, rejoice, do some duties, but
could not bear trials, want comforts, live by faith when sight failed; you were
much it may be in some duties, but negligent in others; but now you have more
variety of graces, enlargement in duties, and more universal respect to all
God's commands, Psalm. 119. 6. And if you are less in the bulk of duty, you are
more in the spirit of it; when it is thus, there is a thriving Trade in
Christianity.

Fourthly, Are you less in debt than you were? that is another sign of good
Trading: Do you make conscience of rendering to God again for all his benefits?
Psalm. 116. 12, 13. Is it your trouble when you are behind-hand with grace, and
fall in arreer to the mercy of God by your unthankfulness? Dan. 9. 10. Indeed,
in compensation of the grace of God you are defective; to make requitals of
mercies you cannot; you see possibly an infinite shortness in your performances
of the meanest favor that the Lord bestows upon you; but such as you have, you
give to the Lord; you render all possible praises, though not all praises due,
Exodus 15. 2. This you are careful of, and charge upon your hearts every day, to
walk as becomes the grace that brings salvation, and the mercies bestowed on
you: it is the desire of your heart and labor, to walk worthy of God to all
wellpleasing, and to answer the end of mercy in which you are willing beyond
your ability, and grieve at your falling short herein: Now this does the Lord
count for the deed, and accept at his peoples hands, as full pay, through the
satisfaction of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 8. 12. And where it is thus that persons
live in the daily sense of Divine Grace, and grateful acknowledgment of every
mercy, there is a thriving Trade in spirituals.

Fifthly, Have you much owed you, and is it secure? This also bespeaks a
thriving Trade: Men count sure debts as good as ready money; though they have
little in bags, yet if they have the more in book, and good debt too, they rate
themselves accordingly, and reckon themselves worth so much as is due, as well
as to what is in hand: And is it so with you Christians? are you rich in
promises? is much coming to you upon a new covenant score? It may be you have
little in hand, little comfort, peace and sweetness you meet with from day to
day: You sow much, but reap little; you ask, but have not, and yet seek with
your whole heart: Goods are received, but no money returned; if so, you have
good grounds of hope for a plentiful harvest, because you sow store of good
seed; are much in holy duties, and sincere in them; many a prayer upon the
file, many a tear droped into God's bottle, much grace laid out in duty, and
time spent in it, a daily care to please God, and upon Scripturegrounds can lay
claim to many a promise on the account of Christ: What you sow, you shall reap,
Gal. 6. 8. Your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, 2 Cor. 15. v. 58. Say
unto the righteous, it shall be well with them, for they shall eat the fruit of
their doings, Isa. 3. 10. And the less is received, the more is behind.
Improvements of grace do book down many a mercy for Believers, which possibly
they may not receive all their life, and yet be sure, and turns to account in
the Inheritance prepared for them; and this is good Trading which brings in
bonds and bills that are sure, and shall be paid to Heavenly Traders in their
own Country.

Sixthly, That Is good Trading where the present incomes maintain the Trader,
and so much is got by it as they may live by; when a person can live
comfortably upon his gettings, without impairing the stock: If it be so with
the Believer in thy Heavenly Trade, then have thou good Trading. Try
Christians, your thriving by your livelihood! can you live comfortably upon the
fruits of Religion, Cant. 2. 3. Isa. 40. 31. does your Religion maintain your
Souls and Graces well? Joh. 4. 30. at what rate do you live? Men that thrive in
the world usually live well, have good fare, and good clothing: Diet, Apparel,
Expenses, do soon show men's gettings; Indeed Prodigals may spend high, live
well for a time, but then they cannot hold it; they soon break, but when men
can bear liberal expenses, and their Estates not impaired, it argues such do
thrive apace, and get well in their Trades; so it is with thriving Christians,
they ordinarily live at a higher rate of peace and comfort than others, Ps.
119. 165. Ps. 80. 19. their fare is better, unless the health of their Souls do
sometimes call to fasting and affliction; strong Christians, overcoming Souls,
have better Provisions promised them than others: such feed on hidden Manna,
Rev. 2. 17. and marrowy bits; milk is for babes, but strong meat for strong
men, Prove. 21. 15. It Is joy to the just to do judgment: Joy and Pleasure (says
Mercer) is the fruit of well-doing to such: Laetitia obvenit ci ex just factis
suis.
Such can expend more than others, who have larger proportion of Blessings on
their Souls. A person may be truly gracious, and yet live uncomfortably in his
Soul, and in the ways of God; but he that thrives in Godliness, has larger
incomes of sweetness and peace, and makes many a merry meal on the review of
his integrity, and the grace of God in and toward him, Psalm. 112. 2.

Seventhly, Layings up, as well as layings out bespeaks good Trading, when men
fill their bags and enlarge their possessions, turn Purchasers, and begin to
join house to house, and field to field, then they manifestly show their
thrivings: So when Souls thrive in their Heavenly Trade, they begin to lay up
for Heaven, and to be preparing for another world; they lay up Treasure in
Heaven, Mat. 6. 21. get bags that wax not old: weak Christians are all for
their comforts here, how they may maintain their peace and pleasure in the way;
but strong Christians, thriving Souls, they have their thoughts upon their
journeys end, and to make provisions for their future state: Bread and Water
contents them here, Genesis 28. 20. a little spending Money in the way to help
them home is all they indent for: But their chiefest care is to lay up for
Heaven; When shall I provide for mine own house, says Jacob, Genesis 30. 30? So
the thriving Christian is thoughtful about his house in Heaven, to make all the
provisions he can for that; he will lay up in store a good foundation to lay
hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 19. he is for securing all he can for Heaven,
and for such works as will follow him; he will turn all he may into movables,
that he may transmit them into his Country. The interests of this world are
staked down to the earth, and cannot be removed; but thriving Christians are
for such goods as they can knock up, and carry with them to their own home:
They strive to pray, hear, think, speak, do, suffer, and all for eternity:
their affections are gone before to Heaven, while their bodies are imprisoned
in the World. As it is said of the Athenians, when besieged by Sylla, their
hearts were with him without the walls, whiles their bodies were forced to
serve within Animos extra moenia, corpora necessitati, servientes intra muros
habuerint. Paterc.
. So it is with enriched Christians; the World is a Prison to them, a strange
Country where they have been sent to trade; and when they have filled their
sacks, and got all they can, they long to depart into their own Country. By
these things (Christians) may you know what kind of Trade you drive for Heaven;
and what share you have in this great engagement to thanksgiving.

Object. All this makes against me, and confirms my just fears that I am a
stranger to spiritual thrivings; I now see it is a pitiful Trade I drive in
godliness: I profess, hear, pray, perform duties, enjoy privileges, but am
never the better. O how may I write lost labor on all my performances! I need
no greater proof than these evidences; nor other judge than my own conscience,
to convince my languishing soul of daily wastes and poverty in my heavenly
Trade: What shall I do to get my case mended, and once attain to true thrivings
in this holy Calling. Sol. There are four things which usually make men
thriving in their earthly Trades; which do also contribute to prosperity in
this heavenly Merchandise.

1 A provident care. 2 A diligent hand. 3 A secret trade. 4 A divine blessing.
First, Men that are thriving in the World are provident and careful to prevent
their dangers, to secure their interests, and proportion means to their
advantage. And so must Christians that think ever to flourish in godliness:
what losses and miscarriages in Religion might a provident care prevent? were
temptations waylaid, and corruptions timely guarded against, souls might
escape many surprisals of sin, and abatements in grace: Never think to prosper
in holiness, till you are provident to prevent its weaknings, and contribute
all you may toward its strength and enlargement. One enjoys a good frame of
soul, much peace and joy in believing; and for want of watchfulness loses all
again. Another has got a little power over his corruptions for a time, and for
want of a provident care to avoid ensnaring occasions, is overcome again.
Another has a choice advantage put into his hand for spiritual good, but not
exercising a timely care and preparation to improve it, miscarries in all his
hopes and labors; and by these changes and interruptions their spiritual
welfare is impeded: Go learn of the Ant, she provideth her meat in Summer,
Prove. 6. 6, 8. Be wise as Serpents, they decline danger as soon as seen, and
guard their noblest part, though with the hazard of their All, Matthew. 19. 16.
Walk circumspectly as wise, Ephesians. 5. 15. O how happy might Christians be, were
they as provident for their souls as they are for their bodies! and did
exercise their reason, care and foresight to further their spiritual
interests; and without this provident care, never think to prosper in this
heavenly Merchandise. Take heed of grace-wasting sins, of any secret lust
allowed, or sweet morsel rouled under your tongue, that will prove a moth in
your spiritual estate, and keep you low in your heavenly interests. Souls under
some perplexing lust, are like Israel under the prevailing hand of Midian
against them, Judge. 6. 3, 4, 6. When Israel had sown, the Midianites came up,
and the Amalekites, and the children of the East, and they encamped against
them, and destroyed the increase of the earth, and left no sustenance for
Israel, neither Sheep, nor Ox, nor Ass; -- and Israel was greatly impoverished:
So it is with such; no sooner have they got any mercy, frame, experience, hope,
or soul-advantage, but presently a prevailing lust rises up, and destroys all:
Cry unto the Lord as Israel did, until he deliver you from every iniquity: make
no peace with any corruption, never let it rest till wholly destroyed if you
think to prosper in your souls and conversations. Be provident also to take all
advantages for godliness, watching your opportunities for every duty, keeping
every soul-market and fair, and taking the best season to lay out grace, and
get in profit, Prove. 8. 34. Be careful to get some good from every thing, and
to keep and save what you have; and this will tend to soul-thriving, Acts 2. 46.

Secondly, A diligent hand tends to thriving; men that prosper in the World
take pains, and follow their employments; rising early, sitting up late,
neglecting no business that may help on to profiting. So must you that intend
to thrive in Religion; you must make it your business, you must be laborers in
God's Vineyard, Joh. 6. 27. and workmen indeed that need not be ashamed, 2 Timothy
2. 15. Christians for the most part are too slothful in their spiritual
business, to have their profiting appear: it will cost you more striving to
enter into the strait-gate, and get ground in the narrow way that leads to
life; more blows must pass before your enemies will down, and more strokes at
your work before your interests will come in: Running, striving, wrestling; in
labors more abundant, in weariness, and painfulness, in watchings: What pains
will men take for the World? She rises also while it is night, -- Her candle
goes not out by night: That neither day nor night sees sleep with his eyes.
Ye compass Sea and Land; and should they not much more for Heaven? The most
diligent soul is the most thriving soul; Always abounding in the work of the
Lord; instant in season, and out of season; taking every opportunity for
Heaven: And what their hand finds to do, to do it with all their might; this is
the way to soul-thriving, 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25. Heb. 12. 4. Ephesians. 6. 12. 1 Cor. 11.
23, 27. Prove. 31. 15. 18. Eccles. 8. 16. Matthew. 23. 15. Eccles. 9. 10.

Thirdly, Driving a secret Trade of holiness, is soul-thriving: Men that have
some peculiar art, and unknown mystery in their Trade which is not ordinary and
common, usually get greatest custom and advantage: So is it in this heavenly
Trade; the more men are taken up in the mysteries of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
the more they thrive in Religion. There Is a secret in holiness, which no
stranger intermeddles with, Prove. 14. 10. There Is a way within the veil; the
hidden part in which souls are made to know wisdom; Psalm. 51. 6. Hidden riches
of secret places, which thriving Christians meet with, Isa. 45. 3. If you would
prosper in Godliness, be sure to maintain the secret duties of piety: The
religion of most men lies in the Market place, and in the view of others; their
hearts, their closets are not privy to any secret transactions between God and
their souls; and in the praise of men they have their reward: but the thriving
trade of Christianity, is the secret trade. Christians be most in those duties
which men least observe, and chiefly excellent in the invisible part of your
visible work: Public duties are most honorable, but secret duties the most
gainful. Matthew. 6. 4. And thy Father which sees in secret, shall reward thee
openly.

Fourthly, The blessing of God makes rich: Prove. 10. 22. Promotion comes not
from the East, nor from the West; nor prosperity from men's fingers ends, but
from God's hand. Deuteronomy. 28. 8, 10, 11, 12. The Lord shall command his blessing
upon thee; in thy storehouses, and in all which thou set thy hand unto: --
The Lord shall make thee plenteous in goods: -- The Lord shall open to thee his
good treasures; the Heavens to give thee rain to thy Land in his season, and to
bless all the work of thy hand: (and then comes riches) And thou shall lend
udto many Nations, and thou shall not borrow: Prosperity, both spiritual and
temporal, comes at God's sending: Psalm. 118. 25. O Lord, I beseech thee, send
now prosperity: Psalm. 18. 32, 33. He restores my Soul, he leads me in the
paths of righteousness: Psalm. 23. 3, 5. Thou anointest my head with Oil: Thou
blessest the springing thereof; thy paths drop fatness: Psalm. 65. 10, 11. The
Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and make
fat thy bones; and thou shall be like a watered Garden, and like a spring of
water, whose waters fail not, Isa, 58. 11. I will be as the dew to Israel, he
shall grow as the Lilly, and cast forth his root as Lebanon, Hos. 14. 5. Secure
an interest in the promises, and get your souls brought under the showers of
blessing, if ever you think to thrive in godliness. Improve thriving graces,
and take prosperous courses; these are under a promise of blessing: though
every grace and duty do in their measure help on soulprosperity, yet there are
some graces and duties have a more special influence on spiritual thrivings.

First, Faith is a soul-prospering grace: 2 Chr. 20. 20. Believe in the Lord
your God, so shall ye be established: believe his Prophets, so shall ye
prosper. Ephesians. 6. 16. Above all take the shield of Faith, wherewith ye shall
quench all the fiery darts of Satan, (...), insuper, Bez. Every grace is useful
in the spiritual warfare, but Faith especially: other graces may (with Saul)
slay their thousands; but Faith (with David) slays its ten thousands: Some
darts may be quenched by other graces, but Faith quenches fiery darts, yea all
the fiery darts of Satan, which does wonderfully further thriving: The just
shall live by Faith, Heb. 10. 38. Faith will maintain the soul's life in the
greatest straits and exigences: Faith is a receiving grace, it takes in
whatever is laid up in the promise; and that is thriving. Gal. 3. 22. That the
promise by Faith might be given to them that believe. A soul-enriching grace,
rich in Faith, Jam. 2. 5. A working grace, And the work of Faith with power, 2
These. 2. 4. A powerful grace; it gives the soul experience of the mighty power
of God. Ephesians. 1. 19. 20. What is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward
who believe, according to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in
Christ, when he raised him from the dead, 1 These. 2. 13. It Is a strengthening
grace: Out of weakness were made strong, Heb. 11. 34. through it does the Lord
let out his abundant grace: And the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant
with faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 1. 14. It does
exceedingly nourish the soul in grace, and edify it to salvation: 1 Timothy 4. 6.
Nourished up in the words of Faith, 1. Tim. 1, 4. Which minister questions
rather than edifying which is in Faith: One reason why souls prosper no more in
piety is their unbelief; they are full of doubtings, fears, and questionings
upon every turn, still wavering as a wave of the Sea; such cannot receive much
at the hand of God, but are still weak, and going back in Religion. Be much in
believing the promises against hope, and above fears, if ever you think to
prosper in Religion.

Secondly, Love to God, his Name, ways and interest is a Soul-prospering Grace.
Let them that love him, be as the Sun that goes forth in his might: Judge. 5.
31. They shall prosper that love thee, Psalm. 122. 6. Let them also that love
thy name be joyful in thee, for thou Lord wilt bless the righteous, with favor
will thou compass him as with a Shield, Psalm. 5. 11, 12. Love to God must needs
be a prospering Grace, because it brings the Soul under the blessing of God,
and within the compass of his securing Shield, Love is a Soul-strengthning and
establishing Grace. Ephesians. 3. 17, Being rooted and grounded in Love, (...), set
in a firm ground, not easily shaken from God or their integrity. Love makes a
growing Soul. Ephesians. 4. 15, Speaking the truth in love may grow up in him, who is
the head in all things. It helps on edification in Grace, ver. 16. makes
increase of the body unto the edifying of it self in love: Love constrains the
Soul after God, makes his commands pleasant, and quickens the heart to make
have in the way to Glory; the more you love God, the more will you prosper in
Godliness.

Thirdly, Humility is a Soul-prospering Grace, and under a promised Blessing.
Prove. 29. 23, Honor shall uphold the humble in spirit; Sustentat. Munst. (...)
shall bear him up from falling, and bring him unto honor (says Montanus)
Prove. 15. 33, By humility are riches and honor: The humble Soul must needs be
a thriving Soul, for God gives Grace to it, Jam. 4. 6. yea, dwells with the
humble to revive the Spirit of the humble, Isa. 57. 15. There Is a great deal of
Pride in most Christians, and that hinders Soul-thriving, proud of Parts and
Grace, proud under seeming humility, proud of humility; Low Valleys are
fruitful, when lofty Mountains are barren: The rich sit in a low place: Eccl.
10. 6, Such as are rich in wisdom Divites quibus adsit sapientia.
(says Mercer) they sit in a low place; they come down, and lie low in
themselves, In ipsa abjectione. Jun. Trem.
folly is set in great dignity: Poor, foolish, empty Creatures, they are high
in conceit as well as place, many times; but the most rich and thriving Souls,
these are poorest in Spirit, and lowest in their own eyes; the richer the
Metal, the heavier; Gold weighs down Silver and Tin; the fuller of fruits
branches are, the more they bow: He sends the springs into the valleys, Psalm.
104. 10. Psalm. 65. 13. They are covered over with Corn: Vineyards thrive best
in low places: One branch of Grapes from the Valley of Eshcol, was said to be a
burden for two men, Numb. 13. 23. would you flourish in Grace? take heed of
Pride: Pride in the Soul, (says one) is like the spleen in the body, when that
swells, all the other parts languish: it is poison at the root of the tree,
which corrupts the sap -- It Is so dangerous a poison, that of another poison
there was confected a counterpoison to preserve Paul from it: would you prosper
in Godliness? be persons of low, humble spirits, (Mr. Adams on 2 Pet.) 2 Cor.
12. 7. Exalt him that is low, and abase him that is high, Ezekiel. 21. 26.

Fourthly, Another choice fruit of the Spirit which will further Soul-thriving,
is sincerity: Prove. 14. 11, The tabernacle of the upright shall flourish: They
shall have good things in possession, Prove. 28. 10. they shall not only be
preserved from evil, and escape the pit into which the wicked fall; but shall
be sure to meet with good; Blessings, good things shall be given to them as
their inheritance, as Aquila and Theodosius interpret it, (...), Thou show
mercy to thy Servants, that walk before thee with all their heart, 2 Chronicles. 6.
14. He that has clean hands and a pure heart, who has not lift up his Soul to
vanity, nor sworn deceitfully, he shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and
righteousness from the God of his Salvation, Psalm. 24. 4, 5. Upright Souls must
needs prosper, they dwell in the presence of God, Psalm. 140. 13. He will
withhold no good thing from them, Psalm. 84. 11. His countenance beholds them,
Psalm. 11. 7. God engages his alsufficiency for their good, Genesis 17. 1. They
shall hold on their way, and wax stronger and stronger, Job 17. 9. and shall
surely prosper. 2 Chronicles. 31. 21, In every work that he began in the service of
the house of God, and in the Law, and in the Commandments, to seek his God, he
did it with all his heart, and prospered: it is not thy many Duties before God,
but the Oneness of thy heart with God: nor the bulk of thy Services, but the
sincerity of thy Soul, which will make thee profperous in thy heavenly
interests.

Again, Take thriving courses, prosperous ways, as well as prospering Graces,
these are under a promised Blessing also. Not to multiply particulars: There
are four thriving ways in which Christians may attain to a prosperous Trade in
Christianity.

The way of 1. Self-Examination. 2. Prayer. 3. Enjoyment of God. 4. Obedience.


First, Be often examining; and calling your selves to an account how matters
stand with your Souls: Traders that would be thriving will be often viewing
their Books, and trying their Accounts, and have some set days, when they
survey their Goods, cast up their Books, and try whether they gain, or lose;
and so must Christians that would profit in Religion, they must be often
judging themselves, that they be not judged, 1 Cor. 11. 31. they must cast up
their accounts, and try their state whether they go forward or backward: Hag.
1. 5. Consider your ways: try how the case stands with you, whether you get or
lose, and what is the cause of all those blastings that are upon you, Psalm. 4.
4, Commune with your hearts upon your beds, and be still: 2 Cor. 13. 5, Examine
your selves whether you be in the faith, prove your own selves; know ye not
your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you except you be reprobates. The
neglect of this examination is one cause of that great mistake of persons about
their Soul-state, some thinking themselves better, Rev. 3. 17. others judging
themselves worse than they are: which begets security in some, discouragement
in others, error and floth in all. A right estimate of thy spiritual capacity,
either poverty or riches, gain or loss is absolutely needful to regulate thy
duty unto a right affecting of thy heart, and advance of thy spiritual
interests: Look over the Day-book of thy heart and life every night, posting
all thy accounts on the large book of thy Conscience, and take some special
time for a more full survey of thy Soul and state for Eternity; this will be of
good use to further Soul-thriving.

Secondly, If you would prosper in your Souls, be much and mighty with God in
Prayer: It Is said of Vzziah, that he sought God in the days of Zechariah, who
had understanding in the visions of God, and as long as he sought the Lord, God
made him to prosper, 2 Chronicles. 26. 5. Right Prayer is a wonderful way to
Soulenrichings: He (says one) can never be poor that can pray well: One reason
why this King prospered as long as he sought the Lord, was, by this means he
came to the visions of God, and that helped him to take a right way to
prospetity. By Prayer you advise with God, what course to take toward mercy:
it is your Ephod by which you ask counsel of God where to go to shun danger, and
what to do to carry on Duty, and obtain Mercy, 2 Samuel 23. 6. 9. Chap. 30. 7.
and by Prayer you procure and get out the Graces and Supplies you need, 1 Chronicles, 4. 10, And Jabesh called on the God of Israel, saying, O that thou
would bless me indeed, and enlarge my coasts, and that thine hand might be
with me, and that thou would keep me from evil, that it may not grieve me:
and God granted him that he requested. Prayer brings down the Spirit sometimes
insensible and almost intolerable measures thereof. When that precious Servant
of the Lord Mr. Bruce in Scotland (of whom King James said he was worthy of the
half of his Kingdom) had sadly represented the Churches case, then under
eminent danger, there was such a sensible down-pouring of the Spirit, that they
could hardly contain themselves; yea, an unusual motion on those who were in
other parts of the house, not knowing the cause of it at that time. O what
great things did Abraham, Jacob, Moses, Jehoshaphat, Samuel, Elijah, and other
Servants of God, get out of the hand of God! Luther was a mighty man in Prayer,
it is said of him, he could get of God what he would, Ille vir potuit quod
voluit.
nothing is too hard for Faith and Prayer, because it seeks nothing but what
God is willing to spare, and has promised to give: Labor to get a mighty
Spirit of Prayer; the gift of Prayer will not do, it must be the Spirit of
Prayer, which is a pure, and heartcleansing Spirit, and cannot dwell with the
least regarded Sin: Gifts of Prayer with natural affections may be mighty on
the Spirits of men, but are no way prevailing with God for the Blessing: It Is
said of Naaman, He was a mighty man in valor, but he was a leper, 2 Kings 5.
1. So there are some that seem mighty men in Prayer, and can wonderfully raife
the affections of others; pray like Angels, but all the while are Lepers, under
the ruling power of some secret lust; pride, passion, covetousnness,
uncleanness, and the like, which they hide under their tongue; but such are far
from this mighty power of prayer, which brings down the Spirit on their own
hearts or others. Ah Christians! if you would prosper in grace, get and improve
the Spirit of Grace and Supplication.

Thirdly, Another thriving way is to engage God with you in all your
undertakings. 'Twas this made Joseph so prosperous in all he did; God was with
him. Genesis 39. 23. Because the Lord was with him; and that which he did, he made
it to prosper: 2 Samuel 5. 10. And David went on, and grew great, and the Lord
God of Hosts was with him: 'Twas not his wisdom, valor, nor any means he used,
but the gracious presence of God with him that made him to grow so great: This
made Solomon to prosper; 2 Chronicles. 22. 11. Now my Son, the Lord be with thee,
and prosper thee. When persons lose the gracious presence of God, they soon
find an alteration, and begin to wither and decay in their soul-comforts and
prosperity: Thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled, Psalm. 30. 6.
Troubled like a withered flower, that loses sap and vigor, [Mr. Leigh.] Jonah
soon found a change in his soul; it ceased to be with him as before, when once
he fled from the presence of God: He never had a good day after he lost the
presence of God, but storms, tempests, shipwreck of peace, safety and
prosperity, and a casting into the deeps of distress, and ruining dangers,
Jonah. 1. 3, 10. Ah Christians! as you love your souls, and your spiritual
welfare, take heed of losing God's gracious presence; whose company soever you
lose, keep the Lord's presence with you; abide with him, and he will abide with
you: 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. The Lord is with you while you be with him; and if you
seek him, he will be found of you: Put away the unclean thing, and he will
dwell in you, and walk in you, 2 Cor. 6. 16. Love him, and keep his
commandments, and he will take up his abode with you, Joh. 14. 23. Content not
your selves with any privilege except you have God with you: If thy presence go
not with us, carry us not up hence, Exodus 33. 15. I protest (says Mr. Bruce,
when wrestling for the presence of God with him in his going to preach) I will
not go except thou go with me.

Fourthly, Follow the counsel of God, if you would thrive in the work and way
of God: Josh. 1. 8. This Book of the Law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but
thou shall meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe to do
according to all that is written therein; for then thou shall make thy way
prosperous, and then thou shall have good success: Jer. 38. 20. Obey, I beseech
thee, the voice of the Lord which I speak unto thee; so it shall be well unto
thee, and thy soul shall live. One cause why men prosper no more in Religion,
is, that little conscience they make of doing the will of God: men hear, but
forget the word; others know their Lord's will, but prepare not themselves to
do it. We live in an age of notions, not of motion after God; like men that see
Countries in a Map, but care not to travel into them; bare knowledge pleases
most: Men's zeal after truth, is like Absalom's love to his Father David, only
to see him, not to serve him: 2 Samuel 14. 32. Let me see the King's face; which
he no sooner did, but conspired against him: So most care for no more than to
behold truth, not to dwell with it; and hence it is that prosperity is such a
stranger to them: 'Twas not directions could heal Naaman of his leprosy, but
obedience; he was never the better till he followed the Prophet's counsel, and
washed in Jordan: that which made the ground rained upon, to be nigh to
cursing, was not bringing forth fruit meet for them, by whom 'twas dressed,
Heb. 6. 8. Do not only seek after, but walk after the truth, if you think to
prosper in Religion, Jam. 1. 25. The doers of the word shall be blessed in
their deed.

Object. It Is the desire of my soul to live in the exercise of every grace, and
discharge of every duty; and some weak endeavors I have had, though too too
short; with many cries for this soul-prosperity, but cannot yet attain unto it:
Methinks I am like a withered arm, a dry tree, and barren womb, nothing does me
good; no food, seed or showers make me thriving and fruitful: I fear I shall be
at last cut down, and bundled for the fire. Sol. First, Thou may thrive in
Religion, and not know it for a season; thy profiting may be, though not
appear: The Tradesman may bring home gain in his purse, though untold: men know
not their gettings till they cast up their accounts: thy prosperity may be as a
casked Jewel, and friend under disguise. If you would estimate your advantage,
survey your selves, compare your present with your former state; what were you?
what are you? speak out soul: was there not a time when thou were blind, thou
could see no evil in sin, nor excellency in grace? but now thy eye is
opened, and things appear otherwise to thy soul than they did: Now there is
nothing so vile as thy wicked heart, and ways; and nothing so desirable as
Christ and holiness.

Thou were once dead in sin, thou did not feel or fear any hurt in it, or
danger by it; but now it is otherwise: thou can not sin, but thy conscience
smites thee: nor God threaten, but it affrights thee: thy quick-ey'd conscience
soon espies the least failing in thy duty, falseness in thy heart, or error in
thy life; and, as a Sergeant, arrests thee, and hales thee to the Judge. Thou
could formerly live without God, and be as still as the dead body in the
grave, and the burning brand in the fire: but now as a bone out of joint, thou
art restless till in communion with him: I remembered God, and was troubled,
Psalm. 77. 3.

Thou were gone out of the way; yea an enemy to the way of life, turned aside
to the flock of his companions, and did turn again, and rend those that were
of them. But now thou art folded with the flocks of Christ, and feedest besides
the Shepherds Tents, Cant. 1. 8. Thy foot has held his steps, and thou
esteemest the word of his mouth more than thy necessary food, Job 23. 11, 12.

Object. But may not an hypocrite go so far, and all this be no more than a
change from darkness to conscience-light, and from sin to common grace. Sol.
Common light cannot see a desirableness in Christ for himself, nor bring the
soul to count all things dross and dung to win him, and obtain the excellency
of the knowledge of Christ as thy Lord; but saving light sees one Christ worth
ten thousand Worlds, and quits all to take him. Phil. 3. 8.

Common light sees no evil in sin; but guilt, and torment, loss of comfort, and
sense of punishment, Genesis 4. 13. but true grace, when in exercise, loathes sin
when it pretends love; and flies from sin when it makes largest proffers; and
fears sin when it sees no danger, when there is no breach on present comfort
feeled, or danger of future misery feared, Tit. 2. 11, 12. The gracious soul,
like Joseph, when tempted with flattery, secured with secrecy, pursued with
restless importunity to wickedness, yet cannot close with it, and sin against
God, Genesis 39. 9.

Common light can dwell with works of darkness, and consist with an
unsanctified heart and life, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2. Common light and lust never fall
out but when it awakens conscience, or weakens interests: but saving grace
cannot bear that which is evil, Rev. 2. 2. or ever be brought to a treaty with
sin, in order to an agreement, Gal. 5. 17. but, with Sarah, can never be at
rest till the bondwoman and her son be turned out of door, Genesis 21. 10. Common
grace may be offended at sin, but never hates sin; there is no contrariety
founded in their nature or difference, but what may upon terms be made up, Luke
23. 12. And if it seems to have an indignation against sin, yet it is not
against every sin, and at all times, nor irreconcilable at any time: but saving
grace hates the very being of sin, 2 Cor. 7. 11. And as the Tiger flies at the
very picture of a man, so does Grace abhor the appearance of evil: It Is
universal against the whole species, and every kind of sin; an enmity founded
in the nature of grace, and therefore irreconcilable, Psalm. 139. 22. and
derived from the riches of grace, Ps. 97. 10. and greatness of redemption-love:
It cannot be reconciled to sin, because sin cannot be reconciled to grace, or
admit of any love to, or enjoyment of God; but still interrupts the soul's
tranquillity, holiness and pleasure in God, his chiefest and only good.

Again, Common light can live without special acquaintance with God, Ephesians. 2.
13. [afar of,] if it can have peace, because its Country is nourished by the
King's Country, Act. 12. 20. and its welfare depends upon divine pleasure,
it is all it looks for: but saving grace gets within the veil, Heb. 6. 19.
approaches the mercyseat, where it converses with God. To be called by his name
will not content grace; no, nor to eat his bread, and wear his raiment, except
it enjoys his bed also: it longs for intimate communion with God, Psalm. 101. 2.
O, when will thou come unto me? It loves the Bridechamber, closet, and secret
corners with him; never thinking it self near enough to, or long enough with
him.

Obj. But change from nature to grace, is not growth in grace: though I may
have received the former rain, and reaped the first fruits of the Spirit; yet I
fear I have not the latter rain, and after-fruits of grace: waterings and
dressings do not make me fruitful, or feedings make me grow: and that is the
case you insist on. Sol. 1. There may be fruit, though not appearing; and
growth, though unseen: Christ has under-ground-fruit, which may not spring up
to thy own view, or others, Ps. 88. 5. [Free among the dead,] as berries hid
among the leaves, which cannot be seen till winter-storms or shaking times
come: thou may thrive more inwardly than outwardly, and be like the windows
of the Temple, wide within, and narrow without; you may grow more in the truth
and parts of grace, though less in the fruits of grace for a season; thy
sincerity may be more, though thy shows be less; you may grow more downward in
humility, self-abasement, sorrow for sin, though not upward in joys and
blossoms of comfort; thou may grow more out of thy self, and into Christ, as
the root of all thy grace, and foundation of thy foul-rest, though not into
sensible frames and workings of grace. Art thou more sensible of thy own
nothingness? thy heart-deceitfulness? self-insufficiency? inward disorders?
soul-wants? sinfulness? hypocrisy? barrenness? then thou profitest, Romans 7.
18. Art thou more jealous of thy heart every day, 2 Cor. 9. 27? more weary of
thy self? and longing after Christ? having a higher valuation of his
excellency, and greater breathings after his quickening spirit, and delighting
presence, Phil. 3. 8? this is profiting.

Secondly, It may be thy conclusion springs from thy impatiency; thou may be
for hasty fruit, not allowing time for its growth and maturity. The Husbandman
waits for the precious fruits of the earth, Jam. 5. 7. before he can enjoy
them, or estimate their worth: Thy hopes, labors and profit may be buried
under the clods for a while: We cannot sow and reap (says one) in a day: The
more excellent and durable the fruit is, the longer is it before it comes to
maturity: rare ripe fruits are soon rotten: hypocrites blossom a pace, and cast
their leaves as fast, Mat. 13. 21. Though it is matter of shame, that those
trees which have less earth, and least nourishment, should grow fastest; yet
the reason is, they take up no time in getting root, and growing downward; and
hence all their growth is outward. Thirdly, It may be it is a wintertime with
thy soul; the Sun of Righteousness is withdrawn from thee, and thy lightsom
days are gone, Cant. 2. 11, 12. The Comforter that should have relieved thy
soul, is far from thee, Lam. 1. 16. It may be thou have sinned away his warming
presence, and lost thy first spring; hence it is the flowers do not appear: Yet
here is thy comfort, though thy winter be not a time of fruit, yet God will make
it to thee a time toward fruitfulness.

Advice 2.
2. You that have any good Trading for Heaven, be exhorted to enlarge your
Trade; drive a greater Trade of godliness every day, as men that prosper in the
world do; they build larger barns, fairer houses, greater shops, get more
goods, buy more land, and widen the bounds of their interests: So should you
Christians, if God bless your heavenly substance, and prosper your souls; if
the gain of godliness come in, lay it out to greaten godliness, as biting
Usurers do, take use upon use; convert your gettings into your Trade; put your
incomes into bank, and your blessings into stock, trading on them. Think

First, On the smalness of thy first stock, and thy low estate at thy setting
up, A Syrian ready to perish, Deuteronomy. 26. 5. thy grace was small, a grain of
mustard seed, Mat. 13. 31. thy capacity is weak, a newborn babe, 1 Pet. 2. 3.
You began with one talent, and have you not reason to improve it? you were the
fewest of all people, Deuteronomy. 7. 7. I taught Ephraim also to go, taking him by
the arm, Hos. 11. 3. as a little weak child; a dry tree, Psalm. 56. 3. a tender
plant, Isa. 53. 2. which need addition.

Secondly, Consider what a poor Trade most men drive for Heaven this day; few
that seek the things that are Christ's, and make Religion their business. All
men seek their own things; the multitude of Professors, as well as others,
wonder after this beast the world: We may say of Religion, as the Prophet did
of Sion: This is godliness which no man seeks after, Jer. 30. 17. Few
Israelites, in whom there is no guile; few Noah's, perfect in their generation,
walking with God; few Calebs, who fulfill after God. Most men's Religion lies in
notion, profession, talkings, frames, privileges, going to Meetings, getting
into Churches; but few make conscience of their words and ways, their promises
and duties; few second-table men and women, that cause their light to shine
before men; and as Zachary and Elizabeth, walking in all the commands and
ordinances of God blameless, Luke 1. 6. doing justly, showing mercy, and
walking humbly with their God, Mich. 6. 8. visiting the fatherless and widow in
their affliction, and keeping themselves unspotted from the world, Jam. 1. 27.
And should not this provoke thy zeal for the Lord of Hosts, to see the Altars
of Religion down, and so few friends of godliness left, and stir up thy holy
ambition to excel and do more for God than others? It would argue a brave
spirit, and be a worthy attempt to offer a lift at fallen godliness, with thy
life as well as lip, and by the raised splendor of thy holy conversation, as a
City on a hill, to provoke others to an imitation, saying, Come up hither.

Think also what an excellent Trade the Saints and Angels in Heaven drive, who
have their portion in hand, and dwell in the City of the great King, who are
always receiving and rendering, driving a whole Trade for God, above all
hazards and interruptions: They always behold their Father's face, and serve him
day and night in his Temple, with palms in their hands, with songs in their
mouths, and their Crowns at his feet, and how far you are beneath these
glorious Merchants. Think what a breadth you have yet to fill up in godliness,
and what advances you must make in holiness, before you can get up to their
pitch, and have a place amongst them that stand by, Zach. 3. 7. and is it not
time yet to build the house of God? Hag. 1. 2. and that you hasten to your
work, and raise higher stories for God every day, pressing after greater
measures of grace, till you come to the fullness of the stature of Christ, and
those perfections of glorified Saints and Angels?

Fourthly, When will you be fit for a return into your own Country, and a
comfortable account of your Stewardship, if you be so slothful and contracted
in your Heavenly Trade? When will your ships be laden, and your sacks full for
a departure hence, if you trade at such a rare, and attend your soul-thrivings
no better? your Treasure is deep, and calls for more digging; your Crown is
afar off, and requires faster running; your Reward is large, greater
enlargements of labors are needful to meeten you for it. O think how far glory
is above all your proportions of grace and duty; and what need you have to
press after more enlargedness in your souls, and suitableness for your estate
above.

Fifthly, The greater Trade you drive for Heaven, the less trouble; it is not so
in earthly Trades; there the more work, the more weariness; but Religion
carries refreshment in its work. John 4. 34. My meat is to do the will of him
that sent me, and to finish his work. Prove. 3. 17. Her ways are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. O the sweetness and delicate
pleasure which vigorous pursuits of holiness afford! Cant. 2. 3. I sat under
his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste. If persons
intermeddle not with the joy of godliness, it is because they neglect the work
of it; they eat not the kernel, because they break not the shell; Christ's
myrrh is to be gathered, and his honey eaten with the honeycomb, which must be
squeezed out ere eaten, Cant. 5. 1. Rabbi Solomon takes the comb (...), for a
Cane, Pro canna in qua sit mel quod exugatur abjecta canna. Mercer.
out of which the honey is sucked, or the sugar boiled out. They that will eat
Christ's pleasant bread, must work hard for it; his idlers have none of his
dainties; the greater the labor, the sweeter is the rest. The Lord's way is
not tiresom, unless to flesh and blood: the more you run in it, the less weary.
Isa. 40. 31. They shall run, but not be weary, walk, but not faint: And though
they should be weary in well doing, through their carnal sloth, yet they are
not weary of it.

Sixthly, The greater Trade, the richer; it is not always so in worldy
employments; men may labor in vain, and sit down in sorrow, but godliness is
profitable for all things, Isa. 55. 2. 1 Timothy 4. 8. And the Heavenly Trade
brings in the true Treasure, as I have already shown; and the more employment,
the more profit.

Seventhly, The larger Trade you drive for Heaven, the more you have of that
honor that comes down from Heaven, Romans 2. 10. Glory, and honor, and peace to
every one that works good. The greater Trade, the greater riches, and the
greater riches, the greater reputation: The rich has many friends, Prove. 14.
20. The greater Trade you drive for Heaven, the greater regard you have from
God; the more of his presence is with you, his delight in you, and blessing
upon you; the Spouses growth and fruitfulness, was much taking upon the heart
of Christ. How fair and how pleasant art thou O Love for delights! Cant. 7. 6,
7. This thy stature is like to a Palmtree, and thy breasts to clusters of
grapes. The Palm Tree is an emblem of growth and fruitfulness; the more it is
oppressed, the more it grows, and no tree more fruitful; it is called (...), always
having leaves: Naturalists say, it is never without leaves and fruit; when some
fruit is ripe (as Pliny tells us) other fruit is growing It has leaves in the
highest branches, wherever the sweet sap comes (says Alsted) It Is a tree
that is exceeding profitable; some reckon three hundred and sixty advantages
that this Palm Tree yields, In fructuum jam maturorum locum alii fructus eodem
in loco and eadem part statim succedunt. Plin.
and hence the Egyptians make it a symbol of the solar year, which consists of
three hundred sixty five days: and its fruit is wonderfully restorative and
nourishing, repairing the decayed strength, and radical moisture of man's body,
Alsted. Theol. Not. and therefore a fit metaphor to express the Church's
fruitfulness, in which the Lord Jesus takes such great delight; he gets up
early to the Vineyard, to see if the Vine flourish, whether the tender grape
appear, and the Pomegranate bud forth, Cant. 7. 12. So delightful is the view
of a flourishing people unto Christ: The more you thrive in grace, the more
will you have of Christ's company; and that is honorable.

Eighthly, The greater Trade you drive for Heaven, the more useful you are
while on Earth; the larger capacities you have to do good to others, and to
serve your generation, which is a blessed thing. It Is more blessed to give than
to receive, Acts 20. 35. 1 Timothy 6. 17, 18. Charge them that are rich in this
world, that they do good, that they be rich in good works, that they be ready
to distribute, willing to communicate. The richer you are in grace, the more
able you are to do good, and not only able, but the more willing also. The
reason Christians have no more heart to do good, and to communicate, is their
soulpoverty; they are not rich in grace, they have but little spiritual
Treasure, little grace to communicate; their hands are shut, because their
hearts are empty; but the more divine treasure you have, the more ready will
you be to do good, and to lay out both your outward and inward riches. O how
useful may rich men be in the places where they live, if God give them hearts
to do it! and how helpful may such be in this day of soul-wants, who are
increased with spiritual goods? there are many impoverished souls this day who
are ready to perish for want of light, peace and comfort; perplexed with
doubts, darkness, and distressing fears, and have none to help them. O how
refreshing, in such a day of soul-exigences, would it be to have some rich
neighbors among them, some prosperous Jobs! Who withold not the poor from
their desire, nor cause the eyes of the Widow to fail, Job 31. 16, 17, 19. Who
would draw forth their soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul, Isa.
58. 10. Who could not eat their morsel alone, or see the poor to perish for
want of clothing: To be eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, Job 29. 15. To
speak a word in season to him that is weary, and to comfort others with the
same comforts they have received of God. Christians, make haste to be rich in
grace, that ye may be rich in good works; that ye may cast in much into the
Lord's treasury, Mark 12. 41. and out of your abundance cast into the offerings
of God, Luke 21. 4. Then should the blessing of the poor, that was ready to
perish, come upon you, Job. 29. 13. and the fruit of welldoing be your savoury
meat, on which the Lord would daily feed you.

Ninthly, The greater Trade you drive for Heaven now, the greater will your
estate in Heaven be hereafter: 2 Timothy 4. 8. Henceforth is laid up for me a
Crown of righteousness; which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will give me at
that day; and not to me only, but to all that love his appearing. To me, who
have run my race, finished my course, and kept the faith: To me, who have
wrought hard in the Vineyard, and traded diligently for Heaven in the World:
For me, yea for all such as enlarge their heavenly Trade, is laid up, (...),
(as Parents do Portions for their children, says Zanchy) a Crown of
righteousness: glory suitable to their improvements of grace; called a Crown, to
note its excellency; and of righteousness, to note its equity: It shall bear a
proportion to all that grace, labors and faithfulness that is in Saints; and
infinitely beyond it. A far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor.
4. 17. God will not leave out the least item of the Saints right in the great
day of righteousness; A cup of cold water; a little meal to the Prophet Elisha;
a mite in the treasury; a desire to build God's house: all shall be remembered
in that day: Mercy gives the Crown, but Justice fits it for the overcomer's
head. God crowns (says Beda) Dona sua coronat non merita tua. Donavit haec
tempore misericordiae, coronabit illa tempore judicii. Beda in loc.
his own gifts, not thy merits: He first gives grace in the time of mercy, and
then crowns it in the day of Judgment: And is not this argument enough? yea
constraint on an ingenious heart, to labor after the greatest latitude of
holiness? Is not Heaven enough to requite all thy duties and hardships on
earth? What Is enough, (says one) if Rome be counted little? Quid fatis est si
Roma parum.
So what can be counted great, if Heaven be small, and not price enough for all
thy holy strivings, and utmost progress in the way of life?

O attend your proficiency in this heavenly Trade! your hearts and hands can
never be too deep in the concerns of this upper World; in this you can never be
too covetous: 1 Cor. 12. 31. Covet earnestly the best gifts, (...), modis
omnibus studio, precibus consequi annitimini.
Take heed of putting stands and limits to your holiness; (the course of all
unsanctified souls:) In this only is it lawful to remove the ancient bounds,
and enlarge your spiritual inheritance, as far as possible; Reaching forth to
the things that are before, and pressing forward to the mark for the price of
the high calling of God in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3. 13, 14. Nothing undoes
Professors like to stinting their measures of holiness, and contenting
themselves with present seize; if they can get to such a pitch of light,
grace, and comfort, as will secure their salvation and present welfare, they
sit down, and go no further: this makes formalists and starvelings in Religion.
Speak unto the children of Israel that they go forward, Exodus 14. 15. is God's
charge on his people in their passage to the heavenly Canaan: Be adding to your
faith virtue, etc, 1 Pet. 1. 5. The greatest skill in this holy Arithmetic
lies in Addition and Multiplication. Be still enlarging your store, get in more
choice of heavenly wares, greater quantities, and more costly goods; and be
putting off more and more goods, as you have opportunity; seeing great is not
only your present advantage, but your reward in Heaven also, Mat. 5. 12.

Advice 3.
Thirdly, You that have good times for trading now, make provision for bad
times; Lay in for changes: be not like the Grasshopper, that spends her All in
Summer; and when the Winter comes, starves. Every Summer has its Winter;
North-winds have their season to blow on Christ's Garden, as well as the South,
Cant. 4. 16. Good and evil have their turns with Christians in this life; It Is
only the Diveses that have their good things in this life; here have the Saints
no continuing City, Heb. 13. 4. Created comforts, whether spiritual or carnal,
have their shakings and removes: Heb. 12. 27. And this word yet once more
signifies the removing of those things that are shaken, as of things that are
made; that those things which cannot be shaken, may remain. The life of
Believers is made up of vicissitudes; with Naomi, now full, then empty, Ruth 1.
21. like Ships in their passage to their Port; now they have calms, then
storms; none but wicked, and they not always neither are exempted from their
changes in this life, Psalm. 55. 19. 'Twas an error in David's apprehensions,
which he soon saw to his cost, that his mountain was made so strong, it should
not be moved. Psalm. 30. 6. I said, in my prosperity, I shall never be moved:
Lord, by thy favor, thou have made my mountain to stand strong; thou did
hide thy face, and I was troubled. Prosperity and affliction have their
different says and thoughts: think of thy most promising state here; though
this be a beautiful structure, yet it is but a tabernacle: Sin puts wheels on
every condition below, and makes them moveable: What that Ambassador said to
the Romans, who boasted of the height and strength of their Walls; they were
not so high, but sin could bring them down, may be said of the most flourishing
condition of Saints in this World: Is thy store full now? a spending time may
come: Dionysius the second had four hundred Ships, an Army of one hundred
thousand foot, nine thousand horse, and the richest Magazine of any Prince, and
yet lived to lose all. Christians have their spending as well as getting times,
and should lay in for times of need.

There are four special seasons when gracious souls will have need of all their
store to relieve them.

Times of Temptation. Times of Desertion. Times of Affliction. And The time of
Death.
First, Times of Temptation are spending times, and call for great succors to
be laid in against such seasons. First, Because such times are certain to
Believers, they will come. Psalm. 11. 5. The Lord tries the righteous: There Is
never a gracious soul, but some time or other the Lord tries it, either
immediately by his Spirit, or mediately by afflictions or temptations from men
or devils. The Apostle tells us, every man is tempted. James 1. 14. But every
man is tempted when he is drawn aside of his own lust and enticed. The best of
men (says one) are tempted, and that when they are at the best. [Capell of
Temptation.] Adam in Paradise, Genesis 3. 6. Solomon after God had twice appeared
to him, 1 King. 11. 9. Job after the evidences of his uprightness before God,
and religious duties, Job 1. 1, 5. Peter after he had made a confession of
Christ, and entered into covenant never to be offended at him, Mat. 26. 33. Yea
Christ himself after his Baptism, and the Spirit's resting on him as a Dove,
and the Father's owning of him by an audible voice from Heaven, Matthew. 3. 17.
chap. 4. 1. He (says the former Author) that thinks he is so good that he
ought not to be tempted, and so strong, that he need not fear to be tempted,
has need of a temptation, that by experience in himself, he might prove what
he ought to have found in the Word; that of our selves we have no strength.
Capell.

Four things make temptations unavoidable to gracious souls:

1 God's good Pleasure. 2 Satan's Rage. 3 The Saints Corruptions. 4 And their
Profit.
First, It Is God's good Pleasure to have them tried: The fire shall try every
man's work of what sort it is, 1 Cor. 3. 13. whether it will bear the fire or
no; hereby the excellency of his work, the greatness of his power appears, in
the enduring graces of the Saints, and their standing after all. By this the
Lord will confute the slanders of men and devils, who are still charging his
people with hypocrisy, and falling away when trial comes; Does Job fear God
for naught? Job 1. 9. Put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and flesh,
and he will curse thee to thy face, Job 2. 5. This is the usual calumny of the
Saints enemies; to confute which, and prove them liars, does the Lord suffer
his people to be tempted. It Is his will and purpose that all his people should
be tried; and therefore it is unavoidable.

Secondly, Such is Satan's Rage, he cannot always keep his fingers from them;
if he lets them alone, it is but for a season. Luke 4. 13. When the Devil had
ended all the temptations, he departed from him for a season. Is Satan busy?
then his work is not done; have thou any rest? it is because his tempting-time
is not come; he is a roaring Lion, and cannot rest from seeking to devour,
though he forbears attempting to devour for a season, when it makes to his
greater advantage: Never expect freedom from temptation, till Satan's chain be
shortened, or thy remove without his reach obtained, Rev. 20. 2, 3.

Thirdly, The Saints corruptions expose them to temptations; Where the carcass
is, there the Eagles resort, Mat. 24. 28. While the Saints have galled backs
they can expect no freedom from flies. If Sampson be bound, the Philistines
will be upon him. The cause of those sins is in us whereof the occasion is from
Satan, Capell. Till the fire of Hell be out in the Saints, the Devil will not
lay down his bellows; where there is no sin, there is no matter for temptation
to work on; as where there is no morbid matter, there contagion cannot so
easily fasten, corruption keeps open the door for Satan; never look for silence
from Satan, till you find cessation from sin.

Fourthly, The profit and good of gracious souls do necessitate it: By this
means they come to see their own vileness; were it not for temptation, they
could not see the greatness of their corruption: David, Solomon, Hezekiah,
Peter, did not think their hearts were so abominable, till left to temptation,
which stirs the mud, and brings up the bottom to the top; and this helps to
abase them, and make them more vile in their own eyes. By this also they see
their own weakness, and their need of Christ; and are more effectually brought
out of themselves to the Lord Jesus for succor and victory. And by temptations
from Satan they come to be acquainted with his devices, 2 Cor. 2. 11. and more
skilled in his wiles and stratagems (no small advantage to one that is in a
state of warfare with him.) This way also does the Lord winnow his Saints, and
by these high winds fan and cleanse them. Luke 22. 31. Satan has desired to
have you, that he may sift you as wheat; and brings them to more conformity to
their head, and to greater establishment in grace, which are glorious
advantages to Believers, promised in the New Covenant, and this way
accomplished, which makes temptations necessary to Wisdom's Merchants, and
renders it their great concern to lay in provision against them.

Secondly, As temptations are certain, and will come; so they are shaking when
they come; they are part of that rain, flood and wind which did beat vehemently
on the sandy building, that it fell, Mat. 7. 27. Luke 6. 49. Temptations are
part of the Devil's Artillery, his fiery darts and cruel buffettings which none
can bear without the whole Armor of God upon him, and then too; all they can
do is but to stand, Ephesians. 6. v. 13, 16. They are so potent and prevailing, as
that none but such as are in Christ can stand their ground under them. And in
time of temptation fall away, Luke 8. 13. Receive the Word with joy, seem to
love God, and delight in his ways for a season, till temptations come to the
purpose, and then fall away. There are some temptations are more easy to be
born, but when Satan sets on a soul with all his might, there is no standing
without divine succor, and the Lord's opening a way to escape. Temptation is
reckoned amongst the sorest afflictions that the Saints do undergo, 1 Cor. 10.
13. Heb. 2. 18. Heb, 11. 37. They were stoned, they were sawn asunder, they
were tempted, they were slain with the sword. No suffering like temptations,
for they draw the soul to sin, which is more cruel than death to a soul that
loves Christ. O Christians, what need have you then to be laying in for an hour
of temptation, seeing it will surely come, and seeing it will be so terrible
when it comes!

Get your selves well furnished with wisdom, that you may know Satan's devices,
that you may be able to distinguish between temptation and corruption, and able
to answer the Objections, and subtle reasonings of Satan; you must have
experience also to encourage your hope, and strengthen your patience, that
instances of former relief in the like cases may lift up your head, and
strengthen your expectations in new Trials also. You must lay in store of faith
to guard your hearts, and shield your heads from the fiery darts of Satan; you
must get your integrity cleared, and the uprightness of your heart and way
evidenced; that is of great use also to bear up your Spirit under all his
charges against you. Make much of every breathing of his Spirit in you, and
take care you quench not any of his motions: God (says one) does often leave
us to own Satan's suggestions for our own, because we do not own God in his
holy motions and breathings. And have good evidences of your interest in
Christ, and assurance of his love to you, and assured help in the time of need;
taking special care to have corruptions weakened, and a growing mortification
in your souls; that so when Satan comes he may find nothing in you to fasten
his temptations on: This calls for your provident care, to store your souls
against times of Trial.

Secondly, Times of desertion are spendingtimes, which will need a full stock,
when the Lord does hide his face, and withdraw the sense of his love, and
influence of his quickening presence: This the Lord may do, and has done; he
has left the dearly beloved of his soul; gone from his habitation; compass
himself about with a cloud; left his children in darkness as those that have
been long dead. It Is just with God (says Mr. Cooper) to deny us the comfort of
our graces, when we deny him the glory of them. Isa. 45. 15. Verily thou art a
God that hidest thy self, O God of Israel the Savior. Job 23. 8, 9. Behold I
go forward, but he is not there, and backward, but cannot perceive him, on the
left hand where he does work, but I cannot behold him; he hides himself on the
right hand that I cannot see him. Isa. 49. 14. But Zion said, The Lord has
forsaken me, my God has forgotten me. This was one of the greatest sufferings
on Christ, his apprehensions of his Father's forsaking him. O God my God, why
have thou forsaken me? Mat. 27. 46. Here was a total and final desertion that
our Lord Jesus came under as to his sense, and the effects of it; he saw
nothing of the comforts of the Divine presence, to the last breath of life, but
died in this darkness. Verse 50. Jesus when he had cried again with a loud
voice (that is, as he had done, verse 46.) he gave up the Ghost; and had no
comfort to the last minute of life: And if God has done so to the green tree,
how much more may he to the dry? if he forsake his natural and only beloved
Son, he may surely hide himself from his Adopted Sons, even to their dying
hour: And this is a condition full of consternation and terror: The poena
damni, the loss of God, and all good, is thought to be a far greater punishment
to the damned, than all the punishment of sense and torment. O the dreadful
apprehensions that good souls have had about God's forsaking them! It Is a Hell
on Earth, and the beginning of the second death, to be under a real sense of
God's removal from the soul. O the amazing dread, and consuming rerrour, that
Job, Asaph, Heman, and others were filled with, by such apprehensions of God's
withdrawment from them, and his wrath lying hard upon them! Soul, though now it
be a time of light with thee, the Candle of the Lord shines upon thee; thou
walk in the light of his countenance, lie in his bosom, and art dandled on
his knee; yet may the days of darkness be many, and thy soul lie in the shadow
of death, and under real apprehensions of the Lord's departure from thee, and
displeasure against thee, and then thou will find need of all the cordials,
light and hope imaginable. O lay in sure and unquestionable satisfaction about
this great case; that God is really and inseparably yours; and under all your
clouds, fears and guilt, think well of God. It Is hard (says one) to think ill
of our selves, and well of God at the same time. Store your selves with
promises and experiences, with faith, hope, patience, and every grace that may
bear you up in such a Trial, and cordial your fainting heart under such
dangerous deliquiums. If God should damn me (says one) I have two arms, the
one of faith, and the other of love, with which I would embrace him, and carry
him with me, and his presence would make Hell it self a Heaven to me.

Thirdly, Times of sore affliction, and distressing calamities, are
spending-times, and will try your store of grace, and strength to bear it, and
to get through it; and such you may live to see: The Cross is the usual way to
the Crown, and affliction the lot of them that will live godly in Christ Jesus.
And we must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God, Act. 14.
22. The fining-pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold, Prove. 17. 3. And
the fan for the wheat; the condition of Believers in this world cannot long
bear prosperity without loss to their spiritual part. Christians under settled
comforts in this world, are like standing pools, which soon gather mud; and as
it is said of Moab, so it is with the people of God. Jer. 48. 11. Moab has been
at ease from his youth, and he has settled on his lees, and has not been
emptied from vessel to vessel, neither has he gone into captivity, therefore
his taste remained in him, and his scent is not changed. The sweetest nights
that ever Jacob spent were in the field; so with Peter in prison; and David had
those large affections to rise at midnight, and God's Word was sweet to him
when his trouble was bitter, says Dr. Harris. But by afflictions the Lord
refines his people from their dross. Though the wisdom of the world (says Mr.
Bradford) think of the cross according to sense, and therefore flies from it
as from a most great ignominy and shame; yet God's scholars have learned to
think otherwise of the Cross, as the framehouse wherein God frames his
children, like to his Son Christ: the furnace that fineth God's gold, the high
way to Heaven, the suit and livery of God's servants, the earnest and beginning
of all consolation and glory. Acts and Mon. 3. Vol. page 322. If you will be
Christ's Disciple, you must expect tribulation; If need be you are in heaviness
for a season. God's fire is in Sion, and his furnace in Jerusalem: Prepare for
afflictions, by which God prepares his people for himself. He is not fit for
the reward in glory (says Bernard) Non est idoneus ad praemium qui nondum
paratus est ad patibulum.
who is not ready to ascend the Gibbet as the way to it. We are fallen on the
last times, which are times of abounding iniquity, Mat. 24. 12. sinning, and
therefore like to be suffering-times, called perilous times; cruel times, 2 Timothy 3. 1. Beza renders it, troublesome times; Tremelius, hard times, (...), it
comes from (...), to bring damage, or to overturn; they will be overturning
times; times of desolation, as Christ prophesies of them, Mat. 24. 15. days of
vengeance. Luke 21. 22. These be the days of vengeance, that all things which
are written may be fulfilled: Great tribulation, such as was not since the
beginning of the world to this time, no nor ever shall be, Mat. 24. 21. called
the great and terrible day of the Lord, when the Sun shall be turned into
darkness, and the Moon into blood. Joel 2. 31. The Sun shall be turned into
darkness, and the Moon into blood before the great and terrible day of the Lord
come. Cocceius thinks this time to fall under the sixth seal, Rev. 6. 12. under
which it is said, These are they which come out of great tribulation. I rather
think that the sixth seal reckons with the enemies of God's people, and brings
redemption to the Saints under great tribulation. That which we may clearly
gather hence is, that those last times will be times of sore calamities, both
personal and public, to Nations, and to the Church of God; and what a portion
of those amazing troubles may fall upon the people of this age, we know not:
this is certain, God seems to give his call from Heaven, as well as out of his
Sanctuary, to prepare to meet with him, Amos 4. 12. to gird up the loins of our
mind, Rev. 16. 15. to keep our garments on; to watch, lest he come as a thief,
Luke 12. 35, 36. to have our vessels stored with Oil, and our lamps burning;
and to reckon on midnight sitting up, and be as men that look for the coming of
their Lord: Matthew. 25. 6. To watch and pray always, that we may be counted
worthy to escape the things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the
Son of man, Luke 21. 36.

Fourthly, The time of Death is a spending time, and calls for great provisions
for that long journey; and great change the Soul is then passing into. Death is
the King of Terrors: O how amazing is the sight of it to a natural eye, and an
awakened conscience! the work that death comes to do is frightful work to flesh
and blood; to pluck a soul out of its ancient dwellings, to take it from all
its acquaintance, friends, relations, and earthly All, from the comforts of the
whole World, never to see or enjoy them more, as they have done; nay, to pull
down this earthly tabernacle, not to leave a stone upon a stone, but quite to
demolish it to the ground, is a great change: to lay a writ on the soul's back,
and in a moment to bring it to judgment, from all its acquaintance, friends,
and dearest relations, to the vision of an infinite holy God, there to receive
its eternal doom, and to enter into a new estate, out of which he shall never
depart, either of blessedness or misery. To take the soul off from all the
means of salvation, and possibility of change out of that estate into which, by
death he enters; that if the soul should die in his sins, there is no future
repentance, or any thing can be done to mend his ill condition: this will be
terrible to a guilty conscience, sensible of many sins unrepented of, many
duties neglected, much time lost, great hypocrisies uncur'd, many fears
unremoved, and doubts unanswered. Now for such a soul, in a moment, to come to
judgment, and to have no time allowed him to set things in order for so great a
compearance, and to state his account for that final Audit, is an amazing
providence. The time of death is also a time of the greatest light, when the
soul's eye shall be opened to see things as they are, no more in a glass, but
face to face; then the soul that has been dark all its days, shall see clearly
things it never knew. As it is said of the Mole, that it is blind all its time,
till it comes to die, and then it sees: So they that would not see, shall then
see, and be ashamed; then shall souls see things as they are, and find that to
be evil which they thought good, and that to be good which they thought to be
evil. Death is the greatest informer, and makes the largest discovery of things
that ever was; it brings to light the hidden things of darkness, sins the world
never knew, and sins it may be the soul it self never saw, or thought it self
guilty of: then will the least flaw, error, unsoundness, neglect, failing, be
fully seen; then the things that now seem to be small, will then appear to be
great; and those things that were taken for mountains, will be less than one
single grain of dust.

Death is a time also when conscience has its quickest senses, and liveliest
acts, when it sees, hears, feels, fears, all things as they are, and without
any other witness, becomes both Accuser and Judge: then Judas needed no Accuser
to charge him, or Judge to condemn him, but his own conscience; nor Executioner
to dispatch him, but his own hand. What Is the matter, man, (said Mr. Perkins to
a Malefactor, going up the ladder, and his countenance showing the inward
terrors of his soul,) art thou afraid to die? O, no Sir, said he, but of a
worse matter. So another upon her deathbed, and under a terrible sight of her
wicked life, when one that was by offered something to comfort her against the
fear of death, replied, Were it but to die, it were nothing: A world (said
another, upon the border of eternity, and under conscienceaffrightings) for one
inch of time! O give me one inch of time! Luther speaks of an Eremite who, a
little before his death, stood very sad, never stirring out of his place for
three days, having his eyes fixed toward Heaven; and being asked the reason of
this posture, answered, he was afraid to die: His Scholars began to comfort
him, telling him he need not to fear death, who had been so holy in his life;
but he replies, it is true, I have lived well, and been obedient, but God's
judgments are otherwise than Man's judgment, Tom. 4. fol. 50.

The time of death is a time of great temptation also; then Satan usually
brings forth his chiefest strength to weaken the soul's faith; it is his last
onset, and that is the hottest; as men that storm a Garrison, in their last
assault they usually put forth their utmost strength: Then he opposes us with
most armed force. In this last assault, Instructissimis copiis nos impugnat,
ipsam resistentiam aggreditur, and de certamine certamen est; and bellum alio
bello defendendum, hic pugnandum ut pugnare liceat, and resistendum ei qui
resistere dissuadet, Luth.
(says Luther) it is not as in other temptations, where faith and hope does
fight; for here he sets upon the very resistance, and the strife is about
striving, and the war is maintained by another war: Here the fight is, that it
may be lawful to fight, and to resist him whose greatest policy is then to
dissuade from resisting; laughing at our hope, as if it were already
vanquished, and it were to no purpose to resist. This is a critical time, and
hard to stand; the last enemy is death; when the soul must have the whole
armor of God, and be found not in his own righteousness, but take sanctuary in
the grace of God, the righteousness and faithfulness of Christ. Death is
somewhat driery, (says Mr. Cooper) and the streams of that Jordan between us
and our Canaan run furiously; but they stand still when the Ark comes: let your
anchor be cast within the veil, and fastened on the rock Jesus; let the end of
the threefold cord be buckled to the heart; so shall ye go through Claude
oculos and nihil responde, and commenda causam Deo. Idem.
. When thou art tempted, (says Luther) and see no way to escape; shut thine
eye, answer nothing, and commit the cause to God: This (says he) is the
chiefest wisdom we should attend to in the hour of death. This was Bernard's
course and comfort, when on the point of death; I have lived wickedly, (says
he) but thou, Lord Jesus Christ, enjoyest Heaven by a double right; first,
because thou art the Son of God; then, because by thy death and passion thou
have obtained it: Hoc servas pro te jure nativitatis, illud largiris mihi non
jure operum, sed gratiae.
thou keep the first thy self by thy birthright; the last thou bestowest on
me, not for my works but of thy grace. Christians, you had need be well
furnished for the hour of death, (your greatest and most difficult hour) laying
in all the provisions you can for a sure and comfortable passage to glory. Thus
you see Wisdom's Merchants have more to do than keep up present life and
comfort, they must lay in for times to come; for times of temptation,
desertion, affliction, and the hour of death.

Advice 4.
Fourthly, If you have good trading with God, then lay out for God. This is
reasonable work, pleasing work, honorable work, profitable work.

First, It Is reasonable work to lay out for God; he deserves it, it is his due;
all your mercies are his interest; I will return and take away my corn in the
time thereof, and my wine in the season thereof; I will recover my wool and my
flax given to cover her nakedness, Hos. 2. 9. Though God gives his people the
use of mercy, yet he keeps the propriety in his own hand: God is the Alpha, and
should be the Omega, the Author, and it is reasonable he should be the end of
all our mercies. James 1. 17. Every good and perfect gift comes down from the
Father of lights: And (as beams from the Sun) is derived from his bounty, as
his peculiar offspring. Bona mea, dona tua. Omne bonum nostrum vel ipse vel ab
ipso. Aug.
My goods are thy gifts (says Augustine) All our good is either himself, or
what comes from him: Both trading and thriving are from him, and should also be
for him, both principle and interest are God's own, Mat. 25. 27. If you lay not
out your mercies for God, you rob him of his due. Your mercies are the Lords,
not only by that interest he reserves in them, but by your resignation of them
unto him. Christians, when you gave up your selves to the Lord, you gave up all
your interests and capacities also, 2 Cor. 5. 8. To keep back any part of your
All from God, is to lie to the Holy Ghost. Acts 5. 3. Why has Satan filled thy
heart to lie to the Holy Ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the Land:
No lower terms will pass in reconcillation with God, than what Ahab yielded to
Benhadad, 1 Kings 20. 4. My Lord O King according to thy saying I am thine, and
all that I have. If you are not your own, much less any thing you have, is
absolutely yours. God gives his people But a conditional interest in all things
beneath himself, so far as it suits his pleasure, use and glory. To keep back
any part of your capacities and interests from God, when by his Word and
Providence he calls for it, for his service, name and people is hypocrisy,
lying, fraud and rebellion, and contrary to the Lord's undoubted interest, both
by creation, redemption, and your own grant, Hos. 2. 8. 2 Cor. 7. 20.

Besides, you receive not your mercies as Owners, but as Stewards, to keep and
use them for him, and according to his instruction, 1 Pet. 4. 10. As every one
has received the gift (whether of grace, or gifts of grace, inward or outward
gifts, spiritual or temporal, it is all one if he have received it) so let him
administer the same, as good Stewards of the manifold grace of life. Your
interests are God's gifts; your abundance, his Bounty and trust to be bestowed
to his use and pleasure, for which you must give an account.

Secondly, It Is pleasing work to lay out for God: Paul counted not his life
dear to lay out for Christ, Acts 20. 24. Peter and John rejoiced that they were
counted worthy to part with their name, and to undergo reproach for Christ,
Acts. 5. 41. Nazianzen was glad that he had something of value, to wit, his
Athenian learning to part with for Christ. The Mother of William Hunter the
Martyr rejoiced, that ever she was so happy as to bear such a child as could
find in his heart to lose his life for Christ's Name sake, Acts and Mon. p. 13.
96. Nothing seems burdensome to do or part with for Christ, to a soul that loves
him: How willingly did Jonathan strip himself of the Robe that was upon him,
and gave it to David, and his garments even to his sword, and to his bow, and
to his girdle, because he loved him; much more pleasing will it be to a soul
loving Christ, to part with his All for Christ, 1 Samuel 18. 4.

Thirdly, It Is honorable work also to lay out for God; He that gives to the
poor lends to the Lord, Prove. 19. 17. And is not this honorable to make God
a debtor, and to get him who is over all blessed for ever, to become bound to
his creature: O what honor is this, that the Giver of All should seem to be
beholding to his creatures, who have their All from him! Have you any thing you
can part with for Christ? think what honor it is that God entrusts you with the
bestowing of such gifts for him; the Lord might have made you beggars, not
givers; who has made you to differ? why is grace, gifts, strength, estate,
time, put into thy hand, and not into others? it shows a good opinion God has
of thy faithfulness, and so bespeaks honor: O let not God have cause to revoke
this estimation!

Fourthly, It Is profitable work: The more you lay out for God, the more you get
for your selves; there is no such way to gather, as to scatter for God; your
improvements of mercy to God's end, are but as sowing of seed, which will come
in again with greater increase, 2 Cor. 9. 6. He that sows sparingly, shall
reap sparingly, and he that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully. Laying
out for God is Trading secured, not liable to hazards, as earthly undertakings
are, but under a promise of sure and great returns, as has been proved, and
that is profit. Laying out for God, is lending to God upon interest, Mat. 19.
29. where both principal and interest are sure. Prove. 19. 17. He that has pity
upon the poor, lends to the Lord, and that which he has given, will he pay
him again. The Lord takes it as done to himself, and will repay with large use;
Tibi a Domino etiam cum amplissimo faenore reddendum. Mercer.
he lends to the Lord upon bond for use, as the Hebrew imports, (...), and he
will surely repay it. God is bound for it, and therefore the debt is sure. It Is
a great mistake in men, and that which starves their expensiveness for God, to
think the more they give, the less they have; whereas laying out for God brings
in principal and use; it sanctifies what is left, and brings it under a promise
of increase. As the pouring out of the Widows Oil filled her vessels; the more
she poured out, the more she had, 2 Kings 4. 5, 6. And as the Widow of
Zarephath, by giving first to the Prophet, secured her own provision in a time
of famine. 1 Kings 17. 13, 14. For thus says the Lord God of Israel, the
barrel of meal shall not waste, neither shall the cruse of Oil fail, until the
day that the Lord sends rain upon the earth. Mal. 3. 10. Bring ye all the
tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in my house, and prove me
now herewith, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open you the windows of
Heaven, and pour you out a blessing that there shall not be room enough to
receive it. It Is men's niggardliness to God, and close-handedness to the poor,
and pious uses, is one reason doubtless of the wastes and blastings on their
outward interests this day. Prove. 11. 28. The liberal soul shall be made fat,
and he that waters shall be watered also himself. Cartwright and Baine think
this is meant of spiritual gifts, as the former verse is of external good
things. But as Mercer well observes, the sentence is general, and takes in any
supplies that are given to such as are needy Q^i rigat, i. e. qui de suo erogat
in egenos.
Such shall be made fat; he shall be so far from being impoverished thereby, as
it shall increase his substance; He shall be watered as with showers in Autumn:
The latter rain, which is fruitfulizing: The streams of charity are not like
running water that passes away, but as fruitful showers that come again with
increase. Prove. 3. 9, 10. Honor the Lord with thy substance, so shall thy
barns be filled with plenty. Multitude of promises might be heaped up, which
give in a joynt-testimony to this truth; as Mat. 25. 29. Eccles. 11. 1. Prove.
28. 27. Prove. 22. 9. Isa. 58. 7, 8, 10, 11. with many others, and are abundant
security for the blessing to such as lay out for God.

Besides, this is a proof of your love to God, 2 Cor. 8. 24. Wherefore show ye
to them, and before the Churches the proof of your love, 1 John 3. v. 17. Whosoever
has this worlds goods, and sees his Brother has need, and shuts up his
bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? 1 John 4.
20. For he that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God
whom he has not seen? By true charity to your poor Brethren you evidence your
love to God; that secures all your true and needed mercies.

Fifthly, This also is pleasing to God, Phil. 4. v. 18. Having received of
Epaphroditus the things which were sent from you, an odor of a sweet smell, a
sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God, Heb. 13. 16. Isa. 56. 4. and that
is surely prosperous.

Then Christians, if God has first given unto you; if you love him; if you
would please him; if you would prosper in soul, body and estate, lay out for
God: If you have freely received, freely give; whatever God has entrusted you
with, expend it for him.

First, Lay out your time for God: Among the many wastes of mercies souls are
guilty of, this is not the least; waste of precious time: Though there is no
creature-blessing of greater worth than time, in which a foundation is laid, of
all those mercies that are eternal. Time is a talent, a treasure; not only a
mercy, but that without which there can be no mercy: Consider for your
improvement of Time,

First, Your Time is not yours, but God's, made by him, and for him. Psalm. 76.
17. The day is thin, and the night is thine; thou have prepared the Light and
the Sun. Time is that space between two Eternities, limited by divine pleasure,
to divine use. Job 14. 5. Seeing his days are determined, the number of his
months are with thee; thou have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass. And
if Time be the Lord's, then it is fit it should be used for God. Give unto God
the things that are God's. When thou sinnest or trifiest away this Time, think
on this; now I rob God, and spend another's goods. You that hate robbery of
men, be not thieves to God and your own souls: Time is God's, not thine own.

Secondly, Think how much you have lost of past Time, and this should make you
choice of present Time. Psalm. 90. 9. We spend our years as a tale that is told;
which vanishes into the Air and is soon gone. Much of our time Multum Temporis
eripitur nobis, plus subducitur, plurimum effluit, exigua pars est vitae quam
nos vivimus. Seneca.
(says one) is plucked away from us, more is stolen away, but most of all does
slide away. O how little a piece of life is that we live! How much of thy time
has been consumed in the grave? How much in the marketplace? much slept away
in the Vineyard: When nature, self, the world and sin have had their shares of
every day, how little a portion has been left for God? Hence it is the Apostle
advises Saints to redeem their Time; to get Time for God and their souls,
though with some loss to other interests, because it has been taken captive by
self, sin and the world, and held prisoner so long. This waste of former Time
makes it absolutely needful for them that will reach their journey's end before
their day be gone, to redeem Time from their callings, recreations,
refreshments, idleness and rest, for the recovery of neglected work, or they
will find it wanting when they come to die. Give me my time again, said a woman
on her deathbed, being under fears about her eternal state; nothing could
relieve her troubled soul, who had lost salvation-time.

Thirdly, Consider how short and uncertain your remaining Time is, or may be:
The whole Time of thy life is but a span, a hand-breadth, a post, a weaver's
shuttle, a vapor, a tale that is told, as a flower of the field, things of no
duration, Job 9. 21. Psalm. 39. 5. James 4. 14. Time (says one) is a short
parenthesis in a long period; so short, that before we can name it, our present
Time is become past Time. Our whole life (says another) consists but of two
days, the day of our birth, and the day of our death; for no sooner born, but
we begin to die. Time is on the wing, hastening to Eternity every moment: Time
travels when you sleep, and runs when you creep: Time goes on when you stop;
and gets ground when you go back: As the stream hastens to the Ocean day and
night; so does Time to Eternity: O use your Time for God while you have it! it
will shortly be none of yours; if you do not use it, you will lose it; you were
as good let God have your Time, as to let it run away to no purpose; if duty do
not improve it, rust will consume it; the Devil, World and Flesh will engross
it; and it is better give it to God, than let the Moth and Caterpillar devour
it. Besides,

Fourthly, Can you put it to better profit than to lay it out for God? he is
the best chapman for your Time; nothing will give you so much interest for Time
as God will; put all the gain of other Time into the scale, with the incomes of
God's Time, and you will soon see the difference. Time laid out for God will be
the best security for your own Time: Give God his Time, and he will give you
your Time; all that Time that is needful for a blessed Eternity; There Is no
such way to enjoy Time, as to use it for God. Prove. 3. 16. Length of days is
in her right hand. Time expended for God will not only secure, but sanctify
your Time also, as the first fruits did the lump, Romans 11. 16. Besides, Time
devoted to God brings in eternal interest; Though Time be but a thing temporal,
yet improved, it will bring to things eternal, 2 Cor. 4. 18. nay it will bring
you mercy in the time of need: Give God your working-time, and he will feed you
when in your unserviceable time. When I was a young man (said Mr. Bruce) I was
diligent, and lived by faith in the Son of God, but now I am old, and am not
able to do so much, yet he condescends to feed me with lumps of sense.
[Fulfill. of Scripture.]

Fifthly, you must give an account for your time to God; he takes notice of
men's time, how it is spent; and accordingly will judge them: Luke 13. 7. These
three years I come seeking fruit on this Figtree, and can find none; cut it
down, why cumbreth it the ground? Psalm. 95. 10. Forty years long was I grieved
with this people. Luke 19. 44. Because thou knew not the time of thy
visitation. God looks for fruit from his people, according to their months,
Ezekiel. 47. 12. O how much is it your concernment to order your disbursements of
time to a consistency with your comfortable account in the day of Christ! then
you will wish God had more of your time, when you come to reckoning for it:
what a blank will there be in our account of time, if it be not better bestowed
than hitherto? That time will yield you most comfort when you come to eternity,
which was spent for God here.

Sixthly, How can you bethink a little time for God, who has not thought an
eternity of mercy too much for you? Christians, it is salvavation, with eternal
glory, he has prepared for you, 2 Timothy 2. 10. A Crown incorruptible, an
Inheritance that fades not away, a Kingdom that cannot be shaken: Upon this
very argument the Apostle presses the Saints to unweariedness in present work,
Gal. 6. 8. Think how disingenuous it is thus to requite the Lord that has dealt
so bountifully with you; to withold your time from him, who first gave it to
you, and has denied it to others; and will shortly close up your troublous
time with eternal rest, in blessed mansions of purest pleasures with himself:
Let this love of Christ shame you for misimproved time, and constrain you, for
the future, to lay out all possible time for God.

Secondly, Lay out your strength for God; he is the God of your strength, he
has right to it, and use for it, Psalm. 43. 2. He has work for you which calls
for all your strength: His works are great, greatly to be sought out of all
that have pleasure therein, Psalm. 111. 2. His mercies are great, and greatly to
be praised: Psalm. 86. 13. His anger is great, and greatly to be feared: 2 King.
23. 26. His trials and rebukes on his own children are many times great, which
need great faith and patience to bear up under them, and the strength of grace
to make a right use of them: Psalm. 71. 10. Which has shown me great and sore
troubles: You do not know what need you may have of all the strength your
hearts and graces are capable to receive, to carry you through your remaining
trials and troubles: you have not yet resisted unto blood, or been brought to
fiery trials, nor seen such days as never yet were or shall be And therefore
you had need be girded with strength, and to be strong in the grace that is in
Christ Jesus; and one way to it, is to use what you have for God, Heb. 5. 14.
God's service also calls for expended strength: Luke 10. 27. Thou shall love
the Lord with all thy strength, 1 Chronicles. 26. 8. The strength of thy heart laid
out, inward strength for God in his service, the strength of your whole souls;
and outward strength, the strength of your bodies also in the work of God. So
did our Lord Jesus, he wasted his strength in the service of his Father, that
at thirty four years old, he was taken to be near fifty: he was weary in his
work. And Paul did spend, and was spent for Christ, 2 Cor. 12. 15. And David
cried out, My knees are weak through fasting, Psalm. 119. 24. Glorify God in
your bodies, and in your spirits, which are the Lord's: 1 Cor. 6. 20. In
labors more abundant: 2 Cor. 11. 23. Striving for the faith of the Gospel.
Religion is no easy work; Ministers (says Mr. Buroughs) must venture their
strength for Christ, and so must all that are Christ's: 2. Cor. 11. 27. In
weariness, in painfulness, in watchings. Religion is worth all your labors and
exhausted strength; men tire themselves for the world; how much more should
they for God and Glory?

Thirdly, Lay out your gifts and graces for God, and the good of souls: 1 Cor.
12. 7. The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal:
that is God's end why he gives gifts to any, that every one who has them should
improve them to his glory, and the good of others. A capacity of serving God,
and furthering his Kingdom in the World, is such a privilege as the Saints in
Heaven enjoy not: and the Angels, when employed in any subserviency toward it,
readily and cheerfully prosecute it. Angels are vigilant creatures, and wait
for opportunities; and when they come, will not lose them, [Greenh.] Yea, it is
such a prize, as being once lost, can never be enjoyed again; nor gracious
souls ever more return to their stewardship, when once it is given up; and
therefore should be heedfully regarded, and faithfully used whiles continued.
God gives not talents to be napkin'd up, nor lights to be hid under a bushel:
none of us lives to himself, Romans 14. 7. All the characters of Saints, and
those relations they stand in, engage to usefulness: They are the lights of the
world set in a candlestick, that they may cause their light to shine forth
before men, Mat. 5. 14, 15. They are the salt of the earth, of purpose to
savor others. Mat: 5. 13. If salt has lost its savor, it is good for nothing
but the dunghill. They are stars in God's firmament, to communicate their light
and influence unto others, 1 Cor. 15. 41. Vessels in God's house to be meet for
use, 2 Timothy 2. 20, 21. Stones in his building, which have a mutual usefulness
to bear up each other, and toward preserving the whole, Ephesians. 2. 2. Branches in
the Vine, that yield their fruit for the cheering the hearts of men, Judge. 9.
13. Trees in God's garden full of sap, Psalm. 104. 16. Members in the body, to
impart their nourishment to each other, Ephesians. 4. 16. and discharge their
respective duties, of sympathy, care, and helpfulness to their fellow members:
1 These. 5. 14. We exhort you, brethren, to warn them that are unruly, comfort
the feeble minded, support the weak, be patient toward all men: Use all your
capacities for God while you have them, lest he take them from you, or
opportunity to improve them.

Fourthly, Lay out your earthly interests for God, Prove. 3. 19. Honor the Lord
with thy substance, and with the first fruits of thy increase: Give God his due
in maintaining his Messengers, and keeping up his worship; alluding to those
first fruits of Israel's increase, which were the Lord's by special
appropriation to his service, Exodus 22. 29. and supply of his ministry among
them, Lev. 23. 20. the equity of which obliges in Gospel Times, though their
ceremonial and judicial respect cease: and this duty is reinforced under the
Gospel by more ample arguments taken from the light of Nature, the law of
Moses, and will of Christ, 1 Cor. 9. from ver. 9. to 15. To this head is
referred that command; Gal. 6. 6. Let him that is taught in the word
communicate to him that teaches in all good things; for God will not be
mocked: (as they do who pretend Religion, and yet are defective in this
manifest duty,) pressing them to unweariedness in this expensiveness for God,
whatever discouragements they meet with upon the assurance of the blessed fruit
of obedience to the will of Christ herein, ver. 7, 8, 9. It Is not the
maintaining or welfare of a few men in the World, that is the design of this
great command of Christ; but the tendency this has to the promulgation of the
Gospel, and keeping up the instituted worship of God, the conversion of
Sinners, and edification of Saints successively in every generation, to which
these supplies are necessary, that the servants of Christ might attend on their
ministrations without distraction; and whoever (a subject of Christ, and sharer
of this privilege) draws back from this duty, he is chargeable not only for
violating the royal righteous law of Christ, but for being guilty of subverting
his Government, Crown and Dignity; and endeavoring in his measure, the ruining
his interest, of hindering the conversion and edification of souls; and
whatever damage hereby comes to the spiritual or eternal welfare of souls; it
will be laid on their heads in the day of the righteous judgment of Christ.

Another greatly concerning duty contained in this Scripture, is charitable
communications, feed the poor, feed the hungry, clothe the naked, relieve the
oppressed. [ Bid Alapid.] This is to honor God with your substance; not to
spend it on your lusts, to live high, to fare deliciously, to build your nests
on high; but to make your abundance a supply for the good of those that are in
wants, 2 Cor. 8. 14. Isa. 58. 7. 10. Mat. 5. 42. Jam. 1. 27. Heb. 13. 16. Luke
14. 12, 13. Otherwise,

First, All your Religion is in vain, James 1. v. 26, 27. Your knowledge,
desires, affections, frames, tastes, enjoyments, marks, experiences, seeming
graces, duties, are all nothing, and can never prove the truth of your grace,
the safety of your estates, and goodness of your religion, if you are found
defective in this great duty of Charity. Psalm. 112. 4, 5. Unto the upright
there arises light in the darkness; he is gracious, and full of compassion,
and righteous. A good man shows favor, and lends. Let men say what they
will, if they be covetous, hard-hearted, have no compassion to them that are in
wants, have no heart to give or lend to needy ones; they have no true grace in
them. Verse 9. He has dispersed, he has given to the poor, his righteousness
endures for ever. Men may talk, and pray, and seem to be eminent Christians;
profess love to God and their neighbors, and yet all the while be deceived,
and have not a jot of grace in them, while their hearts are cruel, their hands
shut to their poor Brethren. Remember the young man in the Gospel, and fear
thine own estate if thy heart be glued to thy possessions: -- How dwells the
Love of God in him! 1 John 3. 17. He loves not God, and God loves not him; that
shuts up the bowels of his compassion from his poor and afflicted Brother.
That Is pure Religion, and undefiled before God to visit the fatherless and
widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world, Jam.
1. 27. Show me thy faith by thy works. Jam. 2. 18. Religion (says one) is not
only contemplative, but the greatest part of it like the Mathematick's (...)
bargains, how will they stand for a penny! in chacharity, how cold are they!
how hard is it to screw an alms out of their hands! if this be Religion, the
Lord keep me from such Religon. This begets an odium in the men of the world
against Religion, and the ways of God: But woe to that man by whom offenses
come; it had been better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck,
and that he were drowned in the midst of the Sea, Mat. 18. 6, 7.

Fourthly, Acts of Charity purely done will evidence your right to glory. Mat.
25. 34, 35. 36. Come ye blessed of my Father inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you from the foundations of the world; for I was an hungered, and ye gave me
meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in;
naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and
ye came to me. The enquiry in that great day will not be after men's profession,
light, frames and duties of Worship, but after the fruits of their faith and
love as evidential, not causal, of their right to glory, Here is held out
(says one) not the Non causa salutis, sed (...), and Testimonium credentius
his verbis innuitur.
cause of their salvation, but the sign and testimony of them that believe,
etc. Opera quae Christus praedicaturus est non (...), sunt; sed (...) respectu
fidei; and finis ejus vitae aeternae. Glass.
The Kingdom is obtained by way of Inheritance: ( Come inherit the Kingdom:)
aad prepared for them, as a portion for children, not purchased by them as the
procurements of their works: The reward is freely bestowed on all interested in
Adoption-grace, of which title the bearing proof in that day will be the fruits
of love to those that are Christ's; words will not be sufficient to demonstrate
this love then; it will not serve men's turn to say they loved Saints, except it
were extended to all, yea the least of Saints, and proved by acts of love, and
communications to all their necessities; and that not some small pittance of
their abundance, which they valued not, but it must be such portions and kinds
of relief, which their necessities call for; in visiting, feeding, clothing,
owning, comforting, receiving into their houses, and whatever help they were
capable to express, and this as readily and heartily expended to them as they
would lay them out to themselves and theirs, that being the rule of Charity:
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, Matt. 22. 39. The want of this
evidence, whatever else may be pretended, will finally and eternally cast souls
in that last and terrible day, Mat. 25. 41. to the end. Do not deceive thy soul
with false hopes of glory; not one mark will pass for Heaven, where there is a
hard heart, and close hands toward poor and distressed Saints: For he shall
have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy, Jam. 2. 13. There is no
room for you in Divine bowels, if you shut up your own bowels against them that
are in misery. See in that Parable, Mat. 18. 33, 34, 35. the dreadful end of
those who are any way cruel to their fellowservants, having themselves tasted
the mercy of their Lord. The liberal distributions of your estates to the poor,
is the only way to make them truly serviceable to your souls, whiles this
becomes the occasion of your reception into everlasting habitations. Luke 16.
9. Make to your selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye
fail they may receive you into everlasting habitations Opus hoc receptionis in
aeterna habitacula solius Dei est, tribuitur autem pauperibus quia ipsi
sententiam Christi Judicis de salvatione piorum (...) approbabunt, and
beneficentiae quae fidei fructus est testes erunt. Glass.
The mammon or riches of this world, is called the riches of unrighteousness,
because they are unrighteously gotten, or unrighteously kept, to the detriment
of those that need them; or unrighteously spent to the hurt of those that have
them; but the way to change their nature, and to make them profitable, is to
lay them out to the poor, who will receive you, or witness for you in that day,
to prove the truth of your love, by which you shall be received into glory.

Fifthly, They are the sure way to blessing here. Luke 6. 38. Give, and it
shall be given to you, good measure pressed down, and shaken together, and
running over, shall men give into your bosom; for with the same measure that ye
mete withal, it shall be measured to you again: Intimating, that giving to the
poor, is but lending to the Lord, as has been showed, and it shall be surely
repaid in this life, either in kind, or in value, in such things as they need;
yea oft-times in the same coin, and that to sufficient requital, good measure
amplified by three metaphors, pressed down, shaken together, and running over;
that is (says Ita illis benefacturum ut sensari sint se esse remuneratos.
Scultetus) God will so bles them, that they shall be sensible they are
sufficiently repaid, 2 Cor. 9. 6. Deuteronomy. 15. 10, 11. Mat. 10. 41, 42. Psalm. 41.
12. Prove. 11. 24. Job was a man of great Charity, Job 29. 12, 13. a man of
great prosperity in the world, v. 6, 7. and though for the trial of his faith
he was stripped of all for a season, yet did the Lord after all turn his water
into wine, chap. 42. 10. Rahab entertained the spies, and saved her self and
family from ruin by it: The Shunamite, the Widow of Zarephath got by laying
out acts of Charity to the Prophet. Tiberius the second was a person of great
liberality to the poor; it is said of him, that whatever Justinus his
predecessor had contracted by covetousness, Tiberius freely distributed to the
poor: And when Sophia, Justine's Widow, reproved him for his excess of Charity,
he replies, Confido in Domino quod non deerit pecunia fisco nostro quamdiu
pauperes Eleemosynam inde accepturi sunt. Est enim is thesaurus ingens de quo
Dowinus dixit Matthew. 6. 10. Theatr. Hisior. Thcoret. Tract.
I trust in the Lord that our Exchequer shall never want money, while the poor
are maintained out of it. Neither did his expectations fail; for as the same
Author reports, he found a vast treasure in his Palace, hidden under the
pavement, which could scarce be emptied for diverse days: Thus God blessed his
bountiful hand. Mr. Gouge, in his Surest and Safest Way of Thriving (a book
worth your getting, and to which I refer you) gives many modern instances of
this great truth; I shall for their sakes who have not the Book mention this
one, concerning the pious and imitable resolution of Mr. John Walter, Citizen
of London, who having a sufficient estate to maintain his Charge, resolved what
further estate God should entrust him with, to bestow the same on charitable
uses; after which vow he found his estate wonderfully increasing: A worthy
president to such as have enough to live comfortably upon, to put bounds to
their further purchases, and entitle their surplusage to the service of Christ,
and refreshments of his Saints; a course men will one day find more gainful,
than to join house to house, and field to field. It Is the best way (says
Chrysologus) for a rich man to make the bellies of the poor his barn, to
succor the fatherless and needy, and thereby to lay up treasures in Heaven.
Gregory the Great was so devoted to Charity, that all what he had seemed to be
the common granary of the Church. It Is said of Cyprian, he was the blind man's
eyes, the lame man's legs, the naked man's garment; he was a man of so great
Charity. Mr. Fox, the Author of the Acts and Monuments, never denied to give to
any that asked for Jesus sake. Augustine sold the Ornaments of the Church to
relieve the poor. And Bazil in a time of great famine sold his Land, and other
goods to maintain the poor. A Duke being asked by some Ambassadors whether he
could show them some hunting-dogs, gathered a great many poor people together,
and showing them to the Ambassador, said, These be the Dogs I daily keep, and
with which I use to hunt after Heaven. O that Christians would have other games
in chase, than that which perishes in the using, and lay out their estates to
better advantage than what appropriating them to self-interest can afford! Feed
the hungry, cloathe the naked, give to him that lacks, seeing such blessed
encouragements do attend this Christian duty.

Fifthly, If you have good trading in grace, then lay up for glory: If you are
Wisdom's Merchants, Heaven is your Country and home, the place of your rest and
eternal residence: The world is a strange Country to you, a spot of ground
where you are set for a while to trade in to get commodities for your Country;
and sent into it as Jacob was to Syria, to provide for his own house, and then
to return into his Country; Genesis 30. 30. This is not your rest, Mich. 2. 10.
Christians, you are not sent hither to take root in the Earth, or with the
Raven, let out of the Ark to build your nests in the world; or with the fool in
the Gospel, to take your rest in your full barns, and increased goods; but as
Joseph was sent before into Egypt to make provision for his own Country; and
as Solomon's ships were sent to Tarshish to transport what materials were
useful for the House of God, and his own house. All that you are allowed here,
is but as factorage for present maintenance: Some viands and refreshments in
the way, but your great business is to get such goods as will vend in your own
Country. Remember, you are all this while left here, to fill your sacks for
your own home, where your kindred and habitation lies: Your Father's house, and
your own mansions, your treasures, pleasures, crowns, thrones, and all that you
are like to have for ever, lies in your City above, whose maker and builder is
God. We know but little of Christ's love (says Mr. Cooper) till all be
perfected and spread before us in Heaven. O lay up for Heaven! treasure up all
you can for the other world whither you are going: Especially lay up these four
things for Heaven:

1 Hopes for Glory, 2 Desires for Glory, 3 Treasures for Glory, 4 Preparations
for Glory,
First, Lay up sound Hopes for Heaven. 1 Pet. 1. 13. Wherefore gird up the
loins of your mind; be sober, and hope to the end, for the grace that is to be
brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus Christ. Sure hopes of Heaven are of
wonderful use to quicken a soul's dispatches for Heaven. Acts 26. 7. Unto which
promise our twelve Tribes instantly serving God day and night hope (...),
omnibus viribus toto animo. A Lapide.
to come. 'Twas their hopes to enjoy those great and glorious things in the
promise, that did put them on such diligence in those ways that lead to it; to
strive in every duty that seemed to have an eye to this glory, they did stretch
out their hand to take hold of eternal life, as one that was near the prize.
Hope puts strength and activity into the soul in its motion after God, and
makes it restless and unwearied till it enjoy him. This argument the Apostle
uses to provoke the Hebrews in their race toward glory: Heb. 12. 1. Seeing
then we are compassed about with so great a cloud of winesses, let us lay aside
every weight, and the sin which does so easily beset us; and let us run with
patience the race that is set before us. The weight of the argument lies in the
sure and blessed issue of well-grounded hope attested by so many witnesses in
the former Chap. who ran so great adventures, sustained so great losses,
underwent such cruel deaths in chase of this eternal Crown; and not one of them
miscarried, all got safe to glory, through their many fears and deaths. And
seeing all that had this true hope hither to have sped well, and the same
promise is made to us; Chap. 11. 40. having provided some better thing for us,
(better privileges, better promises,) Let Us pluck up our spirits, and at it
again; and if no visible comfort or evidence meet us in our way, yet let us
hold on with patience till we come to the end of our race.

Hopes of glory do also guard the soul against discouragements and
difficulties. 1 These. 5. 8. Putting on the breast plate of Faith; and for an
helmet, the hope of Salvation. Hope arms head and heart, and keeps off the
venomed darts of Satan from ruining the soul; while wellgrounded hope of a
blessed end is kept up, Israel prevails, and the Believer is kept from being
overcome: 1 John 5. 4. This is the victory that overcomes the World, even our
Faith.

Hope of glory maintains a patient expectation and quiet waiting for the
fruition of it. Romans 8. 25. If we hope for that we see not, then do we with
patience wait for it; and this is no small mercy: Impatience has a dangerous
influence on a Christian's heart, discouraging it, and exposing to temptation
of giving over; saying, Wherefore should I wait any longer? 2 King. 6. 33.
which danger Hope secures from.

Hope settles, and stays the heart; stilling its fears, scattering its doubts,
and strengthening its confident expectation of glory, turning persuasions into
the highest certainty, even a kind of knowledge. 1 John 3. 2. But we know that
when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is.
Well-grounded and improved hope in a Christian's life, does usually end in a
triumphing confidence at his death: I shall shine (said a precious servant of
God on his deathbed,) I shall see him as he is, and all the fair company with
him, and shall have my large share: it is no easy thing to be a Christian; but
as for me, I have got the victory, and Christ is holding forth his arms to
embrace me; I have had my fears and faintings as another sinful man, to be
carried through creditably, but as sure as ever he spoke to me in his word; his
spirit witnessed to my heart, saying, fear not; he had accepted my sufferings,
and the out-gate should not be matter of prayer, but of praise; [Mr.
Rutherford's last words.] And a little before his death, after some fainting,
he said, Now I feel, I believe, I enjoy, I re^oyce, I feed on Manna, I have
Angels food; my eyes shall see my Redeemer. O what rich cheer will hope of
glory find on a deathbed! What brightness is that I see? (said Mr. John
Holland the day before his death,) have you light up a candle? a stander by
answered, no, it is the Sun shines: Sun shine, (says he) nay, it is my Savior
shines; now farewell World, welcome Heaven; the day star from on high has
visited my heart. O speak it when I am gone, and preach it at my Funeral; God
deals familiarly with men; I feel his Mercy, I see his Majesty; I see things
that are unutterable: Hopes of glory will make the World seem a very poor thing
in a Believer's eye; he that by faith can stand on Mount Nebo, and get one
glance on the promised Land, as his, feeds on the first ripe Grapes of his own
Country; in comparison of which, all the World's dainties are bitter things.
Hopes of of glory cheers the heart in the way to glory. Romans 5. 3. And rejoice
in hope of the glory of God. Romans 12. 12. Rejoicing in hope, patient in
tribulation: It makes the soul go merrily on, like a Ship under sail, that has
both wind and tide; whereas the doubting Saint drives heavily on, when winds
and waves beat against him, being unwheel'd of Faith and Hope: Sure hope of
Heaven gets honey out of the rock, and meat out of the eater, which makes his
rough ways plain, and his passage to Heaven pleasant: It Is Christians losing
their hopes of Heaven, makes them so uncomfortable in their passage through the
World.

Lastly, Well-grounded hopes of Heaven have a great influence toward
preparation for it, while it has an advantage to further his holiness. 1 John
3. 3. And every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself as he is
pure. When the Apostle speaks of the faith of God's elect, which is after
godliness, Tit. 1. 1. as a furtherance of this holiness, lays this hope upon
eternal life; In hope of eternal life, which God, that cannot lie, promised
before the World began: Expectations of Heaven well laid, cannot but constrain
a soul to utmost measures of holiness. 2 Pet. 3. 14. Seeing that ye look for
such things, be diligent that you may be found of him in peace without spot,
and blameless. Heaven is a place of perfect holiness, no unclean thing can
enter there; which the eye of faith seeing, and the soul's right to it, puts a
person upon perfecting his holiness, that he may be ready to enter in. O then
lay up hopes of glory, which have such precious fruits hanging on them.

Quest. But what are those sure hopes of glory, which will never fail of glory;
and from which we may expect such excellent fruit? Sol. First, Sure hopes of
glory, which will never fail of glory, are issued out of a saving union with
the Lord Jesus, the Lord of glory. Col. 1. 27. To whom God would make known
what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles; which is
Christ in you the hope of glory. Christ united to you, and dwelling in you by
his spirit, is this glorious treasure spoken of in the former part of the
verse. Here are two arguments to endear the Lord Jesus to Believers.

First, That in their union with him they are invested with great and
unsearchable treasures; he himself being that glorious and hidden riches opened
in the Gospel, and made over to them in their reception of him into their
hearts by faith; part of which treasure they have in hand in their present
union and communion with him, and the blessed fruits and consequents of it here.

Secondly, Another thing that renders Christ precious to Believers, is, that in
their union with him is laid the foundation of their right to, and evidence of
their hope of glory; [ Quatenus est in illis eatenus habent spem gloriae. Dav.]
and assurance of their future and eternal enjoyment of himself, and all his
treasure laid up in glory: There Is no other way to have a right to glory, but
by union with Christ, who has purchased glory only for those that are his,
and have this spiritual union with him. Hence it is that the Lord Jesus Christ
is called a better hope, John 17. 21, to 27. Heb. 7. 19. For the Law made
nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did, by which we draw
near to God: That is the Lord Jesus in his Priestly Office, of which the
Ceremonial Law was a forerunner, did bring in a ground of better hope in
opening the way to God in grace and glory: All right to glory is through him
who is the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2. 8. and has the disposal of it to whom he
pleases, John 17. 2. even to all the Father has given him to be his; and to
these he gives eternal life, John 10. 28. They that have union with Christ
cannot perish, being members of his body, flesh and bones; should a soul that
has received Christ here, miss of glory hereafter, then would a member of
Christ perish, and his body in Heaven be maimed and imperfect, which cannot be,
his Church being the fullness of him who fills all in all, Ephesians. 1. v. 21. And
Christ has past his word for it they shall not perish, John 10. 28. Not one of
them is lost who are truly in Christ, John 17. 10. They are his servants, and
shall be where he is, John 12. 26. His Spouse, which shall be ever with him.
Try then your union with Christ; Have you received him into your hearts by
faith? Are you one Spirit with him, having the same mind in you that was in
Christ Jesus? you would be holy as he is holy; nothing short of complete
oneness with Christ can content you: Indeed, you have carnal desires within the
borders of your souls, that crave for satisfaction, and sometimes will have it
whether you will or no; but there is another Law in your mind warring against
this Law in your members, that cannot rest till you arrive more to his
likeness, who is your life, righteousness and glory. Are you implanted into
Christ's death and resurrection, brought into some conformity to him? And do
you live upon him as the branch upon the root for all your grace and supply,
and stay upon him as the stone upon the foundation, for your support in grace
unto glory, as your only Lord and Righteousness? Then are your hopes for glory
sure speeding hopes.

Secondly, Truth of grace secures your hopes of glory, it being the earnest,
seal, and first fruits of glory. 2 Cor. 1. 22. Who has also sealed us, and
given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts. Grace is God's seal for glory,
and what greater security can there be? It Is his earnestpenny, which is never
taken away, as a pledge may be, but secures the whole sum; yea it is part of
pay: Grace is that seed of God which remains in him, 1 John 3. 9. and secures
the soul's state against final Apostasy, through its union with the Spirit
dwelling in him, Romans 8. 11. Prove your truth of grace (though never so weak)
and you will prove your title to glory: Does your grace owe its being to the
fullness of Christ, John 1 16. owning its derivation thence; and dependence
there? Does your grace spread it self into every part and faculty of your soul,
wholly sanctified throughout? 1 These. 5. 23. Cannot your grace mingle with sin,
or own the least appearance of evil, Rev. 2. 2. but has according to its
measure an irreconcilable enmity against every known sin? Gal. 5. 17. Cannot
your grace rest in any measures short of perfection, but has desires and
endeavors after more and more grace? 1 Pet. 2. 3. Has your grace pure and
ultimate designs for Divine Glory, aiming in every thing, Phil. 1. 20, 21. that
Christ may be magnified, John 3. 30. and self annihilated? then is your grace
true grace, and will in time turn to glory.

Thirdly, Your mortifiedness to the world will be a good proof of your title to
Heaven. The heirs of Glory are chosen out of the world; are not of the world,
John 15. 19. Redeemed from the earth, Rev. 14. 3. They have not received the
spirit of this world, but the Spirit that is of God, 1 Cor. 2. 12. and are
crucified to it, Gal. 6. 14. dead to the desires, pleasures and interests of
this world, Col. 3. 1, 2. Dead men have no favor or delight in things; no more
have they who are dead to this world, any acquiescing pleasure in earthly
things, which can no more satisfy a heavenly soul, than dung can feed a living
man. Christians, try how your hearts stand affected to earthly things; are
these great in your eye, amiable to your affections, attractive on your
desires, prevalent on your wills, beyond the things of Heaven? then are your
hopes of Heaven unwarrantable by any Divine evidence, and will at last leave
your names written on the earth.

Fourthly, Your hopes for Heaven, if right, will be active lively hopes. 1 Pet.
1. 3. Who has begotten us again to a lively hope, by the resurrection of
Christ from the dead. Hopes that put life in your affections (...), id est,
vivificam scilicet quae vivificat Metonymia Effecti. Piscat.
and spirits, and makes you vigorous after holiness, and the way to glory,
Ephesians. 2. 10. Right hopes for Heaven will make you run in the way to Heaven,
and put you on all manner of holy conversation. Paul's hopes for Heaven put him
on labors and strivings after perfect holiness, 2 Cor. 5. 8, 9. Phil. 3. 12,
13, 14. Try your hopes; do they quicken you to duty, or leave you dead? You
have no heart to the ways of God, or delight in approaching to him; his
commands are grievous to you; this bespeaks unsound and frail hopes for Heaven,
which will at last deceive you: But sure hopes for Heaven are backed with
suitable labors for Heaven.

Fifthly, If your hopes be right for Heaven, then will your conversation be in
Heaven. Phil. 3. 20. But our conversation is in Heaven, whence also we look for
the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile bodies, that it
may be fashioned like to his glorious body. You will be taken up about heavenly
things, and driving on heavenly concerns: You will be maintaining intercourse
in Heaven, and keeping up your converses with God; you will be often taking
journeys to Heaven in your contemplations and desires; your business will be
much in Heaven, and your occasions thither frequent; though you live on Earth,
yet you will converse in Heaven. As Dr. Preston said when he was near death, I
shall but change my place, not my company. O try your hopes for Heaven by your
conversation, if that be engaged about the things of Heaven now; if your work
be in Heaven, your rest shall be in Heaven also.

Sixthly, If your hopes for Heaven be right, you will willingly undergo
whatsoever sufferings and dangers lie in your way to Heaven. He that is sure of
reaching home at last, will venture through any dangers in his way. O what
hazards will men run through to get an earthly Crown! no difficulties will
discourage them; how much more will hopes for Heaven carry souls through the
Red Sea of afflictions and bloody sufferings they may meet with before they
come to it! Acts 20. 24. chap. 21. 13. He that cannot consent to drink of the
cup Christ drinks of, and which the Father shall give him to drink, and to
submit to the cruellest death, losses, shame, trials and torments, which his
faithfulness to God may bring him to, must reckon again, and take up other
conclusions about his future state; easier terms cannot be granted: Whosoever
he be of you that forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my disciple.
Luke 14. 33. He that will come after me, must deny himself, take up his Cross,
and follow me. Matthew. 16. 24. We must through much tribulation enter into the
Kingdom of God. Acts 14. 22. If we suffer with him, we shall reign with him, 2 Timothy 2. 12.

Secondly, Lay up desires for glory, not only some desires of glory, but such
desires as nothing else can satisfy but glory; which nothing short of a whole
God can content. Most souls in this life limit their desires, and take up their
wishes too short of true blessedness: My soul thirsts for God (says God) but
it was only for some sights of his power and glory, as he had seen him in his
Sanctuary, Psalm. 63. 1, 3. Some looks through the lattice; some embraces of
Christ in the arms of faith, pleased the Spouse, and does satisfy most souls
here: Alas, how few are the desires of gracious souls, which a little of God
will not content! One desires grace, another peace; some are for quickenings
and comforts; others for enlightenings, for higher measures of knowledge, for
some sights of God through a glass; but how few breathings are there, to see as
we are seen, to know as we are known? 1 Cor. 13. 12. And indeed it is strange
that Heaven-born souls, that heirs of glory, and fellow-citizens of Heaven,
should have no more longings after their own home, and not only for some
first fruits, but the full ripe fruits of their own Country. David had
sometimes workings after this, not only for God to come to him, but for himself
to go to God; when his heart takes a leap from the path of life, into the
presence of God, where is fullness of joy, and pleasures for evermore. Psalm. 16.
11. Thou will show me the path of life: in thy presence is fullness of joy, at
thy right hand are pleasures for evermore. From the beholding of his face in
righteousness here, he longs for the satisfying visions of God in glory. Psalm.
17. 15. As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness; I shall be
satisfied when I awake with thy likeness. Paul also under the highest
enjoyments of God here, had his unsatisfied longings to be with him as best of
all, Phil. 1. 23. and in respect of which he counts his greatest intimacy with
Christ in the body, to be a kind of absence. 2 Cor. 5. 6. Knowing that whiles
we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord. Do not terminate your
desires upon any thing that can satisfy you on this side glory: Get such
desires raised, which cannot be answered till you come to Heaven, with such
kind of breathings as these: O when shall I come to that blessed state, to know
as I am known; to have every corner of my heart filled with the immediate
emanations of his glorious fullness! O when will that time, or rather eternity
come, when I shall be satisfied with looking on that blessed face which is
every day the Angels wonder, and the Saints joy. Here alas! I lie among the
pots, all sooty and defiled, whiles the vessels of my Father's house, and the
bowls before the Altar, out of which my Lord always drinks, are bright and
glorious. Now I have my habitation where Dragons lie, while a glorious Pavilion
stands empty for me: Here I feed on my own dung, and oft-times eat the
excrements of Devils, and all the while there is bread enough in my Father's
house, and my Brethren fare deliciously at the King's Table. O when shall my
work be done, that I may be gone! When shall the things for cleansing be given
me, and the days of my purification be accomplished, that my turn may come to
go in to the Lord my King! When shall the Nuptial garments, the Bridal
ornaments, the Robe, the Ring, the Royal Vestments bespangled with costly
Jewels, be given me, with this most welcome message, Arise my Love, my Dove, my
Fair One, and come away! Lay up such kind of breathings after the Mountains of
Spices, the Everlasting Hills, the Rivers of Pleasures, the Bride-chamber of
Glory, where you shall be ever with the Lord. Glory, Glory dwells in
Immanuel's Land, Rutherford's last words.
This will hasten your pace to Heaven, and mount you on the wings of a Dove:
This will help you to pass by the world's glory with a holy scorn, and to bear
its cruelty with incredible patience.

Thirdly, Lay up all the Treasures you can to greaten glory: Though the lest
portion of glory is satisfying, yet the highest measures of glory are
desirable, because in it there is the greatest conformity to God, 1 John 3. 2.
Luke 10. 17, 19, 20. Dan. 12. 3. and the fullest enjoyment of God. The Lord
Jesus does propose degrees of glory for the encouragement of his people to
greater improvements of grace; and therefore the highest degrees of glory are
desirable: O get as much as you can here to greaten your felicity in Heaven. Do
all you may to make your Crown more massy, and your mansion more fair, and your
pleasures more full to all Eternity.

Several things have a tendency to greaten your glory. The more grace you
improve now, the greater will be your glory; he that gained ten pounds, had ten
Cities: Grace is seed sown, according to its measure will be the harvest: What
a man sows, that shall he reap, Gal. 6. 7. The less seed is sown, the less crop
will there be; and the more seed, the larger increase, 1 Cor. 3. 9. Glory is a
Crown of Righteousness proportioned to the utmost improvements of Grace. The
more work you do for God, the greater will be your wages of grace in glory, 1
Pet. 5. 2, 4. 2 Cor. 5. 10. That every one should receive according to what is
done in the body.

The more you lay out for God, the more shall you receive from him, 2 Cor. 9.
6. who will certainly repay it.

The greater your sufferings are for God, the greater will your rejoycings be
with him: They that sow in tears shall reap in joy, Ps. 126. 5. Look what
disproportion there is between the Seed-time and Harvest, far greater is there
between the Saints sufferings, sorrows, and triumphing joy: Their sorrow lies
within the compass of a short night, their joy begins with that morning which
has no evening to follow it, Psalm. 30. 5. Their tears will scarcely fill a
bottel, but their pleasures are so vast an Ocean, as that they cannot be
received, but must be entered into, Mat. 25. 21. Our light affliction, which is
but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. Yea the present consolations of the Saints oft-times
abound in their sufferings; The ringing of my chains has been sweet music in
my ears, (said Guy de Bres;) all my former discourses were but as a blind man's
of colors, in respect of my present feeling: O what a precious comforter is a
good conscience! How unspeakable then are those rejoycings, when all tears
shall be wiped off, when sorrow and mourning shall fly away, Mat. 5. 10, 11, 12.

The more your losses are for Christ on earth, the greater will be your gain in
Heaven. Heb. 10. 34. And took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in
your selves that you have in Heaven a better and an enduring substance. Men can
never bring their goods to a better Market, than to have them spoiled for the
sake of Christ: your goods you lose for Christ are capable of being spoiled;
your goods you shall receive in Heaven are above all injury; the very bags wax
not old, much less the treasure: time will mar your best interests here. Alas,
what is a little old goods, moth-eaten garments, rusty silver subject to
change; compared with that substance, whose duration is as long as eternity,
and whose extension is as large as immensity? and such is God in Christ, the
Saints eternal treasure: Mat. 19. 29. And in the World to come life eternal.
Carnal reason judges them the greatest fools that dare to be undone for their
profession; whereas divine truth reckons such the mad men, who to escape them
that can but kill the body, durst encounter him who can damn both soul and body
in Hell, Mat. 10. 28. And to lay a foundation of a few days safety upon the
ruins of themselves and others. How dangerous (said Mr. Cooper) is their
estate, who cannot rise but with the fall of many? Et quantulum sit illud
propter quod nos reliquisti? How poor are those things (says he) for which you
have left us? whereas the Saints losses for Christ are their greatest gain,
while the things they part with are but temporal; but those they gain are
eternal, 2 Cor. 4. 18.

Lastly, The more souls you help to Heaven, the more treasure you prepare for
Heaven: Dan. 12. 3. They that be wise (the margin has it, they that be
teachers) shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn
many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. As nothing does sink a
person deeper into Hell, than to have the blood of souls upon its head, and to
become the occasion of others perishing, Jer. 2. 34. So it wonderfully greatens
a persons own blessedness in Heaven, to be the means of getting others to be
blessed also: 1 These. 2. 19. For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of
rejoicing? are not even you in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his
coming? for ye are our glory and joy.

Lastly, Lay up preparations for glory: Glory is a great thing: O what a change
does Heaven make upon a Believer's state! We shall all be changed, 1 Cor. 15.
51. from corruption to incorruption; from sin to spotless purity; from
imperfection to pefection; from darkness to knowledge; from faith to fight; from
espousals to a marriage-day: and what preparations do such a change call for?
What if death should surprise you, and take you in your old clothes? it is not
your daily garments, no not your best rayments are good enough for your
marriageday: your attire must be all new when you solemnize your eternal
nuptials to the King of Glory. O what manner of persons should you be who look
for new Heavens, and a new Earth! If a Paul be not sufficient to carry a
love-token to Christ's Spouse here on earth, 2 Cor. 2. 16. Who is sufficient
for these things? Who then are fit to lie in the Bridegroom's arms to all
eternity? Few think what a change must be before the Saints can get to Heaven:
1 Cor. 15. 50. Flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; neither
does corruption inherit incorruption. If so much preparation-work must be
dispatched before an Esther could be fit for the embraces of an earthly King,
Esth. 2. 12. six months for purifying with oil of Myrrh, and six months with
sweet Odors, and with other things? How much sanctification-work is needful to
meeten a soul for the immediate enjoyment of God in glory? and how unready are
the most of souls for such a change? O Believers! hasten about your
preparations for Heaven, seeing you have no fixation on earth, and know not
what hour your Lord will come. In order to which, take these six directions.

First, Get your hearts more loose from this present world; men that change
places, knock up, and take abroad things they must carry with them: Your hearts
(Christians) are the principal things you must take with you to Heaven; it may
be you have gone to God in duties many a time, and left your hearts behind you;
but you cannot go to God in glory, except your hearts be with you. And O what a
difficult work is it to go the heart (upon choice) loose from every thing below
God! and till this be done, there is no getting to Heaven: Things fastened to
the freehold (they say) cannot be removed; how then can that heart get to
glory, that is nailed down to the world, and things below. Be daily loosening
your hearts from the world, estates, houses, lands, trades, friends, relations,
and every thing below; for you may not have time to get them off without loss,
when death comes: you must leave them all shortly, and you know not how soon,
to go to better friends and interests: these have been snares and spears to
your souls, and have given you many a wound, and still hinder your speeding to
glory; and why should you be loath to part with them? O Christians! if you are
willing to be with Christ, you will give your hearts warning to be gone from
these tabernacles, and to take their leave of this world daily.

Secondly, Press after more maturity in your graces; the more ripe, the more
fit for gathering, Joel. 3. 13. Tamar must tarry a Widow till Selah be grown,
Genesis 38. 11. and your marriageday must be delayed till you come to a full age:
The Saints must be as a shock of corn that comes in in its season, Job 5. 25.
Ripen a pace in your graces, if you would get to glory: Get your faith, hope,
patience, and every grace increased daily; especially your love to God; that is
the grace shall abide in glory, 1 Cor. 13. 8. Faith and Hope are the soul's
helps, and companions in the way; but Love will be an eternal inhabitant with
you. Get purer, deeper rooted, stronger, more enlarged love to Jesus Christ
every day, till you be downright sick for him; this will make your life a death
without his presence here, and your death to be life in being with him for
ever. 'Twas love to Christ made Ignatius so dead to all things below, Vita sine
Christo mors est; Ignat.
and so longing to be with Christ: It Is storied of him, that when he was dead,
and his heart taken out, they saw the name of Jesus written in it in letters of
Gold: The more love to God, the more fit for God; for God is love, Non est in
me incendium quidpiam amans; D. Ludov. Rub.
.

Thirdly, Get and keep the testimony of a good conscience, that may witness for
you in the day of Christ: when you die, you are to have a trial for your life,
your inheritance, your All; and you had need have your witness firm, and ready:
Now there are two great witnesses you will need in that day to clear your
title; the witness of Conscience, and the Spirit: have the one on your side,
and you will not want the other. Get your consciences sprinkled with the blood
of Christ, and purged from dead works by the Spirit of Christ, that it may be
able to appear for you in that day. The blood of Christ will put words into the
mouth of conscience for you, to plead the general issue, and the benefit of
pardoning grace, wherein you have been transgressors; enlightened conscience
will accuse you that you have sinned; and besprinkled conscience will plead for
you that you are pardoned; and purged conscience will testify for you that you
are changed, and that you hate the evil you have done, and love the holiness
you have neglected. O of what wonderful use will the testimony of a good
conscience be when you stand at the Bar of God! Get it true to you now, and
sure for you then.

Fourthly, Maintain more constant walks with God daily; this will fit you for
your eternal fellowship with him. Converse with God is begun acquaintance here;
and in Heaven is perfect friendship, and perpetual fellowship. It will much fit
you for Heaven hereafter, to begin the work of Heaven here, which lies in
maintained intercourse with him. Through these gallery-walks with God, do the
Saints pass into the Presence Chamber, and sit down with him for ever:
Communion with God now, is Heaven begun; such are fittest for his presence in
glory, who are trained up in his company here.

Fifthly, If you would prepare for Heaven, dispatch your work on Earth: Heaven
is a state of rest, and rest follows the finishing of labor, Heb. 4. 9. Rev.
4. 13. Paul must end his fight, finish his course, and keep the faith, before
he can reach the Crown: 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. In the grave there is no wisdom, device,
or work; this is your only time for labor while you are in the Vineyard. O how
much work is behind with most! which will make a departure terrible to an
awakened conscience. Haste about your neglected work; you have (it may be) much
work to do with others, in your families, with your relations; possibly there
are some souls in their graves, and you have not done what you might to bring
them forth; dead Husband, Wife, Children, Servants, for whom you must do more,
or cannot comfortably appear before God. O hasten about this work, that you may
give up your account with joy! There Is soulwork to be done, to get corruptions
subdued, graces strengthened, your accounts stated, evidences cleared, and lamps
trimmed, which must be attended with utmost vigor. If you would get home,
finish your work.

Lastly, Be always ready, waiting for the coming of the Lord: Luke 12. 35, 36.
Let your loins be girt about, and your lights burning, and ye your selves like
unto men, that wait for their Lord when he will return from the Wedding; that
when he comes, and knocks, they may open to him immediately: 2 Pet. 3. 12.
Looking for, and hastening to the coming of the day of God: Not only be waiting
for your change, but longing after it, as persons that are ready for a desired
journey think the time long ere they go. Why are the wheels of his Chariot so
long a coming? Judge. 5. 28. The Spirit and the Bride say come, Rev. 22. 17.
With the Virgins go out to meet him, Mat. 25. 1. If you knew the welcome that
abides for you when you come home, ye would hasten your pace; Rutherf. The
more ready you are for the coming of Christ, the more will you long for his
appearance; and the more grateful will his approach be. The uncertainty of that
time when the Lord Jesus shall appear, and the unseasonableness of that
surprisal for preparationwork, should put Christians on continual readiness,
lest coming in an hour they know not of, they be found unfit to enter in, and
the door be shut, Mat. 25. 10.

O how dreadful will a miscarriage be at last! All the hopes, labors and
comfort of your life depend upon your final safety, and happy conclusion of
your day: It Is a great thing to live a sanctified, and die a saved soul. O how
few imagine the difficulty of being a Christian indeed, and the infinite
concern of securing an immortal soul, and a sure title to the unsearchable
riches of the other world! O the folly and madness of rational creatures, to
make every thing sure but salvation, and to spend their time and strength about
the many things of a perishing life, and lose the better part! Whoever thou art
that castest thine eye upon this discourse, thou will one day find Religion to
be thy chiefest interest; when thou come to take thy farewell of a vain
deceitful world, and see all thy Lovers, for whom thou have slighted thy
precious soul, thy Soverign Lord, and dying Redeemer, to prove miserable
comforters, not able to afford one drop of balm, to heal, or cordial to cheer
thy fainting heart, and affrighted conscience: When thou see pale death
deliver thee a summons to appear before the holy God, and to give an account of
thy Stewardship, when thou see the Books opened, and such a fearful charge
against thy guilty conscience, which thou can not deny or answer; then will thou find godliness in the power of it, to be the greatest gain; and would
give ten thousand worlds for such an evidence as Hezekiah and Paul had, when
within view of death and eternity. And is not Religion as much thy concern, and
should be as grateful now, and all those great and important duties of piety
which this Book lays before thee; thought to be as advisable now, when time
and capacity may render them feasible, as in a dying hour, when desires and
purposes may be too late? O do not content thy treacherous heart, to cast a
transient glance upon these lines, to approve or commend them, and after all to
shake hands with these vast and concerning Truths in them, and live and die a
stranger to this great and heavenly work; but resolve to set about it
presently, to pursue it thoroughly, that when your Trading-day is done, your
enriching Eternity may begin, and you receive that vast Inheritance that fades
not away, eternal in the Heavens.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
THe occasion of the Discourse, and Introduction to the Word Page 1, 2 The
terms opened, and scope of the Scripture cleared 4 The Doctrine raised, That
the Heavenly Trade is the best Trade; no Merchandise like Wisdoms Merchandise,
and traffiquing about spiritual and eternal things 9 Reasons to prove the
Point, take 1 From the nature of those things about which Wisdoms Merchants
deal 2 The Person they deal with 3 The terms they trade upon 4 The gains that
come by it 9 Three things prove Heavenly Ware to be the best in their own
nature 1 Scripture 11 2 Experience 12 3 Reason 15 4 Things prove even to
enlightened Reason, that Heavenly Wares are the best Wares, cause of 1 Their
rarity 16 2 Their price 18 1 They cost Christ dear ibid. 2 They are oft-times
costly to Receivers 19 3 As their price is high, so their worth is great; good
in themselves, good to those that have them 20 4 Their duration proves them
excellent 21 Reas. 2. The Heavenly Trade is the best Trade, in regard of the
Person traded with, the Lord Jesus, who is most excellent, as to his 1
Greatness 24 2 Goodness 25 3 Ability ibid. 4 Faithfulness 24 Reas. 3. The terms
on which this Trade is driven, proves it the best Trade 1 Goods to trade upon
shall be freely given 28 2 Wisdom to manage them, shall be freely imparted 30 3
A blessing on the improvement of them shall be insured ibid. 4 The glory of all
shall be returned to God 31 Reas. 4. It Is the most profitable Trade, cause it
brings 1 Great returns: Three things prove it. 1 Religion has excellent fruit 2
Abundant fruit 33 3 Durable fruit 2 Sure returns; four things prove it 35 1 The
Justice of God insures it. 2 The Blood of Christ ingages for it. 3 These
returns are the work of his own Spirit. 4 The Lord Jesus is an Adventurer with
Believers in this Heavenly Trade 36, 37 3 Quick returns 38 Ob. Why then do the
people of God complain of his delays to hear and help them? 39 Answ. 1. God
will answer and help in due time 2 If he stay long, he will pay well for it
ibid. 3 The Saints themselves are oft-times the cause of their not receiving
quicker returns 40 U^e 1. Of information, if the Heavenly Trade be the best
Trade, it is strange that so few do set upon this Trade, the evil of which is
aggravated ibid. Use 2. Of lamentation over the great decays of this Heavenly
Trade; where are 1 Six Symptoms of this decay 2 Abatement of price, when
heavenly goods are not valued 45 2 Fewness of Buyers 47 3 Little employment and
slothfulness of spirit in heavenly things 49 4 The poverty of heavenly traders,
largely opened and proved 50 5 Small adventures for God, proves bad trading in
Religion 56 6 Breaking shows bad trading 57 2 Sad effects and dangerous issues
of decays in this heavenly trade 1 It begets a growing strangeness between God
and that soul 59 2 Soul poverty and wastings in men's spiritual interests 61 3
It brings a blast on men's earthly trades and interests 63 4 It Is a ready way to
ruin 65 5 It renders the Traders account heavy 67 Use 3. Of reprehension of
men's too inordinate pursuit of their earthly trades and interests 69 Quest. How
may we know when persons do inordinately pursue their earthly trades and
interests? Answ. 1. When those ingross too much of their time 70 2 When they
take up too much of their hearts 71 Six signs when the World takes up men's
hearts. 1 When the desires do greedily go out after them 72 2 When their
thoughts are earthly 73 3 Their restless labors after the world 76 4 The
delight and pleasure they take in it 78 5 Loathness to part with their earthly
comforts and interests, shows an earthly heart 81 6 When their trust and
dependence is on earthly things 83 2 Aggrevation of the evil of an earthly mind
1 The state of such is dangerous 84 2 Their fall is great 88 Use 4. Of
Exhortation. 1 To such as are strangers to this heavenly trade, where are four
Arguments to persuade them to this blessed Calling. 1 Their wants and
necessities while without this trade 95 2 The danger that attends their present
state 101 3 Their duty to set upon this trade, and the obligations upon them to
do it 102 4 The advantage that comes by it in five things 104 1 Religion will
maintain you in the hardest time ibid. 2 Godliness will secure you in the most
dangerous times and places 106 3 Holiness will enrich you in impoverishing
times ibid. 4 Piety will cheer you under greatest disconsolations 107 5 Wisdoms
trade will make you truly honorable ibid. Seven Directions how to get this
trade 1 Get a capacity and heavenly nature for this heavenly trade 109 2 Cease
from your own works 111 3 Make over your selves to the Lord in an everlasting
Covenant 113 4 Come over into the Family of Christ 115 5 Be mortified to this
present world 119 6 Submit to all the instructions the Lord gives you, in order
to it 121 7 What you do, do quickly; make have about it 124 2 Bran. of Exhort.
To such as profess this Calling, exhorting them to follow it 126 Quer. Wherein
lies this heavenly trade, and what is it you would have us follow: Answ. There
are seven things in which this heavenly trade lies 127 1 To have and keep up a
heavenly spirit 128 2 Properties of a heavenly spirit 1 It sees heavenly things
130 2 It savours heavenly things 133 Directions to keep up a heavenly spirit. 1
Beware of those things that weaken it 134 3 Things do greatly weaken a heavenly
spirit, and what they are ibid. to 140 2 Dir. Get all the nourishment you can
to strengthen it 3 Be much in communion with the Father of Spirits 141 4
Cherish heavenly motions in your heart 143 5 Dwell much in the meditation of
heaven 144 Be much exercised in heavenly graces 146 2 Another part of this
heavenly trade is, to secure your interest in heavenly treasures 147 Quest. How
may I know that heavenly treasures are mine? Answ. 1. By your communion with
the heir of heaven, are you married to Christ or no? 151 Que. What are those
Evidences that will assure this Conjugal Union with Christ? Answ. Five things
prove Marriage to the Lord Jesus. 1 Peculiar acquaintance with Christ, such as
no stranger has, they know his secrets, and have intimate converse with him
156 2 Conjugal love to Christ 158 3 A soul espoused to Christ, will leave all
for Christ ibid. 4 A soul married to Christ, stays and lives on Christ 164 5
Fruitfulness to Christ, proves Marriage to him 166 2 Your interest in heavenly
treasures is known by the naturalness and supremacy of your love to them 167 3
By your care for, and pursuit of them 169 4 If heavenly treasures be yours,
you will find your spirits suited to them 170 3 Another thing wherein this
heavenly trade lies, is, in getting in of heavenly goods, and what they are,
and how to be obtained 171 Que. How may I do to get my soul furnished with
heavenly goods? Answ. 1. Maintain a sense of your own wants 187 2 Get a
believing sight of Christ's fullness 188 Que. What ground may I have for hope
that Christ will supply me? Answ. This is fully spoken to page 190, 191.
Another part of this heavenly trade, is to carry on heavenly work ibid. Four
Motives persuading to it, and what they are 192 to 203 Que. What is this
heavenly work that Christians must do in this trade of godliness? Answ. 1. All
that work which is of a heavenly nature, matter, manner and end 203 1 All that
work which has God for its Author, as acts of Religious Worship ibid. 2 All
that work which has more especial respect to your selves, as 209 1 Heart-work
ibid. to 216 2 Mortification work 217 Que. How shall I do to get sin mortified;
I am convinced it is my duty, but find it not my capacity? Dir. 1. Do nothing
that may strengthen it 221 Eight things help to strengthen sin 222 to 227 Dir.
2. Go not out in your own strength against sin ibid. Not in the strength of
your purposes, nor of your frames, nor in the strength of your duties, nor in
the strength of your graces 228 Dir. 3. Get the Union between your heart and
sin broken 229 There are seven things that help to break the hearts union with
sin ibid. Dir. 4. Strike at the root of sin 234 Four helps toward it 236 Dir.
5. Give no place to the least motions of sin 238 2 Helps toward it ibid. Dir.
6. Keep up the life of grace 239 3 Carry on Renovation work; some helps toward
it 240 4 Keep your Evidences for heaven fair 243 3 Carry on all those natural,
moral, and religious duties that concern others; in your house, in the house of
God, in your callings and dealings with men 244 2 Another part of your heavenly
work, is to do earthly things in an heavenly manner 247 This lies in three
things. 1 To do earthly things by heavenly rule 2 With heavenly hearts 248 3 To
heavenly ends Ten Rules about doing of earthly things. Rule 1. Be sure the
matter of your employment be good, that your callings and recreations be
according to the Will of God 249 Rule 2. Set on earthly things in their proper
place and order 251 Rule 3. Keep your earthly business within the bounds of due
time 252 Rule 4. Be diligent in the use of your working time 255 Rule 5. While
your hands are about the world, set a guard about your hearts 257 Rule 6.
Attend your earthly affairs with a calm and quiet spirit ibid. Rule 7. Follow
your duty, but cast your care on God 261 Rule 8. In all your labors pray for a
blessing 262 Rule 9. Though you live in the world, yet be dead to the world.
10. Do all your work in the view of Death, Judgment, and Eternity, 263, 264 2
Then do you earthly work in a heavenly manner, when you do it with a heavenly
heart 266 Que. How may I know when my heart is heavenly in my earthly work?
Answ. 1. A heavenly heart is enlightened to see heavenly things 267 2 A heavenly
heart savours heavenly things 268 3 A heavenly heart desires and longs after
heavenly things 269 4 A heavenly heart has heavenly thoughts 270 5 A heavenly
heart will be full of heavenly projects ibid. 6 A heavenly heart is acted and
influenced by heavenly motives 271 7 A heavenly heart lives upon heavenly
things 272 5 Another part of this heavenly trade lies in keeping up heavenly
thoughts 274 6 If you would drive on the heavenly trade, keep up heavenly
converses 278 7 Then do you carry on this heavenly trade, when you improve
every thing to heavenly advantages There are nine things especially that
Christians should improve to heavenly advantage 1 Privileges: 2 Ordinances. 3
Providence. 4 The World, and things thereof. 5 Your Callings. 6 Your Company. 7
Your Retirements. 8 Occasional Objects. 9 Your falls and miscarriages. 1 Get
good from your privileges. 1 Natural Privileges 283 2 Providential 285 3
Spiritual 287 2 Get good from Ordinances, 4 helps toward it 288 1 Preparation
before you come to them 489 2 Attention 290 3 Retention 291 4 Obedience ibid. 3
Get all the good you can from Providence, from smiling Providence, and from
frowning, from giving and taking Providence 292, 293 4 Get good from the
World, and the things thereof 294 5 Get good from your Callings and Employments
297 6 Get good from your Company 299 7 Get good from your Retirements 303 8 Get
good from occasional objects and occurrences of Providence 307 9 Get good from
your falls and miscarriages 309 Ob. If souls may get good from their sins, then
why should persons be troubled for sin, or watch against it? Answ. In two
particulars: 1 They that are dead to sin cannot live any longer therein; proved
by four Reasons 310 3 They ought not to commit sin. 1 It Is slavish work. 2 It
has bitter fruit. 3 It has doleful wages 312 3 Branch of Exhort. To earthly
traders who meet with breaches and discouragements in their earthly trades,
counselling them Coun. 1. To be hereby convinced of the excellency of the
heavenly trade, which is not liable to such disappointments 313, 314 Coun. 2.
See God in your afflictions 311 Coun. 3. Search out the cause of them 316
Probable Reasons of breaches on men's earthly trades and interests. 1 Letting
down of Religion, and decay in the heavenly trade 317 2 Declensions in the
Worship of God ibid. 4 Withholding their interests from God 319 5 Greedy
desires after the world 320 6 God does it to bring men down to his feet, and to
bring them back to himself 324 Coun. 4. Get the breach between God and your
souls composed 326 Coun. 5. Get advantage from earthly decays, to further your
heavenly trade Four advantages hence to your heavenly trade 1 It helps to
convince you of the vanity and uncertainty of all things below God 327 2 It
helps to discover those sins that procure these wastes 328 3 By this you come
to see a necessity of pursuing and securing better treasure 329 4 It helps,
through grace, to loosen the heart from things below 330 5 It tends to the
furtherance of Soul-inlargements ibid. 6 It makes heavenly things relish the
sweeter 331 4 Branch of Exhort. To such as have begun this heavenly trade, but
are fallen back, this advises them Advice 1. To be deeply affected with their
evil case 333 Considerations to further it. 1 Think on the change thy decays
have brought upon thee 333 2 What an unlovely and displeasing object thou art
hereby become in the eyes of God 334 3 It makes thee little desirable in the
eyes of men ib. 4 Thou art the greatest loser of any: thy case is dangerous,
and thy recovery difficult, such are hardly recovered 335, 336 Que. I fear this
is my cause, I am fallen back in grace, and fear I shall never recover; How may
I know whether my backslidings shall be healed? Answ. There are six signs of
backslidings that shall be healed. 1 When thy back slidings are not upon
choice, but against thy judgment and consent 336 2 When they become thy
Soul-trouble, and hearts burden 337 3 When they are after thy effectual
calling, and sincere choice of God 337 4 When thou art restless, until the Lord
does heal thee 338 5 When thy vitals are still sound ibid. 6 When under all thy
backslidings thou find a humble and contrite heart 339 5 Dangerous symptoms
of falling back that shall hardly be restored. 1 If thy falling back be before
thy falling in with Christ 339 2 A falling off from the foundations 340 3 A
making Merchandise of the truth, selling themselves to work wickedness ibid. 4
Backslidings in heart shall not be cured 341 5 When persons are prejudiced
against the means of recovery ibid. Adv. 2. Search out the causes of thy Souls
decay, and get them removed 342 Cause. 1. Entrance upon this heavenly trade
without a stock to set up ibid. 2 Setting upon this trade, and having no skill
to manage it 344 3 Want of diligence in following it 345 4 Great and frequent
losses in thy spiritual interests 346 5 Great wastes, and needless expenses 347
6 Great debts are breaking 350 Adv. 3. Compound with your Creditor Adv. 4. Set
up no more for your selves, but enter your selves Factors for Christ 352 Three
things required in a Factor, which must be followed by those that will thrive
in this heavenly trade 1 To trade upon another stock 353 2 To be regulated by
another advice 356 3 To drive on another interest 358 Adv. 5. Follow your
trade better than you have done ibid. 5 Branch of Exhort. To such as have good
trading in Religion, be you exhorted 1 To bless God for good trading 360 1 This
is a great mercy at all times ibid. 2 A singular mercy at this time 361 3 An
earnest of eternal mercy ibid. Qu. How may I know whether I have good trading
in spirituals? Sol. There are seven signs of good trading in evil times 364 1
When men go not back ibid. 2 If Wares go off well 365 3 When men are richer in
stock 366 4 Are you less in debt 368 5 Have you more owed you, and is it sure
367 6 That is good trading, when the present incomes maintain the trader 369 7
Laying up, as well as laying out, bespeaks good trading 371 Complaint. This is
my case, I see I am this languishing soul, what shall I do to get my condition
mended, and my languishing soul revived, and attain unto true thrivings in this
holy Calling? Sol. There are six things that help to thrive in their trading. 1
A provident care 373 2 A diligent hand 375 3 Driving a secret trade 376 4 The
blessing of God on men's labors ibid. 5 There are also prospering graces to be
kept up 1 Faith is a Soul-prospering grace 377 2 Love to God, his name and ways
379 3 Humiltty is a Soul-thriving grace ibid. 4 Sincerity is a Soul-thriving
fruit of the Spirit 381 6 Take prospering courses 382 There are four
Soul-thriving courses. 1 Keep up Self-examination ibid. 2 Be much with God in
prayer 383 3 Engage God with you in all your undertakings 385 4 Follow Divine
Counsel in all you do 386 Ob. My fear still remains that I am a barren soul,
and shall perish at last 388 Sol. 1. Thou may thrive in Religion, and not
know it ibid. Try thy change ibid. Ob. But may not a hypocrite go so far, and
all this but change from darkness to conscience light, and from sin to common
grace 389 Sol. This is answered in four particulars ib. to p. 391 Ob. But
change from nature to grace is not growth in grace; I may have the first
fruits, though not the after-fruits of the Spirit 391 Sol. This is answered in
three particulars 391 to 393 Advice 2. Enlarge your trade Nine Motives to
engage Christians to Soul inlargements 393 to 399 Advice 3. Lay in for bad
times 402 There are four seasons when Christians will need all their store 1
Times of temptation 403 Mat. 2. 1. Cause they are certain they will come 403 2
They are shaking when they are come 407 2 Times of desertion 408 3 Times of
great affliction 410 4 The time of death 413 Advice 4. Lay out for God; this is
1 Reasonable work 417 2 Pleasing work 419 3 Honorable work 420 4 Profitable
work ibid. 5 It Is a proof of your love to God 422 Dir. 1. Lay out your time for
God. Mot. 1. Your time is not yours, but Gods Mot. 2. Much of your time is lost
already 424 Mot. 3. Your time is short and uncertain ibid. Mot. 4. You cannot
put it to better profit 425 5 You must give an account of your time 426 6 How
can you bethink a little time for God, who has not thought an eternity of
mercy too much for you 427 2 Lay out your strength for God ibid. 3 Lay out your
gifts and graces for God 428 4 Lay out your earthly interests for God 430 1
Else all your Religion is vain 432 2 Acts of charity are parts of Religious
worship 433 3 God is much glorified by duties of charity 434 4 Sincere charity
will evidence your right to glory 435 5 It Is the sure way to blessings here 437
Coun. 5. Lay up for glory 440 1 Lay up sound hopes for glory 441 With Motives
thereto ibid. Que. What are these sure hopes of glory? Sol. 1. They issue from
saving Union with Christ 445 2 They are the fruits of true grace 447 3 There
will be a mortifiedness to this world 448 4 Right hopes are active hopes 449 5
Then will your conversation be in heaven 454 2 Lay up desires for glory 455 3
Lay up all the treasures you can to greater glory 457 Several things tend to
greater glory 458 Lay up preparations for glory; for which 461 1 Get your
hearts more loose from the world 462 2 Press after more maturity in your graces
463 3 Get and keep the testimony of a good Conscience ibid. 4 Maintain walks
with God daily 464 5 Dispatch your work on earth 465 Lastly, Be always ready
for the coming of the Lord ibid.
FINIS.

