AT a General meeting of all the subscribers to the stock of the Royal
Company, holden at Drapers-Hall the 19th of December 1671 His Royal Highness
present with the Sub-governour and Deputy Governor.
THe Preamble, Upon which the subscriptions were made, being read from
Paragraph to Paragraph, several Amendments were then made, and ordered by the
Court to be taken care of, to be so reprinted by the present Committee of the
old stock, and the same to be ready for every subscriber, that shall please to
call for them at the African-House in Throgmorton-street.

WHereas, at a General Court of the Company of Royal Adventurers of England
Trading into Africa, holden at Whitehall the 11 September 1671. It was
Resolved, that for the future carrying on the Trade to Africa, in Pursuance of
his Majesty's gracious Letters Patents: A new Stock of one hundred thousand
Pounds or more, be raised by any of his Majesty's Subjects whatsoever, who
shall on, or before the 10th of December next, subscribe to Adventure any part
thereof upon the following Terms, Conditions and Articles, which are to be duly
kept and strictly observed by all persons whatsoever, that shall be hereafter
concerned or employed in the Affairs of this Company; but no man's subscription
shall be Obligatory, unless there be one hundred thousand pounds subscribed.

I. That the payment of the several and respective Sums subscribed, shall be in
ten equal payments, and paid to the Treasurer of the Company, at the Treasury
Chamber at the African-house in London, viz.

Two Tenth parts on or before the 25th Jan. next 1671. One Tenth part on or
before 25th Feb. 1671. One Tenth part on or before the 25th March 1672 One
Tenth part on or before the 25th April 1672. One Tenth part on or before the
25th May 1672. One Tenth part on or before the 25th June 1672. One Tenth part
on or before the 25th July 1672. One Tenth part on or before the 25th August
1672. And the last one Tenth part on or before the 25th Sep. 1672.
Unless any of the respective days of payment above expressed shall happen to
be on a Sunday, and in that Case the payments may be made the day following.

II. That if any Subscriber do fail to pay the first Payment at the time and
place aforesaid, his said Subscription shall be totally void.

III. That if any Subscriber having paid in the first payment shall fail to pay
any of the following payments, a Penalty of two per Cent. for each Month shall
be charged to his Debt on account, until his said Subcription shall be fully
satisfied and paid, or until the whole Money by him before paid be thereby
extinguished. And further he shall be incapable to be chosen into the
Government of the Stock, or give any Vote at any General Court, or Court of
Assistants, until he has paid as well his Penalties as his Subscription.

IV. That the former Adventurers shall be paid out of this new joint Stock, the
Sum of thirty four thousand Pounds, wherewith they may be enabled to pay to
their Creditors forty per Cent. of what their Debts amount unto, and Ten per
Cent. to every of the former Adventurers for what Stock they have paid, and the
said Sum, is for, and in Consideration of all their remains, Debts, Lease of
the African house, Rent payable by the Gambia Adventurers, for a remaining term
of four years by Lease granted them to the North parts of Africa, Plantations,
Forts, Privileges and Immunities whatsoever, due and belonging to the said
Stock of the former Adventurers in all places whatsoever.

V. That every Adventurer who shall be present at any General court shall Vote
and Rule in the Stock and Trade according to his Adventure, that is to say; for
every one hundred pounds Adventure to have one Vote; But no Adventurer shall be
capable to be chosen into the Court of Assistants, or any Committee to manage
the Affairs of this Stock, unless he have subscribed four hundred pounds at
least.

VI. That immediately after the Subscription of this intended Stock, and before
the time of the first payment, a General Court of all the Subscribers be
summoned to choose a Governor, Sub-governour, Deputy Governor, and twenty
four Assistants, and as soon after as may be, another Court be summoned to
select five of the said Assistants to be a standing Committee to act as is
hereafter appointed: and with so many of the Subscribers as shall be present to
prepare Rules and Orders for managing and governing the Trade as well abroad as
at home.

VII. That general Courts be summoned twice every year, or oftener as occasion
may require: One upon the Tenth of January, except it fall upon a Sunday, and
then on the Eleventh day; for Election of Governor, Sub-governour,
Deputy Governor, and twenty four Assistants for the year ensuing, of which not
more than sixteen shall be capable to be chosen two years together, nor any be
continued longer than three years successively, nor shall they be capable to be
chosen again, till two years afterward be expired. And another Court that day
seven night after, for Election of the abovesaid standing Committee of five,
of whom, not more than three shall be capable of being chosen three years
successively, at which last Court the Assistants shall present to the general
Adventurers a State of the Companies Stock at that time by an exact Balance of
the Books, and an indifferent valuation of all remaining effects, that thereby
the Adventurers may know the true condition of their Stock and Trade,

VIII. That the Sub-governour and Deputy Governor shall not be continued
longer than two years together and that the Deputy Governor shall always be a
Merchant, and one of the five of the Committee.

IX. That all general Courts, Courts of Assistants and Meetings of the
Committee, shall be holden only at the African-house in London, unless His
Royal Highness (being Governor) shall particulary direct to summon the general
Courts to any other place.

X That the Court of Assistants shall be summoned to meet on the first Thursday
in every Month, or oftener if there shall be cause, to give directions to the
standing Committee, and to receive an account from them of their proceedings,
and to do what else shall be needful in order to the good management of the
Stock.

XI. That there be a standing Committee of five persons annually chosen, (as is
aforesaid) by Plurality of Votes at a general Court, and by Balletting: Three
whereof to be a Quorum, to manage the Affairs of the Stock according to such
directions as shall from time to time be given them, either by the general
Court, or Court of Assistants, and in the intervals of Courts of Assistants,
where delays may be prejudicial, that the said Committee may have power to
proceed to act further, as in their discretion they shall judge most
advantageous to the Company, provided they act nothing contradictory to any
Order of the general Court, or Court of Assistants before made. The said
Committees daily proceedings to be Registered, as also the proceedings of the
general Courts, and Courts of Assistants, and all their Bargains for Goods, and
Contracts for fraights of Ships to be made publicly at the Board, and
immediately entered into Books to be kept for such purposes.

XII. That the said standing Committee do meet three days in every week at
least, and stay three hours each time either Mornings or Evenings as shall be
most convenient, if business require it, and that they be allowed each man for
every of those three meeting days twenty shillings; and if any of them be
absent upon any pretense, or for any reason whatsoever, that he loose that days
Salary, provided a Quorum do meet; But if no Quorum do meet, then every person
that shall be absent shall not only loose the Salary for that day, but pay
twenty shillings to the Company, so far as his whole Salary for that year shall
amount unto; to which end, no reward or Salary shall be paid to any of the
Committee; until their attendances for the whole year be examined by the
Records of the Committee, which shall be done at the first Court of Assistants
after a new Election, and warrants for their rewards, shall be signed at that
Court accordingly.

XIII. That any Member of the Company may be present at the Court of Assistants
or meetings of the Committee to hear their debates, and may offer his opinion;
but none to Vote in the resolution, save those of the Court of Assistants or
Committee.

XIV. That if any Member, Officer or Servant of the Company shall directly
defraud the Company in any thing, or receive any gift or bribe from any person
in any wise, relating to the concerns of the Company, or shall trade to, or
from any Ports or places within the limits of the Campany's Charter, other than
in the joint Stock, or so as shall be allowed by a general Court or Court of
Assistants: that such Member do forfeit and loose his whole Stock, or else do
pay such pecuniary mulct or penalty as a general Court shall impose, and such
Officer or Servant shall forfeit all Salary due unto him, be forthwith
discharged, and made incapable of being ever after restored, and further be
prosecuted according to Law, and that the said Forfeitures do redound to the
Use and benefit of the Adventurers in general, and that Bonds be given by every
Officer, to submit to the said mulcts and penalties.

XV. That every member having share or part in any Goods to be sold, or Ship to
be fraighted for the Company's Use, shall if he be then present, or any ways
privy to such Bargain, declare his Interest to the Committee, and shall cause
the same to be Recorded, otherwise upon discovery to be made thereof, he shall
forfeit his whose Stock, or pay such penalty as a general Court shall impose
upon him, and the Committee shall be prohibited, during their being Committees
to sell any of their own Goods to the Company directly or indirectly upon the
aforesaid Penalties without the Allowance of the Court of Assistants.

XVI. That the Stock and Dividents of each respective Adventurer shall from
time to time be obliged for such debts and engagements as such Adventurer shall
become engaged in to the Company, and that the Courts of Assistants may, and
shall detain the same for the benefit of the generality, until such debts and
engagements are fully satisfied.

XVII. That if it shall please God that at any time the Stock shall be
augmented fifty per Cent. a Divident of twenty per Cent. at least shall be
forthwith made to the several Adventures, and afterward annually one half
part, or more, as the general Court shall direct, of all profits that shall be
made, shall be divided in the like manner.

XVIII. That no Dividents shall be made in Goods to the Adventurers, but in
Money only.

XIX. That all Goods received for the Company's account from Foreign parts be
sold publicly at the Candle, and be paid for to the Treasurer, before their
delivery to the Buyer, except Gold and Silver, which shall be always Coined in
the Tower of London, except there be a special Order from the general Court
that directs otherwise.

XX. That every Member of the Company before they give any Vote in any
Election, shall take an Oath to the Company, according to the form agreed on,
and herewith at large expressed.

An Oath for the Members of the Royal Company.
YOu do swear to be good and true to our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, and
to his Heirs and Successors, and that you will be faithful to the Governor,
Sub-governour, Deputy Governor and Company of Royal Adventurers of England,
Trading into Africa in the management of their Trade; The secrets of the said
Company which shall be given you in charge to conceal by the said Governor,
Sub-governour or Deputy Governor you will not disclose; and during the present
joint stock of this Company you will not Trade to any of the limits of this
Company's Charter, without leave of the general Court or Court of Assistants.

So help you God.
XXI. That every Officer or Servant to be employed by the Company do first give
good security, and then take an Oath to perform their respective duties in
their several employments, and that they be chosen annually by Plurality of
Votes by Balletting, at the first general Court after the 12th January, and
that if any Officer or Servant shall misdemean himself upon complaint of the
Committee, the Court of Assistants shall have power to suspend them until the
next general Court.

XXII. That no meeting or Assembly of the Adventurers shall be deemed or taken
to be a general Court, or shall have power to alter any Rules or Articles of
this Preamble, or make any new or further Rules or Orders for the Government of
the Company, unless there be present at such meeting or Assembly, the major
part of the Assistants, and at least twelve of the generality, besides the
Governor, Sub-governour, Deputy Governor, or one of them, or provided so many
Adventurers be present, as shall be concerned in the major part of the Stock,
but at a general Court (so constituted) all such Orders or alterations, as
shall at any time be made by Plurality of Votes by Balleting, shall be binding
to the whole Company, and no question shall be otherwise determined than by
Balleting, if required by any Member present either at a general Court, or
Court of Assistants, wherein either any particular Member or Servant of the
Company is concerned, or any of the Company's money by way of Gift or Reward
shall be disposed of.


