THE Ingenious and Diverting LETTERS OF THE Lady -- TRAVELS INTO SPAIN.

DESCRIBING The Devotions, Nunneries, Humors, Customs, Laws, Militia, Trade,
Diet, and Recreations of that People.

Intermixed with Great Variety of Modern Adventures, and Surprising Accidents:
being the Truest and Best REMARKS Extant on that Court and Country.

The Fourth Edition Corrected.

In Three PARTS Complete.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Crouch at the Corner of Pope's- Head-Alley, next
Cornhil. 1697.

To the much Honored Mr. DAHE.
SIR,
FInding Encouragement for a new Edition of the Ladies Travels, as I had just
Reason from your Merits before, to dedicate a part of them to you, so the
Continuation of your particular Favors makes me take this Opportunity to
acknowledge them, and now to Address the Whole. I found the former Editions to
have good Success under your Name; so that both Profit and Gratitude oblige me
again to beg you to take this Work of the Fair Sex into your further Protection
and Patronage. Your Great Skill in that Excellent Art, which with so much Life
and Pleasure represents the Ladies, besides your other extraordinary
Qualifications, endears you to them, and I hope will influence them to help me
off with this Impression. They will certainly for the Honor of their Sex,
contribute to let this Incomparable Lady's Productions have a more extensive
Spread and Acquaintance.

Pardon me, Sir, and give me leave to conclude with my humble Thanks for all
your Civilities and Kindnesses, and my hearty Wishes for your Prosperity. I am,

SIR, Your most Obliged humble Servant, Sam. Crouch.

A RELATION OF A Voyage to SPAIN, IN Several Letters.
LETTER. I.
SEEING you are so earnest with me to let you know all my Adventures and
whatsoever I have observed during my Travels, you must therefore be contented
(my dear Cousin) to bear with a great many trifling Occurrences, before you can
meet with what will please you: I know your fancy is so nice and delicate, that
none but extraordinary Accidents can entertain you; and I wish I had no others
to relate: but recounting things faithfully, as they have happened, you must be
contented therewith.

I gave you an Account in my last, of what I met with as far as Bayonne: you
know this is a Town in France, Frontier to Spain, washed by the Rivers Dadour
and Nivelle, which join together; and the Sea comes up to them. The Port and
Trade are considerable: I came from Axe by Water, and observed that the
Boat-men of Adour have the same Custom as those of Caronne; which is to say,
That in passing by one another, they set up a Hollowing; and they had rather
lose their Wages than to forbear these sort of Shoutings, although exceeding
vexatious to those who are not used to them. There are two Castles strong
enough to defend the Town, and there are about it several pleasant Walks.

At my Arrival there, I entreated the Baron de Castlenau, who had accompanied
me from Axe, to bring me acquainted with some Women, with whom I might spend my
time with less impatience, till the Litters came, which were to be sent to me
from St. Sebastian.

He readily complied with my Request: for being a Person of Quality and Worth,
he is much esteemed at Bayonne. He failed not the next Morning to bring several
Ladies to visit me.

These Women begin here to feel the scorching Heats of the Sun; their
Complexion is dark, their Eyes sparkling; they are charming enough, their Wits
are sharp: And I could give you a farther Account of their Capacities, could I
have better understood what they said: not but that they could all speak
French, yet with such a different Dialect, as surpast my Understanding.

Some who came to see me, brought little sucking Pigs under their Arms, as we
do little Dogs: it is true they were very spruce, and several of 'em had Collars
of Ribbons, of various Colors: However, this Custom looks very odd, and I
cannot but think that several among themselves are disgusted at it: When they
danced, they must set them down, and let these grunting Animals run about the
Chamber, where they make a very pleasant Harmony. These Ladies danced at my
Entreaty, the Baron of Castleneau having sent for Pipes and Tabors.

The Gentlemen who attended the Ladies, took each of 'em her whom he had
brought with him, and the Dance began in a Round, all holding Hands: they had
afterward long Canes brought them, and then each Spark taking hold of the
Lady's Handkerchief, which separated them from one another, moved very
gracefully at the Sound of this Martial sort of Music, which inspired them
with such Heat, that they seemed not to be able to moderate it. This seemed to
me to resemble the Pyrric Dance so much celebrated by the Ancients; for these
Gentlemen and Ladies made so many Turns, Frisks and Capers, their Canes being
thrown up into the Air, and dexterously caught again, that it is impossible to
describe their Art and Agility: And I had a great deal of Pleasure in seeing
'em; but methoughts it lasted too long, and I began to grow weary of this
ill-ordered Ball* When the Baron de Castleneau, who perceived it, caused
several Baskets of dried Fruit to be brought in. They are the Jews who past for
Portuguises, and dwell at Bayonne, who transport them from Geroa, and furnish
all the Country with them. We wanted not for Limonade, and other refreshing
Waters, of which these Ladies drank heartily; and so the Entertainment ended.

I was carried the next Morning to see the Synagogue of the Jews, in the Suburb
of the Holy Spirit, but met with nothing remarkable there. Monsieur de St. Pe,
the Kings Lieutenant, who came to see me, though much troubled with the Gout,
invited me to Dine at his House, where I was most deliciously entertained; for
this is a Country abounding with good Cheer, and at cheap Rates. I found here
Women of Quality, that were very handsome, whom he had invited to bear me
Company. The sight of the Castle, which faces the River, is very pleasant, and
has always a good Garrison in it.

At my return to my Lodging, I was surpised to find several Pieces of Linen,
which were brought to me from the Ladies who came to see me, with Baskets full
of dried Sweetmeats. This Treatment seemed to me very obliging, to a Lady whom
they had not known above four or five Days. But I must not forget to tell you,
there is not any finer Linen in the World than that which is made in this
Country, some of which is open like Network, and the Threads of it finer than
Hair: And I remember, that traveling through the Villages of Bourdeaux, which
may be rather called Deserts, the poor Peasants living so wretchedly; yet I
found among them as neat Napkins as those used amongst People of Quality at
Paris.

I failed not to send these Ladies such little Presents which I thought might
please them: I perceived they were great Admirers of Ribbons, and wear a great
many on their Heads and Ears, which made me send them a great many; to which I
added several Fans: and they, by way of Return, presented me with Gloves, and
Thread-Stockins, most delicately knit.

In sending them to me, they desired me to go to the next Chapel, which was
not far from my Quarters, where they intended to Regale me with the best Music
the Town would afford but though there were very good Voices, yet there is no
great pleasure in hearing them, because they want both Air and Skill.

The Litters which I expected from Spain, being come, I prepared for my
Departure; but I never met any thing dearer than these sort of Equipages; for
each Litter has a Master that accompanies it, who keeps the Gravity of a Roman
Senator, being mounted on a Mule, and his Man on another, with which they
release ever and anon those that carry the Litter. I had two, I took the
greatest for my self and my Child, and had besides four Mules for my Servants,
and two others for my Baggage: to conduct them, there were other two Masters
and two Men. You see what Charge one is at, to go to Madrid, seeing you must
pay not only for their Attendance on you forwards, but the same Price for their
return back: However, we must submit to their Customs, and suffer our selves to
be peeled by them.

I found at Bayonne several Turks and Mores, and I think a worse sort of
People, and these are Custom-House-Men: I had caused my Trunks to be weighed at
Paris, that I might have the less to do with these sort of People; but they
were more subtle, or to speak better, more obstinate than I; so that I was
forced to give them whatsoever they demanded. Scarcely was I got clear from
them, when the Drums, Trumpets, Pipes, and Violins of the Town, came thundering
upon me; they followed me farther than St. Anthony's Gate, through which you
pass for Spain through Biscaye: they played each of them in their way, and all
together without any Harmony, which was enough to drive any one out of their
Senses: I ordered some Money to be given them, upon which they left persecuting
me. As soon as we had left Bayonne, we entered into a large barren Heath, where
we saw nothing but Chesnut-Trees; but we afterward past along by the Sea,
whose Sand makes a delightful way, and a pleasant Prospect.

We arrived in good time at St. John de Luz: nothing can be pleasanter than
this Borough, which is the greatest in France, and the best built; there are
several smaller Cities: its Port lies between two Mountains, which Nature seems
to have expressly placed to defend it from Storms; the River Nivelle disgorges
it self therein; the Sea comes up very high in it, and the greatest Barks come
up commodiously to the Key. The Seamen here are very skilful at catching
Whales, and other large Fish. We were here very well entertained, so that our
Tables were covered with all sorts of Wild Fowl: but our Beds were not
answerable, being stuck with Feathers whose Pinions ran into our sides, and we
wanted Quilts to lay on the top of them: I thought when we were to pay, that I
should have had a large Reckoning, but they only demanded of me half a Lewis
Dor, when they would have cost more than five Pistoles at Paris. The Situation
of St. John de Luz is extremely agreeable.

In the most spacious part of the Town you see here a very fine Church, built
after the Modern Fashion; and here is a Passage over the River Nivelle, on a
Wooden Bridge of great length. Here are Toll-Gatherers, who make you pay for
every thing you carry with you, not excepting your Clothes: This Tax is
demanded at their Pleasure; and it is excessive on Strangers. I was weary with
speaking French to 'em, and protesting I was no Spaniard; they feigning not to
understand me, sneering in my Face, and wrapping up their Heads in their
Hooded-Gowns; they seemed to me to be Thieves, disguised in Capuchins: In
short, they taxed me eighteen Crowns, and would persuade me they used me well,
though I found the contrary. But I have already told you (dear Cousin), that when
you travel this Country, you must stock your self with Patience, and good store
of Money.

I saw the Castle of Artois, which seems a strong place; and a little farther
Orognes, where the Biscaye is spoken, without either French or Spanish. I
designed to lie at Iron, which is but three Leagues distant from St. John de
Luz and I had set out that after Noon, but the Dispute which we had with the
Watch on the Bridge, the Difficulty we had in passing the Mountains of Beotia,
and the ill Weather, joined to other little Difficulties which happened, were the
Cause that it was Night before we arrived on the Borders of the River Bidassoa,
which separates France from Spain. I observed along the way from Bayonne
thither, little Carriages, on which they transport every thing, which have only
two Iron Wheels, and the Noise they make is so great, that they are heard a
mile off, when there are many of them together, which often happen; for you
often meet with Sixty or Seventy at a time; they are drawn by Oxen. I have seen
the same in the Villages of Bourdeaux, and especially on the side of Axe.

The River of Bidassoa is usually very small, but the Snows melting, had
increased it to such a degree, that we had no small trouble to pass it, some in
a Boat, and others swimming on their Mules: The Moon shined very bright, by
means of which I was showed on the right Hand the Isle of Conference, where the
Marriage of our King was made with Maria Therese, Infanta of Spain. I saw a
while after the Fort of Fontarabia, which belongs to the King of Spain,
standing on the Mouth of this small River: the Flux and Reflux of the Sea
arrives here. Our Kings heretofore pretended it belonged to them: there have
been such great Contests hereupon, especially by the Inhabitants of Fontarabia,
and those of Andaye, that they have several times come to Blows. This obliged
Lewis the Twelfth, and Ferdinand, to agree, That it should be common to both
Nations: the French and the Spaniards take Toll equally; these last making
those pay who pass into Spain, and the former doing the like in relation to
those who pass over to France.

War does not hinder Commerce on this Frontier: it is true they cannot subsist
without it, seeing they must perish through Want, did they not assist one
another.

This Country called Biscaye, is full of high Mountains, where are several Iron
Mines: The Biscays climb up the Rocks as easily, and with as great swiftness as
Stags: Their Language (if one may call such Jargon Language) is very poor,
seeing one Word signifies abundance of Things: There are none but those born in
the Country that can understand it; and I am told, that to the end it may be
more particularly theirs, they make no use of it in Writing; they make their
Children to read and write French and Spanish, according to which King's
Subjects they are. It Is certain, as soon as I past the little River of
Bydassoa, I was not understood, unless I spoke Castillan; and not above a
quarter of an Hour before, I should not have been understood had I not spoke
French.

I found on the other side of this River a Banker of St. Sebastian, to whom I
was recommended: he tarried for me, with two of his Relations; they were
clothed after the French manner, but ridiculously, their Justau Corpse being
short and large, and their Sleeves hanging down very short; those of their
Shirts were so large, that they hung down below their Justan Corpse: they had
Bands without Collars, and Periwigs, one of which had enough Hair for four, and
so frizled, as made 'em look as if they were frighted; iller-drest People you
cannot meet with. Those who wear their own Hair, wear it very long and close,
parting it on the Crown, and pass part of it behind their Ears: But what kind
of Ears think you? those of Midas were not larger; and I believe, that to
lengthen them, they are stretched when they be young: without question they
find some kind of Beauty herein.

My three Spaniards made me in bad French most tedious and dull Complements. We
past through the Bourg of Tran, which is about a quarter of a League from the
River, and came afterward to Irun, which is distant about another quarter of a
League: this little Town is the first of Spain which you meet with, leaving
France: it is ill built, the Streets are unequal, and there is nothing one can
speak of: We entered into the Inn through the Stable, where are the Stairs on
which you must ascend to your Chamber; this is the Country's Fashion. I found
this House very light, by a great many Candles, which were as small as
Pack-thread; there were at least forty in my Chamber, fixed on little bits of
Wood; in the midst of 'em stood a Pan of Coals burning, made of Olive Rhines,
to take away the scent of the Candles.

I had a great Supper, which my Gallants, the Spaniards had caused to be made
ready for me; but all was so full of Garlic, Saffron and Spice, that I could
eat nothing: and I had made very bad Cheer, had not my Cook made me a little
Ragon of what he could find.

Determining to go but to St. Sebastian the next Morning, which is but seven or
eight Leagues, I thought to Dine before I set out: I was sitting at Table, when
one of my Women brought me my Watch to wind it up, as it was my Custom at Noon;
it was a striking Watch, of Tompion's make, and cost me fifty Lewises: My
Banker, who was by me, showed some desire to see it; I gave it him, with a
customary Civility. This was enough: my Blade rises, makes me a profound
Reverence, telling me, He did not deserve so considerable a Present; but such a
Lady as I could make no other: That he would engage his Faith and Reputation,
that he would never part with my Watch as long as he lived; and that he found
himself extremely obliged to me. He kissed it at the end of this pleasant
Complement, and thrust it into his Pocket, which was deeper than a Sack. You Will
take me to be a gery great Sot, in saying nothing to all this, and I do not
wonder at it; but I confess ingenuously, I was so surpised at his Proceeding,
that the Watch was out of sight before I could resolve on what I was to do. My
Women, and the rest of my Servants who were about me, stared on me, and I on
them, blushing with Shame and Vexation to be thus caught: However, I
recollected my self, and considered, that this Man was to pay me a good round
Sum of Money for the Charge of my Journey, and to return Money to Bourdeaux,
where I had taken it up; that having Bills of Credit on him, he might use
several Tricks to me, and Put-offs, which might make me spend twice the Value
of the Watch: In fine, I let him part with it, and endeavored to do my self
Honor from a thing which gave me great Mortification.

I have learnt, since this little Adventure, that it is the Custom in Spain,
when any thing is presented to one, if he likes it, and kisses your Hand, he
may take it with him. This is a very pleasant Fashion, and being sufficiently
acquainted with it, 'twill be my Fault if I am Trapt again.

I left this Inn, where they peeled me sufficiently; for this is a grievous
dear Country, and every one strives to be Rich at his Neighbor's Cost. A while
after we had left the Town, we entered on the Pyrenean Mountains, which are so
high and steep, that looking down, you see, not without Horror, the Precipices
which environ them: we went thus as far as Rentery: Don Antonio (which was my
Banker's Name) went before me, and for my more commodious Passage, he obliged
me to quit my Litter; for although we had traverst several Mountains, yet there
remained more difficult to pass: he made me enter into a little Boat, which he
had prepared to go down the River of Andaye, till we were near the Mouth of the
Sea, where we saw the King of Spain's Gallions; there were three very fine and
large ones. Our little Boats were set forth with Gilt Streamers; they were
managed by Girls, who were very lusty and handsome; there are three in each,
two that Row, and one who holds the Rudder.

These Wenches are very well shaped, of Chestnut Complexion, have very good
Teeth, Hair Black, which they tie up with Ribbons, in Knots, and so let it hang
behind them: They wear a kind of Veil on their Heads, made of Musling,
embroidered with Flowers of Gold and Silk, which hangs loose, and covers their
Breasts: they wear Pendants in their Ears of Gold and Pearls, and Bracelets of
Coral; they have a kind of Justau Corpse, like our Gypsies, whose Sleeves are
very strait: I can assure you they charmed me. I was told, these Wenches swim
like Fishes, and suffer neither Women nor Men among them. This is a kind of
Republic, where they repair from all Parts, and where their Parents send them
very young.

When they are willing to marry, they go to Mass at Fontarabia, which is the
nearest Town to 'em; and there the young Men come to choose 'em Wives to their
Humor. He that will engage himself in Hymen's Bonds, goes to his Mistress's
Parents, declares to them his Intentions, regulates every thing with them: And
this being done, notice of it is given to the Maid: If she likes the Party, she
retires to their House, where the Nuptuals are celebrated.

I never saw a more gay Air than that on their Countenances; they have little
Habitations along the Waterside, and there are old Maidens to whom the younger
pay Respect, as to their Mothers. They related these Particulars to us in their
Language, and we hearkened to 'em with great Delight, when the Devil, who never
sleeps, disturbed us with a vexatious Adventure.

My Cook, who is a Gascon, and exactly of the Humor of those of that Country,
was in one of our Boats behind us, at some distance, very near a young
Biscaneer, who appeared to him very handsome; he contented not himself with
telling her as much, but would have rudely turned up her Veil. She being not
used to this sort of plain Dealing, without any Words broke his Head with her
Oar: Having done this Exploit, Fear seizing on her, she threw herself
immediately into the Water, though the Season was very cold, and swam with great
swiftness; but having all her Clothes on, and it being far to the Shore, her
strength began to fail her. Several of these Wenches who saw this at Land,
leapt immediately into their Boats to her Assistance, when those who had
remained in the Boat with the Cook, fearing the loss of their Companion, fell
on him like two Furies, resolving by all means to drown him, and had like two
or three times to have overturned their little Vessel, which we beholding from
ours, had much a-do to part and appease them.

I assure you, the foolish Gascon was so cruelly handled, that he was all over
blood; and my Banker told me, that these young Biscaneers provoked, are worse
then Lions. In fine, we came to Land, but were scarcely on Shore, but we saw
this Wench which was saved out of the Water, making up toward us, with near
fifty others, each with an Oar on their Shoulder, marching in Battle-ray, with
Fife and Drum; when she who was to be the Mouth of the Company, advanced, and
calling me several times Andria, which is to say, Madam, (for that is all I
could retain of her Speech) gave me to understand, That they would have my
Cook's Skin, if Satisfaction were not made proportionably to the Damage done
their Companion's Clothes. At the ending of which words, the She-Drummers fell
loudly beating their Drums, and the rest of their Amazons set up an Hollowing,
Leaping and Dancing, and Fencing with their Oars in a most astonishing manner.

Don Antonio, to make me amends for the Present he had wrung from me, (I cannot
but often mention it, lying on my Heart as it does) undertook to make Peace: He
found that my Cook, who thought himself sufficiently beaten, had Reason to give
nothing; and therefore he distributed some Pieces of Money among this Marine
Troop: On receipt of which they set forth louder Hollow's than before, and
wished me a good Journey, and speedy Return, each of 'em dancing and singing at
the sound of their Pipes and Tabors.

We entered into a very rough Way, and ascending along very narrow Paths, on the
side of which there are Precipices; so that I was greatly afraid lest the Mules
which carried my Litter should stumble: We afterward past over a large Sandy
Field. I tarried some time in the Convent of St. Francis, which stands near the
River of Andaye: We past over it on a very long Wooden Bridge; and though we
were near St. Sebastian, yet we could not then perceive it, because a Mount of
Sand hid the Town: It Is situated on the Foot of a Mountain, which serves on one
side as a Rampart against the Sea, and the Vessels come to the Foot of this
Mountain, to shelter them from the Storms; for here arise extraordinary
Tempests, that the Ships at Anchor perish in the Port: it is deep, and defended
by two Moles, which leave only as much room as is requisite for one Vessel
passing at a time. They have raised here a great four Square Tower, where there
is ever a good Garrison to defend the Place, in case of Assault: it was a fine
Day for the Season: I found the Town very pleasant, being surrounded with a
double Wall: there are mounted several Pieces of Cannon on that part toward
the Sea, with Bastions and Half Moons: the Town is situated in a Province of
Spain, called Guipuscoa: the Out-parts are exceeding pleasant, by reason that
the Sea, as I now said, serves for a Channel to it: the Streets of this Town
are long and large, paved with great White Stones, which are always clean: the
Houses are well enough; and the Churches decent, in which the Altars are of
Wood, on which are hung little Pictures, from top to bottom. Mines of Iron and
Steel abound in this Country, finer and purer perhaps than in any other Parts
of Europe; and this is the greatest part of their Trade. Here the Wool which
comes from Castille, is embarked, which makes a considerable part of their
Traffic. Bilbo and St. Sebastian are two of the most considerable Ports which
the King of Spain has on the Ocean: The Castle stands very high, and may make
an indifferent Defense: here are mounted several fine Pieces of Cannon, and
there are a great many along the Ramparts; but the Garrison is so weak, that
the Women might conquer them with their Distaffs.

Every thing is as dear in this Town as in Paris, yet they fare well here: Fish
is excellent, and I was told Fruit was the same. I lay in the best Inn, and
when I had been there some time, Don Fernand de Toledo, sent his Gentlemen to
enquire, whether his Visit would not be troublesome to me; My Banker, who knew
him, and who was then in my Chamber, told me, he was a Spaniard of great
Quality, Nephew to the Duke D' Alva; that he came from Flanders, and was going
to Madrid.

I received him with that Civility which was due to his Birth, and soon
thereunto adjoined particular Respects to his own Merit: He is a Gentleman of
good Presence, has Wit and Politeness is Complaisant and Agreeable; he speaks
as good French as I do; but understanding Spanish, and being desirous to speak
it better, we therefore discoursed only in that Language.

I was very well satisfied with his Carriage. He told me he came Post hither
from Brussels, and if I pleased, he would increase my Train, and be one of my
Company. I thought he jested, and answered him accordingly; but he added, The
ways were so full of Snow, that indeed they could not ride Post; that he could
make more speed on Horses than in Litters, but the Honor of accompanying me,
made abundant Recompense for that. In a word, I say he was a civil Person, and
came no way short of the Gallantry natural to the Spanish Cavaliers: I
therefore considered, how advantageous it might prove to have a Man of this
Quality, and Country, who could make himself be heard and obeyed by the
Muletteers, who have Iron Souls, and no Consciences.

I told him, I was very glad I met with him, and the Fatigue of the Road would
be less'ned by his Company. He immediately thereupon ordered his Gentleman to
find a Litter for him: It being late, he took his leave of me, and I betook my
self to eat a good Supper; for, my deer Cousin, I am none of those Romantic
Ladies that never eat.

Scarcely did I begin to sleep, when I heard somebody speak French so near me,
that I thought at first 'twas in my Chamber; but having hearkened with more
attention, I found 'twas in a Chamber separated from mine by only some thin
Boards, and those ill joynted: I drew my Curtain, and saw Light through the
Crevices, and at the same time two young Women, the eldest of which appeared
not to be above Seventeen or Eighteen; neither of 'em were of those Beauties
without Defect, yet were they so pretty, spoke so sweetly, and had such great
sweetness on their Countenances, that I was much taken with 'em.

The youngest, who seemed to, continue the Conversation, said to the other, No,
my dear Sister, there is no Remedy to our Misfortunes; we must die, or get them
out of the Clutches of this vilanous Dotard. I am resolute for any thing,
replied the other, in uttering a deep sigh, should it cost me my Life: What
remains? Have we not sacrificed all for them? Then considering a while their
Misfortunes, they mutually embraced, and began to weep in a most piteous
manner: And having consulted a while, and spoke some other Words, the greatest
part of which were interrupted by their Sighs, they concluded on Writing, which
they did; and here is most of what I heard them read to one another:

Judge not of my Love and Grief by my Words, I have none can express either the
one or the other; but remember you Ruin me, unless you betake your self to the
greatest Extremities against him that persecutes us. He has now sent me word,
That if we delay our Departure, he will have us seized. Consider what he
deserves from this base Usage of us; and remember you owe me all, seeing you
owe me my Heart.

I think the other Billet was in these Terms,

Could I secure thee thy Happiness, in losing mine, I love thee sufficiently to
offer thee such a Sacrifice:: Yes, I would fly from thee, could thou be Happy
without me; but I know thy Heart too well to believe this. Yet thou remainest
as Quiet in thy Prison, as if I were with thee: Break thy Chains without more
delay; punish the Enemy of our Loves. My Heart shall be thy Recompense.

Having made up these Billets, they went out together; and I profess, I was not
a little uneasy for 'em, and no less curious to know these poor Ladies
Misfortunes. This hindered me from sleeping, and I was expecting their Return,
when immediately there was a great Uproar in the House: I saw an old Man enter
the Chamber, attended by a great many Servants: He held one of these young
Women by the Hair of the Head, which he had wound about his Arm, and drew her
after him, as a wretched Sacrifice. Her Sister was not treated with less
Cruelty, by those who led her: Perfidious Wretches, said he to them, not
content with the irreparable Injury you do my Nephews, you would persuade them
to be my Executioners? Had I not surprised you with these seducing Letters what
might have happened? What dreadful Tragedies might I not have expected? But you
shall pay once for all: as soon as ever the Day appears I will have you punished
as you deserve. Ah Sir, said she whom he held, remember we are Women of
Quality, and that our Alliance can be no Dishonor to you; that your Nephews
have given us their Faith, and we them ours; that in so tender an Age we have
left all for their sakes; that we are strangers, and have no Friends here: What
will become of us? We dare not return to our Relations: if you are for
constraining us to this, or for putting us in Prison, let us entreat you rather
presently to dispatch us out of the World.

The Tears which they shed in such abundance, wrought in me the greatest
Compassion: And had the old Man been as tender as I, he had soon freed 'em from
their Trouble.

My Women, who had heard such a great Disturbance, and so near my Chamber,
arose, in the fear of some Mishap toward me: I made Signs to them to draw near
softly, and to behold through the Boards this sorrowful Spectacle: We hearkened
to what they said, when two Men, with their Swords in their Hands, entered into
my Chamber, the Door of which my Women had left open: They had Despair painted
on their Faces, and Rage in their Eyes: I was so greatly frighted, that I
cannot express it to you. They looked on one another without speaking a word;
and having heard the old Man's Voice, they ran on that side.

I did not doubt but 'twas the two Lovers; and 'twas them indeed, who entered
like two Lions into this Chamber: They struck these Servants with so great
Terror, that never a one of 'em dared approach his Master, to defend him, when
his Nephews advance toward him, and set their Swords to his Throat: Barbarian,
said they to him, can you thus use Women of Quality, that are to be our Wives?
Because you are our Guardian must you therefore be our Tyrant? And is not the
separating of us from what we love, the taking of our Lives from us? It Is now
in our Power to take a just Vengeance of you; but we cannot do it to a Man of
your Age, who cannot defend himself: give us then your Word, and swear by all
that is Good and Holy, That in Acknowledgment for the Life we give you, you will
contribute to our Happiness, and suffer us to perform what we have promised.

The poor old Wretch was so afrighted, that he could hardly make any Answer:
However, he swore more than they would have him; he fell on his Knees, and kissed
an hundred times his Thumb laid across one of his Fingers, after the manner of
Spain. Yet he told them, whatever he had done, was only in regard to their
Interests; however, he would not in any sort, for the future, oppose their
Inclinations, in reference to this Marriage. Two of the Domestics took him
under the Arm, and rather carried him away than led him. Then the Gentlemen
seeing themselves free, threw themselves in their Mistresses Arms; they said to
one another, whatever Grief, Love and Joy do usually inspire in such Occasions.
But in Troth, one must have a Heart as affected and content as theirs, to
repeat all these things: they are only proper to Persons more tender than you
are, my dear Cousin. But I hope you will excuse this Relation; I was so tired,
in having not yet slept, that I could scarce hear any more, but confusedly: and
to hear no more, I got farther into bed, and threw the Quilt over my Head.

The next Morning Don Fernand de Toledo, sent me some choice Wines, with great
quantity of Oranges and Sweetmeats. As soon as he thought it a proper time to
Visit me, he came: Having thankt him for his Present, I asked him, Whether he
had heard nothing of what had past in the Night? He told me, No, for he had
lain in another part of the House. I was about relating to him what I knew,
when our Hostess entered into the Chamber: she came from the two Gentlemen who
had given me that Disturbance, with the Swords in their Hands, entreating me to
receive their Excuses. She likewise told me, That two young Ladies desired they
might wait on me, and kiss my Hand. I answered these Civilities as I ought; and
they soon entered.

What charming Effects does the Return of Joy produce? I found these Gentlemen
very well shaped, and these Ladies very lovely; neither one nor the other had
any more on their Countenances the Characters of Despair; an Air of Gaiety
displayed itself in all their Words and Gestures. The Eldest of the two
Brethren made the most handsome Excuse as is possible for his Mistake in
entering my Chamber: he added, He had well observed the Fear he had caused me;
but told me, that in that Moment he was so transported, that he was capable of
no other Thought but the Rescuing his Mistress. You would have been to blame,
said I to him, should you have thought of any thing else: However, if it be
true, you are willing to make me Satisfaction for the Alarm you have given me,
you must not refuse the gratifying my Curiosity: With these fair Ladies leave,
inform we what has reduced all of you to these Extremities you were in. He
looked on them, as if it were to ask their Approbation, which they willingly
granted; and he thus began: We are two Brothers, Madam, Natives of Burgos, and
of one of the best Families of this City. We were very young, when we fell into
the Hands of an Uncle, who took care of our Education and Estates, which are so
considerable, that we need not envy others on that account; Don Diego (is our
Uncle's Name) he had made long since a firm Friendship with a Gentleman living
near Blaye, whose Merit is far above his Fortune; he is called Monsieur de
Mesignac: our Uncle resolving to send us for some time into France, he wrote
hereupon to his Friend, who offered him his House, which he joyfully accepted.
He made us set out; and it is a Year since we were received there with great
Civility; Madam de Messignac used us as her own Children; she has several: but
of her four Daughters, those you see are the most amiable. It would have been
very difficult to have seen them every day, to dwell with them, and yet not to
have loved them.

My Brother at first concealed from me his growing Passion, and I hid mine from
him; we were both of us very melancholy; the trouble of loving, without being
loved again, and the fear of displeasing those who caused our Passion, all this
cruelly tormented us; but a new Vexation did greatly increase our Disquiet,
which was a restless Jealousy we had one of another: My Brother plainly saw I
was in Love, and thought 'twas with his Mistress; I looked on him likewise as my
Rival; and we bore such Hatred to one another, as might have transported us to
the greatest Extremities: but that I resolutely determined one day to discover
my Sentiments to Mademoiselle de Messignac; but wanting Courage to speak to her
my self, I wrote some Verses in a little Book touching my Passion for her, and
dexterously slid it into her Pocket, without her perceiving me. My Brother, who
had always an Eye on me, observed it, and playing with her, he took out the
Verses, and found 'em to contain a respectful and passionate Declaration of
Love to her: he kept them till Night, when being withdrawn into my Chamber,
with the greatest Inquietude, he came to me, and tenderly embracing me, he told
me, He was heartily glad at the notice he had of my being in love with
Mademoiselle de Messignac.

I remained as one Thunderstruck; I saw my Papers in his Hands; I imagined she
had made them a Sacrifice to him, and that he came to insult on my Misfortune.
He saw in my Eyes and Countenance part of what I thought: Undeceive your self,
continued he, she gave 'em not to me; I have taken 'em without her seeing them:
I Will be serviceable to you for the obtaining her; be you the same to me in
relation to her elder Sister. I then embraced him, and promised him all he
desired. Thus we mutually rendered good Offices to one another; and our
Mistresses, who were not then acquainted with the power of Love, began to
accustom themselves to hear talk of it.

It would be to abuse your Patience, to tell you, Madam, how we came at length
by our Cares and Assiduities to win their Hearts. What happy Moments! what
sweet Hours! to see without ceasing what one loves, and to be beloved! to be
together in the Fields, where an Innocent and Country Life let us one taste,
without disturbance, the Pleasures of a growing Passion; this is a Felicity
which cannot be expressed.

Winter being come, Madam de Messignac was at Bourdeaux, where she had a House;
we accompanied her thither; but this House was not great enough to ledge us,
with all our Family; we took one near hers.

Though this Separation was only the Nights, yet we had lively Resentments of
it; we were not now every Moment with 'em; our Visits were accompanied with a
certain Air of Ceremonies, which disturbed us. But our Alarums were much
increased, when we saw two rich handsome Sparks address themselves to
Mademoiselles de Messignac, and earnestly Court them, and that with the
Approbation of their Parents. Good God, how we looked! Their Proceedings went
on at a great rate, and our dear Mistresses, who shared in our Sorrow, mingled
every day their Tears with ours. In fine, having thoroughly tormented our
selves, by devising a thousand fruitless ways, I resolved to Address my self to
Monsieur de Messignac: I spoke to him, and told him what my Passion inspired
me, to persuade him to defer these Marriages. He answered, He accepted, with
the greatest Acknowledgments, the Offers my Brother and I made him; but being
not of Age, what we might do at present might be afterward Cancelled: That his
Honor was dear to him, though his Estate was small; however, should always
esteem himself Happy, in living without Reproach: That my Uncle, who had
entrusted us to him, might justly accuse him of Seducing us; and that in short,
we must no more think of these Matters.

I withdrew in the greatest Affliction, which I shared with my Brother; and
this was a dreadful trouble among us. Monsieur de Messignac, to complete our
misfortunes, sent an Account to my Uncle, of what had past, and earnestly
entreated him to lay his Commands on us to be gone. He did so; and seeing no
remedy to our Misfortunes, we went, my Brother and I, to Mademoiselles de
Messignac, we threw ourselves at their Feet; We told them what might persuade
Hearts already pre-possest: We gave them our Faith and Promises, Signed with
our Blood: In short, Love made an end of vanquishing them; they conserted to go
with us. In fine, we took such Measures, that our Passage was happy enough till
our Arrival here; and it is not two days since entering this House, the first
Person offering himself to us was Don Diego; He was impatient of our Return;
and to satisfy himself, he came in quest of us. How did we look at this sight!
He caused us to be apprehended as Criminals; and forgetting that Mademoiselles
de Messignac, were the Daughters of his best Friend, and Persons of Quality, he
loaded them with Injuries, and o're-whelm'd them with Threatenings, after he had
learnt from one of my Servants, that we had resolved to pass Incognito as far
as Madrid, to some Relations we had there, to tarry in this place for a full
liberty of declaring our Marriage. He locked us up in a Chamber next to his;
and we were there, when these Ladies came by Moonlight, coughing under our
Windows. We heard them, and ran to them -- They showed us their Letters; and we
were devising on our Deliverance, when my Uncle, having notice of what past,
silently came upon us with all his Servants, and before our Faces misused these
amiable Creatures. In the Excess of our Despair our Strength, without doubt,
increased. We broke open the Doors, which were fast shut on us, and we ran to
Succor them, when imprudently, Madam, we came into your Chamber.

The Gentleman here stopped, and I found he had related his little History with
great Ingenuity. I thank't him for it, and offered these Ladies my Endeavors,
and those of my Friends, to appease their Family: Which Offers they accepted,
and testified their Acknowledgments.

Some Ladies of the Town, who came to see me, would stop me; they proposed to
me to go to the Religioses, whose Convent is so pleasantly situated, that the
Prospect has no Bounds: You may see thence, at the same time, the Sea, Ships,
Towns, Woods and Fields. They spoke much in praise of the Voices, Beauty, and
good Humor of these Religioses. Add to this, that the ill Weather was so
increast, and the Snow fallen in so great abundance, that no body advised me to
proceed in my Journey. I was in suspense a while, but the Impatience I had to
be at Madrid, prevailed over all these Considerations, and I parted the next
Morning. I have received of my Banker the Money I want.

But I must not forget to tell you, that the Inhabitants of this Town have a
particular Privilege, and of which they are not a little proud; which is, That
when they Treat of any Affairs with the King of Spain, and that it is directly
with him, he is obliged to speak with them bare-headed. I could not get the
Reason from 'em for this.

I am told I must furnish my self with good store of Provision, to prevent
starving in some places through which we must pass; and Gammons of Bacon, dried
Tongues, being much esteemed in this Country, I have therefore taken up a good
quantity; and as to the rest, we have sufficiently provided. Now this being the
Post-day, I would not omit this occasion of informing you of what has happened to
me; and testifying, that I am,

From St. Sebastian, Feb. 20. 1679. Yours.

LETTER. II.
I Reassume, Dear Cousin, without any Compliments, the Sequel of my Travels:
In leaving St. Sebastian, we entered into a very rough Way, which brings you to
such terrible steep Mountains, that you cannot ascend them without climbing;
they are called Sierra de St. Adrian. They show only Precipices and Rocks, on
which a puling Lover may meet with certain Death, if he has a mind to it. Pine
Trees of an extraordinary height crown the top of these Mountains. As far as
the Sight will reach you see nothing but Deserts, cut with Streams clearer than
Crystal. Near the highest part of Mount St. Adrian, you meet with an elevated
Rock, which seems to have been placed in the midst of the way to block up the
Passage, and thus separate Biscaye from the Old Castille.

A tedious and painful Labor has pierced this mass of Stone in manner of a
Vault; you may walk forty or fifty Paces under it, without sight of Day, but
what comes by the Overtures at each Entry, which are shut by great Doors: You
find under this Vault an Inn, which is left in the Winter, by Reason of the
Snows: You see here likewise a little Chapel of St. Adrian, and several
Caverns, where Thieves commonly retreat; so that it is dangerous passing here
without being in a condition of Defense. When he had traverst the Rock, we
still a little ascended, to rrrive to the top of the Mountain, which is held to
be the highest of the Pyraneds; it is wholly covered with great Ash Trees.
There was never a finer place of Solitude; the Springs run here as in the
Valleys: the sight is only bounded by the Weakness of the Eyes; Shades and
Silence here reign, and the Eccho's answers on every side. We began afterward
to descend down faster than we climed up: We saw in some parts little barren
Plains, many sandy places, and ever and anon Mountains covered with great
Rocks. It is not without Reason, that in passing so near, you fear, lest some
one of 'em should get loose, which would certainly over-whelm one; for you see
some which are fallen from the top, and hang in their passage on other Clefts;
and these finding nothing in the way, would give a sorry Diversion to a
Traveller. I made all these Reflections at my ease; for I was alone in my
Litter, with my Child, who did not at all disturb my Thoughts. A River called
Vrrola, big enough, but which was increased by the Torrents, and melted Snow,
slides along the Way, and breaks forth into particular Streams in some places,
which fall with a great impetuosity and noise, and make a very pleasant sound
and sight.

We meet not here with those fine Castles to be seen on the Banks of the Loire,
which make Travelers call it the Country of Fairies. Here are on these
Mountains only some Shepherds Cottages, and some few Hovels, and at that
distance, that you must go a great way before you can find them; yet all these
Natural Objects, though very melancholy ones, yet have something that is very
taking in them. The Snows were so high, that we had always twenty Men, who made
way for us with Shovels. You will perhaps imagine this cost me very much; but
here are so well established Orders, and those so well observed, that the
Inhabitants of a Village are obliged to meet Travelers, and be their Guides to
the next; and no one being bound to give them any thing, the least Liberality
therefore satisfies them. To this first Care there is added another, which is
that of Ringing the Bells without-ceasing, to give notice to Travelers, where
they may retreat in stormy Weather. They told me, there had not fallen this
forty Years so much Snow as we met with, there having been no Frost for a great
while in this Province.

Our Troop was so great, that we might count our selves no ways inferior to
those Famous Caravans which go to Mecha; for without reckoning my Train, and
that of Don Fernand de Toledo, there joined with us near St. Sebastian, three
Knights, with their Attendants, who returned from their Commanderships of St.
James; there were two of this Order, and one of that of Alcantara: The first
wear Red Crosses, in form of an embroidered Sword, on their Shoulders; and he
of Alcantara had a Green one. One of the two first is of Andalousia, the other
of Galicia, and the third of Catalonia; they are of good Families; he of
Andalousia calls him self, Donesteve de Carvaial; he of Galicia, Don Sancho
Sanniento, and the other of Catalonia, Don Frederic de Cardonne; they are
Persons of good Meine, and well acquainted with the World. I received all
possible Civilities from them, having much of the French Humor in them. They
have traveled over the greatest Part of Europe; and this has rendered them so
Polite. We went to lie at Galareta; this is a Borough a little distant from
Mount Adrian, situated in the little Province of Spain, I now mentioned named
Alava, which makes a Part of Biscaye; we had there but bad Entertainment. They
reckon it eleven Leagues from thence to St. Sebastian.

We had better Way from Galareta to Victoria, than we had before: The Country
here yields much Corn and Grapes; and the Villages lie very thick together: We
found here Custom-House-Men, who made us pay both for the Clothes and Money we
carried with us: they were not very exacting with us, because our Company was
too large to be imposed on. Don Fernand de Toledo had informed me over Night,
that we were to travel near the Castle of Quebare, which was said to be haunted
with a Spirit, telling me a thousand extravagant Stories, which were readily
swallowed by the Inhabitants of the Country, and which were so effectually
believed by them, that no body would live there. I had a great desire to see
this place; for although I am naturally as fearful as another, yet am not
afraid of Ghosts; and if I were, our Company was so numerous, as would animate
the greatest Coward: we struck off a little to the left, and came to the
Borough of Quebara; the Master of the Inn where we entered, had the Keys of the
Castle; he told us, in going along with us, That the Duende, which is to say
the Spirit, could not endure Company; yet if we were a thousand together, he
would, if he were minded, beat us all, in such a manner, as to leave us for
dead. I began to tremble; Don Fernand de Toledo, and Don Fredric de Cordonne,
who gave me their Hands, perceiving my Fear, burst out into Laughter: I grew
ashamed, and pretended to gain Courage; and so we entered the Castle, which
might have past for a fine one, had it been kept in order: It had no Furniture,
except an old Tapistry Hanging in a great Hall, which represented the Amors of
Don Pedro the Cruel, and Donna Maria de Padilla: she is represented fitting
like a Queen in the midst of other Ladies, and the King placing on her Head a
Crown of Flowers: In another part she sat under the shade of a Wood, the King
showing her a Hawk on his Fist: And again, in another, she appears in a
Warrier's Dress, and the King in Armor presents her with a Sword; which makes
me believe that she had been in some Warlike Expedition with him. She was very
ill represented; and Don Fernand told me, He had seen her Effigies elsewhere,
by which she appeared to be the most beautiful and most cruel Woman of her
time; and that the Figures in this Tapistry resembled neither her nor the King:
his Name, Cipher and Arms were everywhere on it. We went up into a Tower, on
the top of which was a Dungeon, and 'twas there where the Spirit inhabited; but
without doubt he was abroad, for we neither saw nor heard him, or any of his
Companions; and having seen sufficiently this great Building, we left it to
pursue our Journey. In approaching Victoria, we past over a most delightful
Plain, at the end of which stands a Town situated in this Province of Spain, I
lately mentioned, called Alava; this is the Capital Town of it, as well as the
first of Castille: It is enclosed with two Walls, one of which is old, and the
other new; besides this, it has no other Fortifications. After I had refreshed
my self a while here, 'twas proposed to me to go to a Play; but in tarrying
till it began, I had no small Diversion, in seeing come into the most spacious
place of the Town, four Companies of young Men, preceded by Drums and Trumpets:
they marched several times round, and in fine, immediately began the Fight with
Snow-balls, which they threw at one another with such Fierceness, that they
were all very well pelted in the end: they were above two hundred who fought
this Battle. To tell you of those who fell, or recovered their Feet again, and
the Shouts and Acclamations of the People, will be needless; and I was obliged
to leave them thus engaged, to go to the place where the Play was to be
represented.

When I entered into the Room, the People set forth an hollowing, Mira, mira!
which is to say, look, Look,! The Decoration of the Theater was not over
Magnificent; it was raised on Barrels, and ill-rang'd Plancks; the Windows of
the Room were open, for they used no Candles or Flambeaux, whence you may
easily imagine this much takes away from the Beauty of the Sight. They acted
the Life of St. Anthony; and when the Players said any thing which pleased the
Company, all the People cried out, Victoria, Victoria; I was informed this was
the Custom of the Country. I observed the Devil was no other ways clad than the
rest, having only a pair of Stockins of a Flame-colour, and a pair of Horns to
distinguish him. This Comedy consisted only of three Acts, and they are all no
more: at the end of each serious Act, another began of Farce and Pleasantry,
wherein appeared him they called El Gracioso, which is to say, the Buffoon,
who, among much insipid Stuff, says sometimes something that is less nauseous:
The Interludes were mixed with Dances, to the sound of the Harps and Guitars:
The Actors had Castagnets, and a little Hat on their Heads, without which they
never Dance, and then it is a Saraband; they seem not to walk, they slip along
so lightly. Their manner is wholly different from ours: they move too much
their Arms, and often pass their Hands on their Hats and Face, and that with no
ill Grace; they play admirably well on the Castagnets.

As to the rest, (Dear Cousin) I would not have you think these Actors, for
being in a little City, do much differ from those of Madrid. I was told, that
those of the King are a little better; but, in a word, both act what they call
Las Comedias Famosas, which is to say, The finest and most famous Comedies;
which in truth are very ridiculous: For Example, when St. Anthony said his
Confiteor, which he did often enough, all the Spectators fell down on their
Knees, and gave themselves such rude Mea Culpa's, as was enough to beat the
breath out of their Bodies.

Here would be a proper place to speak of their Habits; but you had better
excuse me till I come to Madrid, lest I tire you with Repetitions: Yet I must
tell you, that all the Ladies I say, in this Company, had a prodigious quantity
of Red, which begins just under the Eye, and passes from the Chin to the Ears,
and Shoulders, to their very Hands; so that I never saw any Radishes of a finer
Color.

The Lady Governess of the Town drew near to me; she just touched my Clothes,
and hastily drew back her Hand, as if she had burnt her Fingers. I bid her in
Spanish not to be afraid: She at length familiariz'd her self, and told me,
'Twas not through fear of any thing else but of displeasing me: that 'twas no
new thing to her to see French Ladies: and that if she might, she would gladly
dress her self after their Fashion. She ordered Chocolate to be brought her,
with which she presented me; which is far better here than in France. The Play
being ended, I took my Leave of her, having thanked her for her Civilities.

The next Morning, as I entered the Church to hear Mass, I espied an Hermit, who
had the Air of a Person of Quality, and yet begged an Alms of me, with such
great Humility, that I was greatly surpised at it: Don Fernand having notice
of it, drew near, and said to me, The Person whom you behold, Madam, is of an
illustrious Family, and of great Merit, but his Fortune very Unhappy.

You raise in me, said I to him, a great Curiosity to know more; and therefore
I must beg your Favor to satisfy it. You may command any thing of me, replied
he, Madam; but I am not so thoroughly informed of his Adventures, to undertake
the relating them to you; and I believe 'twere better I engage him into a
Recital of them himself. He left me, and went immediately to Embrace him, with
the greatest Civilities and Tenderness: Don Frederic de Cardonne, and Don
Esteve de Carvajal, had already accosted him, as their old Acquaintance; and
when Don Fernand had joined them, they all earnestly entreated him to come with
them when Mass was over. He as earnestly excused himself; but being told, I was
a Stranger, and much importuned, that I might learn from himself, what had
obliged him to turn Hermit; he at length consented, on condition I would permit
him to bring one of his Friends, who was perfectly knowing in what related to
him: Do us Justice, continued he, and judge whether it is fit for me to relate
such Particularities in this Habit I wear. They found he had Reason, and prayed
him to bring his Friend, which he did a while after I was at my Lodgings: He
presented a very fine Cavalier to me; and taking leave of us very civilly, he
told him, He should be obliged to him, if he would satisfy, the Curiosity
which Don Fernand de Toledo had given me, of knowing the Spring of his
Misfortunes. This Gentleman took place by me, and began in these Terms:

I think my self very Happy, Madam, that my Friend has choshen me to satisfy
the Desire you have of knowing his Adventures; but I fear I shall not acquit my
self so well as I would: The Person whose History you would learn, has been one
of the finest Gentlemen in the World; it would be hard to make a Judgment of
him now; he is buried, as it were in his Hermit's Habit. He was an exceeding
graceful Person, well shaped, of an excellent Meine, and Noble Air: And in
fine, had all the Accomplishments, both Natural and Acquired, of a Person of
Quality, being liberal, witty and brave. He was born at Cagliari, Capital of
the Isle of Sardogne, one of the most illustrious and richest Families of all
that Country.

He was brought up with one of his Cosin-Germans; and the simpathy which was
sound in their Humors, and Inclinations, was so great, that they were more
strictly united by Friendship than Blood: they hid no Secret from each other.
And when the Marquess Barbaran was married (which was his Cosin's Name,) their
Friendship continued in the same force.

He married one of the finest Women in the World, and the most Accomplished; she
was then not above Fourteen: She was Heiress to a very Noble Estate and Family.
The Marquess every day discovered new Charms in the Wit and Person of his Wife,
which likewise increased every day his Passion. He speaks without ceasing, of
his Happiness, to Don Lewis de Barbaron; which is the Name, Madam, of my
Friend; and when any Affairs obliged the Marquess to leave her, he conjured him
to stay with the Marchioness, thereby to lessen the Trouble of his Absence. But
alas! how hard is it when one is at an Age incapable of serious Reflections, to
see continually so fair a Woman, so young and aimable; and to see her with
Indifference! Don Lewis was already desperately in Love with the Marchioness,
and thought then 'twas only for her Husband's sake: Whilst he was in this
Mistake, she fell dangerously sick; at which he grew so dreadful melancholy,
that he then knew, but too late, this was caused by a Passion which would prove
the greatest Misfortunes of his whole Life. Finding himself then in this
condition, and having not strength to resist it, he resolved to use the utmost
Extremity, and to fly and avoid a place where he was in danger of dying with
Love, or breaking through the Bonds of Friendship. The most cruel Death would
have seem gentler than the Execution of this Design: When the Marchioness
beginning to grow better, he went to her to bid her Adieu, and see her no more.

He found her busied in choosing among several Stones of great price, those
which were the finest, which she intended to have set in a Ring, Don Lewis was
scarce entered the Chamber, but she desired him, with that Air of Familiarity
usual among Relations to go and fetch her other Stones which she moreover had
in her Cabinet. He ran thither, and by an unexpected good hap, found among what
he looked for, the Picture enamill'd of the Marchioness, in little, set with
Diamonds, and incircled with a Lock of her Hair; it was so like, that he had
not the power to withstand the desire he had of stealing it: I am going to
leave her, said he, I shall see her no more; I sacrifice all my quiet to her
Husband: Alas! is not this enough? And may I not without a Crime, search in my
Pain a Consolation so innocent as this. He kissed several times this Picture; he
put it under his Arm, he carefully hid it, and returning toward her with these
Stones, he trembling told her the Resolution he had taken of Traveling. She
appeared much amazed at it, and changed her color. He looked on her at this
moment; he had the pleasure of perceiving it; and their Eyes being of
Intelligence, spoke more than their Words: Alas! What can oblige you, Don
Lewis, said she to him, to leave us? Your Cousin loves you so tenderly; I esteem
you; we are never pleased without you; he cannot live from you: Have you not
already traveled? You have without doubt some other Reason for your Departure,
but at least do not hide it from me. Don Lewis, pierced through with sorrrow,
could not forbear uttering a deep Sigh, and taking one of the delicate Hands of
the Charming Person, on which he fixed his Mouth, Ah, Madam, what do you ask me?
said he to her, What can I say to you? And indeed, What can I say to you, in
the Condition I am in? The Violence he used, to conceal his Sentiments, caused
him such a great Weakness, that he fell half dead at her Feet. She remained
troubled and confused at this sight: She obliged him to sit down by her; she
dared not lift up her Eyes to look on him; but she let him see Tears, which she
could not forbear shedding, nor resolve to conceal from him.

Scarcely were they come to themselves, when the Marquess entered into the
Chamber. He came to embrace Don Lewis with all the Testimonies of a perfect
Friendship, and he was in the greatest trouble, when he understood he parted
for Naples. He omitted no Arguments to persuade him from it, pressed his stay
with the greatest Earnestness, but all in vain. He there immediately took his
leave of the Marchioness, and saw her no more. The Marquess went out with him,
he left him not till the moment of his Departure. This was an Augmentation of
Don Lewis 's Sorrow; he would have willingly remained alone to have an entire
Liberty of afflicting himself.

The Marchioness was sensibly afflicted at this Separation: She had perceived
he loved her, before he had known thus much himself; and she had found in him
such singular Merit, that for her part too she had loved him without knowing
it; but she found this to her Cost after his Departure: Recovering but lately
from a dangerous Sickness, of which she was not perfectly cured, this unhappy
Accident made her fall into a languishing Indisposition, as soon rendered her
quite another body; her Duty, her Reason, her Virtue equally persecuted her:
She was greatly sensible of her Husband's Respects to her, and she could not
suffer but with great Sorrow, that another should take up her thoughts, and
have so great a place in her Affections. She dared not any more mention the
Name of Don Lewis; she never made any Inquiries after him; she made it an
indispensable Duty to forget him: This Violence which she used on her self, was
like a continual Martyrdom; she made one of her Women, in whom she most
confided, the Repository of this Secret: Am I not very unhappy? said she, I
must wish never again to see a Man, toward whom it is impossible for me to be
in a state of Indifference; his Person is always before mine Eyes; nay, I think
sometimes I see him in the Person of my Husband; the Resemblance which is
between them, serves only to nourish my Affection toward him. Alas! Mariana, I
must die, to expiate this Crime, although it be an involuntary one: I have only
this means to get rid of a Passion of which I cannot hitherto be Mistress:
Alas, what have I not done to stifle it, this Passion which yet is dear to me.
She accompanied these Words with a thousand Sighs: She melted into Tears, and
though this Woman had a great deal of Wit and Affection to her Mistress, yet
she could say nothing to her could yield her any Comfort.

The Marquess in the mean time, every day reproacht his Wife with her
Indifferency to Don Lewis: I cannot suffer, said be to her, that you should
think so little on the Man I love above all the World, and who had so much
Complaisance and Friendship for you: I must needs say, this is a kind of
Hardness, which would make one judge untowardly of the Tenderness of your
Heart: At least, you must grant, Madam, that he was scarcely gone, but you
forgot him. What good would my remembering him do him? said the Marchioness with
a languishing Air, Do not you see he avoids us? Would he not have been still
with us, if he had any real Kindness for us? Believe me, my Lord, he deserves a
little that we should forsake him in our turn. Whatever she could say, repel'd
not the Marquess; he still importuned her to write to Don Dewis to Return. One
Day among the rest, she was gotten into his Closet to speak to him about some
Affairs; she found him busied in reading a Letter of Don Lewis, which he lately
received.

She would have retired; but he took this opportunity to oblige her to do what
he would have her; he told her very seriously, That he could no longer bear the
Absence of his Cousin; that he was resolved to go find him; that 'twas already
two Years since he had been gone, without intimating any desire of returning to
his Friends and Country; that he was persuaded he would yield a greater
Deference to her Requests than his; that he conjured her to write to him: And
that in fine, she might choose either to give him this Satisfaction, or be
content to see him, part for Naples, where Don Lewis was to make some stay. She
remained surpised, and perplexed at this Proposal; but knowing he expected with
great Impatience her Determination, What would you have me say to him, my Lord?
said she to him with a sorrowful Countenance, Dictate this Letter to me, I will
write it; I can do no more; and I believe this is more than I ought The
Marquess, transported with Joy, most affectionately embraced her; he thanked
her for her Compliance, and made her write these Words:

IF you have any Kindness for us, defer not your Return; I have very urgent
Reasons to desire it. I am not a little concerned that you show such
Indifference toward us, which is an unquestionable Indication that you take no
Delight in our Company. Return, Don Lewis, I earnestly wish it; I entreat you:
And if it were fit for me to use more urgent Terms, I would say, perhaps, I
Command you to do it.

The Marquess made a single Packet of this fatal Letter, (...) the end Don
Lewis might not think 'twas by his Order the Marchioness had wrote it; and
having sent it to the Currier, he expected the Success with extraordinary
Impatience. What becam^ of this Lover at the sight of so dear and unexpected an
Order! Although he had remarkt Dispositions of Tenderness in the Countenance of
this fair Person, yet he dared not promise himself she could desire his Return;
his Reason revolted against his Joy: How Unhappy a Wretch am I? said he, I
Adore the most Amiable of all Women, and yet I dare not offer to please her!
she has a Kindness for me, yet Honor and Friendship withold me from making
the least Advantage of it. What shall I do then, O Heavens! What shall I do! I
flattered my self, that Absence would Cure me: Alas! this is a Remedy which I
have fruitlesly tried; I have never cast mine Eyes on her Picture, but have
found my self more in Love, and more Miserable than when I saw her every day. I
must obey her, she commands my Return; she desires to see me, and she cannot be
ignorant of my Passion: When I took my Leave of her, my Eyes declared to her
the Secret of my Heart: And when I call to mind what I saw in hers, all my
Reflections then are to no purpose; for I resolve rather to die at her Feet,
than to live remote from her.

He parted without any delay, and without taking leave of his Friends. He left
a Gentleman to Excuse him toward them, and to order his Affairs. He was in
such great haste to see the Marchioness, that he used such Diligence to be with
her, that no body but he could have done: In arriving at Cagliary, Capital of
Sardagne, he understood that the Marquess and his Wife were at a stately
Country House, where the Viceroy was gone to give them a Visit, with all his
Court. He learnt moreover, that the Marquess de Barbaran prepared for him a
great Feast, where there were to be held Justs or Tournaments, after the Ancient
Manner of the Mores: He was the Defendant, and was to maintain, That a Husband
beloved, is Happier than a Lover.

Several Gentlemen that were not of this Opinion, were preparing themselves to
go and dispute the Prize, which the Marchioness, at the Vice-Queen's Entreaty,
was to give to the Conqueror; 'Twas a Scarf embroidered with her own Hands,
wrought with Ciphers: No one was to appear but maskt and disguised, to the end
all might be freer and more gallant.

Don Lewis had a secret Despite, in comprehending the Marquess so well
satisfied: He is beloved, said he, I cannot but look on him as my Rival, and as
an Happy Rival; but we must endeavor to disturb his Happiness, in triumphing
over his vain Glory. Having formed this Design, he would not appear in Town: he
caused to be made a Suit of stripped Green Satin, embroidered with Gold, and all
his Liveries were of the same Color, to denote his new hopes.

When he entered into the Lists, every body had their Eyes on him; his
Magnificence and his Air gave Emulation to the Cavaliers, and great Curiosities
to the Ladies. The Marchioness felt a secret Emotion, of which she could not
discover the Cause: He was placed very near the Balcony, where she sat with
the Vice-Queen; but there was no Lady there which did not lose all her Luster
near that of the Marchioness; her youthful Air, which exceeded not eighteen
Years, her lovely white and red Cheeks, her Eyes so sweet and graceful, her
Scarlet and little Mouth, agreeable Smiles, and her Shape, which surpast the
Fairest, made her the Admiration of all the World.

Don Lewis was so ravished in seeing her so charming, and to observe yet in her
Countenance a languishing sorrowful Air, that he flattered himself to have
therein a part; and this was the first Moment wherein he thought himself Happy.
When his turn came, he ran against the Marquess, and smote him so dexterously,
that he got the Advantage all along of him: so that in a word, he gained the
Prize with a general Applause, and with every one's good-liking. He threw
himself at the Marchioness's Feet, to receive it at her Hands; he altered the
Tone of his Voice, and speaking to her with his Mask on, low enough not to be
heard but only by her: Divine Person, said he to her, be pleased to observe
what Fortune decides in favor of Lovers. He dared not say more to her; and
without knowing him, she gave him the Prize, with this natural Grace with which
all her Actions were accompanied.

He suddenly withdrew himself, for fear of being known; for this might have
been an occasion of Quarrel between the Marquess and him; and without doubt he
would not have easily pardoned the Victory he obtained over him. This obliged,
him to keep himself still concealed for some Days. The Voice-Roy and his Lady
returned to Cagliary, and the Marquess and Marchioness accompanied them
thither, with the whole Court.

Don Lewis then showed himself; he pretended he just then arrived, and made as
if he knew not what had past in the Field. The Marquess de Barbaran was
transported with Joy in seeing him; and Absence had not at all altered the
Affection he had for this dear Relation. He had no difficult task to find a
favorable moment wherein to entertain his amiable Marchioness; he had as much
liberty in their Lodgings as in his own; and you may well judge, Madam, that he
forgot not to mention the Prize he had received from her fair Hands: How
wretched am I, said he to her, that you did not know me? Alas, Madam, I
flattered my self, that by some secret Pre-sentiments you would learn, that no
one but I could sustain with such Passion the Cause of Lovers against Husbands.
No my Lord, said she to him, with an Angry and Disdainful Air, to take away all
Hope from him, I could never have imagined that you could have been Patron of
so foul a Cause; and I could not have believed you could have taken such strong
Engagements at Naples, that you should come as far as Sardagne to Triumph over
a Friend who maintained my Interests as well as his own. I shall die with
Regret, Madam, said Don Lewis, if I have displeased you in what I have done;
and were you more favorably disposed, and I might dare to make you my
Confident, it would be no hard matter for me to persuade you, that it is not at
Naples I have left the Object of my Vows.

The Marchioness apprehending lest he should speak more than she was willing to
hear, and appear livelily touched with the Reproach she made him, she put on a
more pleasing Countenance, and turning the Conversation into a Tone of
Raillery, answered him, He took too seriously what she had said to him. He
dared not make use of this occasion to declare his Love to her; for though he
loved her above all things, yet he respected her no less.

When he had left her, he began to blame himself for his Fearfulness: Shall I,
said he, always suffer without seeking any Remedy! It was some time before he
could meet with a favorable occasion, because the Marchioness studiously
avoided him; but being come one Night where she was, he found her alone in an
inward Room, lying on a Bed in a most lovely manner, and most becoming Vndress,
her Hair being fastened with Knots of Diamonds, hung carelessly about her
Breasts: The Trouble she felt in seeing Don Lewis, appeared on her Countenance,
and rendered her yet more lovely: He drew near her with an Awful and respectful
Air, fell down on his Knees by her; he looked on her for some time, not daring
to speak but becoming a little more bold, If you consider, Madam, said he to
her, the pitious Condition whereunto you have reduced me, you will easily
comprehend that it is no longer in my power to keep Silence: I could not avoid
such inevitable Strokes as you have given me; I have adored you as soon as I
saw you: I have endeavored to Cure my self in flying from you; I have offered
the greatest Violence to my self, in endeavoring to master my Passion. You
have recalled me, Madam, from my Voluntary Exile, and I die a thousand times a
Day, uncertain of my Destiny: If you be Cruel enough to refuse me your Pity,
suffer at least, that having made known to you my Passion, I may die with Grief
at your Feet. The Marchioness was some time without resolving to answer him;
but at length, gaining Assurance, I acknowledge, said she, Don Lewis, that I am
not wholly ignorant of one part of your Sentiments, but I was willing to
persuade my self 'twas the Effects of an Innocent Affection: Make me not a
Partner of your Crime; you commit one, when you betray the Friendship due to my
Husband: But, alas, you will pay but too dearly for this; for I know that Duty
for^ids you to Love me; and in Respect, it does not only forbid me to love you,
but to fly from you: I will do it, Don Lewis, I will avoid you; and I do not
know, whether I ought not to Hate you: But, alas, it seems impossible to me to
do it. What do you then, Madam, answered he, interrupting her, being full of
Grief and Despair, when you pronounce the Sentence of my Death? You cannot
Hate, me say you: Do you not Hate me, and do you not do me all the Mischief you
are able, when you resolve to avoid me? Make an end, Madam, make an end, leave
not your Vengeance imperfect; sacrifice me to your Duty, and your Husband; for
my Life cannot but be odious, if you take from me the Hopes of pleasing you.
She looked on him at this instant with Eyes full of Languishing: Don Lewis, said
she to him, you reproach me with what I would deserve. In ending these words,
she arose, fearing greatly, lest her Affection should triumph over her Reason;
and notwithstanding his endeavors to withold her, she past into a Chamber
where her Women were.

She thought she had gained much on her self in forcing her way out of this
Conversation, without answering so favorably as her Heart could have wished;
but Love is a Seducer, which must not be in any sort hearkened to, if one will
not be totally overcome by him. From that day Don Lewis began to think himself
Happy, though he wanted many things to complete his Felicity. The Marchioness,
in effect, had a Principle of Virtue, which opposed it self always with Success
to the desires of her Lover.

He had no longer those Scruples of Friendship for the Marquess de Barbaran
which had so greatly disturbed his Mind; Love had perfectly banished Friendship;
nay, he even secretly hated him.

In fine, Don Lewis flattering himself, that perhaps he might find a favorable
moment to affect the Marchioness's Heart with some Pity; he carefully sought
it; and to find it, one day when 'twas very hot, knowing that the Marchioness
was wont to retire to Repose her self after Dinner, as it is customary, in that
Country, he came to her, doubting not but every body was asleep in the House.

She was in a Ground-Room which looked into the Garden; all was fast and shut
close, save a little Window, whereby he saw on her Bed this Charming Creature:
She was in a profound Sleep, half undrest; he had the time to discover such
Beauties as still augmented the force of his Passion. He approacht so softly to
her, that she did not awake: It was already some moments that he had looked on
her with all the Transports of a Man amazed, when seeing her naked Breasts, he
could not forbear kissing them. She arose on a sudden; she had not her Eyes
open; the Chamber was dark, and she could never have believed Don Lewis could
have been so bold. I have already told you, Madam, that he resembled the
Marquess de Barbaran; She did not doubt then but it was he, and calling him
several times, her dear Marquess and Husband she tenderly embraced him. He well
knew his Error; whatever Pleasure it procured him, he could have wished to have
owed this only to his Mistress's Favors. But, O Heavens, how unfortunately it
happened! The Marquess came in this dangerous moment; and 'twas not without the
greatest fury he saw the Liberty Don Lewis took with his Wife. At the noise he
had made in entering, she had turned her Eyes toward the Door, and seeing her
Husband enter, whom she thought she had already in her Arms, it is impossible
to represent her Affliction and Astonishment.

Don Lewis amazed at this Accident, flattered himself, that perhaps he was not
known: He past immediately into the Gallery, and finding a Window was opened
into the Garden, he threw himself out of it, and immediately past through a
Backdoor. The Marquess pursued him, without being able to overtake him: In
returning the same way he came, he unhappily found the Marchioness's Picture.
which Don Lewis had dropped as he ran; he immediately made most cruel Reflections
hereupon: This Picture of his Wife, which Don Lewis had let fall, and the sight
of her embracing him, all this made him no longer doubt of his Wives Falsehood:
I am betrayed, Cried he, by her whom I loved dearer than my own Life: Was there
ever a more Unhappy Man in the World? In ending these Words, he returned to his
Wives Chamber. She immediately threw her self at his Feet, and melting into
Tears, would have justified her self, and make known to him her Innocence; but
the Spirit of Jealousy had so fully possessed him, that he violently represt
her: He harkned only to the Transports of his Rage and Despair, and turning
away his Eyes, that he might not see so lovely an Object, he had the Barbarity
to strike his Dagger into the Breast of the most Beautiful and most Virtuous
Woman in the World. She offered her self to be slaughtered as an innocent
Sacrifice, and her Soul issued out in a stream of Blood.

O God, cried I, O Imprudent Don Lewis! Why did you leave this Charming Lady to
the Fury of an Amorous Husband, transported with Jealousy! You might have
snatched her out of his cruel Hands. Alas, Madam, replied this Gentleman, he
knew not what he did; for what would he have done at another time to have
prevented such a Misfortune.

As soon as the unfortunate Marchioness had rendered her last Breath, her cruel
Executioner shut her Apartment, took all the Money and Jewels he had, mounted
on Horseback, and fled with all the speed he could. Don Lewis restless, and
more Amorous than ever, returned thither in the Evening, notwithstanding
whatever might befall him: He was surpised when he was told the Marchioness was
still asleep; he immediately went into the Garden, and entered into the Gallery,
through the same Window which he had found open, and from thence came into the
Chamber: 'Twas so dark, that he was fain to walk warily; when he felt something
which had like to have made him fall, he stooped down and found it was a dead
Body; he uttered a great Shriek, and doubting not but it was that of his dear
Mistress, he sunk down with Grief: Some of the Marchioness's Women walking
under the Windows of her apartment, heard Don-Lewis 's Cries; they easily got up
through the same Window, and entered the Room. What a sad Spectacle, what a
lamentable sight was this? I cannot find Words to denote to you the Horror of
this Spectacle, Don Lewis was no sooner come to himself, by the force of
Remedies, but his Grief, Rage and Despair, broke out with such Violence, that
it was impossible to calm him; and I am persuaded he had not outlived her
whose loss he occasioned, if the desire of Vengeance had not re-animated him.

He parted like one furious in search of the Marquess de Barbaran; He sought
him everywhere without hearing any news of him; He ran over Italy, traverst
Germany, came into Flanders, and past into France. He was told that the
Marquess was at Valentia in Spain; he came there, and met not with him. In
fine, three Years being past, without finding the means of sacrificing his
Enemy to his Mistress's Ghost, Divine Grace, which is irresistible, and
particularly on great Souls, touched his so efficatiously, that he immediately
changed his Desire of Revenge into serious Desires of leaving the World, and
minding only the fitting himself for another Life.

Being filled with this Spirit he returned into Sardagnia: He sold all his
Estate, which he distributed among some of his Friends, who with great Merit
were yet very poor; and by this means became so poor himself, that he reduced
himself to the begging of Alms.

He had heretofore seen, in going to Madrid, a place very fit to make an
Hermitage, (it is toward Mount Dragon;) this Mountain is almost inaccessible,
and you cannot pass to it but through an Overture, which is in the midst of a
great Rock; it is stopped up when the Snow falls, and the Hermitage lies buried
more than six Months under it. Don Lewis made one be built here, where he was
wont to pass whole Years without seeing any one. He made such Provisions as
were necessary, having good Books, and thus remained in this dismal Solitude;
but this Year his Friends forced him hither, by reason of a great Sickness,
which had like to have cost him his Life. It is four Years since he has led
this Holy Spiritual Life, and so different from that to which he was born, that
it is with great trouble he sees any of his Acquaintance.

As to the Marquess de Barbaran, he has wholly left the Isle of Sardagnia,
where he has not the Liberty to return. I am informed he is married again at
Anvers, to a Widow of a Spaniard named Fonceca.

And it is he himself that has related to one of my Friends the Particularities
of his Crime; and he is so furiously tortured with the remembrance of it, that
he imagines he continually sees his Wife dying, and reproaching him with his
Fury and Jealousy. In a word, he has contracted such a deep Melancholy, that
his Death is thought by every one to be near, or at the least, the loss of his
Senses.

The Gentleman here was silent; and I not being able to forbear weeping at so
Tragical a Relation, Don Fernand de Toledo, who had observed it, and would not
take notice of it, for fear of interrupting the Relation, rallied me about my
Tenderness, telling me how well he was pleased to find me so Compassionate, and
that I should not be long before I met with Objects fit to exercise it on. I
did not so much mind the returning an Answer to him, as the Thanking this
Gentleman, who was pleased to entertain me with the Recital of so extraordinary
an Adventure: I entreated him to make my Compliments to Don Lewis, and to give
him from me two Pistols, seeing he lived on Alms. Don Fernand, and each of the
Cavaliers, gave as much: Here is, said the Gentleman to us, wherewith to enrich
the Poor of Victoria; for Don Lewis appropriates not such great Charities as
these to himself. We told him, he was the Master, and might dispose of the
Money as he pleased. But to return to my Adventures:

Although I had a Pasport from the King of Spain, the best specified, and most
general, as is possible, yet I was obliged to take a Billet from the
Toll-House; for without this Precaution, all my Clothes had been confiscated:
To what purpose then is my Pasport? said I to them. To none at all, replied
they. The Surveyers and Officers of the Customs would not so much as cast their
Eyes on it; they told me, The King must come and assure them, that this Order
was from him. It is to no purpose for any one to allege his being a Stranger,
and ignorant of the Usages of the Country: For they drily answer, That the
Stranger's Ignorance makes the Spaniard 's Profit. The ill weather has kept me
here two Days, during which I saw the Governess, and the Play. The principal
Place of this Town is adorned with a very fair Fountain standing in the midst:
it is incircled with the Townhouse, the Prison, two Convents, and several
well built Houses: Here is a New Town and an Old one; every body forsakes this
latter to dwell in the other. Here are very rich Merchants; their chief Trade
is at St. Sebastian or Bilbo; they send great store of Iron to Grenada,
Estremadour, Galicia, and other Parts of the Kingdom. I observed, that the
great Streets are set with fine Trees, which are watered with Streams running
by them. From Mount St. Adrian hither, it is seven Leagues. In fine, I am just
setting out, and must end this long Letter; it is late, and I have spoke, to
you so much of what I have seen, that I have said nothing of my Affections to
you: Believe me, however, Dear Cousin, that I am, and ever shall be.

From Victoria, Feb. 24, 1673. Yours.

LETTER III.
MY Letters are so long, that it is hard to believe when I finish them, that I
have any thing else more to tell you; yet, my dear Cousin, I never close any,
but there remains still sufficient for another: When I were only to speak to
you of my Friendship, this would be an inexhaustible Subject; you may make some
Judgment of it from the Pleasure I find in obeying your Commands. You are
desirous to know all the Particulars of my Voyage, I will therefore go on to
relate them:

I set out very late from Victoria, by reason of my stay at the Governess's,
whom I before mentioned: and we went to lie at Miranda; the Country is very
pleasant as far as Avigny; we came afterwerds by a difficult Way to the Banks
of the River Vrola, whose. Noise is the greater, in that it is full of Rocks, on
which the Water dashes, beats up, and falls down, and forms natural Cascades in
several places: We continued to ascend the high Mountains of the Pyrenees,
where we ran a thousand several Dangers: we saw the ancient Ruins of an old
Castle, where Ghosts and Spirits have their Apartments, as well as in that of
Quebara, it is near Gargason; and being to stop there to show my Pasport,
because here certain Customs are paid to the King, I learnt from the Alcade of
the Borough, who drew near my Litter to talk with me, that it is the common
Report of the Country, That there were formerly a King and a Queen here, who
had so fine and beautiful a Woman to their Daughter, that she was rather taken
for a Goodness than a Mortal Creature: she was called Mira; and it is from her
Name came the Mira of the Spaniards, which is to say, Look you; for as soon as
ever she appeared, all the People attentively beheld her; and cried out, Mira,
Mira; and here is the Etymology of a Word drawn far enough. This Princess was
never seen by any Body who became not desperately in love with her; but her
Disdainfulness and Indifference made all her Lovers pine away: The famous
Basilisk never killed so many People as the Beautiful and Dreadful Mira; she
thus depopulated her Father's Kingdom, and all the Countries thereabouts were
full of the deceased and dying Lovers. After they had in vain Addressed
themselves to her, they lastly applied themselves to Heaven, to demand
Vengeance on her Cruelty: The Gods at length grew Angry, and the Goddesses were
not much behind them in the Exercise of this Passion: so that to punish her,
the Scourges of Heaven finished the Destruction of her Father's Kingdom: In
this general Calamity he consulted the Oracle, which told him, That all these
Miseries would not have an end, till Maria had expiated the Mischiefs which her
Eyes had done: and that she must be gone: That Destiny would conduct her to the
place where she was to lose her repose and liberty. The Princess obeyed,
believing it impossible for her to be touched with Tenderness: She carried only
her Nurse with her; she was clad like a simple Shepherdess, lest she should be
taken notice of, whether at Sea or Land. She ran over a great Part of the
World, committing every day two or three Dozen of Murders; for her Beauty was
not diminisht by the Fatigue of her Travels: She arrived at length near this
old Castle, which belonged to a young Count, called Nios, endowed with a
thousand Perfections, but extreme Proud and Reserved: he spent his time in the
Woods; as soon as ever he perceived a Woman, he fled from her, and of all
things he saw in the World, she was his greatest Aversion. The beautiful Mira
was resting her self one day under the shade of some Trees, when Nios past by,
clothed with a Lyon's Skin, a Bow at his Girdle, and a Mace on his Shoulder;
his Hair was all clotted together, and his Face be smeared like a
Chimney-Sweeper's, (this Circumstance is observable) yet the Princess thought
him the most handsome Man in the World; she ran after him as if she had been
mad; and he ran from her as if he had been in the same condition: she lost the
sight of him; she knew not where to find him: she is now in the greatast
Sorrow, weeping Day and Night with her Nurse. Nios returned to the Chase; she
saw him again, and would have followed him: as soon as he perceived her, he did
as at first, and Mira betook her self again to her Lamentations; but her
Passion giving her new strength, she out-ran him, stopped him, taking hold of his
Locks, entreating him to look on her, thinking this was enough to engage him:
He cast his Eyes on her with as much Indifference as if she had been an
ordinary Person. Never Woman was more surpised; she would not leave him; she
came maugre him to his Castle: where, as soon as she had entered, he there left
her, and was no more seen. The poor Mira, being not to be comforted, died with
Grief, And from that time you hear deep Sighs and Groans, which come from the
Castle of Nios. The young Wenches of the Country are used to go there, and
carry her little Presents of Fruits and Milk, which they set down at the Mouth
of a Cave, where no body dare enter: they said, this was to comfort her; but
this has been abolisht as superstitious. And though I believed not a word of
whateever was told me at Garganson, in relation to Mira and Nios, yet I was
pleased in the Recital of this Story, of which I omit a thousand Particulars,
for fear of tiring you by its length. My Waiting Woman was so affected with
this Relation, that she was for having us return back again, to set at the
Mouth of the Cave some red Partridges, which my People had brought: she
imagined the Princess's Ghost would be mightily comforted in receiving this
Testimony of our good Will; but for my part, I thought I should be more content
than her, in having those Partridges for my Supper. We past the River of Vrola,
on a great Stone Bridge, and having went over another, with difficulty enough,
by reason of the melted Snow, we arrived at Miranda d' Ebro; this is a great
Village, or a little Town: here is a large place adorned with a Fountain; the
River Ebro, which is one of the most considerable of Spain, traverses it: You
see on the Top of a Mountain the Castle, with several Towers; it appears to be
of some strength; and there issues out so great a Stream from a Rock on which
it is built, that it turns several Mills: I could not observe any thing else
worth writing to you.

The three Knights I spoke of to you, were arrived before me, and given all
requisite Orders for Supper; so we eat together: And though the Night appeared
well advanced, because the Days are short in this Season, yet 'twas not late;
so that these Gentlemen, who showed me great Respect and Civility, asked me, How
I would pass the time? I proposed to them the playing at Ombre, and that I
would go Halves with Don Fernand de Toledo. They accepted the Offer: Don
Fernand de Cardonne said, He had rather Converse with me than Play: so the
three others began, and I for some time gave my self over to the looking on
them, with great Pleasure, for their Way is quite different from ours: They
never utter a word; I do not say, to complain, (for this would be unworthy the
Spanish Gravity) but to demand a Gano, or to cut higher, or to show that one
may take some other Advantage: In a word, they seem to be Statues, or Pieces of
German Clock-work, never appearing transported with either good or bad Luck.
Among other Discourse which I had with D. Fred. de Cardonne, he told me, There
were two observable things in Catalonia, one of which is a Mountain of Salt,
partly white as Snow, and the other part clearer and more transparent than
Crystal: that there is Blue, Green, Violet, Orange, and a thousand different
Colors, which yet loses its tincture when wetted; it continually forms it
self, and grows there: and though commonly the places where Salt is to be
found, are so barren, that you see not so much as an Herb, yet there are here
Pine-Trees of great height, and excellent Vine-yards: When the Sun darts its
Rays on this Mountain, it looks as if it wholly consisted of the most precious
Stones in the World: but the best of it is, that it yields a good Revenue.

The other Particular he mentioned to me, was of a Fountain, whose Water is
very good, and of the same Color as Claret: I have never heard any thing of
this, said I to him, but one of my Relations, who has been in Catalonia, has
assured me there is a Fountain near Balut, whose Water is as others are for
Color, and yet whatever you put therein, appears like Gold. I have seen it,
Madam, continued Don Frederic; and I remember a Man that was very covetous, and
more foolish, went thither every Day to put therein his Silver, hoping in time
'twould be changed into Gold: but he was so far from enriching himself that he
was ruined; for some Peasants, more subtle and crafty than he, having perceived
what he did, stood watching a little lower, and the Stream of the Water would
now and then bring some Pieces to them. If you return into France by Catalonia,
added he, you will see this Fountain, It is not that which can draw me thither,
replied I, but the desire of passing by Montferat, would make me undertake a
longer Journey. It is situated, said he, near Barcelona, and is a place of
great Devotion: It seems as if the Rock were sawed through the middle; the
Church stands high, is small and obscure. By the help of Fourscore and Ten
Lamps of Silver, you perceive the Image of the Virgin, which looks very
duskish, and is held for Miraculous. The Altar cost Philip the Second thirty
thousand Crowns; and here is every Day seen Pilgrims from all Parts of the
World; this Holy Place abounds with Hermitages, inhabited by Persons of great
Devotion: These are commonly Men of good Birth, who have not left the World
till they have well tried it, and who appear much taken with the Sweets of
their Retirements, though the Place be dismal; and 'twould been impossible to
have had Access to it, had not a Passage been cut through the Rocks. Yet you
find here several agreeable Objects, a curious Prospect, various Springs,
Gardens well dressed by these Religioses own hands, and every where a certain Air
of Solitude and Devotion, which mightily affects those who come there. We have
another famous place of Devotion, added he, and that is Nuestra Senora del
Pilar: it is at Saragossa, in a Chapel on a Pillar of Marble, where our Lady
holds the Babe Jesus in her Arms. It is pretended, that the Virgin appeared on
this same Pillar to St. James; and the Image is here worshipped with great
Reverence. It cannot be well observed, because it stands so high, and in a very
dark place; so that without the Flambeaux it could not be seen at all. Here are
always Fifty Lamps burning; Gold and precious Stones shine here on all sides;
and the Pilgrims come here in great Sholes. But yet, says he, I may truly say,
in favor of Saragossa that it is one of the finest Towns you shall see; it is
situated along the Ebre, in a vast Field, is adorned with great Buildings, rich
Churches, a stately Bridge, fine open Places, and the most charming Women in
the World, who love French, and will omit nothing to oblige you to speak well
of 'em, if you pass by there. I told him, I had already heard several things
spoken of them to their commendation: But continued I, this Country is very
Barren, and the Soldiers can hardly subsist in it. In effect, replied he,
whether the Air be bad, or that they want Necessaries, the Flemmings and
Germans cannot live there? and if they do not die there, it is because they run
away. The Spaniards and Neopolitans are more prone than they to desert; these
last past through France, to return into their Country; the others Coast the
Pyrences along Languedoc, and enter Castille by Navarre, or Biscaye. This is a
Course which the old Soldiers fail not to steer; for the new-raised ones, they
perish in Catalonia, being not accustomed thereto; and it is certain there is no
place where War is more troublesome to the King of Spain: He maintains his
Forces here with great Charge, and the Advantage which the Enemy gains of him
is not small; and I very well know they are more sensible at Madrid for the
smallest Loss in Catalonia, than they would be for the greatest in Flanders, or
Milan, or elsewhere. But at present, continues he, we are going to be more at
our Ease than we have been, being expected at Court, that the Peace will be
lasting, because they talk much of a Marriage which will make a new Alliance;
and the Marquess de Los Balbares, Penipotentiary at Nimiguen, has received
Orders to pass speedily to France, to demand of that King, Mademoiselle d'
Orleans; therefore it is not doubted but the Marriage will be concluded: But it
is thought very strange, Don John of Austria should consent to this Marriage.
You will do me a singular Pleasure, said I, interrupting him, if you would
inform me of some Particularities touching this Prince: It is natural for to
have a Curiosity in relation to Persons of this Character; and when a body
comes into a Court where one was never before, that I may not appear a Novice,
I should have some previous Notices. He answered me, It would be a great
satisfaction to him, if he could relate any thing might please me; and he began
thus:

You will not, perhaps, Madam, think it amiss, that I begin at the Original of
Things, and tell you, That this Prince was Son of one of the finest Women in
Spain, named Maria Calderona; she was a Player; and the Duke de Medina de las
Torres, became desperately in love with her: This Cavalier had so many
Advantages above others, that Calderonna loved him no less than she was beloved
by him. In the Heat of this Intrigue, Philip the Fourth saw her, and preferred
her to one of the Queen's Maids of Honor, and who was so grieved at this
Change of the King, whom she really loved, and had a Son by, that she retired
from the World, and betook her self to Los del Calsas Reales, where she put on
the Religio's Habit. As for Calderonne, her inclination lying wholly toward
the Duke de Medina, she would not hearken to the King, without the Duke would
thereto consent: She spoke to him of it, and offered to withdraw secretly where
he would; but the Duke fearing to incur the King's Displeasure, answered her,
He was resolved to yield up to His Majesty a Treasure which he was not in a
Capacity to contend for. She made him a thousand Reproaches for this; she
called him Traitor to his Love, ungrateful toward his Mistress: And more-over,
told him, That though he was so Happy as that he could dispose of his Heart as
he pleased, yet she could not do the same; and therefore he must continue to
visit her, or prepare to see her die with Despair. The Duke affected with so
great a Passion, promised to feign a Journey to Andalousia, and to remain with
her hid in a Closet: he effectually parted from the Court, and afterward shut
himself up (as it was agreed) whatever Risque he ran by so imprudent Conduct.
The King, in the mean time, was very Amorous, and remained very well satisfied:
She had, during this, Don John d' Austria, and the Resemblance he had with the
Duke de Medina de Las Torres, had made it be thought that he was his Son; but
though the King had other Children, and particularly the Bishop of Malaga, good
Fortune decided in his Favor, and he has been only acknowledged.

Don John 's Friends say, That 'twas by reason of the Exchange which had been
made of the Son of Calderonna, for the Son of Queen Elizabeth; and here is how
they set forth this Change, which is a Story made on purpose to impose on the
World, and which I believe has no ground of Truth: They pretend, the King being
desperately in love with this Player, she became big with Child at the same
time as the Queen; and seeing the King's Passion was so greatly toward her,
that she might expect any thing, she so ordered it, that she made him promise
her, That if the Queen had a Son, and she likewise, he should put hers in his
place: What will you lose by this, Sir? said she, Will it not be your Son that
will still Reign, only with this difference, that loving me, as you say you do,
you will love him likewise the better. She had Wit, and the King could deny her
nothing; he consented, and in effect the Business was managed with that
Address, that the Queen being brought to Bed of a Son, and Calderonna of
another, the Exchange was made. He that should have Reigned, and who bore the
Name of Baltazar, died at the Age of fourteen Years: The King was told, 'twas
with over-heating himself at Tennis; but the truth is, this Prince was suffered
to keep bad Company, which procured him his Misfortunes; it is said likewise,
That Don Pedro d' Arragon, his Governor, and Chief Gentleman of his Chamber,
more contributed to this than any other, suffering him to bring into his
Apartment a Woman he loved; after this he was taken with a violent Fever, and
concealed the Occasion: The Physicians, who were ignorant of it, thought to
ease him by frequent Bleedings, which put an end to what strength he had; and
by this means they ended his Life. The King knowing, but too late, what had
hapn'd, banished Don Pedro for not hindering this Excess, or for not having
timely discovered it.

In the mean time Don John of Austria, who was brought up as the Natural Son,
changed not his Condition, though this ought to have been, had he been indeed
the lawful Son; yet notwithstanding this, his Creatures affirm, He so exactly
resembles Q. Elizabeth, that she needs no other Picture of her Likeness. And
this Opinion fails not of gaining Belief with the People, who run violently
after Novelties, and who so passionately loved this great Queen, that they
bewail her still as if she was but now deceased. It is true, that if Don John
of Austria would make his Advantage of the favorable Dispositions of the
People, he has met with several Opportunities of extending his Fortune very
far; but his only Aim is to serve the King, and to keep his Subjects in those
Sentiments of Fidelity they ought to have for him.

To return to Calderonna: The King surprised one day the Duke de Medina with
her, and in the excess of his Rage, he ran to him with his Poynard in his Hand;
he was about to kill him, when this Woman placed her self between, telling him,
He might strike her if he would. Having the most extreme Passion for her, he
could not but Pardon him, contenting himself only with banishing him: But
understanding she continued to love him, and write to him, he studied only how
to get a new Passion; when he had one strong enough not to apprehend the Charms
of Calderonna, he sent word to her to retire into a Monastery, as is customary
when the King forsakes his Mistress. She put it not off, writing a Letter to
the Duke, to bid him Adieu: And she received the Veil of a Religio from the
Hand of the Apostolic Nuncio, who became since Innocent X. It is very likely
the King believed Don John was his real Son, seeing he loved him so dearly: One
thing will appear to you very singular, which is, that a King of Spain having
Natural Sons owned by him, they never entered Madrid during his Life: So Don
John was brought up at Ocanna, which is some Leagues distant from it. The King,
his Father, came often thither, and he made him come even to the Gates of the
Town, where he went to meet him. This Custom comes from that the Grandees of
Spain dispute the Rank which these Princes would hold. Don John, before he went
into Catalonia, remained commonly at Buen Retiro, which is a Royal Seat, at one
of the farthest parts of Madrid, a little without the Gate: And he showed
himself so little, that he was never seen at any Public Feast during the Life
of the late King: but since, Times have changed, and his Fortunes stand on a
different bottom.

Whilst the Queen, Maria Ann of Austria, Sister to the Emperor, and the King's
Mother, Governed Spain; and her Son was not yet of Age to hold the Reigns of
the State. She would have always Don John keep from the Court; and more-over,
found her self so capable of Governing, that she had a mind to ease her Son for
a long time of the Burden of Ruling. She was not troubled to see him ignorant
of whatever might give a desire of Reigning: but though she brought the
greatest Precautions, to hinder him from feeling he was under too strict a
Tutelage, and suffered no Persons to come near him, but those she was well
assured of; yet this hindered not but some of the King's Faithful Servants
hazarded themselves, by giving him to understand what he might do for his
Liberty. He followed the Advice was given him; and in fine, having taken
Measures accordingly, he stole away one Night, and went to Buen Retiro. He as
soon sent from thence an Order to the Queen his Mother, not to stir out of the
Palace.

Don John is of a middle Stature, well shaped, Black, and lively Eyes, and a
most Manly Countenance. He is Polite, Generous, and very Brave. He is ignorant
of nothing befitting his Birth, being well-verst in all Arts and Sciences. He
writes and speaks very well five Languages, and understands yet more. He has
for a long time studied Judicial Astrology. There is no Instrument which he
cannot make, and use with the best Masters. He works on all kind of Mechanics,
makes Arms, and paints finely. He took a great Pleasure in the Mathematics;
but being charged with the Government of the State, he has been obliged to lay
aside all other Employments.

He came to Buen-Retiro in the beginning of the Year 1677. and as soon as he
was there, he sent the Queen Mother to Toledo, because she had declared against
him, and hindered his return to the King. Don John had an extreme Joy in
receiving from the King's own Hand an Order to take Care of Every thing, and to
manage the Affairs of the Kingdom: And 'twas not without occasion he discharged
himself on him, seeing he then was ignorant of the Art of Reigning. It was
alleged for a Reason of his slow Education, That the King his Father was dying
when he gave him Life: That when he came into the World, they were fain to put
him in a Box of Cotton, being so tender and small, that he could not be
swadled: That he was brought up in the Arms, and on the Knees of the Ladies of
the Palace, till he was Ten Years old, without putting his Foot once all this
while on the Ground to walk: That in the Sequel the Queen his Mother, who was
engaged by all the Ties of Natural Duty to preserve this only Heir of the
Spanish Branch, fearing to lose him, dared not let him study, lest by two great
an Application he should lose his Health, which in truth was very unsound: And
'twas observed, that the great Number of Women, with whom the King always was,
and who too sharply reprehended him for his Faults which he committed, had
inspired him with such a great Aversion to them, that as soon as ever he had
notice a Lady staid for him in any place he was to pass, he stole another way,
or kept himself shut up all day in his Chamber. The Marchioness de Luz Veles,
who was his Governess, told me, she waited for an Opportunity full six Months
to speak with him, and when Chance had brought them vnavoidably to him, he
took, their Requests from their Hands, but turned his Head another way, for
fear he should see them. His Health is since so increased, that his Marriage
with the Arch-Dutchess, the Emperor's Daughter, having been broke off by Don
John, by reason 'twas the Queen-Mothers Project, he has desired to marry
Mademoiselled' Orleans. The Circumstances of the Peace which are lately
concluded at Nimiguen, made him cast his Eyes toward this Princess, with whose
excellent Qualities, Madam, you are better acquainted than I.

It is hard to believe, that having Dispositions so far from Gallantry, he
should become so suddenly and vehemently in love with the Queen, as he became
on the only Rehearsal of her good Qualities, and at the sight of her Picture in
Minature, which was showed him. He never lets it go out of his Hand; he always
holds it to his Heart; He Dialogues with it so prettily, as astonishes all the
Courtiers; for he speaks a Language he never spoke: His Passion for the
Princess furnishes him with a thousand Thoughts, which he dares not entrust any
body with. He thinks no body makes haste enough; and therefore sends fresh
Curriers every day to carry his Billets doux, and bring hack News of her.

When you come to Madrid, added he, you will hear, Madam, several Particulars
which have without doubt happened since I was there, and which will perhaps more
satisfy your Curiosity than what I have related to you. I am very much obliged
to you, answered I, for your Civilities; but do me the Favor to oblige me
farther, in giving me the true Character of the Spaniards: You know them, and I
am persuaded nothing has escaped your Enquiries; You speaking to me without
Passion and Interest, I may reckon my self sure of what you tell me. Why
believe you, Madam, replied he smiling, that I shall speak to you more
sincerely than another? There are Reasons which may render me suspected: They
are my Masters; I must manage them; And if I be not Politic enough to do it,
the Vexation of being constrained to obey them, would tempt me to entertain
Notions in their Respect contrary to Truth. However it be, said I, interrupting
him, pray tell me what you know of them.

The Spaniards, said he, have always past for Fierce and Glorious: This Glory
is mixed with Gravity; and they carry it so far, that one may call it an
extravagant Pride: They are Brave, without being Rash; yet they are accused for
not being daring enough; They are Choleric, Revengeful, without showing any
Transport, Liberal without Ostentation, Sober in their Diet, very Presumtuous
in Prosperity, too Rampant in Adversity: They Idolize Women; they are so
prepossest in their Favor, that they show no Discretion in the Choice of their
Wives: They are Patient to Excess, Obstinate, Idle, Singular, Philosophisers:
And as to the rest, Men of Honor, keeping their Words, though it cost 'em their
Lives. They have a great deal of Wit and Vivacity, easily comprehend, explain
themselves in the same manner, and in few Words; They are Prudent, Jealous
without measure, Disinterested, bad Oeconomists, Close, Superstitious, great
Catholics, at least in appearance: They are good Poets, and write Verses with
great Facility. They would be capable of Nobler Sciences, would they vouchsafe
to apply themselves thereto.

They have a Greatness of Soul, Elevated Wit, Constancy, a Natural Seriousness,
and a Respect for Ladies, as is not seen elsewhere: They have a Set-Behaviour,
full of Affectation, intoxicated with their own Merit, hardly ever in this
Particular doing Right to that of others. Their Bravery consists in standing
Valiantly on the Defensive Part, without giving Ground, and without dreading
Danger; but they love not to seek it, which proceeds from their great Judgment:
They discern Danger, and avoid it. Their greatest Defect, in my Opinion, is the
Passion of Revenge and the Means they use for this: Their Maxims hereupon are
absolutely opposite to Christianity and Honor: When they have received an
Affront, they make him be Assassinated who has offered it. They are not
contented with this; for they cause them to be Assassinated likewise whom they
have offended, in the Apprehention of being prevented, knowing well, that if
they do not kill, they shall be killed themselves. They pretend to justify
themselves herein, when they say, That their Enemy having took the first
Advantage, they ought to secure themselves of the secend: That should they fail
herein, they would wrong their Reputation: That you must not fight with a Man
that has insulted over you, but put your self in a Condition to punish him,
without running half the Danger. It is true, that Impunity Authorizes this
Conduct; for the Privilege of Churches and Convents in Spain, is to give an
assured Retreat to Criminals; And as near as they can, they commit these
Villainies hard by a Sanctuary, no have the less way to an Altar; Which you see
often embraced by a Villain, with his Poynard reeking in his Hand, and be-smeared
with the Blood of the Murder which he has committed.

As to their Persons, they are very lean, little, fine shape, comely Head, good
Faces, fine Eyes, well-set Teeth, yellow and duskish Complexion; they will have
one walk slowly, commend big Legs, and a little Foot, Shoes without Heels,
parting the Hair on both sides, being strait cut, and kept behind their Ears
with a great Two-handed Hat, an Habit always Black, instead of a Shirt, Taffity
Sleeves, or black Tabby, a Sword of a strange length, with a black Freize Cloak
over all this, very strait Breeches, hanging Sleeves, and a Poynard. All this
must so dis-figure a Man, let him be otherwise never so well-shaped, that they
seem to affect a Garb the most disagreeable; And ones Eyes cannot with any
Complacency accustom themselves to this fight.

Don Frederick would have continued on his Discourse, and I had so much
pleasure in hearing him, that I would not have interrupted him; but he broke
off himself, having observed that the Play was at an end, and considering, that
we were to set out early next Morning, he thought I might be desirous of
retiring; he therefore with the other Gentlemen, bad me good Night. I rose in
effect very soon next Morning, because 'twas a great Journey to Birbiesca,
where we intended to lie. We followed the River to avoid the Mountains, and
past at Oron, a great River, which falls into the Ehre. We a while after entered
into so strait a Way, that our Litters could scarce pass: We ascended along, a
very strait Coast to Pancorvo, whose Castle I saw standing on a raised Ground,
not far distant: We traverst a great Plain; and this was a Novelty to us, to
see an even Country: This here is surrounded with several Mountains, which seem
linkt together as a Chain, and especially those of Occa: We must again pass
over a little River, before we can come to Birbiesca: This is only a Borough,
which has nothing remarkable but its College, and some few pleasant Gardens
along the Water. But I may say, we came thither in worse Weather than any we
had yet: I was so tired, that as soon as I arrived I went to Bed: so that I saw
not Don Fernand de Toledo, and the other Gentlemen, till the next Day, at
Castle de Peones. But I should tell you how one is served in these Inns, they
being all alike: When you come into one of them, wearied and tired, roasted by
the heat of the Sun, or frozen by the Snows (for there is seldom any
Temperament between these Two Extremes), you see neither Pot on the Fire, nor
Plates washed: You enter into the Stable, and from thence to your Chamber; this
Stable is ordinarily full of Mules and Muletteers, who make use of their Mules
Saddles for Pillows in the night, and in the daytime they serve 'em for
Tables: They eat very friendly with their Mules, and are very good Company
together.

The Staircase by which you go up is very strait, and does rather resemble a
sorry Ladder: La Sennoro de la Casa receives you with her Gown tuckt up, and
her dangling Sleeves; she takes time to put on her Sunday-Cloathes, whilst you
get out of your Litter: and she never omits this; for they are all very Poor
and Vain Glorious. You are showed a Chamber, whose Walls are white enough, hung
with a thousand little scurvy Pictures of Saints; the Beds are without
Curtains, the Covertures of Cotton, the Sheets as large as Napkins, and the
Napkins like Pocket-hankerchiefs; and you must be in some considerable Town to
find four or five of them; for in other places there are none, no more than
there are Forks: They have only a Cup in the House; and if the Mule-Drivers get
first hold of it, which commonly happens, if they please, (for they are served
with more Respect than those whom they bring) you must stay patiently till they
have done with it, or drink out of an Earthen Pitcher. It is impossible to warm
one at the Kitchin-fire, without being choked, for they have no Chimneys; and
it is the same in all the Houses on the Road; there is an Hole made in the top
of the Ceiling, and the Smoke goes out thence; the Fire is in the midst of the
Kitchen: They put what you would have roasted on Tiles, and when it is well
gril'd on one side, they turn the other: when it is gross Meat, they fasten it
to a String, and so let it hang on the Fire, and turn it with their Hands; so
that the Smoke makes it so black, that it would turn ones Stomach to look on it.

I think there cannot be a better Representation of Hell than these sort of
Kitchins, and the Persons in them; for not to speak of this horrible Smoke,
which blinds and choaks one, they are a Dozen of Men, and as many Women,
blacker than Devils, nasty and stinking like Swine, and clad like Beggars.
There are always some of 'em impudently grating on a sorry Guiter, and singing
like a Cat a roasting. The Women have all of 'em their Hair about their Ears,
and you would take 'em for Bedlamites; they have Glass Necklaces, which hang
twisted about their Necks like Ropes of Onions, but however serve to cover the
Nastiness of their Skin. They are as great Thieves as any are in Jayls, and
they are urgent to serve you only to have an opportunity to steal something of
you, though it be but a Pin.

Before all things, the Mistress of the House brings you her little Children,
who are bare-headed in the midst of Winter, though but of a Day old: she makes
'em touch your Clothes, she rubs their Eyes with them, their Cheeks, Throat,
and Hands. This seems as if one was become a Relick, and could heal all
Diseases. These Ceremonies over, you are asked, If you will eat any thing; and
though at Midnight, you must send to the Butchery, the Market, the Tavern, the
Bakers; in fine, to all parts of the Town, to gather wherewith to make a sorry
Meal. For though the Mutton here be very tender, their way of frying it with
Oil, is not to every Bodies Relish. Here are great store of Partridges, and
those very large; they are not very fat, but dry; and to make 'em drier, they
roast 'em to a Coal. The Pigeons here are excellent; and in seve-places here
is good Fish, especially Bessugosses, which have the taste of a Trout, and of
which they make Pasties, which would be good, were they not stuffed with
Garlic, Saffron, and Pepper. Their Bread is white enough, and sweet, that one
would think it made up with Sugar; but it is ill wrought, and so little baked,
that it is as heavy as Lead in the Stomach: it has the shape of a flat Cake,
and is not much thicker than one's Finger. The Wine is good, and Fruits in
their season, especially Grapes, which are very large, and of delicate taste.
You may reckon your self certain of a good Desert. You have Sallads here of
such good Lettice as the World cannot afford better.

Do not think (Dear Cousin) it is sufficient to say, Go fetch such things, to
have them; for not very seldom you can meet with nothing: But supposing you
find what you would have, you must give out your Money beforehand: so that
your Meat is paid for before you have begun to eat it; for the Master of the
Inn is only allowed to Lodge you: they allege for a Reason, That it is not
just one only Person should go away with all the Profit from Travelers, it
being better the Money should be dispersed.

You enter not any Inn to Dine, but carry your Provision with you, and stop at
the Bank of some River, where the Mule-Drivers bate their Mules; and this is
with Oats or Barley, with chopped Straw, which they carry with them in great
Sacks; for as to Hay they give them 'em none. It is not allowed a Woman to
tarry above two Days in an Inn on the Road, unless she can offer good Reasons.
And here is enough in relation to Inns, and the Manner of your Treatment therein.

After Supper these Gentlemen played at Ombre, and I not being strong enough to
play against them, I went shares with Don Frederic de Cardonne; and Don Fernand
drew near the Fireside to me; he told me, He could, have wished my time would
permit me to pass by Vailladolid; that it is the most pleasant Town of Old
Castille, it having been for a great while the Mansion of the Kings of Spain;
and that they have a Palace there fit for them. That as to him, he had
Relations there would be infinitely pleased to entertain me; and would show me
the Dominicans Church, which the Dukes of Lerma have founded; that it was very
Stately, and the Portal of singular Beauty, by means of the Figures and
Embossed Work, which enrich it: That in the College of the same Convent the
French see there, with great satisfaction, all the Walls full of Flower de
Luces; it being said, a Bishop who defended on the King of France, had been at
the Charge of Painting them. He added, They would have carried me to the
Religioses of St. Claire, to show me in the Choire of their Church, the Tomb of
a Castillan Knight, whence it is said, issues out Accents and Groans every time
any of his Family are near their Deaths. I smiled at this, as being doubtful of
the Truth of such kind of Relations: You give not Credit to what I say,
continued he, neither would I engage for the Truth of it, though all the
Country thereabouts are so fully persuaded of it, that you would be suspected
for an Heretic should you question it. But it is certain there is a Bell in
Arragon, in a small Town called Villilla, on the Ebre, which is about fifty
Foot compass, and it happens sometimes to sound of it self, it being not
perceiveable to be agitated by any Wounds or Earthquakes: In a word, by no
visible thing. It first Tolls, and afterward, by intervals, Rings, out, as
well in the Day as the Night: When it is heard, it is not doubted but it
denounces some sad Accident; which is what happened in 1601, on Thursday the 13th
of June, till Saturday the 15th of the same Month; it ceased then to Ring, but
it began again on Corpus Christi, when they were on the point of making the
Procession. It was heard likewise when Alphonsus the Fifth, K. of Arragon, went
into Italy to take Possession of the Kingdom of Naples. It was hard at the
Death of Charles the Fifth. It denoted the Departure of Don Sebastion, King of
Portugal, for Africa. The Extremity of King Philip the Second: and the Decease
of his last Wife Q. Ann. You would have me to believe you, Don Fernand, said I;
Perhaps I shall seem too obstinate in standing out all this while, but you will
agree there are Matters one may lawfully doubt of. Nay, Madam, replied he, with
a pleasant Air, I tell you nothing but what I can have a thousand Witnesses to
justify; but perhaps you will sooner believe Don Esteve de Carvajal in a thing
as extraordinary in his Country. He at the same time called to him, demanding
of him, Whether 'twere not true, that there is in the Convent of Cordoua a
Clock which fails not to Ring every time a Religious is to die; so that the
time is known to a Day? Don Esteve confirmed what Don Fernand said: and though
I remained not absolutely convinced, yet I made a show as if I was.

You pass so quickly through Old Castille, continued Don Fernand, that you will
not have time to see what is most remarkable: The Picture of the Blessed Virgin
is talked of far and near, which was found miraculously stamped on a Rock; it
belongs to the Religio's Augustines d' Avila, and several Persons go there out
of Devotion; but one has no less Curiosity to see certain Mines of Salt, which
are near there, in a Village called Mengraville; you defend above two hundred
Steps under Ground, and then enter into a vast Cavern formed by Nature, whose
Top, or Roof, is upheld by one only Pillar of Chrystalin Salt, of astonishing
Largeness and Color. Near this place, in the Town of Soria, you see a great
Bridge without a River, and a great River without a Bridge, the River being
forced out of its place by an Earthquake.

But if you go as far as Medina del Campo, added he, I am sure the Inhabitants
will give you a welcome Entrance, only because you are of the French Nation,
whom they much affect, to distinguish themselves hereby from the Sentiments of
the other Castillians: Their Town is so priviledg'd, that the K. of Spain has
not the Power to create any Officers, nor the Pope to confer Benefices: this
Right belongs to the Townsmen, and they often fall together by the Ears, in the
choosing of their Magistrates and Ecclesiastics.

One of the Rarities of this Country is the Aquaduct of Segovia, which is five
Leagues in length; it has above two hundred Arches of extraordinary height,
though in several places there are two standing one on another; and it is all
built on Free Stone, there having been no Mortar, or any Cement to join them:
This is looked on as one of the Romans Works, or at least as worthy to be so.
The River which is at the end of the Town surrounds the Castle, and serves it
for a Ditch; it is built on a Rock. Among several things remarkable, you see
the Effigies of the Kings of Spain, who have Reigned for several Years: And
there is no Town but Segovia and Seville where Money is Coined, and the Pieces
of Eight which are made at the former Places are held to be the best; and this
is by means of the River which turns certain Mills that stamp the Money. Here
are likewise most curious Walks along a Meadow planted with Elm Trees, whose
Leaves are so thick and large, that the greatest Heats of the Sun cannot pierce
them. I want not Curiosity, said I to him, for all things which deserve it; but
I at present want Time to see them: However, I should be very glad to arrive
timely at Burgos, to view the Town. Which is to say, Madam, replied Don
Fernand, we must lose your Company, and let you retire.

He gave notice thereof to the other Gentlemen, who gave over their Play, and
we thus separated.

I rose this Morning before Day; and I end this Letter at Burgos, where I now
arrived: Thus, Dear Cousin, I shall send you nothing of this Day, but shall take
the first occasion to acquaint you with what befalls me.

From Burgos, Feb. 27, 1673. Yours.

LETTER. IV.
WE could sensibly perceive in arriving at Burgos, that this Town is colder
than any of those we past; and it is likewise said, you have none of those
excessive Heats which are intolerable in other Parts of Spain: The Town stands
where you descend the Mountain, and reaches to the Plain as far as the River,
which washes the foot of the Wall: the Streets are very strait and even: the
Castle is not great, but very strong, and is seen on the top of the Mountain: A
little lower is the Triumphant Arch of Fernando Gonsales, which the Curious do
much admire. This Town was the first that was conquered from the Mores; and the
Kings of Spain have long resided here; it is the Capital of Old Castille; it
holds the first Rank in the two States of the two Castilles, although Toledo
disputes it with her: You see her fine Buildings; and Velascoe's Palace is very
stately. Here are in all the broad Streets and spacious Places, Fountains, with
Statues, some of which are good Pieces; but the finest sight is the Cathedral,
which is so large, that Mass is said in five several places of it, without any
disturbance to each other: the Architecture is so exquisitely wrought, that it
may pass among the Gothic Buildings for a Masterpiece of Art: and this is so
much the more remarkable, in that they build very sorrily in Spain: in some
places this is so through Poverty, and in others want of Stone and Lime: I am
told, that even at Madrid you see Houses of Earth, and the finest are made with
Brick, cemented with the same, for want of Lime. To pass from the Town to the
Suburbs of Bega, you go over three Stone Bridges: the Gate which answers that
of Santa Maria, stands high, with the Image of the Virgin upon it: this Suburb
contains the greatest part of the Convents and Hospitals; there is a great one
founded by Philip the Second, to receive the Pilgrims which go to St. James,
and which entertains them for a Day. The Abbey of Miile Flores, whose Building
is very stately, is not far distant. You see here in this Suburb several
Gardens which are watered with Fountains and pleasant Springs; the River serves
for a Channel: And you find in a great Park enclosed with Walls, pleasant Walks
at all times of the Year.

I would have seen the Crucifix in the Augustines Convent; it is placed in a
Chapel of the Cloister, large and dark enough, so that you could hardly
discern it, were it not for the Lamps, which are continually burning, they are
above an hundred; some are of Gold, and others of Silver, of so extraordinary a
size, that they cover all the Vault of this Chapel: there are sixty Silver
Candlesticks of a length, exceeding the tallest Man, and so heavy that two Men
cannot lift 'em: they stand on the ground on both sides of the Altar; those
which are upon it are of Massy Gold: You see between 'em two Crosses of the
same, set out with Precious Stones, and Crowns hanging over the Altar, adorned
with Pearls and Diamonds of great Luster; The Chapel is hung with Tapistry,
wrought with Gold; it is so laden with rich Gifts, that there is hardly room to
put 'em in, so that part of 'em are kept in the Treasury.

The Holy Crucifix stands on the Altar, near the natural bigness, it is covered
with three Curtains one on another, all embrodered with Pearls and Diamonds:
When they open them, which is not done without great Ceremony, and for Persons
of Quality, several Bells are rung, every one falls on his Knees: and it must
be granted, that this place and sight strikes one with an Awful Regard: The
Crucifix is of Carved Work, and cannot be better made; its Carnation is very
natural; it is covered from the Breasts to the Feet with a fine Linen, in
several Foulds or Pleats, which makes it look like a loose Jerkin, which in my
Opinion, is not over-agreeable.

It is commonly held, that Nicodemus made it; but those who are for making
every thing Miraculous, will have it brought down from Heaven, they know not
how nor when. I was told, certain Monks of this Town had once stole it, and
conveyed it away; but it took a convenient time to give 'em the slip, and was
found the next Morning in the Chapel, in its usual place: These honest People
being enraged, that it should serve 'em such a Trick, mustered up their Forces,
and violently laid Hands on it the second time, but to as little purpose; for
'twould by no means stay with 'em: However, it works Miracles, and is one of
the chief Objects of Devotion in Spain: The Religious tell you, it sweats every
Friday.

I was going into my Inn, when we saw the Sieur de Cardonne's Valet de Chamber,
running as fast as he could after us; he was booted, and three Friars scowring
after him: I was over-rash in my Judgment; for I could not but think he had
stole something in this rich Chapel, and was taken in the Fact; but his
Master, who was with me, having demanded of him, What put him on such full
speed; He answered, He went into the Chapel of the Holy Crucifix with his
Spurs on, and the Friars had kept him in custody, to get Money of him, but that
he was gotten out of their Clutches, but they were now upon the Hunt for him.
They make it a Forfeit, as well as others, for a Man to go with Spurs into
these Holy Places.

The Town is not very great; it is adorned with a spacious Place; here are high
Pillars which bear up very fine Lodgings. The Bull-Feasts are kept here; for
the People are much delighted with this sort of Divertisement. There is also a
very well built Bridge, long and large: the River which passes under it bathes
a Meadow, on the Bank of which you see Allies of Trees, which form a most
delicious Walk. Trade was heretofore considerable, but it is of late much
diminisht. The best Castillian is here spoken; and the Men are naturally
Soldiers, so that when the King has need of them, he finds here great Numbers,
and better Men than elsewhere.

After Supper our Company set to Play, as heretofore: Don Sancho Sanniento was
for yielding his place to any one, pretending 'twas his Right to entertain me
this Evening. I knew he had lately returned from Sicily; I asked him, whether he
had been one of those who had helped to Chastize those Rebellious People?
[Alas, Madam, said he, the Marquess de Las Navas was sufficient to punish them
beyond what their Crime deserved: I was at Naples, in the design to pass into
Flanders, where I have Relations of the same Name. The Marquess de Los Veles,
Viceroy of Naples, engaged me to leave my first Project, and embark my self
with the Marquess de Las Navas, whom the King sent into Sicily: We set Sail in
two Vessels of Majorca, and arrived at Messina the sixth of January. Having
sent no notice of his coming, and no body expecting it, he was not received
with the Honors paid commonly to the Viceroys: But in truth, his Intentions
were so cruel against these poor People, that his Entrance should have been
made in Tears.

Scarcely was he arrived, but he clapped up the two Sheriffs in Prison, named
Vicenzo Zuffo, and Don Diego: He put Spaniards in their Places; he rigorously
abolisht the College of Knights of the Star; and began to execute the Orders
which Gonzaga had long received, and which he had eluded through Favor or
Weakness. He immediately published an Order, by which the King changed all the
Form of Government of Messina, deprived the Town of its Revenues, forbad its
bearing for the future the Glorious Title of Exemplary, dissolved the Senate,
and put into the place of six Sheriffs, six Officers, two of which should be
Spaniards; that these Officers should not for the future appear in Public with
their Formalities; that they should no more be preceded by Drums and Trumpets,
ride no more together in a Coach with four Horses, as they were wont; that they
should fit henceforward on a plain Bench; should have no more Incense offered
'em in the Churches; go clothed after the Spanish Fashion; should Assemble on
Public Affairs in a Chamber of the Viceroy's Palace; and have no longer any
Jurisdiction on the Champian Country.

Every one was seized with such Consternation, as if he had been
Thunderstruck; but their Sorrow was much increased on the fifth of the same
Month, when the Camp Master-General went to the Townhouse, and seized all
their Charters, and Original Copies of their Privileges, and made 'em be burnt
publicly by the Hands of the common Hangman. The Prince de Condro was
afterward apprehended, to the great grief of his Family, but particularly the
Princess Elenora, his Sister, whose Tears were not shed alone: this Princess is
not above Eighteen; her Beauty and Wit are miraculous, which astonish those
about her. Don Sancho's Eyes grew red at the remembrance of this Princess, and
I plainly perceived Pity had not all the share in what he said; yet he
continued on his Discourse to me of Messina.

The Viceroy, added he, published an Order, by which all the Citizens were
enjoined, under penalty of ten Years Imprisonment, and five thousand Crowns
Fine, to bring their Arms into his Palace. He at the same time caused the great
Bell in the Townhouse to be taken down, and beaten to pieces in their sight:
He ordered all the Bells in the Cathedral to be melted, to make a Statue of the
King of Spain. And the Prince of Condro's Children were taken into Custody: But
their Fear increased, when the Viceroy ordered D. V. Zuffo's Head to be cut
off. This Example of Severity Alarmed all the People; and what appeared most
terrible, was, That in the late Troubles, some Families of Messinois having
withdrawn themselves into several Parts, the Marquess de Liche, the Spanish
Ambassador at Rome, advised them, as a Friend, to return into their own
Country, assuring them all was Quier, and that a General Pardon was already
published; and for their greater assurance, gave them Pastports. These poor
People (who had not taken up Arms, and being not of the number of the
Revolters, knowing their Innocence, could never have imagined they should have
been treated as Criminals] returned to Messina; where they had scarcely landed,
but the Joy they had of seeing themselves in their Native Country, and in the
midst, of their Friends, was sadly disturbed, when they were seized on, and the
next Morning, without any Quarter, or regard to Sex or Age, by the Viceroy's
Order, all hanged. He afterward, sent to demolish the great Tower of Palermo;
and the principal Citizens of it, remonstrating against the excessive
Impositions on Corn, Silks, and other Commodities, the Marquess de las Navas
sent them all to the Galleys, without being moved by the Tears of their Wives,
and the need so many poor Children might have of their Fathers.

I must acknowledge, continued Don Sancho, that my Nature is so averse to the
Rigors every day exercised on these poor People, that I could not for all the
World remain any longer at Messina. The Marquess de las Navas was for sending
to Madrid, to inform the King of what he had done. I entreated him to charge me
with this Commission; and in effect he consented, and gave me his Letters,
which I have delivered to the King at Madrid; and at the same time my
Intercessions for the Prince de Condro: And I presume my good Offices will not
be wholly useless to him. I am persuaded, said I to him, this was the principal
Motive of your Journey: I am no prying body, but methinks you are greatly
concerned for the Interests of this Family. It Is true, Madam, continued he, the
Injustice done this Unfortunate Prince does sensibly affect me: Were he not
Brother to the Princess Eleonora, said I to him, perhaps you would not so much
lay it to heart. But no more of this; I perceive this Remembrance afflicts you.
Pray let me rather hear from you what is most remarkable in your Country. Ah!
Madam, cried he, you insult over me; for you must needs know, that Galicia is
so poor and mean a Country that there is no place for bragging; not but that
the Town of St. James de Compostella is considerable enough: it is the Capital
of the Province, and scarce one in Spain that is superior to it in Riches and
Greatness: Its Archbishopric is worth Seventy Thousand Crowns a Year, and the
Chapter has as much; It stands in an agreeable Plain, surrounded with little
Hills of moderate height; and it seems as if Nature had placed them there to
defend the Town from those deadly Blasts which arise from other Mountains. Here
is a University, fine Palaces, stately Churches, public Places, and an
Hospital, one of the most considerable, and best served in Europe: It consists
of two Courts of Extraordinary greatness, with Fountains in the midst. Several
Knights of St. James live in this Town, and the Metropolis, which is dedicated
to this Saint, keeps his Body: It is extreme stately, and prodigiously rich: It
is pretended you hear a kind of Clattering at his Tomb, as if Arms were struck
one against another; and this noise is only heard when the Spaniards are to
undergo any great Loss. His Figure is represented on the Altar, and the
Pilgrims thrice kiss it, and put their Hats on his Head; for this is the chief
part of the Ceremony: they have also another very singular one; they ascend the
top of the Church, which is covered with great flat Stones; In this place
stands a Cross of Iron, whereon the Pilgrims ever fasten some Rag, or Scrap of
what they wear: They pass under this Cross by so strait a Passage, that they
are forced to crawl on their Bellies through it; and those who are not slender,
are in danger of being bursten. And there have been some so ridiculous and
superstitious, that having omitted to do this, they have expressly returned back
again three or four hundred Leagues; for you see here Pilgrims of all Nations.
Here is a French Chapel, of which great Care is taken; It is said, the Kings
of France have been always great Benefactors to it. The Church which is under
ground is a better than that above; there are stately Tombs, and Epitaphs of
great Antiquity, which exercise the Wits of Travelers. The Archiepiscopal
Palace is a vast Pile, and its Antiquity adds to its Beauty, instead of
diminishing it. A Man of my Acquaintance, a great Searcher into Etymologies,
assured me the Town of Compostella was so called, because St. James was to
suffer Martyrdom in the place where he should see a Star appear at Compestella.
It is true, continued he, that some People pretend it to be thus; but the
Peoples Credulity and Superstition carries 'em further; for you are showed at
Padron, near Compostella, an hollow Stone; and it is pretended this was the
little Boat in which St. James arrived, after he had past so many Seas in it,
which being of Stone, must have, without a signal Miracle, sunk to the bottom.
I suppose, said I to him, you believe this to be most true. He smiled, and
continued his Discourse: I cannot but give you the Description of our Militia:
They are called together every Year in the Month of October, and all the Young
Men from the Age of Fifteen, are obliged to march; for should it happen that a
Father, or any other Relation should conceal his Son or Kinsman, and those who
are Officers should come to know it, they would condemn him who has so
offended, to perpetual Imprisonment. There have been some Examples of this, but
they are rare; for the Peasants are so infinitely pleased to see themselves
Armed, and treated as Cavalieros and de Nobles Saldados del Rey, that they
would not for any Consideration be wanting to show themselves on this occasion.
You shall seldom see in an whole Regiment any Soldier that has more Shirts
than that on his Back; and the Stuff they wear, seems for its Coarseness to be
made of Pack-thread: their Shoes are made of Cord; they wear no Stockins, yet
every Man has his Peacock, or Dunghil-Cock's Feather in his Cap, which is tied
up behind, with a Rag about his Neck in form of a Ruff; their Sword oftentimes
hangs by their side tied with a bit of Cord, and ordinary without a Scabbard;
the rest of their Arms is seldom in better Order: And in this Equipage they
march gravely to Tuy, where is the General Rendezvous, it being a Frontier
place to Portugal. There are three which lie thus, the abovementioned,
Cindud-Rodrigo, and Badajor, but Tuy is the best guarded, because it is
over against Valentia, a considerable Town belonging to the King of Portugal,
and which has been carefully fortified: These two Towns are so near, that their
Cannon will reach each other; and if the Portuguises have omitted nothing to
put Valentia out of danger of being insulted over, the Spaniards pretend Tuy is
in as good a Condition to defend it self; It stands on an Hill, whose lower
part is washed by the River Minhio; it has good Ramparts, strong Walls, and
good store of Artillery. It is here, I say, where these our Champions bid
Defiance to the King's Enemies, and in a strutting Bravery, declare, they do
not fear 'em. Perhaps something of this may happen in time, for here are formed
as good. Troops as in any other part of Spain. However, this is a great loss to
the Kingdom, the whole Youth being thus taken up; for the Lands, for the most
part lie untilled, and on the side of St. James de Compostella, you would think
you saw a Wilderness; on that of the Ocean, the Country being better and more
peopled, yields greater Profit, and all things necessary and convenient, as
Oranges, Lemmons and Pomgranates, several sorts of Fruits, and excellent Fish,
especially Pilchards, more delicate than those which come from Royan to
Bordeaux.

One of the most remarkable things, in my mind, in this Kingdom, is the Town of
Doiense, one part of which always enjoys the Sweetness of the Spring, and the
Fruits of Autumn, by reason of several Springs of boiling Water, which warm the
Air by their Exhalations; whilst the other part of this same Town suffers the
Rigors of the longest Winters, standing as it does at the Foot of a very cold
Mountain; so that you find in the space of one only Season, all those which
compose the course of the Year.

You say nothing, replied I to him, of the mavelous Fountain, called Louzano.
Who have told you of it, Madam? answered he. Persons that have seen it, added
I. You have been then told, continued he, that on the top of the Mountain of
Cerbret, you find this Fountain at the Source of the River Lours; which has
Flux and Reflux as the Sea, though it be at twenty Leagues distance from it; that
the greater the Heats are, the more Water it casts, that this Water is
sometimes cold as Ice, and sometimes as hot as if it boiled, there being no
Natural Cause to be given for it. You learn me Particulars I was ignorant of,
said I to him, and this is doing me a great Pleasure, for I want not for
Curiosity in relation to things uncommon. I wish, replied he, 'twas not so
late, I would give you an account of several Rarities in Spain, and which
perhaps you would gladly learn. I leave you for to Night, said I to him, but I
hope before we come to Madrid, we shall have an opportunity of discoursing of
them. He very civilly made me a Promise; and the Play being ended, we bad one
another good night.

When I would go to rest, I was led into a Gallery full of Beds, as you see in
Hospitals: I said, this was ridiculous; and that needing only four, what
occasion was there for showing me forty, and to put me into such an open place
to starve me? I was answered, This was the best place in the House, and I must
take up with it. I caused my Bed to be made, when scarce was I laid down, but
some body knocked softly at my Door; my Women opened it, and remained much
surpised to see the Master and Mistress followed by a dozen of sorry
creatures, and so clothed that they were half naked. I drew my Curtain at the
Noise they made, and opened more mine Eyes at the sight of this Noble Company.
The Mistress drew near to me, and told me, These were honest Travelers, who
were coming into the Beds which remained empty. How, lie here? said I, I
believe you have lost your Senses. I should have lost 'em indeed, replied she,
should I let so many Beds stand Empty. Either, Madam, you must pay for them, or
these honest Gentlemen must lie in them. I cannot express my Rage to you; I was
in the mind to send for Don Fernand and my Knights, who would have sooner made
'em pass through the Windows than through the Doors: But I considered this
could not be done without some Disturbance, and therefore I came to Terms, and
agreed to pay 20 d. for each Bed: they are hardly dearer at Fontainbleau when
the Court is there. These Illustrious Dons, or, to speak better,
Tatterdemalions, who had the Insolence to come into my Room, immediately
withdrew, having made me several profound Reverences.

The next Morning I thought to have burst with laughter, tho 'twas at my Cost,
when I discovered mine Hostess's Trick to ruin me: For you must know in the
first place, that these pretended Travelers were their Neighbors, and that
they are accustomed to this Stratagem, when they see Strangers: But when I
would have reckoned the Beds to pay for em, they were rolled all of 'em into
the midst of the Gallery; there were diverse wretched Troughs of Straw pulled
out, which were hardly good enough to entertain Dogs, yet I must pay for each
20 d. Four Pistoles ended our Dispute. I was not able to put my self in a
Passion, such singularity did I find in this Management. I would not recount
this little Accident to you, did it not serve to give you some insight into the
Humor of this Nation.

We set out from Burgos very late, the Weather was so bad, and there had fallen
in the Night such great quantity of Rain, that I tarried there as long as I
could, in expectation of its ceasing. In fine, I came to a Resolution, and
ascended my Litter. I had not gotten far from the Town, but I repented of my
leaving it; no Track could be seen, especially on a very high steep Mountain,
over which we must necessarily pass. One of our Mule-drivers, who went before,
struck too far on the Edge of this Mountain, so that he fell with his Mule into
a kind of Precipice, where he broke his Head, and put his Arm out of joint;
this being the famous Philip de St. Sebastian, the most intelligent of all his
Profession, and who commonly carries Persons of Quality to Madrid; he was
therefore much bemoaned; and we remained a great while before we could hale him
out from the scurvy place where he had fallen; Don Fernand was so compassionate
as to let him have his Litter. The Night came speedily on us, and we could have
comforted our selves, could we have returned to Burgos, but it was impossible,
the ways were no less covered with Snow on that side, than all the rest; so
that we put in at Madrigalesco, which has not above a dosen Houses, and I may
say we were besieged without having any Enemies. This Adventure gave us some
disturbance, though we had brought Provisions with us for several Days. The best
House of the Town has half uncovered; and I was scarce lodged there, when a
venerable Old Man asked for me on the part of a Lady who was just arrriv'd: He
made me a Compliment, and told me, He was informed this was the only place
where there was any tolerable Entertainment; and therefore entreated me to
spare her some room. He added, She was a Person of Quality of Andalousia, was
lately a Widow, and that he had the Honor to belong to her.

One of our Knights, named Don Esteve de Carjaval, who is of the same Country,
failed not to demand her Name of the old Gentleman: He told him, she was the
Marchioness de Los Rios. At this Name he turned toward me, and spoke to me of
her as of a Person whose Merit and Fortune were very considerable; I readily
accepted of this good Company: She immediately came in her Litter, out of which
she had not descended, having found no House where she could abide.

Her Dress seemed to me very singular; had she not been so handsome as she was,
she could never have appeared in any sort tolerable: Her Gown and Petticoat was
of black Serge, and over them a kind of Linen Surplice, which reached down
lower than her Knees; the Sleeves were long, and strait in the Arms, which hung
over her Hands: This Surplice was fastened to her Gown, and being not pleated
behind, it seemed like a Bib: she wore on her Head a piece of Muslin, which
covered her Face, and one would have taken it for a Religiose's Hood; this
covered her Neck, and reached down very low: There appeared no Hair on her
Head, they were all hid under this Muslin: She wore a great Mantle of black
Taffaty, which covered her Heels; and over this Mantle she had an Hat, whose
Brims were very large, fastened under her Chin with silken Twist. I was told
they wear this but only when they travel.

This is the Habit of the Widows and Duenna's, a Dress which is insupportable
to my sight; and should one meet with a Woman in the Night thus clothed, one
might be startled without Reproach; yet the Lady was very beautiful in this
Unseemly Dress. They never leave it, unless they marry; and they are obliged to
bewail the Death of an Husband, whom they could not endure when living.

I was informed they pass the first Year of their Mourning in a Chamber hung
with Black, wherein there is not the least glimmering of Daylight to be seen;
they fit cross-legg'd on a little Holland-Quilt. When this Year is ended, they
retire into a Chamber hung with Gray: they must have no Pictures, nor
Looking-Glasses, nor Cabinets, nor fine Tables, nor Plate, neither must they
have any Diamonds, or wear any Colors: However modest they are, they must live
so retired, that it must seem their Soul is already in the other World. This
Constraint is the cause that several Ladies who are wealthy, and especially in
rich Houshold-Goods, marry again to have the satisfaction of making use of them.

After the first Compliments, I informed my self from this mournful Widow where
she was going; she told me, She had not for a long time seen a Friend of her
Mother's who was a Religious at Lashuelgas de Burgos, which is a famous
Nunnery, wherein there is an hundred and fifty Nuns, most of 'em the Daughters
of Princes, Dukes and Titulado's. She added, That the Abbess is Lady of
fourteen large Towns, and above fifty other Places, wherein she chooses
Governors and Magistrates; that she is Superior of seventeen Convents; Collates
to several Benefices, and disposes of twelve Commanderships in favor of whom
she pleases. She told me she designed to pass some time in this Monastery: Can
you, Madam, said I to her, accustom your self to so retired a Life as is that
of a Convent? It will be no hard matter, said she, for I believe I see fewer
People at my own House than I shall see there; and in effect these Religious
have Liberty enough: They are commonly the handsomest young Women of the Family
who are there; these enter therein so young, that they know not what they are
made to leave, nor what they undertake at the Age of six or seven, and it may
be sooner. They are caused to make Vows, when it is often the Father or Mother,
or some near Relation, who pronounce them for 'em, whilst the little Sacrifice
disports her self with Sugar-plums, and lets 'em dress her how they will: Yet
the Bargain holds, there is no unsaying it; however, they have every thing which
can be expected in their Condition. There are at Madrid s me whom they call the
Ladies of St. James: they are properly Canonnesses, who make their Trials like
the Knights of this Order; they bear, like them, a Sword made in form of a
Cross, embroidered with Crimson Silk; they have 'em on their Scapularies and
great Cloaks, which are white: These Ladies House is very stately; all who come
to visit 'em enter without any difficulty; their Apartments are very fine, and
every whit as well furnished as if they were at large in the World; they enjoy
great Pensions, and each of 'em has three or four Women to wait on them: It Is
true, they never stir out, nor see their nearest Relations, but through several
Grates. This perhaps would look horrid in another Country, but in Spain they
are accustomed to Confinement.

There are Convents where the Religious see more Cavaliers than the Women who
live at large, neither are they less gallant; It is impossible for any to have
more Gayety than they; and, as I have already told you, Madam, here are more
Beauties than abroad; but it must be granted, there are several among them who
are deeply sensible at their having been so soon sacrificed; they think of the
Pleasures which they have never tasted, as the only ones which can make this
Life Happy. They pass theirs in a Condition worthy of Compassion, always
telling you, they are there by Force; and that the Vows they are made to repeat
at the Age of five or six Years, are to be regarded like Childrens Plays.

Madam, said I to her, it would have been great pity, had your Relations
designed you for such a Life; and one may judge, in beholding you, that all the
beautiful Spanish Ladies are not Religioses. Alas, Madam, said she, in fetching
a deep Sigh, I know not what I would be; it seems I am of a very odd Humor, not
to be contented with my Fortune: but one has sometimes Vneasinesses which are
unaccountable to Reason. In ending these words, she fastened her Eyes to the
ground, and fell into such a deep fit of Musing, that I could easily perceive
something disturbed her.

Whatever Curiosity I had to know the Subject, we had been so little together,
that I dared not desire to be her Confident; but to draw her from the
melancholy Posture she was in, I entreated her to tell me some News of the
Court of Spain, seeing she came from Madrid. She did what she could to recover
her self: she then told me, There were great shows of Joy at Court on the
Queen's Birthday: that the King had sent one of the Gentlemen of his Chamber
to Toledo, to Compliment her from him: Yet these fine Appearances hindered not
the Marquess de Mansera, the Queen's Major Domo, from receiving Orders to
retire twenty Leagues from the Court, which had greatly mortified this
Princess. She informed us, That the Fleet which carried Troops to Galicia, was
unhappily cast away on the Coasts of Portugal. That the little Duchess de
Terra Nova, was to Espouse Don Nicolo Pignatelli, Prince de Monteleon, her
Uncle. That the Marquess de Laganez had refused the Vice-royalty of Sardagnia,
being in love with a fine Lady, whom he could not find in his heart to leave.
That Don Carlos de Omodei, Marquess d' Almanazid, was dangerously ill, at his
Disappointment of being admitted a Grandee of Spain, to which he pretended,
having married the Heiress of the House and Grandeurship of Castle Rodrigue;
and that which most sensibly afflicted him, was, that Don Ariel de Gusman, this
Lady's first Husband, had enjoyed this Honor; so that he could not but look on
the Difficulties thrown in his way as a slighting of his Person: In truth,
Madam, said I to her, I can hardly comprehend how a Man of sense, can with such
eagerness pursue, and be so greatly dejected at a Disappointment of this
Nature. We are otherwise affected in Spain, replied the beautiful Widow, and
this Instance is a proof of it.

Don Frederic de Cardonne, who greatly interested himself for the Duke de
Medina Celi, asked her News of him: The King, said she, has lately made him
President of the Indies. The Queen Mother has wrote to the King, on the Report
which runs, that he is about Marrying; that she is surpised things are already
gone so far, and he has not acquainted her with them. She adds in her Letter,
She advised him in the mean time, whilst all things were ready for this
Ceremony, to make a Journey to Catalonia and Arragon. Don John of Austria
sufficiently understands the Necessity of this, and he presses the King to
depart, to content these People, in promising by Oath, according as is
customary to new Kings, to maintain all their ancient Privileges. Have then,
Madam, said I to her, interrupting her, the Arrogonois any other Privileges
than the Castillians? Very particular ones, replied she, and you being a
Stranger, I believe you will be willing to let me inform you of them. Here Is
what I learnt:

The Daughter of Count Julien, named Cava, was one of the most beautiful Ladies
in the World: King Rodrigue became so passionately in love with her, that his
Affections knowing no Bounds, transported him beyond all measure. The Father,
who was then in Africa, informed of the Outrage done his Daughter, who
breathed nothing but Revenge, treated with the Moors, and supplied 'em with the
means to enter into Spain, This happened in 714, after the Battle of St.
Martin, wherein D. Rodrigue lost his Life; others say, he fled into Portugal,
and died in a Town there called Viscii.
and to make there, for sundry Ages, all those Ravages set forth at large in
history.

The Arragonois were the first who shook off the Yoke of these Barbarians; and
finding no more among them any Princes of the Race of the Gothish Kings, they
agreed to Elect one, and cast their eyes on a Lord of the Country, called Garci
Ximinex; but they being Masters, to impose Laws on him, and finding himself
sufficiently Happy that he might Rule over them under any Condition, these
People therefore confined him within narrow Bounds.

They agreed, That as soon as their Monarch should break through any of their
Laws, he should immediately forfeit his Power, and they be at full liberty to
choose another, though he were a Pagan: and to hinder him from violating their
Privileges, and to defend themselves against him, they established a Sovereign
Magistrate, whom they called the Justicia, whose Office was to observe the
Conduct of the King, the Judges, and he People: but the Power of a Sovereign
being likely to Awe a mere Particular, to Assure the Justicia in the Execution
of his Office, they ordered, That he might not suffer either in his Person or
Goods, but by a complete Assembly of the States, which they call Las Cortes.

They moreover provided, That if the King should Oppress any one of his
Subjects, the great and considerable Men of the Kingdom might assemble
themselves, and hinder his receiving any of his Revenues, till the Innocent was
acquitted, and re-establisht in his former Rights. And to make Garci Ximinez
timely sensible of the Power this Man had over him, they set him on a kind of a
Throne, and made the King to kneel down bare headed before him, to receive from
him his Oath of keeping their Privileges. This Ceremony ended, they
acknowledge him their Sovereign, but in as odd as disrespectful a Manner, for
instead of promising him Fidelity and Obedience, they say to him, We who are as
good Men as your self we make you our King and Governor, on Condition you keep
to us our Rights and Properties, otherwise we Disacknowledge you.

The King, Don Pedro, in process of time coming to the Crown, relisht this
Custom, as unworthy of the Regal State; and it so greatly disgusted him, that
by his Authority and Entreaties, and the Offers he made of bestowing several
notable Privileges on the Kingdom, he procured the Abolishment of this, in an
Assembly of the States: he got this general Consent in Writing, which was
presented to him. As soon as he had the Parchment, he drew out his Dagger, and
pierced his Hand with it, saying, 'Twas fit a Law which gave Subjects the
Liberty of choosing their Sovereign should be Effaced with their Sovereign's
Blood. His Statue is still seen in the Deputation-Hall of Saragossa: he holds a
Dagger in one Hand, and the Charter in the other. The late Kings have not been
such Religious Observers of their Privileges as the first.

But there is a Law still in force, and which is very singular, and this they
call, The Law of Manifestation; which is, That if an Arragonois had Wrong done
him in Judgment, in consigning 500 Crowns, he may bring his Cause before the
Justicia, who is obliged, after an exact Perquisition, to punish him who has
given a wrong Sentence: And if he fails therein, the oppressed Person may have
Recourse to the States of the Kingdom, who Assemble and Nominate five Persons
of their Body, which is to say, of the Prime Nobility, the Ecclesiastics, the
Gentry and Commonalty: they appoint three out of the first Rank, and two from
each of the others. But it is observable, they choose the most Ignorant to
Judge the most able Men in the Gown, whether to Disgrace 'em the more for their
Fault, or, as they allege, That Justice should be so clear, that the very
Plow-men, and those who understand the least, should discern it without the
help of Oratory. It is likewise affirmed, That the Judges tremble when they
pronounce a Sentence, fearing lest it turn against themselves, to the loss of
their Lives or Estates, should they commit the least Fault therein, either
wilfully, or through Inadvertency. It were well if this Custom were observed in
all Kingdoms: but this is rather to be wished than expected.

Yet what is no less singular, is That Justice remains always Sovereign; and
though the Unjust Judge be punished severely for his wrong Decree, yet it
subsists in its full force, and is fully executed: If then any Unhappy Wretch
be sentenced to Death, he is not spared, though his Innocence be discovered, and
made as clear as Noonday; but his Judges are executed too before his Face;
which, in my mind, is a poor Consolation. If the Judge accused, as justly
performed his Office, the Plaintiff leaves the 500 Crowns which he had
confign'd: But were he to lose an 100000 Crowns of Annual Revenue, by the
Sentence he complains of, the Sentence or Decree remains good, and the Judge is
only condemned to pay him likewise 500 Crowns; the rest of this Judge's Estate
is forfeited to the King: which is, in my Opinion, another Point of Injustice;
for in fine, he ought, above all others, to have Recompense made him who
suffers by a wrong Sentence.

These same People have another Custom, to distinguish by the Punishment the
Crime committed: for Example, A Cavalier, who has killed another in Duel (for
they are here strictly forbid), he has his Head cut off before; and he that has
Assassinated, his is cut off behind. This is to distinguish him who has behaved
himself like a brave Man, from him that kills you Treacherously.

She added, That to speak in general of the Arragonois, They have a Natural
Pride, which is hard to be suppressed: but likewise to do them Justice, there
are People of brave Minds to be found among them; insomuch, that they are
easily discerned from all the rest of the King of Spain's Subjects: That they
have never wanted Great Men, from their first King to Ferdinand: That they
counted such a great number of them, as would scarce be believed: However, they
have greatly recommended themselves by their Valor and Conduct. That as to the
rest, their Country was so little fruitful, that excepting some Valleys which
were watered by Channels, whose Water came from the Ebre, the rest was so dry
and sandy, that you meet with scarce any thing else but stony and parched up
places: That Sarragossa is a great City, the Houses finer than at Madrid; the
Public Places adorned with Arches; That the Holy Street, where the Courses are
run, is so long and large, as may make it pass for a great and vast place,
having several great Men's Palaces on it; that of Castelmorato being one of the
pleasantest: That the Vault of St. Fancis's Church was very curious, for being
of extraordinary Largeness, yet it is upheld by no Pillars: That the City is not
strong, but the Inhabitants so stout, that it needed no Walls; that it has
never a Fountain, this being one of its greatest Defects: That the Ebre carried
no Boats, the River being full of dangerous Rocks. As to the rest, the
Archbishopric was worth 60000 Crowns a Year: That the Vice-Royalty brought in
no Revenue, being a Place of Honor, fit only for great Lords to bear the
Expense of it, to maintain their Ranks, and keep the People under, who are
Naturally Fierce and Imperious, not Affable to Strangers; and so little
desirous of making Acquaintance, that they choose rather to stay at Home alone
all their Lifetime, than stir out to procure Friendships: That here is a
severe Inquisition, who have a stately Palace, and a most Rigid Court of
Justice; Yet this does not hinder great Troops of Robbers, called Bandoleros,
from Ravaging, and dispersing themselves over all Spain; who give no Quarter to
Travelers, snatching up sometimes Women of Quality, whom they afterward set
at Ransom, for their Parents to Redeem; but when they are Handsome they keep
them: And this is the greatest Misfortune can happen to 'em, being forced to
spend their Days with the Worst of Men, who keep them in dreadful Caves, or
carry them along with them on Horseback, being so furiously jealous of 'em,
that one of their Captains (having been lately set upon by Soldiers sent into
the Mountains to seize on him) being mortally wounded, and having his Mistress
with him, who was of the Marquess de Camaraza, a Grandee of Spain's Family:
When she saw him in this Condition, she thought only of making Use of this
favorable Opportunity of saving her self; which he perceiving, dying, as he
was, he caught hold of her Hair, and struck his Dagger into her Breast, being
not willing, said he, that another should possess a Treasure which had been so
dear to him. And this is what himself acknowledged to the Soldiers who found
him, and saw this sad Spectacle.

The Beautiful Marchioness here held her peace; and I returned her all due
Thanks for the Favor she did me, in informing me of these Curiosities; and of
which, perhaps without her, I might have been Ignorant all my Life. I do not
think, Madam, said she to me, you owe me such Thanks; I rather fear the having
deserved Reproaches for so long and tiresome a Conversation.

I would not let her leave me to eat elsewhere; and I obliged her to lie with
me, she having no Bed. So Civil and Courteous a Proceeding made her much my
Friend. She assured me of this in such Affectionate Terms, that I could not
doubt of it; for I must tell you, the Spanish Women are more Caressing than we,
and are far more Kind and Tender to those they profess Friendship, In fine, I
could not forbear telling her, That if she had all the Kindness for me she made
profession, she must be so complaisant, to inform me, What made her seem so
melancholy? That I had heard her fetch deep Sighs in the Night, and appeared
very Restless and Disconsolate; That if she could find any Comfort in sharing
her Grief with me, I offered my Service to her, as a most faithful Friend. She
embraced me with great Affection, and told me, without delay, she would
immediately satisfy my Curiosity; which she did in these Terms:

Seeing you are desirous to know me, I must without disguising to you any
thing, acknowledge my Weaknesses to you: and by my Sincerity and
Open-heartedness, deserve a Curiosity as obliging as yours:

I come not of such a Family as may claim Nobility; my Father's Name was
Davila; he was only a Banker, but he was in good Credit, and was moderately
Wealthy: We are of Seville, Capital of Andalousia, and we have ever dwelt
there. My Mother knew the World, she saw many People of Quality, and having no
Children but me, she took great care of my Education: It did not appear
ill-bestowed on me; for I had the good Fortune to get the good Will of most
that saw me.

We had two Neighbors who came often to our House, who were very welcome both
to my Father and Mother: Their Condition and Age were in no sort alike; One was
the Marquess de Los Rios, a Person Wealthy and Noble; he was a Widower, and
well advanced in years: the other was the Son of a great Merchant, who traded
to the Indies; he was Young and Handsome, he had Wit, and a very graceful
Behavior; his Name was Mendez; He was not long before he fell passionately in
Love with me; so that he omitted nothing which might please me, and gain my
Affections.

He was in all places where he knew I was to pass; he spent whole Nights under
my Windows, to sing Verses which he had composed and set to my Praise, which he
had very well accompanied with his Harp.

But seeing his Attendancies had not all the Effect he expected, and having
past some time in this manner, without daring to mention his Affection to me,
he at length resolved to make use of the first occasion to acquaint me with it.
I avoid-: ed him ever since I had a Conversation with one of my Friends, who
had more Experience and Knowledge of the World than I: I had felt, that
Mendez's Company gave me Joy, and that my Heart had an Emotion for him, which
it had not for others: That when his Affairs, or our Visits hindered him from
seeing me, I grew restless; and loving this young Woman, above others, and
being as dear to her, she observed I was not so free and gay as I was wont, and
that my Eyes were sometimes attentively fixed on Mendez. One Day when she
rallied with me about it, I said to her very innocently, My dear Henrieta,
define to me the Sentiments I have for Mendez: I know not whether I ought to be
afraid of them, and whether I ought not to defend my self from them. I feel I
know not what sort of Trouble and Pleasure arising in my Breast. She began to
laugh, she embraced me, and said to me, My dear Heart, you are in Love. Who, I
in Love? replied I, in amaze: You joke with me; I neither am, nor will be in
Love. This depends not always on us, continued she, with a more serious Air,
our Stars decide this before our Hearts. But in earnest, what is it so much
startles you? Mendez is in a Condition equal to yours; he deserves well, a good
comely Man; and if his Affairs go on with the same success as they have done
hitherto, you may live very happily with him. And whence should I learn,
replied I, interrupting her, that he will be happy with me, and that he so much
as thinks this? O, take my Word for it, answered she, whatever he has done has
its Designs; for Men are not wont to pass Nights under Windows, and the Days in
following a Person for whom they have nothing but Indifferency.

After some other Discourse of this Nature, she left me, and I resolved, maugre
the Repugnance I felt in me, to give Mendez no opportunity of speaking to me in
particular.

But one Night as I was walking in the Garden, he came toward me: I was
perplexed to see my self alone with him; and he had the opportunity of observing
it on my Countenance, and in the manner after which I received him. This could
not divert him from the design he had of entertaining me: How Happy am I,
Madam, said he, to find you alone? But do I call my self Happy! Perhaps I know
not what I say: for it may be you will not receive a Secret with which I would
entrust you. I am as yet so young, said I to him, blushing, that I would advise
you to say nothing to me, unless you would have me impart it to my Companions.
Alas, continued he, should I tell you, I adore you; that all my Happiness
depends on the Inclinations you have toward me: That I cannot live without
some Certainty, that I may one day please you; will you tell this to your
Companions? No, said, I to him, in great perplexity, I would look on this
Confidence as a Railery, and not believing it my self, I would not hazard its
being left to be believed by others.

We were interrupted as I ended these words; and he appeared to me not
over-content with the Answer I made him; and a while after he found an
opportunity to reproach me with it.

I could not but give a favorable Ear to the Inclinations I had toward him;
every thing he told me seemed to me to have its particular Gracefulness: And it
was no hard matter for him to persuade me, that he loved me above all things in
the World. In the mean time, the Marquess de Los Rios took such a liking to me,
and my Person and Behavior ran so deeply in his Thoughts, that he wholly
applied himself to please me. He was very nice and cautious; he could not
resolve with himself to owe me wholly to my Parents Authority: He well knew
they would receive as an Honor the Intentions he had for me; but he was for
gaining my Consent before he demanded theirs.

In this Design he said all to me he thought was like to take with me. I
answered him, I should always think it an indispensable Duty to obey my Father:
yet our Ages were so different, that I told him, I thought 'twere better he
left off thinking of me; that I should have an everlasting Acknowledgment for
the advantageous Intentions he had for me: and therefore I would esteem him,
tho I could not love him. Having heard what I said, he was some time without
speaking, and immediately taking up a very generous Resolution: Lovely Mariana,
says he, you might have made me the happiest Man in the World; and if you were
ambitious, I had therewith to satisfy you: But you refuse me, and I desire to
be another: I consent to it; I love you too well to be in suspense, whether
you are to be satisfied or I; I therefore wholly sacrifice my Happiness to you,
and leave you for ever. In ending these Words he left me, and appeared so
afflicted, that I could not forbear being concerned.

Mendez arrived a while after, and found me melancholy: He was so earnest with
me to know the Cause, that I could not deny him this Proof of my Complaisance.
Any one but he would have had a sensible Obligation at the Exclusion I came
from giving his Rival: But far from seeming to value it, he told me, He saw in
mine Eyes the Regret I had for a Lover, who could place me in another sort of a
Rank than he was able; and that my Proceeding was very Cruel. In vain I
endeavored to make him sensible of the Injustice of his; but all I could say,
could not hinder him from charging me with Inconstancy. I remained vexed, and
surpised at this his way of Dealing, and was several days without speaking to
him.

He, in fine, at last understood he had no Reason to Complain; he came to me,
begged my Pardon, and testified to me a great Displeasure at his own Jealousy:
He excused himself, as all Lovers do, on the strength of his Passion. I had so
much Weakness as to be willing to forget the Trouble he had given me: we made
up the Matter between us, and he continued on his Courtship.

His Father having understood the Passion he had for me, thought he could not
procure him a more advantageous Marriage: he took notice of it to him, and came
afterward to my Father, to open to him the Proposal: they had been long
Friends; he was favorably heard, and they easily agreed on the Matter.

Mendez came to inform me of the News, with such Transports as would have
seemed ridiculous to any other than a Mistress. My Mother ordered me to look
kindly on him, telling me, this Affair would be advantageous to me: and as soon
as the India-Fleet should arrive, wherein he was greatly concerned, the
Marriage should be concluded.

Whilst matters thus past, the Marquess de Los Rios had retired to one of his
Country-Houses, where he scarcely saw any one: He led a languishing Life; he
still loved me, but hindered himself from telling me so, and from comforting
himself by this innocent Remedy.

In fine, his Body could not resist the Heaviness of his Mind; he fell
dangerously ill, and being told by the Physicians, there was no hope of his
Recovery, he plucked up his Spirits to write me the most affectionate Letter
imaginable, and sent at the same time to me a Deed of Gift of all his Estate,
in case he dyed. My Mother was in my Chamber, when a Gentleman presented this
Packet from him; she would know what it contained.

I could not forbear at the same time, telling her what had past; and we were
both of us in the greatest surprise at the Marquess's extreme Generosity. She
sent him word, that I should go with my Family to thank him for a Liberality
which I had no ways deserved: And in particular, she sharply reprehended me for
having made a Mystery of a thing to her with which I ought to have immediately
acquainted her. I threw my self at her Feet, I excused my self the best I
could, and testified such great Sorrow for having displeased her, that she
easily pardoned me. Leaving my Chamber, she went to my Father, and having
learnt him all which had past, they resolved to go the next morning to see the
Marquess, and to carry me with them.

I acquainted Mendez with this in the Evening; and the Fear I had, lest my
Parents should, in fine, make me marry this old Man, if he chanced to escape
out of his Sickness. However sensible I appeared to him of this, he was so far
transported, and reproacht me so greatly with it, that I must have loved him as
much as I did, not to have broke off with him: But he had such an Ascendant
over me, though he was the Injustest of all Men, yet I thought him the most
Reasonable.

We were at the Marquess de Los Rios's; his Country House was not above two
Leagues from Seville: Dying, as he was, he received us with such Joy as was
easily observable. My Father testified to him his Grief, to see him in so low a
Condition, thankt him for the Donation he made me, and assured him, If he could
find a fair and just Pretense, he would break ofs with Mendez, to whom he had
engaged his Word: That should this happen, he promised him solemnly I should be
no Body's but his. He received this Assurance in the same manner as if he had
received his perfect Felicity; but he knew well the Dolor I conceived thereat:
I became Pale, my Eyes were covered with Tears; and when we were about leaving
him, he desired me to draw near to him; he told me with a languishing Tone:
fear nothing, Mariana; I love you too well to displease you; you shall have
Mendez, seeing your Affections are engaged to him. I answered him: I had no
particular Inclination for him; but being commanded to respect him, as a Man
who was to be my Husband, I could do no otherwise; however, I entreated him to
be well.

This seemed to me the least step I could take toward a Person to whom I had
so great Obligations. He appeared thereat sufficiently satisfied, attempting to
take my Hand and kiss it: Remember, said he to me, you enjoin me to live; and
that my Life being your Work, you will be obliged to conserve it. We returned
at Night, and the Impatient Mendez waited for us, to make me new Reproaches: I
took 'em as I was wont, as Proofs of his Passion: and having justified my self,
I asked him, What News there was of the Fleet? Alas! said he to me, my Father
has received such as drives me to Despair: I dare not inform you. Have you any
thing separate from me? said I to him, looking tenderly on him: Would you have
me to be reserved to you? I am too Happy, replied he, in that you have such
favorable Dispositions; and being not able to keep any Secret from you, I must
plainly tell you, That the Galion in which is is our whole Estate, is split and
lost, running against a Rock. But I should be less sensible, how greatly soever
I am Interest, did I not look on the Unhappy Consequences of this Loss: Your
Presence will restore the Marquess de Los Rios to his Health; his Sentiments
for you are known in your Family; he is Rich, and a great Lord: I become
Miserable; and if you forsake me, my dear Mariana, I shall have no more Hope
but in a speedy Death. I was pierced with Sorrow at this sad News: I took one
of his Hands, and closing it with mine, I said to him, My dear Mendez, do not
think me capable of loving you, and yet leaving you, by the Effects of your
good or bad Fortune: if you be able to bear up against it, believe me so too. I
call Heaven to witness, continued I, provided you love me, and be faithful to
me, that I will never forsake you; and let it punish me if ever I prove
Inconstant.

He testified all the Acknowledgements he ought me for such affectionate
Assurances, and we resolved not to divulge this Accident.

I withdrew very melancholy, and shut my self up in my Closet, ruminating on
the Consequences of this sad Disaster. I was still there, when I heard some
Body knocking softly at the Shutters of my Window: I drew near, and saw Mendez
by the Light of the Moon: What do you here, said I to him, at this time of the
Night? Alas, answered he to me, I was trying whether I could speak with you
before I departed: My Father has again lately received News of the Galion, and
will have me immediately go where she is run a-ground, to endeavor to save
something: It is a great way thither, and I shall be a great while without
seeing you. Ah, dear Mariana, during all this time will you be as good as your
Word to me? May I hope my dear Mistress will be faithful to me? What Reason
have I given you, Mendez, said I, interrupting him, to doubt it? Yes, continued
I, I will love you were you the most Unfortunate Man in the World.

It would be to abuse your Patience, Madam, to relate to you whatsoever we said
in this doleful Separation; and though there appeared no Danger, yet our Hearts
had a foreboding of what was afterward to happen to us. The Day began to
appear, and we must bid Adieu: I saw him shed Tears, which were accompanied
with mine.

I threw my self on my Bed, rolling a thousand sad Thoughts in my Mind; and I
appeared the next Morning so out of Order, that my Father and Mother were
afraid I was falling into some dangerous fit of Sickness.

Mendez his Father came to make them a Visit, to excuse his Son's parting
without taking his Leave of them. He added, He had a Business which required
such haste, as would not suffer him a Minute's time at his disposal. As to my
self, Madam, I was comfortless, being insensible to every thing. And if any
thing could ease me, 'twas some hours Conversation with my dear Henrietta, with
whom I freely vented my Thoughts touching the long Absence of Mendez.

In the mean time the Marquess de Los Rios was out of Danger, and my Father
went often to see him: I observed one day great Alteration on my Mother's
Countenance, she and my Father having been long shut up with Religioses, who
came to give 'em a Visit; and after a Conference of some time, they called me,
without my being able to divine the Cause.

I entered into their Apartment in such Disorder, that I knew not what I did.
One of these good Fathers, Venerable by his Age and Habit, spoke much to me
about the Resignation we owe to the Divine Will, on his Providence, in every
thing which relates to us: and the Close of his Discourse was, That Mendez was
taken by the Algerines; that he was a Slave; and by his Misfortunes these
Pirates had learnt he was a rich Merchant's Son; which had occasioned the
setting him at an extraordinary Ransom: That they were at Algiers in the time
he arrived; would have willingly brought him along with 'em, but the Money
which they had for all, was not sufficient for him alone. That at their Return
they had been at his Father's to inform him of this vexatious Disaster; but
found he had absented himself, and that the loss of a Galion, on which was
embarkt all his Effects, without being able to save any thing, had induced him
to avoid his Creditors, who sought him everywhere, to throw him in Prison.
That things being in this Condition, they saw no Remedy to poor Mendez his
Misfortunes, being in the hands of Meluza the most famous and covetous of all
the Corsaries; and that if I would follow their Advice, and that of my Parents,
I would think of taking another Party. I had so far heard this dreadful News in
so ecstatic a Condition, that I could only interrupt them by sad Sighs; but
when he told me, I must think of another Party; I burst out with Tears and
Shrieks, as made both my Father and Mother, and these Religioses compassionate
me.

I was carried into my Chamber as one nearer death than life; and Donna
Henrietta was sent for, and it was not without great Affliction she beheld me
in this sad Condition. I fell into a most deep Melancholy; I tormented my self
day and night, and nothing was able to remove my dear Mendez out of my Mind.

The Marquess de Los Rios, having learnt what had past, conceived such strong
Hopes, that he soon found himself in a Condition to come and Claim of my Father
and me the Effect of the Words we had given him. I showed him that mine were
not disengaged in respect of Mendez; that he was Unfortunate, which no ways
lessened my Engagements to him. He heard me without being persuaded by me, and
told me, I had the same desire of destroying my self, as others had of saving
themselves; that 'twas more my Interest than his, which made him act as he did.
And being ravished with having a Pretense which seemed to him plausible, he
pressed my Father with such Earnestness, that he at length consented to what he
desired.

It is impossible for me to represent to you, Madam, in what an Abyss of Sorrow
I was in: What is become my Lord, said I to the Marquess, of that scrupulous
Tenderness which hindered you from taking my Heart from any other hand than my
own? Let me at least have some time to forget Mendez; Perhaps his Absence and
Misfortunes may prevail on me to some Indifferency toward him. To this cruel
Accident, which has snatched him so lately from me, you add new Troubles when
you expect I should so speedily pass over from him to you.

I know not what I expect or may hope for, said he to me, but this I am sure
of, that my Complaisance had like to have cost me my Life; that if you be not
designed for me, you will be another; and as to Mendez, his Fortune has been
such, that he can no longer pretend to you; and seeing you must be disposed of,
I think you are very hard hearted to refuse me. You cannot be ignorant of what
I have done hitherto to please you, my former Proceeding should serve as a
sufficient Testimony of my future Respects.

The Marquess made a greater progress in my Father's Mind than mine. In a Word,
my Mother having one day sent for me, told me, 'Twas to no purpose to use any
longer Delays, my Father being resolved I should obey his Orders. Whatever I
could say to excuse my self, my Tears, my Remonstrances, Entreaties were all to
no purpose, and served only to exasperate my Mother.

All things necessary were prepared for my Marriage, the Marquess would have
every thing suitable to his Quality; He sent me a Cabinet of Jewels and
Precious Stones, to the value of several thousand Crowns. The fatal Day for our
Wedding was set. Seeing my self reduced to this Extremity, I took a resolution
which will surprise you, Madam, and demonstrate a great Passion.

I went to Donna Henrietta; this Friend had been ever faithful to me, and threw
my self at her feet, surprising her by so extraordinary a Carriage: My dear
Henrietta, said I to her, melting in Tears, there is no Remedy to my
Misfortunes, unless you have pity on me; do not abandon me, let me conjure you
in the sad Condition I am in; to morrow I must marry the Marquess de Los Rios,
I can no longer avoid it. If the Offers of Friendship you have made me be Proof
against all Trial, and can make you capable of a generous Resolution, you will
not refuse to follow my Fortune, and to accompany me to Algiers to pay Mendez
his Ransom, to redeem him from the cruel Slavery he is in. You see me at your
Feet, continued I, I will never rise till you have given me your Word, to do
what I desire you. She seemed so concerned at my Posture, that I arose to make
her answer me. She immediately embraced me with great Testimonies of
Tenderness: I will refuse you nothing, my dear Mariana, said she to me, were it
my very Life; but you are going to ruin your self and me with you. How can two
Girls execute what you project? Our Age, our Sex, and your Beauty, will expose
us to Accidents, the bare imagination of which makes me to tremble: this is
certain, we are going to overwhelm our Families with Shame and Confusion; and
if you had made serious Reflections hereon, it is not possible you could have
come to this Resolution. Ah, barbarous! cried I, and more barbarous than he
that detains my Lover; you forsake me, but though I am alone, yet that shall not
hinder me from pursuing my Point, neither can the assistance you should give me
stand me in much stead: Remain, remain, I consent, it is fit I should depart
without any Comfort to affront all Dangers; I confess such an undertaking is
fit only for a desperate Creature.

My Reproaches and Tears moved Henrietta; she told me my Interest had obliged
her as much as her own to speak to me as she had done; but in short, seeing I
persisted in my first Resolution, and nothing could divert me from it, she was
resolved I should not go alone; That if I would be ruled by her, we should
disguise our selves; that she would undertake to get two Suits of Men's Apparel;
and as for the rest, it belonged to me to take care of it. I embraced her with
a thousand Testimonies of Thankfulness.

I afterward asked her, Whether she had seen the Jewels which the Marquess had
sent me; I will bring them, said I to her, to purchase Mendez 's Ransom with
them. We resolved to lose no time, and we neither of us failed in what we had
projected.

Never were two Maidens better disguised under the Habit of two Cavaliers. We
parted that Night, and embarkt, our selves without the least Obstacle, but
after some days Sail we were overtaken by so violent a Storm, as made us
despair of our Safety. In all this Disorder and Peril, I was less concerned for
my self, than for not having compassed my dear Mendez's Liberty, and for having
engaged Henrietta to follow my ill Fortune: It is I, said I to her, in
embracing her, it is I, my dear Companion, that has raised this Storm, were I
not on the Sea it would be Calm; my Misfortune follows me wherever I go. In
fine, we having been a Day and two Nights in continual Alarums, the Weather
changed, and we arrived at Algiers.

I was so glad to see my self in a Condition to deliver Mendez, that I reckoned
all the Dangers we underwent as nothing: But alas, what became of me in
disembarking, when after all the search which could be made, I perceived there
was no hope of finding the little Cabinet wherein I had put all I had was most
precious: I found my self seized with such violent Grief, that I thought I
should have expired before I got out of the Vessel. Without doubt this Cabinet,
which was little, and of which I took but small Care during the Tempest, fell
into the Sea, or was stole, which ever of these two it was, I had a
considerable Loss, and I had only remaining Jewels to the value of a thousand
Pounds, which I had kept for all Events about me.

I resolved with this, to make a Trial with Mendez's Patron: As soon as we were
in the Town, we enquired out his House, (for Meluza was well known) and went
thither clad as Gentlemen.

I cannot express to you, Madam, the trouble I was in drawing near this House,
where I knew my dear Lover languisht in Chains; what sad Reflections did I not
make; how did I look when I entered the Corsary's House, and saw Mendez
Chained, with several others, who were leading out to work in the Field. I
should have fallen at his Feet, had not Henrietta born me up: I no longer knew
where I was, nor what I did; I would have spoken to him, but Grief had so
seized on my Spirits, that my Tongue could not utter a Word. As to him, he
beheld me not; he was so sad and deprest, that he could look on no body; and
one must love him as much as I did, to know him, so greatly was he changed.

After having been some time coming to my self, I went into a low Room, where I
was told Meluza was; I saluted him, and told him the occasion of my Voyage;
that Mendez was my near Relation; that he was undone by the Loss of a Galion,
and his Captivity together; and that 'twas out of my own Money that I would pay
his Ransom. The Moor appeared to me little concerned at what I said; and
looking scornfully on me, he answered, It was not his business to enquire
whence I had my Money; but this he certainly knew, that Mendez was Rich; and to
show that he would not take all Advantages, he would therefore set him at
twenty thousand Crowns.

Alas, what would this have been, had I not lost my Jewels? but this was too
much in the Condition I was in. In fine, after several long fruitless Disputes,
I took on me immediately a resolution which could only be inspired by an
extreme Love.

Here Is all I have, said I to the Pyrate, in giving him my Diamonds, they are
not worth what thou demandest: take me for thy Slave, and be persuaded thou will not keep me long. I am the only Daughter of a Rich Banker of Seville; keep
me for an Hostage, and let Mendez go; he will soon return to Redeem me. The
Barbarian was surpised to find me capable of so generous and affectionate a
Resolution. Thou art worthy, said he to me, of a better Fortune. Be it so; I
accept the Condition you offer me: I will take care of thee, and be a good
Patron to thee. Thou must leave the Habit thou wearest, to put on one agreeable
to thy Sex: thou shall keep thy Jewels if thou will, I can as well stay for the
whole as for a part.

Donna Henrietta was so confused and dismayed at the Bargain I came from
concluding, that she could not sufficiently express her Displeasure to me; but
in fine, maugre all her Remonstrances and Entreaties, I held firm, and Meluza
caused a Slave's Habit to be brought me, which I put on.

He conducted me to his Wives Chamber, to whom he delivered me, having
recounted to her what I had done for my Lover's Liberty.

She seemed to be much effected with it, and promised she would shorten the
time of my Servitude by all the good Treatments she could make me.

At Night, when Mendez returned, Meluza caused him to be called, telling him,
That being of Seville, he would therefore show him a Slave he had bought,
because perhaps he might know her.

Immediately I was brought before him; Mendez at this sight, losing all
Countenance, came and cast himself at my Feet, and taking my Hands, which he
bathed with his Tears, he said every thing which was most tender and
affectionate to me. Meluza and his Wife diverted themselves, in seeing the
different Motions of Joy and Grief with which we were agitated: in fine, they
informed Mendez of the Obligations he had to me; that he was free, and that I
would remain in his place. He did whatever could be done to dissuade me from
taking this Task on me: Alas, said he to me, you would have me load you with my
Chains, my dear Mistress; Shall I be free, when you are not? I go then to do
for you what you come from doing for me; I will sell my self, and Redeem you
with this Money: for in fine, consider, that should I as soon as I arrive at
Seville, find Assistance, and return again to bring you back, yet how is it
possible for me in the mean time to leave you; judge how I can do this in a
time wherein my Fortune promises me nothing, and am the most Unhappy of all
Men. I offered against all his Reasons, the Tenderness of my Father, who would
soon Redeem me when he knew where I was. In fine, I made use of all the Power I
had over his Mind, to make his Advantage of what I had done in his Favor.

What shall I say to you, Madam, of our Separation? It was so dolorous, that
Words cannot express what we felt. I obliged Henrietta to part with him, to
solicit and press my Parents to do their part in my behalf.

In the mean time my Father and Mother were in an unconceivable Affliction and
when they perceived my flight, they thought to die with Grief.

They blamed themselves infinitely for forcing me to marry the Marquess de Los
Rios. He was for his part in no less Despair; they caused me to be searched for
in vain, in all places where they thought I might have hid my self.

Two whole Years were past without my receiving any News or Succors from
Mendez; which made me believe with great likelihood, that both he and Henrietta
were cast away on the Sea: I had given them all the Jewels which Meluza had
left me; but it was not their Loss, nor that of my Liberty, which I regretted:
It was of my dear Lover and faithful Friend, whose Remembrance continually
possessed me, and caused me an unparalled Affliction; I could get no Rest nor
Health; I wept Day and Night; I refused to come out of my Slavery in neglecting
to signify to my Father my present Condition. I wished only for a speedy Death,
which I would have willingly met with, to put an end to my Troubles and
Misfortunes.

Meluza and his Wife began to pity me: they did not doubt but Mendez, was cast
away: they treated me less cruelly, than these sort of People are wont to use
those Unhappy Wretches, who fall into their Hands.

One Day, as Meluza came from Pyrating he brought with him several Persons of
both Sexes which he had taken, and among the rest a Young Woman of some Quality
of Seville, and whom I knew. This sight renewed my Grief: she was much
surprised to find me in this sad place. We affectionately embraced one another,
and observing a deep silence; How now, Beautiful Mariana, said she to me, are
you so indifferent toward your Relations and Country, that you have no
Curiosity to make any Enquiries about them? I lifted up mine Eyes to Heaven in
uttering a deep Sigh; I entreated her to tell me, If 'twere known where Mendez
and Henrietta were lost? Who has told you they are lost? replied she, they are
at Seville, where they lead a very happy Life. Mendez has re-establisht his
Affairs, and makes it his great Delight and Honor to publish in all places the
Extreme Obligations he has to Henrietta. Perhaps you are ignorant, continued
she, that Mendez was taken and made a Slave by the Algerines; this generous
young Woman disguised her self, and came hither to redeem him, but he has not
been ungrateful, for he has married her. There is a most charming Union between
them. Hymen has not banished Love in their particular.

As she was yet speaking, she perceived my Countenance to alter on a sudden,
and that I was ready to faint; my Strength failed me, mine Eyes closed, and I
sunk down between her Arms; she was greatly troubled at this; she called my
Companions, who put me to Bed, and endeavored to recover me from this pitious
Condition.

This young Woman greatly concerned her self for me; and when I came to my
self, I began to complain; I uttered Sighs and Groans, able to move a Rock.

Meluza was affected at the Recital of such a worse than barbarous Instance of
Treachery, and without any notice to me, he informed himself, by his new Slave
of my Father's Name, and immediately wrote to him what he knew of my
Misfortunes.

These Letters were like to have been the Death of my Mother, she could not
imagine I could be in Chains at eighteen Years of Age, without shedding a
torrent of Tears: But that which augmented her Grief, was, the Disorder of my
Father's Affairs; several considerable Bankrupts had ruined him; his Credit was
gone, and it was impossible for him to procure the 20000 Crowns which Meluza
demanded for my Ransom.

The Generous Marquess de Los Rios heard this News, came to my Father, and
offered him what lay in his Power: I do not do this, said he, in design to
force your Daughter's Inclinations when she shall be here; I shall love her
always, but I will never displease her. My Father having no other way of
Relief, thankfully accepted of what was offered him; and in a word, embarkt
himself, and happily arrived at Argiers, in the time when I thought only of
dying.

He forbore all those Reproaches I deserved; he redeemed me, and at my
Entreaty, this young Woman of Seville, for a moderate Ransom. We returned
together, and my Mother received me with such Joy as is impossible to be
expressed. I answered hereto as much as was possible; but I carried always in my
Heart, Madam, the fatal Stroke which had wounded me: Whatever my Reason could
represent to me, was not sufficient to eface out of my Remembrance the Image of
the Traitor Mendez.

I saw the Marquess de Los Rios: he dared not mention the Inclinations he still
had toward me; but I had such pressing Obligations to him, that Gratitude made
me do for him, what my Inclinations would have made me do for another.

I gave him my Hand, and he his to me, with such Affection, as if he had had no
solid Matter of Complaint against me.

In fine, I married him, and apprehending lest I should see Mendez, that
Ungrateful Wretch, to whom I owe such Horror, and for whom I had so little, I
prayed the Marquess we might dwell in the Country House he had near Seville.

He ever approved of what I liked; he would have my Father and Mother retire;
he less'ned the sad Condition of their Fortune, by considerable Liberalities:
and I may truly say, there never was a greater Soul. Judge, Madam, of all the
Reproaches I made my Heart for its not being so tender to him as it ought to
have been: It was not in my power to forget Mendez, and I always felt new
Regrets, when I learnt his Felicity with the Unfaithful Henrietta.

Having past two Years in a continual watching over my self, that I might do
nothing but what was agreeable to my Husband, Heaven deprived me of him, of
this Generous Husband; and he did for me in these last Moments, what he had
already heretofore done, giving me all he had, with such Testimonies of Esteem
and Affection, as much enhanced the Price of the Gift: He made me the richest
Widow of Andalousia, but he could not make me the Happiest.

I would not return to Seville, where my Parents would have had me been; and to
avoid it, I pretended a Journey farther into the Country, to look after some
part of my Estate. I set out; but there being a particular Fatality in whatever
relates to me, in arriving at an Inn, the first Object which struck my sight,
was the Unfaithful Mendez: he was in deep Mourning, and had lost nothing of
whatever made me heretofore fancy him too Lovely. It is impossible to express
the Condition I was in, for endeavoring to get speedily from him, I found my
self so weak and trembling, that I fell at his Feet. Although he knew me not at
that instant, yet he earnestly endeavored to raise me up; but the great Veil
under which I was concealed, flying open, what became of him in seeing me? He
remained no less confused than I was: he would have drawn near to me, but
casting a furious Look on him: Dare thou, Perjured Wretch! said I to him,
dare thou approach me! Art thou not afraid of the just Punishment of thy
Perfidiousness? He was some time without answering me, and I was about leaving
him when he stopped me: Confound and over-whelm me with Reproaches, Madam, said
he to me: Give me the worst and most perfidious Names as is possible; they
cannot be more than I deserve: But my Death shall soon revenge your Quarrel: I
ought to die with Sorrow for having betrayed you; and if I regret any thing in
dying, it is only the having one Life to lose, to expiate all the Crimes you
can justly accuse me of. He appeared to me much affected in ending these words;
and would to Heavens his Repentance were really sufficient and true! I would
not hazard a longer Conversation with him: I left him, disdaining to return him
an Answer. And this Mark of Contempt and Slighting, was, without doubt, more
sensible to him, than all the Reproaches I might have made him.

He had some time since lost his Wife, that Unfaithful Creature, who had helped
him to Revolt against all the Offices of Love, Honor, and Gratitude. And from
that time he followed me everywhere: he was like a Complaining Shadow, ever
fastened to my Feet; for he became so lean, pale, and changed, that he was no
longer discernable. Heavens! Madam, what Violence did I not offer my self, in
continuing to ill Treat him: I found at last I wanted Strength to resist the
Weakness of my Heart, and the Ascendant this Wretch had over me. Rather than to
commit so shameful an Offense, and to Forgive him, I parted for Madrid, where I
have Relations, and sought among them a Shelter against the Violence of mine
own Inclinations.

I was not there long but Mendez found me out: I must confess to you, I was not
heartily displeased at his Attendance on me; but maugre my Inclinations toward
him, I put on a firm Resolution to avoid him, seeing I could not sincerely hate
him; and unknown to every Body, I took the Road to Burgos' where I am going to
Cloister my self with a Religious there, my Friend. I flatter my self, Madam,
with the Hopes of finding more Rest there, than I have hitherto met with.

The Beautiful Marchioness here held her peace; and I testified to her my
particular Acknowledgments for the Favor she had done me: I assured her of the
part I took in her Adventures: I conjured her to write to me, and to let me
hear from her at Madrid; and she promised it me in the most obliging manner as
is possible.

We found the next Morning we could not set out, it having snow'd all the
Night, and no Path appearing on the Ground; but we wanted not Company to pass
the time in Play and Discourse. Having been three days with the Marchioness de
Los Rios, without any Weariness at the length of the Time, through the pleasure
I had of seeing and hearing her talk, (for she is one of the most lovely Women
in the World:) We parted with a mutual Regret, and it was not without doubling
our Promises of writing to, and seeing one another hereafter.

The Weather mended, and I continued on my Journey to Lerma: We had traverst
dreadful Mountains, which bear the Name of Sierra de Cogollos, and it was not
without great trouble we got thither: This Town is small; she has given her
Name to the famous Cardinal de Lerma, Chief Minister to Philip III: it is from
him that Philip IV. took the great Revenues he had received from the King his
Master. Here is a Castle which I will see to Morrow, and of which I shall give
you an Account in my next, I am told an Extraordinary Express is arrived, and
will set out to Night: I will lay hold of this Opportunity of sending to you,
and ending this long Letter; for in truth I am tired both with the Way, and
with Writing, but I shall never be weary of Loving you.

From Lerma, Mar. 5. 1679.
A RELATION OF A Voyage to SPAIN, IN Several Letters. PART. II.
LETTER. V.
MY Last was so long, and I was so weary when I ended it, that I could not add
some Particulars, which probably might not have been unwelcome to you. I
proceed then (dear Kinswoman) to recount them, seeing you so much desire it.

I arrived late at Lerma, and resolved to tarry some time to see the Castle,
which the Spaniards so highly esteem, that they prize it next the Escurial; and
it is indeed a very fine place. The Cardinal de Lerma, Philip the Third's
Favorite, was its Founder. It stands on the side of an Hill, and in your way to
it you must pass through a spacious place, surrounded with Arches and Galleries
about it. This Castle consists of four vast Piles of building, which makes a
complete Quadrangle of two Ranges of Porches within the Court, which are near
as high as the Roof, and hinder the Apartments from Prospects on that side. The
Windows of all the Chambers look forward into the Country; the Rooms are
spacious, and the Lodgings very fine and curiously gilt. There are a prodigious
number of them, and very well furnished. Near the Castle you have a great Park
which extends it self along the Plain, through which runs a River, and several
lesser Springs: On the side of the River, there are rows of great Trees, and
not far hence a Wood, so that, I believe, in fine weather this is a delightful
place.

The Keeper of the Castle ask't me, whether I would see the Religioses, whose
Convent is adjoining thereunto. I told him most willingly; so that he made us
pass through a Gallery, at the end of which you meet with a Grate which reaches
from top to bottom. The Abbess, having been advertised of it, came here with
several Religioses, who were very entertaining, handsome, witty and young, and
discoursing with great exactness of every thing. I was not weary of their
Conversation, when a young Girl came and whispered the Abbess in the Ear, who
afterward told me there was a Lady of great Quality, who had retired into
their House, being the Daughter of Don Mandrica de Lara, Count de Valine, and
eldest Son to the Duke de Naxara; That she was Widow of Don Francisco Fernandez
de Castro, Count de Lemos, Grandee of Spain, and Duke de Tauresano; that when
she knew of French Ladies passing through Lerma, she was greatly desirous of
Entertaining them. I made answer, I should be glad of the honor of seeing her:
Whereupon this young Girl was sent to her.

This Lady soon came in a Dress used by the Spaniards this hundred years; she
had a kind of Pattins on, or rather Stilts, which made her look prodigious
Tall, so that she was fain to lean on two persons shoulders when she moved. She
leaned likewise on two Daughters of the Marquis del Carpio; one of them is of a
very fair Complexion, which is rare in this Country, and the others Hair is as
black as Jet. Their Beauty surpised me, and they wanted only, in my mind, to
be a little fat. But this is not reckoned a Defect in this Country, where they
fancy leanness so much, that they desire only to have Skin and Bone. The
singular Dress of the Countess de Lemos, appeared to me so extraordinary, that
I could hardly get mine eyes off of it. She wore a kind of black Satin Gold
embroidered Bodice, and buttoned with great Rubies of considerable value. This
Bodice came down from her Neck just like a Doublet; her Sleeves were strait,
with large Wings about her shoulders, and other Sleeves hanging as low as her
Gown, which were fastened on each side with Roses of Diamonds; She had a
dreadful Virdingal, which hindered her from sitting, otherwise then on the
Ground. She wore a Ruff, and several Chains of great Pearls and Diamonds; her
Hair was white, which she hid under a Coverture of black Lace, for she was no
less than 75 years old. She seemed to me to have been a great Beauty in her
time; her face had not a wrinkle, and her eyes were still sparkling, and her
white and red Paint became her very well: Her Wit and her Personage, as I have
been told, were not a little famous in the World. I looked upon her as a curious
Piece of Antiquity.

She told me she had the honor to Accompany the Infanta when she espoused
Lewis the Thirteenth. That she became acquainted with the Prince of Conde when
he was in Flanders, and the Queen of Sweden came thither. You have seen this
Queen, said I to her, interrupting her, be pleased, Madam, to favor me with a
Relation of some Particulars of her humor.

You must know then, said she, that the King of Spain sent Don Antonio Pimentel
in quality of Ambassador to Stockholm, to discover, as much as in him lay, the
Intentions of the Swedes. They had been long Enemies to the House of Austria,
and it was not doubted but they would make new Attempts to thwart it, in the
design of making the Emperor's Son King of the Romans; Pimentel was charged to
carry on this Affair with great Circumspection. He was a gallant, witty and
handsome Person, and he succeeded better than could be expected. He immediately
discovered the Queen's Genius, and easily made himself her Confident. He soon
perceived she was mightily charmed with Novelties, and that of the crowd of
Strangers which she drew to the Court, the last come was the most favored. He
made it his Task to please her, and gained so far on her Affections, that he
became informed by her self of the most secret Affairs, and which she ought the
most to conceal from him. But what cannot he do, who has found a way to the
heart. The Queen's was so inclined to him, that he became the sole Disposer of
the Affections of this Princess, and by this means was able to write to the
Emperor, and to the Electors, things so certain and agreeable, as made 'em
easily judge that the Queen of Sweedland's Council had no part in the
Declaration she made in favor of the King of Hungary.

This Intrigue being at an end, 'twas thought the King would recall Pimentel,
there appearing no occasion requiring the Presence of an Ambassador: But if it
were needless for the King of Spain that he should remain at Stockholm, 'twas
not the same with the Queen, she neglecting nothing whereby to retain him near
her. He attended her wherever she went since, and many, who were led by outward
Appearances, judged when she left the Crown to her Cousin, she did it with great
Satisfaction, because she did it with dry Eyes, and had the Courage to harangue
the States with great Force and Eloquence; but the People were greatly mistaken
in the secret Motives of this Princess. Her soul at that time was pierced with
the most lovely sorrow; she was not a little grieved to yield to the Prince
Palatine a Scepter which she thought her self worthy to wield alone, and of
which she was the lawful Heiress.

This Prince had the Address to get it declared, that if she married she should
choose him for her Husband.

As Soon as this Declaration was made, she began to feel the weight of the
subjection wherein she was placed; and on the other hand, the People did not
well relish the being governed by a Woman. They insisted more on her Defects
than they minded her Virtues. The Prince contributed underhand thereto, and
the Queen, who was penetrating soon perceived it; she observed the Inclination
the People had to him, and the wishes which were made to see him on the Throne;
she grew every day more and more jealous of this, and past from hence to such a
deadly Hatred, that 'twas impossible for her to stop the Course of it. The
Princes presence became so insupportable to her, that perceiving it, he
withdrew into an Island which belonged to him. But he set not out till he had
left good Memoires to his Creatures against the Queen's Conduct.

When she saw her self delivered from an Object, whose sight was so great an
Eyesore, she drew off her Mind from the too intent pursuit of the Affairs of
the Kingdom, and gave way to her Inclinations to Books. Her mavelous Wit
made, in a short time, admirable Progresses in the most profound Sciences; but
these were not so needful to her as a good Conduct in the management of her
Honor and Interest. It often happens, that having spent several days in her
Study, she would appear disgusted with her Books, saying, They were good for
nothing but to waste the Spirits, and mislead Men's Judgments. When the Great
Men of the Court saw her in this Disposition, they approacht her with more
familiarity, and then the whole Business was to follow the Pleasures of Love,
of Plays, Balls, Turneys, Huntings, and all other Diversions. She gave up her
self entirely to them, and nothing could bring her off them; but she added to
this Defect that of enriching Strangers, at the Expense of her own Subjects.

The Swedes began to murmur at this; the Queen was advertised of it; their
Complaints appeared to be unjust, and little respectful; and being not a little
offended at them, she was so unwise as to take Vengeance on her self. In
effect, at the time when 'twas least expected, and when she was in a Condition
to find less violent Remedies, she abandoned at one stroke her Crown and
Kingdom to her Cousin; to this Cousin, I say, whom she was so far from loving,
that she wished him all the ill she was able; and yet to whom she did so much
good, she thought 'twas impossible for any to penetrate into the Motives of
this. She pretended by this great stroke of Generosity, to distinguish her self
from among the Heroina's of the most famous Ages: But in effect, the Conduct
she held afterward, distinguished her only to her Disadvantage.

She was seen to set out from Swedeland in a very odd Dress for a Woman, with a
kind of Justaucorps, a short Petticoat, with Boots and Cravat, in a Perriwig, a
Hat covered with Feathers, and this Perriwig tied up in a lock behind which
seemed then very ridiculous. She forbad all her Women to folfow her, choosing
only Men to serve her, and attend her. She was wont ordinarily to say, That she
did not love Men as Men, but because they were not Women. So that she seemed to
have renounced her Sex in renouncing her States, although she had sometimes such
Weaknesses as would have made the meanest Women ashamed.

The trusty Pimentel past over into Flanders with her, and I being then there,
continues she, I saw him arrive; he procured me the honor to kiss her hand,
and there needed no less than his Credit to obtain this; for she sent word to
all the Ladies of Brussels and Antwerpt, she would excuse them for their
Visits. Yet she received me very well, and the little she said to me, appeared
full of Wit and extraordinary Vivacity; but she swore at every turn like a
Soldier, and her Words and Actions were so free, not to say so dishonest, that
were it not for her Rank, her Person would have been little regarded.

She spoke before every Body of the passionate desire she had to see the Prince
of Conde; that his great Actions had charmed her, and that she was desirous to
learn the Trade of War under him. The Prince had no less desire to see her,
than she testified to see him. In the midst of this mutual Impatience, the
Queen stopped on a sudden on some Formalities and Steps which she refused to
take, when he should come to salute her. These Reasons hindered him from seeing
her with the usual Ceremonies. But one day, when the Queen's Chamber was full
of Courtiers, the Prince slipped therein; whether she had seen his Picture, or
that his Martial Air had distinguished him from among others, she had singled
him out, and knew him. She would immediately hereupon have testified as much to
him, by extraordinary Civilities. He presently retired, and she followed to
conduct him. Then he stopped, and contented himself with saying these words,
Either All, or Nothing. Some few days after, an Interview was set on foot to be
between them in the Mall in the Park at Brussels, where they spoke together
with great Civility and much Coldness.

As to Don Antonio Pimentel, the Favors she has had for him, have, made noise
enough to come to your Ears, and if you be ignorant of 'em, Madam, I believe I
ought not to undertake to learn you the Particulars, of which perhaps I my self
may have been ill informed. She held her peace, and I made my profit of this
moment to thank her for complaisance in giving me an account of a Queen, who
had ever given me such a great Curiosity. She asked me afterward, whether I had
seen the Castle of Lerma. He that build it, said she, was Favorite to Philip
the Third, whose Death happened very strangely. This Prince, continued she, was
writing Letters in his Closet, and it being very cold that day, they had placed
very near him a quick fire of Coals, whose reverberation struck so much on his
face, that he was all in water, as if a great quantity of it had been poured on
his Head. The easiness of his temper hindered him from complaining, and even
speaking of it; for he never found fault with any thing. The Marquis de Pobar
having observed the incommodiousness which the King received by this extreme
heat, advertised the Duke d' Alva's Gentleman of his Chamber of it, to the end
he might remove the Fire away: He replied, It was not his Office, and that the
Duke Duesda ought to be made acquainted with it, whose proper Business it was.
The Marquis de Pobar being troubled to see the King thus suffer, and not daring
himself to ease him, for fear of invading another's Province, left the fire
still in its place; but he sent to give notice of it to the Duke Duesda, who
was by Misfortune gone near Madrid to see a stately House he was there
building. Word was brought of this again to the Marquis de Pobar, who proposed
again to the Duke de Alva the taking away the fire. But he found him inflexible
hereunto, and chose rather to send into the Country, to the Duke Duesda, so
that before he was come, the King was almost spent, and that very Night he fell
into a violent Fever, accompanied with an Erisipellis, which inflamed, and the
Inflammation degenerated into the Purples, which caused his Death.

I must confess, said she, that having seen when I was abroad in the World,
other Courts besides our own, I could not forbear blaming these kind of
Ceremonies and Punctilio's which hinder the taking of one step faster than
another, tho life depended thereon. The old Countess of Lemo's loved to talk,
and continuing her Discourse, and among other names mentioned that of the Count
de Villa Mediana, I have heard, said I, interrupting her, that this Gentleman,
being one day in the Church of our Lady d' Arocha, and finding there a
Religio's, who begged for the Souls of Purgatory, he gave him a piece of four
pounds. Ah my, Lord, said the good Father, you have now delivered a Soul. The
Count drew out again alike piece, and put it into the Basin. Here Is, continued
the Religio, another Soul delivered: He gave him in this manner six, one after
another, and at the dropping of each piece, the Monk cried Here Is a Soul
delivered from Purgatory. Will you be positive in it, replied the Count. Yes,
my Lord, replied the Monk, I am certain they are now in Heaven. Give me now
then back again my six pieces, said, he, for they signify nothing to you,
seeing the Souls are already got to Heaven, there is no danger of their
returning again to Purgatory. It was as you relate, added the Countess, but he
took not again his Money, for this would have been among us an horrid
Sacrilege. And I knew a man of good quality, who being much behind in the
World, yet when he was dying, would have fifteen thousand Masses to be said for
him. His last Will was executed, and his poor Creditors defrauded; for how just
soever their Debts be, they can expect to receive nothing, till such time as
all the Masses which are left in the Will be said. And this has given occasion
to that common saying among us, That such a one has made his Soul his Heir;
whereby is meant, that he has left his Estate to the Church to say Prayers for
him.

King Philip the Fourth ordered in his Will an hundred thousand Masses to be
said for him; farther declaring, That should he cease needing them, they should
serve for his Father and Mother; and in case they were got to Heaven, they
should be applied to the Souls of those who were slain in the Wars of Spain.

But what I have already told you of the Count de Villa Mediana, brings to my
mind, that he being one day at Church with Queen Elizabeth, he saw a great deal
of Money on the Altar, which was given for the Souls in Purgatory. He drew
near, and took it up in his hand, saying, My Love will last for ever, my Pains
will be likewise Eternal, those of the Souls in Purgatory will have an end;
alas, mine will never end! This hope comforts them; as for me, I am without
hope and comfort, so that these Charities are more due to me, than they.
However, he took nothing away, only speaking these words as an occasion to
bring in his Passion before this beautiful Queen, who was there present: For in
effect, his was so violent for her, that there is some reason to think she was
not wholly insensible of it, if her rigid Virtue had not preserved her heart
against the Count's Merit. He was young, well shaped, handsome, brave,
magnificent, gallant and witty; every Body knows how he appeared to his
Misfortune in a Carosel at Madrid, with a Suit embroidered with pieces of new
Money, called Realles, and which he bore for a Device; MIS AMORES SON REALES.
making an allusion to the word Reales, which is to say Royal, with the Passion
he had for the Queen. This is finer in Spanish, and signifies in English, My
Love is Royal.

The Count Duke d' Olivarez, the Kings Favorite, and the secret Enemy of the
Queen and the Count, made his Master take notice of the boldness of a Subject,
who dared even in his Presence declare the Sentiments he had for the Queen; and
in this moment he persuaded the King to be revenged on him. An occasion was
waited for which should make no noise. But here is what hastened his ruin;
applying his Mind only to divert the Queen, he wrote a Comedy which every Body
likes, and the Queen, more than others, found therein such moving and delicate
strokes in it, that she would act apart in it her self on the King's Birthday.
It was the Amorous Count who managed and took care of the Festival; he ordered
the Clothes, and provided Machines, which cost him above Thirty thousand
Crowns. He had caused a great Cloud to be painted, under which the Queen was
concealed in a Machine. He stood very near it, and at a certain sign he gave a
Man who was faithful to him, he set fire to the linen work of the Cloud. The
whole House, valued at an hundred thousand Crowns, was in a manner consumed;
but he comforted himself, when making his advantage of this favorable
Opportunity, he took his Sovereign in his Arms, carried her into a little
by-place, and there stole from her some Favors; and that which is much taken
notice of in this Country, is that he touched her foot. A little Page who saw
him, informed the Count Duke of it, he did not doubt but when he saw the fire,
but this was an effect of the Count's Passion. He made such an exact Enquiry,
that he laid before the King certain Proofs of it; and his Proofs so greatly
enraged the King, that it is pretended he caused him to be shot with a Pistol
one night, as he was in his Coach with Don Lewis de Haro.

Here Is a very Tragical end, said I to her, interrupting her; but whilst, said
she, I am speaking to you of Philip the Fourth, I cannot but I must tell you,
that he was vehemently in love with the Duchess Dalburkerke. He could never
meet with a favorable opportunity of Entertaining her. The Duke her Husband
kept strict guard over her, and the more Obstacles the King met with, the more
his Desires increased; but when Night came, and when he was at play, he feigned
to call to mind he had a Letter to write of the greatest consequence. He called
the Duke Dalburkerke, who was in his Chamber, and desired him to take his
place, and continue his Game. He immediately hereupon entered into his Closet,
disguised himself, and went down by a back Stairs, and came to the young
Duchess with the Count Duke his Favorite.

The Duke Dalburkerke, whose mind ran on his Domestic Interests more then on
his Game, easily believed his Master would not have committed it to him,
without some secret Design. He began then to complain of an horrid Colic, and
uttering Cries and making Faces enough to fright one, he gave the Cards to
another, and without any stop run home. The King had only just arrived there
without any Train, he was then in the Court, and seeing the Duke come he hid
himself; but there is nothing so clear sighted as a jealous Husband. He
perceived the King, and being not willing to have Lights brought that he might
not be obliged to acknowledge him, he made up to him with a great Cane which he
commonly walked with: Ha! Ha! Villain, said, he to him, thou come to rob my
House; and without more words he laid on him with all his strength. The Count
Duke was no more spared, who fearing least worse might happen, cried, out
several times, 'Twas the King, to stop the Duke's Fury: but this was so far
from effecting it, that he redoubled his blows both on the Prince and his
Minister, crying in his turn, That this was a stroke of the greatest Insolence,
to make use of his Majesty's Name and his Favorites in such an occasion, that
he could find in his heart to send 'em to the Palace, because he well knew the
King would cause 'em to be hanged. In all this Fray the King said not a word,
and at length got away half mad, in having received so many blows, and not one
favor from his Mistress.

This produced no ill Consequences to the Duke Dalburkerke; but on the contrary
the King being cured of his Love to the Duchess, made a Jest of it some time
after. I know not whether I do not abuse your patience by the length of this
Conversation, added the Countess de Lemos, and I fall insensible into the
defect of persons of my Age, who forget themselves when they tell of things
done in their time. I saw she was for retiring, and having again thankt her for
the honor she had done me, I took my leave of her, and returned to my Inn.

The Weather was so foul, that we with great difficulty set out, but being
resolved on it, we marched as long as the day lasted, falling down and getting
up as well as we could. We could hardly see four Paces before us, the Storm was
so great, that it blew off several Stones off the Rocks, which fell into our
way, and hurt one of our Company; he had been killed, had he not stepped on one
side. In fine, after having made about eight Leagues, according to our
reckoning, we were much astonished to find our selves at the Gates of Lerma,
without having advanced or gone back. We had still turned about the Town,
without perceiving it, as it were by Enchantment, sometimes farther, sometimes
nearer, and we were all of us not a little out of humor at having taken so much
pains to so little purpose.

The Hostess transported at the sight of us, she who could have been glad with
all her heart we should thus Travel as long as we lived, to return to lie at
her House every night, tarried for me at the top of her little Staircase. She
told me she was very sorry she could not let me have my Room again, but would
give me another commodious enough, and that mine was taken up by a Seignora,
the greatest in Spain. Don Fernand asked her name, she told him, she was called
Donna Eleonor of Toledo; he as soon informed me she was his near Kinswoman. He
could not comprehend by what chance she should come there.

To be satisfied in the matter, he sent his Gentleman to make her a Complement,
and to know whether his visit would not be troublesome. She sent word she had a
great Satisfaction at this happy Meeting, and that he would do her a great deal
of honor. He went up immediately to her Chamber, and was informed by her of
several particulars which related to him. He came afterward to me, and told me
very civilly, That where not Donna Eleonar excessive weary and indisposed, she
would have given me the first Visit. I in short, desired him to conduct me to
her Chamber, where she received me in a most obliging manner; and I observed in
the first moment of our Conversation, that she had a great deal of Wit and
Politeness. I found her very neat and handsome, her Eyes were lively and so
glistering, that one could not without pain endure their brightness. Don
Fernand told her who I was, and that I went to see one of my near Relations at
Madrid. Her name was not unknow to her, no more than her Person, she told me
'twas not long since the King had made her Titularia and Marchioness of
Castille. I should be greatly obliged to you, Madam, said I to her,
interrupting her, if you would be pleased to give me some Account of this
title, she having mentioned it in her Letters, without explaining to me what it
means, no more than that of Grandee, etc.

I shall take a pleasure to inform you of what I know, replied Donna Eleonora,
and I have always heard, that in the time of the first Kings, Doviedo, de
Galicia and Asturia, they were elected by the Prelates of the Kingdom, and by
the Ricos-homes. These Lords having not yet obtained the Titles of Dukes,
Marquisses and Counts, which distinguished them from Gentlemen, they were called
Ricos-homes, which were as the Grandees of Spain now. The Ricos-homes, stood
covered before the King, entered among the States, and had their Active and
Passive voice. And the Titulado's at present, are the same which were then
called Ricos-homes; but their Privileges are not so large, and most of these
Honors, as I shall tell you, have been reserved to the Grandees of Spain. The
Titulado's may have a Canopy or Cloth of State in their Chamber, a Coach in
Madrid with four Horses, with los tiros largos, which are long Traces of Silk,
which fasten the last Horses to the foremost. When there are Bull-Feasts, they
have Balconies in the great place, where their Wives are regaled with Baskets
full of Sweeetmeats, Gloves, Ribons, Fans, Silk-hofe, and this at the King or
Towns charge, which gives the Feast. They have their Seat set out in the
Ceremonies, and when the King makes a Titulado, Marquis of Castile, Arragon, or
Grenada, he enters into the States of this Kingdom.

As to the Grandees, there are three different Ranks of them; and the manner in
which the King speaks to 'em in making them, distinguishes them. The one are
those whom he bids be covered, without adding any thing thereto; their Grandeur
is only fixed to their Person, and is not conserved to their Family.

The others, whom the King qualifies with the Title of one of their Lands; as
for Example, Duke or Marquis of such a place, Cover your self, for you, and for
yours, are Grandees in a more advantageous manner than the first, because their
Grandeur being fixed to their Estates, passes to their eldest Son, and if they
have none, to their Daughter or Heir.

The last are not covered till after they have spoken to the King; and the
difference between these is observed in saying, They are Grandees for Life, or
in their Race. It is farther to be observed, That there are some whom the King
makes be covered before they speak to him, in saying to 'em Cubridos; and they
spoke, and hear the King speak, ever covered. Others, who are only covered
after they have spoke to him, and he has answered them. And the third, who are
only covered when they have withdrawn themselves from the King toward the
Wall; but when they be altogether in public Offices, or at Chapel, there is
no difference between them, they sit down and are covered before him. And when
he writes to them, he treats them as if they were Princes, they have the Title
of Excellency given them. When their Wives go to the Queen, she receives them
standing, and instead of sitting on the Footcloth, they have Cushions brought
'em to sit on.

Here Is Madam, continued Donna Eleonora, what you desired to know; after due
thanks for her Civility, the hour of withdrawing being come, I took my leave of
her, entreating her to continue me in her Friendship.

I arose before day, because we had a great Journey to make to lie at Aranda de
Duero. The Weather growing milder, it became very misty, which at length turned
to Rain; and in arriving at Night, our Host told us we were very welcome to
him, but we must make a shift without Bread. This is, replied I, a thing one
cannot easily be without. And in effect, this News put me a little out of
humor. I enquired how happened this Scarcity; 'twas answered me, The Alcaid
Major of the Town (who is he that orders every thing) and who is both Governor
and Judge, had sent for all the Bread and Meal which was at the Bakers, and had
brought it into his House to make an equal Distribution of it, proportionable
to the Necessities of each particular Person, and that what had occasioned
this, was that the River of Duero, which passes about the Town, was frozen, and
the Rivers of Leon, Suegra, Burgos, Tormes and Salamanca, which throw and lose
themselves therein, had likewise ceased their Courses, so that no Mills could
grind, which made 'em apprehend a Famine: This obliged us to address our selves
to him for to have the Bread we needed. Don Fernand sent him one of his
Gentlemen in the Name of us all, and immediately we had so much Bread sent us,
that we gave part to our Host and his Family, who much wanted it.

Scarce were we at Table, when one of my Servants brought into my Chamber
several Packets of Letters, which they had found on the Stairs in the Inn. He
that carried them having drank more than he needed, had fallen there asleep, by
which means all his Letters lay exposed to the Curiosity of all that past by.
Here is in this Country a very ill order touching Commerce, and when the French
Currier arrives at St. Sebastian, all the Letters he brings are delivered to
others who are good Footmen, and ease one another. They put these Packets into
a Sack, tied with rotten Cords to their shoulders, by which means it often
happens, that the secrets of your Heart and Family are open to the first
curious Body who makes drunk this Foot-post; and this is what happened in this
Occasion; for Don Frederic de Cardonne having looked on the Superscriptions of
several Letters, he at last met with one from a Lady in whom he was apparently
interessed, at least I so judged from the emotion of his Countenance, and the
earnestness with which he opened the Packet. He read the Letter, and was
willing to show it me without telling me from whom it came, nor for whom it
was; but he promised to inform me further about it at Madrid; finding it well
writ, it came into my mind, that you would be perhaps glad to see the style of
a Spanish Lady, when she writes to what she loves. I prayed the Knight to let
me take a Copy of it; but it is certain the Translation takes away much of the
beauty of the Original. Here it is.

EVery thing contributes to afflict me in the unfortunate Embassy you have
undertaken, not to mention that distance is the bane of the strongest
Friendship. I cannot flatter my self, that a Rupture between the Sovereigns,
may abridge the time of your absence, and restore me a Good without which I can
no longer live. Of all the Princes of Europe, he to whom you are sent, is the
most at Union with us. I can foresee no War with him, and this Scourge with
which Heaven punishes the guilty, would be to me a thousand times more welcome
than Peace: Yes, I would be glad to bear alone all the Disasters of it, to see
my Lands wasted, my Houses burnt, to lose my Estate and my Liberty, provided we
could be together, and that without your share in my Disgraces, I could enjoy
the pleasure of seeing you; you may judge by these Dispositions of the
Condition I am in, when I think that you are really going away, that I remain
at Madrid, that I dare not follow you, that my Duty stiffes immediately the
Projects I might make to comfort my self, and that I lose you, in fine, in a
time wherein I have most reason to be persuaded of yours, and wherein I feel
more the Marks you gave me of it; I should conceal from you my Grief, and add
none to yours; but how can I weep and weep without you. Alas, Alas! I shall be
soon forced to weep alone, are you not afraid so lively an Affliction will
kill me, and can you not feign your self sick, that you may not leave me; think
of all the Advantages which are included in this Proposition; but I am a Fool
to make it you, you will prefer the King's Orders before mine, and 'twou'd
bring me into new Vexations to put you on such a proof. Adieu, I ask you
nothing, because I have too much to ask you; I was never so afflicted.

As I ended the Translating this Letter which I send you, the Alcade's Son came
to see me; he was a young man who had a good Opinion of himself, and who was a
true Guap. Let not this word offend you, (dear Cousin) Guap is the same in
Spanish, as a brave Gallant and Spark is with us; his Hair was parted on the
Crown of his Head, and tied behind with a blew Ribond about four fingers
breadth, and about two yards long, which hung down at its full length; his
Breeches were of black Velvet, buttoned down on each Knee with five or six
Buttons; he had a Vest on so short, that it scarce reached below his Pockets, a
Scollopt Doublet with hanging sleeves about four fingers breadth, made of white
embroidered Satin. His Cloak was of black Bays, and he being a Spark, had
wrapped it round his Arm, because this is more gallant, with a very light Buckler
in his hand, and which has standing out in the midst a steel Pike; they carried
it with 'em when they walk in the Night on any Occasion, he held in the other
hand a Sword longer than an Half-pike, and the Iron for its Guard was enough to
make a Breast and Back-plate. These Swords being so long that they cannot be
drawn out, unless a Man has the Arms of a Giant; the Sheaf therefore flies open
in laying the finger on a little Spring. He had likewise a Dagger, whose Blade
was very narrow, it was fastened to his Belt on his back; he had such a strait
Collar, that he could neither stoop nor turn about his Head. Nothing can he
more ridiculous than what they wear about their Necks, for it is neither a Ruff
nor a Band, nor a Cravat. His Hat was a prodigious size, with a great Band
twisted about it, bigger than a mourning one. His Shoes were of as fine Leather
as that whereof Gloves are made, and all slasht and cut, notwithstanding the
cold, and so exactly close to his Feet, that they seemed rather pasted on, and
having no Heels. He made me in entering a Reverence after the Spanish fashion,
his two Legs cross one another, and lowly stooping as Women do when they
Salute one another; he was strongly perfumed, and they are all so; his visit
was not long; he was very brisk; he forgot not to tell me he went often to
Madrid, and that there were no Courses of Bulls wherein he ventured not his
life. But as the little care which was taken of Letters, run in my mind, and
troubled me; I told him of the Courrier whom my People had found asleep on the
Stairs. He answered me, this happened from the neglect of the great Postmaster,
or to speak better, in that he would gain too much, and that if the King knew
of it, he would not suffer it. This Name of Great Postmaster made me enquire
of him, whether any one rode Post in Spain. He told me, yes; provided they had
the King's leave, or of the Great-Master, who is always a Person of a distinct
Birth; and that unless you have an Order well signed, and in good form, you can
have no Horses. But, said I to him, A Man who has fought a Duel, or has other
Reasons to hasten away; What does he? Nothing, Madam, said he to me, if he has
good Horses he makes use of them; and if he has not, he is perplexed enough; but
when one will go Post, and parts not directly from Madrid, it is sufficient to
take a Billet from the Alcade, which is to say, Governor of the Towns where
you pass. My Curiosity being satisfied on this Subject, the gallant Spaniard
withdrew, and we supt altogether, as we were wont.

I had been some time in Bed and asleep, when I was awakened by the ringing of
Bells, and by a confused Noise of dreadful Voices. I knew not as yet what was
the Cause, when Don Fernand de Toledo, and Don Frederic de Cardonna, without
knocking at my Door, burst it open, and calling out to me, as loud as they
could to make me hear (for they had no Light) came both of them to my Bed, and
throwing my Gown upon me, they carried me away, with my Daughter, as quick as
they could to the top of the House. It is impossible to represent to you my
astonishment and fear, I asked them at length, what was the matter? They told me
the Thaw was come down all of a sudden, with such a great violence, that the
Rivers, being swelled by the Torrents which fell from all sides of the
Mountains, with which the Town is surrounded, had fallen on it, and overflowed
it, that at the instant when they came to take me, the Water had already got to
my Chamber, and that all was in horrid Confusion, they needed say no more, for
I heard dreadful Cries and Shrieks, and the Water shook the whole House. I was
never so seized with Fear in all my life; I affectionately regretted my dear
Country! Alas! said I, I have traveled along way to come to drown my self on
the fourth Story of an Inn in Aranda. All Raillery apart, I thought seriously
my last hour was come, and I was so troubled, that I was twenty times thinking
to entreat these Gentlemen to hear me in Confession. I believe that in the
sequel they would have more laughed at it than I. We were till Day in continual
Alarms; but the Alcade, and the Inhabitants of the Town so speedily and
effectually bestir'd themselves in turning aside the Torrents, and making the
Waters pass, that we were only affrighted; two of our Mules were drowned; my
Litters and Clothes were so soakt in Water, that to dry them, we were forced to
tarry one whole Day; and this was no easy matter, for there are no Chimneys in
the Inns, they heated the Oven, and put my Clothes in it. I can assure you, I
have not gained any thing in this unhappy Inundation: I lay down after this or
to speak better, I bathed my self, my Bed being as wet as any thing else.

My fellow Travelers thought fit to let me rest a little; I have employed one
part of my leisure time in writing to you. Adieu dear Cousin; it is time to
finish: I am ever, more yours than any Bodies in the World.

From Aranda de Duero, this 9th of March.
LETTER VI.
THE Exactness I observe in giving you an Account of things which I judge
worthy of your Curiosity, puts me often times on Enquiries into several
Particulars which I should have otherwise omitted, had you not persuaded me
that you are a great Lover of Novelties, and that you love to Travel without
going out of your Closet.

We parted from Aranda in a time of Thaw, which as it rendered the Air warmer,
so it made the ways more troublesome. We came a while after to the Mountain de
Samozierra, which parts the Old Castile from the New; and we Traverst it not
without difficulty, as well for its height, as the quantity of Snow, with which
the Bottoms were filled, and into which we sometimes fell as from Precipices,
believing the way even. They call this Pass the Puerto, which Name methinks
should be only given to a part, where one Embarks on the Sea, or a River; but
it is thus, they call the Passage from one Kingdom to another, and you make
your way to your Cost, for the King's Officers wait for Travelers in the Road,
and let 'em not go till they have paid what they require.

In arriving at Buitrago, we were as wet as the night of the Inundation at
Aranda, and though I kept my Litter, I felt no less the Incommodiousness of the
Weather than if I had been on foot or Horsback, because the Litters are so ill
closed and made in this Country, that when the Mules pass through any Water,
they throw up with their Feet part of the Water into the Litter, which there
remains. So that I was forced in arriving, to change my Linen and Clothes:
afterward Don Fernand, the three Knights, my Daughter, and my Women, went with
me to the Castle I had been so often told of.

It appeared to me as regularly built as that of Lerma, not so large, but every
whit as pleasant: The Apartments are better contrived, and the Furniture is
richer and very singular as well for its Antiquity as Magnificence. This
Castle, as well as that of Lerma, belongs to Don Rodrigo de Silva de Mendosa,
Duke de Pastrana and de L'infantada. His Mother's Name is Donna Katherina de
Mendosa and Sandoval, Heiress of the Dutchy's of Infantada and Lerma. It
descends from Father to Son of Ruy Gomes de Silva, who was made Duke of
Pastrana, and Prince of Eboly by King Philip the Second. This Princess d'Eboly,
who has been so much talked of for her Beauty, was his Wife, and the King was
passionately in love with her: They showed me her Picture; she is represented
at her whole length, sitting under a Tent fastened to some Boughs of Trees; she
seems as if she were rising, for she has only a fine Linen Cloth on her, which
lets one part of her Body be seen. If she were as handsome as her Picture makes
her, and if her Features were so regular, she must be judged the most charming
Woman in the World; her Eyes are so lively and full of Spirit, that it seems as
if she was about speaking to you; her Neck, Arms, Feet and Legs are naked; her
Hair falls down on her Breasts, and little Cupids which appear every where
about her, press on one another to serve her, some had her Slippers, others are
ready to strew flowers on her, and some hold her looking Glass. Others are seen
farther off, who are sharpning their Arrows, whilst others fill their Quivers
with them, and bend their Bow: A Fawn looks on her through Boughs, she sees him
and shows him to a little Cupid, who is leaning on her Knees, and weeps as if
he were afraid of it, at which she seems to smile. I remained a great while
looking on this Picture with the greatest pleasure; but I was made to pass into
a Gallery, where I saw her again. She was painted in a large Piece attending
Queen Elizabeth, Daughter to Henry the Second King of France whom Philip the
Second, King of Spain espoused, instead of giving her to Don Carlos his Son, to
whom she had been promised. The Queen made her Entrance on Horseback, as it is
the Custom, and I found the Princess Eboly less shining near her than she
appeared to me when alone. You may hereby judge of the Charms of this young
Queen; she had a blue Satin Gown, but as to the rest, just as I represented to
you the Countess of Lemos. The King stood in a Balcony to see her pass by. He
had a black Suit with a Collar of the Golden Fleece, his Hair reddish and gray,
long visage, pale, old, wrinkled and ugly. The Infant Don Carlos accompanied
the Queen, he was very white, a fine head, his Hair of a light yellow, his Eyes
blue, and he looked on the Queen with so moving an Air, that it appeared the
Painter knew the secret of his heart, and would express it: His Habit was
white, embroidered with precious Stones; he was in his Doublet, with his Hat
botton'd upon one side, and covered with white Feathers. I saw in the same
Gallery another piece which much affected me, which was the Prince Don Carlos
dying, he was sitting in a Chair, leaning on his Arm on a Table before him,
holding a Pen in his Hand, as if he would have wrote something; there was a
Vessel by him, wherein appeared a sort of black Liquor, which apparently was
designed for Poison. A little further you see the Bath preparing for him, where
his Veins were to be opened; the Painter had perfectly well represented the
Confusion of so sad an Occasion, and having read his History, and being much
affected with it, methoughts I saw him really dying. I was told these Pieces
were of inestimable value. I was afterward conducted into a Chamber, whose
Furniture had belonged to the Arch-Dutchess Marguerita of Austria, Governess of
the Low Countries; and it is pretended she had workt it her self, there is a
neatly wrought Bed of Flowers, Woods, Animals, and Feathers of all Colors, the
hangings are the same, and the different Colors therein do make a very
agreeable show. And this is what I found most remarkable in the Castle of
Buitrago, and it growing late we left it.

It was several days since I had the pleasure of seeing the playing at Hombre,
I therefore caused the Cards to be brought. Don Fernand, with two of the
Knights, began the Game, and I intrest my self, as I was wont, and Don Estreve
de Carjaval did the like; so that after we had seen them play some time, I
demanded of him to whom of the three Knights was the Commandership, whence they
came when I met them. He answered me, It did not belong to any one of them; that
he had been to see one of their common Friends, on a vexatious Accident which
had happened to him in Hunting. Falling on the Subject of Commanderships, I
entreated him to inform me whether the Orders of St. James, Calatrava, and
Alcantara were ancient. He answered me, 'Twas above 500 years they had
subsisted; that heretofore the Order of Calatrava was called the Gallant, that
of St. James the Rich, and that of Alcantara the Noble. That which made 'em be
called thus, was that ordinarily there entered only young Cavaliers into
Calatrava; that St. James's was richer than the two others, and that to be
received a Knight of Alcantara, one must make his Proofs of four Races, whereas
to enter into the others, there needed only two. In the first times, when these
Orders were established, the Knights made Vows, lived most regularly in
Community, and wore Arms only to Combat the Moors; but afterward the greatest
Lords of the Kingdom entered into it, who obtained the liberty to marry, under
this Condition, that they should be obliged to demand an express Dispensation,
from the Holy See, one must have the King's Letter, make his proofs of
Nobility, and likewise prove he comes of old Christians, which is to say, there
have entered no Jews nor Moors into his Fathers and Mothers Family. Pope
Innocent the Eighth gave in 1489. to King Ferdinand and his Successors, the
disposal of all the Commanderships of these three Orders, which are called
Military. The King of Spain disposes of them in effect under the Title of
Perpetual Administrator; and he enjoys three great Masterships, which bring him
in above four thousand Crowns a year. When he holds a Chapter, as Great Master
of the Order, or any other Assembly, the Knights have the Privilege to sit and
be covered in his Presence. Don Esteve added, That the Order of the Calatrava
had 34 Commanderships, and 8 Priories, valued at 120 thousand Ducals a year;
that Alcantara had 33 Commanderships, 4 Alcaydies; and 4 Priories, which
yielded 80 thousand Ducals, and that the 87 Commanderships of St. James, as
well in Castille, as in the Kingdom of Leon, were valued at 272000 Ducats. You
may hereby judge, Madam, continued he, that there are some helps for the poor
Gentlemen of Spain.

I agree, said I to him, that this would be very advantageous for them, were
they the only Persons admitted into these three Orders. But I think you now
told me, that the greatest Lords possess the best Commanderships. This is by a
general Rule, said he, that those who have much will have more, although
there is the greatest Justice others should have a share; and the eldest of
great quality might have wherewith to satisfy them in obtaining the Order of
the Fleece, which extremely distinguishes those whom the King honors with it.
However, this being a Favor accompanied with no Revenue, and being not easily
obtained, few People seek it, and you see ordinarily none but Princes have it.
If you know who instituted this Order of the Fleece, said I to him, you will
oblige me in informing me. It is pretended, replied he, that in the time when
the Moors possessed the best and greatest part of Spain, a pious Peasant, praying
one day earnestly to God to deliver the Kingdom from these Infidels, perceived
an Angel coming down from Heaven who gave him a Fleece of Gold, and commanded
him to make use of it to gather Troops, because at this sight he would not be
refused to be followed for the fighting the Enemy. This holy man obeyed; and
several Gentlemen took up Arms in effect on what he told them.

The Success of this Enterprise answered the hope conceived of it. So that
Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, instituted the Order of the Golden Fleece,
in the honor of God, of the Virgin and St. Andrew, in the year 1429. and the
Day of his Marriage with Isabella Daughter to the King of Portugal, was chosen
for this Ceremony. It was made at Bruges, it ordained that the Duke of Burgundy
should be perpetual Chief of the Order, because St. Andrew is Patron of
Burgundy. Those who have it are called Cavallero's del Tuzon, which is to say,
Knights of the Fleece; and one may hence remark, that there is a difference in
relation to this Order, saying, when one speaks of the others, That such a one
is Knight of the Order of St. James, or the Order of Calatrava.

In the time when we were thus talking, we heard a noise, as of a Coach and
Attendants that stopped, not long after, Don Frederic de Cardona's Valet de
Cambre entered into my Chamber, to tell his Master, that the Archbishop of
Burgos was arrived.

This is an unhappy Encounter for me, said he, for I parted expressly from
Madrid to see him; and having not found him at Burgos, I was not a little
troubled at it.

Fortune is always on your side, said Don Sancho smiling to him, but not to
retard the pleasure of seeing this Illustrious Kinsman, we will leave off our
Game. Don Fernand and Don Sancho arose. Undoubtedly, says Don Esteve, Don
Frederic will not be of our Company this Night. I am of another mind, replied
Don Fernand; the Archbishop is one of the most obliging Persons in the World,
as soon as ever he knows here is a French Lady, he will give her a Visit. He will
do me a great deal of honor, answered, I but yet I shall be a little perplexed,
for we must sup and go to rest betimes. I had scarce ended these words, when
Don Frederic returned again.

As soon as ever the Archbishop knew there was a strange Lady at Buytrago, said
he to me, he no more minded me; and if you please, Madam, he will come and
offer you whatever depends on him in this Country.

I answered this Civility as I ought; and Don Frederic being returned to him,
conducted him a while after into my Chamber. I found him extraordinary civil,
he spoke little, and observed the gravity befitting his Character, and the
Spanish Nation. He much bewailed my making so long a Journey in so rigorous a
Season, entreating me to lay my Commands on him in something wherein he might
obey me. This is the usual Complement in this Country; he had a long Cassock
over his other Clothes of purple Velvet, with high ruffled Sleeves, which
reached to his very Ears, and a pair of Spectacles on his Nose.

He sent for a little Monkey, which he would needs give my Daughter; and though
I was troubled at it, I could not resist his Instances, and the Desires my
Daughter had of accepting it. Every time the Archbishop took Tobacco, which he
often did, this little Ape reached out his Paw to him, and he put some on it,
which he made as if he would take. This Prelate told me the King of Spain
expected with extreme impatience the Answer of the Marquis de Los-Balbares, on
the Orders he had given him on the Demand of Mademoiselle from the French King.
If his most Catholic Majesty's Greatness be considered, continued he, this
Marriage must needs be esteemed very honorable; for when the Sun goes down in
one part of his Dominions, it rises again in another. And this Monarch enjoys
not alone his Grandeur, he has the pleasure of sharing it to his Subjects, he
is in a Condition to recompense them, to make them happy, to put them into high
places, where their whole Ambition is satisfied, wherein they receive the same
Honor as Sovereigns; and is not this what a King ought to wish, to be in a
Capacity to recompense magnificently the Services which are rendered him, and
force even an unthankful Person to become grateful. It is a surprising thing,
the number of Employs for Men of the Sword and the Gown, which his Majesty
every day bestows.

Several Persons have spoken to me of this, as you do, my Lord, said I to him,
but I hope to be perfectly instructed in it at Madrid. I am able to inform you,
at least in part of what you would know, replied he; some Reasons have obliged
me to take a little Abstract, and which I think I have about me. He immediately
delivered it to me; and having kept the Copy of it, and it appearing curious to
me, I shall therefore hear, dear Cousin, translate it for you.

Vice-Royalties which depend on the King of Spain.

Naples, Sicily, Arragon, Valantia, Navarre, Sardagnia, Catalonia, and in the
New Spain, Peru.

Governments of Kingdoms and Provinces.

The States of Flanders, Milain, Galicia, Biscay, the Isles of Majorca and
Minorca. Seven Governments in the West Indies; to wit, the Isles of Madera,
Cape Vert, Mina, St. Thomas, Angola, Bresil, and Algarves. In Africa, Iseuta,
Maragan; in the East the Philippia Islands.

Bishoprics and Archbishopricks in the most Catholic King's Nomination, since
Pope Adrian the Sixth, yielded his Right of Nomination.

First in the two Castilles the Archbishopric of Toledo, whose Archbishop is
Primate of Spain, Great Chancellor of Castille, and Counselor of State. He
speaks to the States, and in the Council, immediately after the King; and he is
usually consulted in all important Affairs. He has three hundred and fifty
thousand Crowns a year, and his Clergy four hundred thousand.

The Archbishop of Braga in Portugal, who is Spiritual and Temporal Lord of the
City, and who for a Mark of his Authority, carries his Crosier in his hand, and
his Sword by his side, pretends to the Primacy of all Spain, and disputes it
with the Archbishopric of Toledo, because this Primacy was heretofore held at
Seville, afterward Translated to Toledo, by reason of the Invasion of the
Moors, and that Toledo being fallen into their hands, it was Translated to
Braga, so that the Archbishop long possessed this Dignity; but after the
Spaniards had retaken Toledo, the Archbishop re-demanded his Primacy, he of
Braga would not consent to restore it; and this Difference being not yet
terminated, they both assume this Title.

The Archbishopric of Seville is worth 350 thousand Ducats, and its Chapter
above an hundred thousand. Nothing can be seen finer than this Cathedral. Among
other remarkable things, there is a Tower built with Brick, near 200 foot
large, and above an 100 in height. Another Tower is raised above it, which is
so well contrived within, that a Man may ride up on Horseback to the top of it.
The outside is all painted and gilt.

The Archbishopric of St. James's de Compostella is worth near sixty thousand
Ducats, and its Chapter an 100 thousand.

The Archbishop of Grenada is valued at 40000 Ducats. That of Burgos near as
much. The Archbishop of Sarragossa 50000. The Archbishop of Avila 20 thousand
Ducats a year. The Archbishopric of Valencia 40 thousand. The Bishopric of
Astorgas 12 thousand. Bishopric of Cuensa more than 50 thousand. Of Cordoua
about 40 thousand. Of Siguensa the same. Of Segovia 25 thousand. Of Calahorra
20 thousand. Of Salamanca something more. Of Placentia 50 thousand. Of Palentia
25 thousand. Of Jaca above 30 thousand. Of Malaga 40 thousand. Of Osma 22
thousand. Of Zamora 20 thousand. Of Coria 20 thousand. Of Ciudad Rodrigo 10
thousand. Of the Canary Island 12 thousand. Of Lugo 8 thousand. Of Mondenedo 10
thousand. Of Oviedo 20 thousand. Of Leon 22 thousand. Of Pampelune 28 thousand.
Of Cales 12 thousand. Of Orensa 10 thousand. Of Onguela 10 thousand. Of Almeria
5 thousand. Of Guadix 90000 thousand. Of Tuy 4 thousand. Of Badajoz 18
thousand. Of Vailladolid 15 thousand. Of Huesca 12 thousand. Of Tarazona 14
thousand. Of Balbastro 7 thousand. Of Albarvacin 6 thousand. Of Tervel 12
thousand. Of Jaca 6 thousand.

I ought not to omit observing, That the Cathedral of Cordua is extraordinary
stately; 'twas built by Abderhaman, who ruled over all the Moors in Spain. It
served them for a Mosque in the year 787. But the Christians having taken
Cordoua in 1236. they made a Church of this Mosque. It has 24 great Gates, all
of 'em carved with Ornaments of Steel; its length is 600 foot, and 50 wide. It
is perfectly well proportioned, and sustained by 850 Pillars, the greatest part
of which are of Jasper, and the others of black Marble, of one foot and an half
Diametre. The Roof is admirably well painted; and one may hence judge of the
magnificent humor of the Moors.

It is hard to believe, after what I have written of the Cathedral of Cordoua,
that that of Leon is yet more considerable. Yet nothing is truer; and this is
what has given occasion to what is commonly said, That the Church of Leon is
the finest in all Spain, the Church of Toledo the richest, that of Seville the
greatest, and that of Salamanca the strongest.

The Cathedral of Malaga is admirably well set forth, and justly proportioned;
the Desks in the Quire has cost 105 thousand Crowns, and all the rest answers
this Magnificence.

Principalities of Catalonia.
The Archbishopric of Tarragone. The Archbishopric of Barcelona. The
Bishopric of Lerida. Vrgel. Gironne. Vique. Salsona. Tortosa. Elm.

In Italy.
The Archbishopric of Brindes. Lanciano. Matera. Otrante. Rocli. Salerna.
Trani. Tarante.
The Bishopric of Ariano, Acerra. Aquila. Costan. Castelamare.

The Kingdom of Naples.
The Bishopric of Gaeta Galipoli. Gniovenazzo. Mofula. Monopoli. Puzzol.
Potenza. Trivento. Tropea. Dugento.

Kingdom of Sicily.
The Archbishopric of Palerma. Monteral.
The Bishopric of Girgento. Mazara. Messina. Parti. Cefalu. Catania. Zaragoza.
Malte.

At Milan.
The Archbishopric of Milan. The Bishopric of Vigevano.
Kingdom of Majorca.
The Bishopric of Majorca.
Kingdom of Sardagnia.
The Archbishopric of Cagliari. Oristan. Sacer.
The Bishopric of Alguerales. Boza. Ampurias.

In Africa.
The Bishopric of Tanger. The Bishopric of Ceuta.
In the Indies.
The Archbishop of Goa. The Bishopric of Madera. Angola in the Tercere Isles,
Capoverde. St. Thomas. Cochin. Malara. Maliopor. Macao.

From all the Archbishopricks and Bishoprics there comes nothing to the Pope
from the Bishop that dies, nor whilst the Benefice is Vacant. It will be a hard
matter to recite the number of Abbeys and other Dignities to which the King of
Spain presents.

We shall now mention the six Archbishopricks, and the thirty two Bishoprics
of New Spain, of its Isles, and of Peru.

The Archbishopric of the City of Los-Reyes, Capital of the Province of Peru,
is valued at near 30 thousand Crowns a year.

The Bishopric of Arequipa 16 thousand. Truxillo 14 thousand. St. Francisco de
Quito 18000. the great Town of Curco. 24 thousand. St. John of Victory 8000.
Panama 6000. Chile 5000. of our Lady of Chile 40000.
The Archbishopric of Bogota in the Kingdom of Grenada 14000. Popaya 5000.
Cartagena 6000. St. Maria 18000.

The Bishopric of Plata in the Province of Los Charcas sixty thousand. The
Archdeacon of this Bishopric has 5000, the Master of the Children of the
Quire, the Chaunter, and Treasurer, each 4000. Six Canons, each 3000. Six other
Dignities valued each at 1800 Crowns. And one may observe by the Riches of the
Chapter of Plata, that the others have not much less.

The Archbishopric of La Plata has for Suffragans, The Bishopric of Paz.
Tucuman. Santa Cruz de la Sierra. Paraquay de Buenos Airs. Del Rio de la Plata.



The Archbishop of St. James, in the Province of Tutuman, is worth 600 Crowns.

The Bishopric of S. Lawrence de Las Barrancas 12000.

The Bishopric of Baraguay 16000. La Sante Trinite 15000.

The Archbishopric of Mexico, erected in 1518 Twenty Thousand Reales.

The Bishopric of Los Angelos Fifty Thousand Reales.

The Bishopric of Valadolid, of the Province of Mechoacan, 14000 Crowns.

The Bishopric of Antequera 7000. Guadalaxara, Province of the new Galicia
7000. Durango 4000. Merida^, Capital of the Province of Yucatan, 8000.
Gantiago, in the Province of Guatamala, 8000. Santiago of Leon 3000. Chiapa
5000.

The Archbishopric of St. Domingo of the Spanish Islands, Primate of the
Indies 3000.

The Archbishopric of St. Juan de Porto-Rico Fifty Thousand Reales. the Isle
of Cuba 8000. St. Anna de Coro 8000. Camayagua, Capital of the Province of
Hunduras 3000.

The Archbishopric Metropolitan of Manila Capital of the Philippin Islands,
3000 Crowns, which the King is obliged to pay him by the Bull granted in 1595.
The King likewise pays the Chapter the same sum. This Archbishopric has three
Suffragans, one in the Isle of Cebu, the other in that of Luzon, and the third
in Comorina.

Having read the Memorandum which the Archbishop of Burgos gave me, and made
it to be copyed out, he withdrew, praying me that I would give him leave to
send his Olio to me, because 'twas ready, and that I could not get any thing
better for my Supper. I thanked him, and told him, the same Reason obliged me
to refuse it, seeing without it he would make as bad a Supper as we.

Yet Don Frederick de Cardona was already gone to fetch it and he returned
laden with a great Silver Pot; but he was much surprised in finding it fastened
with a Lock: This is usual in Spain; he would needs have the Key of the Cook
(who taking it ill that his Master would not eat his Olio) answered, he had
unfortunately lost the Key in the Snow, and knew not how to open it. Don
Frederic vexed at this, would against my will, go and acquaint the Archbishop
with it, who ordered his Major Domo to look after it; he threatened the Cook,
and the Scene past so near my Chamber, that I heard it all, but that which I
liked best were the Cook's Answers, who said, No puedo padecer la rina, siendo
Christiano viejo, hidalgo come el Key y poco mas, which is to say, I cannot
bear the being reprimanded, who am of the Race of Old Christians, who are Noble
as the King, and something more.

It is commonly at this rate the Spaniards value themselves: This same Blade
was not only vainglorious, but obstinately conceited: and whatever could be
done or said to him, he would not deliver the Key of the Pot, so that the Olio
remained in it untouched for us. We went to Bed late, so that not rising very
early, all that I could do before I set out, was to finish this Letter, and to
Morrow I shall begin another, wherein you shall be informed of the rest of my
Travels.

From Buitrago, this 13th. of March, 1679.
LETTER. VII.
WE can easily perceive that we are not far from Madrid, the Weather is fair
notwithstanding the Season, and we have no more need of Fire; but it seems very
strange to us, that in the Inns which are the nearest to this great Town, you
are worse used than in those which are an hundred Leagues distant; you would
think you came rather into Deserts, than near a Town where resides so great a
Monarch; and I can assure you (dear Cousin) that in our whole Course, I have not
met with an House or Castle that has pleased me; I am much amazed at it, for I
thought that in this Country as in ours, I should find fine Walks, and curious
Seats, whereas you can scarcely see any Trees, save some few which grow in
spite of the Soil: And at this time, when I am but Ten Leagues from Madrid, my
Chamber stands even with the Stable; it is an Hole that needs a Light at Noon,
but what kind of Light think you? better have none at all; for this is a Lamp
which banishes all Cheerfulness by its glimmering light, and your Health by its
stinking scent: and go you where you will, though to the Curate of the Parish for
a Candle, you will not find one, and I doubt much whether there be any in his
Church. Here every where a sad Scene of Poverty presents it self to your sight;
Don Ferdinand de Toledo, who took notice of my Astonishment, assured me I
should see very fine things at Madrid; but I could not forbear telling him, I
could not easily imagine it: It is true, the Spaniards bear up under their
Indigency with such an Air of Gravity as would cheat one, the very Peasants
telling their steps as they walk; they are mightily inquisitive after News, as
if their whole Being depended thereon; I have had many of 'em come into my
Chamber without any Ceremony, and without Clothes on their backs, or Shoes on
their Feet, entreating me to tell them what I knew of the Court of France;
after I had spoke to them, they have examined what I have said, and argued on
it among themselves in such a manner, as showed great sense, and a lively
apprehension: This Nation has ever had something extraordinary among them above
others.

There came to see me among others one of the Townsmen's Wives, a good likely
Woman; she carried her Child in her Arms, which was a dreadful lean one; he had
above an hundred little hands like those of Joynted Babies hanging about his
Neck, and on all sides of him. I asked his Mother what this meant? She answered
me, this was good against Evil Eyes. How, said I to her, do these little hands
hinder one from any Distemper of the Eyes? Undoubtedly, replied she, but not as
you mean; for you must know if you please, there are Peo-in this Country, who
have such a Poison in their Eyes, that in looking steadfastly on a Person, and
especially on a young Child, they make him pine away to death. I saw a Man who
had an Evil Eye, and doing mischief when he looked with this Eye, he was obliged
to cover it with a great Plaster: As to the other Eye, it had no Malignity,
yet it sometimes happened that being with his Friends, when he saw a great many
Fowls together, he would say, choose which of these you would have me kill. He
was showed one, he took off his Plaster, looked fixedly on the Fowl, and a
while after she turned several times round as giddy, and fell down dead. This
Woman likewise would persuade me there are Magicians, who looking on any one
with an Evil intention, strikes them with such a Languishment, as makes 'em
become lean like Skeletons; and her Child, she told me, has been struck in this
manner, and the common Remedy is these little hands. She moreover told me, it
is the custom, when they see any one look attentively upon them, and the Party
has a look ill enough to fear she should give the Evil d' Ojos (it is thus
called, because it is done by the Eyes) to present her own of these Hands, or
even her own shut, and to say to her Toma la mano, which is to say, Take this
hand; to which the Party suspected must answer, Dios le benediga, God bless
you, which if she does not, she is judged to be ill intentioned, and thereupon
he or she may be denunciated to the Inquisition; or if you be the stronger, you
may beat them till they say Dios le benediga.

I do not assure you as a thing certain, that the Relation of the Fowls is
positively true; but this is certain, that they are here strongly persuaded
there are Persons who can do you hurt by bare looking on you, and here are even
Churches to which they go in Pilgrimage to be cured of it. I asked this young
Woman if there appeared nothing extraordinary in those they call mischievous
Eyes; She told me no; except that they are full of such a shining Vivacity,
that they seem to be all on fire, and would make one think they will pierce you
like a Dart. She moreover told me, that of late the Inquisition had caused an
Old Woman to be seized on, who was accused to be a Witch, and she believed
'twas she who had put her Child in that piteous condition I saw it. I asked her
what they would do to this Woman; she told me if there were Proofs strong
enough, she would be infallibly burnt, or left in the Inquisition; and that the
best treatment she could choose would be to be delivered thence by being whipped
along the Streets; That these Witches are tied to an Asses Tail, or that they
are placed on these Beasts coif'd with a Paper Mitre painted with all colors,
with Writings which denote the Crimes they have committed: That in this fine
Equipage they are led about the Town, where every one has the liberty to strike
them, or throw dirt at them. But, said I to her, how know you their condition
would be worse if they remained still in Prison? O Madam, said she to me, I see
you are not yet informed what the Inquisition is; whatever can be said of it,
comes not near the Rigours exercised therein: You are seized on, and thrown
into a Dungeon; you lie there two or three Months, sometimes more, and
sometimes less, without a word being said to you; at the end of this time you
are led before the Judges, who with a terrible look ask you why you are there?
It is Natural to answer, you know not. They say no more to you, but send you
back again to this dismal Hole, wherein is every day suffered a thousand times
more trouble than Death it self; yet you are not suffered to dye there, but
remain many times a Year in this condition. At the end of this time, you are
brought again before the same Judges, or before others, for they change, and go
into several Countries; these demand of you again, why you are detained? You
Answer, you have been Apprehended, but you know not for what. You are sent
again into your Dungeon without any more words. In short, sometimes you pass
over your whole Life there. And demanding of her, if it were the Custom for one
to accuse himself, she answered, that as to some Persons, 'twas the best and
shortest way; but that the Judges held only this course with those against whom
they had no certain Proofs: for commonly, when any one accuses a Person of
Capital Crimes, the Accuser was wont to remain in Prison with the Criminal, and
this is the reason of their being a little more moderate. She related to me the
particular punishments, and the whole manner of them, with which I will not
fill this Letter, nothing being more dreadful. She moreover told me, she knew a
Jew named Ishmael, who was put into the Prison of the Inquisition of Seville,
with his Father, who was a Rabbin of their Law. It is four years since they
were there, when Ishmael, having made an hole, climbed up to the top of a
Tower, and making use of Ropes he had provided, he slid down along the Wall
with a great deal of danger; but having got down, he reproached himself for
having abandoned his Father, and without considering the Risk he ran after more
than one manner, seeing his Father and he were condemned, and were to be led in
a few days to Madrid with several others, to suffer there the greatest Torment;
yet this hindered him not from determining himself, he generously climbed up the
Tower, descended into the Dungeon, drew thence his Father, made him escape
before him, and got away himself. I found this Action very brave, and worthy to
be set as an Example to Christians in an Age wherein, the most indispensible
Obligations are slighted. I continued entertaining my self with this Spanish
Woman, when Constance, one of my Women, whom you know, came to tell me with
great earnestness, that she now saw Monsieur Daucourt, and that if I would, she
would step out and call him: This is a Rich Gentleman, whom I knew at Paris, a
civil Man, and of good Sense, and of comely Personage: I knew he had a Brother
at Madrid, belonging to Don Juan of Austria. Having showed I should be glad to
speak with him, Constance went out in quest of him, and brought him to me.
After the first Civilities, and informing my self of the News of my Kinswomen
whom I believed he knew, I asked him of his own Affairs, and whether he was
content with his Journey. Ah, Madam, speak to me no more of my Journey, cried
he, there was never a more unfortunate; and had you come some days sooner, you
might have seen me hanged. How, said I to him, what do you mean by this? I
mean, said he to me, that I had all the fear of it, and that this is the most
unpleasant Country in the World for Strangers: But, Madam, if you are at
leisure, and would know more, I will relate to you my Adventure. It is
singular, and will fully prove to you what I have told you. You will do me a
great deal of pleasure, said I to him, we are here in a place where such a
Relation will much divert us; he began it then in this manner.

Some Affairs wherein I was concerned, and the desire of seeing a Brother whom
I had been away from some years, obliged me, Madam, to undertake this Journey
to Madrid: I was little acquainted with the Customs of that place, I imagined
one might go to Women without difficulty, and that one might play and eat with
them; but I was astonished to learn, that every one of them is more retired in
her House, than a Carthusian in his Cell; and that there are Persons who have
been mutually in Love for two or three years, and yet had never spoke to one
another. Such singular Manners seemed ridiculous to me, I said thereupon freely
whatever came into my Head; but I treated the matter more seriously, when I
understood these Women who were so closely confined, were the most amiable
Women in the World; that they had such a Delicacy, Vivacity, and Manners, as
are no where to be met with but among them; that Love always appeared new, that
no one would change a Spanish Woman but for another. I was in the greatest
despair at the difficulties there were to get at them. One of my Friends, named
Belleville, who was my Companion in my Journey, and who is a brisk Lad, was no
less troubled on his side than I on mine: my Brother, who feared lest some
vexatious Accident should befall us, continually inculcated into us how Jealous
Husbands are in this Country; great Murderers, and no more valued the killing
of a Man than a Fly. This did not agree very well with two Men who were not as
yet weary of living.

We went into all parts where we thought we might see Ladies; we saw some in
effect, but this did not satisfy us, all the bows and cringes we made 'em
brought forth nothing; we each of us returned home every Night very weary and
disgusted at our fruitless Circuits.

One Night Belleville and I went upon Design to the Prado, which is a Walk
adorned with great Trees, and several Fountains, they throw their Water a great
height, and in great gushes it falls into Basins, from whence it runs (when
they have a mind) into the Courts to Water them, and so to make them fresh and
pleasant. It was the finest Weather this Evening that one could wish. After we
had light out of our Coach, and sent it away, we began to walk softly, and
having made a few turns, we sat us down on the side of one of the Fountains,
and then began to make our usual Complaints. Dear Belleville, said I to my
Friend, shall we never be so happy to meet with one of these Witty and Charming
Spanish Women, so much boasted of? Alas! says he, I desire it too much, but
dare not hope it: Hitherto we have met with nothing but such ugly Creatures, as
run after Folks to fright them, and who under their white Vails are more Tauny
and Loathsome than the Bohemians; such as these, I swear to you, do not please
me at all, and notwithstanding their sprightfulness, I cannot consent to enter
into a very near conversation with them.

At the very instant these words were out of his Mouth, we spied coming out of
a Door hard by, two Women; they had left off their upper Garments, which were
always very plain; and when they opened their Manta's, the light of the Moon
made the glory of their Gold and Precious Stones appear. As God's true, cries
out Belleville, here is at least two Fairies. Nay, said I, let us be juster, and
think them not other than two Angels. When they came near us, we stood up, and
made them the lowest Bow that ever we did in our lives. They past by us softly,
and with those little Apish Tricks, which become the Spaniards so well, they
looked at us, first with one Eye, and then with the other. They went on a little;
we were in pain what to think, whether they would return back the same way, or
whether we should follow them; but while we were deliberating, we perceived
them to approach us; when they were near us, they stood still, one of them
began to speak, and asked us, if we could speak Spanish. I see by your Habits,
said she, that you are strangers. But pray tell me of what Country are you? We
told her we were Frenchmen, and that we spoke Spanish ill enough, but we had a
great mind to learn to speak it well: That to succeed therein, we were
persuaded we must love a Spanish Woman, and we heartily wished we might find
one that desired to be beloved. The matter is nice, replied the other Lady,
which had not yet spoke, and I should be sorry for her who engages in such a
Design, for I have heard that Frenchmen are not Faithful. Oh! Madam, says
Belleville, this was some body which had a mind to do us an ill turn, and put
us out of your good opinion, but it will be easy to wipe off this Aspersion.
Though I may soon give my Heart to a pretty Woman, yet I am very sensible I
cannot so easily call it back again. What! says she that spoke to me before,
dare you without further consideration, enter into such an Engagement at first
sight? I should not have quite so good an Opinion of you. Oh! Madam, cries he,
why should we lose precious Time? If it is good to love at all, it is good to
begin as soon as it is possible: Hearts that are born to Love, languish and
decay when they are not exercised therein. Your Maxims are fine, replied she,
but they seem dangerous; it is not only necessary to avoid following of them,
but even the hearing of them; and then indeed they would have been gone, but we
begged them with great earnestness to tarry a few moments longer in the Prado.
We said all the pretty things to them both, which might oblige them to discover
themselves, and give us the satisfaction of seeing them without their Vails.
Our Conversation was very brisk, and pleasant enough: they had abundance of
Wit; and as they knew how to manage all their Advantages, so without
affectation, they showed us their Hands as they had occasion to mend the
sitting of their Head-dresses, and they were whiter than the Snow. In spite of
their seeming care to hide themselves, yet we saw enough to observe their
delicate Complexion, their brisk Eyes, and their Features very regular. You may
be sure we left them as late as we could, and that we conjured them to make
that Walk happy sometimes with their Presence, or else give us leave to wait on
them at their House. They agreed to nothing; and indeed, we were several times
after that at the Prado, and near that Fountain where the first saw them,
without being able to perceive them. Here Is a deal of time lost, said we; what
must we do to pass our Lives in this great want of Employment, for we must
renounce the thoughts of Ladies, whose Access is so difficult? This was our
Resolution, but it held not long, for scarcely had we made it, but we see come
out of the same House the two Incognito's. We drew near them, full of Respect,
and our civil Carriage did not displease them. Belleville took the least by the
hand, and I the biggest. I endeavored to persuade her with what Impatience I
expected her. I blamed her a little, at which she seemed somewhat concerned;
but taking more courage, I discoursed to her of the thoughts she had inspired
me with, and assured her, that it was in her power to engage me for my whole
Life. She seemed extreme careful not to give the least mark of Favor. At
length, amongst other things, she told me, that she was Heiress to a great
Estate; that her Name was Ines, that her Father was a Knight of the Order of
St. James, and was of a considerable Quality; that she, which was with her, was
called Isabella, and that they were Cosins. All these particulars pleased me
well, finding her a Person of Birth and therein my Vanity flattered. At
parting, I begged her to give me leave to come see her, What you desire of me,
says she, is the Custom of your Country; and if I were there, I would please my
self to observe it; but we have different, and though I do not conceive any Crime
in what you ask me, yet I am obliged to observe certain Rules of Decency, which
by no means I will transgress. I will contrive some other way to see you, and
of this, depend upon me, and do not take it ill, that I refuse you a thing,
which is not in my power to grant. Adieu, continues she, I will think of what
you desire, and will let you know what I can do. I kissed her Hand, and so
withdrew, extremely touched with her way, as well as her Wit and her Prudence.

As soon as I was alone with Belleville, I asked him, if he was pleased with the
Conversation he had enjoyed. He answered me, that he had great cause to be so,
and that Isabella seemed to be of a Nature sweet and amiable. You are very
happy, said I, already to have found so much kindness. Ines gives me no room to
hope for any. She Is of a gay Humor, and turns every thing I say to her into
Jest, and I despair ever to make her serious. Some days past, before we either
saw or heard from them: But one Morning as I was at Mass, an Old Woman, hid
under a Vail, comes up to me, and presents me a Billet, in which I read these
words: YOU appear too Amiable to me to see you often, and I must needs confess
to you, that I a little mistrust my own Heart: If yours is truly touched for
me, Marriage must be thought on. I have told you that I am Rich, and I have
told you the truth: That part which I offer you, is not inconvenient to take:
But consider of it, and in the Evening I shall be on the Banks of Mansanarez,
where you may let me know your thoughts.

As the place where I was did not allow me to write her an Answer, so I
contented my self to Note only on my Table Book these Lines: YOU have power to
make me take what Journey you please. I am very sensible, that I Love you too
well to be at ease, and that I have more cause to suspect my own Weakness, than
you have to be afraid of yours; however, I shall be at Mansanarez, being
resolved to obey you, whatever you Command me.

I gave my Table Book to this honest Messenger, which had the looks though, to
steal off the Plates and Clasps before she would deliver it. I desired
Belleville to let me go alone to this Assignation. He told me, he was very glad
of it, for Isabella had given him Notice, that she desired to speak with him
alone at the Florid. It was with impatience that we waited for the appointed
hour, and then we quitted each other, after having wished our selves good
Success in our Adventure.

As soon as I came to the Riverside, I carefully looked at all the Coaches
which past by; but it was hard for me to discover any thing, because they had
double Curtains drawn. But at last, there came one and stopped, and I perceived
some Women in it, who gave me a sign to approach. There was Ines, who was more
concealed than usual, and I could not know her but by her Voice. How
industriously you hide your self, said I to her. Do you think, Madam, that the
thoughts of not being able to see you, and the violent desires I have for it,
are not enough to kill me with Grief? If you will come along with me, says she,
you shall see me. But for the present I must hoodwink you. To be free with you,
said I to her, till now, you have appeared very amiable to me; but this
Mysterious Carriage, which serves to no end, but to make me suffer, is
troublesome. If I am so unhappy to be thought by you an unfaithful man, you
ought not at all to trust me; but if on the contrary, I am in your good
Opinion, you ought to declare it, by a mo^e ingenuous proceeding. Interrupting
me, says she, you ought to be persuaded, that I have strong Reasons for what I
do, since notwithstanding what you have now told me, I alter not my Resolution.
The thing however is at your choice; but for my own part, I will not let you
come into my Coach, but upon that Condition. As the Spaniards are naturally
obstinate, I rather chose to suffer my Eyes to be covered than to break off
with her. I must needs own, that these appearances of Good Fortune, had filled
me with some sort of Vanity, and I fancied my self with some Princess, which
for the present had no mind I should know her, but afterward, that I should
find her, one of the most perfect and rich Women of Spain. This conceit
hindered me any longer to oppose her will. I told her, I submitted to her, to
be hood-winked, and even to be blinded by her, if she could please her self in
the Action. She tied a Handkerchief about my Head so hard, that at first she
put me in terrible pain: I sat me down by her; it was now dark, I knew not
whether we were going, but I gave my self up entirely into her power.

She had with her two other Women; the Coach moved so long, that I believe we
passed through most of the streets of Madrid. She entertained me with such
witty Discourse, that I had no need to think the time or way long; and I was
even charmed with hearing her, when our unlucky Coach, which was but a mean
one, run upon another and all on a sudden was over-turn'd. And we happened to
fall in a place called the Maree, which is one of the greatest and nastiest
Ditches in the City. I was never so vexed in my life; the three Ladies fell
upon me, they almost stifled me, and I was even deaf with their noise. Having
my Eyes bound, and my Head turned about after a strange fashion, I could not
have my share of making a noise, without swallowing a great deal of this
stinking Water. I then began to make some Reflections on the unlucky hours of a
Man's Life; and though I dearly loved Ines, yet I found that I loved my self
more, and wished I had never seen her. I cannot positively tell how things
past, but I felt my self delivered from that heavy weight which so oppressed
me; and when, by the help of some People which drew me out, I got upon my
legs, I could neither see Ines nor her Companions. The Folks which stood about
me, laughed like so many Fools, to see me hood-winked, and so covered with this
black Water, that I looked as if I had come out of an Ink-tub. I asked the
Coachman where his Mistress was. He told me the Lady with whom I was, was none
of his Mistress, and that she went away cursing of me; that she was very dirty;
that he knew her not; and that she only said to him at going away, that I must
pay him. And prithee, said I, where did thou take her up? He answered me, At
the Gate Delcalcas Reales, and that an Old Woman came for him, and brought him
to that place where he took her up. For my Money I got him to carry me home. I
expected Belleville with a mixture of Impatience and Grief: It was late before
he came, and he was extremely satisfied with Isabella, in whom he found
abundance of good Nature, and an infinite deal of Wit.

I related to him my Adventure, he could not but laugh heartily at it; and as
he was filled with an extraordinary Joy, so he told me a hundred pleasant
Stories, which put me indeed into a very bad Humor: It was daylight before we
went to Bed, and I had not got up, but to take a walk with him in the Prado; As
we were going along by some very low Windows, I heard Ines cry out to me,
Cavallero, go not so fast, it is at least fit to ask you how you do after your
fall last Night. Advancing to the Window, pray, said I to her, what became of
you, fair Ines? And had not I misfortunes enough, but I must lose you too. You
had not lost me, replied she, but that a Lady, who was my Relation, passing by
in that moment, knew my voice, and I was obliged against my mind, to go with
her in her Coach, for I was unwilling she should see us together; though the
Coachman told me another story, yet I durst not examine any further into the
matter, for fear of making her uneasy, and with abundance of kindness I asked
her, when I should have an Opportunity without any restraint to let her know
what a mighty Passion and Respect I had for her. It shall be very quickly, says
she, for I now begin to think you love me; but yet time must confirm me in this
Opinion. Oh! you are very cruel, said I, and must have very little Love for me,
thus to defer what I so earnestly beg. Speak the truth freely, says she, and
tell me whether you will Marry me? Yes, said I, if you will, I Will Marry you,
notwithstanding I never yet had a full sight of you, nor have had the happiness
to know you. I am Rich, says she, and am of Birth, and they tell me, I have
some Personal Merits. I replied, You have all the things which please me,
beyond any Person in the World: Your Wit has charmed me, but you make me often
despair, and I had much rather choose to dye at once, than suffer what I do.
She fell a laughing, and after that, there were few Evenings that we did not
converse together, either at the Prado, or at Mansanarez, or else at some House
unknown to me, whither I was conducted. I must confess, I never went into the
Chamber with her, and I only talked to her through the Grates of the Window,
where for four hours together I used to make the most impertinent Figure in the
World. To speak freely, one must live in Spain, to be able to endure such ways
and Customs; but yet really I loved Ines; I observed in her something that was
very smart and taking, which surpised and affected me.

One time I met her in a Garden, where she had appointed me to be, and where
she showed me more kindness than she used to do. When she saw it begin to be
dark, she desired me to be gone; I unwillingly obeyed her, and as I went along
a narrow Street, I perceived three Men with Sword in hand, set upon one single
Man, who defended himself valiantly: I could not endure to see so unequal a
Match, and I run to Second him, but just as I came up to him, they made a pass
at him, and he fell upon me like a dead Man. These Murderers run away as fast
as they could, and by this time the noise had drawn out a great many People,
who seeing me with my Sword in hand, made no question that I was one of the
Criminals. They prepared to seize me, but perceiving their ill intentions, I
thought it was better to provide for my safety by flight, than to trust to my
Innocence. I was closely pursued, and which way soever I took, still they met
with me. In this distress, I had a glympse of a Door half open, I slipped into it
without any body's seeing me, and groping along, I came at last into a very
dark Hall; I perceived Light through a door, I could not tell whether it was
best to open it, nor what I should say, if there were People in it. I
considered with my self, that I had the looks of one affrighted, and that I
should be taken for a Man that came from doing some ill Action, and sought for
an Opportunity to do some other: I deliberated a long time, I listened with
great Attention to hear some body talk, and hearing none, at last I ventured,
and softly opened the Door, and saw no body; I nimbly looked about where to
hide my self; methought the Hangings stuck out in some places, and really I got
behind them in a little corner: I had been there but a very little while, when
I espied coming in, Ines and Isabella. I cannot express to you, Madam, what a
pleasant Amazement I was in, to find my self in my Mistress's House: I no ways
doubted, that Fortune favored my Design; I was in no fear of those who might
search after me, and as I was even ready to go and throw my self down at her
feet, I heard Isabella begin to Discourse. Says she, What have thou been doing
to day, dear Ines, Have thou seen Daucourt? Yes, says Ines, I have seen him,
and I have reason to believe he loves me desperately, unless all my Rules
deceive me; he talks very seriously of Marrying me; that which perplexes me,
is, that he will first see and know me. And how is it possible for thee to deny
either the one or the other? replies Isabella. No, I do not pretend to do it,
answers Ines, only I Will take the most favorable Opportunities; I fancy I shall
not think it cunning to set my self in a full light, and all the Curtains open;
no, I intend they shall be close drawn, and that the Windows shall only let in
some glimmering Rays of the Sun, which shall serve to set me off. As to my
Birth, I have got my Pedigree Authentically drawn, which cost me nothing but a
little Old Parchment gnawed by the Mice. And as to ready Money, thou know my
Old Lover, honest Don Diego, will furnish me: when Daucourt has told and
received it, he will little think, that Thieves are appointed to take it away
from him upon our very Wedding-Night: I have this day taken very fair Lodgings
ready Furnished; so that thou will yield, I have neglected nothing which might
contribute to the success of a business so advantageous to me, and which I so
much desire. Says Isabella, Thy precautions seem very wise; but yet I fear the
discovery of the Intrigue. But says Ines, Prithee my Dear, what do thou do?
As to Marriage, I make but a small Progress, says Isabella; but to speak truth,
that is not my Design: I find Belleville an honest Man; I am sensible that I
love him, I only desire the possession of his Heart, and I fancy, I should be
sorry if he would Marry me. Thou art of an odd sort of Humor, says Ines; thou
love him, thy Fortune is none of the greatest, thou might be happy with
him, and yet thou durst not desire to be his Wife. But prithee, says Isabella,
who told thee that I should be happy with him? Love is so unconstant a thing,
that hardly are the first moments of Marriage pleasant; I tell thee, Love must
have something continually to provoke and spur it; Novelty is a grateful Dish
to it, and how is it possible for a Wife always to be new? And how can a
Mistress either, cries Ines, be so? Go, Isabella, thy Modish Maxims are not
reasonable. Neither, says Isabella, can I like of what thou designest; and if
thou would take my Advice, thou should seriously consider thine own Age;
for to speak freely, thou art Old, very Old: Is it just for sixty Years to put
the Cheat upon a Man of thirty? He will be enraged at thee, he will certainly
forsake thee, or else he will break thy Bones; nay, it may happen he will knock thy
Brains out before he leaves thee. Ines was of a quick Apprehension and brisk;
she took it hainously that Isabella should reproach her with her Age, and
immediately she gave her the greatest box on the Ear which perhaps was ever
given. The other, of as hasty a Nature, returned her two. Ines lent her a dozen
good cuffs with her fist, which were speedily repaid: So that my two Female
Champions entered the Field of Mars. The Combat was so extreme pleasant between
them, that I almost broke my sides with laughing in my little Hole, and I had
much ado to hinder my self from breaking out aloud; for you may easily believe,
Madam, that I had very little concern for either of them, after the Trick which
I understood was to be put upon me with so much Malice, and when I must
necessarily look upon Ines as a common Jilt. Isabella, who knew all the weak
places of her Enemy, took her Opportunities, and being both younger and
stronger, tore off her Head-dress, and left her all bald. In my whole Life I
was never more surpised, than to see the Hair fall off, which before appeared
so lovely to me, and which I thought had been her own: But this was nothing to
what followed, for with one blow of her fist she not only made several of her
Teeth leap out of her Mouth, but also two little Cork-plumpers, which served to
fill out her hollow Jaws. And here the Fray ended, for their Chamber-Maids, who
had heard the noise of the Skirmish, run in, and with much ado parted them.
They said the bitterest things one against the other, and even threatened to
reveal to the Inquisition most terrible Crimes, with which they reproached each
other.

Ines finding her self with her Chambermaid only, looked at her self a long
time in a great Glass, and protested that there was nothing so injurious, which
she had not said to Isabella, that she might be revenged of her for the Abuses
she had received from her: At last she sat her down and rested her self a
while; a little Table was brought and set before her, and upon it she lays an
Artificial Eye, which used to fill up the place of a Natural one she wanted;
afterward, she takes off her Face as much white and red Color, as without any
Hyperbole, would have covered a Mask. It would be hard to describe to you,
Madam, the extraordinary ugliness of this Woman, who till now, had appeared to
me very pretty. I rubbed my Eyes, I was like a Man that could not tell whether
he doted, or had some idle Dream. To be short, she undrest her self, and was
almost naked: and here I shall forbear representing to you this frightful
Carcass. But certainly, Love never met with a better Cure; in all those parts
where other Folks are fat and plump, she was lean and hollow; she looked
perfectly like a Skeleton, which by some secret Spring was made to move about
the Room: She was in a Gown with a white Mantle upon her shoulders, her Head
bald, and her Arms appeared extreme little and lean; she bethought her self,
that in the Scuffle her Pearl Bracelets broke, she had a mind to gather them
up, but had enough to do to find them; her Chambermaid came to help her, they
counted them, and found they had all but two, which were well cursed for my
sake: Ines swore by St. James, Patron of Spain, that she would not go to Bed
till she had found them: Her Maid and she looked in every corner and hole,
removing the Tables, tumbling the Chairs, and throwing this way and that way
every thing they came near, for Ines was in a very ill Humor: As I saw her
make toward my corner, fear of being discovered by such a Fury, made me lie as
close as 'twas possible; but unluckily as I drew back, I threw down several
Bottles which stood there upon Shelves, and these made a mighty noise: Ines
believing it was the Cat which had done this mischief, with all her might cried
out, Gato, Gato; that is, Cat, Cat; and lifting up the Hangings to chastise the
Cat, with an amazement and rage which almost struck her dead upon the spot, she
espied me; she fell violently upon me, and pulled the Hair off my Head; she
reviled me grievously, she was like one Frantic, the veins of her Neck were so
swelled, and her wrinkles and furrows were so frightful, that methought I saw
the Head of Medusa; and in this my great Terror, I considered my escape, when
on a sudden I heard a strange noise upon the Stairs, which gave me a fresh
Alarm: But Ines left me, and run down to know what was the matter, and by that
time, the whole House was filled with cries and weeping: The Officers of
Justice, who had found this Young Man (of whom I told you before, Madam) lying
upon the Ground, and was the cause I was so hotly pursued, after some diligent
search, found that he was the Son of a Lady who lived in the same House; they
brought him thus with his Body all wounded and bloody, at which sad sight she
fell into a desperate condition. And as I had told Ines something of my
Adventure, that I might give her some satisfaction why I came into her Chamber,
so this lean Hag, would not keep my Secret, but to be revenged on me for having
discovered her crafty tricks, was resolved to inform against me. I have the
Murderer in my power, cries she; come, come along with me, and I Will deliver him
up to you. Immediately she opens her Chamber Door, and being followed by a
Troop of Alquazils, that is to say, Sergeants or Bailiffs, delivered me up to
them with all the necessary Evidence for my speedy Trial. Says she, I saw this
wretch with his naked Sword all bloody with the wound he came from giving; he
ran into my Chamber to save himself, and threatened me with Death if I would not
conceal him. Whatever I could say in my Justification was all in vain, they
would not so much as hear me; they bound my hands with Cords, and so led me to
Prison as a wretched Malefactor, whilst good Ines, and the Mother and Sister of
the wounded, loaded me with blows and curses; they caused me to be put in a
Hole, where I was several days without having the liberty to give notice to my
Brother or my Friends of what had past; they likewise were in mighty pain about
me, concluding for certain, that I was murdered in some corner of a Street, or
else at some of my Night-Intrigues.

At last, Belleville, who still continued to see Isabella, acquainted her with
his grief, and begged her to assist him to discover at least, what they had done
with my Body: She was so industrious to get Information about it, that Ines's
Chambermaid, who had been ill enough used by her Mistress, told her the whole
Secret of the History, although her good Lady had strictly forbid her. Upon this
News, my Brother ran to beg the King to have pity on me, and to command them to
remove me out of that hole, which seemed more like Hell than a Prison: I
swooned away when I saw light: I was so wasted and weak, that I frighted folks;
but yet I could not come out of Prison for some time, because of certain
Formalities; and I leave you to think, Madam, what I mediated against the
perfidious Ines; but yet I know not whether ever I should be in a condition to
put in execution all the Projects of my just Revenge, for the Gentleman, who
was wounded, contitued very ill, and his Life was despaired of; mine depended
upon such a ticklish point, that I put up most ardent Prayers for him; and in
such a melancholy uncertainty, I past a great many hours: But my Brother, who
was persuaded of my Innocence, omitted nothing for the discovery of the Authors
of this Murderous Act. At last, he understood, that this young and wounded
Cavallero had a Rival, and he made so diligent a Search and Examination, that
he certainly knew that the Blow came from thence; he was so fortunate to get
him apprehended, and this Man freely owned the Fact, which acquitted me. I was
therefore set at Liberty, and I conceived so much Joy at it, that I was sick
for several days after; or rather perhaps, it was an effect of that unwholsom
Air which I received in the Prison.

In the mean while, wicked Ines, who to be sure, was not much at ease, for fear
of what might happen upon her serving me such a pleasant Trick, having notice
that I was set free, and in a condition to Reward her according to her Merits,
packed up her Baggage, and one Night privately runs away, and no body knew
whither she was gone; so that when we wanted her, at least to make her an
Example amongst the cheating Jilts, we were disappointed. But I was easily
satisfied, because naturally I do not love to do any hurt to Women. But lest
she might play me some other pranks, I left Madrid, that I might also avoid
those of Spain. I am now returning into France, Madam, continued he, whither I
shall be very glad to carry your Commands, if you will do me so great an Honor
to lay any upon me.

Though I have some trouble at what happened to this Gentleman, yet I could not
choose but laugh at some Circumstances of this Adventure, and I am willing to
believe, Dear Cousin, that you will not be displeased, that I make you partake
with me. I shall write to you no more till I come to Madrid, where I promise my
self to see things far more worthy of your Notice, than hitherto I have been
able to acquaint you.

From St. Augustine, this 25th. of March.
LETTER. VIII.
I Would not, if you please, Dear Cousin, have you angry, that I did not write
to you as soon as I arrived at Madrid: I thought it was better to tarry till I
was in a condition to tell you something more exactly and curious. I knew that
my Kinswoman was to go before me, as far as Alcouendas, which is about six
Leagues distance from Madrid. As she was not yet come, and I had a mind to stay
for her, Don Frederic de Cardonne proposed to me to go Dine at a very fine
House, the Master whereof was his particular Acquaintance: So that instead of
going into this little Village, we crossed by it, and through a Walk pleasant
enough, we came to the House of Don Augustine Pacheco. This Gentleman is
ancient, and yet he is lately married to Donna Thoresa de Figucroa: This is his
Third Wife, and she is but Seventeen Years of Age; but of such an agreeable
Humor, and so ingenious, that we were perfectly Charmed with her Wit and her
Person: It was then Ten a Clock when we got there. The Spaniards are naturally
Lazy, and love to rise late; and these Two were yet in Bed. Her Husband gave us
such a frank and civil Reception, as sufficiently testified how much he was
pleased that we came to see him. He went to walk in his Gardens, whose
Exactness yields in nothing to ours. I accompanied him without delay; for the
Weather was very inviting, and the Trees in this Country are as forward in the
Month of March, as they are in France at the latter end of June. Indeed this is
the most Charming Season for the Enjoyment of what they call La Prima Vera,
that is to say, the Beginning of the Spring: For when the Son begins to have
more Force and Heat, it scorches and withers the Leaves, as if they had passed
through Flames. These Gardens of which I speak, were adorned with
Bowling-Greens, Fountains and Statues, and Don Augustine was not backward to
show us all the Rarities. He is much taken with them, and values not spending
Money thereon; for he is very rich. He led us into a Gallery, where there were
diverse Tables of Cedar Wood, set full of Books. He immediately led us up to the
Biggest of them, and told us, they contained an inestimable Treasure; and that
there was a Collection of Plays of the best Authors: Heretofore, continued he,
Virtuous persons could not think fit to go to Plays; there was nothing to be
seen but Actions contrary to Modesty; they heard Discourses which were
offensive; the Actors made honest people ashamed; there Vice was flattered, and
Virtue condemned; the Scenes became bloody with Combats; the weakest was always
oppressed by the strongest, and Custom gave continuance to Crimes. But since
Lopes de Vega has so successfully labored to reform the Spanish Theater,
there is now nothing suffered contrary to good Manners: Both the Favorite, the
Footman and the Ploughman, without disguise, keeping to their Native
Simplicity, and making that pleasant by an ingenious turn, find the Secrets to
cure our Princes, and even our Kings, of that common Disease to hear Truth,
when their own Faults are represented. It was he who gave Rules for these
Ascents, and who taught them to divide their Plays into Three Jornada's, or
Acts. Since his time, we have seen flourish the Mount alvanes, the Mendoza's,
the Rojas Alarcones, the Veles, the Mira de Mescuas, the Coellos, and the
Villaizanes. But above all, Don Pedro Calderone excelled as to the Serious and
Grave Part, and even in the Comic Part he surpassed all those that went before
him. I could not forbear telling him, That at Victoria I saw a Play, which to
me seemed bad enough: And if I might speak my Judgment freely, I would not have
them intermix with Holy Tragedies (which require great Respect, and according
to their Subjects should be worthily managed) any idle or silly Jests. He
replied, That by this I had said to him, he knew the Genius of my Country;
that he had seldom observed the French to like what the Spaniards did; and as
this Thought carried him to some displeasing Reflections, I assured him, That
Naturally we have no Antipathy for any Nation; That we even thought our selves
obliged to do Justice to our Enemies. And as to Plays, though I had yet found
none to my Fancy, it did not follow but that there might be others much better
and more agreeable to me. The manner of my talking to him did a little compose
him; so that he desired me to go into his Wife's Apartment, which was at the
end of the Gallery.

Don Fernand de Tollede, and the Three other Knights, tarried there, because it
is not the Custom in Spain for Men to go into Women's Chambers while they are in
Bed: A Brother has not this Privilege, unless his Sister be sick. Donna Theresa
received me in as kind and obliging a manner, as if we had been long
acquainted. And this must be confessed, in praise of the Spaniards, that
nothing of that sort of Familiarity which comes from want of, or a mean
Education, appears in their Entertainments; for with great Civility and
Earnestness they are very careful to pay what they owe to others, and at the
same time do not forget what is due to themselves. She was in Bed without any
Coif or Cornet; her Hair was parted in the middle of her Forehead, tied behind
with a Ribbon, and wrapped up with Carnation-colour'd Taffety: Her Shift was very
fine, and of so vast a largeness, that it looked like a Surplice; the Sleeves
were as big as Men's, and buttoned at the Hands with Diamonds: Instead of narrow
Point at the Neck and Hands, she had hers wrought with Blue and Flesh-colour'd
Silk in Flowers; her Ruffles were of White Taffety Pinkt. -- She had several
little Pillows tied with Ribbons, and trimmed with very broad and fine Lace;
she had Basses all of Flowers of Point de Spain in Silk and Gold, which looked
very pretty: Her Bed was all of Copper, Gilt, with little Balls of Ivory and
Ebony; her Bed-Head was adorned with four Rows of little Copper Ballisters,
very well wrought.

She asked me leave to rise, but when she came to put on her Stockings and
Shoes, she caused the Key to be taken out of the Door, and that to be bolted.
I inquired the Reason of this Barricading: She told me, That she knew there was
with me some Spanish Gentlemen, and that she had rather lose her Life than they
should see her Feet. I broke out into Laughter, and begged her to let me see
them; for that I could not apprehend that the thing was of that moment. It is
true indeed, that for their Littleness, they are something extraordinary; for I
have seen Children of six Years old have as great. As soon as she was up, she
took a little Cup full of Red, and with a good big Pencil she laid it on, not
only upon her Cheeks, her Chin, under Nose, above her Eyebrows, and the Edges
of her Ears; but she also be-daub'd the inside of her Hands, her Fingers, and
her Shoulders. She told me, That every Night at going to Bed, and every Morning
at rising, they laid this Color on; That she did not paint, and that she was
willing enough to leave the use of this Red, but that it was such a General
Custom, that it could not be dispensed with; for let one be of never so fresh a
Color, they would look pale and sickly when they were near others, if they did
not use this Red. One of her Women perfumed her from Head to Foot, with
excellent Pastils, the Smoke whereof she made to ascend to her; another took
Orange-Flower-Water in her Mouth, and dexterously through her Teeth she
sprinkled it like Rain upon her; and this they call Roussia. She told me, That
there was nothing that spoiled the Teeth more than this was of squirting it,
but that the Water smelt better for it. Of this I doubted, and I thought it
very ugly, that an Old Woman, such as that was which I saw there, should come
and spurt Water out of her Mouth, in my Face.

Don Augustine having known by one of his Wife's Servants, that she was dressed,
did not stand upon the Custom of the Country, but lead Don Fernand, and the
Knights, into her Chamber. The Conversation was not long in common, but we
divided; for my part, I discoursed with Donna Theresa, and she told me, she was
born at Madrid, but was brought up at Lisbon with her Grandmother, who was
Sister to Don Augustine Pacheco; so that her Husband was her great Uncle; and
these sort of Alliances are often contracted in Spain. She talked to me much of
the Young Infanta of Portugal, and boasted mightily of her Wit, and told me, if
I would go into her Closet, I might judge of her Beauty, for she had her
Picture there. I immediately went, and was surpised with the Charms I observed
in this Princess. She had her Hair cut and curled like the Periwig of an Abbot,
and an Invention for preserving Children from falling, so big, that there were
upon it Two Baskets of Flowers, and little Vessels of a Medicinal Earth, of
which they eat a great deal in Portugal and Spain, although it is an Earth that
has little Taste. Donna Theresa showed me the Skin of a Serpent, which her
Husband killed in the Indies; and though it was dead, yet I was afraid of it.
Those of this kind are extreme dangerous; but it seems as if Providence had
taken care to preserve Men from them, for these Serpents have a sort of Bell
about their Head, which rings when they move, and so gives notice to Travelers
to secure themselves.

This young Lady, who is a great Lover of Portugal, discoursed to me much in
its Favor: She told me, That the Sea, which flows up into the Tagus, renders
that River capable to bear the greatest Gallions, and the fairest Ships upon
the Ocean: That the City of Lisbon stands upon the side of a little Hill, which
insensibly descends to the very Brink of the Tagus: So that the Houses being
built one above another, are all seen at once, and so becomes a very pleasant
Prospect. The old Walls, which the Moors built about it, are yet standing:
There are of them four Rounds, built at diverse times; the last may have about
six Leagues Circumference. The Castle, which stands upon a Hill, has its
particular Beauties: In it you see Palaces, Churches, Fortifications, Gardens,
Armories and Streets: There Is always a good Garrison with a Governor: This
Fortress commands the City, and from thence they may thunder upon it, in case
it proves rebellious. The Palace where the King lives, is more considerable, if
not for its Strength, yet for the Uniformity of its Buildings: Every thing
there is Great and Magnificent; the Prospect it has to the Sea has made them
take so much care to beautify it. She discoursed to me afterward of the
Public Places, which are adorned with Vaults and Arches; and of the great
Houses round about the Dominicans Convent, where the Inquisition is, before the
Gate of which there is a Fountain, with a great many Statues of White Marble,
which throw the Water every way. She added, That the Fair of Roucio is kept on
the Tuesday of every Week, in a Place which might be taken for an Amphitheatre,
because it is environed with little Hills, upon which are built several fair
Palaces. There Is another Place on the side of the Tagus, where the Market is
kept; and there one may meet with every thing which can be desired, of the best
in his kind, either in Fowl, Fish, Fruits, Herbs or Pulse. The Custom-House
stands a little higher up, where there is infinite Riches and Rarities, and
some Fortifications are lately made to preserve them. The Metropolitan Church
is not eminent for any thing but its Antiquity: It is dedicated to St. Vincent;
it is pretended, that after he had suffered Martyrdom, they refused him Burial,
and that the Ravens watched over his Body, till some pious Persons came and took
it up, and carried it to Valentia in Spain, to have it worshipped; and for this
Reason there are Ravens kept in the Church; and there is a Box for them, into
which are put the Alms to buy them Food.

Although Lisbon, continued she, is a very pleasant place to live in, yet we
dwelt at Alcantara: This Village is not above a quarter of a League from the
City; There Is in it a Royal House, not so fine for its Buildings, as for its
Situation; the River supplies the place of a Canal: There one sees admirable
Gardens, all filled with Grotts and Cataracts, or great Falls of Water, as well
as Spouts of Water. Belem is not far from hence: it is the place designed for
the Sepulture of the Kings of Portugal, in the Church of the Hieronimites: It
is all covered over with White Marble; the Pillars and Statues are of the same;
the Tombs are in even Rows in three different Chapels, amongst which there are
some well wrought. Belem, Feriera, Sacavin, and some other places about the
City, are remarkable for the vast quantities of Oranges and Lemons growing
there; the Air you smell there is all perfumed; you can hardly sit down under
the Trees, but you are covered with their Flowers; one sees running amongst
them a Thousand little Rivulets, and it may be affirmed, that there is nothing
more sweet in the Night, than the Murmurs and Harmony which are there
frequently heard. At Belem there are great Magazines of Oranges, both sweet and
sour Lemons, Pome-Citrons and Lemons. They load them on small Vessels, and so
transport them into most parts of Europe.

Likewise she told me of the Knights del Habito de Christo, of the Habit of
Christ, whose Multitude made them less considerable; and also of the Counts of
the Kingdom, which have the same Privileges as the Grandees of Spain; they are
possessed of Las Comarcas, which are certain Lands belonging to the Crown, and
divided into Counties of a considerable Value. She told me, That when the King
intended to go abroad, the People had notice of it by a Trumpet, which sounds
very early in the Morning in the place through which his Majesty is to pass.
For the Queen, it is a Flute and a Drum; and for the Infanta, a Hauthoy. When
they all go abroad together, the Trumpet, the Drum, the Flute, and the Hautboy,
march in a Company; and by this means, if any one which cannot get into the
Palace to present a Petition, he need only wait for the King's coming by. Eight
Leagues from Coimbre, there is a Fountain in a place called Cedima, which draws
in, and swallows down every thing which touches its Water; Experiments are
often made upon great branches of Trees, and sometimes of Horses, which they
cause to be brought there, from whence they cannot get back, but with great
difficulty.

But that which causes the greatest wonder, added she, is the Lake of the
Mountain of Strella, where there are often found the wracks of Ships, broken
Masts, Anchors, and Sails, and yet the Sea is above twelve Leagues off, and
this is upon the top of a very high Hill too; it cannot be imagined by what
means all these things should come there. Whilst I was hearing with great
delight Donna Theresa relate these things, her Husband and the rest of the
Company came and interrupted us. Don Augustine was a Man of Understanding, and
for all his Age, was very pleasant. If my Curiosity is not indiscreet, pray,
Madam, says he, tell me, what Subject this Child has entertained you with? Mi
Tio, replied she, that is, my Uncle, you may easily believe it was Portugal:
Oh! I thought as much, cried he; There it is she always chooses her Field of
Action. Dear God, says she, every body has some place they love, and when once
you are got to your Mexico, one cannot draw you from thence. You have been in
the Indies, resumed I, and Donna Theresa has showed me a Serpent, which she
says you killed there. It is true, Madam, continued he; and if it were not time
for you to Dine, it would not, it may be, be unpleasant to you to hear of what
I have seen there. But, says he, I should go to Madrid, and if you please, I Will
bring to you Donna Theresa: It is there indeed, where I should lay the Scene of
Discourse, and where I could tell you of things which I believe you would not
be unwilling to know. I assured him, that he would do me a particular favor to
give me so signal a mark of his kindness; and that I should be overjoyed to
see the fair Donna Theresa, and to hear her talk of the Indies, she that
discoursed so admirably of every thing. He took me by the Hand and led me down
into a Hall paved with Marble, which was hung with Pictures instead of
Tapistry, and set round with Cushions. Cloth was laid there upon a Table for
the Men, but upon a Carpet on the Floor, it was laid for Donna Theresa, my
self, and my Daughter.

I was surpised at this Fashion, not having been used to Dine so; however I
took no notice of it, and I had a mind to try it, but I was never more uneasy;
my Legs ak'd most horribly: one while I leaned upon my Elbow, and then upon my
Hand: In a word, I could not Dine, and yet the good Lady was not sensible of
it, for she thought the Women in France were used to eat upon the Floor, as
they did in Spain. But Don Fernand De Toledo, who observed me uneasy, rose
from Table with Don Frederick De Cordonna, and both of them told me, that
absolutely I should sit with them; I was willing enough, provided Donna Theresa
would do so too; but she durst not, because there were Men, upon whom she did
not so much as lift up her Eyes but by stealth. Don Augustine bid her come
without Ceremony, and told her, that they must let me know, that they were glad
to see me at their House. But that which was very pleasant, was, when this Lady
was set upon a Chair, she was no less at ease, than I was when I sat upon the
Carpet; she protested with a pretty sort of freedom, that she never before sat
in a Chair, and that she had never once thought on it. Thus we dined very
merrily, and there was nothing which could be added to the obliging manner of
my Reception in this House. I gave to Donna Theresa some Ribbons, Pins, and a
Fan. She was mightily pleased, and gave me as many thanks, as if the Present
had been of value. Her thanks were not common, one could not observe in them
any thing that was low or covetous. And to speak truth, they have abundance of
Wit and Sense in this Country, it appears even in the smallest trifles.

I had not been gone an hour from this House, when I saw coming toward us two
Coaches drawn by six Mules a piece, which galloped a great pace, and faster
than the best Horses could do. I could hardly have believed that Mules could
run so fast. But that which I wondered most at, was the manner of their being
harnass'd. These two Coaches and their Furniture took up almost a quarter of a
League of room. There was one with six Glasses indifferent large, and made like
ours, except that the upper part is very low, and so, inconvenient. Within, it
had a Cornish of Wood gilt, but so large, that it looked like one for a Chamber.
The Coach was gilt on the outside, which is only allowed to Ambassadors and
Strangers. The Curtains were of Damask and Cloth sewed together. The Coachman
rode upon one of the fore-Mules; they do not sit in the Coach-box, although
there is one; and upon my asking the Reason of it, Don Frederick de Cardonna
told me, that he had been assured, that this Custom had been ever since the
Coachman of the Lord Duke D' Olivares drove his Master, who over-hearing
something of great Importance which the Duke told to one of his Friends,
revealed it; the matter having made a great noise at Court, (for it seems the
Duke accused his Friend of some indiscretion, which nevertheless he was
innocent of) ever since, they have been so cautious to make the Coachman ride
upon the first Mule. Their Traces are Silk or Hempen Cords, so excessive long,
that from one Mule to another, there is above three Else distance; and I cannot
understand, but every thing should break at the rate they run. It is true, that
though they run very fast in the Country, yet they go very softly in the City;
and it is a tireso^e thing to go so slowly as if they told their steps. And
though at Madrid, they have but four Mules, yet they have a Postillion. My
Relation was in the first of these Coaches, with three Spanish Ladies. The
Gentlemen and the Pages were in the other, which was not made after the same
manner. It had Boots, as formerly our Coaches had; they are to let down, and
the Leather is open at bottom, so that when the Women come out (if they have no
mind their Feet should be seen) the Boot is let down to the ground to hide
their Shoes. It had Glasses twice as big as my hand, made fast to each end of
the Coach, for the convenience of calling to the Footmen. Nothing more
resembles our Garret-windows than these do. The top of the Coach is covered
with Gray Parragon, and the Curtains are of the same, large and long, hang
without, and draw round, and are fastened with Buttons and Loops; This looks
very ill, and you are enclosed within as if you were in a Box.

My Relation was dressed, half French and half Spanish; she seemed overjoyed to
see me, and I was no less to see her. As to her Person, I found her not at all
changed; but I could not forbear laughing at her way of speaking: She now
understands very little French, although she continually speaks and loves it so
much, that it is impossible for her to learn any other Language: But she now
mixes Italian, English, and Spanish with her own Natural Language; and this
makes such a Jargon, as is very strange to one, who knew her, as I did, to have
the French Language in its purity, and able to read Lectures of it to the
Learned. She cannot endure to be told, that she has forgot it; and indeed she
does not believe it, having never left off speaking it, either with some of her
own Women, or with Ambassadors and Strangers, who generally understood it.
Nevertheless, she speaks very ill: And if one is not at the Fountainhead, it
is difficult long to speak a Language well, which is every day changing, and
continually making new progresses.

I found the Ladies which were with her extreme pretty: I do assure you, that
there are in this Country some very handsome and aimable. We embraced each
other often, and went back to Madrid. Before we came there we past over a Sandy
Plain, of about Four Leagues, but so uneven, that every moment we fell into
holes big enough to bury the Coach, and which hindered it for going very fast.
This uneven way lasted till we came to a little Village called Mandes, which is
but half a League from Madrid. All the Country here is dry, and very open; you
can scarcely see a Tree on any side you look: The City is situated in the
middle of Spain, which is New-Castile. It is above an Age since the Kings of
Spain have chosen to keep their Court in it, because of the purity of the Air,
and the goodness of the Water, which really is so good and so light, that the
Cardinal Infanta would drink no other when he was in Flanders; and he caused it
to be brought by Sea in Earthern Jars, well stopped. The Spaniards pretend, that
the Founder of Madrid was a Prince named Ogno Bianor, Son of Tiberino, King of
the Latins, and of Manto, who was a Queen, more Famous for the Science of
Astrology, which she understood to a wonderful degree, than for her Birth. It Is
thought, that Madrid must be in the Heart of Europe, because the little Village
of Pinto, which is not above Three Leagues from it, is called in Latin,
Punctum; and that is reckoned to be in the Center of Europe.

The first thing I observed was, that the City is not enclosed either with a
Wall or Ditch; the Gates, as one may say, are only made fast by a Latch; those
which I have already seen, are all broken; there is not seen any place of
Defense, neither Castle, nor in a word, any thing which might not be forced
with throwing of Oranges and Lemons; but yet it might be necessary to Fortify
this City: The Mountains which are round it, are of some use for its Defense; I
have passed through some places of them, which are so narrow, that one might
shut them up with a good big Stone, and with a hundred Men oppose the passage
of a whole Army. The Streets are long and straight, and of a good largeness,
but there is no place worse paved; let one go as softly as it is possible, yet
one is almost jumbl'd and shak'd to pieces; there are more Ditches and dirty
places than in any City in the World, the Horses go up to the Bellies, and the
Coaches to the middle; so that it dashes all upon you, and you are spoiled
unless you either pull up the Glasses, or draw the Curtains which I have spoke
of; very often the Water comes into the Coaches at the bottom of the Boots,
which are open.

The Houses there have rarely any great Gates to them, those which have, are
without Courts. The Doors indeed, are pretty large; and for the Houses, they
are very graceful, spacious, and convenient, though they are only built of
Earth and Brick. I think they are altogether as dear as at Paris. The first
Story which they raise belongs to the King, and he can either let, or sell it,
unless the Owner of the House buy it off, which is almost constantly done, and
this is a considerable Revenue to the King.

There is commonly in every House Ten or Twelve Rooms on a Floor; in some
Twenty and more; they have their Summer and their Winter Apartments, and very
often, one for Autumn, and another for Springtime: So that having very great
Families, they are forced to Lodge them in some Neighboring Houses, which they
hire on purpose for them.

You must not wonder, Dear Cousin, that they have so many Domestics: There are
two Reasons for it. The first is, that both for Food and Wages the Spaniards
give but two Rials a day, which is not above Sixpence of our Money. I say, the
Spaniards do this, for Strangers pay after the rate of four Rials, which is
about Twelve pence of our Money. Neither do the Spaniards give to their
Gentlemen above Fifteen Crowns a Month, with which they must wear Velvet in
Winter, and Taffety in Summer: But then they live only upon Onions, Pease, and
such mean stuff, and this makes the Pages and Footmen as greedy as Dogs. But I
should speak of the other Domestics as well as the Pages, for in this matter
they are all alike, let them have what Wages they will. They are kept so very
hungry, that in carrying the Dishes to the Table, they eat half the Victuals
that is in them; they throw it into their Mouths so burning hot, that you shall
observe their Teeth all rotten with the Practice. I advised my Kinswoman to get
a little Silver Stew Pan made and fastened with a Pad-lock, like that I saw of
the Arch Bishop of Burgos, and she did so and now after the Cook has filled
it, he looks through a little Grate to see whether the Soupe does well; and
thus the Pages get nothing of it but the Steam. Before this Invention, it
happened a hundred times, that when we thought to have taken up some Broth, we
found neither that, nor any Flesh; for you must know, that if the Spaniards are
Temperate, it is when the Expense is their own; they are not so, when they eat
at another's cost. I have seen Persons of the Highest Quality eat with us like
so many Wolves, they were so hungry: They were sensible enough of it
themselves, and prayed us not to wonder at it, for they found the Ragoas after
the French way, so excellent, that they could not forbear.

There are Cooks-shops almost at every corner of a Street: These have great
Kettles set upon Trevets. There folks may have such ordinary things as Beans,
Garlic, Leeks, or a little Broth, in which they steep their Bread. The
Gentlemen and Waiting-women go thither as other People, for at home they only
dress Victuals for the Master and Mistress, and their Children. They are
strangely Temperate in Wine; the Women never drink any, and the Men so little,
that a quarter of a Pint will serve one a whole day. You cannot affront a Man
worse, than to call him a Drunkard. Here Is indeed, a great many things to make
up the first Reason why they keep so many Servants. Now follows the second.

When a great Man dies, if he had a hundred Servants, his Son keeps all he
found in the House, without putting one away: When the Mother happens to dye,
either her own Daughter, or her Daughter-in-law takes into her Service all the
Women-Servants; and this Custom holds to the fourth Generation, for they are
never turned away. They are put, as I have told you, into Neighboring Houses,
and have their Ration, or Allowances. They come often to their Master or
Mistress's House, but it is rather to show they are not dead, than to do any
Service. I was to see the Duchess of Ossona, which is a very great Lady, and I
was amazed to see so many Chamber-maids and Women, for every Room was full of
them. I asked her, how many she had? She told me, she had now only 300, but that
very lately she had 500 more. If particular Persons have this Custom of keeping
so many Servants, the King must needs keep abundance more, which without doubt
is very chargeable to him, and must hurt his Affairs. I have been told, that in
Madrid only, if the Pensions which he gives are reckoned, he gives Ration or
Allowances to above Ten Thousand Persons.

As to the King's House, the Provision for it is daily brought in, and it is
regulated according to the Quality of the Persons. There is distributed both
tame and wild Fowl, Fish, Chocolate, Fruit, Ice, Charcoal, Wax-Chandles, Oil,
Bread, and in a word, every thing that is necessary for Life.

Ambassadors have their certain Expenses, and so have some Grandees of Spain.
There are Persons appointed to Sell at their Houses whatever I have just now
named, and that without paying any Custom or Excise: And this saves them a
great deal of Money, for the Duties upon all sorts of Goods and Wares are
excessive high.

None but Ambassadors and Strangers are allowed to have a great many Footmen
and Pages to follow them: For by the Pragmatick (by which name they call all
their Edicts of Reformation, they are forbidden to have any more than two
Footmen to follow them.) It is somewhat strange, that they who keep four or
five hundred Persons, may not be allowed above three to accompany them. This
third, you must know, is a Groom, which goes on foot, and keeps near the
Horses, to hinder them from putting and intangling their Legs in their long
Traces, and he does not wear a Sword as the Footmen do: And I must needs say,
that if Age is a recommendable Quality, these three Men have that in a good
degree. I have seen Footmen of Fifty Years of Age, and never any under Thirty.
They are very unpleasant to look at, being very tawny, and of a Clownish
Aspect: They cut their Hair close on the top of their heads, only let a Round
be a little long, but very greasy, and seldom combed. The Hair they cut on the
top of their heads, is done in the shape of a Wild Boar's Head. They wear long
Swords, with Shoulder-Belts and Cloaks. They are all clothed either in Blew or
Green; and often their green Cloth Cloaks are lined with blew Velvet cut in
Flowers; their Sleeves are either of Velvet, Satin, or Damask. One would think
that these should be handsome Liveries, but yet I assure you, nothing is
uglier; and their ill Looks disparage their Clothes. They wear Bands, but
without any Collar, which is ridiculous. And upon their Clothes they have
neither Galloons, nor tufted Buttons and Loops, nor any sort of Lace or
Trimming.

Their Gentlemen and their Pages always go in a Coach that follows; these wear
black Clothes in all Seasons: In Winter they wear Velvet, with Cloth Cloaks
very long, but when they Mourn, they draw upon the ground. Although they are
Pages, they wear no Swords, only most of them have a little Poniard hid under
their Clothes. In Summer they wear either Damask or Taffety, with Cloaks of a
black Stuff very light.

It is only the great Lords, and the Titulado's, or Men of Title, which are
permitted to have four Mules to their Coaches with those long Traces in the
City. If any Person, without the distinction of some Character, let him be as
Rich as he will, should appear in the same Equipage, he would be affronted and
abused in the open Street, his Traces would be cut, and himself Fined very
high. Here, it is not enough to be Rich, a Man must also be of some Quality.
The King only, can have six Mules to his own Coach, and to those of his
Attendants; which Coaches are not like others, and are distinguished by this,
that they are covered with green Oyl-Cloth round, as well as on the top, just
as the Stage-Coaches in France, except that they are not of Wickers but the
carved Work is very coarse, and ill done, and they have falling Boots, and all
is very ugly; and one would wonder how so great a King can make use of them.
But I have been told, that these fashioned Coaches were in use in Charles the
Fifth's time, that his were just like them; and that it is in imitation of so
great an Emperor, that all the Kings which have Reigned since, will have no
other. Without doubt there must be some such great Reason; for notwithstanding
this, the King has as fine Coaches as any are in the World, some made in
France, and others in Italy, and other Parts. The great Persons have also very
stately ones; but after the King's Example, they do not use them four times a
Year. All Coaches are kept in large Courts, in which there are several
Partitions enclosed. There are it may be to the number of two hundred in one
Yard, and there are several of these Yards or Courts in diverse parts of the
City. The Reason why they set them abroad is, because they have no room for
them at home, their Houses being built, as I have already said, without Courts
or great Gates. Of late, they begin to alter their Fashion, and use Horses
instead of Mules. And to be just, these Horses are extreme beautiful; there is
nothing wanting to them, and it would be difficult for the best Painters to
draw any in greater Perfection. But it is a piece of Cruelty to make them draw
such huge Coaches, which are almost as heavy as a House; besides the Streets
are so very ill paved, that their Feet are quite spoiled in two Years time.
They cost very dear, and are not big enough for their Coaches. But I have seen
some draw their pretty little Calashes, which were all painted and gilt, like
those which are made in Holland, and nothing looked more pleasant; and by their
swift running, and handsome carrying of their Heads, you would take them for
Stags. As soon as you are out of Town you may put six Horses to your Coach.
Their Harness are very neat, and they trim their Manes, which hang to the
ground, with Ribbons of diverse colors; and sometimes they dress up their Manes
with a great many puffs of Silver, Gauze, which makes a very pretty show. The
Harness for their Mules, are made of Leather, flat and broad, with which they
cover them almost all over.

Two days ago I went with my Kinswoman to walk without St. Bernardine's Gate.
It Is a place they frequent in Winter. Don Antonio of Toledo, Son to the Duke of
Alva, was there, with the Duke of Vzeda, and the Count of Altamire. He had a
Harness for his Horses of an Isabella color, which so pleased me, that I could
not forbear speaking to him of it when his Coach came near ours. According to
Custom, he told me, that he laid them all at my Feet; and at Night when we got
home, I was told, that his Gentleman desired to speak with me. He made me a
Complement, and told me, that his Master's six Horses were in my Stable. My
Kinswoman fell a laughing, and made Answer for me, that I was so lately arrived
at Madrid, that I did not yet understand, that one must not praise any thing
which belonged to so generous a Cavaliero, as Don Antonia; but however, 'twas
not the Fashion to receive Presents of so great value, and desired him to take
them back again. But this he would not do, we sent them back immediately; he
returned them, and so did we. To be short, the whole Evening past thus in
sending backwards and forwards; and at last, we were forced to write him a
Letter, and give our selves a great deal of trouble to persuade him not to take
it ill, that I would not accept them.

I am told, that after the King has once made use of a Horse, in Respect to
him, no body afterward will ride on him. It happened, that the Duke of Medina
De las Torres had bought a Horse worth Five and Twenty Thousand Crowns, he was
the handsomest and the bravest which was ever seen. He caused his Picture to be
taken; King Philip the Fourth saw it, and had a mind to see the Horse. The Duke
begged him to accept of him; but he refused him, and gave this Reason, That as
he should seldom ride on him, and that no body would make use of him after he
had mounted him, so the strength and usefulness of the Horse would be lost.

It is usual here for good Families to put their younger Daughters to Ladies;
by whom they are employed for the most part to Embroider in Gold and Silver, or
in Silk of various colors, about their Shift-Necks or Hands: But if they are
left to follow their own Natural Inclination, they work very little, and talk
much. They keep also both Male and Female-Dwarfs, and very ugly ones: The
Females particularly have very frightful looks, their Heads are bigger than
their Bodies; they always wear their Hair loose about their Ears, and hanging
down to the ground: At first sight, one would wonder what these little Figures
were when they present themselves before ones Eyes. They wear Rich Clothes;
they are their Mistress's Confidents, and for this Reason, they are denied
nothing they have a mind to.

In every House at a certain stated hour, all the Women meet with the Mistress
of the Family, in the Chapel, there to repeat their Rosary aloud; they make
use of no Book to say their Prayers by; indeed it is very seldom they have any.
The Count of Charny, who is a Frenchman, very handsome, and of great worth, and
is the King of Spain's General of his Horse in Catalonia, told me, that the
other day being at Mass, and as he was saying his Prayers by his Book, an Old
Spanish Woman came and snatched it from him, and with great Indignation threw
it to the ground, saying to him, Let this alone, and make use of your Beads. It
is a strange thing to consider how continually fond they are of their Beads;
every Woman there has a pair fastened to her Girdle, and so long, that they
almost touch the ground. They are perpetually without ceasing using them, in
the Streets, as they play at Omber, as they Discourse, nay, when they are
making Love, when they are telling Lies, or speaking Evil of their Neighbors.
They are continually muttering over their Beads, let them be in never so much
Company, nothing of this hinders them still to keep on their pace. I leave you
to judge what Devotion there can be in this; but Custom has a great Power in
this Country.

Till of late, Women wore Vertingales of a prodigious bigness; this Fashion was
very troublesome to themselves as well as others. There were hardly any doors
wide enough for them to go through: But they have left them off now, and only
wear them when they go to appear in the Queen's or the King's Presence:
Commonly in the City they wear a certain sort of Vestment, which to speak
properly, is a young or little Vertingale. They are made of thick Copper Wyre
in a round form, about the Girdle, there are Ribbons fastened to them, with
which they tie another round of the same form, which falls down a little lower,
and which is wider; and of these they have five or six rounds which reach down
to the ground, and bear out their Petticoats and other Garments. They wear a
vast number of this Device; and one would hardly believe that so little
Creatures as the Spanish Women are, could bear such a load. Their upper Garment
is always of coarse black Taffety, or of a gray plain Stuff made of Goats-hair,
with a Truss or Fardle coming down a little above the Knees, and round the
upper Garments; and if you ask them to what end this serves? they will answer
you, that with this they can make it longer as it wears out. The Queen Mother,
as well as others, uses this to all her Garments. Even the Carmelites wear them
in France as well as in Spain. But as to Women, it is rather a Fashion which
they follow, than any Frugality; for they are neither Covetous nor good
Housewifes, and of these things, they have two or three new ones in a Week.
These upper Garments are so long before and on the sides, that they draw a
great deal upon the ground, but behind, they do not draw at all. Though they
wear them down so low, yet they will tread upon them, that their Feet may not
be seen, which are the parts they most industriously hide. I have heard say,
that after a Lady has Obliged her Gallant by all possible Civilities and
Compliance, to confirm to him her Kindness, she will show him her foot; and
this here, they call the highest Favor; one must needs own, that in its kind,
there is nothing prettier. As I have already told you their Feet are so small,
that their Shoes look like those of our Babies. They are made of black Spanish
Leather, cut upon colored Taffety, without Heels, and as strait as a Glove.
When they go, you would think they flew; we should not in a hundred Years learn
their way of walking; they keep their Elbows close to their sides, and go
without raising their Feet, just as one slides. But to return to their Habits;
under this plain upper Garment, they have a dozen more, one finer, than
another, of rich Stuffs, and trimmed with Galloons and Lace of Gold and Silver,
to the Girdle. That I have told you a dozen, pray do not think that I exceed
the Truth: During the excessive Heats of the Summer, they only wear seven or
eight, of which some are of Velvet, and others of thick Satin. They wear at
all times a white Garment under all the rest, which they call Sabengua; it is
made either of the fine English Lace, or of Muslin embroidered with Gold, and
so wide, that they are four Else in compass. I have seen of these worth five or
six hundred Crowns. At home they wear neither the little Vertingale nor Patens,
these last are a sort of little Sandal, made of Brocado or Velvet, set upon
Plates of Gold, which raise them half a Foot, and when they have these, they
walk very ill, and are apt to fall. They use but very little Whale-bone in
their Stays, the midst of which are a third part of an Ell. One can hardly see
in other Countries Women so slender. They shape their Bodies before pretty
high, but behind, you may see them to the middle of the back, they are so
naked, and yet this is no Charming sight, for they are all dreadful lean,
though they would be very sorry to be fat. And this is a great Error among
them. Besides, they are very swarthy; so that this brown Skin which is glew'd
to their backs, must necessarily be displeasing to those who are not used to
it. They put Red upon their Shouldiers, which are all naked, as well as on
their Cheeks. Neither do they want there for White, which is very good, but
there are few which know how to use it; at first sight you can discern it. I
have seen some of a very clear Complexion that was Natural. Most of them have
very fine and exact Features; in their Looks and all their Actions you may see
a little affectation of being Courted, which their Humor does not dissemble.
It Is reckoned beautiful among them to have no Breasts, and they take care very
early to hinder them from growing big. As soon as they begin to appear, they
bind thin pieces of Lead upon them, as close as one would swaddle a Child. And
indeed their Breasts are as flat and even as a sheet of Paper, except the holes
and hollowness, which their leanness causes, and those are pretty many. Their
hands have no defect, they are little, white, and well shaped. Their large
Sleeves, which they fasten at the bottom of their wrists, still contribute to
make them appear less. These Sleeves are made of Taffety of all colors, like
those of the Egyptians, with Ruffles of broad Lace. Their Stays are commonly of
Gold and Silver Stuffs, mixed with lively colors; the Sleeves of them are very
strait, and their Silk Sleeves appear instead of their Shifts. Nevertheless,
People of Quality wear very fine Linen; but all others wear little or none. It
is scarce and dear, besides, the Spaniards have that foolish Vanity to desire
it very fine; insomuch, that they had rather have but one such Shift than half
a dozen a little coarse; and either lie in Bed till it is washed, or else dress
themselves without any, which they frequently enough do. They use this fine
Linen after an ill manner when they wash it; for the Women lay it upon rough
stones, and so beat it hard with a stick, by which means, there shall be a
hundred holes in it immediately. There Is no difference between the best and the
worst Laundress; all these Creatures are very awkward.

But I return to the Women's Clothes, which I have often left, that I might give
an Account of several things which occurred to me. I must tell you, that they
wear about their Necks Bone-lace, embroidered over either with red or green
Silk, or Gold or Silver. They wear Girdles all of Medals and Relics. There
are diverse Churches which have not so many; they wear also the Cord of some
Order, either of St. Francis, the Carmilites, or some other. It is a small
Cord, made either of black, white, or brown Wool, and is worn on the outside
of their Stays, and hangs down before to the edge of their Petticoats. They are
full of knots, and commonly upon every knot there is a Diamond-stone fastened.
They make Vows to some Saint or other to wear their Cords; but if the reason of
these Vows was inquired into, it would not be found very good.

They have great store of Jewels, the finest that can be seen. Neither is it
enough to have one Set of Jewels, as our Ladies in France have, but these must
have Eight or Ten; some of Diamonds, others of Rubies, Emeralds, Pearls,
Turkey-stones; and in short, of all sorts. But the Workmen set them very ill,
for the greatest part of the Diamond is hid, very little of it is seen. I asked
the reason of it, and they told me, that to them, the Gold looked as well as
the Stones. But I am of Opinion, that their Lapidaries do not understand how to
set set them better. I must except Verbec, who can do them well if he will take
the pains.

The Ladies wear at the top of their Stays a broad knot of Diamonds, from
whence there hangs a Chain of Pearl, or ten or twelve knots of Diamonds, which
they fasten at the other end, to their sides. They never wear any Necklace, but
they wear Bracelets, Rings, and Pendants; which last are longer than ones Hand,
and so heavy, that I hare wondered how they could carry them without tearing
out the hole of their Ears. To which they add whatever they think pretty. I
have seen some have good large Watches hanging there, others Padlocks of
Precious Stones, and even your fine wrought English Keys, and little Bells.
They also carry upon their Sleeves, their Shoulders, and all about their
Bodies, Agnus Dei's, and little Images. They have their Heads stuck full of
Bodkins, some made of Diamonds in the shape of a Fly, and others like
Butterflies, whose colors are distinguished by various Stones. They dress
their Heads after several Fashions, but still they must be naked; they part
their Hair on the sides of their Heads, and lay it cross on their foreheads; it
shines so, that without lying, one may see themselves in it. Formerly they wore
a Tress or Lock of Hair, the worst made that one should see, and this fell all
spread upon their Shoulders, lest their own Hair should mix with it, which
indeed is very fine. They have usually five-broided Rolls, to which they fasten
Knots of Ribbons, or else Pearls, and these they tie altogether to their
Girdles, and in Summer when they are at home, they wrap them up in a piece of
colored Taffety, trimmed with Thread Bonelace. They never wear any sort of Coif,
either Night or Day. I have seen some which had their Heads dressed up with
Feathers like little Children: These Feathers are very curious, and spotted
with different colors, which make them much more beautiful. I cannot imagine,
why they do not make such in France.

The Young Women, or new-marry'd, have very Rich Clothes, and their upper
Garments are colored and embroidered with Gold. I was to see the Princess of
Monteleon: She Is a little Body, not above Thirteen Years old, and she is lately
married to her Cousin-German, named Don Nicholas Pignatelli; her Mother is the
Daughter of the Duchess of Terra Nova, nominated to be Camarera major, or
first Maid of Honor to the new Queen. These, that is to say, the Duchess of
Terra Nova, D'Hijar, and Monteleon, with the Young Princess of the same Name,
and her little Sisters, dwell all altogether. The Duchess of Terra Nova may be
about Threescore Years old; my Kinswoman is one of her intimate Friends, and
she received us with such Civility and Kindness as is not usual with her: For
it may be, there is not in the World a more haughty Spirit, which her very
looks declare. Her voice is harsh, she speaks little, and would be thought of a
kind and good Nature; but if what is said, be true, she is not really so: One
shall hardly meet with a greater share of Wit, and a more piercing Judgment,
than she has; she discoursed to us much of the Place she was going to take upon
her in the Queen's House. Says she, I Will neglect nothing to make my self
acceptable to her, I Will endeavor to discover every thing that may please her;
I am sensible that a Young Princess, born in France, must be allowed a greater
Liberty than an Infanta of Spain, born at Madrid. So that by me, she shall not
be able to find any difference betwixt this and her own Country. She presented
me with a pair of Beads of Paulo D'Aguila, which is a curious sort of Wood that
comes from the Indies. Really they are so long, that when I hold them in my
hands they reach to the ground. They are trimmed with two bunches of small green
Taffety Ribbon, each bunch has about three hundred Else in it. She gave me also
some Puoatos of Portugal, which are Pots and Dishes made of that Medicinal
Earth, and are adorned with Filigrane Work: And she presented me likewise with
several other pretty Toys.

One can hardly see any thing that looks more splendid than this House of
theirs; they use the upper Apartments, which are hung with Tapistry all done
with raised Work of Gold. In one great Chamber, which is longer than it is
broad, you may see several Glass-doors which go into Closets or little Cells.
The first of which is the Duchess of Terra Nova's, hung with gray, and a Bed
of the same, and all other things very plain. On one side Lodges her Daughter,
the Duchess of Monteleon, who is a Widow, and has her Room furnished like her
Mother's. Afterward you come to the Princess of Monteleon's Chamber, which is
not larger than the others, but her Bed is of Gold and green Damask, lined with
Silver-Brocade, and trimmed with Point De Spain. The Sheets were laced about
with an English Lace of half an Ell deep. Over against it were the Chambers of
Monteleon and Hijar's Children, which were Furnished with white Damask. Next to
these is the little Chamber of the Duchess of Hijar, Furnished with
Crimson-colour'd Velvet upon a Gold Ground. Their Rooms were no otherwise
divided than by Partitions of a certain Sweet Wood; and they told me, that six
of their Women lay in their Chambers, upon Beds brought thither at Night.

The Ladies were in a great Gallery, spread with a very rich Foot-cloth; there
were set round it Crimson-colour'd Velvet Cushions embroidered with Gold, and
they are longer than they are broad: There were also several great Cabinets in
laid and adorned with Precious Stones, but they are not made in Spain; and
between them were Tables of Silver, and admirable Looking-Glasses, both for
their largeness and rich Frames, the worst of which were of Silver. But that
which I thought finest, were their Escaparates, which is a certain sort of a
close Cabinet with one great Glass, and filled with all the Rarities which one
can imagine, whether it be in Amber-grease, Porceline, Crystal, Bezoar-stone,
Branches of Coral, Mother of Pearl, Fillagran in Gold, and a thousand other
things of Value. There I saw a Fish, and upon its Head there was a little Tree;
it was neither of Wood nor of Moss; it grew on the top of the Fish's scull,
which is very small. This seemed to me a great Curiosity.

We were above threescore Women in this Gallery, and not so much as one Man
among us. They all sat down upon the Floor cross-legg'd. This is an Old Custom,
which they have derived from the Moors. There was only one great Elbow-Chair of
Spanish Leather stitched with Silk, and very ugly. I asked for whom it was
designed? They told me it was for the Prince of Monteleon, who came not in till
after all the Ladies were retired. I could not long sit after this fashion, and
therefore I got some Cushions under me, five or six of which were fastened
together by a Silver brace full of Olive-stones, that it might not break
through. When any Lady comes to Visit, the He or She-Dwarf comes to give
Notice, by kneeling down upon one Knee, upon which all the Company rises, and
the Young Princess walks before as far as the Door to receive her which comes
to see her after her Marriage. In Saluting each other, they do not kiss,
perhaps, that is, because they will not rub off the color from one another
Faces; but they shake Hands with their Gloves off, and in Discourse, they say
Thou and Thee; and without calling one another either, Madam, or Lady, or
Highness, or Excellency, they only say, Donna Maria, Donna Clara, or Donna
Theresa. I was willing to know the reason of this Familiar way, and I learnt it
was to avoid all occasion of Offense amongst them; and that as there were
different ways of speaking to distinguish the great difference of Quality and
Degree, and that it was not easy to observe all the Rules about them without
sometimes giving distaste; therefore to prevent which, they have chosen to
speak to each other without any Ceremony at all. I must also add, that the
Women here do not intermix, and so these are always Persons of Quality
together. The Wives of the Long Robe never so much as go to visit the
Court-Ladies, and a Man of Birth ever Marries with a Woman of Quality. Here one
never sees those which are not Gentlemen mix with the Nobility, as in France;
so that there can be little danger, as long as they Associate together. If
there comes in a hundred Ladies one after another, every one rises up as often,
and they go, as in Procession, as far as the Antichamber to receive them. I
was so tired that day, that I was in a very ill Humor.

They were all very well dressed; and as I have already told you, they have
very rich Clothes, and their Jewels are extreme fine. There were two Tables for
the Game of Ombro, at which they played very high, and without any Noise. I
could not understand their Cards; they are as thin as Paper, and painted after
a quite different way from ours. One of those Cards looks as if one held a
Letter; when they have a good Game in Hand, it were easy for a Cheating
Gamester to discover several of their Cards, if not the whole Game.

While they played, they discoursed of News, of the Court and the City: Their
Conversation is free and pleasant, and it must needs be confessed, that they
have a certain quickeness of Wit, which we cannot come up to. They are very
kind and friendly; they love to praise, and do it after a gentile way, very
ingeniously, and with great Judgment. I am amazed to find such strength of
Memory joined with so great a degree of Wit and Understanding. They are
compassionate, even almost to a fault. They Read little and Write not much; but
yet by that little which they do Read, they improve much, and that little they
Write is both exact and concise.

Their Features are very regular and delicate; but their excessive leanness
offends one that is not used to it. They are of a brown Complexion, and their
faces very smooth: The Smallpox must needs not do them so much hurt here, as
in other Countries, for I have seldom seen any marked with them.

Their Hair is as black as Jett, and very shining, notwithstanding there is
cause to think that they comb long with one and the same Comb, for the other day
I saw at the Merchioness of Alconnizas (who is Sister to the Constable of
Castille, and whose first Husband was the Count and Duke of Olivares) her
Toylet spread; and although she is one of the neatest and richest Ladies, and
the Toylet was laid upon a little Silver Table, yet it was only furnished with
a little bit of Callico, a Looking-Glass no bigger than ones Hand, two Combs,
and a little Box, and in a small China Cup some White of an Egg beat together
with Sugar Candy. I asked one of her Women what she did with this; she told me,
this was to take the dirt off her Face, and to make it shine. I have seen some
whose Faces were so bright, that you would wonder. One would think that they
were Varnished over; and the Skin is so pulled and rubbed, that I am confident
it does a great deal of hurt. Most of the Women make themselves Eyebrows, and
they have only as 'twere a little thread of Hair, which in my mind looks very
ugly; but that which is yet worse, is, they comb the middle of their Foreheads
so much till they make their Eyebrows meet; and this with them is extreme
Beautiful.

But yet there are a great many whose Fancies do not lie this way; I have seen
some Spanish Women more exact to the Rules of Beauty than our French Women,
notwithstanding their way of dressing cross-wise, and the little Advantage
which they give to their faces. One may say, that they are like things made out
of Rule, for they have neither Hair, nor Cornet, nor any Ribbon, to set them
off; and yet, what Country can show such Eyes as theirs? They are so very
sprightly, and declare so much Wit, and by them, talk to one in a Language so
kind and intelligible, that if they had no other Charms, these alone would make
them pass for handsome Women, and unavoidably steal away ones Affections. Their
Teeth are very even, and would be white enough, if they took a little care of
them, but they neglect them; and besides, their frequent use of Sugar and
Chocolate does them much hurt. They have all a bad Custom here, the Women as
well as the Men, which is to pick their Teeth, let them be in what Company they
will: This they reckon as a Diversion, and do it with grave looks. They do not
so much as know what belongs to having them cleaned by an Artist, there is no
such Trade there, and when they need them to be drawn out, they get the
Surgeons to do it, if they can.

At my first coming in to Visit the Princess of Monteleon, I was surpised to
see so many Young Ladies with great Spectacles on their Noses, and fastened to
their Ears; but that which yet seemed strangest to me, was, that they made no
use of them where it was necessary: They only discoursed while they had them
on; I was disturbed at it, and asked the Marchioness De la Rosa (with whom I
have contracted a dear Friendship) the reason of it: She Is a pretty sort of
Woman, and understands how to live. She has a neat Wit, and is a Neapolitan.
She fell a Laughing at my Question, and told me, that it was done to make them
look grave, that they did not wear them for any need, but to draw Respect. Do
you see that Lady, says she to me? meaning one that was near us, I do not
believe, that since she was Ten Years Old, she ever left them off, but when she
went to Bed. Without lying, they both eat with them, and in the Streets and
Assemblies you can never fail of meeting abundance of Men and Women with their
Spectacles. Upon this occasion, I must needs tell you, continued she, that
sometime ago, the Jacobite Friars had a Suit in Law of high Importance; the
success of which they were too much concerned for, to neglect any means. One of
the Young Fathers of the Convent had some Kindred of the greatest Quality,
which upon his Account did solicit very hard on their behalf. The Prior
assured him, that if through his Credit and Interest they should get the better
of the Suit, he could ask nothing that should not be granted him for an
Acknowledgment: At last, they gained their Point, and the Young Father,
transported with Joy, immediately ran to tell the News, and at the same time
prepared himself to ask a Favor which a long time he had had a mighty desire
to obtain. But the Prior, after having embraced him, with grave looks and tone,
said to him, Hermano, ponga las Ojalas, that is to say, Brother, put on
Spectacles. The Honor of this Permission filled the Young Monk with a strange
Joy; he thought himself and his care too highly recompensed, and had nothing
else to ask. The Marquess of Astorgas, Viceroy of Naples, added she, had his
Statue to the middle cut in Marble, upon which he was very careful to cause his
best Spectacles to be put. It is so common a thing to wear them, that I have
heard, there are different Spectacles, according to the different Qualities and
Degrees of Men and Women. Proportionably as a Man's Fortune rises, he increases
in the largeness of his Spectacle-Glasses, and wears them higher upon his Nose.
The Grandees of Spain wear them as broad as ones Hand, which for distinction,
they call Ocales. They fasten them behind their Ears, and leave them off as
seldom as they do their Collars. Heretofore they had the Glasses of them from
Venice; but ever since the Enterprise of the Marquess of Cueva, which was
called the Triumvirat, because they were three Persons who undertook to Fire
the Arsenal of Venice with Burning-Glasses, and by this means to make the King
of Spain Master of that City: The Venetians, to be revenged, caused a vast
number of those Ocales to be made, and sent to their Ambassador at Madrid. He
presented of them to the whole Court, and all that used them were almost
blinded with them; for they were made of burning Glass, and very artificially
done, and set in certain Frames made of combustible Matter, which with the
least Rays of the Sun would put all in a Flame. It happened upon a Council-day,
that in the Room where they sat, one of the Windows was left open, and the Sun
shining perpendicularly upon their Spectacles, all on a sudden they perceived a
dangerous sort of fire contrived against their Eyebrows and Hair; one can
hardly imagine what a fright these venerable old men were in. I could wish,
said I to the Marchioness, that this story were credible, for it is very
pleasant. As I did not see it, replied she in smiling, so I cannot positively
assure you that it is true: But the business of the Jacobite Friars which I have
related to you, I had from the best Authority. I have since, observed several
Persons of Quality in their Coaches, sometimes alone, and sometimes in Company,
with these great Spectacles hung upon their Noses, which in my Mind, is a
strange sight.

This Princess gave us a Collation, her Women, to the number of eighteen,
brought every one of them a great Silver Basin full of dry Sweetmeats, wrapped
up in Paper, for that purpose cut and gilt. In one, there was a Plum, in
another a Cherry or an Apricock, and so in all the rest accordingly. This to me
seemed very neat, for by this way, one might either eat or carry away, without
soyling the Fingers or Pockets. There were some ancient Ladies, who after they
had eat of these Sweetmeats till they were ready to burst, filled five or six
Handkerchiefs full, and they bring them on purpose; and although they are well
observed, yet no notice seems to be taken, but they are suffered to take as
much and as often as they will; they tie these Handkerchiefs with strings quite
round their little Vertingales: This is like the hook which is used in a
Pantry, upon which is hung all sorts of Flesh and Fowl. Afterward they present
you with Chocolate, every one a China Cup full upon a little Dish of Agat set
in Gold, with Sugar in a Box of the same. There was some Chocolate ordered with
Ice, and some hot, and some made with Milk and Eggs: One drinks it with some
Biscuit, or else with some thin bread as hard as if it were toasted, which they
make so on purpose. There are some Women which will drink six Cups one after
another, and this they do, very often twice or thrice a day. One should not
wonder that they are so dry, since nothing is hotter than this Liquor; and
besides, they eat every thing so very high seasoned with Pepper and Spice, that
one would think it impossible they are not burnt up: There were several also,
which eat great pieces of the Medicinal Earth. I have already told you, that
they have even a great passion for this Earth, which frequently causes in them
great Obstructions; their Stomachs and their Bellies will be swelled with it,
and become as hard as a Stone, and they themselves as yellow as Saffron. I had
a mind to taste this Ragoue which is so much esteemed beyond its worth, but I
declare I had rather eat a piece of a Stone.

If one had a mind to oblige them, one must treat them with such kind of things
which they call Barros; and very often their Confessors enjoins them no other
Penance, than to forbear one whole day from eating thereof. It is said to have
a great many Properties; and is good against Poison, and cures abundance of
Diseases. I have a great Cup made of it, which holds a pint; it spoils Wine
that is put into it, but it makes Water excellent, which seems as if it boiled
in it, at least one may observe it to work and fret, if it is proper to say so;
and if one leaves it a little while, the Cup shall be quite empty, the nature
of the Earth makes it so full of Pores; it has a strong sent. We drank Water
there, which was very well ordered; one may truly say, that in no place they
drink it cooler: They make use only of Snow, and are of Opinion that it cools
much better than Ice; It is the custom here to drink very cold Water before
they take their Chocolate, which otherwise they think would be unwholsom.

After the Collation was ended, Flamboys were brought in; there came in first a
little simple Fellow, white with Age, who was Governor of the Pages: He had a
great Gold Chain and a Medal about his Neck; this was the present he had at the
Prince of Monteleon's Marriage: He kneeled down upon one Knee in the middle of
the Gallery, and aloud, said, Let the Most Holy Sacrament be praised; to which
every body answered, For ever: This is their Custom, when Light is brought in.
Next came in four and twenty Pages following two by two; and in the same manner
kneeled upon one Knee; every one of them brought two great Flamboys, or one
Branch, and when they had placed them upon the Tables, went out with the same
Ceremony. And then all the Ladies made to each other a low bow, accompanied
with a wish, as when they sneeze. It is fit I should tell you, that these
Branches are full of Lamps fastened to a silver Pillar, whose foot is very
broad; there are most times eight and twelve Pipes to every Lamp, in which the
Week burns, so that this gives a very great Light. And to increase it yet more,
they fasten a silver Plate to it, in such manner, that the Light reflects upon
it. One is not troubled with the Smoke, and the Oil they burn is altogether as
good as that of Provence, which is eat with Sallads. I liked this fashion very
well. When all the Lights were put in their proper places in the Gallery, the
young Princess of Monteleon bid her Women bring her Wedding-cloaths, that I
might see them; they brought thirty silver Baskets full, which were as deep and
as wide, as Table Baskets; they were so heavy, that there were four Women to
carry one Basket. In them there was, what ever is possible to be seen that is
fine and rich, according to the fashion of the Country; amongst other things,
there were six of a certain sort of close Coat of Gold and Silver Brocard, made
like Vests to wear in a Morning, with Buttons, some of Diamonds, and others of
Emeralds, and of these every one had six dozen. The Linen and the Lace were
not inferior to the rest. She showed me her Jewels also, which were admirable,
but so ill set, that the biggest there made no better a show than a Jewel set
in Paris, which one might buy for thirty Lew's.

I will not write to you often, because I will always have a stock of News to
tell you, which in this place, is pretty long in picking up. Pardon this
tedious Letter, and the little Method which I have observed in it; I set things
down just as they come into my Mind, and that is ill enough; but in your Love,
dear Cousin, I am safe from all my faults.

From Madrid, this 29th. of March, 1679.
LETTER IX.
I Fear you will take it ill that I have omitted writing to you one Post; but
dear Cousin, I was willing to be informed of diverse things, which I am now
going to relate.

And first, I will speak of the Churches of Madrid, which I find extreme
beautiful and neat: The Women of Quality seldom go to them, because they all
have their Chapels in their Houses; but there are certain days in the year,
they never fail to be at them, of which number are all the days in the
Passion-week; and there also they make their Go to receive their Indulgences.
Stations, and sometimes go to Confession.

Our Ladies Church of Atocha, that is to say, our Lady of the Bush, is indeed a
very fine one. It stands within a vast Convent, which is filled with Religious
Women, who seldom or never go out of it, that being one of their Rules they are
to observe. They lead an austere Life; and from all parts, People come to pay
their Devotion here; and when the Kings of Spain have gained any Victories or
happy Success, thither they go to sing Te Deum. There you will see a Virgin
holding a young Jesus, which they report to be miraculous. She Is of a black
Complexion, and very often they dress her up like a Widow; but upon great
Festivals she is richly clothed, and so adorned with Jewels, that nothing can
be seen more magnificent. She has in a particular manner the Sun drawn rown
her Head, whose Beams shine admirably. She always has a vast pair of Beeds
either in her Hand, or hung at her Girdle. This Chapel is on one side of the
body of the Church, and in such a place, as it would be very dark, were it not
that there is continually burning above an hundred great Lamps of Gold and
Silver. The King has his Gallery there, whose forepart is made up with a
Lattice Window. In all their Churches they make use of Hassocks to kneel on;
and when a Person of Quality, or a strange Lady comes in, the Sexton spreads a
large Carpet before 'em, upon which he either sets an Oratory with Cushions, or
else he leads 'em to certain little Closets, all painted and gilt, with
Glass-windows round, where one is very conveniently placed. There never fails a
Sunday that the Altar is not ^^luminated with above an hundred thick Wax
Candles. It is ^^kewise adorned with a prodigious quantity of Plate, and so are
all the Churches in Madrid. Here are abundance of fine Walks made of your green
Turf; and set full of Flowers, in which they place a great many Fountains, from
whence the Water falls into Basins, either of Silver, or Marble, or
Porphiry-stone. Round about them they plant great numbers of Orange Trees, as
high as a Man, and these are set in very fine Boxes; and among these they turn
loose several Birds, which make a pretty sort of Music. And this as I have
described to you, lasts almost all the year; neither are their Churches ever
without Orange or Jassemin Trees, which perfume them much better than their
Incense.

In the Chapel which they call our Lords of Almunada, you see a Virgin, which
they tell ye St. James brought from Jerusalem, and hid in a Tower which is in
the middle of Madrid. The Moors having besieged the City, the Inhabitants were
reduced to so great a want of Provisions, that they were deliberating to
Surrender, when on a sudden they found this Tower full of Corn; they concluded
such a plentiful and seasonable Supply could be no less than the effect of a
Miracle; this filled them with Joy and new Courage, and made them so vigorously
defend the City, that the Moors toiled with a long Siege, were forced to
retire. Afterward, they found the Image of the Virgin, and in gratitude, they
built a Chapel for her, upon the Walls of which, this whole History is painted
in Fresco. The Altar, Rayles, and all the Lamps are of solid Silver.

The Minime Friars have a Church near this, in which is the Chapel of our Lord
of Soledad, where the Salutation is every Night said; this is a place of great
Devotion; I mean for those that are truly devout, for there are a great many
Persons which make it their Rendezvous for other ends.

But St. Isidore's Chapel surpasses all in beauty. He is the Patron of Madrid,
and he was but a poor Labourer. The Walls of the Chapel are all cased with
Marble of diverse Colors, and its Pillars are of the same, and so are some
Statues of certain Saints: His Tomb is in the middle, and four Pillars of
Porphiry supports over it a Crown cut in Marble, in which are represented
Flowers, whose Colors are so very natural, that one may say, Art has outdone
Nature. The Cupulo without is adorned with the Images of the Twelve Apostles,
which stand round it.

I saw at St. Sebastines, (which at present is my Parish) a Canopy which the
Queen Mother caused to be made, for the carrying the Holy Sacrament to the Sick
in bad Weather: It is made of Crimson Velvet embroidered with Gold; it is
covered with Chagrin, and nailed with Gold Nails; it has several great Glasses
about it, and in the middle of its roof, there is raised a sort of Steeple,
which is full of little Bells of Gold, Four Priests carry it when any Person of
Quality is sick, and desires to receive the Sacrament, and all the People at
Court attend it. There are about a thousand Flamboys of white Wax to give
Light, and several musical Instruments play before it. They make some stay at
all the great Places in their way, to give leave to the People to kneel and
receive the Benediction, and to let the Musicians play upon their Harps and
Guittars, and sing to them. It is generally in the Night time, that they carry
it with so much Ceremony and Respect.

When they are to celebrate a Festival in some Church, the Evening before they
set up a long Pole fastened in the Ground, on the top of which is a kind of a
deep Chaffing-dish, which they fill with wooden Chips mixed with Brimstone and
Oil: This burns a long while, and gives a very great Light; they place these
Poles in the form of Allies, which make a delightful sort of an Illumination.

The Women which go abroad to Mass, hear a dozen of them, but show so much
Distraction and wandering of Thoughts, that one may easily perceive their Minds
are employed on some other thing than their Prayers. They wear Muffs that are
above half an Ell long; they are made of the finest Martins and Sables which
can be seen, and are worth 4 or 5 hundred Crowns apiece. They must stretch back
their Arms as far as possible they can, to be able only to put their fingers
ends into the entrance of their Muffs. I fancy, I have already told you that
the Women are extreme little, and these Muffs are very little less than
themselves. They always wear a Fan too, and be it in Summer or Winter, they
never cease fanning themselves all the time of Mass. In the Church they all sit
upon their Legs, and are continually taking of Snuff, and yet never smut
themselves with it, as it is usual; for in this, as in all other things, they
have very neat and dextrous ways of management. Every time the Elevation is
made, both the Women and Men give themselves a score of blows with their fists
upon their Breasts; which makes such a noise, that the first time I heard it, I
was very much affrighted, and thought they were beating one another.

As to the Cavalleros, (I mean those which by Profession are Gallants, and wear
a piece of Crape round their Hats) as soon as Mass is ended, they march up to
the place where the Holy Water is kept, and ranging themselves round it, they
present of it to all the Ladies, who also come thither, and at the same time
say something to them that is kind; to which the Women make a pertinent answer
in few words; for it must needs be granted, that they speak precisely what they
should, and that ex tempore, without any trouble of studying for words. But the
Pope's Nuncio, has upon pain of Excommunication, forbid the Men to present the
Women any Holy Water. And it is said, that this Prohibition was obtained at the
Entreaty of some jealous Husbands. However it be, it is observed, and they say,
the Prohibition even forbids the Men to give each other any Holy Water.

Let the Spanish Women be of what quality they will, they neither have Cushions
in the Church, nor any kind of Train held up. For our parts, as soon as we
appear there in our French Clothes, every body gets round about us; but the
most troublesome of all, are the big bellied Women, which are more inquisitive
than the others, and for whom they have here, the greatest respect and
complaisance; for it is pretended, that if they long for any thing, and miss of
it, they receive so much hurt, that they immediately miscarry; so that they
have a liberty to pull off ones Gloves, and to tugg, hale, and examine every
body as they list.

At first, I could not take such kind of Jesting, and talked to them so roughly,
that some of them went away weeping, and durst not return: But there were
others which were not so easily put out of Countenance; they would see my
Shoes, my Garters, and what I had in my Pocket; my Kinswomen seeing I would
not permit them, told me that if the People once took notice of me, they would
certainly stone us, and bid me let them have their humor. My Women and
Chamber-maids were yet worse tormented than I; and I am ashamed to tell you,
how far the curiosity of these big-belly'd Women proceeded.

I was told that there was a young man at Court, who was desperately in love
with a very fine Woman, whose Husband continually kept under his Eyes; so that
finding no other way to speak to her, he disguised himself like a Woman big
with Child, and so went to her House; he addressed himself to the jealous
Husband, and told him, he had the Lantajo (which is the word for Longing) to
discourse with his Wife in private. The Husband deceived by this appearance,
made no question that this was a young big bellied Woman, and immediately
consented that his Wife should make this Person happy with a long and pleasant
audience.

When any of these Women long to see the King, they give him notice of it, and
he has the Goodness to come into a great Balcon, which looks into the Palace
Court, and there he tarries as long as they desire.

Not long since a Spanish Woman just come from Naples, sent to beg the King
that she might see him, and when she had looked upon him as long as she had a
mind, in a transport of Zeal, with hands lifted up, she said to him, I beseech
God, Sir, that of his Mercy, he would one day make you Vice Roy of Naples. It Is
said, that this Passage was acted before the King, to inform us, that the
Magnificence of the then Vice Roy, who was not beloved, far exceeded his. Very
frequently there comes into my Relation's House, Women which are perfect
Strangers, to whom nevertheless she is very kind and civil, because they are
big with Child, and such we must not vex.

Thanks to Heaven, Lent is over, and though I only observed the Passion-Week,
yet that was more tedious to me, than a whole Lent kept at Paris, for there is
no Butter here; that little which one meets with, is brought about Thirty
Leagues off, wrapped up like Sausages in Hoggs Bladders. It is full of Worms, and
very dear. But the Oil makes amends, for it is very excellent; only you know,
every body loves it not, and I am one of those, which cannot eat it, without
being very sick.

That which makes it yet worse here, is, that Fish is very scarce; it is
impossible to have any sweet which is caught in the Sea, for that is distant
from Madrid above Fourscore Leagues. Sometimes there is Salmon brought, of
which they make Pies, which being seasoned with Spice and Saffron, is eatable.
There Is very little Fresh Water Fish, and yet for all this, they do not suffer
much Inconvenience, for indeed, there is hardly any body keeps Lent, neither
Master nor Servant, because of the great want of Provisions. They take a
License from the Pope's Nuncio, which costs about a Shilling, which gives them
leave to eat Butter and Cheese all Lent, and the Heads, Feet, and Inwards of
Fowl, etc. every Saturday throughout the Year. And it seems to me pretty odd,
that on this day they should eat the Feet, Head, and Inwards, and yet dare not
eat of any other part of the same Creature.

The Shambles are as open in Lent, as they are in the Carnaval. Their way of
selling Meat is very troublesome; it is close shut up in the Butcher's Shop, one
speaks to him through a little Window, and desires to buy of him half a Calf,
or the like; he neither vouchsafes to answer you, nor to show you the least bit
of Meat; at last, you are content with a Loyn of Veal; but he makes you pay
your Money down beforehand, and then through his little Window he gives you a
Leg of Mutton; you return it, and tell him, this is not what you ask for; he
takes it again, and instead thereof he gives you a short Rib of Beef; then you
make a noise for your Loyn, but he concerns himself no further than to throw
you your Money, and shut the Window upon you. This vexes one, and you go to
another, and he treats you after the same manner, if not worse; so that it is
best, to tell them how much Meat you would have, and leave the rest to them.
This Flesh is ill for the Stomach, it is so lean, dry, and black; but as bad as
it is, yet there is less required of it than of ours in France, to make a good
Soup. Every thing here nourishes so extremely, that an Egg does one more good
than a Pigeon elsewhere; and this I take to be an Effect of the Climate.

As to their Wine, it does not please me; this is not the Country where the
Excellent Spanish Wine is drank, that comes from Andalousia and the
Canary-Islands, which must pass the Sea too, to gain that strength and
pleasantness which we find in it. At Madrid the Wine is strong enough, if not
too strong, but i^ wants that delicious taste. Add to this, that they keep it
in Bags made of Buck-skin, and fitted up for that purpose, so that it always
smells and tastes either of Pitch, or as if it was burnt. I now begin not to
wonder that Men are so temperate with such Liquor. They Will sell as little a
quantity of it as one will, even to the value of a French Double: But that
which is so retail'd out to the poor People, is yet made worse than it would
be, by their letting it stand all day in an open Earthen Basin, out of which
they sell to those who have a mind. It grows sour, and smells so strong, that
it makes one's Head ache in passing by.

Lent makes no alteration in their Pleasures, indeed they are so moderate, or
at least those they use make so little noise, that they enjoy them at all times.

No body fails of going to their Station in Passion-Week, but particularly from
Wednesday to Friday. In these three days, there is acted very different things,
by real Penitents, Lovers, and Hypocrites. There are diverse Women, which under
pretense of Devotion, constantly go to certain Churches, where for a Year
before, they are assured to meet him they Love; and though they are attended
with several of their Women, which they call Duennas, yet as the Crowds are
great, and Love makes them ingenious, so they make a shift in spite of all the
Argus's, to slip on one side into a little adjoining House, which by a private
sign they know, and is hired for that purpose, and without the help of any
body, but at that very moment of time. When they have done, they return to the
same Church, where they find their Women busy in searching for them; they fall
a chiding them for their carelessness in losing them; and thus the Husband, who
for a whole Year has industriously watched his dear Wife, loses her at that
very season when she is obliged to be the most faithful to him: The great
Constraint they live under, puts violent desires in them to enjoy some freedom;
and their very Amorous Nature makes them Witty to find out means to bring about
their Designs.

It Is an unpleasant thing to see the Disciplinarians: The first time I met one
of them I thought I should have swooned away. The unexpectedness of such a
terrible sight seized me; fancy a Man coming so near you, that he will cover you
all over with his Blood; this, it seems, is one of their Pastimes: there are
certain Rules by which to Discipline themselves handsomely, and Masters to teach
the Art, just as to Dance and to Fence. They have a sort of a Gown made of
their Baptist Cloth very fine, which comes down to their Shoes; it is laid in
small plights, and so prodigiously wide, that it contains at least fifty Else
of Cloth. They wear upon their Heads a Cap three times higher than a
Sugar Loaf, and of the same shape: It is covered with Holland, and from it
falls a great piece of Cloth which hides all the Face and the forepart of the
Body; there is two little holes in it to see through: On the back of their
Wastcoats they have two great holes upon their shoulders; they wear white
Gloves and Shoes, and abundance of Ribbon which ties their Wastcoat-sleeves,
but hanging down, and not in knots. They also tie one to their Whip; commonly
it is their Mistress which Honors them with this Favor: And to be the more
admired, they must not lift up their Arms, only the Wrist and the Hand, and the
blows must not follow hastily, nor the Blood which runs out spoil their
Clothes. They give themselves most terrible cutes and slashes upon their
shoulders, from whence runs streams of Blood. They walk so softly in the
Streets as if they counted their steps; they present themselves before their
Mistress's Window, and there with wonderful patience lash themselves. The Lady
through the Lattice of her Chamber sees this fine sight, and by some sign
encourages her Gallant to Flea himself alive, and lets him know how very kindly
she takes this Action of his. When they meet a handsome Woman, they whip
themselves after such a rate, as to make the Blood fly upon her: This is
esteemed a particular Civility, and the Lady acknowledges and thanks them for
it. When once they have begun to give themselves this Discipline, the
preservation of their Health obliges them afterward to use it every Year,
otherwise they would be sick. They have also little Needles stuck in Sponges,
with which they prick their shoulders and their sides so eagerly, as if it did
not hurt them. But I Will tell you something yet stranger. Several Courtiers
often take this Walk in the Night: But they are commonly the Young Fools, and
they give notice to all their Friends of their Design, who immediately come to
them very well Armed. The Marquess De Villa Hermosa was one of them this Year,
and the Duke De Vejar was the other. This Duke went out of his House about Nine
a Clock at Night, he had a hundred Flamboys of white Wax carried before him,
two by two. Threescore of his Friends went before, and a hundred followed after
him, and every one had his Page and Footmen; and it was a very long Procession.
It is known when Men of this Quality are to walk; so that all the Ladies are in
their Windows, and hang out their Carpets in their Balconies; and that they may
the better see and be seen, they have Flamboys fastened to the sides. The Knight
of Discipline with his Guard, passes along, and salutes the Spectators. But
that which often causes a great deal of Mischief, is, when the other
Disciplinarian, who stands upon his Honor and Reputation, marches with his
great Company in the same Street. This happened to these Persons I have now
mentioned. Each of them would have the upper hand, and neither would yield it.
The Footmen with their Flamboys began to lay one another over the Faces, and
burn their Whiskers and Hair; the Friends of each Party drew their Swords
against one another. Our two Heroes, who were only Armed with this Instrument
of Penance, search for each other, and being met, being a most terrible Battle.
After they have used a little Discipline about one another Ears, and covered
the Ground with the ends of their Whip-cords, they fall to downright
Fifty-cuffs like any Porters: Though after all, there is but little matter to
laugh at in this piece of Mummery, for they beat one another well-favouredly;
they wound, and often kill; and here old Enmities revive and are revenged. But
at last, the Duke de Vejar yielded to the Marquess De Villa Hermosa; they
gathered up their broken Whips, and mended them as well as they could: The
great Cap, which was thrown into the Canal, was wiped and put upon the
Penitent's Head again; the wounded were carried home, and the Procession began
again, and they walked more gravely than ever, through a great part of the City.

The Duke had a great mind the next Morning to be revenged; but the King
commanded both him and the Marquess not to stir out of their Houses. But to
come to what they do upon these Occasions: You must know, that after these
Servants of God are returned home, there is a magnificent Supper prepared of all
sorts of Meats; and observe that this is on the last day of Passion-Week: But
after so good a Work, they think they may do a little Evil. Immediately the
Penitent causes his shoulders to be a long time rubbed with Sponges dipped in
Vinegar and Salt, lest there should remain any bruised Blood; after that, he
sets himself at the Table with his Friends, and receives from them the Elogies
and Applauses which he believes he has merited. Every one in his turn, tells
him, that in the Memory of Man, none was ever seen to to receive the Discipline
with so good a grace. They magnify all his Actions, but above all, the
Happiness of that Lady for whose sake all this Bravery was performed. The whole
Night is spent in such kind of Discourse, and sometimes he that has been so
well flog'd, is so sick, that he cannot go to Mass on Easter Day. Do not think
that I use any Art to set out the History of this matter to make you merry, it
is all literally true, and I tell you nothing, which you may not be satisfied
in, from every body that has been at Madrid.

But there are also true Penitents, which indeed troubles one extremely to look
on them; they are dressed just as those who gives themselves the Discipline,
except that they are naked from the shoulders to the middle, and with a kind of
a narrow Matt are swadled and bound so very hard, that all the Flesh which
appears is black and blew; their Arms stretched out, are wrapped about with the
same Matt. They carry to the number of seven Swords sticking in their Backs and
Arms, which hurt them grievously when they stir too much, or happen to fall,
which they often do; for they going barefoot, and the stones in the Streets
being sharp, and cutting their Feet, they cannot possibly always keep
themselves up. There are others, who instead of these Swords carry Crosses so
very heavy, that they are even born down with them; neither would I have you
think that these are of the ordinary People, some of them are of the highest
Quality. They are forced to have several of their Servants to accompany them,
but they are disguised, and their Faces covered, lest they should be known.
These carry Wine, Vinegar, and other things, to give their Master from time to
time, who very frequently drop down dead with the extreme pain and toil they
endure. Generally these Penances are enjoined by their Confessors, and they are
so very severe, that he which undergoes them seldom out-lives the Year. The
Pope's Nuncio told me, that he had forbid all Confessors to impose them; yet I
have seen diverse, though in likelihood it proceeded from their own Devotion.

From the beginning of Passion-Week to Low-Sunday, one cannot stir out of Door
without seeing an infinite number of Penitents of all sorts; and on Good Friday
they all come to the Procession, which is but one general one for all the City,
and is composed of all the Parishes and Convents. Upon this day, the Ladies are
more finely dressed than on their Wedding-days; they place themselves in their
Balconies, which are set out with rich Carpets and Cushions. Sometimes there is
above a hundred Women together. The Procession begins about four a Clock, and
is not ended till past eight; for I cannot express to you the numberless Number
of People I have seen, counting from the King, Don John, the Cardinals,
Ambassadors, the Grandees, the Courtezans, to all sorts of Folks, both of the
Court and City. Every one holds a Wax-Candle in his Hand, and all their
Servants, which are numerous, carry Torches and Flamboys. In the Procession,
all their Banners and Crosses are covered with Crape, and there is a vast number
of Drums covered with the same, and they beat, as at the Death of a General.
The Trumpets sound some Melancholy Tune. The King's Guards, which are four
Companies of different Nations, to wit, Burgundians, Spaniards, Germans, and
L'Ancillians, have their Arms covered with Mourning, and trail them upon the
ground. There are certain Machines, set upon Theaters, which represent the
Mysteries of the Life and Death of our Lord; the Figures are as big as Life,
but very ill made and dressed: There are some so heavy, that a hundred Men can
but lift them, of which there is a vast number, for every Parish has some. I
observed that of the Blessed Virgin flying into Egypt; she was upon an Ass
which had good Furniture; the Housing was all over embroidered with fine
Pearls, the Figure was very great and heavy.

Here they are afraid lest sometimes the People should fail in their Devotion
at Easter, and therefore for that reason, each Parish Priest goes to every
House, and enquires of the Master, how many Communicants he has? Being
informed, he notes the Number in his Book: To every one that has received the
Communion, they give a Printed Certificate. After Low-Sunday they visit all the
Houses again, and demand to see the Certificates, which they ought to have
according to the first Account taken of them; and if they can show none,
there is a strict enquiry made after him or her who has not Communicated. At
this time the Poor who are sick, hang out a Carpet at their Door, and the
Sacrament is brought to them in a very fine and Devout Procession.

Since my being at Madrid, I have seen very few stately Funerals, except one
for the Duke of Medina Celi's Daughter. Her Coffin was made of rare Indian
Wood, put into a blue Velvet Bag, and crossed with silver Mohair, with Cords of
silver Thread, and the strings were of the same, and fastened the Bag at each
end, like a stuff Cloak-bag. The Coffin was in a Hearse covered with white
Velvet, set round with Garlands and Coronets curiously made of Flowers. And
thus they carried her to Medina Celi, the capital City of the Duchy of that
Name.

Commonly they dress up the dead in the habit of some Religious Order, and
carry them all barefaced into the Church where they are to be buried. If it is
a Woman, they put her on the habit of the Carmelites. This Order is in great
Veneration here; the Princesses of the Blood retire to their Convent. The
Queens themselves, when they are Widows, are obliged to spend the rest of their
Life there, unless the King otherwise appointed before his Death, as Philip IV.
did in favor of Queen Mary Ann of Austria his Wife. And in case a Queen is
Divorced, she must go into a Religious House; for Divorced or Widow, she has
not the Liberty to marry again.

The Kings of Spain presume so much above other Kings, that they will not
endure a Princess who has once been their Wife, should ever be so to another,
let her have the greatest Passion in the World.

Don John has a natural Daughter, a professed Carmelite at Madrid. She is
wonderful handsome, and it is said she had no mind to take the Habit; but it was
her fate, as it is of diverse others of her Quality, who like it no more than she.

They call them the Descalcas Reales, which is to say, The Royal bare-feet.
This reaches even to the King's Mistresses, whether they be unmarried or
Widows, when he can love them no longer, they must turn Nunns.

I have seen some of the Works of St. Theresa, writ with her own Hand; the
Character is Legible, large, and indifferent fair. Donna Beatrix Carillo, who
is her Neece's Niece, keeps them very choisely. It was she that showed them to
me. They consist of a Collection of Letters; I do not believe they were ever
Printed; there is a great deal of Perfection in them; and throughout, one may
discover a certain air of cheerfulness and sweetness of Nature, which
sufficiently declares the Character of that great Saint.

All the time of Lent, and even at other times, one meets with Preachers at
every corner of a street, whose Sermons are ill enough contrived, and do as
little good; but however in preaching as they do, they both satisfy their zeal
and their desire. Their most constant Auditors are the blind Folks, which
resemble our fingers upon Pont-Neus. Every one of them being led by a little
Dog which does it very well, they go about singing of Romances and Cacara,
which are certain old Stories or Modern Events, which the People are very glad
to know. They have a little Drum, and a Flute, on which they play. They often
sing a Song on King Francis the First, it beginning, When the King left France,
to his Sorrow he left it, etc. Now I doubt you know it, dear Cousin, for who
does not: This Song is sung in very bad French, and by Folks that do not
understand one word of it; All that they understand is, That the King was taken
by the Spaniards; and as this Price was much for their Glory, so they are
willing to convey the Memory of it down to Posterity. There Is a Flower-de-Luce
all gilt upon the roof of the Chamber where this King was Prisoner; and I must
not omit telling you, that the Prison is one of the fairest Buildings in
Madrid; the Windows are as large as those of other Houses. There are indeed
Iron Bars, but they are all gilt, and set at a distance great enough, to make
any one think they were not designed to hinder escapes. I stood amazed at the
seeming neatness of a Place which in reality is unpleasant enough, and I
thought that in Spain, they had a mind to contradict the French Proverb, which
says, That, There Is neither any handsome Prison, nor ugly Love. Pardon this
Proverb, I do not love them so well to trouble you often with them.

All the Household Stuff one sees here, is extreme rich, but not so neatly made
as ours in France, and they come altogether short of our skill. It consists of
Tapistry, Cabinets, Paintings, Looking-Glasses, and Plate. The Viceroys of
Naples, and the Governors of the Low Countries, have had most admirable
Tapistry; the Viceroys of Sicily and Sardinia, show most excellent
Embroideries and Statues; those of the Indies, Precious Stones, and Vessels of
Gold and Silver. So that several returning home from time to time, laden with
the Riches of another Kingdom, cannot choose but to have enriched this City with
abundance of valuable things.

They change their Furniture several times a year; their Winter-beds are of
Velvet trimmed with thick Galoons of Gold; but they are so low, and the Valens
so deep, that one is as if they were buried in them; and when one is in Bed,
the border of the Valens lying almost upon the Counterpain, one can hardly be
seen. In Summer they have neither Curtains, nor any thing else about the Bed;
this looks very ill. Sometimes they hang colored Gauze to keep off the Gnats.

In Winter they have their Appartments very high, sometimes in the fourth
Story, according as the cold increases, to keep them from it. At present they
use their Summer Lodgings, which are low and very commodious. All their Houses
have a great many Rooms on a floor; you go through a dozen or fifteen Parlours
or Chambers one after another. Those which are the worst lodged have six or
seven; the Rooms are generally longer than they are broad, the Floors and
Seelings are neither painted, nor gilt, they are made of Plaster quite plain,
but so white that they dazzle ones Eyes, for every year they are scrapt, and
whited as the Walls, which look like Marble, they are so well polisht. The
Court to their Summer Appartments is made of certain matter, which after it has
had ten Pails of Water thrown upon it, yet is dry in half an hour after, and
leaves a pleasant coolness; so that in the Morning they water all, and a little
while after, they spread Matts or Carpets made of very fine Rushes, which cover
all the Pavement. The whole Appartments are hung with the same small Matt about
the depth of an Ell, to hinder the coldness of the Walls from hurting those
which lean against them. On the top of these Matts, there are hung Pictures and
Looking-Glasses. The Cushions which are of Gold and Silver Brocado, are placed
upon the Carpet, and the Tables and Cabinets are very fine, and at little
distances there are set Silver Cases or Boxes, filled with Orange and
Jessemin-Trees. In their Windows they set things made of Straw, to keep the Sun
out, and in the Evenings they walk in their Gardens. There are several Houses
which have very fine ones, where you see Grotta's and Fountains in abundance,
for they have great plenty of Water here, and it is very good. In the number of
these fine Houses they reckon, the Duke D'Ossona's, that of the Admiral of
Castile's Lady, the Countess of Ognate, and the Constable of Castile; but I do
wrong in particularizing of them, for there are a considerable number of them.

For the rest, it seems to me, that the great care they take, prevents the
heats (let them be never so excessive) from being troublesome to them. But do
not fancy, I beseech ye, that only the great Lords have their low Appartments,
for indeed every body else has them according to their Ability; though it be
only a little Cellar, they will live in it very contentedly.

There are but few ordinary People at Madrid, one seldom sees any but Persons
of Quality, if seven or eight Streets which are full of Tradesmen, are
excepted. You see no Shops in this City, unless it be those where Sweetmeats,
Liquors, Ice, and Pastry are sold.

I will not neglect telling you, that a thousand People here, have their
Canopys; for without reckoning the Princes and the Dukes, the Titled (of which
there is a vast number) have theirs also. These Titled, are those they call the
Grandees of Spain, the real Marquises, and the real Counts. If there be thirty
Chambers on a floor in a House, you shall there see as many Canopys. My
Kinswoman has twenty in her House: The King has made her Marchioness of
Castille. You cannot imagine how gravely I look under a Canopy, particularly
when they bring me my Chocolate; for three or four Pages clothed in black like
Lawyers, serve me upon Knee. This is a Custom I had much ado to bring my self
to, for methinks this respect ought to be paid to God only. But it is so common
here, that if a Cobler's Prentice should present an old Shoe to his Master, he
must do it with knee upon the Ground. This quality of Titulos gives them diverse
Privileges, of which I have already told you, and particularly that of having
a Canopy. They use no Ballisters about their Beds.

I have observed to you before, Dear Cousin, that our Houses are not near so
well furnished in France, as the Persons of Quality here are, but chiefly as to
Vessels of Silver, the difference is so very great, that one which had not seen
it could hardly believe it: They use no Vessel of Tin or Pewter, but either
Silver or Earthen-ware only, is what they make use of; and you must know their
Plates here, weigh little less than our Dishes in France, every thing is made
so strangely heavy.

The Duke of Alburqerque died some time ago. I have been told, that they were
six Weeks in weighing his Vessels of Gold and Silver, and writing them down;
during this time they employed two whole hours every day; this was very
chargable. Amongst other things, there were fourteen hundred dozen of Plates,
five hundred great Dishes, and seven hundred little ones, and of every thing
else proportionably; there were also forty Silver Ladders to set things on the
Cup-bord, which was made to ascend by little Steps, like your Altars in a great
Hall. When they told me of such great Wealth of a particular Man, I thought
they jested with me, and therefore desired the Confirmation of it from Don
Antonio de Toleda, Son to the Duke of Alba, who was in the same House; he
assured me it was very true, and that his Father, who did not esteem himself
rich in Vessels of Silver, had three hundred dozen of Silver Plates, and eight
hundred Dishes. The mighty Meals which they make do not require such great
store, unless it be at their Marriages, where every thing is magnificent. But
that which causes such great abundance of Vessels, is, that they are brought
from the Indies ready made, and pay no Custom to the King. The truth is, they
are little better shaped than their pieces of four Pistols, which they stamp in
the Galeon as they come from that Country.

It would grieve a body to see the ill management of some great Lords; there
are diverse which will never go to their Estates, (for so they call their Lands,
their Towns and Castles) but pass all their Lives at Madrid, and trust all to a
Steward, who makes them believe what he judges most for his own Interest. They
will not so much as vouchsafe to enquire whether he speaks true or false; this
would be too exact, and by consequence below them. This methinks is one
considerable fault; the strange profusion of Vessels only for an Egg and a
Pigeon, is another.

But it is not only in these things which they fail, but it is also in the daily
Expenses of their Houses; they know not what it is to lay up stores, or make
Provision of any thing, but every day they fetch in what they want, and all
upon trust, at the Bakers, Cooks, Butchers, and all other Trades; they are even
ignorant what they set down in their Books, and they put down what price they
will for every thing they sell, this matter is neither examined into, nor
contradicted. There are often fifty Horses in a Stable, whithout either Corn or
Straw, and they perish with Hunger; and when the Master is in Bed, and should
be taken ill in the Night, he would be at a great loss; for they let nothing
remain in his House, neither Wine nor Water, Charcoal nor Wax-candle, and in a
word, nothing at all; for though they do not take in Provisions so near that
there is nothing left, yet his Servants have a Custom of carrying the overplus
away to their own Lodgings, and the next day they furnish themselves with the
same things again.

They observe no better Rules with the Tradesmen; a Man or Woman of Quality had
rather dye, than to haggle for, or ask the price of a Stuff, or Lace, or any
other thing, or to take the remainder of a piece of Gold; they rather choose to
give it the Tradesman for his pains of having sold them that for ten Pistols,
which was not worth five. If there is a reasonable price made, he that sells to
them is so honest not to take advantage of their easiness to give whatever is
asked them; and as they have Credit given them for ten years together without
ever thinking of paying, so at last they find themselves under great
difficulties with their Debts.

It is very rare they engage in tedious Suits at Law, or let things come to
extremity; they bring themselves to account, call their Creditors, and make
over to them a certain part of their Lands, which for a limited time they
enjoy. Sometimes they give up every thing, and reserve only a Pension for Life,
which cannot be medl'd with by any Creditors who may afterward sell or lend
any thing to them; and to the end they be not defrauded of it, they publish the
agreement between the Lord and his Creditors.

All Law-paper is marked, and costs more than the other. There Is a certain time
when they make a distribution of Lawsuits; they give the Instructions at
Madrid, but there are few judged there; all the Papers of one side are put into
a Bag, and those of the other, into another Bag, and the Instructions into a
third; and when the time to distribute the Lawsuits is come, they send them to
some distant Parliaments, so that very often one's Cause is tried and judged
without knowing any thing of it: It is writ in a Register whether the Cause was
sent, which is kept very secret. When Judgment is given, it is sent back to
Madrid, and is signified to the Parties. This Method saves a great deal of
Trouble and Solicitations, which in my Opinion ought always to be forbidden.
As to business here, it is excessive tedious, whether it be at Court or in the
City, and ruins one in a little time. The Spanish Practitioners are great
Knaves in their Trade.

There are several different Councils, all composed of Persons of Quality, and
the greatest part are Counselors of the Sword. The first is the Council of
State, the others are called the supreme Council of War, the Royal Council of
Castille, the Alcaides of Court, the Council of the Holy Inquisition, the
Council of Orders, the Sacred, Supreme and Royal Council of Arragon, the Royal
Council of the Indies, the Council of the Chamber of Castille, the Council of
Italy, the Council of the Finances, the Council of the Croisado, the Council of
Flanders, the Court for the Duty of Horse, the Court for his Majesty's Woods,
and the Courts of the Millions.

They understand so little how to manage things to the best advantage, that
when a Father dies and leaves ready Money, and some Children under Age, that
they lock the Money up in a Chest, and never put it out to be improved. For
Example, The Duke de Frias, whose Widow is married to the Constable of
Castille, left three Daughters, and six hundred thousand Crowns in ready Money,
they put it into three Chests, with with the Name of each Daughter. The Eldest
was not seven years old; she is now married in Flanders to the Prince de Ligne.
The Guardians constantly kept the Keys of these Chests, and never opened that
of the Eldest, but to count it to her Husband. Observe what a loss there is of
Interest: But they tell you it would be much worse, if the Principal happened
to be lost; that sometimes when one thinks they have put it securely out, it
proves quite otherwise: That a Bankrupt makes one lose all; so that it is
better to gain nothing, than to hazard the Pupil's Estate.

It is time to come to an end, Dear Cousin; I shall be afraid to tire you with
a longer Letter: I beseech you cause all those I send you, to be delivered, and
pardon the freedom I take; Adieu, I embrace and constantly love you with all my
Heart.

From Madrid this 27th of April, 1679.
The end of the Second Volume.
A RELATION OF A Voyage to SPAIN, IN Several Letters. The Last PART.
LETTER X.
YOU did me a particular Kindness in letting me know that all my Letters come
to your hands, for I was a little concerned for the Two last: And since you
still desire it, (dear Cousin) I shall continue to inform you of every thing
that passes, and of all that I observe in this Country.

The Royal Palace is built upon a Hill which insensibly descends to the very
Banks of the River called Mansanarez: It looks several ways upon the Country,
which is very pleasant there. One goes to it through the Callemayor, that is to
say, the Great Street, which indeed is both very long and broad, several
considerable Houses add to its Beauty. There Is a large open place before the
Palace, no body of what Quality soever, is allowed to come with a Coach into
the Court, but they stop under the great Arch of the Porch, except it be when
Bonefires are made there, or when there are Masquerades, and then Coaches go
in, a very small number of Halbardeers stand at the Gate, upon my asking, why
so great a King had so small a Guard, why, Madam, says a Spaniard to me, Are
not we all his Guards? He reigns too absolutely in the Hearts of his Subjects,
either to fear any thing, or distrust them. The Palace stands at the end of the
City toward the South, it is built of very white Stone, Two Pavillions
complete the Front, the rest is not regular. Behind it, there are two square
Courts, each consisting of four sides, the first is adorned with two great
Terrass-walks, which run quite through, they are raised upon high Arches, and
are beautified with Ballisters and Statues: That which I observed very
singular, was, that the Women's Statues had Red upon their Cheeks and Shoulders,
you go through fine Porches which bring you to the Staircase, which is extreme
large, the Apartments are furnished with excellent Pictures, admirable Tapistry,
most rare Statues, stately Household Goods, and in a word, with every thing
suitable to a Royal Palace. But there are diverse of the Rooms dark, I saw some
which had no Window, and received Light only when the Door opened, those which
have Windows are but little lighter, because of their smallness, they allege
that the Heat is so excessive, that they are willing to hinder the Sun from
coming in, as much as they can. But there is yet another Reason, for Glass is
very scarce and dear; and as to other Houses, there are many which have Windows
without any Glass; and when they would describe a complete House, they will tell
you in one word, that it is Glazed. This want of Glass does not appear without,
because of the Latices. The Palace is addorn d with diverse gilt Balconies,
which indeed look very fine. All the Councils sit there, and when the King has
a mind to be present, he passes through certain Galleries and little Entries
unperceived. There Is a great many People persuaded, that the Castle of Madrid,
which Francis the Fifth caused to be built near the Wood of Bologn, was after
the Model of the King of Spain's Palace; but it is a mistake, and nothing is
less alike. The Gardens are not suitable to the Dignity of the Place, they are
neither large enough, nor so well improved as they should be, the Ground as I
have observed, reaches to the very Brink of Mansanarez, the whole is enclosed
with Walls; and if these Gardens have any Beauty, they owe it purely to Nature.
They work hard to get the Young Queens Apartment ready for her Reception, all
her Servants are named, and the King expects her with the greatest Impatience.

The Buen Retiro is a Royal House near one of the Gates of the City, the Count
Duke caused at first, a little house to be built there, and called it Galinera,
it was for keeping his rare Poultry in, which had been presented to him, and as
he often went to see them, and the Situation of the Place was on the descent
of a little Hill, and there was a pleasant Prospect, so he was invited to
undertake a considerable Building. Four great Apartments and four great
Pavillions make a perfect Square. In the middle there is a Flower-Pot, well
furnished with Flowers, and a Fountain, whose Statue (which throws the Water
when they have a mind) Sprinkles the Flowers and the Cross-Walks, which goes
from one Apartment to another. This Building has the fault of being too low,
the Rooms are large, stately and adorned with curious Paintings. Every thing
shines with Gold and lively Colors, with which the Cielings and Floors are
beautified. I took notice in the great Gallery, of the Entry of Queen
Elizabeth, Mother to the late Queen, she is on Horseback, with a Ruff and
Fardingal, she has a Hat trimmed with Jewels and a Plume of Feathers; she is
fat, fair and pleasing, she has fine Eyes, and her Looks are sweet and
ingenious. The Room for acting Plays in, is well designed, very large, all well
set out, with Carving and Guilding, there may be fifteen in a Box without
inconvenience to each other, they have all Latice Windows, and the King's is
richly guilt, there is neither Galleries nor Amphitheatre, every body sits upon
Benches on the Floor. On the side of the Terrass is the Statue of Philip the
II. upon a Horse of Brass, this Piece is of great Value, those that are curious
please themselves in taking a draught of him. The Park is above a good League
in compass, there are in it diverse separate Lodges, very pretty, and which have
good Accommodation of room, there is a Canal which is supplied with Water from
Springs at a vast Charge, and another square Place in which the King has little
Gundoloes painted and gilt, thither he goes during the great Heats of the
Summer, the Fountains, Trees and Meadows making that Place more cool and
pleasant than any other, there is Grottos, Cataracts, Ponds, Shades, and in some
parts even something of the wild Fields, which shows the simplicity of the
Country, and is extreme delightful.

The Casa del Campo is for rural Affairs, it is not great, but its Situation
is fine, being upon the Bank of Mansanarez, the the Trees in it are high, and
yield a Shade at all times. I speak of the Trees of this Country, because one
finds very few of them, there is Water in diverse parts of it, particularly one
Pond which is surrounded with great Oaks. The Statue of Philip the IV. is in
the Garden, this Place is a little neglected here, I saw Lions, Bears, Tigers
and other wild Beasts, which live very long in Spain, because the Climate is
little different from that from which they come, many People go there to think,
and the Ladies usually choose this Place to walk in, because it is less
frequented than others. But to return to Mansanarez, this River does not run up
to the City, at certain times, it is neither River, nor so much as a Brook, tho
at other times it is so big and rapid, that it carries before it all that
stands in its way, all the Summer People walk in it, there is so little water
in it at this season, that one can hardly wet ones foot, and yet in Winter, all
on a sudden, it overflows the adjacent Country, this is caused by the melting
of the great Quantities of Snow which covers the Hills, and so descends into
the Mansanarez in violent Torrents of Water, Philip the II. caused a Bridge to
be built over it, which they called the Segovie Bridge, it is a very lofty one,
and every way as fine as the Pont-neuf, over the River Seine at Paris, when
Strangers see it, they fall a laughing, they think it ridiculous to have caused
such a Bridge to be built, where there is no Water. Hereupon there was one said
wittily enough, he would advise 'em to sell the Bridge, and buy some Water.

The Florid is a most pleasant House, and its Gardens are infinitely
delightful; there are in great numbers Italian Statues by the best Masters: The
Water there makes a pretty sort of a murmur, which with the sweet smell of the
Flowers, (of which they have a Collection of the rarest and best scent) is very
charming. From thence we come to the Prado Nuevo, where there are several
spouting Fountains, and Trees there are of an extraordinary height; this is a
Walk, which though it be not even Ground, yet is not less agreeable; its
descent is so easy, that one hardly perceives the unevenness of the Place.

There is also the Carzuela, which affords nothing but Contrary delights, and
some cool Rooms, where the King comes and rests himself after Hunting; but it is
the Prospect which yields the Pleasure, and very fine things might be there
made.

That I may tell you of something else besides the Kings Houses, you must know,
dear Cousin, that on May Day, they resort to a Place without the gate of
Toleda. This is called El Sotillo, and no body excuse themselves from going
thither; to be sure then I went, but it was more to see then be seen, tho my
French-Dress made me very remarkable, and drew a great many Eyes upon me, The
Women of great Quality never go abroad to take the Air in their whole Life,
except it be in the first year of their Marriage, I mean into public Walks and
Places; and then too, it is under the very noses of their Husbands, the Wife at
the lower, and the Husband at the upper end of the Coach; the Curtains all
open, and she finely adorned: but it is a rediculous thing to see these two
Creatures sit like Statues, looking at each other, and without speaking a word
in an hours time. There are certain days set apart for walking and taking the
Air, all Madrid go abroad then; the King is seldom there, but except the King
and a few Courtiers, no body else fail of going. That which makes it very
troublesome is, their long Traces, which take up a great compass of Ground, and
occasion the Horses often to entangle. Several Ladies which are not of the
highest Rank, resort thither, but with their Curtains close drawn; they only
look through little Glasses which are fastened into the sides of the Coach: but
at Night the Ladies of great Quality come Incognito; and when it is dark they
please themselves so far as to walk a foot: They wear white Mantles upon their
Heads; these are a kind of a Hood made of Woolen stuff, which covers them all
over; they Embroider them with black Silk: they are only the ordinary Women,
and such as go upon some Intreague, which wear them; yet sometimes, as I have
said, certain Court-Ladies will go in this Dress. The Cavallero's also alight
and walk, and say some odd thing or other to them, but they meet with their
match.

The Count de Berka, the German Enyoy, told me, that the other Night as he was at
Supper, and his Windows (because of the cold) being shut, somebody knocked at
the Lattice of his Hall, he sent to see who it was; they found three Women in
white Mantles, who desired to have the Windows opened that they might see him.
He sent them word, that they would be more conveniently in the Hall: They came
in all concealed, and placed themselves in a corner, and so stood all the while
he was at Table. He entreated them (but in vain) to sit down and eat some
Sweetmeats, but they would neither do one nor the other; but after they had said
a great many merry things to him, in which they abundantly showed a strange
quickness of Wit, they went away. He discovered that these were the Dutchesses
de Medina Celi, d' Ossona and Ducada, having seen them at their own Houses; for
Ambasadors have the privilege sometimes to go to the great Ladies, and to give
them a visit of Audience; but he was willing to have yet a greater certainty,
and therefore caused them to be followed: and they were seen to go into one of
their Houses by a false Door, at which some of their Women waited for them.
These little Disguises are not always attended with overmuch Innocence.

As to the Men, when Night comes, they walk a foot in the Prado; they make up
to the Coaches in which they see Women, and leaning upon the Bouts, they either
throw Flowers, or sprinkle sweet Water upon them; and when they are permitted,
they go into the Coach to them.

But as to the meeting on May Day, It is certainly a great pleasure to see the
Citizens and the People how they sit; some upon the young Corn, some upon the
sides of the Mansanarez, others playing at Ombre, and others either with their
Wives, Children, Friends or Mistresses, basking themselves in the Sun; some are
eating of a Sallad with Leeks and Onions, and others, hard Eggs; and others
Gamon of Bacon, and even Galinas de Loche, which are Sea-Hens, and very
excellent. They all drink Water like Ducks, and play either upon the Guittar or
Harp. The King came there with Don John, the Duke de Medina Celi, the Constable
de Castile, and the Duke de Pastratie; I only saw his Coach of green Oil-cloth,
drawn by six py'd Horses, the finest in the World; and all covered over with
Gold-spangles, and knots of Rose-coloured Ribbon: The Curtains of the Coach
were of green Damask, with a fine gold Fringe, but so close drawn, that one
could perceive nothing but through the little Glasses on the sides of the
Coach. It is the Custom, when the King passes by, to stand still, and in
respect, to draw the Curtains; but we, according to the French fashion, let
ours be open, and were satisfied in making a very low Bow. The King took notice
of a Spaniel-bitch I had in my Arms, and which the Marchioness d' Alvi, who is
a very pretty Lady, desired me to carry to the Constable of Colonna's Lady; and
as I loved it mightily, she sent it to me very often. The King sent the Count
de los Arcos, Captain of the Spanish Guards, to ask me for it; he came up to
the Coach side on Horseback. I immediately gave it to him, and the Creature
had the Honor to be made much of by his Majesty, was mightily pleased with the
little Bells about her Neck; and the Buckles upon her Ears. He had a Bitch
which he loved extremely, and he sent to ask me if I would be willing that he
should keep mine for Daraza, which was the Name of his.

You may easily imagine, Dear Cousin, what answer I made. He returned me the
Spaniel, but without either her Collar or Buckles, and he ordered the Count de
Los Arcos to give me a gold Box full of Pastills, which he had about him, and
desired me to keep it. It is but of a small value, but coming from such a hand,
I mightily esteem it.

It was Don John, who is my Kinswomans Friend, which obtained this mark of the
King's bounty to me; for he knew of my being in Madrid, though I had not had
the Honor yet to see him.

Two days afterward, as I was all alone in my apartment, busy in painting a
small piece, I saw come in, a Man whom I knew not; but one, who by the air of
his Face, I could easily judge to be of Quality: He told me, that not having
met with my Kinswoman, he was resolved to tarry till she came, for he had
Letters to give her. After some little Discourse, he gave occasion to talk of
Don John, and told me that he doubted not, that I frequently saw him. I
replied, that indeed, since my arrival, this Prince came often to visit my
Kinswoman, but he never asked for me. The reason of that perhaps, adds he, was,
because you were sick that day. I was not sick, replied I, and I should have
been very glad both to have seen and heard him, for I have been told both good
and ill of him, and I have a mind to know whether they do him right or wrong. I
have signified my desire to my Kinswoman, but she told me, there was no way to
gratify me, for he was so devout, that he would speak to no Woman. It is
possible, says he, in smiling, that his Devotion should so much disturb his
Mind? for my part, I am confident he asked for you, and was assured that you
were ill of a Fever; Of a Fever! cried I, that is very strange! I beseech ye,
how do you know it? But just then, my Kinswoman came in, she was extremely
amazed to find Don John with me, and so was I, for I little thought it was he.
He told her several times, that he knew not how to pardon her for the Idea she
had given me of him, that he was no Bigot, and that he was persuaded, true
Devotion did not make a Man rude and inhumane,

I think him very handsome, of a noble Carriage, very well bread, and extreme
witty, and of a mighty quickness of Mind. As my Kinswoman has a great share of
Wit, so she cleared her self well enough from what he taxt her with. But when
he was gone, she was ready to eat me for anger, because I denied having had a
Fever. I desired her to excuse me, because me, because I was ignorant what she
had said to him, and that I could not divine: She answered me, that at Court,
one must either be able to divine, or else they would act a very silly part.

She asked the Prince, if it was true, that the Queen Mother had writ to the
King, and begged that she might see him, and that he had refused her. He agreed
it was, and also, that that was the only reason which hindered his Majesty from
going to Aranjus, lest she should come to him there, contrary to the
Prohibition for her not stiring out of Toleda. What, my Lord, said I, will not
the King see the Queen his Mother? Say rather, reply's he, that it is
State Policy which forbids Sovereigns to follow their Inclinations when they do
not suit with the public good. We have a constant Maxim in the Council of
State, always to consult the Spirit of Charles V. in all difficult Matters; we
enquire what he would have done upon such an occasion, and that we endeavor to
practice in our turn. For my part, I am of Opinion with a great many others,
that he ought not to see his Mother, since it was fit for him to banish her;
and the King himself is so fully persuaded of this, that he answered her, it
could not be. But it was not difficult for me to see, that Don John fitted the
Genius of Charles V. to his own.

The King is gone to Buen Retiro, where I had the Honor to see him first, at a
Play, for he opened the Lattice of his Box to look at us in ours, because we
were dressed after the French way. The Danish Ambassador's Lady was dressed after
the same fashion, and so handsome, that he told the Prince of Monteleon, he was
mightily taken with us, only it was pity that our Heads were not trimmed, and
our Bodies clad after the Spanish mode; that the more he looked at the French
Ladies Cloths, the more they displeased him, that the Men's did not so much
offend him. The Opera of Alcinus was acted before him, but I gave little
Attention to it, looking so earnestly at the King, that I might be able to
describe him to you. I must tell you then, that his Complexion is delicate and
fair, he has a broad Forehead, his Eyes are fine and have a great deal of
sweetness in them; his Face is very long and narrow, his Lips like those of the
House of Austria, are very thick, and his Mouth is wide, his Nose is very much
hawk't, his Chin is sharp and turns up, he has a great Head of Hair, and fair,
lank and put behind his Ears, his Stature is pretty high, straight and slender,
his Legs are small, and almost all of a thickness: He is naturally very kind
and good, he is inclined to Clemency and of the great variety of Council he has
given him, he takes that which is most for the advantage of his People, for he
loves them extremely. He is not of a vindicative Spirit, he is sober, liberal
and pious; his Inclinations are Virtuous, he is of an even temper, and of easy
access: He has not had all that Education which is requisite to form the Mind,
but yet he does not want any neither. I will now note some of his merry Humors
which have been told me, and though they are of no great importance, yet it may
still be pleasant to know them.

It is not long since the Lady Connestable de Collonna, who is in a Religious
House at St. Domingo, got out of the Abbey, from whence she had made several
Escapes; the Nuns tired with her proceeding, resolved to admit her no more; and
indeed the last time she endeavored to get in, they plainly told her, that she
might either betake her self to the World, or chose some other place than their
House for a Retirement. She was extremely offended at this refusal, which by no
means suited with a Person of her Quality and Merit. She got some of her
Friends to apply themselves to the King, and he sent Orders to the Abbess to
receive her in again. The Abbess and all the Nuns were obstinate in their
refusal, saying that they would themselves represent their Reasons to his
Majesty, and in their Persons go to him. When this Answer of the Nuns was
related to the King, he burst out a laughing, and said, It will be pretty sport
to see this Procession of the Nuns, who will come along singing, Libera nos
Domine de la Condestabile. But yet they did not go, and chose rather to obey,
which is always safest.

Some days ago it rained and thundered most terribly; the King, who sometimes
pleases himself in playing little Tricks with his Courtiers, commanded the
Marquis d' Astorgas to wait for him upon the Terras walk in the Palace. The
good old man said to him in smiling, Sir, will it be long before you come? Why
do you ask, said the King? that your Majesty, replied he, may send a Coffin to
put me in, for there is no likelihood that I should be able to contend with such
Weather as this. Go, go Marquess, says the King, I Will come to you. The Marquess
went out, and without any Scruple, stepped into his Coach and went directly home.
Two hours afterward, the King said, for certain the good old Man is wet to the
Skin, let him be called in, I have a mind to see him in such a Condition. But
they told the King that he did not expose himself at all, upon which he said,
that he was not only old, but very wise.

There was taken a little while since near the Palace disguised in man's
Clothes, one of the handsomest Misses of Madrid, she had set upon her Gallant,
of whom she believed she had cause to complain, he knowing her by her voice and
the manner of handling her Sword, would not make use of his to defend himself,
so far from it, that he opened his Wast-coat, and gave her free leave to thrust
at him, thinking perhaps, that she either was not angry, or had not Courage
enough to do it; but he deceived himself, for with all her strength she made a
Pass at him, which made him drop down, she no sooner perceived his Blood, but
she threw her self upon the ground, and cried out most dreadfully, tore her
Skin off her Face, and pulled her Hair off her Head: the People which were got
about her very well perceived by her Looks, and her long Hair, that she was a
Woman, the Officers of Justice seized her, and some Lords passing by at that
time, seeing her, related to the King what had happened: He had a mind to speak
with her, she was brought before him; Art thou she, said he, to her, that has
wounded a Man near the Palace, Yes, Sir, answered she, I was resolved to be
revenged of an ungrateful Man; he promised I should have his Heart, and yet I
am assured he gave it since to another. But why art thou so afflicted, replied
he, since thou have got thy Revenge? Ah Sir, continued she, in seeking my
Revenge, I have punished my self, I am now upon the brink of Despair, I beseech
your Majesty to command them to put me to death, for I have deserv d the
severest Torment. The King took pity of her, and turning to those about him,
Well, really, said he, I can hardly believe that there is in the World so
miserable a State, as to love and not be beloved. Go, said he, thou have more
Love than Reason, But endeavor to be wiser for the future, and do not abuse
that Liberty I restore to thee. And thus she withdrew without being carried to
the Place where they keep miserable Wretches that have led ill Lives.

All this that I have told you of the King has carried me from the Opera of
Alcinous, the first time I saw it was, with so much wandering of Mind, that when
I saw it again, it appeared quite new to me, there was never seen more sorry
Machines, they made the Gods come down on Horseback upon a Beam which reached
from one end of the Theater to the other; the Sun shined by the help of a
dousen of oiled Paper Lanthorns, in each of which there was a Lamp: when
Alcinous practiced her Enchantments, and invoked the Demons, they came
conveniently out of Hell by Ladders: Le Gratiosa, that is to say, the
Jack-pudding said a thousand Impertinences, the Singers had in different good
voices, only they sang too much in the Throat. Heretofore there was a Liberty
for several sorts of People to come into the great Room, but this Custom is
changed, and now there is only suffered to come in, the Great Lords, and at the
most, the Tutulados and the Knights of the Three Military Orders. This Room is
certainly a very fair one, it is all painted and gilt; the Boxes, as I have
already told you, are always Barred with Lattices like those we have at the
Opera; but they reach from top to bottom, and look as if they were Chambers,
that side where the King sits is magnificent. As for the rest, the finest
Comedy in the World (I mean those that are acted in the City) very often
receives its Fate from the weak Fancy of some ignorant Wretch or other. But
there is one particularly, and a Shoemaker, which decides the matter, and who
has gained such an absolute Authority so to do, that when the Poets have made
their Plays, they go to him and as 'twere, sue for his Approbation, they read
to him their Plays, the Shoemaker with grave Looks thereupon, utters abundance
of Nonsense, which nevertheless the poor Poet is forced to put up, after all,
if he happens to be at the first Acting of it, every body has their Eye upon
the Behavior and Actions of this pitiful Fellow, the Young People of what
Quality soever imitate him. If he Yawns, they yawn, if he laughs so do they. In
a word, sometimes he grows angry or weary, and then takes a little whistle and
falls a whistling, at the same time you shall hear a hundred whistles, which
makes so shril a noise that it is enough to confound the heads of the
Spectators. By this time our poor Poet is quite ruined, All his Study and Pains
having been at the Mercy of a Block-head, according as he was in a good or bad
humor.

In this Playhouse, there is a certain part of it, which is called La Casuela,
it is like the Amphitheater, all the Women that are not over-vertuous sit
there, and thither the great Lords go to talk with them, sometimes they make
such a noise that they would outdo the Thunder, and they say things so very
pleasant, that they would make one die with laughing: for their Wit is free
from all restraint of Decency. Besides, they are informed of all things that
happen in the Town; and if they had a merry Jest to break upon their Majesty's,
they had rather be half hanged then lose it.

It may be said, that the Women Players are adored in this Court, there is
hardly any that is not the Mistress of some great Person, and for whom several
Duels have been fought, and a great many People killed. I do not know how
charming their Discourse may be, but I am sure their Persons are the ugliest in
the World, they are extravagantly expensive, and sooner must a whole Family
perish with Hunger and Thirst, than one of those beggarly Players should want
the least Superfluity.

We are now in a Season that is troublesome enough, for it is the Custom here to
put their Mules to Grass, and every body almost walks a foot. At this time you
can see nothing but Grass brought from all parts, and the greatest Lord hardly
keeps two Mules to draw him, for this reason they often go on Horseback.

Those Horses which have been at the Bull-baitings and are good for these sort
of Sports, are dear, and much in request. The King had a mind to divert
himself, and ordered a Bull-Feast to be on the Twenty second of this Month, I
was very glad of it, for though I had heard much talk of them, I never saw any
yet; and the young Count De Conismark, who is a Swede, would Taurise, or Bait
the Bull for a young Lady of my Acquaintance, so that I was the more eager to
go to the Placa-Mayor, where my Kinswoman, as she was a Tutulada of Castille,
had her Balcony set up with a Canopy, a Carpet and Cushion of State. To give
you a particular Account of all that passes at these Feasts, I must tell you,
that after the King has appointed one of them, there are some Cows, which they
call Mandarines, led into the Forests and Mountains of Andalousia. It is known
that the most furious Bulls are in these Places, and as they are trained up for
this purpose, so they run into the Wood; the Bulls spy them out, and eagerly
court them, those fly and these pursue them, and so are decoyed into certain
Pallisadoes, set on purpose along the way, which is sometimes Thirty or Forty
Leagues in Length, several Men are armed with Halfpikes and well mounted, hunt
these Bulls and hinder them from coming back, but it is not seldom that they
are forced to fight them within these Pales, and frequently they are killed or
wounded.

There are People placed all along the Road, which bring advice when the Bulls
will arrive at Madrid, and there also they set Pallisadoes in the Street to
prevent any mischief.

The Mandarines, who are real traitors, go constantly before, and the poor
Bulls quietly follow after, into the very place designed for baiting them,
where there are great Stables built on purpose with Shutters contrived to keep
them in, there are sometimes 30, 40, or 50, Together, this Stable has two
Doors, the Mandarines go in at one, and escape at the other; and when the Bulls
think to follow them still they are hindered by Trap, in which they are caught.

After they have rested a few hours, they are one after another let out of the
Stable into the great Place, where there are a great many young, lusty, strong
Peasants, some of which take the Bull by the horns, and others by the tail, and
because they mark him upon the Buttock with a hot iron, and slit his ears, they
call them Heradores. This is not so easily done, for there are frequently
diverse Persons killed, and this is the beginning of the Show, which always
mightily delights the People, whether it be upon the Account that Blood is
shed, or else, that they love to see something extraordinary, and at first
sight surprising, and which afterward furnishes with matter for long
Reflections; but though unlucky Accidents do happen at these Feasts, yet it
does not appear that they take any Warning from them, for they are still
forward to expose themselves at at every Baiting that is made.

The Bulls are fed, and the best of them are picked out for the Baiting; they
can even distinguish those that are either Sons or Brothers of those Bulls
which made a great slaughter in former Feasts, they tie to their horns a long
Ribbon, and by the color of that every body knows them again, and recites the
History of their Ancestors; that the Grandsire or great Grandsire of these
Bulls bravely killed such and such a one, and they expect no less from those
that then appear.

When they have sufficiently rested, the Placa Mayor is covered with Sand, and
round it are placed Bars as high as a Man, upon which are painted the Arms of
the King and his Kingdoms. I fancy this Place to be larger than the Place Royal
at Paris, it is longer than it is broad, and about it are Houses built upon
Pillars and Arches, like Towers, five Stories high, and to each a row of
Balconies, into which there are great Glass-doors. The King's stands more
forward than the rest, is more spacious, and all gilt. It is in the middle of
one of the sides, with a Canopy over it; over against it are the Ambassadors
Balconies, who have place when the King goes to Chapel, that is the Nuncio,
the Emperor's Ambassadors, that of France, of Poland, the Venetian, and that
of Savoy; those of England, Holland, Swedland, Denmark and other Protestant
Princes, have none there. The Councils of Castille, Arragon, the Inquisiton,
Italy, Flanders, the Indies, the Orders, War, the Croisado, and of the
Finances, are on the right hand of the King: they are distinguished by their
Arms upon their Crimson Velvet Carpets which are all embroidered with Gold.
After these, are placed the city Companies, the Judges, the Grandees and
Titulodos, according to their several Degrees, and at the King's Charge, or
else at the City's, who hire these Balconies of private Persons that dwell
there.

For all those I have now named the King makes a Collation; and it is given in
very neat Baskets, to the Women as well as the Men, it consists of Fruits
dried, Sweetmeats, and Water cooled with Ice, of Gloves, Ribbons, Fans,
Pastiles, Silk-stockings, and Garters, insomuch that these Feasts always cost
above a hundred thousand Crowns, and this Expense is defrayed out of the Fines
and Forfeitures adjudg'd to the King, or to the City, this is a Fund which must
not be medl'd with, tho it were to save the Kingdom from the greatest Danger,
the doing of it might cause a Sedition. So bewitched are the People with this
kind of Pleasure.

From the Level of the Pavement to the first Balcony, there are Scaffolds made
for the rest of the People, they give from Fifteen to twenty Pistols for a
Balcony; and there is not any but what are let, and adorned with rich Carpets,
and fine Canopies. The People are not seated under the King's Balcony, that
Place is filled with his Guards, there is only Three Gates open into it, through
which the Persons of Quality pass in their richest Coaches, and particularly
the Ambassadors; and they make several turns round it, a little before the King
comes. The Cavaliers salute the Ladies who stand in the Balconies, without
being covered with their Mantles or Vails, they are decked out with all their
Jewels, and whatever they have that is finest. One can see nothing but extreme
rich Stuffs, with Tapistry, Cushions and Carpets, all of raised work in Gold. I
never saw any thing more glorious, the King's Balcony is hung round with Green
and Gold Curtains, which he draws when he will not be seen.

The King came about four a clock, and immediately all the Coaches went out of
the Place. Generally the Ambassador of France is the most taken notice of,
because he and all his Train are dressed after the French mode; and he is the
only Ambassador that has this Privilege here, for the others are in the
Spanish Dress. There Is five or six Coaches go before the King's, in which are
the Officers, the Gentlemen and Pages of his Chamber. The Coach of Honor, in
which there goes no body, marches immediately before his Majesty's own, whose
Coachman and Postilion are always barehead, a Footman carrying their Hats; the
Coach is surrounded with Foot-Guards. Those which they call the Lifeguard have
Partisans, and march very near the Coach, and next the Boots go a great many of
the King's Pages, clothed in Black, and without Swords, which is the only mark
to know them from other Pages. As the Ladies that are designed to be about the
young Queen, are already named, so they all came under the Conduct of the
Duchess of Terra Nova, in the King's Coaches, they march by the Men's Boutes of
the highest Quality, some on Foot that they might be nearer, others mounted on
the finest Horses in the World, trained up for that purpose, and which they
call Horses of Motion. That they may perform this piece of Gallantry, they must
have leave from their Mistresses, otherwise it is a great Blemish to their
Reputation, and even engages the Ladies Kindred in Trouble, for they take their
Honor to be concerned in this Liberty: But when she approves of it, they may
practice all the pleasant Humors, for which these sort of Feasts minister
occasion. But though they need fear nothing from the Ladies they serve, nor
their Relations, yet they are not freed from all uneasiness, for the Duegno's
or Women of Honor, of which there is too great a Provision in each Coach, and
the Guardadamas which go on Horseback, are troublesome Observers, hardly can
one begin to discourse, but these old Haggs will draw the Curtain, and the
Guardadamas will tell you, that that Love which is fullest of Respect is the
most discreet, so that very often one must be content to let the Eyes speak,
and to sigh so loud, that one may be heard at a Distance.

All things being thus disposed, the Captains of the Guards and the other
Officers mounted upon very fine Horses, enter the Place, at the head of the
Spanish, German, and Burgundian Guards, they are clothed in Yellow Velvet or
Satin, which is the Livery of the King, trimmed with tufted crimson Galoon mixed
with Gold and Silver. The Yeomen of the Guard, which I call the Lifeguard,
wear only a short Cloak of the same Livery, over black Clothes. The Spaniards
wear Breeches tuckt up after the old way. The Germans, which are called
Tudesques, wear them like the Switzers, they stand in Ranks near the King's
Balcony, while the two Captains and the two Lieutenants, who carry each of them
a Staff of command in their Hands, and are followed by a great many in
Liveries, march all four in a Rank, at the head of the Guards, several times
round the Place, to give the necessary Orders, and to salute the Ladies of
their Acquaintance; their Horses curvet and bound continually, they are covered
with knots of Ribbons, and embroidered Housings; they are called Pissadoyes for
Distinction. Upon this day every one of these Lords affect to wear that color
which their Mistresses love most.

When the People are come without the Bars, and are seated upon their
Scaffolds, the Place is watered with forty or fifty Tuns of Water which is
brought thither in little Carts. Then the Captains of the Guards come back, and
take their Posts under the King's Balcony, where all the Guards are likewise
placed, and make a sort of a Fence, standing very close together; and although
the Bulls are sometimes ready to kill them, yet they must not go back nor stir
from their place; they only present to them the Point of their Halberds, and so
with a great deal of hazard defend themselves.

I do assure you that this strange number of People, (for every place is full,
even the tops of the Houses as well as the rest) the Balconies so richly set
out, and so many beautiful Women in them, this great Court, the Guards, and in
a word, the whole place makes one of the finest shows that ever I saw.

As soon as the Guards are possessed of the quarter where the King is, six
Alguazils, or City Door-keepers, enter the place, each holding a white Rod:
Their Horses are excellent, harnass'd after the Morisco fashion, and covered
with little Bells. Their Habit is black, they wear Plumes of Feathers, and put
the best Looks on they can, in so much danger as they are in; for they are not
allowed to stir out of the List: and it is their business to fetch the Knights
that are to fight.

I should tell you, before I proceed any further in this short Description,
that there are certain Laws established for this sort of Baiting, which are
called Duelo, that is, Duel, because one Knights assault the Bull, and fights
him in single Combat. These are some of the things which are observed: One must
be a Gentleman born, and known for such, that he may fight on Horseback. It is
not allowed to draw the Sword upon the Bull, unless he has insulted over you;
they call it insulting when the Bull breaks or forces the Garrochion or Lance
out of the Hand, or if he make your Hat fall off, or your Cloak, or has wounded
you or your Horse, or any of your Company. In this case, the Knight is obliged
to push his Horse directly upon the Bull; for this is an Empenno, that is to
say, an affront that engages one to be revenged, or to dye; and he must give
him Vna Cachilada, or a back stroke upon his Head or Neck. But if the Horse on
which the Cavallero rides, refuses to go up to the Bull, then immediately he
alights, and courageously marches up a foot to this fierce Animal. The Sword is
very short, and about three fingers broad. The other Knights which are there to
fight, are also obliged to alight off their Horses and accompany him, that is
under the Empenno; but they do not second him, so as to assist him in the least
against his Enemy. If they all march up in this manner toward the Bull, and he
flies to the other end of the Place instead of tarrying for them, or meeting
them, after they have pursued him some time, they have satisfied the Laws of
Duelling.

If there be in the Town any Horses that have been at a Baiting, and are
dextrous at it, though they do not know the Owners, yet they will borrow them;
nay, though they do not desire to sell them, nor the others in a condition to
buy them, yet they never refuse them. If by mischance the Horse is killed, and
they offer to pay for him, it is not accepted; because, to receive Money upon
such an occasion would not be agreeable to the Spanish Generosity.
Nevertheless, it would vex a Man to have a Horse that he had taken pains to
breed up, without any more ado taken from him by the first Stranger, and
through his means killed. This sort of Combat is reckoned so dangerous, that
Indulgencies are exposed in several Churches for those days, because of the
great Massacre that is then made. Several Popes would have quite abolished such
barbarous sights, but the Spaniards begged the Court of Rome so earnestly to let
them continue, that their Humor has been complied with, and to this day they
are tolerated.

The first day I was there, the Alguazils came to the Gate, which is at the end
of the List, to fetch the six Knights (of whom the Count de Connismark was one)
which offered themselves to Combat. Their Horses are handsome to admiration and
most richly harnass'd: Besides those they ride on, they had each of them a
dozen led by Grooms, with as many Mules loaded with Rejones or Garochons, which
are, as I have said, Lances made of very dry Fir, about four or five foot
long, painted and gilt, and the Iron-work very well polished; and the Mules
were covered with Velvet Cloths of the same color of the Combatants, with
their Arms embroidered in Gold: This is not practiced at all Feasts, when the
City orders one, there is far less Magnificence; but as the King commanded this,
and it was upon his Marriage, nothing was omitted.

The Cavalleros were dressed in black, embroidered either with Gold and Silver,
Silk or Bugles; they had white Plumes of Feathers spotted with several colors,
and a rich knot of Diamonds, with a Hat-band of the same. They had Scarfs, some
white, and others crimson, blue and yellow, embroidered with Gold. Some wore
them round their Wast, others over their Shoulders like a Belt, and others
about their Arm; these last were narrow and short, without doubt their
Mistresses presented them, for commonly they run to please them, and to show
that there is no danger to which they would not expose themselves for their
diversion. They had also a black Cloak which wrapped them about, but the ends
being thrown behind them, it did not hinder their Arms: they wore little white
Buskins, with long guilt Spurs, which have only one sharp point after the Moors
fashion; they also sit a Horse like them, which is called Cavalgas a la gineta.

The Cavalleros were handsomely mounted, and looked gracefully enough for this
Country; they were nobly born, and every one had forty Footmen, some clothed
in gold Mohair trimmed with Lace; others in Carnation-colour'd Brocado, stripped
with Gold and Silver, and the rest in some other fashion. Every one of them was
dressed like a Stranger, whether 'twas Turk, Hungarian, Moor, Indian, or wild
People. Several of the Footmen carried a bundle of these Garochons I have
mentioned, and this looked very well: Thus with all their Train they crossed the
Plaza Mayor, conducted by the six Alguazils, and the Trumpets sounding. They
came before the King's Balcony, and made a profound Reverence to him, and
desired leave of him to fight the Bulls, which he granted them, and wished them
Victory. Then the Trumpets every where began to sound again, and this is done,
as 'twere, in defiance of the Bulls. All the People fall a shouting, and repeat
Viva, viva los bravos Cavalleros: After this they separate, and salute the
Ladies of their Acquaintance. All the Footmen go out of the List, except two
for each Knight, which are left to carry their Rejoues; they keep close to
their Masters, and it is very seldom that they forsake them.

Several young Men enter into the place, and they come a great way off to fight
on these days: These I now speak of are a foot, and not being nobly born, they
use no Ceremonies with them. Whilst one Cavallero is fighting, the rest
withdraw, but not out of the Bars; and they do not assault that Bull which
another has undertaken to fight, unless he makes at them. The first to whom the
Bull comes when they are altogether, is he that fights him. When he has wounded
the Knight, they cry out, fileno es Empenno, that is to say, it is an
Obligation upon such an one to revenge the Affront he has received from the
Bull; and indeed Honor engages him, either on Horseback, or a foot, to attack
the Bull, and give him a cut with his Sword, as I have said, either upon his
Head or Throat, without striking him in any other part. Afterward he may fight
him as he will, and strike him where he can; but in doing this, ones Life is a
thousand times in danger. When this blow is given, if the Knights are a foot,
they may mount their Horses.

When the King thought it was time to begin the Baiting, two Alguazils come
under his Balcony, and he gives to Don John the Keys of the Stable where the
Bulls are secured; for the King keeps the Key, and when it must be thrown, he
delivers it into the hands of a Privado, or Chief Minister, as a Favor.
Immediately the Trumpets sound, the Timbrels and the Drums, the Fifes and the
Haut-boys, the Flutes and Bagpipes make a noise round the Place one after
another; and the Alguazils, who are naturally great Cowards, go trembling to
open the Doors where the Bulls are kept. There was a Man hid behind the door,
who shut it as fast as he could, and then by a Ladder climbed up to the top of
the Stable; for it is usual with the Bull, in coming out, to look behind the
door, and to begin his Expedition by killing, if he can, the Man that stands
there: after that he falls a running with all his might after the Alguazils,
who spur their Horses to save themselves, for they are not allowed to stand
upon their defense, and their best play is to run away. Those Men which are on
foot, throw at him Arrows and very sharp Darts, which are trimmed with
Cutt-paper; these Darts stick in him in such a manner, that the pain causing
him to stir much, makes the Iron enter deeper; besides, when he runs, the Paper
makes a noise, and being on fire, vexes him extremely; his Breath looks like a
thick mist about him, his Eyes and his Nostrils are like fire, he runs swifter
than a Race-horse, and holds it much better; to speak truth, he strikes Terror.
The Knight who is to fight him comes near him, takes a Rejon, holds it like a
Poniard, the Bull makes up to him, he declines his blow, and thrusts his
Gorachon at him; the Bull so thrusts it back, that the Wood being weak, it
breaks, immediately his Footmen, who hold ten or twelve dozen, present him
with another, which the Cavallero thrusts also into his Body; with this the
Bull falls a bellowing, grows angry, runs, leaps, and woe be to them that stand
in his way: And if at any time he is ready to run at a Man, a Cloak or a Hat is
thrown at him, and this stops him; or else, one falls down on the Ground, and
the Bull in running, passes over him. They have also great Figures made of
Past-bords, with which they deceive him, and so gain time to escape. That which
helps them further is, that the Bull constantly shuts his Eyes just before he
pushes with his Horns, and they are so quick in that moment to avoid the blow;
but yet this is not so certain, but that a great many perish.

I saw a Black, with a short Poniard, go directly to the Bull, when he was in
the height of his Fury, and between his Horns thrust it into the very seam of
his Skull, which is a place very soft and easy to be pierced, but withal, very
small to hit. This was one of the boldest and most dextrous blows that can be
imagined. The Bull fell down dead upon the spot; and presently the Trumpets
sounded, and several Spaniards ran with their Swords in their Hands, to cut in
pieces the Beast that was no longer able to hurt them. When a Bull is killed,
four Alguazils go out to fetch four Mules, which some Grooms, clothed in
yellow, and Carnation-colour'd Satin, lead in. They are covered with Feathers
and little silver Bells; they have silken Traces, with which they tie the Bull,
and so draw him away; upon which the Trumpets and People make a prodigious
noise: There were twenty baited the first day. There came out a furious one
which very dangerously wounded Count Conismark in his Leg, and yet the force of
the blow did not light upon him, but upon his Horse, whom it burst; he quickly
got off him, and though he is no Spaniard, yet he would not be excused from any
of the Laws, It would have drawn pity from any body to see one of the finest
Horses in the World in such a condition; he ran violently about the place,
striking fire with his feet, and killed a Man with a blow upon his Head and
Breast: The great Rail was opened for him, and he went out. As for the Count,
as soon as he was wounded, a very fine Spanish Lady, who believed that he
fought for her sake, stood forward in her Balcony, and with her Handkerchief
made several signs, in all likelihood to encourage him, but he did not seem to
need being animated; and although he had lost abundance of Blood, and was
forced to lean upon one of his Footmen, who held him up, yet with great
fierceness he advanced with his Sword in his Hand, made a shift to give a very
great wound to the Bull on his Head; and then presently turning himself toward
that side where this young Lady, for whom he fought, was, he kissed his Sword,
and suffered himself to be carried away by his People half dead.

But you must not think that these sort of accidents interrupt the Feasts, it is
said, that it will not end but by the King's Order; so that when any Knight is
wounded, the others accompany him to the Bars, and immediately they return to
fight. There was a Biscanier so bold, as to throw himself off his Horse upon
the back of the Bull, held him by his Horns, and in spite of all the
endeavors of the Animal to throw him off, yet the Biscanier set upon him for
above a quarter of an hour, and broke one of his Horns. If the Bulls defend
themselves too long, and that the King would have others come out, (for fresh
ones afford more delight, because every one has his particular manner of
fighting) they turn loose some English Dogs; these are not so big as is
generally seen there, but it is a breed something like those the Spaniards
carried into the Indies when they conquered them; they are small and low, but
so strong, that when they once seize the Throat, you may sooner cut them in
pieces than make them let go their hold. They are very frequently killed, the
Bull takes them upon his Horns, and tosses them up in the Air like Foot-balls;
sometimes they hamstring the Bull with certain Irons made cross-wise, which
they put at the end of a long Pole, and this they call Jaretar al toro.

There was another Cavallero under the Empenno, because in fighting, his Hat
fell off; he did not alight, but drew his Sword, and pushing his Horse upon the
Bull which expected him, gave him a wound in the Neck; but as it was a slight
one, so it served only to enrage him the more: He tore up the Earth with his
Feet, he roared, and he leapt about like a Stag. I cannot well describe to you
this Combat, nor the Acclamations of every body, the claping of hands, nor the
multitude of Handkerchiefs which are thrown up in the air, for an Expression of
Admiration, some crying out, Victor, Victor, and others Ha Toro, Ha Toro, the
more to excite the Bulls fury. Neither can I tell you my particular
disturbance, and how my Heart failed me every time I saw these terrible
Creatures ready to kill those brave Cavallero's: these things are equally
impossible to me.

There was a Toledian, both young and handsome, which could not avoid being
wounded by the horns of the Bull, who tossed him up very high, he immediately
died; there were two others mortally wounded, and four Horses either killed or
desperately hurt, and yet every body said, it had not been a fine Baiting,
because there was so little Blood shed; and to have been such, there should
have been at the least, ten Men killed upon the Spot. It is hard to describe
the Dexterity of the Cavalleros in fighting, and that of the Horses in avoiding
the Bull. They Will turn sometimes an hour about him, and tho they be not a foot
distant from him, yet he is not able to touch them, but when he does hit them,
he wounds them cruelly. The King threw Fifteen Pistols to the Black that killed
the Bull with his Poniard, and he gave as much to one that had subdued another,
and said, he would remember the Knights that had fought.

I observed a Castillian, who knew not how to defend himself, jump upon a Bull,
as nimble as a bird. These Feasts are fine, great and magnificent; it is a noble
Sight, and costs abundance; One cannot give a just Description of it, it must
be seen to be well understood. But I assure you that all this did not please
me; Do but think if a Man that is very dear to you, should be so rash to go and
expose himself against a furious Beast, and that for your sake, (for generally
that is the Motive) you see him brought back weltering in his Blood, and half
dead, is it possible I say, for you or any one, to approve of such Actions and
these Customs? Nay suppose one had no particular concern, would one desire to
be present at such Sports, that cost the Lives of so many Men? For my part, I
wonder that in a Kingdom, where their King bears the name of Catholic, there
should be such barbarous Diversions permitted. I am satisfied that it is very
ancient, because they derive it from the Moors; but yet methinks this, as well
as diverse other Customs which they have from those Infidels, ought to be
entirely abolisht.

Don Ferdinand observing me very much disturbed and uneasy during the Baiting,
and taking notice, that I was sometimes as pale as death, I was so much
frighted to see some of those killed which fought, said to me in smiling, what
would you have done Madam, if you had seen what had happened some years ago? A
Cavallero of worth, passionately loved a young Woman, who was only a Jeweller's
Daughter, but a perfect Beauty, and was to have a great Estate. This Cavallero
having understood, that the most furious Bulls of the Mountains were taken, and
thinking it would be a very glorious Action to vanquish them, resolved to
Taurize as they call it, and for that end desired leave of his Mistress. She
was so surpised at the bare proposal only which he made, that she swooned
away, and by all that Power which he had given her over himself, she charged
him not to think of it, as he valued his Life. But in spite of this Charge he
believed he could not give a more ample proof of his Love, and therefore
privately, caused all things necessary to be got ready in order thereunto. But
as industrious as he was to hide his design from his Mistress, she was informed
of it, and used all means to dissuade him from it. In fine, the day of this
Feast being come, he conjured her to be there, and told her, that her very
presence would be sufficient to make him conquer, and to acquire a Glory, which
would render him yet more worthy of her. Your Love, says she, is more ambitious
than it is kind, and mine is more kind than it is ambitious. Go where you think
Glory calls you, you have a mind I should be there, you will fight before me;
well, I do assure you, that I will be there, but yet perhaps my presence will
afford you more matter of Trouble than Emulation. However he left her, and went
to the Placa Mayor where there was already a mighty Assembly; but scarce had he
begun to defend himself against the fierce Bull which assaulted him, when a
Country Youth threw a dart at this Terrible Creature, which pierced him so
deep, that it put him to a great deal of pain. He immediately left the Cavalero
that was fighting him, and roaring ran directly after him that wounded him,
this Youth thus frighted would have saved himself, when his Cap which covered
his head fell off, and then the loveliest and the longest hair which could be
seen appeared upon his shoulders, and this discovered it to be a Maid of about
Fifteen or sixteen Years of Age. Fear had put her in such a Trembling, that she
could neither run, nor any way avoid the Bull. He gave her a desperate push on
the side, at the same instant her Lover knew that it was she, and was running
to assist her. Good God! what a grief it was for him to see his dear Mistress
in this sad Condition! Passion transported him, he no longer valued his Life,
and grew more furious than the Bull, and performed things almost incredible. He
was mortally wounded in diverse places. On this Day, certainly the People,
thought the Baiting fine, they carried these two unfortunate Lovers to her
unhappy Father's House, they both desired to be in the same Chamber, and though
they had but a little time to live, yet begged the Favor they might be married,
accordingly they were married, and since they could not live together, yet at
least were they buried together, in one and the same Grave. The Story has
mightily increased the Aversion I had already conceived against these sort of
Feasts, and I told Don Ferdinand so, after I had thanked him for his pains in
relating it to me.

Hitherto I have said nothing to you concerning the Spanish Language, in which
I am endeavoring to make some Progress. It pleases me extremely, it is
expressive, noble, and grave, Love finds it commodious for its work, and can
play the fool prettily enough in it. The Courtiers speak more concisely than
others, they make use of such abstracted Comparisons and Metaphors, that unless
one is used to hear them, half their meaning is lost. I have learnt several
Languages, or at least understand the first Rudiments of them, but yet in my
mind, it is only our own which exceeds the Spanish.

I come just now from seeing Ten Galleys which are arrived, this is somewhat
strange in a City that is Eighty Leagues from the Sea, but these are Land-
Galleys; for if there be Sea-horses and Dogs, why not Land ones? They are
shaped like a Chariot, but four times longer, and have six Wheels, three on a
side, and do not go much slower than a Chariot, the upper part is round, and is
very like a Gally, they are covered with Canvas, and may contain forty Persons;
there one sleeps and dresses victuals, indeed it is a Moving-house, they put
eighteen or twenty Horses to draw it, the Machine is so long that it cannot be
turned but in a field; they come usually from Gallicia and Manca, the country
of the brave Don Quixot, they set out eight, ten or twelve in a Company, to be
helpful to one another in case of need; For when one overturns, it makes a
great havoc, and the best that can happen, is a broken Arm or Leg, there must
be above a hundred to raise it up again. In it there is carried all sorts of
Provisions, for the Country through which they pass is so very barren, that on
Mountains which are fourscore Leagues broad, the biggest tree one meets with is
a little wild Time, there is in it neither Inn nor Innkeepers, you sleep in the
Gally, and it is a miserable Country for Travelers.

Monsieur Mollini the Popes Nuncio, consecrated the Patriarch of the Indies on
Trinity Sunday, and the King was there. I saw him come in, he had a Black Suit
and a gold colored Silk Belt on, and little Pearls were set round the flowers,
his hat was so broad which they never cock here, that the Brims laid upon his
shoulders, and looked ill. I observed, that during the Ceremony he eat of
something which was held to him in a Paper, they told me it was either Leeks or
Shallots, of which he eats very often. I was too far off, to see him well, he
did not return to Buenretiro, because of Corpus Christi-day, at which Ceremony
he would assist. In coming out of the Church, I knew a French Gentleman whose
Name is Juncas, he is of Bordeaux, where I saw him, I asked him how long he had
been here: he told me but a little while, and that his first Business had been
to have seen me, had he not been engaged at Bayon, not to lose a minute's time,
in the search of a very wicked Fellow, which was supposed to be hid at Madrid;
That it was not the Curiosity to see the Patriarch of the Indies consecrated,
which drew him to the Hieronimites, (otherwise the Daughters of the Conception)
but that having desired to speak with one of the Nuns, he was told, that he
could not see her till the King was gone. He added, that this was one of the
handsomest Women in the World, and has been the cause of a great unhappiness
in the Family of Monsieur De Land. I remember to have seen her as I have gone
by, and entreated him to tell me the matter. It is, says he, too long and
melancholy a Mischance to relate presently; but if you will see the young Nun I
speak of, I am persuaded she will not be unpleasant to you. I willingly accepted
his Offer, because I have so often been told, that they have so much more wit
in Monasteries, then elsewhere in the world. We went into a Parlour, which had
three such terrible Iron-doors with spikes, as made me wonder. How is this,
said I? It has been told me, that the Nuns in this Country are very amorous,
but I cannot be persuaded, that Love is bold enough to venture over these long
Spikes, and through these little holes, where one must undoubtedly perish. You
are deceived, Madam, cried Juncas, at the Appearances of things; if the Lady
which is coming, can spare me so much time, I Will presently tell you, what I
learnt of a friend of mine a Spaniard, the first Journey I made hither. But at
the very instant, Donna Isidora came into the Parlour. I found her much
handsomer, than I had fancied her in my own Mind to be. Monsieur De Juncas told
her, that I was a French Lady which had a great mind to be acquainted with her,
upon his report of her Merits. She thankt me in a very modest manner, and
afterward told us, that it was very true, that the Wretch after whom Enquiry
was made, had been lately at Madrid; but that she was certain he was not now
there, and that he had even had the Impudence to write to her by the hands of a
Man where he lodged; that the Letter was brought to her after his Departure,
and that she would not receive it. It seems to me, said I, interrupting of her,
that he could not be taken, supposing he were yet here. Sometimes, says Donna
Isidora, Permission is obtained from the King. There are certain Crimes for
which there is no Sanctuary, and that is one of them. She fell a weeping,
notwithstanding all her endeavors to hinder her tears, and added, that thanks
be to Heaven, she could not reproach her self with any thing in the late
Business, but yet she could not forbear grieving extremely that she had been
the cause of it. We talked together a good while longer, and I was as much
charmed with her Wit as with her Beauty. Afterward I withdrew. I am absolutely
yours, most dear Cousin, be thoroughly persuaded of it

From Madrid this 29 of May, 1679.
LETTER XI.
ONE must love you as mightily as I do Dear Cousin to resolve to write to you
in a Season when the Weather is so excessive hot: Whatever has been told me,
and whatever I could imagine of it, is nothing in comparison to what I now
feel. To defend my self from the heat, I leave open all my Windows all night
long, without fearing the Gallick Winds which criple a body. I sleep bare-head,
I put my Hands and Feet in Snow, enough to kill one; but I think it is much at
one to dye, as to be smothered with heat, as they are here. It Is Midnight
before one feels the least breath of Air from the Western Briezes.

In going to take the Air, one is sufficiently puzzled; for if the Glasses are
open, one's chok'd with the Dust, of which the Streets are so full that one can
hardly see, and although the Windows of the Houses are shut, the Dust finds a
way through and spoils all Household Goods; so that what with the ugly smells in
the Winter, and the dust in the Summer, all things of Silver, and every thing
else is so tarnish'd and spoiled, that little can be kept handsome any
considerable time: Notwithstanding all care at present, ones face will be
covered with sweat and dust, like those Wrestlers which are represented to us
in a Ring.

I should now tell you that I have seen the Ceremony on Corpus Christi-day,
which is very solemnly kept here: There Is a general Procession of all the
Parishes and Monasteries, which are very numerous; the Streets through which the
Holy Sacrament is to pass, are hung with the richest Tapistry in the World; for
I do not only speak of that which belongs to the Crown which is there, but also
of that which belongs to a thousand particular Persons which have most
admirable Tapistry. All the Balconies are then without their Lattices adorned
with Carpets, rich Cushions, and Canopies: they hang Ticking cross the Streets
to hinder the Sun from being troublesome, and they throw water upon it, to make
the Air cooler: All the Streets are spread with Sand, well watered, and filled
with so great a quantity of Flowers, that one can hardly tread upon any thing
else. The Repositories are extraordinary large, and adorned with the greatest
splendour.

No Women go in the Procession: the King was there in a black Lute-string
Taffety Suit, a Sholder-belt of blue Silk edged with white; his Sleeves were of
white Taffety, embroidered with Silk and Bugles; they were very long and open
before: he had little Sleeves hanging down to his Waste, his Cloak was wrapped
about his Arm, and he had on his Collar of Gold and precious Stones, at which
there hung a little sheep in Diamonds: He had also Diamond Buckles at his
Shoes and Garters, and a great Hat-band of the same, which shined like the
Sun; he had likewise a knot which buttoned up his Hatt, and at the bottom of
that a Pearl which they call the Pereagrine, it is as big as the Russet Pear,
and of the same shape; it is pretended to be the finest in Europe, and that
both its color and kind is in perfection. The whole Court without exception,
followed the Holy Sacrament, the Councils walked after it without any Order or
Precedence, as they happened to be, holding white Wax Candles in their hands;
the King had one, and went foremost, next the Tabernacle where the Sacrament
was. It is certainly one of the finest Ceremonies that can be seen. I observed
that all the Gentlemen of the Bedchamber had a great gold Key by their sides,
it opens the King's Chamber, into which they can go when they will; it is as
big as a Cellar-door Key: I there saw several Knights of Malta, who wore every
one a Cross of Malta, made of Holland, and embroidered upon their Cloaks; it
was near two a Clock, and the Procession was not yet gone in; when it past by
the Palace, they fired several Rockets, and other Inventions.

The King went to meet the Procession at St. Mary's, which is a Church near the
Palace. Upon this day all the Ladies begin to wear their Summer Garments, they
make their Balconies very fine, in which they have either several Baskets of
Flowers, or Bottles filled with sweet Water, which they throw about whilst the
Procession passes by; Commonly the three Companies which guard the King, are
new clothed. As soon as the Holy Sacrament is gone back to the Church, every
body goes home to eat, that they may be at the Autos, which are certain kinds
of Tragedies, upon Religious Subjects, and are odly enough contrived and
managed: They are acted either in the Court or Street of each President of a
Council, to whom it is due. The King goes thither, and all the Persons of
Quality receive Tickets over Night to go there; so that we were invited, and I
was amazed to see them light up abundance of Flamboys, whilst the Sun beat full
upon the Comedians Heads, and melted the Wax like Butter; they acted the most
impertinent piece that ever I saw in my days. This is the Subject of it:

The Knights of St. James are assembled, and our Lord comes and desires them to
receive him into their Order; there are diverse of them that are very willing to
it, but the Seniors represent to the others, the wrong they should do
themselves, if they should admit into their Society, a Person of ignoble Birth,
that St. Joseph his Father was a poor Carpenter, and that the Holy Virgin
wrought at her Needle: Our Lord with great impatience expects their Resolution,
at last they determine with some unwillingness, to refuse him; but at the same
time propose an expedient, which is, to institute on purpose for him, The Order
de Christo, and with this every body is satisfied. This is the Order that is in
Portugal, but yet these things are not done with a wicked design; no, they had
rather dye than in the least to fail of the respect due to Religion. These
Autos last for a Month; I am so weary of going to them, that I excuse my self
as often as I can: They use Sweetmeats and Water cooled in Ice very much, and
they have need of them, for the heat almost kill's one, and the dust choaks a
body: I was ravished with Joy to meet Don Augustine Pacheco, and his Wife (of
whom I have formerly told you) at the President d' Hazienda's House; they come
thither, because they are related to the President: We were placed near one
another, and when the Ceremony was over, we went to take the Air in the Prado,
after the French Mode, that is Men and Women together in the same Coach. Don
Frederick de Cardona was one; our Curtains were close drawn whilst there was a
great many folks, because of our beautiful and young Spanish Women; but as we
tarried later than others, the Nuncio, and Frederick Cornaro the Venetian
Ambassador, caused their Coaches to drive up to ours, and talked with us; when
all on a sudden we saw a great Illumination all along the Walk, and at the same
time appeared sixty Cardinals upon Mules, in their Habits and red Caps; after
them followed the Pope, he was carried upon a certain Machine all covered with
a foot Carpet; he sat under a Canopy in a great Chair, and St. Peter's Keys
laid upon a Cushion, with a Vessel full of holy Water of Orange-flowers, with
which he sprinkled every body. The show marched on gravely; and when they were
come to the end of the Prado, the Cardinals began to play a thousand cunning
tricks to make his Holiness merry; some threw their Hats upon the Trees, and
standing directly under, they fell upon their Heads again; and others stood
upright upon the Saddles on their Mules, and made 'em run as fast as they
could. There was a vast number of People followed them; we asked the Pope's
Nuncio what this meant, and he assured us he understood nothing of it; and that
he did not like this sort of Mirth. He sent to enquire from whence the Holy
College came in that manner; and we understood it was the Bakers Holy Day, and
that every year they used to make this fine show. The Nuncio had a great mind
to have disturbed them with a Volly of Cudgels, and had already commanded his
Attendants to begin the Fray; but we interceded in the behalf of these poor
People, who had no other intention than to celebrate the Festival of their
Saint. In the mean time, some that had overheard the Orders which were given,
and were Disturbers of the public Peace, gave Information thereof to the Pope
and Cardinals; this was enough to put all in confusion, every one escaped as
well as he could, and their fear made our Pleasure short lived. In France such
Mascarades would not be suffered, but perhaps there are many things innocent in
one Country, which would not be so in another.

My Kinswoman knowing how very civily I had been received by Don Augustine
Pacheco, invited him to Supper at her House; I desired him to remember his
promise of giving me a Relation of what he knew of the Indies, immediately I Will
tell you, says he, concerning those they call the West Indies, in which a part
of America is comprised.

In the Reign of Ferdinand King of Castile and Arrogon, Christopher Columbus a
Genoway, discovered this part of the World in the Year 1492. As the Spaniards
were the first that found this fortunate Country, unknown to the Europeans, so
King Ferdinand and Queen Isabel, had the Propriety of it by a Bull from Pope
Alexander VI. He established them and their Successors, perpetual Vicars of the
Holy See, over this vast Country; so that the Kings of Spain are both Spiritual
and Temporal Lords, and nominate Bishops and other Ecclesiastics, and receive
Tenths from them. Their power there, is of a larger extent than in Spain, for
you must know that America alone is one of the four Parts of the World, and
that we possess more Land there, than all other Nations together besides. The
Council of the Indies which is established at Madrid, is one of the most
considerable of the Kingdom, and there being so great a necessity of holding a
very frequent Correspondence between Spain and the Indies, to send Orders to
maintain the Court Authority, they were obliged to establish beside, a
particular Chamber, which is composed of the eldest Counselors of the Council
of the Indies, and they are to take Cognizance of all things concerning the
Revenues, and cause Expeditions by the Secretaries of the Council.

Besides this Chamber at Madrid, there is another at Siville, called the House
of Contrataction, it is composed of several Counselors both of the Robe and
the Sword, with other necessary Officers. Those of the Sword, take Cognizance
of things which concern the Fleet and the Galeons. The other Counselors take
Care of matters of Justice. Appeals from this Tribunal are made to the Council
of the Indies at Madrid. There are Registers kept in the House of Contrataction
at Sevile, in which are writ all the Merchandises that are sent to the Indies,
and all that come from thence, that so the King may not be cheated of his
Customs; but this signifies little, the Merchants are so cunning, and those who
keep the Accounts are so easily drawn to share with them, that the King is not
a whit the better for them, and the Duty to him, which is only the fifth Part,
is so ill paid, that he does not receive the fourth Part of what is due to him.

It is the Council of Madrid which proposes Subjects to the King to fill up the
vacant Vice-Royalties of New-Spain and Peru, they are granted for five Years,
and so are all other Places, of which the most considerable, are these
following, viz. The Governor and Captain General, and President of the Royal
Chancellary of St. Domingo in the Spanish Islands, the Governor and Captain
General of the City of St. Christopher of the Havana, the Governor and Captain
of War, of the City of St. James of Cuba, the Governor and Captain General of
the City of St. John of Puerto Rigo, the Governor and Captain General of the
City of St. Augustine, in the Province of Florida, the Governor of the City of
Ascension of the Island of Marguretta, the Governor and Captain General of the
City of Cumana, Capital of New-Andalousia, the Viceroy, Governor and Captain
General of New Spain, A President of the Royal Audience, who resides in the
City of Mexico, the Governor and Captain General of the City of Merida,
Capital of the Province of Yucatan, the President and Governor of the Royal
Audience and Chancellery, which resides in the City of Gaudalaxara, captital of
the Kingdom of Galatia; the Governor and Captain General of the City of
Guadiana, capital of the Kingdom of New Biscay; the Governor Captain General
and President of the Chancellery which resides in the City of Santiago, of the
Province of Guatemela; the Goverour of the Province of Locnusco in the Strait
of Guatemala; the Governor and Captain General of the City of Cornagua, of the
Province of Honduras,; the Governor of the City of St. James of Lion, capital
of the Province of Nicaragua; the Governor and Captain General of the City of
Cartagena capital of the Province of Costa Riga; the Governor, Captain General
and President of the Royal Chancellery, which resides in the City of Manila, in
the Phillipine Islands; the Governor and Lieutenants of the Forttesses De
Ternate, and Governor and General of the Militia of the same Country; the
Vice Roy, Governor, Captain General and President of the Audit of the City of
Lima, More, eight Counselors, four Alcades, two Accusators, a Protector of the
Indies, four Reporters, three Porters and a Chaplin in the same City. A
Governor of Chucuito, one of Zico, one of Ica, one of Delos Collagos, one of
Guamanga, one of Santigo de Misaflores de Zara, one of St. Marco, one of
Arequipo, one of Truxillo; a Vice Roy of Castra; a Vice Roy of Michel y puerto
de Blata; a Master of the Camp of the Strait of Puerto del Callao; the
President De la Plata has under him six Counselors, an Accusator, two
Reporters and two Porters; the Governor of the Province of Tucumanan; the
Governor of the Province of St Croix; the Governor and Captain General of the
Province of De la Plata; the Governor of the Province of Paraguay; the
Governor of the Citadel of the Imperial City De la Plata de Potosy; the
Governor of St. Philip of Autrich, and of the Gold Mines; the Governor of the
City of Paix; the chief Governor of the Mines of Potosy, the Governor,
Captain General and President of the City of St. Foy; the Governor and Captain
General of the Province of Castenaga; has under him a Lieutenant, a Captain and
a Marechal de Camp; the Governor and Lieutenant of the Castle St. Matthias;
the Governor and Captain General of the Province of St. Martha; the Governor
of the Citadel of St. Martha; the Governor of the Province Aentoja; the
Governor of the Province of Popayan; the Governor De los Musos y Colinos; the
Governor of the Province of Merida; the Governor of the City of Tunja; the
Governor of the City of Tona Emalbague, and the People of the burning Land;
the Governor of Quixos Zomoco Ecanela; the Governor of the City of Jane; the
Governor of the City of Santigo de Quagaquil; the Governor of the City of
Loja Zonnora, and of the Mines of Comura; the President, Governor and Captain
General of the City of Ponama; the Governor of Veragua, has under him a
Captain General, a Lieutenant General, a Captain of the Companies of the
Infantry, and a Captain of the Artillery, the Governor and Captain of the
Castle of St. Philips, in the City of Puerto velo; the chief Governor of
Puerto velo, and the Governor and Captain General of the Province of St.
Martha of the River of Hacha, and the Governor of the great Caxamarca.

I do not hear mention the Places of Judicature, nor the Benefices, which are
very numerous; But it must be observed, that all the Employments I have spoken
of, are given either from three to three Years, or from five to five Years,
that so one Man alone may not grow rich, whilst there are so many others that
stand in need to partake of the King's Kindness.

In those Places where there is no Vice Roy, he that is President, is also
Governor, and when a Vice Roy dies, the President of the Vice Royalty for the
time being, takes the Government upon him, till another Vice Roy is sent from
Spain. It is his Catholic Majesty which gives those great Posts and the most
considerable Governments. The Vice Roys fill up the lesser, and these Vice Roys
make a shift very easily in five Years time to bring home two Millions of
Crowns all charges paid, the Governors of the Principal Places, get in the
same Compass of time about five or six hundred thousand Crowns; none goes
thither, but what grows rich, and this is so certain, that even the Friars
which are sent thither to preach the Faith, and convert the Indians, make such
a profitable Mission, that they bring home every one of them, thirty or forty
thousand Crowns. The King disposes of diverse Pensions paid by the Villages of
the Indies. And from these they draw from two to six thousand Crowns per Annum.
And this is another way the King has to gratify his Subjects.

The Philippine Islands which lie near the Kingdom of China, depend upon the
King of Spain, the Trade there is in Silk: these Places cost him more to keep,
then they bring him in.

The Castillians had their Reasons why they would not let any sort of
Manufactures be set up in the Indies, nor any Stuffs made there, nor any of
those things else, which are indispensibly necessary. This Policy cause every
thing to go from Europe, and make the Indians, who passionately love all the
Commodities and Ornaments which come from thence freely to sacrifice their
Silver to their Satisfaction: by this means, they are put out of a Capacity to
grow rich, because they are forced at very dear rates to buy the least Trifle
they want, and with which they amuse them.

The Flota consists of diverse Vessels laden with rich Merchandises which are
sent to the Indies, and there are other great Ships of War which are called
Galleons, which the King sends to convoy them. These Men of War ought not to
carry any Merchants Goods, but the Lucre of Gain tempts them against the
express Prohibition of the King, and sometimes they are so full laden, that if
they should happen to be attacked, they could not defend themselves. When these
Vessels are ready to sail, the Dispatch which the Merchants obtain from the
Council of the Indies at Madrid for leave to send them, cost for each of them,
from three to six thousand Crowns, according to the bigness of the Vessel. It
is easy to imagine, that since they give so much, they are sure of gaining a
great deal more.

The Galleons go no further then Porto Velo, whither they bring all the Silver
of Peru, the Flota leaves them at this Place, and continue their Voyage to New
Spain. The Galleons sail from Sanlucar to Cartagene in six Weeks or two Months
at most, they tarry there a little while, and in five or six Days they come
back to Portovelo; it is a Town situated on the Coast of America, the Air
there is very unwholsom, and the Weather excessive hot. On the other side of
the Isthmus some ten Leagues distance only, is the City of Panama, whether is
brought from Peru a vast Quantity of Silver in Bars or Wedges, and diverse
Merchandises which are conveyed by Land-carriage to Porto velo, where the
Galleons are, and where there is kept one of the greatest Fairs in the World,
for in less then forty or fifty Days there is sold of all sorts of European
Goods to the value at least of twenty Millions of Crowns ready Money. After the
Fair is done, the Galleons return to Cartagena, at which place there is a
considerable Trade for Indian Goods, and those of the Kingdom of St. Foy, as
well as for those, from Morigenta: After this, they go to the Havana to take in
necessary Provisions for this Voyage, and from thence they are commonly two
Months in Sailing to Cadiz; But as to the Flotta, it stops at Porto Rico to
refresh, and arrives at Vera Crux in five Weeks, there they unload their
Merchandises, which is afterward carried by Land fourscore Leagues beyond to
the great City of Mexico, the Sale of them is quickly over, and the Flota parts
afterward to go to the Havana; but this must be past only in the Month of
April or September, because of the North Winds. The Galleons are commonly Nine
Months in their Voyage to Peru, and the Flota is thirteen or fourteen Months,
some particular Persons go thither also at their own Charge, after they have
obtained Leave from the King and have Registered themselves at the
Contrataction at Sevile, these go to the Coasts of St. Domingo, Honduras,
Caracas, and Buenos Airs.

The Money which comes directly from the King from the Indies, must be brought
in one Galleon, this Silver is delivered to one of the Masters of the Mint, who
pays to the King every Voyage he makes, six thousand Crowns, and he keeps one
per Cent. Of all the Silver that goes through his Hands, which arises high. As
to the Silver which belongs to particular Persons, that is brought in what
Vessels they will choose; and it is the Captain that is responsible for it.

There Is a certain Duty which is Called Avarie, and it is taken for all Goods
Registered, and for all the Silver which is brought from the Indies. This Duty
is so considerable, that it suffices to fit out the Galleons and the Flota for
their Voyage, although the Charge amounts to nine Millions of Crowns; but that
of the Flota is not so great.

He that the King chooses to be General of the Galleons, advances to him,
fourscore or a hundred thousand Crowns which is repaid him in the Indies with
great Interest. Every other Captain does also advance Money to the King
proportionable to the bigness of the Vessel they command. There goes moreover
with the Galleons a Patacha, which leaves them in the Gulf Delas Yequas, she
goes to the Isles of Margueritta to fish for Pearls, of which they pay to the
King a fifth part, that is of all the Pearl they take, and afterward she comes
to Cartegena.

Within these few Years, there is discovered Seventy Leagues from Lima, some
Mines which yield a vast Revenue, those of Peru, and all the others in the West
Indies pay the King the fifth part, as well of the Gold, as the Silver and
Emeraulds. There is at Potosi greater plenty of Mines than any where else, the
Silver they get there is brought to Port D' Ariga, and from thence, it is sent
to Callao. It is one of the Ports of Lima, whether the Galleons come to fetch
it. The Kingdom of Peru yields every Year in Gold and Silver to the Value of
eleven Millions of Crowns. From New Spain is brought five Millions of Crowns,
besides Marchandizes, which are commonly, Emeraulds, Gold, Silver, Cochenil,
Tobacco, Wool of Vigogne, Campecha Wood and Hydes.

It was a long while before they would suffer in New Spain any Workmen that
wrought in Silk or Wool; there are some now, and this may do some hurt to the
Trade of Stuffs which are sent from Europe, they are not allowed to plant there
any Olive Trees or Vines, that so the Oil and Wine which is carried thither may
sell the better. The King has the Power in the Indies as well as Spain, to sell
the Bull of the Crusada, which is a License to eat Flesh every Saturday, and to
enjoy the Benefit of Indulgences.

The Indian Idolaters are not subject to the Inquisition in the Indies; that it
is established only against Heretics and Jews. No Strangers are suffered to go
to the Indies, but if at any time some happen to go, there must be a special
Permission obtained which is very rarely granted.

How is it possible for me, continued Don Augustine, to express to you the
Beautifulness of the City of Mexico, the Churches, the Palaces, the Public
Places, the Riches, the Profusion, the Magnificence and the Pleasures, a City
that is so happily situated, that in all Seasons it enjoys a continual Spring,
and where the Heats are not at all excessive, where they feel not the Severity
of Winter. the Country is no less charming, the Flowers and the Fruits at all
times equally loading the Trees. There you gather more than one Crop in a Year;
the Lakes and Ponds are full of Fish, the Grounds are well stockt with Cattle,
the Forests and Woods afford excellent Fowl and wild Beasts, the Earth seems to
open her Bowels on purpose to give up the Gold she encloses, there are Mines or
Rocks of precious Stones discovered, and Pearl are there taken. Oh! said I, let
us all go dwell in that Country. This Description Charms, but as it is a long
Voyage, it may be convenient, if you please, Madam, said I, to Donna Tereza in
smiling, to get our Supper before we go; I immediately took her by the hand,
and we came into a Parlour, where I had provided the best Musicians, which are
bad enough, and which in my Opinion, have nothing to recommend them but their
dearness. My Cook made us some Ragous afte the French way, which Donna Theresa
found so excellent, that she desired I would let her have the Receipt how to do
them. Don Augustine entreated me also, to let him have some of my Larding-Pins,
of which really one may look all over Spain, and not find so much as one. We
tarried very late together, for in this Season they set up till four or five a
Clock in the Morning because of the heats, and that the best time is in the
Night.

There are certain days in the year, that every body goes out to take the Air
upon the Bridges which cross the River Mansanarez; but at present all Coaches
are laid up, the Gravel and some little Brooks help to make it very cool and
pleasant. The Horses endure a great deal in these Walks, for nothing can be
more prejudicial to their Feet than the Flints upon which they continually
tread. In certain places of this River they make a stand, and there remain till
two or three a Clock in the Morning; there is very often a thousand Coaches:
Some particular People bring Victuals to eat there, and others sing and play
upon several Instruments; all this is very pleasant in a fine Night: There are
some Persons which wash or bath themselves, but indeed it is after an ugly
manner. The Danish Ambassador's Lady did it lately; her People go a little
before her, and dig a great hole in the Gravel, which presently fills it self
with Water, into which the Lady comes and thrusts her self; you may imagine how
pleasant such a Bath is, and yet this is the only way that can be made use of
in this River.

You will not be sorry, perhaps, to know, that in making out ones Nobility
here, it must be proved, that one is descended both by Father and Mother from
Vijos Christianos, that is, from Ancient Christians. The blemish which they
ought to fear is, their being allayed to any Jewish or Moorish Family.

As the People of Biscay and Navarre were defended from the Invasion of the
Barbarians by the height and Ruggedness of their Mountains, so they esteem
themselves all Cavalleros, even to the meanest Water-bearer; for in Spain, the
Children sometimes take their Mothers Name, if she is of a better Family than
the Father. It is certain, that there are few Families entire, and whose Name
and Nobility has not been carried by an only Daughter and mixed with another
Family: That of Velasco is not of this number, for they reckon up ten
Connestables of Castilo successively from Father to Son. Here Is one thing very
singular, and that which is not allowed of in any other Country; and that is,
That Foundlings, or Children found by chance are reckoned Noble, and bear the
Title of Hidalgos, and enjoy all the Privileges annexed to the Nobility; but to
this end, they must prove, that they were Foundlings, and were maintained and
bred in the Hospital where such Children are kept.

There are in Spain some great Families which hold almost all their Estates by
the Title of Mayorargo; and when it happens that all of the Name are dead, and
that the next akin is a Male, though he be a natural Son, yet he shall Inherit;
and for want of such, the eldest Domestic shall take the Name and the Arms of
his Master, and inherit his Estate: And this is one reason why the younger
Brothers of other Houses, as Noble and Illustrious, do not scorn to be Servants
to these, and their hopes are pretty well grounded; for it often happens that
Families are extinct, because the Spanish Women have fewer Children than the
Women of other Countries.

There lately happened a very great misfortune to a young Woman of Quality
called Donna Clora; she could not preserve her Heart against the Charms of
Count de Castrillo, a Man of the Court, very witty and handsome; the Cavallero
had the secret to please her without designing it; he was ignorant of the
Inclinations she had for him, and so did not improve his Happiness. And
although the Father of this amiable Creature was absent, yet she did not enjoy
the more Liberty, because her Brother, whose Name was Don Henriques, to whose
care her Father had recommended her, continually watched over her Actions and
Behavior; she durst not speak to him she loved, and this was a double
Martyrdom, not to be able to make her Complaints, and to divide her Grief with
him that caused it: But at last she resolved to write to him, and to find out
some way that the Letter should come to his hands; but as this was a business
of the highest consequence to her, so she was at a stand about the choice of a
Confident; and here she stopped for some time, till at last she bethought her
self of a Friend of hers, who had always testified abundance of kindness for
her, and so without further consideration, she writ a very moving Letter to the
Count de Castrillo, and was going to her Friend to entreat him to get it
delivered to this Cavallero, when she saw him pass close by her Chair; this
sight of him increased her desires to let him know her mind, and immediately
taking this opportunity for her self, threw the Letter she had in her hand to
him, at the same time feigning, that this was a Letter which he had given to
her as he went by; Know my Lord, says he, aloud with an angry look, That it is
not to me you ought to address your self upon such a design as yours. Here,
take the Letter, which I will not so much as open. The Count had too much Wit
not to apprehend presently the favorable intention of this fair one. You need
not complain, Madam, says he to her, that I have not made use of your Advice;
he quickly withdrew to read a Letter which must needs give him abundance of
Pleasure: by this means he was informed of Donna Clora's Intentions, and what
he must do to see her. He omitted nothing, he became desparately in Love, and
thought himself, as he had reason, one of the happiest Cavalleros of Spain.
They impatiently expected the return of her Father, that they might propose the
Marriage to him, which in all likelihood must have been very acceptable to him.

But notwithstanding all the Precautions that these young Lovers took both
certainly to fix and continue a Conversation, which was the Joy of their Life;
yet the suspicious and watchful Henriques discovered their Intreague. He
believed her Criminal, and in the excess of his Rage, without signifying or
making the least show, he one Night went into the Chamber of the unfortunate
Dona Clora, and as she was in a deep sleep, he strangled her in the most
barbarous manner imaginable.

Nevertheless, though it was known, that he was the Author of so wicked an
Action, yet he was not prosecuted, for he had too much Credit and Interest; and
besides, this poor Gentlewoman had no kindred but what was his, and they were
unwilling to increase the Misfortunes of their Family, which were already but
too great.

After this wicked Fact, Henriques feigned a great fit of Devotion; he appeared
no more in Public, and had Mass said at his House, and saw very few People;
for he was very apprehensive that Count Castrillo (who had not dissembled his
Grief, but had let it visibly appear) would at last be revenged for his
Mistress, for indeed he most carefully sought all Opportunities. At length,
after having attempted all imaginable ways, he found out one which succeeded.

He disguised himself like an Aguador, that is, a Water-Bearer, these sort of
People load an Ass with several great Pitchers, and so carry them about the
City; they wear thick coarse Cloth, their Legs are naked, and their Shoes are
either cut or slasht, or else they have Soals made fast with Strings. Our Lover
thus disguised waited all day long leaning upon the side of a Springwell, whose
waters he increased by his Tears; for this Well was just against the House
where he had so often seen his dear and fair Clara, and there it was also,
where the inhumane Henriques dwelt. As the Count kept his Eyes continually upon
this House, he perceived one of the Casements half open, and at the same time
his Enemy to draw near it, he had a Looking-Glass in his Hand, in which he was
looking himself. Immediately the cunning Aquator threw some Cherry-stones at
him, in a jesting way, and some of them having hit his Face, Don Henriques
affronted at the Insolence of a Man, which appeared to him to be only a poor
Aguador, and transported with the first motions of his Anger, came down alone
to chastize him: But he was hardly in the Street, when the Count discovered
himself, and drawing his Sword, which for his purpose he kept hid, cried out,
Traitor that thou art, think of defending thy Life. The surprise and the fright
had so amazed Don Henriques, that he was only able to ask quarter; but he could
not obtain it from this enraged Lover, who came to revenge the Death of his
Mistress upon him that had so cruelly murdered her. This Count would have found
it very hard to have escaped, upon his doing such an Action just at the door of
a Man of note, and that had abundance of Servants; but in that very moment that
all Don Henriques People were sallying out upon the Count, happily for him, the
Duke Duzeda came by with three of his Friends, they immediately came out of
their Coach, and rescued him so seasonably, that he made his Escape, and we do
not yet hear where he is; I am concerned for him, because I know him, and that
he is a very honest Man.

It is very common in this Country, to assassinate one for several Causes, and
Custom even authorizes the Fact, for every angry Difference; for example, If
one give an other a Box of the Ear, or strikes him on the Face with his Hat, his
Handkerchief, or his Glove, or has wronged him, in calling him Drunkard, or
lets drop any words that reflect on the Virtue of his Wife, these things I say
must be no otherwise revenged than by Assassination; but they give this Reason,
that after such Affronts, it would not be just for a Man to venture his Life in
single Combat upon equal terms, where the Offended might perish by the hand of
the Aggressor. They Will keep a Revenge twenty Years together if they cannot
sooner meet with a fit Occasion to execute it: and if they happen to die before
they have got Satisfaction, they leave their Children Inheritors of their
Resentments as well as of their Estates, and the best way for a Man that has
given any Affront to another, is for ever to forsake his Country. I was lately
told of a considerable Man, that after he had lived twenty Years in the Indies,
to avoid an ill turn from another to whom he had given some Offense, and having
understood that not only he but his Son was dead, believed himself secure. He
returns to Madrid, after he had taken care to change his Name that he might not
be known; but all this was not able to save him, for the Grandson of him that
thought himself abused, though he was but twelve Years old, caused this Person
to be murdered quickly after his return.

The Men that committed these horrid Actions are commonly hired from Valentia;
It is a City in Spain, whose People are wicked to excess; there is not any Crime
which they will not deliberately commit for Money; they wear Stillettos, and
Fire Arms which go off without any noise. There are two sorts of these
Stillettos, one about the length of a short Poniard, but not thicker than a
thick needle, and made of excellent Steel, square and sharp edged. This
Instrument wounds mortally for entering very deep, and making no bigger an
Orifice than an needle; no Blood comes out, nay hardly can one perceive the
place where it entered, and so being impossible to dress it, they almost
constantly die. The other sort is longer, and no thicker than the little
finger, but so hard and strong that I have seen one of them at one blow struck
throw a thick Walnut-Tree Table. These sort of Arms are forbidden to be carried
in Spain, as Bayonnets are in France; neither is it lawful to carry those
Pocket-Pistols which fire without noise; but yet notwithstanding the
Prohibition, several Persons make use of them.

I have been told, that a Person of Quality thinking he had a just cause to
destroy one of his Enemies, went to a Bandolero of Valentia, and gave him a Sum
of Money to murder him, but afterward he was reconciled to his Enemy; and
being willing to use a good Conscience, he made it his first business to
acquaint the Bandolero with what had past, that so he might have a care not to
kill this Man. The Bandolero seeing his Service needless, offered to return the
Money, but he that gave it, entreated him to keep it; Well, says he, I am a Man
of Honor, I shall keep your Money, and I will kill your Man. The other
earnestly begged him to do nothing, seeing they were now friends. Look you,
says he to him, all that I can do, is to give you your choice, whether it shall
be you or him, for to gain your Money honestly, there is a necessity I must kill
one of you. And notwithstanding all the Entreaties of this Person, he persisted
in his design, and executed it. It had been an easy matter to have seized him,
but there was too much danger in it; for those Bandoleros are so numerous and
united, that if any one of them should be executed, the Death of him is
certainly and quickly revenged. These Wretches are never without a List of
their wicked Actions they have committed, and count it an honor to them; and
when any one would set them on work, they show that, and ask, whether they
desire them quickly dispatched, or to give them a languishing Wound. These are
the most pernicious People in the Universe. Indeed if I should tell you all the
Tragical Stories which I hear every day, you would grant that this Country is
the very Theater of the most horrid Scenes in the World. Love frequently
furnishes the matter, either for its Satisfaction or Revenge. There is nothing
that a Spaniard will not undertake, nor nothing that is above either his
Courage or Compassion.

It Is said, that Jealousy is their prevailing Passion, yet they do not pretend
it so much out of Love, as Resentment and Pride; for they cannot bear to see
another preferred before them, and every thing which contributes to affront
them, makes them desparate; let these things be how they will, one thing is
certainly true, that it is a most furious and barbarous Nation in this Affair.
The Women keep not company with Men; but yet they very well understand how to
write and appoint Meetings when they have a mind; notwithstanding the danger is
great both for themselves, the Lover and the Messenger; but in spite of all
that, by their Wit and their Money, they make a shift to deceive the most
cunning Argus.

It is unaccountable that Men who put every thing in practice to satisfy their
Revengeful Minds, and who are guilty of such abominable Actions, should even be
scrupulously Religious, at the same time they are going to stab their Enemy.
And that they may not fail in their Enterprise, they must forsooth, perform
their nine days task of Devotion for the Souls in Purgatory, and recommend
themselves to the Relics they carry about them, which they often kiss. I would
not be thought to fix this Character upon the whole Nation; it may be affirmed
that there is as good People as in any part of the World, and that they are
endowed with a mighty Greatness of Mind. I Will give you some Instances of this
last, which perhaps though you will look upon as Follies, for every thing has two
handles.

The Connestable de Castille is for certain, one of the richest Lords of the
Court in Lands; but as he has the same fault as others like him self, which is
to be careless in looking after his Interest, so he is ill furnished with
Money. The Pensions which the King allows him, as he is Doyen or Chief of the
Council of State, Connestable of Castille, and Grand Falconer, are so
considerable, as to supply all his wants, but he is so haughty, that he will
not receive any thing upon that Account. He gives these Reasons, That when a
Subject has Estate enough to live upon, he ought not to be chargeable to his
Prince, but ought to serve him, and esteem himself happy; that to be paid for
what he does is mercenary and slavish.

The Duke d'Arcas, alias d'Avero, has likewise another obstinate humor; he
pretends that the King of Portugal has usurped the Crown from his Family, and
therefore when he speaks of him, he never calls him any thing, but Duke de
Bragance; in the mean while, this Man has forty thousand Crowns a year in
Portugal, of which he does not enjoy a farthing, because he will not submit to
kiss the King's hand, nor to do him homage.

The King of Portugal has sent him word, that he will dispense with his coming
himself, provided he will send in his stead one of his Sons, either the eldest
or the youngest, which he will, and that he will then let him receive his
Rents; and moreover, will pay him all the Arrears, which amount to an immense
Sum. The Duke d'Avero will not so much as hear it mentioned: He says, that
seeing he has lost the Crown, it would be a shame for forty thousand Crowns a
year, to submit to the Usurper; that the greater evil takes away the sense of
the lesser; that the Glory the King would receive from his Homage, would exceed
the profit he gets from his Revenue; and that he would have cause to reproach
him, for having done an honor to him which was not his due.

The last I reserve for you, is the Prince Destillano; he has Places and
Commissions to dispose of at the Contratraction in Sevile, to the value of
fourscore thousand Livres a year. He had rather lose them, than so much as set
his hand to the necessary dispatches, saying, It is not agreeble to the
Generosity of such a Cavallero as he is, to trouble himself to sign his Name
for so small a matter; for you must know, that these fourscore thousand Livers
are not in one Article, it may be there is above thirty; and when his Secretary
presents to him a dispatch or grant of a Place, worth four or five thousand
Livres, he will refuse to sign it, and alleges his Quality, always saying,
Esto es una Mineria, that is, it is but a Trifle. The King however is not so
nice in the matter, for he fills up the Places for him, and receives the profit
to himself.

You Will say now, that the Spaniards are Fools with this their fantastic
Grandeur; and perhaps you are in the right, but for my part, and I think I know
'em pretty well, I am not of that Opinion; yet nevertheless I Will own, that
whatever difference can be found in comparing the Spaniards and the French, it
must be to our advantage; but it does not seem fit for me to meddle in
determining the matter, for my Interest is too much concerned to let me judge
impartially; but yet I am persuaded, that there are very few rational Persons,
who would not make the same Judgment.

There are fewer Strangers that come to Madrid, than to any City in the World,
and they have reason; for unless they have somebody to procure them Lodging in
some private House, they will run the hazard of being very ill lodged, and the
Spaniards are not very ready to offer their Houses to any body, because of
their Wives, of whom they are extreme jealous. I do not know, that in all this
City, there is any more than two Inns, whereof at one of them, they eat after
the French mode; and when these are full (which they are very quickly, being
very little) one knows not what to do; add to this, That there is no convenience
for passing too and fro in the Town, Hackney, or hyr'd Coaches are scarce
enough, but one may have as many Chairs as one will; yet it is seldom that Men
are carried in them, unless they be very old or infirm. But after all, why
should Strangers come to Madrid? That which is finest and the most amiable, is
always hid, I mean the Women, there is no conversing with them; those Women that
may be seen, are such dangerous Creatures for a Man's Health, that it must be a
great Curiosity indeed, that a Man can resolve to satisfy at so much risque;
yet in spite of all this, the only Pleasure, and the sole Enjoyment of the
Spaniards, is to contract some League; even Youths of Quality that are rich,
begin at the Age of twelve or thirteen years to entertain a Concubine-Mistress,
which they call Amancebade, for whom they neglect their Studies, and make away
with whatever they can catch up in their Father's House, but it is not long
before those Creatures give them cause to repent of their Folly.

But that which is terrible is, That there are few Persons in this Country,
either of one or the other Sex, and even of those whose Quality distinguishes
them, that are free from that cursed Disease; their Children either bring it
into the World with them from their Mother's Womb, or suck it from the Nurse; a
Virgin may justly be suspected to have it, and they are hardly persuaded to be
cured of it, they are so certain of falling again into the same Condition. But
doubtless this Disease is not so dangerous in Spain as in other Countries, for
they still preserve their Hair very fine, and their Teeth very good: At Court,
and amongst the Women of the highest Quality, they discourse of it as they do
of a Fever, or the Meagrim, and they all bear the Distemper patiently, without
so much as troubling themselves one minute about it. As they know not but that
the most virtuous Women, and the youngest Child may have it, so they never let
blood in the Arm, but always in the Foot; they will let a Child three Weeks old
blood in the Foot, and this is so constant a Custom amongst them, that unless
it be some very able Surgeon, they know not how to let blood in the Arm. I was
indisposed, and was forced to make use of the French Ambassador's valet de
Chamber, to let me blood in the Arm. By all that I have told you, it is easy
to judge, that this is the Nuptial present which a Spaniard makes to his Wife,
and that though they marry, they do not quit their Mistresses, be they never so
dangerous. Every time these Mistresses are let blood, their Gallants are
obliged to give them a complete new suit of Apparel; and yet you must observe
they wear ten or twelve Petticoats at a time; so that this causes no ordinary
Expense. The Marquess de Liche understanding that his Mistress was just let
blood, and so could not tarry till the Tailor made her a suit which he intended
for her, he sent her one that was just brought home for the Marchioness his
Lady, who is extreme beautiful. It is a common saying with him, That to be the
happiest Man, he would only wish a Mistress as handsome as his Wife.

The great Lords which return very rich from their Governments (whether for the
most part they go poor enough, and where they pillage and extort all they can,
because they are but for five years time) do not lay out their Money when they
come home, in the purchase of Lands; they keep it in their Chests, and as long
as it lasts, they live at a great rate, for they think it is below 'em to
improve their Money. Following this Method, it would be very hard for the
greatest Treasure not to be quickly exhausted; but the future disturbs them but
little, for every one of them hopes either for some Vice-Royalty, or some other
Post, which will effectually repair all their ill Husbandry, and restore them
to a good Condition: And it must be owned that the King of Spain is capable
both to satisfy the Ambition of his Subjects, and to reward their Services;
and indeed, many of his Subjects fill up the Places of diverse Sovereign
Princes, which were the most eminent Men of their Age.

The difference is very remarkable between those Sovereigns heretofore, and the
Spaniards at present; it is less as to their Birth, than as to their Merit; for
the Families of the great Lords are very Illustrious, there is many of them that
are descended from the Kings of Castille, Navarre, Arragon and Portugal; but
yet this does not hinder several of them (for I make an exception) from
contradicting the virtue of their Ancestors; but then let us see, how these are
educated: They do not study, neither have they any able Masters; as soon as
they are designed for the Sword, no further care is taken to teach them either
Latin or History; but one would think they should at least be taught what
belongs to their Art, such as the Mathematics, to fence, and ride the Horse;
but they do not so much as think of these Matters. Here are no Academies, nor
Masters to teach such things; the young Men pass that time which they should
employ for their Instruction, in a wretched Laziness, either in walking about,
or courting some Lady; and yet in spite of all this, they are persuaded, that
there are not any People in the World which deserve public Admiration more
than they do. They believe Madrid to be the very Center of all Glory and
Happiness, of all Arts and Sciences, and of all Delights and Pleasures; in
dying, they only wish their Children the enjoyment of Paradise, and afterward
that of Madrid; by this means you see they exalt this City above Paradise, with
so much satisfaction do they live in it. And it is this which hinders them from
visiting other Courts, and there acquiring that Politeness which they have not
amongst themselves, and to which they are perfect Strangers. And it is this also
which makes them so eager to return home to Madrid, let them be where they
will, whether they be sent by the King, or let them be there in what Rank or
Station they will; let them be never so much honored, and heap up never so
much Wealth, yet the love to their Country, and the Prepossession for that,
has such a power over them, as to make them renounce every thing; and they had
rather choose to lead a mean poor Life, (so it be not observed) without any
Train, Grandeur or Distinction, provided it be but at Madrid.

It is very seldom, that a Father lets his Son travel abroad, but keeps him at
home, and suffers him to take up what Customs he pleases; you may easily
believe, that generally these are none of the best; for there is a certain Age,
when Youth aims at nothing else, but to gratify their Appetite, and enjoy
Pleasures. One entices and draws another, and that which ought to be severely
reproved, is authorized by the Example of those, on whom they depend. Add to
this, That they make them marry, as one may say, as soon as they are out of the
Cradle. At the Age of sixteen or seventeen years they turn into the World a
young Man with a Wife that is but a Child, and this at once makes him less
capable to know his Duty, and puts him upon being more debauched, because he is
his own Master under no control: by this means, he passes his Life in a
Chimney-corner, like a Man in his decriped old Age; and because this gentle
Sluggard is of an Illustrious Family, he must be chosen to govern a People that
must suffer through his Ignorance; but that which is yet worse, is, That such a
Man taking himself for some great and knowing Person, acts only by his own
head, without consulting or advising with any body, and so does every thing
awkwardly and absurdly. The Wife, it may be, is not better stored with Wit and
Parts; her mighty greatness, with which she prides her self, is the only thing
that can make her be regarded; and thus Persons of the highest Capacity, must
be subject to two Animals, which are made their Superiors.

But on the other hand, let us be just, and render to Caesar his due. It must be
owned, that when Heaven has been so kind to a Spaniard, as to give him a good
Education, and let him travel and see the World, he makes a better improvement
than any body. Nature has been kinder to them than they are to themselves; they
are born with more Wit than others; they have a great quickness of Mind joined
with great Solidity; they speak and deliver their words with ease, they have a
great Memory; their Style is near and concise, and they are quick of
Apprehension. It is easy to teach them whatever they have a mind to; they are
perfect Masters in Politics, and when there is a Necessity for it, they are
temperate and laborious. Without question, several great Qualities may be found
amongst them, such as Generosity, Secrecy, Friendship, Bravery, and in a word,
all those Endowments of Mind, which go to make up a perfect, good, and virtuous
Man. And here methinks, I have a fair opportunity to conclude this Letter, and
to beget in you an esteem of these People. I should not be sorry, if I could
procure them this Happiness; for their Manners do not suit so ill with me, as
with a great many others, who cry out against them, and condemn them, before
they have either examined or known them. For my part, I must needs say, that
there is here, both good and bad, as there is in all other parts of the World.

From Madrid this 27th of June, 1679.
LETTER XII.
Here Is a general rejoicing, since the arrival of the Marquess de los Balbaces,
who brought certain News that the most Christian King had granted Mademoisel to
the King of Spain. He so impatiently expected these Tidings, that there was
hardly an hour passed, that he did not ask if the Courrier was not come; and as
soon as he knew it, he immediately went to hear Te Deum at our Lady d' Atocha's
Church. As the Ladies do not go thither, so they are to content to dress
themselves very fine, and place themselves in their Windows. I chose this, and
I thought I should have been both choked and blinded, it was so excessive
dusty. I saw the King in his Coach of green Oyl-cloth; he had but a small
attendance, for some twenty Halbardiers clothed in yellow with trust Breeches
like the Pages, made up his Guard, marching before and behind him. The
Courtiers Coaches indeed that accompanied him, were so numerous that they could
hardly be told; the People every where crowding, even to the tops of the
Houses, cried out Viva el Roy, Deos le Bendiga, and several added, Viva el
Reina nuestra Seinnora. There was not the least House or Street without its
spread Tables; every body had their Garlic, Leeks and Onions in their hands,
insomuch that they perfumed the Air with them, and they were even debauched
with drinking their Majesty's Health in Water: For dear Cousin, though I have
already mentioned it to you, yet methinks I may repeat it here, That there
never was People so temperate as these, especially in Wine; and they have so
strange an abhorrence for those that are guilty of Intemperance, that by their
Law, a Man that can be proved but once to have been drunk, is refused for being
a Witness in any Court of Justice where he is offered, and after a sharp
reproof is sent away. And if it happen, that one calls another Boracho, that is
Drunkard, this Injury is sure to be revenged with Murder.

That Night the King was at Antocha; we illuminated all our Houses with great
Flamboys of white Wax which they call Hachas; they are longer than those that
are used at Paris, to light the Coaches at night, but withal, they are a great
deal dearer, not only because the Wax is brought at great Charges from other
Parts of the World, but also because there is a prodigious quantity of it
consumed in Spain. And when they make Illuminations, they are not contented to
set up four or six Flamboys, but they must put two in every Balcony, and two at
each Window up to the highest Story; there are some Houses which thus require
four or five hundred. Every where there were Bonefires made, and we went to the
Palace to see a Masquerade of a hundred and fifty Lords which they said was to
be there. I cannot imagine why they call this Diversion by that Name, for they
were not at all maskt; commonly they choose the darkest Night. All the
Courtiers are mounted upon their finest Horses, every Horse was covered with
Silver Gauze and Housings embroidered with Gold and Pearl. The Cavalleros were
clothed in Black, with colored Taby Sleeves, embroidered with Silk and
Bugles; they wore little Hatts buttoned up with Diamonds, and in them a Plume
of Feathers, they had rich Scarfes and many Jewels; but with all this, their
Black Cloaks and their ugly Collars strangely disfigure them. They ride a
Horseback like the Turks and Moors, that is, as they call it a Genita, their
Stirrups are so short that their knees are even with, and rest upon the Tops of
the Horses shoulders. I cannot yet reconcile my Eyes to this Fashion; they say,
that thus they can better raise and put themselves forth against any that
assaults them. But to return to the Masquerade, they all met together at an
appointed Place, which usually is at one of the Gates of the City. The Streets
through which they were to go, were all strewed with Sand, and on each side
there was a kind of Chaffing dishes set upon Poles, which beside the white Wax
Flamboys gave a great Light, there were also placed several very clear
Lanthorns in Windows, which made a very fine Show. Every Cavallero had a great
many Footmen, which were clothed in Cloth of Gold and Silver; they went by
their Masters sides with Flamboys. The Masters marched four in a rank very
softly, each holding a Flamboy also; they went all over the City attended with
Trumpets, Timbrels, Bagpipes and Flutes, and when they came to the Palace which
was illuminated, and the Court covered with Sand, they took several Turns, and
run and pusht against one another with a Design to throw each other down with
these tricks. Prince Alexander de Parma, who is of a prodigious bigness fell
down, and the fall of him made as great a noise as the shooting of a moderate
high-hill, they had much ado to carry him off, for he was grievously bruised
with his Fall; there were several of them with their great Spectacles on, but
particularly the Marquess D' Astorgas, who does not only wear them for gravity
sake, but for need, for he is old; but yet for all that, he is frolicksom, he
will be Meyor Domo to the young Queen, and he is a Grandee of Spain.

And now I speak of a Grandee of Spain, Don Fernand de Tolledo, told me the other
day a thing pleasant enough. His Father in Law, who is the Marquess De
Palacios, lives at a horrid profuse rate, for it seems he is one of those
professed Gallants of the Ladies of the Palace, and to arrive to that, one must
both have a great deal of Wit, and show abundance of Magnificence, I mean a
certain peculiar sort of Wit that is neat and refined, he must have choice
Phrases and Expressions, and some ways and modes not common, he must understand
how to write both in Prose and Verse, and that too better than another. In a
word, one must both talk and do in this Pallace-Gallantry after quite another
rate than is used in the City. But to return to the Marquess De Palacios. There
was a public Festival appointed by the King, this Marquess wanted Money to
appear there, he is Lord of several Towns, it came into his head to go down
post to them; as soon as he arrived, at the first, he caused Papers to be set
up, That all those of that Town which desired to be made Grandees, should
immediately come to him. There was not either Justice, Burgess or Tradesman,
which was not presently filled with vehement Ambitious desires for the Grandeza
his House was crowded with all sorts of People, he agreed with them every one
severally in private, and got as much as he could of them, and afterward he
made them all be covered before him, and gave them Patents in Form just as the
King does, when he makes any one a Grandee. His Invention succeeded two well in
the first Town, not to practice it in the rest: He found amongst them the same
Disposition to give him Money, that through his means they might be Grandees,
with this trick, he got a considerable Sum, and away he comes, and makes a
splendid Show at Court. But as a Man is never without Enemies, so there were
some Persons that had a mind to make use of this pleasant Frolic to put him
out of the King's Favor. His Majesty was told of it, and the Marquis justified
himself well enough, in saying all those to whom he had granted permission to
be covered before him, being born his Vassals, they owed more respect than to
dare to take this liberty without his leave, and that therefore he had made
them Grandees, as to himself. And after this the thing was only looked upon as a
merry jest.

This Marquess comes often to see us, and as he belonged to the late Court, so
Yesterday he told me, that a famous Astrologer being one day with the late King
in the Terrass-walk of the Palace, the King asked him the height of that Place,
he gazed up into the Air, and named a certain Height. The King priately ordered
them to raise the Pavement of the Terrass about three or four fingers, and in
the Night it was done. The next Morning he caused the Astrologer to come to
him, and being upon the Terrass with him, says he to him, I spoke last night of
the height you told me of this Walk, but there was some that maintained that
you were mistaken, Sir, says he, I dare say, I was not mistaken; But consider
it well says the King, and afterward we'll him ashamed, which boasts himself
to be a more knowing Man than you. Immediately he began again to make his
Observations, the King saw him change color, and seem to be at a great loss;
but at last he drew nigh the King, and said, what I told your Majesty Yesterday
was true, but to day I find, that either the Terrass is raised, or the Heavens
are sunk down a little lower. The King smiled, and told him the trick he had
put upon him.

That I may give you an Account of other matters, I must tell you, that the
King has in his Family three Persons which by way of Eminency are called, the
great Officers, the Mayor Domo Mayor, the Sumiller of the Body, and the Master
of the Horse. These three Places are thus distinguished, the Mayor Domo commands
in the Palace, the Business of the Sumiller of the Body, is in the King's
Chamber, and the Master of the Horse, orders all things in every Place, except
the Palace.

After these come the Gentlemen of the Kings Bedchamber, they wear at their
Girdle for a mark of their Dignity, a golden Key. There are three sorts of
these Keys; the first, gives the Employment of the Gentleman of the
Bedchamber; the second, the Entrance with the Employment; and the third is
called, Clavae Capona, which only gives Entrance into the Antichamber. The
Number of these Gentlemen is great, there are Forty of those for Service, which
take it in turns every day, and for the most part they are Grandees of Spain.
The Mayor Domo, that is to say, the Steward in Ordinary, have the same Access
as the Gentlmen of the Bedchamber. The Persons of highest Quality fill up
these Places, for the most part they are the second Sons of the Grandees, they
wait in turns every Week, and when the High-Steward is absent, they are
invested with his Power, these also introduce Foreign Ministers when they have
Audience, there are eight of them, sometimes more, but seldom fewer.

The King has three Companies for his Guards, but they have not any thing that
agrees with one another. The Marquess De Falces commands the Flemish or
Burgundian Guard, it consists of a hundred Halbardiers, and although here, they
call them the Yeomen of the Guard; yet they may be called the Life Guard; the
German Guard consists of the same Number, Don Pedro D' Arragon is Captain of
it, the Spanish Guard is also composed of a hundred Halberdiers, and are
commanded by the Count De los Arcos. He is likewise Captain of another Company
of a hundred Spaniards, called the Guards of the Lancilla, and this never
appears, but at great Ceremonies, and at the Funerals of Kings. The Affairs of
the State are managed by a Chief Minister which they call Privado, he has
under him a Secretary of State, whose Office is in the Palace. All Business
that come to the King and the Minister, ought to pass directly through his
hands, and as he dispatches also whatever the King orders, so he is called
Secretario del despacho Universal.

The Council of State, and diverse other Councils examine all matters, and the
King or the Chief Minister, afterward determine them, there are a great many
Counselors: Here follow the Names of those which at present compose the
Council of State, Viz. The Constable De Castile of the Family of the
Valesaco's, is the President, the Duke D' Albe, the Duke De Medicina Celi, Don
Pedro D' Arragon, the Admiral of Castile, the Marquess D' Astorgas, the Prince
De Stillano, the Duke D' Ossona, the Count De Chinchon, Don Vincent Gouzaga,
Prince De Guastalla, Don Lewis Portocarrero Cardinal Archbishop of Tolledo, the
Marquess De Liches, the Marquess De los Balbares Don Diego Sarmituto, Don
Melchios Navarra, the Marquess De Losveler, the Marquess De Mansera, and the
Duke D' Alburquerque.

Besides This Council, which is the principal, there is that of the Inquisition
of War, of the Orders of Arragon, of the Indies, of Italy, of Hazienda, of the
Croisado, and of Flanders, there is also the Chamber of Castile, of the
Alcaides de Corta, of the Contaduria, D' Aposento, Delos Bosques Reales, De
Milliones, and De Competancias. But do not think, dear Kinswoman, that the
Salleries and Profits of those Places are small. For instance, The Counselors
of the Council of the Indies, make from eighteen to twenty thousand Crowns a
Year of their Places. And here it is pertinent to tell you, that it is thought no
Places are sold in this Country, at least it is not known; in in all appearace
they are bestowed upon Merit or Birth, but yet underhand, there are such
considerable Presents made, that to get a Vice Royalty, they will give Five
thousand Pistols, and sometimes more. That which would be called Buying in
another Country, at Madrid is termed giving a Regalio, that is, making a
Present, and one is equivalent to the other, with this difference, that a
Place, or a Government which one buys, is yours as long as you live, and
sometimes passes by Inheritance to your Children, either by natural Right, or
the Concession of the Prince; but in Spain, they enjoy a Place which cost them
very dear, only three or five Years at most. It is easy to believe that those
who advance so much, are very certain to reimburse themselves both Principal
and Interest. From this Practice the People are horribly oppressed, they have
perpetually upon them, either a new Vice Roy, or Governor, which comes from
draining himself of all the ready-Money which he could either make of his own
and sometimes of his Friends, to bribe the Court. Thus he comes hungry, and he
has but a short time to enrich himself, and so the poor People are on all hands
pillaged, without so much as being able to have their Complaints heard. But it
is yet quite another thing in the Indies, where Gold is so plentiful, and they
are so far from the King and his Ministers. It is certain they bring from
thence immense Sums, as I think, I have already intimated to you, even the
Religious as they call them, who are sent to preach there, return not without
forty and fifty thousand Crowns, which they have heaped up in four or five
Years time; so notwithstanding their Vow of Poverty, they find out the secret
of growing rich; and during their Life they are suffered to enjoy the Fruit of
their Mission.

The Monasteries here, have yet another piece of Craft, which commonly
succeeds, when a Religieus Person or Friar happens to be the only Son. If his
Father is rich, they beg him to leave his Estate to the Convent, where his Son
has taken the Habit, upon condition that he shall manage and enjoy it whilst he
lives, but after his Death that the Monastery shall inherit it, and put up
Prayers and say Masses for the Father and the Son. By this means there are
profes'd Friars which have ten thousand Crowns a Year, at their disposal. This
Affluence in a Country where Reason has put little power over the Affections,
does not always make them more holy; and if there are any that use it well,
there are abundance which abuse it.

It is known, that every year there comes from the Indies, above five and
thirty Millions of Crowns, but yet not a quarter part of this ever goes into
the King of Spain's Coffers. These Treasures spread themselves over all Europe,
the French, English, Dutch, and the Genoeses, draw away the best shares of it.
Methinks, this does not suit with the refined Policy of the Spaniards, to waste
their own Subjects in digging Gold out of the Mines, to let other Nations, with
whom they are often at War, reap the Profit; but the natural Laziness which
hinders them from working, and to have at home Manufactures of their of their
own, obliges them to have recourse to those, who can furnish their Country
with the Merchandises they want.

As Strangers dare not venture to go there, because it is upon no less penalty
than hanging, so they contrive to send their effects in the Names of the
Spanish Merchants, with whom they meet with all the Fidelity imaginable; and if
the King would, he could not hinder Strangers from receiving what is properly
theirs; for the Spaniards upon this occasion, had rather loose their Lives,
than any wrong should come to another. There Is one thing remarkable, and that
is, when the Flota comes to an Anchor at Cadiz, there are Men who make public
profession to assist in cheating the King of his Customs upon Silver and other
Merchandises. It is as much their Trade and Livelihood, as for a Banker to deal
in Money. They call them Metadors; and as much Knaves as they are toward the
King, yet one must do them the right to say, they are not so to the private men
which agree with them for a certain reward securely to lodge their Silver in
such a place of the City as they shall desire. And this practice is so certain
and safe, that one never hears of any that have violated their Trust: It were
easy to punish these men for the Frauds they are guilty of against the King,
but there would be Inconveniences to the prejudice of Trade, perhaps far
greater, than the Punishments would bring Advantage; so that the Government and
Magistrates take no notice of what passes. There might also be an easy remedy
found out to hinder the King from losing all upon this occasion; and that is,
to abate the Duties a little, which indeed are very high, and so what is given
to these Metadors, and somewhat more, might be paid to the Cotrataction, for
naturally the Merchants do not love cheating, and are continually afraid of
paying at once, what they have been saving for half a score Voyages; but it is
the humor of the Spaniards, To have all or nothing, and very often they have
nothing. As to Madrid, it is impossible to find there any greater Robbers and
Cheats than the Magistrates and Officers themselves; these are the Men, that
with Impunity appropriate to themselves the Kings Customs, and who cheat him
after such a rate, that it is no wonder if he so often wants Money: but they are
not satisfied with cheating their Sovereign, they must also abuse and pillage
the People; and although the Laws of this Nation are not only very just, but
equitable, yet no body seems to be sensible of them: Those very Persons into
whose Hands they are put, and who are set on purpose to execute them, are the
first that break and corrupt them.

If you will but give Money to an Alcalde, or to an Alguazil, you may have the
most innocent Person in the World arrested or seized, and then thrown into some
nasty dark hole of a Prison, and there perish with hunger, without any
proceeding or coming to a Trial, and wthout any Order or Degree; and when the
poor wretch is let out of Prison, he must not so much as think of doing himself
right against this wicked Officer of Justice. This sort of People are generally
much favored every where, but here they are beyond all measure; and righteous
Judges in this Country are more scarce than in any Country whatever.

Thieves, Murderers, Poysoners, and the greatest Criminals imaginable, remain
safe and quiet at Madrid, provided they are not rich, for if they be, they are
sure to be disturbed for the sake of that.

They do not judge Criminal Matters above twice or thrice a year; it is with
the greatest difficulty that they bring themselves to cause any Criminal to
dye, who is, say they, a man like them, their Countryman, and the King's
Subject; they send most either to the Mines, or to the Galleys, and when any
Wretch is condemned to be hanged, he is carried upon an Ass, with his Face to
the Tail; he is clothed in black, and a Scaffold is erected for him, that he
may make a Speech to the People, who are all upon their Knees, and in Tears,
beating themselves upon their Breasts: After he has spent what time he will in
his Harangue, he is dispatched with a great deal of Gravity; and as these
Examples of Justice are very rare, so they make a mighty impression upon the
Spectators.

Notwithstanding the vast Riches, and the excessive haughtiness and Presumption
of the great Lords, yet they obey the least Order of the King, with that
exactness and Respect which cannot be sufficiently praised. Upon the first
Command, they depart, they return, go to Prison, or into Banishment, without
murmuring. It is not possible to find a more perfect Submission and Obedience,
nor a more sincere Love, than that of the Spaniards for their King. This Name
is Sacred with them, and to bring them to whatever one has a mind, it is
sufficient to say, The King Wills it; it is under his Name, that the poor People
of both the Castilles are so horribly oppressed with Taxes: the other Kingdoms or
Provinces are not so loaded, but boast themselves for the most part, that they
are a free People, and pay but what they have a mind to.

I have already hinted to you, dear Cousin, that in every thing they exactly
follow the Politics of Charles V. without considering that the difference of
times makes a mighty alteration in the Events of things, although they may seem
to be alike, and in the same Circumstances; and that what without the
imputation of rashness might have been undertaken 120 years ago under a
flourishing Reign, would be impudent to practice now under a Reign that is far
less so: but a vanity that is natural to them, hinders them from seeing, that
Providence sometimes permits Empires, as well as particular Families, to have
their Revolutions and Periods. The Spaniards believe themselves to be just the
same People, and in the same Circumstances they ever were; but though I never
knew their Ancestors, yet I dare say they deceive themselves.

But not to make any farther Reflections, which perhaps are too serious and high
for me, I will tell you, that here is a general rejoicing at Madrid for the
arrival of the Flota from the Indies. As it is not their humor here to treasure
up Wealth, so this prodigious quantity of Silver, which comes all at a lump, is
spread over all the World. One would think that these immense Sums cost
nothing, and that it is Money which chance sent them. Hereupon the great Lords
summon their Creditors, and pay them with a profuseness, which yet without
lying, has something in it that is both noble and very generous; for there are
but few Countries where Liberality is so natural, as it is in this; and I must
also add, that they are patient even to admiration. They have been known to
endure most long and toilsome Sieges, in which besides the Fatigues of War,
they had nothing to support them but Bread made of rotten Corn, and stinking
Water for their Drink; and yet there are no Men in the World more nice about
good Water. I say, notwithstanding all this, and that they have been exposed to
the Severities of the Weather, were half naked, and had hard Lodging, yet in
spite of all these things, they have been found more brave and courageous,
than when they enjoyed Plenty and Prosperity. It is true, that that Temperance
which is so natural to them, is a mighty help to them to endure hunger when
they are forced to it; they eat very little, and scarcely will they drink any
Wine. The Custom they have of eating all alone, contributes something to make
them so frugal; for indeed, neither their Wives, nor their Children, ever eat
with them. The Master has his Table to himself, and the Mistress with her
Children sit on the Floor upon a Carpet, after the Turkish and Moorish way.
They seldom or never invite their Friends to feast together, so that they are
not guilty of any excess. Upon this account, it is their saying, That they only
eat to live, whereas there are People, which only live to eat. Nevertheless,
there are some rational People, which find this affectation too great; and as
they admit of little familiarity in Conversation, so they perpetually live at a
distance, and as 'twere in Ceremony with one another, without enjoying that
freedom which makes that true Union, and produces that desirable openness of
Heart.

This great Retirement gives them up to a thousand Illusions, which they call
Philosophy; it makes them singular, dull, fantastic, melancholy and jealous;
whereas if they governed themselves otherwise, there is nothing they would not
be capable of, since they have a wonderful vigor of Mind, an excellent Memory,
good Sense, a solid Judgment, and great Patience; than which, there needs no
more to make a Man wise, to grow in Perfection, to be agreeable in
Conversation, and to distinguish himself from the most polite Nation. But they
are so far from being what naturally they might be, though at never so little
pains, that they affect a certain Indolency which they call greatness of Mind;
they neglect their most important business, and the advancement of their
Fortunes. Provision for the future, gives them not the least disturbance; the
only matter they are not indifferent in, is Jealousy; they improve that to the
utmost, the bare suspicion is enough to make them stab their Wife or their
Mistress. Their Passion of Love is always furious, and yet the Women please
themselves in it; they say, they would not for all the mischief that may befall
them, have them less sensible of their unfaithfulness; that their desperate
Temper is a certain proof of a true Passion, and that they themselves are not
more moderate when they are in Love. They leave nothing unattempted to be
revenged of those they love, if they forsake them without cause; so that these
sort of amorous Engagements have commonly a fatal end. For instance, not long
since, a Woman of Quality, who had cause to complain of her Gallant, contrived
to get him into a House where she commanded, and after she had sufficiently
reproached him, against which he did but weakly defend himself, for he was
guilty; she presented to him a Poniard, and a Cup of poisoned Chocolate,
leaving him only the liberty which sort of Death he would choose: He did not
waste one minute to move her pity, he very well saw, that in this Place she
was the strongest, so that he tamely drank off the Chocolate without leaving a
drop. After he had drunk it, says he to her, it had been better if you had put
a little more Sugar in it, for the Poison made it very bitter; remember to do so
the next time you prepare another. He was immediately seized with Convulsions;
it was very violent Poison, and killed him in an hours time; and for all this
Lady still loved him passionately, yet she had the barbarity not to stir from
him till he was dead.

The Venetian Ambassador, who is a very well accomplished Man, being lately at
home, they brought him word, that a Lady covered with a Mantle desired to speak
with him, and that she hid her self so close, they could not possibly see what
she was; she had with her two Gentlemen Ushers, and a considerable Attendance.
He invited her to his Chamber of Audience, and she desired he would cause every
body to go out. When she was alone with him, she unveiled her self, and
appeared to him extreme handsome. I am of an Illustrious Family, says she to
him, my Name is Donna Blanca de Gusman; I have despised all the Laws of
Decency, in Favor of that Passion I have for you; I came to declare it to you,
my Lord, and to tell you, that I must needs remain here this Night. From such
an impudent Speech, the Ambassador could not in the least doubt, that this was
some Tilt that had borrowed a great Name, to draw him into some Snare: but yet
with abundance of kindness, he told her, that till now he had never thought
himself unhappy in the Service of the Republic, that he could wish he were not
an Ambassador, that so he might embrace the Favor she offered him; but that
being in such a Station, there was little likelihood that he could give
Entertainment to a Person of her Eminent Quality, that this might bring him
into great trouble, and therefore begged her that she would withdraw.
Immediately she was like a Fury, and after she had reviled and reproached him,
she drew out a Stilletto, and run upon him to have stabbed him. He easily
prevented her, and having called one of his Gentlemen, bid him give five or six
Pistols to this Woman. She so little deserved this Generosity, and it so
appeased her, that she really told him, she was one of those Creatures he took
her for, and that the reason why she had been so desperate, was, that the
Gentlemen Ushers, who waited for her below, were her Gallants, and would have
broke her bones if she had made no advantage of the Plot they had laid; and
that besides, she was to pay for the Equipage she came in, which was hired
purposely for this design, and that she had much rather have died, than to have
endured all those Abuses. The Ambassador was so taken with her pleasant
Confession, that he caused ten Pistols more to be given her; for, says he to
her, since so many honest Folks must share with you, your part will be too
small. She succeeded so well here, that she went directly to the French
Ambassadors; but she was not so courteously received there: For upon the first
Apprehension of her Design, she and her Attendance escapt very narrowly of
being entertained with the Strapado. He gave her not a Sons, happy was she that
got out as she came in, for he had an aversion for all these Creatures.

This Morning we tarried a while in the Placa Mayor, for an Answer of a Message
my Kinswoman had sent to a Gentleman that dwelt there. In this Place Fish is
sold, and there was a Woman which had some little bits of Salmon to sell, which
she said was fresh; she made a horrid noise in crying it, and in calling
Customers to buy it, at last comes a Shooemaker, which I knew for such, because
she called him Sinior Capatcro; he ask her for a Pound of her Salmon (and by
the way, you must observe, that every thing here is bought by the pound, even
Wood and Charcoal) says she to him, You do not enquire after the price, because
you think it is cheap, but do not deceive your self, I assure you, I must have a
Crown for every pound. The Shoemaker vexed that she questioned his thoughts and
ability, with an angry tone said to her, had it been very cheap, I would have
had but one pound, but since it is dear, I Will have three, and immediately he
gives her three Crowns, and then thrusting down his little Hat (for you must
know that the Tradesmen wear them as narrow as the People of Quality wear them
broad, and turning up his Mustachios by way of Rodamentade, he raised the point
of his formidable Sword almost to the top of his shoulder, and haughtily looked
at us, having well observed that we took notice of him and overheard his
Discourse and were Strangers; but the pleasantness of the thing lies here,
perhaps these three Crowns was all that ever this vainglorious Fool had in the
World, that this was his whole Weeks profit, and that to morrow, himself, his
Wife and poor Children, would have a more severe Fast, than with Bread and
Water; but such is the vain humor of these People here; nay there are some of
them which will take the legs of a Capon, and will let them hang down under
their Cloaks, that they may look as if they really had a Capon, whilst they
have nothing but the Legs and Feet.

You cannot see a Joyner, a Sadler, or other sort of Shopkeeper, without his
Velvet and Satin Suit like the Kings, with his long Rapier and Dagger, and his
Guattar hung up in his Shop. They work as little as ever they can, for I have
more than once told you, that they are naturally lazy. Indeed nothing but
overruling Necessity drives them to do any thing at all, and then they work
upon Sundays and other Festivals, without any scruple, as well as upon any
other Day; and afterward they carry their Goods abroad. If it is a Shoemaker
and he has two Prentices, he takes them both with him, and each of them carry a
Shoe, nay if he has three, they must all go along with him, and it is with much
ado, that he will stoop to try the Shoes he made; when he has done, he goes and
sits him down in the Sun (which is called the Spaniard's Fire) with a Company
of such idle Fellows as himself, and there with a sovereign Authority they
determine matters of State, and settle the Interest of Princes; very often they
fall out about them, some one of them that takes himself to be a more able
Politician than the rest, will have them yield to his Judgment, but another as
conceited as himself will not submit, and so they fall together by the Ears
without Mercy. I was two days ago to see the Danish Embassador's Lady, and
there was brought in thither a poor Wretch which was just then wounded in the
Street; he was a Costermonger, and it seems had maintained that the Grand
Senior would not be reckoned a cunning Politician if he did not cause his
Brother to be strangled; another to whom that young Prince was not so
displeasing, stood up in his defense, and thereupon these two fell a fighting;
but after all, to give them their due, all these People talk of Government and
Politics with a great deal of Judgment, and give good Reasons for what they
say.

Here is in this City several Houses which are a sort of Academies, where
People meets some to Play, and others for Conversation. They play there with
great honesty, and let them lose what Sum they will upon Honor, they never
fail to pay it in twenty four hours. If there should be any failure, their
Honor and Reputation is for ever lost. No Reason whatsoever will be admitted
against the necessity of paying in that time. They play there very high and
very fairly, without noise or showing the least vexation or concern: If they
win, it is the Custom to give the Barato; this I think is also used in Italy,
that is to say, you give Money to those that are present, to some more to
others less, and this whether you know them or no. He to whom you present the
Barato must never refuse it, let him be a hundred times richer and better
Quality than the Donour, nay one may demand it of a Gamester that is winning,
and he will not deny to give it. There are People that have no other Subsistence
than this; but yet this is no good Custom, for though a Man does win, yet
sometimes he hardly carries any thing of his gains away with him, and if he
begins to play again, he often loses his own.

Further, if a Man is found to have cheated, he has as good betimes to forsake
all Company; for no honest Person will have any thing to do with him, and if he
is taken in the fact, he may think himself happy if he comes off with some
Cuchillades, that is, some Cuts, but not Thrusts with a Sword.

As to the Conversation in these Academies, there is of it that is very
ingenious, and very knowing Persons that frequent them; for in a word, they are
here just as in other Places, and there are some that write very fine things.
What they call Novels seem to me to be of a Style, and to have an Air that
charms; they never advance any thing but what is probable, and the Subjects they
take is so well managed, and their Narration so concise and plain, neither mean
nor lofty, that one must needs grant they have a Genius, which surpasses all
others, in these sort of pieces. I will endeavor to get some of this kind, and
will translate and send them to you, that so you may judge of them your self.
As I have not capacity enough to speak of things which treat of more sublime
matters, so shall I say nothing of them till I have been informed by those that
are competent Judges, and then I shall only pretend to be their Echo. But
after all I must needs say, that I think them extravagant in their Elogies, and
that in them they keep not near to probability, their Imagination, which is
very lively and active, sometimes runs too fast. I was the other day reading in a
Book, where speaking of Philip the VI. the Author said, that his Virtues and
great Qualities were so many, that there was not Paper enough in the World to
write them down; that a common Pen was not worthy to describe such divine
things, and therefore they deserved to be writ by the Rays of the Sun upon the
surface of the Heavens. You Will grant me that this is really losing a Man's self
in the Clouds, and that with endeavoring to exalt his Hero, our poor Author
falls and breaks his own neck. Their Books are very ill printed, rheir Paper is
not white, and they are very ill bound, being covered with Parchment or
Sheep-skin Leather.

I must not forget to tell you one thing, and it is very material, and that is
the Policy of the Spaniards, which persuades them rather to be at the charge of
a hundred false Informations, than to neglect the Opportunity of receiving one
true Advice: neither the distance of the Country from whence they come, nor
their Agents, are suspected by them, they will know every thing and liberally
recompense those that serve them, nay they will hardly tarry till the Service is
accepted, before they will reward them. You cannot believe how much advantage
this Maxim has gained them, they have been sometimes taken for Fools, but that
has not discouraged them, and in the end they always had what they intended. It
is likewise true, that though they have but very slender ground to beg a favor
of the King, yet provided they are not disheartened with Repulses, but pursue
their first Design with Perseverance, sooner or later they obtain what they
wished for. The Ministers of State think it is not suitable to the Grandeur of so
mighty a Monarch to refuse a small matter; and tho there is but little Justice
in pretending to a favor which one has not deserved by some Service, yet if it
is sued for without intermission, it is always obtained. I see Examples of it
every day.

I have not yet told you, dear Cousin, that upon my Arrival here, all the
Ladies did me the Honor to visit me first. It is the Custom here to prevent
Strangers, when once they know they are of Quality and their good Conduct,
concerning both which they are very nice. When I returned them their Visit,
every one made me a Present; sometimes in one House I received a Dozen, for
even the Children of four Years old will treat you. I was presented with great
Baskets of gilt Silver, adorned with Corral curiously wrought in Flowers; these
are made at Naples and Millan: I had also Amber Boxes set with Gold,
ennammell'd and full of Pastils; diverse presented me with Gloves and with
Silk-Stockings and Garters in abundance; but these Gloves are singular, in that
they are as short as the Men's, for the Women wear their Sleeves down to their
Wrists, the Fingers are so long that they look as if they were nothing else,
and are ridiculous: The Stockings are made of Polo, that is raw Silk; they are
made so short and so little in the Foot, that I have seen several Babies that
they would not fit; the Garters are of a broad Ribbond, made very light and
thin, like those our Peasants give at their Weddings; they are trimmed at each
end with some English Thread Lace. They presented me also with several Cups of
that Mineral Earth, and a thousand other things of this kind. If ever I go from
hence, and make another Journey hither, it will be my turn to present: But
alas! any thing pleases them, Needles, Pins, a little Ribbond, but above all,
any thing made of their false Stones ravishes them with Joy; they that have so
many that are right and so excellent, yet wear a prodigious quantity of these
false ones, which in reality are nothing neither, but bitts of Glass set, and
just like those our Chimney-sweepers sell to our Provincials, who never saw
more than their Curate and their Flock. The Ladies of the greatest Quality are
loaded with these false Stones, which they buy at dear rates; and when I asked
them why they were so fond of these conterfeit Diamonds, they told me it was
because they could have of them as big as they desired. And indeed they have of
them in their Pendants, as big as an Egg, and all these come to them either
from France or Italy; for as I have told you, few things are made at Madrid,
Idleness reigns too much there.

There Is no good Painters in this City, the greatest part of those that draw,
are not of this Country; they are either Flemmings, Italians or French, which
come and settle here; but yet they do not grow rich, for Money does not come
and move in the circle of Trade. For my part, I must needs say, I never saw
less stirring. My Kinswoman receives pretty considerable Sums all in Quartos;
it is Copper Money, and as nasty as our Doubles; but as bad as it is, yet it
com^^ ^ut of the Royal Treasure; it is delivered by Weight (for how is it
possible to count such sorry stuff?) and Men bring it upon their backs in great
matted Baskets; when these sort of Payments come, the whole House is employed
for eight days together in taking an Account of these Quartos, in three or four
thousand Crowns, there is not a hundred Pistols, either in Gold or Silver.

They have here great numbers of Slaves, which are bought and sold at great
rates, these are Moors and Turks; there are some of them worth four or five
hundred Crowns; heretofore they had power of Life and Death over them, a Patron
might have killed his Slave as he might have killed a Dog; but it was thought
that these Barbarities did not agree with the Maxims of the Christian Religion,
and now that Practice is forbid; but yet they beat them till they cripple them,
without ever being called to account for it. It Is true, there are but few
Masters that are thus severe; and if a Man happen to love his female Slave, and
she grants his desires, she becomes immediately free. As to the other
Domestics, it would be somewhat dangerous to use them ill; they pretend for
the most part, to be of as good Families as the Masters they serve; and if they
should be abused, they would be in a capacity to revenge themselves, either by
Treacherously Murdering, or Poisoning of them; there are many Examples of this,
they say, that a Man ought not to insult over them, because they are poor, that
though they are reduced to serve, yet they have not renounced their Honor; and
that they should forfeit it, if they should take blows from any body whatever.

The Beggars are even proud, and when they ask an Alms, it is in an imperious
and domineering way; if one refuses them, it must be done civilly, in saying to
them, Cavallero, Perdone, usted, no tenga moneda; that is, Pardon me Cavallero,
I have no Money. If you give them a rough Denial, they will begin to argue with
you, and undertake to prove to you, that that you do not deserve that Estate
God has blessed you with, and will never let you alone; but if one speaks
courteously to them, they seem well enough content and desist.

The Spaniards are naturally gentle and kind; they marry their Slaves, and if
it be with another Slave, the Children they have are not free, but like their
Fathers, are subject to the Patron; but if these Children marry, their Issue
shall not be Slaves. And so it is, if a Woman Slave marry a Freeman, their
Children follow the Condition of the Father. One is mighty well served by these
unhappy Wretches; they are far more diligent, laborious and humble than other
Servants; there are few of them that will change their Religion. I have one
that is not above nine years old; she is as black as Jett, and would be
reckoned in her own Country a wonderful Beauty, for her Nose is quite flat, her
Lips prodigiously thick, her Eyes of a white and red color, and her Teeth
admirable, in Europe as well as in Africa. She understands not a word of any
other Language than her own; her Name is Zayde, we have got her baptized; this
young Christian has been so used to throw off her white Mantle, and to be quite
naked when she was exposed to sale, that I have had much ado to hinder her from
doing so now; and the other day, when we had a great deal of Company, I sent for
her; and truly Mrs. Zayde was pleased to appear before them all with her little
black Body as naked as she was born. I am resolved to have her whipped, to make
her know that this sort of fashion does not please me, for there is no other
way to make her understand. Those that sold her to me, told me she was a Girl
of Quality, and the poor Child will come often and fall down on her Knees
before me, hold her hands together, cry, and point toward her Country; I would
willingly send her thither, if she could there be a Christian; but this
impossibility obliges me to keep her. I would fain understand her, for I
believe she is witty, all her Actions show it; she dances after her fashion,
and it is so pleasantly, that she makes us very merry. I make her wear white
Patches, with which she is mightily taken. She is dressed as they are at Moroco,
that is, with a short Gown almost without any plights, great Shift-sleeves of
fine Cloth, stripped with different colors, like those of our Bohemians or
Gypsies; a pair of Stays which are only made of a slip of Crimson Velvet with a
gold ground, and are made fast at the sides with silver Buckles and Buttons,
and a Mantle of very fine white woollen stuff, very large and long, in which
she wraps her self, and with one corner of it covers her Head. This dress is
handsome enough; her short Hair, which looks like Wool, is cut in several
places, on each side like a Half Moon, on the the Crown a Circle, and before a
Heart; she cost me twenty Pistols, my Daughter has made her Governess of her
Marmosett; it is the little Monkey which the Archbishop of Burgos presented to
her. I do assure you, that Zayde and the Marmosett are well met, and understand
one another very well.

But to come to other things, here is arrived a Man which has been fetched from
the farthest parts of Galicia; he is such a Saint, that he has done many
Miracles, as it is pretended. The Marchioness de Los Velez, heretofore Governess
of the King, was like to dye, and she sent to have him come in all haste, but
they were so long upon the Journey, that she was well again before he came. It
was known what day he would arrive, and while she was then expecting him, Don
Fernand de Tolleda, who is her Nephew, and had not seen her since his return
from Flanders, because of her having been sick; knowing that she was then much
better, happened to go to her House much about the time the Saint of Galitia
was to be there. The Marchioness's People seeing him, and not knowing him at
all, (for he had been absent several years) without considering that there were
few Men of his Age and Looks so happy as to work Miracles, concluded, at first
sight, that he was the Saint: immediately they threw open the great door, and
rung the Bell for the signal, as the Marchioness had ordered them; all the
Duennas and the Maids came to receive him with every one a Wax-Candle in her
hand; several of them fell upon their Knees, and would not let him stir till he
had given them his blessing. He thought they made a fool of him, to give him
such a reception; he knew not whether he was bewitched, or whether he dreamt;
and do what he could, he could not persuade himself that all this was real; it
was to no purpose to talk to them, they minded him not at all, the noise and
the crowd was so great; they brought their Beads to touch him, and those that
were far off him, threw them at his Head, with a hundred Medals fastened to
them. The most zealous began to cut his Cloak and his Clothes; and now his fear
began to be very great, lest through a desire to multiply his Relics, they did
not cut him to pieces. The Marchioness de Los Veloz, who was carried between
four in a great Elbow-Chair, came to meet the Holy Man: and truly when she
perceived the mistake, and saw it was her Nephew, she fell a laughing so loud
and so long, that she far exceeded the strength every body thought she had.
When he came from her House, he came to see us, all torn, and just as the
devout People had left him.

I should tell you, that all is mighty private and retired in this Court; but
here is the way and manner how some particular Persons live: In the Morning as
soon as they are up, they drink Water cooled with Ice, and presently after
Chocolate; when Dinnertime is come, the Master sits down to Table, his Wife
and Children, as I have already observed, eat upon the Floor near the Table;
this is not done out of respect, as they tell me, but the Woman cannot sit upon
a Chair, she is not accustomed to it; and there are several ancient Spanish
Women which never sat upon one in their whole Life: they make a light meal, for
they eat little flesh; the best of their food are Pigeons, Pheasants, and their
Olio's which are excellent; but the greatest Lord has not brought to his Table
above two Pigeons, and some very bad Ragou, full of Garlic and Pepper; and
after that some Fennel and a little Fruit: when this little Dinner is over,
every one in the House undress themselves, and lie down upon their Beds, upon
which they lay Spanish Leather-Skins for coolness: at this time you shall not
find a soul in the Streets; the Shops are shut, all Trade ceased, and it looks
as if every body were dead. At two a Clock in the Winter, and at four in the
Summer, they begin to dress themselves again, then eat Sweetmeats, drink
either some Chocolate, or Waters cooled in Ice, and afterward every body goes
where they think fit; and indeed they tarry out till eleven or twelve a Clock
at Night, I speak of People that live regularly. Then the Husband and Wife go
to Bed, a great Table-Cloth is spread all over the Bed, and each fastens it
under their Chin; the He and She Dwarfs serve up Supper, which is as frugal as
the Dinner, for it is either a Pheasant Hen made into a Ragou, or some Pastry
business, which burns the Mouth, it is so excessively peppered. The Lady drinks
her belly full of Water, and the Gentleman very sparingly of the Wine, and when
Supper is ended, each goes to sleep as well as they can.

The unmarry'd, or those who observe but few rules with their Wives, after they
have been taking the Air in the Prado, where in Summer they go half naked in
their Coaches; I mean when it is dark they get a light Supper, mount their
Horses, and take a Footman behind them, they do this that they may not lose
him; for going in the darkest Night through so many Streets very quick, how
should a Footman be able to turn and wind, and follow his Master? But they are
also afraid of being assaulted behind, the Footman having no other care than to
look about him, is as it were the Sentinel, and is ready to defend his Master.
There may be some which will do this, but most of them in such cases run away,
for they are not stout. This nocturnal Ramble is upon the Ladies account, they
then visit them, and to gain an Empire, they would not neglest that
opportunity. They talk to them through the Lattice of their Windows, sometimes
they go into their Gardens, and when they can into their Chambers. Their
Passion is so violent, that they will look the greatest danger in the face;
they will go to the very place where the Husband sleeps, and I have been told
that they will see one another years together, without daring to speak one word,
for fear of being heard. They are ignorant in France what it is to love at the
rate these People are said to love. And not to mention the cares, the earnest
desires, the nicety, and the devoting of themselves up even to death, (for the
Husband and the Relations give no quarter) that which I admire, is their
Fidelity and Secrecy. It is never known, that a Cavallero boasts of having
received Favors from a Lady; they speak of their Mistresses with so much
respect and value, as if they were their Sovereigns. And on the other hand,
these Ladies never desire to oblige any other than their Gallants, they are
entirely taken up with him; and although they cannot see him in the daytime,
yet they have opportunity to employ several hours about him, either in writing
to, or speaking of him with some she Friend who is privy to the Intreague; or
else in waiting all the day long, and looking through their Lattices to see him
go by. In a word, upon all that I have been told about these Matters, I can
easily believe, that Love had its Birth in Spain.

Whilst the Cavalleros are with their Mistresses, their Footmen look after
their Horses at some distance from the House; but there are very often
unpleasant Mischances happen to them, for there being no necessary places in
their Houses, all night long they throw that out of their Windows, which
decency hinders me from naming to you; so that the amorous Spaniard which goes
silently along the Street, is many times in a nasty condition from head to
foot; and though at his coming out he was curiously perfumed, yet he is forced
to return as fast as he can to change his Cloths. This is one of the greatest
Inconveniences in this City, and which renders it so stinking and filthy, that
in the Morning one can hardly pass along the Streets. I say in the Morning, for
the Air is here so subtle and hot, that all this nastiness is consumed before
Noon. When a Horse, or any other Animal dies, they throw him into the Street
where he happens to be, though it were before the Pallace-Gate, and the next
day you will find him reduced to dust. They are persuaded, that if they did not
throw out their Filth and Carrion in this manner into their Streets, Madrid
would not be long without the Plague, and it never is there.

But besides those ways I have now mentioned, that Gallants have to see their
Mistresses, they have yet others; for the Ladies visit one another frequently,
and there is nothing more easy for them than to wear a Vail, and by the back
door go into a Chair, and be carried where they will: And this is the more
practicable, because all the Women agree to keep one another Secrets
inviolably, let there be what Differences there will amongst them, and let them
never be so angry one against another, yet they never open their lips to make
the least Discovery; their Discretion cannot be sufficiently praised: It is
true indeed, the consequences would be more fatal if they did otherwise, since
they make nothing here of murdering upon a bare Suspicion.

After this manner, the L^^ies make their Visits to one another; you must not
go to see your Friend when you have a mind, you must tarry till you are desired
to come, and the Lady that has a mind to be visited, writes a Letter in the
Morning, and invites you, you are carried in a Chair which is extreme (...)
every way, and that they may be the lighter, they are made only of a thin stuff
hung upon a wooden frame, these stuffs are always mixed with Gold and Silver,
and are very rich; they have in them three great Glasses, and the top is made
of a very thin Leather, lined as the rest, and it opens upwards that so one may
go in and out more conveniently; to every Chair there is four Bearers, which
relieve one another, and a Footman carries the Hat of the foremost; for let it
be what Weather it will, he must not be covered before his Mistress. The Lady
is set as fast in her Chair, as a Diamond-stone in a Ring; she either wears no
Mantle or Vail then, or if she does, it has a black English Lace set on it,
half an Ell deep very fine and dear; this is becoming enough: she has also a
Coach with four Mules in those long Traces I have formerly mentioned, which
follows softly after the Chair, that is commonly filled with old
Gentlemen-Ushers, and five or six Pages; for every body has these, my Banker's
Wife has two. The Ladies never take any of their Women with them; and though
several of them are going the same place, yet they each of them take a Chair to
themselves, and do not go together in any one of their Coaches. I happened
the other day, to be in a stop there was in a Street, and there came by me fifty
Chairs, and as many Coaches one after another, they came out of the Duchess De
Frias, and went to the Duchess D' Vzeda's House, I Will tell you why they went
thither, when I have first told you that when the Lady is come to her House
whom she goes to visit, the Chairmen carry her as far as the Antichamber, the
Stairs are made purposely very wide and low, for the greater ease, as soon as
she is set down, she sends away all her People and her Coach, and appoints them
what hour to come and fetch her home, which is usually between ten and eleven a
Clock, for their Visits are long enough to tire the greatest Patience.

There never comes any Men where they are met, a jealous Husband would have
little to do to seek his Wife among them; he would be laughed at, and they would
not vouchsafe to give him any other Satisfaction, than telling him, That she is
where he is not. The good Women are cunning enough, and they make use of this
liberty; for you must know that every House has its back doors, by which they
can steal out, and never be seen. Besides this, every one has a Brother at her
Sisters, a Son at her Mothers, or a Nephew at her Aunts, and this is another
pretense they make use of to see their Lover. Love in this Country is very
ingenious, nothing is neglected to gratify their Passion, and the Mistress
meets with Fidelity; there are Intrigues that last one's Life, and yet there
has not been an hours time loss to accomplish them, all Opportunities are
improved, and there needs no more after seeing and liking one another.

I was some days ago at the Marchioness D' Alcannizas, she is one of the
greatest and most virtuous Ladies of the Court; discoursing of these things,
she very freely said to us, I must needs confess, that if a Cavallero should be
convenienly alone with me half an hour, and did not ask me all that a Man could
ask, I should resent it so briskly, that I would stab him if I could. And would
you grant him all the Favors he might ask you, interrupted the Marchioness De
Liche, who is young and handsome? That does not follow, replied my Lady D'
Alcannizas, on the contrary, I have reason to believe, that I should grant him
nothing at all; but then I could not reproach him with any thing, whereas if he
made no attempt upon me, I should conclude he despised me. There are few, I
believe, but what are of the same opinion in this matter.

There Is one thing I find very odd, and not to look well, methinks in a
Catholic Kingdom, and that is, The tollerating of Men, that keep Mistresses so
openly, without the least disguise; it is very true that they are forbid by the
Laws, but they value not the Laws, and only obey their own Inclinations, and
yet no body offers to call them to account, or to reprove them in the least.
These Mistresses are called Amancebades; though a Man is married, yet he must
have one of these Creatures, and often the natural Children are brought up with
the legitimate in the sight of the poor Wife, who patiently bears all this
without so much as speaking a word. It is very seldom one hears of any
Differences between Husband and Wife, and yet seldomer, that they separate as
in France. Of an infinite number of Persons that I know here, I have only seen
the Princess Della Rocea, that does not live with her Husband, but in a
Convent, the Courts of Justice are not much troubled here with domestic
Quarrels.

It seems extraordinary to me that a Lady who loves, and is beloved by a
Cavallero, is not jealous of his Amancebada; she looks upon her as a second
Wife, and believes she cannot stand in competition with her; so that a Man has
his Wife, his Amancebade, and his Mistress, this last is generally a Person of
Quality; it is she that is visited in the Night, and for whom they venture their
Lives.

It happens sometimes that a Lady covered with her great plain Mantle or Vail,
and not showing any more of her Face than half an Eye, and being ordinarily
dressed, because she would not be known, and having no mind to take a Chair,
walks afoot to the place of Rendezvous; either her being little used to walk,
or very often, her manner and way distinguishes her: a Cavallero follows, and
begins to talk to her, uneasy to have such a Companion which it is hard to get
rid of, she addresses her self to the first she meets, and without further
discovery of her self, I conjure you, says she to him, to hinder this
importunate Man to follow me any longer, his curiosity may injure my affairs;
this Request amounts to a command with a brave Spaniard; he asks him against
whom the Lady complains, why he will press upon her against her mind, and if he
meets with an obstinate Person, the Sword must be drawn, and sometimes they
kill each other, without knowing for whom they have so exposed themselves. In
the mean while, the Lady makes the best of her way, leaves them fighting
together, and goes where she is expected; but the jest is, that very often this
proves either to be the Husband or the Brother that asserts her Cause, and by
defending her from the Pursuit of the inquisitive, gives her an Opportunity to
enjoy the embraces of her Gallant.

Some time ago, a young Lady who dearly loved her Husband, being informed that
he did not live so regularly as he should, disguised her self, put on her Vail,
and standing in a Street he used often to pass through, she spied him and gave
him an Opportunity to speak to her. After he had occosted her, she began to
thou him; and it is commonly in this familiar way that the Women in this Country
make known their Inclinations. He made a Proposal to her, which she accepted,
but upon condition that he should not be desirous either to see her or know who
she was: he promised he would not, and so led her to a Friend of his; at their
parting he assured her, that he thought himself the happiest of Men, and that
Fortune had never been so kind to him before, and then gave her a very fine
Ring, and begged her to keep it for his sake. I Will keep and love it dearly, and
will meet thee here again when thou will, says she to him, for I had as good
have thy Jewels as another. When she had ended these words, she opened her
Vail, and the Husband seeing 'twas his Wife, was in the greatest confusion
imaginable at his Adventure; but he considered, that since she had so well
contrived the matter as to get out of her House to watch him, she might also
find a way to play him some other trick less pleasant; and therefore to be
secure of her, he appointed two Duennas constantly to look after her, and they
never after left her.

It happens also sometimes, that when a Man's House is not near the Place,
where by chance he meets his Mistress, he goes without Ceremony into the next
he comes at, whether he is acquainted there or no, he civilly entreats the
Master to let him have a Room to himself, because he has now an Opportunity to
discourse with a Lady, which if he loses, he shall not have the like in a long
time; this is enough to make the Master grant an Accommodation to the Gallant
and his Mistress, and sometimes, I assure you, it is the very Wife of the Fool
that goes away so kindly; in a word, they will venture strangely for an
Opportunity of seeing each other, though but for a quarter of an hour.

I remember a French Lady, discoursing of a certain Man to one of her Friends,
said, Show me an amorous Man, and I Will show you one ruined. This Maxim is
verified here, more than in any place in the World; a Lover or a Gallant has
nothing that he can call his own. It is no matter whether she either sees, or
has a real occasion for a thing, it is sufficient if she does but barely desire
it, they are never denied any thing, and the manner of giving it, enhaunses
their Liberality. I find them nothing near so amicable as our Frenchmen, but
it is said they know how to love at a greater rate. Besides, their Behavior is
a thousand times more respectful, nay this extends so far, that when a Man, let
him be of what Quality he will, presents any thing, or gives a Letter to a
Lady, he kneels upon one knee, and he does the same, when he receives any thing
from her hand.

I said I would tell you, why so many Ladies went to the Duchess of D'
Vzeda's; she is very amiable, and Daughter to the Duke D' Ossone, her Husband
has had a Quarrel with the Prince De Stillano, about a Lady which they both
love; they drew their Swords, and it is like to be an ill business. The King has
caused them to be arrested, that is, they are not made Prisoners, but he has
confined them to their Houses; unless they privately go abroad in the Night to
pursue their usual amorous Pleasures. And that which is strange, the poor Wife
must not set her foot out of door as long as her Husband is under these
Confinements, though it is almost constantly for some piece of Infidelity he is
guilty of toward her. And it is the same also, if they be banished, or sent to
remain upon some of their own Estates in the Country, which frequently happens.
In all the time of their Absence, their Wives keep house without so much as
once going abroad. I have been told, that the Duchess D' Ossone, was a
Prisoner after this manner for above two Years; this is the Custom, but it
makes ones Life very dull and tedious.

But it is not only the Spanish Ladies, who are so tired and uneasy here, the
French find but little diversion: We are in a few days to go to Arranjues and
Tolledo to kiss the Queen Mothers hand; I Will write you, dear Cousin, the
particulars of that small Journey, and I wish with all my Soul I were in a
condition to give you more essential marks of my Affection.

From Madrid this 25 of July, 1679.
LETTER XIII.
BY my last Letter, I told you, Dear Cousin, that we were to kiss the Queen
Mother's Hand; I have had this Honor, but before I conduct you thither, give
me leave to tell you of something else. I would not go from Madrid till I had
seen the Entry of the Marquess De Villars; he made it on Horseback, which is
the Custom here, and if a Man be handsome, it is very advantageous for him: when
the Venetian Ambassador made his, it was happy for him that he was not in his
Coach; he had one that was worth twelve thousand Crowns, which in going from
his House was overturned, and as it was in Winter, the Maree (which is that
nasty black dirt that stands in great puddles in the Streets, and through which
a Horse goes up to his Girts) so spoiled the Velvet with a Gold ground, and the
rich Embroidery it was set off with, that it could never serve again. I thought
it strange that for such usual Sights as these Entrees are, the Ladies should
all be in their Balconies, in their rich Apparel, and with the same
earnestness, as if it was to see the greatest King upon earth; but they have so
little liberty, that they are glad to embrace all Occasions to show themselves;
and as their Lovers and Gallants hardly ever speak to them, so they take care
to place their Coaches as near their Mistresses Balcony, as they can, that so
they may the more easily discourse with them by their Eyes and their Fingers;
this is a Practice that is very useful to them for the understanding one
another Minds, and they do it more readily than with their Voice, this silent
Language seems to me very difficult unless one were long used to it; but they
are early acquainted with it, and but two days since, I saw a Girl of about six
years old and a Boy of the same Age, which understood by this way to tell one
another a thousand pretty things. Don Frederick De Cordonna, who observed them
as well as I, but understood them far better, explained to me every thing they
said; and if he did not add to the Discourse of these two Children, one must
needs confess, that in this Country, they are born for Love and Courtship.

The Marchioness De Palacio, the Mother of Don Fernand de Tolleda, is one of my
Kinswoman's best Friends; she has a fine House called Igarica, upon the Banks
of Xarama, and though this Lady is now very old, yet she never was there,
notwithstanding it is but eight leagues from Madrid. It is not looked upon in
this Country to be according to Grandeur to go visit their Lands, except they
lie in some Principality or some City, and then they call them by the Name of
their State. I chid this Lady for her Carelessness, and my Kinswoman engaged her
to make one in the Company of her Daughter Donna Mariguita, who is a little
Woman, pale, fat and fair; these three Qualities are equally rare here, and
she is admired by every body that sees her; the young Marchioness De la Rosa,
would also be of our Company, her Husband, with Don Fernand de Tolleda, Don
Sanche, Sarmiento, and Esteve de Carvajal, went on Horseback; Don Frederick de
Cardonna, would not have failed of being there too, had not the Archbishop of
Burgos writ him to come to him in all haste: when he told it me, I desired him
to go see the fair Marchioness De Los Rios alas Huelgas. I gave him a Letter
for her, in which I taxt her with her silence, and desired to know particularly
how all things went. We set forward in two Coaches the sixth of August, at ten
a Clock at Night, in the finest Weather that could be; the Heats were so
excessive, that unless one would venture their Lives, it was impossible to
travel in the daytime; but the Nights are cool, and the Coaches are in the
Summer all open; the sides of the Coach were turned up quite round, with fine
large Holland Curtains, trimmed with fine English Bone-lace, and tied with Knots
of colored Ribbond, and as they often change them, they look very neat. We
went so swift, that I was almost dead with fear least something about our Coach
should break; for it is certain, that we might have been all killed a hundred
times over, before the Coachman would have known any thing of the matter. I
fancy they run so, to make amends for their slow going in Madrid; for even the
Foot-pace of the Mules is too quick there, because of the ill pavement, the
holes, the dirt in Winer, and the dust in Summer, with which the Streets are
extremely troubled. The Marchioness De Palacios wore a little Hat, trimmed with
Feathers, according to the mode of the Spanish Ladies when they go into the
Country; and the Marchioness De la Rosa looked very pretty in her short
close-coat, strait sleeves, and her other Ornaments, upon sight of which, we
cried out, that we thought her Muy Bizzarra, and Muy de Gala, that is, very
gallant and very splendid.

It was very odd methinks, that these Ladies should oblige us in three several
Places upon the Road to alight out of our Coach, and hear the Marchioness de la
Rosa's two Gentlemen play upon the Guittar, whom it seems they brought on
purpose, and it was pretty comical to see these Blades gallop with their
Guittars hanging behind their Backs. This ordinary consort of Music was
nevertheless ravishing to them, and they were extremely charmed with the
pleasantness of the Country in so fine a Night. Indeed, I never saw Women so
infinitely satisfied. We arrived at Arranjues about five a Clock in the
Morning, and I was amazed at its wonderful Situation; half a League on this
side the Tagus we passed over a wodden Bridge, which is made to shut up; and
after that we came into some Walks of Elm and Lyme Trees, which were so high,
green and shady, that the heat of the Sun is never felt. It is an extraordinary
thing to find so near Madrid, Trees so perfect in their kind, for the Soil is
very barren, and they will not grow there; but yet near Arranjues, one cannot
perceive this defect I speak of, for all along the Walks, and near the Trees,
there are little Pits and Trenches made, into which the Water of Tagus runs and
moystens the roots of the Trees. These Avenues are so long, that when one is in
the middle, one cannot see to the end of 'em. Several Alleys come into these,
and every way make the perfect figure of a Star. People walk on the Banks of
the Tagus and Xamara, which are two famous Rivers that environ the Island in
which Arranjues stands, and which supplies it with Water, and extremely
contributes to its beautifulness. To speak truly, I never saw a more delightful
place; I must confess the Gardens are too close, and several of their Alleys
too narrow, but yet it ravishes one to walk there; and at our coming into them,
I fancied my self in some enchanted Palace. The Morning was cool, every where
the Birds made a sweet Melody, and the Waters a pleasant murmuring noise, the
Trees and Hedges were laden with excellent Fruit, and the Parterres were
covered with most odoriferent Flowers, and I enjoyed all this in most pleasant
Company. We had an Order from Don John to be lodged in the Castle, so that the
Alcade received us with great Civility, and was very careful to show us every
thing that was the most remarkable. The Fountains are in that number, and there
are so very many of them, that it is impossible to pass through an Alley, to go
into an Arbor, or upon a Patere or Terrass without taking notice of five or six
with brazen Statues, and marble Basins: The Spouts throw up their Water to a
vast height, they are not fed from Springs, but from the Tagus. Amongst others,
I Will give you an account of the Fountain of Diana; It stands upon an ascent,
from whence it is seen at a great distance; the Goddess is in the midst,
environed with Bucks, Does, and Dogs, and every one of them spouts out Water. A
litttle lower is a circle of Myrrh, cut in several fashions, and little Cupids
peeping out half way, and throw the Water against those Animals which stand
about the Fountain. The Mountain of Parnassus raises up its head in the midst
of a great Pond, with Apollo, the Muses, Pagassius's Horse, and a fall of Water
which represents the River of Helicon. Out of a Rock there issues out a
thousand several Spouts of Water, some lanching out, others winding in and out
like a Serpent upon the Surface of the Pond; some gliding gently, and others,
either falling like Flowers in the Air, or else like Rain. The Fountain of
Ganymedes is also very pretty, this beautiful Child sitting upon Jupiter's
Eagle, seems frighted with its flight; the Bird sits on the top of a Pillar
with its Wings spread; he throws out the Water by his Beak and his Tallons; the
Fountain of Mars is near this: That of the Harpyes is fine, they are placed
upon very high Marble Pillars; at the four corners they throw out Water every
way, they seem to have a mind to drown a little Youth who sits in the middle of
the Fountain, picking a Thorn out of his Foot. But the most pleasant of all is,
the Fountain of Love; this little God seems to rise with his Body all full of
Darts, from every one of which comes out a Spout of Water. The three Graces sit
at the Feet of the God of Love; but that which is most extraordinary, is the
Water which falls from four high Trees like Fountains, whose noise is very
delighful and surprising, it not being natural for Water to come out of Trees.

I should be afraid to tire you, did I undertake to tell you the vast number of
Cataracts, Falls, and Fountains of Water which I have seen here, I will only in
general assure you, that it is a Place worthy of the curiosity and attention of
every body. At eight a Clock the Sun began to be too hot, and some went into
the House, which comes far short of that Beauty it should have, justly to
answer all the other things; and when the King goes there, those that attend
him are so ill accommodated with Lodging, that either he must be contented to
go there in all haste, and keep his Court a little, or else go as far as
Tolleda; for there are only two bad Inns, and a very few private Houses. If we
had not taken care before hand for Provisions, even to Bread, I am confident we
had met with none, unless the Alcade would have given us some of his. And by
the way, I Will inform you the difference there is between the Alcade and Alcalde,
that so you may not confound them; the first signifies the Governor of a Castle
or Place, and the other a Sergeant. Although the most curious Pictures are at
the Escurial, yet I found some excellent ones in the King's Appartment at
Arranjues; it is furnished according to the Season we are now in, that is to
say, the Walls are all white, have only a Matt that is very fine and thin about
three foot deep with some Looking-glasses and Pictures. In this Building there
are diverse little Courts, which takes from the grace of it. We eat our
Breakfast all together, and they persuaded me to eat some of a Fruit they call
Pimento, which is as long as one's finger, but as hot as Pepper, the least bit
of which puts ones Mouth in a Flame, they let it lie steeping in Vinegar and
Salt, to get out the Virtue: this Fruit is brought into Spain growing upon a
Plant; and I never saw any of it in other Countries where I have been. We had an
Ollio, some Ragous made of cold Partridges with Oil, Canary Wine, fat Pullets,
and Pigeons which are excellent here, and also several sorts of Fruit, which
was extraordinary fair. When this Repast, which was worth a Dinner, was ended,
we went to Bed, and went not a walking till about seven a Clock in the Evening.
The Charms of this Place were as new to me as if I had not seen them in the
Morning, but particularly, I still admired the Situation, which indeed
ravishes, on what side soever one turns the Eyes. The King is there, with half
a dozen of his Guards, in great safety, because there is no getting at him but
over Bridges, which are all drawn up, and the Xamara, which in this Place,
swells the Waters of Tagas, fortifies Arranjus. After we had walked till ten a
Clock at Night, we came back into a great Hall, paved with Marble, and
supported with Pillars of the same. It was all enlightened with diverse brancht
Candlesticks, and Don Esteve de Carvajal had privately got thither several
Musicians, which were a pleasant sort of a surprise to us, at least the Spanish
Ladies and my Kinswoman were mightily delighted with them. For my part, I
thought they sung too much in the Throat, and their Divisions and Shakes were
so long, that they were tedious; not but that their Voices are good, but their
manner of singing is not good, and generally the greatest part in Spain, do not
sing as they do in France and Italy. When Supper was done, we went to the great
Canal, where there is a small Gallion painted and gilt, we went aboard her, and
tarried till two a Clock in the Morning, and then we set forward on our way to
Tolleda.

I took notice when we came out of Arranjues, that the Ground was all Heath and
Ling, and yet the Air was perfumed with wild and mother Time, with which these
Plains were all covered. They told me there were a great many Rabits, Stags,
Does, and Fallow Deer, but it was not then their time to appear. Our
Conversation was for sometime general, and for two Leagues together from
Arranjues, I did not speak one word to Don Fernand, tho he sat just close by
me; But being willing to employ the time, in thoroughly informing my self about
all the Particulars of the cruel Inquisition, which he had promised to acquaint
me with, I desired him to let me know something of it,

The Inquisition, says he, has not been known in Europe, but since the
beginning of the Thirteenth Century. Before that time, the Bishops and Civil
Magistrates, inquired after Heretics, and either condemned them to Banishment,
or to the Forfeiture of their Goods and Estates, or else, to some other
Penalties, which never almost extended to Death: But the vast number of
Heresies which appeared toward the end of the Twelfth Age, caused that
Tribunal to be Established: The Pope sent several Religious Persons to the
Catholic Princes and Bishops, to exhort them, to take an extraordinary care,
in the Extirpation of Heresies, and to bring obstinate Heretics to
punishments: and thus things continued till the Year 1250.

In the Year 1251. Innocent IV. Authorized the Dominican Friars with the
assistance of the Bishops, to take Cognizance of these sort of Crimes. Clement
the IV. confirmed these Tribunals in the Year 1265. Afterward, there were
several Courts erected in Italy, and in the Kingdoms which were dependants of
the Crown of Arragon, till such time, that the Inquisition was established in
the Kingdoms of Castille, in the Reign of Ferdinand and Isabel, and after that
in Portugal, by King John the III. in the Year 1557.

To that time the Inquisitors had a limited Power, and it was often contested
by the Bishops, to whom the Cognizance of Heritical Crimes belonged. According
to the Canons, it was contrary to the Rules of the Church, for Priests to
sentence any Criminals to Death, much more for those Crimes, which the Civil
Laws often punished, with far less severe Penalties: But ancient Right yielding
to new Power, the Dominican Friars by the Popes Bulls have been for these two
Ages, in possession of this extraordinary Jurisdiction; from which the Bishops
have been excluded, the Inquisitors now only wanted the Authority of the
Prince, to enable them to execute their Sentences. Before Isabella of Castille
came to the Crown, the Dominican John de Torquemada, her Confessor, and
afterward Cardinal, made her promise him to persecute all Infidels, and
Heretics, as soon as it should be in her Power to do so. She pervail'd over
Ferdinand her Husband to obtain, in the Year 1483. Bulls from Pope Sixtus the
IV. to constitute an Inquisitor General, over the Kingdoms of Arragon and
Valentia, for these two Kingdoms were his Fee held in Capite: and it is to be
noted, that Ferdinand disposed of the Places in his Estates, and Isabel of
those that were in hers: but the Queen got this Place for Torquemada.
Afterward the Pope extended his Jurisdiction over all the States and Countries
of the Catholic Kings, and then Ferdinand and Isabel established a Supreme
Council of the Inquisition, of which they made him President: It is composed of
an Inquisitor-General, (who is nominated by the King of Spain, and confirmed by
the Pope) of five Counselors, whereof one is to be a Dominican, by a
Privilege granted to this Order, in the Year 1616. by Philip the III. Of a
Procurator, two Secretaries of the King's Chamber, two Secretaries of the
Council, an Alguazil Mayor, a Receiver, two Reporters, and two Qualificators.
and Consulters. The Number of the Familiars and small Officers is very great,
because all that belong to the Inquisition being not subject to or tryable by
any other Jurisdiction, shelter themselves here from the ordinary Courts of
Justice.

The Supreme Council has a full and sole Authority over the other
Inquisitions, which cannot perform any Auto or Execution, without leave from
the Great and General Inquisitor: The particular Inquisitors are those of
Sevile, Tolleda, Grenada, Cordua, Cuenca, Vailladolid, Marcia, Derena,
Logronno, St. James Saragossa, Valantia, Barcelona, Majorque, Sardaignia,
Palermo, Canaries, Mexico, Cartagena, and Lima.

Every one of these Inquisitions is composed of three Inquisitors, three
Secretaries, one Alguazil Mayor, and of three Receivers, Qualificators and
Consulters.

All Persons that take any of these Employments upon them, are obliged to make
out their Proofs De casa Limpia, that is, that their Family is not stained with
any thing of Judaism, or Heresy, and that they are Catholics from the
beginning.

The Proceedings of this Tribunal are very unusual. A man is Arrested and lies
in Prison, without knowing the Crime he is accused of, or the Witnesses which
depose against him: He cannot come out thence, unless he will own the Fault, of
which often he is not guilty, and which the desire of Liberty forces him to
confess, for they do not put one to death for the first time; but then the
Family is marked with Infamy, and this first Judgment makes the Persons
incapable of any Employment.

There Is no confronting of Witnesses, nor any means for a Man to defend
himself, because this Tribunal above all things affects an inviolable Secresy.
It proceeds against all Heretics, but chiefly against Judaizing Christians,
and secret Mahumetans, of whom the Expulsion of Jews and Moors by Ferdinand and
Isabel, has filled all Spain.

The severity of this Court was so excessive, that the Inquisitor Torquemada
tried above a hundred thousand Persons, of which six thousand were condemned to
be Burnt in the compass of fourteen Years.

It is pretended, that the sight of so many Criminals condemned to so terrible
a Death, without any regard either to their Sex or Quality confirms and keeps
the People in the Romish Religion, and that it is the Inquisitor alone, that has
hindered the wickedest Heresies from spreading themselves in Spain, even in that
time when all Europe besides was infected with them. For this reason, the Kings
have given such Arbitrary Authority to this Tribunal, which is called the
Tribunal of the Holy Office.

The general Acts of the Inquisition, which by the greatest part of Europe, are
looked upon, only as a bare Execution of Criminals, amongst the Spaniards, are
esteemed a Religious Ceremony by which his Catholic Majesty gives public
proofs of his Zeal for Religion. And therefore, are called by 'em Autos de Fe,
or Acts of Faith; commonly they are performed either at the Accession of the
Kings to the Crown, or at their coming to Age, that so they may be the more
Authentic: The last was in the Year 1632. and there is one now making ready
for the King's Marriage. As there has not been one of a long time, so there are
great preparations making to render this as Solemn and as Magnificent as it is
possible for those sorts of Ceremonies to be. One of the Counselors of the
Inquisition has already drawn a Project of it, which he has showed me: Here Is
the Contents of it.

In the great Place at Madrid, there shall be a Theater erected fifty Foot
long; It shall be raised as high as the Balcony designed for the King, and no
higher.

On the right-side of the King's Balcony, quite cross the Theater, there shall
be raised an Amphitheater, of twenty five or thirty Steps, designed for the
Council of the Inquisition, and the other Councils of Spain, on the uppermost
of which shall be placed the Chairs under a Canopy, for the General Inquisitor
a great deal higher then the King's Balcony. On the left of the the Theater and
the King's Balcony, there shall be another, Amphitheater as big as the first,
upon which the Criminals shall be placed.

In the middle of the great Theater, there shall be raised another very little
one, on which shall be made two Cages, where the Criminals shall be kept while
their Sentence is reading.

There shall be likewise placed upon the great Theater, three Chairs for the
Readers of the Judgment and for the Preacher, before whom there shall be an
Altar erected.

The Places for their Catholic Majesty's shall be so ordered, that the Queen
shall be on the left hand of the King, and on the right of the Queen Mother.
All the Queen's Ladies of Honor, shall take up the rest of the length every
way of the same Balcony; there shall be other Balconies prepared for the
Ambassadors, and Lords and Ladies of the Court, and Scaffolds for the People.

The Ceremony shall begin by a Procession from St. Mary's Church. A hundred
Charcoal-men armed with Pikes and Muskets, shall march before, because they
provide the Wood, which is to burn those that are condemned to the Fire. Next
them shall follow the Dominicans with a white Cross carried before them; the
Duke de Medina Celi shall carry the Standard of the Inquisition according to a
Privilege that is Hereditary to his Family: This Standard is of red Damask, on
one side of it, is represented a naked Sword, in a Crown of Laurel, and on the
other the Arms of Spain.

After that, shall be carried a green Cross, wrapped about with black Crape; and
after it shall march several Grandees and other Persons of Quality of the
Inquisition, covered with Cloaks, that have black and white Crosses upon them,
embroidered with Gold-Thred. The March shall be brought up by fifty Halberdiers
or Guards to the Inquisition, clothed in black and white, and commanded by the
Marquis De Pouar, Hereditary Protector of the Inquisition of the Kingdom of
Tolleda.

After the Procession has in this order past by the Pallais, it shall come to
the great Place; the Standart and the green Cross shall be fixed upon the Altar,
and the Dominicans only, shall remain upon the Theater, and spend part of the
Night in Singing Psalms, and as soon as day breaks, they shall celebrate
several Masses upon the Altar.

The King, the Queen and the Queen Mother, and all the Ladies must be in their
Balconies about seven a Clock in the Morning; at eight, the Procession shall
begin to march, as it did the day before, by the company of Charcoal-men, who
shall place themselves on the left hand of the King's Balcony, the right shall
be for his Guards. Afterward, several Men shall bear certain Past-board
Effigies as big as Life; some of them representing those that died in Prison,
whose Bones shall also be carried in Coffers with Flames painted round them,
and the rest shall represent those who have escaped, and who have been
condemned for Contumacy: These Figures shall be placed at one end of the
Theater. After that, their Sentance shall be read, and they shall be executed.
But I should tell ye, added he, That the Supreme Council of the Inquisition is
more absolute than all the others: It is believed that the King himself has not
Power to release those which shall be accused before it, because this Tribunal
acknowledges the Pope only to be above it, and that there has been a time, when
upon some occasions the King's Power, was found too weak to contend with that
of the Inquisition. Don Diego Sarmiento is Inquisitor General; He is a mighty
honest and good Man; and is about threescore Years of age: The King nominates
the President of the Inquisition, and his Holiness confirms him; But as for the
Inquisitors, the President proposes them to the King, and after he has approved
of them, he then puts them in their Places.

This Tribunal takes Cognizance of every thing concerning the Faith, and it is
absolutely invested both with the Pope's and and the King's Authority, there is
no appealing from its Judgment; and the two and twenty Tribunals of the
Inquisition, which are in all the Estates of Spain, and which depend upon this
at Madrid, every Month render an Account to it, of their Finances, and
Revenues, and every Year of their Causes and Criminals: But those of the Indies
and the other distant Places, only give an Account at the end of every Year. As
to the Places of these inferior Tribunals, they are filled by the General
Inquisitors, with the Approbation of the Counselors. It would be pretty
difficult to be able precisely to reckon up the number of the Officers, which
belong to the Inquisition; for in Spain alone, there is above two and twenty
thousand Familiars of the Holy Office. They are called by this Name, because
they are as 'twere Spies, scattered up and down every where, which are
continually giving true or false Informations to the Inquisition, upon which
those are seized and taken up, which they accuse.

Whilst with the greatest Attention I was listening to Don Fernand, the
Marchioness De Palacios interrupted us, to let us know that we were come near
Tolleda, and that certain old Ruins of an ancient Castle which we saw upon our
left hand, were those of an enchanted Palace. I seemed to Don Fernand to doubt
of what she affirmed, upon which he said, you may think what you please; but
certain it is, that there is for it a very ancient Tradition in this Country;
and moreover, they pretend that there is a Cave shut up, and a Prophecy which
threatened Spain with the greatest Miseries, when ever this Cave was opened:
Every body terrified with this threat, had no mind to draw upon themselves the
sad Effects, so that this place did for several Ages remain very close. But
Don-Rodrigue, the King, less credulous, or more curious, caused it to be
opened, upon which there were heard most terrible Noises; every body thought
that the very Elements themselves were going into confusion, there was so
violent a Tempest: This did not hinder him from going into it, where by light
of several Elamboys, he saw the Figures of diverse Men, whose Clothes and Arms
were very strange: There was one held a Copper Blade in his hand, and upon it
was writ in Arabic, that the Time drew near, for the Dissolation of Spain, and
that the Persons, whose Statues were there, would ere long come. I never was in
any place, said I smiling, where they relied so much on fabulous Tales, as they
do in Spain: Say rather, replied he, that there never was any Woman so
incredulous as you; and in telling you this Story, I did not think I should
alter your Judgment; But as much as one can be assured of a thing by the
Testimony of Men, this Story is credible.

It was now light enough, very plainly to observe all the Charms of the
Country. We past the Tagus over a very great and fine Bridge, of which I had
heard, and a little after discovered Tolleda all surrounded with Hills and
Rocks, which command it; There are very neat Houses built amongst those Hills,
designed for the pleasure of Solitude: The Archbishop of Tolleda has one
there, whether he goes often: The City stands upon the Rock, the unevenness of
which in diverse places contributes to make it high and low; the Streets are
narrow, ill paved and troublesome, which is the reason, that all the People of
Quality go there, either in Chairs or Litters: And as we were in a Coach, we
took up our Quarters in the Placa Mayor, because that is only the part to which
one can pass with a Coach; as soon as we were arrived, we alight at the
Hospital of Foira, which stands in the Suburbs, whose Building consists of
three Sides, within which is a great square Court, and the Church makes up the
fourth side, and there we heard Mass: This Hospital was built by an Archbishop
of Tolleda, whose Monument and Statue in Marble are in the midst of the body of
the Church: The Walls of the City were rebuilt by the Moors; on the Sides
stands a great many little Towers, which heretofore served to defend it; And it
would be astrong Place, being almost encompast with the Tagus, and having
extreme deep Ditches, did not the adjacent Hills command it, from whence it
were easy to batter it down. It was not eight a Clock when we got thither; and
we would spend the rest of the Morning in seeing the Church, which as it is
said, is the finest in Europe: The Spaniards call it Holy, whether it is upon
the Account of the Relics which are there, or for some other reason which they
did not tell me, I know not: If it was as long and as high as it is broad, it
would be much better. It is beautified with diverse Chapels as big as Churches;
they all shine with Gold and Paintings; the chief of which are those of the
Virgin, St. James, St. Martin, Cardinal Sandoual and the Connestable De Luna.
In the Quire, I saw a Niche, or hollow place, from whence it is pretended there
issued out for several days together, a Spring of Water with which the Soldiers
and Citizens quenched their thirst in the time they maintained the Sieges
against the Moors, when they were half dead with thirst; For without digressing
from my subject, I must tell you, that in the City there is not so much as a
Well or a Spring, and that they fetch all their Water from the Tagus, which is
so very troublesome, that one would wonder how Tolleda comes to be so full of
People as it is. Near the entrance into the Church, there is a Marble Pillar,
which they Reverence, because the Holy Virgin appeared upon it to St. Alphonsus.
It is encloas'd with an Iron Gate, and through a little Window they kiss it,
and upon it is writ, Adoraebimus in loco ubi fleterunt pedes ejus. Between
every Canon's Seat there is a Marble Pillar, and the Sculpture of the Church is
fine and curiously wrought. I was amazed when I saw the Treasury. There must be
thirty Men to carry the Tabernacle upon Corpus Christi day. It is made of
Silver gilt, and there is exquisitely wrought upon it several Spires of
Steeples, with abundance of Angels and Cherubins: within this, there is also
another of Massy-gold, and such a vast quantity of precious Stones that their
value is inestimable; the Chalacies, the Patins and the Pyxes are no less
beautiful: Indeed, every thing shines there, with great Diamonds and Oriental
Pearls; the Sun, where the Holy Sacrament is kept, the Crowns and Robes of the
Virgin are the most splendid things, that I ever saw in my days. But indeed
this Archbishopric is so very rich, that it is but just every thing should be
answerable to it. I have told you, dear Cousin, that the Archbishop of Burgos
informed me, that the Bishopric of Tollada had three hundred and Fifty
thousand Crowns a Year. I must now add, that the Revenue of the Church it self,
is a Hundred thousand Crowns. Forty Canons, which have every one a thousand
Crowns, the Grand Archdeacon, Forty thousand, three Archdeacons, the first of
which has fifteen thousand, the second twelve thousand, and the third ten
thousand, and the Dean ten thousand Crowns a Year.

There is besides, an infinite number of Chaplains, Clerks of the Chapel, and
other Persons, to whom daily allowances are given.

There is the Chaplain Mayor of the Chapel de los Rios, who enjoys twelve
thousand Crowns a year, and six others that are under him, have a thousand
Crowns per Annum.

After we had spent a great deal of time in considering the fine things with
which this Court was filled, we resolved to return to our Inn, where we had
left our Coach; and just when we were going away, there came to us an Almoner
and a Gentleman that belonged to Cardinal Porto Carrero, who sent them to
complement us, and to assure us, that by no means we must lodge any where else
than at the Archbishops Palace. They chiefly addressed themselves to the
Marchioness de Palacios who was near a kin to him, and who earnestly desired us
to go thither: We excused our selves upon our being in such Disorder, not
having slept that Night, and being in an undress: she ordered her Son to go to
the Cardinal, and to beg him to accept our excuses. Don Fernand returned in a
moment, attended with abundance of Pages, some of which brought Umbrellos of
Gold and Silver Brocado. He told us that his Eminence mightily desired we would
go to his House, and that he had showed so much concern at our refusal, that
indeed he had promised to bring us; and thereupon he commanded them to bring
Umbrellos to defend us from the Sun, and that they had watered the place which
we mere to cross from the Church to the Palace. And immediately we spied two
Mules drawing a little Cart, in which there was a Tub full of Water; and we
were told that as often as the Cardinal was to come to the Church, it was the
Custom to water the way.

The Archbishops Palace is very ancient and large, most richly furnished, and
every way suitable to the Person that possesses it. We were conducted into a
very fine Appartment, where immediately they brought us Chocolate, and
afterward, all sorts of Fruits, Wine, Water and other Liquors cooled with Ice.
We were so sleepy, that after we had eat a little, we begged the Marchionness
de Palacios to see the Cardinal, and to excuse us to him, if we deferred giving
our selves that honor, for that we were not able any longer to live without
sleep. And indeed, the young Marchionness de la Rose, my Kinswoman and my self,
chose to go to bed, and in the Evening, we dressed our selves to see the
Queen Mother. The Marchioness de Palacios, who had always been extremely
devoted to her, went to the Alcacar, which is the Name of the Castle, and made
her a visit whilst we slept; so that she told her, she would give us Audience
at eight a Clock in the Evening, and that was the first time I was dressed
according to the Spanish Mode.

I do not think there is a more troublesome dress; ones Shoulders must be so
squeezed, that it hurts one; there is no lifting up ones Arm, hardly can you get
it into the Sleeve. I had on a Fardingal of a dreadful bigness, (for one must
wear that in the Queen's Presence) I know not what to do with my self with this
strange Invention; there is no sitting down in it, and I believe if I should
wear it all my Life, I should never be reconciled to it. My Head was dreast
after the Melene fashion, that is, the Hair all spread over the Neck, and tied
at the end with some Non-pareil Ribbon, this is a great deal hotter than a
Palatine; so that being now in the Month of August, and in Spain, you may
easily guess how I pass away my time. But this being a ceremonial Dress of the
Head, there was nothing to be omitted upon such an occasion; besides, I wore
their Patins which are fitter to break ones Neck, than to walk with. When we
were all in a Condition to appear, for my Kinswoman and my Daughter were both
also dressed after the Spanish fashion, we were led into a Chamber of State,
where the Cardinal came to see us; his Name is Don Luis Porto Carrero, he may
be about two and forty years old, he is very civil, is of a sweet complaisant
Temper, and has well learnt the polite Breeding of the Court of Rome: He
stayed an hour with us, and afterward there was served up to us a very
plentiful Meal; but every thing was so full of Amber, that I never tasted any
Sawces so rich, and less pleasant. I fancied my self at this Table, like
Tantalus, in the midst of Victuals, and yet starved with hunger, because I
could not eat; for either all the Meat was perfumed, or else full of Saffron,
Garlic, Onion, Pepper and Spices: but with searching about, I found some
Jellies and white Meats, which were admirable, and with which I saved my self
harmless. There were also brought to Table a Ham of Bacon, which came from the
Frontiers of Portugal, and which is better than either those they boast so much
of at Bayonu, or those of Ments; but it was spread all over with certain little
Comfits, which in France we call Non-pariel, the Sugar of which melted in the
Fat; it was drawn full of Limon-peel, which abated much of its goodness. The
Fruit was the best and the pleasantest thing one can see, for whole Trees with
their Fruit were Iced over with Sugar after the Italian way; you will easily
believe the Trees were not very big. There were Orange Trees thus ordered, with
little artificial Birds fastened in them. There were likewise Cherry Trees,
Rasberry and Goseberry Bushes, and others set in little Cases of Silver.

We did not sit long at Table, because the hour for seeing the Queen was near;
we were carried thither in Chairs, though it is a pretty distance, and very
much up Hill; for the Alcacar is built upon a Rock of a prodigious height, and
the Prospect is admirable. Before the Gate there is a very wide Place,
afterward one comes into a Court an hundred and sixty foot long, and an
hundred and thirty broad, adorned with two rows of Piazza's, ten rows of the
Pillars which made the length, were all of one entire Stone; and the breadth
had eight rows of Pillars, and this made a fine show. But that which pleases
much better, is the Staircase at the bottom of the Court, which is an hundred
and thirty foot wide, like the Court. After one has gone up some steps it parts
in two, and to speak the Truth, I believe it is one of the fairest in Europe. We
went through a great Gallery, and vast Appartments, but met in them so few
People, that it did not look as if one could have met with the Queen Mother of
Spain there; she was in a great Hall, whose Windows were all open, and which
had a Prospect to the Valleys, and the River. The Hangings, Cushions, Carpets
and Canopy were all of gray Cloth; the Queen was standing and leaning upon a
Balcony, having in her hand a great pair of Beads. When she saw us, she turned
toward us, and received us with a Countenance merry enough. We had the Honor
to kiss her Hand, which is little, lean and white: She is very pale, her
Complexion pure, her Face a little long and flat, her Looks are agreeable, and
her Stature is of a middle size; she was dressed as all the Widows in Spain are,
that is, like a Nun, without so much as one Hair appearing; and there are many,
(though she is not of that number) that cause all their Hair to be cut off when
they lose their Husbands, for a greater expression of their Grief. I observed
that her Gown was tucked up quite round, that so it might be let down as it
wears out; yet I do not believe she practices this, but such is the fashion of
the Country. She asked me how long I had been come from France, and I gave her
an account; she inquired if they discoursed then of a Marriage between her Son
and Mademoiselle d' Orleance, and I told her no; then she said she would show
me her Picture which was drawn from that the King her Son had, and she bid one
of her Ladies, who was an old Duenna, and very ugly, bring it. It was drawn in
water Colors, in the bigness of ones hand, in a Box covered with black Satin,
and lined with green Velvet. Do you find, says she, that it is like her? I
assured her that there were not any of her Features; for indeed it seemed to
squint, the Face was awry, and nothing could less resemble a Princess so
perfect as Mademoiselle. She asked me whether she was more or else handsome
than this Picture. I told her, that she was handsomer beyond comparison. The
King my Son then, replied she, will be pleasantly cheated, for he believes this
Picture is just like her, and no body can be better satisfied than he is with
her. For my part, her Eyes that look askew were troublesome to me; but to
comfort my self, I considered that she had a great share of Wit, and diverse
other good Qualitles. Do not you remember, says she, to the Marchioness de
Palacios, to have seen my Picture in the late King's Chamber? Yes, Madam,
answered the Marchioness, and very well remember also, that as soon as we saw
your Majesty, we all wondered extremely, why the Painter would do you so much
wrong; that is what I would have said to you, replied she, for when I arrived
here, and cast my Eyes upon that Picture which they said was made for me, I in
vain tried to believe it, but I could not do it. A little she Dwarf, but thick
as a Tun, and no taller than a good big Mushroom, clothed all in Gold and
Silver Brocade, with long Hair hanging dowh to her Feet, came in, and kneeling
before the Queen, asked her if she would please to have Supper; upon which we
offered to withdraw, but she told us, we might follow her, and she went into a
Parlour all of Marble, she sat down to Table all alone, and we all stood round
her. Her Maids of Honor, with the Camera Mayor, who looked very sad, came to
wait on her. I saw some of them, which methinks were very handsome; they talked
to the Marchioness de Palacios, and told her, that they were horribly tired
with that sort of Life, and that they lived at Tolleda, as if they were in a
Desert. These were called Damas de Palecio, and they wear Patins; but for the
little Menines, they wear Shoes quite flat; the Menines are Children of the
highest Quality, and neither wear Cloak nor Sword.

There were several Dishes brought before the Queen, the first were Melons
cooled with Ice, and some Sallets and Milk, of which she eat plentifully before
she touched any of the Flesh, which looked ill enough. She does not want a
Stomach, and she drank a little Wine pure, saying that was to digest her Fruit:
When she called for Drink, the first Menin brought her Cup covered upon a
Salver, and kneeling gave it to the Camarera, who also kneeled when the Queen
took it from her Hands; and on the other side, a Lady of the Palace presented
upon Knee a Napkin to the Queen to wipe her Mouth with: She gave some dried
Sweetmeats to Donna Mariguita de Palacios, and to my Daughter, in saying to
them, they must not eat much of such things, because they spoiled the Teeth of
young Girls. She asked me diverse times, how the Most Christian Queen did, and
how she diverted her self? She said, that she had lately sent her some Boxes of
Amber Pastils, some Gloves, and some Chocolate: She was above an hour and half
at Table, speaking little, but seemed merry enough. We desired to know her
Commands for Madrid, whereupon she expressed a great deal of Kindness and
Civility, and after that we took our leave of her. It cannot be denied, that
this Queen has abundance of Understanding, as well as Courage and Virtue, to
take as she does, so tedious a Banishment.

I must not forget to tell you, that the first Menine brings the Queens Patins
and puts them on; this is so great an Honor in this Country, that they would
not change it for the best place belonging to the Crown. When the Ladies of the
Palace marry, and with the Queens consent, she adds to their Portions fifty
thousand Crowns, and commonly some Government or Vice-Royalty is given to their
Husbands.

When we came back to the Cardinal's House, we found a Theater prepared in a
mighty great Room, and abundance of Ladies on one side, and Cavalleros on the
other; and that which seemed pretty odd to me, was a Damask Curtain which was
drawn all the length of the Room to the very Theater, and so hindered the Men
and the Women from seeing one another: They only stayed for us, to begin the
Comedy of Pyramus and Thisbe; this was a new Play, but the worst that I have
yet seen in Spain. Afterward the Comedians danced very well, and the Diversion
lasted till after two a Clock in the Morning.

There was given a stately Supper in a great Hall, where there were diverse
Tables; and when the Cardinal had placed us, he went back to the Cavalleros,
who had the same things on their side as we had: There was an excellent Italian
Consort of Music, for his Eminence had brought with him Musicians from Rome,
to whom he gave large Pensions. It was six a Clock in the Morning before we
could retire to our Appartment; and as there were diverse things for us yet to
see, instead of going to bed; we went to the Placa Mayor, which they call
Secodebet; the Houses which environ it are of Brick, and all uniform, with
Balconies: It is of a round Figure, and has Piazzas about it, under which
People walk, and this is a fine Place. We went back to the Castle to view it
better and more leisurely; The Building is after the Gothic fashion, and very
ancient; but there is something in it that looks so great, that I do not wonder
that Charles V. had rather have lived there, than in any other City under his
Obedience. It contains in a square, four great Appartments with their several
Wings and Pavillions; there is room enough conveniently to lodge the whole Court
of a great King. We were showed a Machine that was very strange before it was
broken; it was to draw up the Water from the Tagus, and to make it rise to the
top of the Alcacar; the House where it stood is yet whole, though it be several
Ages since it was built. There Is above five hundred steps from it to the River
side; when the Water was come into the Receiver, it ran by certain Channels
into all parts of the City where there were Fountains: This was a mighty
Convenience, for now they are forced to draw their Water thirty fathom deep.

We went and heard Mass in the Church de Los Reys: It is fair and large, and
all full of Oranges and Pomegranet Trees, Jassemin and Mirtles, that are very
high; they are set in Cases, and are formed into Walks up to the very high
Altar, whose Ornaments are extraordinary rich, so that looking through all
these green Boughs, and the Flowers of different Colors, upon the shining
Gold, Silver, Embroidery, and great lighted Candles which adorn the Altar, it
seems as if the Rays of the Sun played before your Eyes. There are also some
Cages painted and gilt, and filled with Nightingales, Canary Birds and others,
which make a charming noise. I should be very glad that in France they would
imitate them in adorning our Churches. The Walls of this Church is all over
covered on the outside with the Chains and Irons of the Captives which have
been redeemed out of Barbary. In this part of the Town I observed that most of
the Houses had upon their Doors a square piece of Earthen Ware, upon which was
set the Angelical Salutation in these words, Maria sue concebida sin peca lo
original. I was told that these Houses belonged to the Archbishop, and that
none but those that work in Silk dwell in them, of which there are very many at
Tolleda. The two stone Bridges cross the River are very high, broad and long:
If they would but take a little pains with the Tagus, Boats might come up to
the City, this would be a considerable Convenience; but they are naturally too
lazy, to consider that the Profit and Advantage of a work is to be preferred
before the trouble of undertaking it. We also saw the Hospital of Los Linnos;
that is of Foundlings, and the City-House which is near the Cathedral; and at
last our Curiosity being satisfied, we came back to the Archiepiscopal Palace,
and we went to Bed and laid till Night, when again we had another Feast as
splendid as the former: His Eminence eat with us, and when we had returned him
all due thanks, we set forward toward the Castle of Ignarica: The Marquess de
Palacios, with all his Family, was there waiting for us; so that we were so
obligingly received, that nothing can be added to the good Cheer and to the
Pleasure, with which we were entertained for six days, either in Fishing upon
the River Xarama, of in Hunting, in Walking, or in common Conversation: Every
one was Emulous to appear good humored; and one may say, that when the
Spaniards go so far as to lay aside their Gravity, and know and love you, they
contribute hugely to ease and recreate the Mind. They become sociable,
obliging, earnest to please you, and the best Company in the World. This is
what I have found in this little Journey I have made, of which I should not
have given you so particular an Account; but yet I am persuaded, Dear Cousin,
you desire it so, and that you set some value upon my Complaisance.

From Madrid this 30th of August, 1679.
LETTER XIV.
THE Ceremony of Swearing to the Treaty of Peace concluded at Nimmiguen,
between the Crawns of France and Spain, was performed here the last of August.
I had a great desire to have seen what past then; but as Women are not to be
present there, so the Connestable De Castille promised to get us into the
King's Chamber, as soon as he should be gone into the great Hall, Madam Gueux
the Danish Ambassador's Lady, and Madam De Chais, the Envoy of Holland's Lady,
were there also. We went up at a grivate Pair of Stairs, where one of the
Constable's Gentlemen waited to receive us, and we tarried for some time in a
very fine Closet full of Spanish Books, well bound and very diverting: There
amongst others, I found the History of Don Quixot, the famous Knight of the
Manca, in which the plainness and the subtilty of the Expression, the weight
and strength of Proverbs, and that which the Spaniards call El pico, that is
the smartness and nicety of a Language, appeared quite otherwise, then the
Translations which we have in French. I was so pleased in reading it, that I
hardly thought of seeing the Ceremony: It began as soon as the Marquis De
Villars came, and through a Lattice-window which was opened, we saw what past.
The King placed himself at the end of the great Gilt-Hall, which is one of the
most stately in the Palace; The Alcove was spread with a wonderful fine Carpet;
the The Throne and the Canopy were embroidered with Pearls, Diamonds, Rubies,
Emeraulds and other precious Stones. Cardinal Portocarrero sat in a great Chair
below the Alcove, on the right hand of the Throne; the Constable of Castille
sat upon a Stool; the French Ambassador was seated on the left hand of the
Throne upon a Bench covered with Velvet, and the Grandees were placed near the
Cardinal; when every body was seated according to their Quality, the King came
in, and when he was in his Throne, the Cardinal, the Ambassador, and the
Grandees set down and covered themselves. A Secretary read aloud, the Power
which the most Christian King had sent to his Ambassador. After that, a little
Table was brought and set before the King, with a Crucifix and a Book of the
Evangelists, and whilst he held his hand upon it, the Cardinal read the Oath,
by which he swore to keep the Peace with France: There were some other little
Ceremonies, but I did not mind them well enough to be able to give you an
Account of 'em. A little after the King returned to his Lodgings, but we were
gone out of them before: We stayed in the same Closet where we stopped at first:
It was so near his Chamber, that we heard him say, that he was never so hot,
and that he would put off his Collar: And indeed, the Sun does shine very hot
in this Country: At my first coming hither, I was afflicted with a strange
Meagrim, and could not imagine the cause of it; but my Kinswoman told me 'twas
because I wore too much upon my Head, and that if I did not take care I might
lose my sight so; I immediately threw off my Bonnets and my Cornets, and since
that time I have never had any pain in my Head. For my part, I cannot believe
that there is in any part of the World more serene Air than there is here: It is
so pure, that you cannot perceive so much as one Cloud; and it is affirmed to
me, that even the Weather here in Winter, is like the finest Weather in any
other Country: That which is most dangerous here is, a certain Wind De
Galiegue, which blows off the Mountains of the Mountains Gallicia: It is not
violent, but it is so piercing, that it reaches the very Bones, and sometimes
causes a Lameness in a Leg or an Arm, and often in half the Body, which lasts
for ones life: It is more frequent in Summer than in Winter. Strangers take it
for the Western Briezes, and are ravished when they feel it, but experience
convinces them of its Malignity. The Seasons in Spain are much more convenient
and pleasant than either in France, England, Holland, or Germany; For hot to
reckon that purity of Air, which cannot be imagined so fine as it is from the
Month of September to the Month of June, it is not so cold, but one can make a
shift without fire; and this is the reason, why there is no Chimneys in any of
their Appartments, and that they make use only of Chafindishes. But it is a
great Happiness that Wood being so scarce as it is in this Country, they have no
occasion for it; It never freezes thicker than the thickness of two Crowns, and
there falls little Snow. But the adjacent Mountains furnish Madrid with it all
the Year round: The Months of June, July and August, are indeed excessive hot.

I was lately in a Company where all the Ladies were sadly frighted: One of 'em
said, that she had received a Letter from Barcelona, which advised, that a Bell
there, which was only rung upon some public Calamity, or upon some occasion of
the highest Consequence, had all alone rung several times: This Lady came from
Barcelona, and she assured me, that whenever any Misfortune and Misery is to
befall Spain, or that any of the House of Austria is to die, this Bell rings;
that for a quarter of an hour together the Clapper of the Bell moves with a
strange quickness, and strikes in turning round: I would not believe it,
neither do I yet: But all the Company confirmed what she said: If it is a Lie,
there were above twenty that conspired with her in it. They began to think upon
what, and on whom this unhappiness which by this sign is foretold was to fall;
and as they are very Superstitious, the beautiful Marchioness De Liche,
encreast their fears, by telling them, that Don John was very sick.

In their deep Mourning, they are attired like Fools, but chiefly on the first
days; for the Footmen as well as the Masters have long Cloaks trailing, and
instead of Hats, they wear a very high Past-board Cap covered with Crape; their
Horses are all in black Trappings, and Houssings which cover their Heads and
all their Bodies: Nothing looks uglier; their Coaches are so ill covered, that
the Cloth which covers the Roof, hangs almost down to the Boots: No body that
sees this doleful Equipage but would think, that some Corpse is a carrying to be
buried; the People of Quality wear their Cloaks of black Bays, very thin and
rotten, the least thing tears it in pieces: And that Mourning is most graceful,
that is most ragged and tattered. I have seen some Cavelleros which tore their
Clothes on purpose; and I assure you, that through some of their Clothes, you
may see their Skin as ugly as it is to look on: For though their Children when
they are young, are as white as Alablaster, and so pretty, that you would take
them for Angels, yet it must be granted, that as they grow bigger, they alter
very strangely; the heat of the Sun roasts them, the Air tans them, and it is
easy to know a Spaniard from any other Nation: Their Features are nevertheless
regular, but still there wants methinks our Air and Mien as well as our Skin
and Complexion.

All the Scholars wear long Robes, with a little Border of Linen about their
Necks instead of a Collar; they are habitted very like the Jesuits; there is of
'em above thirty Years old; they are known to be Students yet by their Habits.

I fancy this City to look like a great Coup, in which they feed Poultry: For
really, from the Level of the Street to the fourth Story, one can see nothing
but Lattices whose holes are very small; and their very Balconies have 'em:
There Is always to be seen some of the poor confined Women standing behind them,
to look upon Passengers, and when they dare, they open them, and with great
delight show themselves; there is not a Night passes without four or five
hundred Consorts of Music, in several parts of the Town; it is true they are at
a moderate rate, and it is sufficient if a Gallant has only his Guittar or his
Harp, and sometimes both joined with a Voice hoarse enough to awake the most
drowsy body, and afford 'em the pleasure of a Queen: If either they do not
understand what is most excellent, or cannot obtain it, they are content with
what they can get: I never saw any Virginals or Theorba's here.

In every Street, and at every corner House, there is an Image or Statue of our
Lady dressed after the Fashion of the Country; with a Pair of Beads in her
Hands, and either a great Wax Candle or a Lamp burning before her: I have seen
three or four in my Kinswoman's Stable, with other pieces of Devotion; for you
must know, that every Groom will have his Oratory as well as his Master, though
perhaps neither one nor the other often pray there. When one Lady goes to visit
another, if it be in the Night, four Pages comes to receive her with great
Flamboys of white Wax, and in the same manner conduct her out again, and while
she is going into her Chair, they commonly kneel upon one Knee: This is
something more splendid, than the small Wax Candles enclosed in Links which are
used in France.

Here are Houses on purpose for Women of lewd Lives, like the Madelonnettes at
Paris: They use them very severely, and there is not a day passes that they are
not whipped several times; in a certain time they are released, but come out
worse than they went in, what they suffered making them not a bit the better.
They live almost altogether in a particular part of the Town, where virtuous
Women never go, but if by chance any one does go that way, they run and pursue
after her, as if she was their Enemy; and if it happens that they are the
strongest, she is sure to be cruelly used; and for the Cavalleros, they run the
Risque of being torn in pieces as often as they pass that way; that is to say,
who shall have 'em: One takes him by the Arm, another by the Legs, and a third
by the Head, and if he grows angry, they altogether fall upon him and rob him,
and even strip him of his Clothes. My Kinswoman has a Page who was ignorant of
the Tricks of these wretched Wenches, and went innocently through their
Quarters, but they stripped him as naked as common Thieves in a Wood could have
done; and yet a Man must be content with this Treatment, For to whom shall he
go for Restitution?

The Bell of Barcelona has been but too true in its Prognostics, for Don John
was the first of this Month brought down so very low with his sickness, that
the Physicians despaired of him, and he was advised to prepare himself for
Death: He received the News with so much Tranquillity and Resignation, as very
much confirmed the Belief that several Persons had before entertained, that he
had taken some private disgust, which made him rather wish to die than live:
The King came every moment into his Chamber, and spent several hours at his
Bedside, notwithstanding his earnest Prayers that he would not so expose
himself to a Fever: He received the Blessed Viaticum, made his Will, and writ
a Letter to a Lady whose name I could not learn: He commanded Don Antonio Ortis
his chief Secretary to carry it with a little Box locked, which I saw; it was
made of China Wood, and light enough to make one think there was in it nothing
but Letters and perhaps some Jewels; while he was so dangerously sick a
Courrier arrived with the News of the King's Marriage with Mademoiselle; the
Joy of which did not only fill the Palace, but all the City showed Expressions
of it, for there were over the whole Town Artificial Fireworks and
Illuminations for three Days together: The King could not contain himself, but
run into Don John's Chamber, and although he was very drowsy and heavy to
sleep, and wanted rest, yet he awaked him to tell him that the Queen would
quickly be here, and entreated him to think of nothing but being well again,
that he might assist at her reception. Ah! Sire, answered the Prince to him, I
shall never have that Satisfaction, I should be content to die, if I had had
the Honor to have seen her once: The King fell a weeping, and told him, That
seeing him in that Condition, was the only thing that disturbed his Happiness.
There was to have been a Bull-Feast, but the Prince's sickness has caused it to
be put off, and the King would not have suffered any Fireworks in the
Palace-Court, had not Don John, notwithstanding he had a violent pain in his
Head, begged him to permit them. In fine, the 17th of this Month he died
extremely regretted by some, and as little by others. This is the fate both of
Princes and Favorites, as well as of Persons that move in an ordinary Sphere;
and as his Credit was already declining, and the Courtiers now thought of
nothing else but the Queen-Mother's Return, and the Arrival of the new Queen,
so it is a mighty strange thing to observe with what indifference the Sickness
and Death of Don John was taken; they did not so much as talk on him the very
next day; It seemed as if he had never been in the World. Alas! Dear Cousin,
does not this deserve a little to be reflected on? He governed all the Kingdoms
of the King of Spain, his very name struck Terror, he caused the Queen Mother
to be banished; he drove away Father Nitard, and Valenuela, who were both
Favorites, he had for the most part a greater Court than the King: And yet
four and twenty hours after he was dead, I believe I saw in different places
fifty Persons of the highest Quality, which did not so much as speak one word
of this poor Prince, notwithstanding diverse of them had very great Obligations
to him: And yet after all, he had very great personal Qualifications and
Virtues: He was of a middle Stature, and a well shaped body, his Features were
regular, his Eyes black and lively, he had black Hair, a great deal of it, and
very long: He was well bred, of a great Wit and Judgment, very generous, brave
and beneficent, and had a Capacity for the highest Affairs. He was not ignorant
of any thing that was suitable to his Birth, nor of any of the Arts and
Sciences. He both spoke and writ very well five several Languages, and
understood more: He was perfectly well read in History; he could both make and
play upon any Instrument as well as the best Master. He understood how to turn
several things; he could forge Arms, and he delighted much in the Mathematics;
but being called to the management of the Government, he was obliged to take
his Thoughts off all these Exercises. The face of things changed in a moment,
his Eyes were scarce closed, before the King (moved only by his own kind and
easy Nature for the Queen his Mother) run to Tolleda to see her, and to
entreat her to return; she consented to it with all the Joy she had to see the
King. They wept not a little, while they embraced each other, and we saw 'em
come back together. All the Persons of Quality went to meet their Majesty's,
and the People showed abundance of Joy. I should enlarge a great deal more upon
this return, did I not intend to be very particular in the Memoirs I am writing.

Don John laid three days in his Bed of State, and in the same Clothes which he
had made to go meet the young Queen; after that he was carried to the Escurial:
The Funeral had nothing of Greatness; the Officers of his House, with a very
few Friends accompanied him: He was laid in the little Vault near the Pantheon,
which is reserved solely for the Princes and Princesses of the Royal Blood; for
there are none buried in the Pantheon, you must know, but Kings, and those
Queens that have had Children; those that have had none, are buried in that
particular Vault. In a few days we are to go to the Escurial, which will be
when the King goes there; but he is so taken up with his young Queen, that he
can think of nothing but going toward the Frontiers to meet her. In every
place where I come, they are continually ringing it aloud in my Ears, that
she will quickly be Queen of two ^^d twenty Kingdoms. In all likelihood there is
eleven of them in the Indies; for I only know those of the old and new
Castille, Arragon, Valentia, Navarre, Murcia, Grenada, Andalousia, Gallicia,
Leon, and the Isles Majorques. In these Places there are some parts of them
admirable, upon which it seems as if Heaven had a mind to spread abroad its
most benign Influences. There are others again so barren, that there is neither
Corn, Herbs, Vines, Fruit, Meadows, nor Springs; and of these one may say,
there is more than of the others. But generally speaking, the Air there is good
and wholesome. In certain parts the Heats are excessive, and in others the Cold
and the Winds are insupportable, although it is in the same Season. There are a
great many Rivers, but that which is pretty singular, is, that the biggest of
them is not Navigable; particularly those of Tagus, Guadiana, Minchio, Duero,
Guadalguiver, and that of Ebre; for either because of the Rocks, the falls of
Water, the Gulphes, or the Turnings, Vessels cannot pass upon them, and this is
one of the greatest Difficulties of Trade, and which most of all hinders those
things from coming to Cities which there is need of; for if there was an easy
Communication between them, those Places and Towns that want a great many Wares
and Goods, might be supplied from those that abound, and so every body might be
furnished with necessary things at a reasonable price; whereas the Charges by
Land-carriage being so high, one must want diverse Conveniences, unless you are
in a Condition to pay three times more for a thing than it is worth.

Amongst the several Cities which belong to the King of Spain, these are
esteemed, either for Beauty or Riches, viz. Madrid, Seville, Grenada, Valentia,
Sarragousa, Tolleda, Vailladolid, Cordoua, Salamancha, Cadiz, Naples, Milan,
Messina, Palermo, Cagliari, Bruxelles, Antwerp, Gand, and Mons. There are a
great many others which nevertheless are very considerable; and several of the
Towns are as big as Cities; but there are not in them those multitudes of
People, which are both the Riches and Strength of a King. And there are diverse
Reasons to be given why there is this defect. First, When King Ferdinand drove
away the Moors out of Spain, and established the Inquisition, what through the
Punishments they inflicted upon some Jews, and the banishing of others, there
died and went out of the Kingdom in a little while, above nine hundred thousand
Persons; besides, the Indies draw away abundance; the Unfortunate go there to
enrich themselves, and when they have done so, they remain to enjoy the fruit
of their Labor, and the Pleasures of the Country. Again, Soldiers are raised
in Spain, and sent away to Garrison other Cities under the obedience ^f the
King; these Soldiers marry and settle in the Places where they happen to be,
and never return to those from whence they came. Add to this, that the Spanish
Woman bear but few Children; if they have three it is reckoned abundance: and
Strangers do not come to inhabit there, as in other parts of the World, because
they are not loved there, and the Spaniards are naturally recatados, that is
singular, and reserved to themselves, and will not be communicative and open
with other Nations, which they either envy or scorn: And thus having examined
into all those means which help to depopulate the Country under his Catholic
Majesty, one may rather wonder that there are so many People remaining.

There grows but little Corn in Castille, it is brought from Sicily, France and
Flanders; and indeed, how should it grow, unless the Earth would produce it of
it self, as the Land of Promise did? The Spaniards are too idle to take pains
to Till and improve it; for being the meanest Peasant is persuaded that he is
Hidalgo, that is to say, a Gentleman, that in every little Family there is an
Apocryphal History, composed within an hundred Years, which he leaves to the
Children and Nephews of a Village as an Inheritance, in which fabulous History
they are all made to descend from ancient Chivalry, whose Ancestors have done
wonderful things; reciting that their Great Grandfathers, Don Pedro, and Don
John, performed such and such Services to the Crown. I say, they having taking
up these vain Conceits of themselves, no wonder if they will neither derogate
from the Gravidad, nor Decendentia. At this rate do they talk, and they will
more willingly endure Hunger, and all Severities of Life, than work (say they)
like Mercinaries, which belongs only to Slaves. And thus Pride seconded by
Sloth, hinder the most part of them to sow their Land, unless some Strangers
come and help them to till their Ground, which by a special direction and
guidance of Providence always happens; Strangers that are more labourious and
worldly minded, being moved thither by the gain they find; so that you shall
have a sorry Peasant sitting in his Chair reading of a moldy Romance, whilst
these Strangers are working for him, in order to carry away his Money.

There Is no Oats to be seen, Hay is scarce, their Horses and Mules eat Barley
in the Straw chopped small. The Hills and Mountains in these Kingdoms I speak of,
are of such a prodigious height and length, that I do not believe there is the
like in any other part of the World; one meets with some of an hundred Leagues
in length, which join one to another in a continued Chain, and which without
Hyperbole, are higher than the Clouds, they are called Sierras, amongst which
are reckoned the Mountains of Pyrenea, Granada, Astura, Alcantara, Morena,
Tolleda, Doua, Molina and Albanera. These Hills render the way so very
difficult, that no Wagons can pass, which obliges them to carry all upon
Mules, who are so sure footed, that in two hundred Leagues continual traveling
amongst Rocks, and great Flint Stones, they will not so much as once stumble.

I have been showed some of the Patents the King Grants, I never read so many
Titles, I Will set 'em down here. He calls himself King of Spain, Castelle, Leon,
Navarre, Arragon, Grenada, Tolleda, Valentia, Gallicia, Sevile, Murcia, Jaen,
Jerusalem, Naples, Sicily, Majorque, Minorque and Sardignia, the East and West
Indies, the Isles and Terra Forma of the great Ocean, Arch Duke of Austria,
Duke of Burgundia, Brabant, Luxemburgh, Guelderland, Milan, Count of Hasburgh,
Flanders, Tirol and Barcelona, Lord of Biscay and Molina, Marquess of the Holy
Empire, Lord of Friezland, Salines, Vtrecht, Malines, Overissel and Groningen;
and Grand Seignior of Asia and Africa. I have been told, that Francis I. laughed
at these, when he recriv'd a Letter from Charles V. stuffed with such arrogant
Titles, and in his Answer gave himself no other Title than Citizen of Paris,
and Lord of Gentilis.

They do not trouble their Heads to study much here, that little they do know
bears them out, for with the help of their Wit and Grave looks, they seldom
betray their ignorance by being at a loss about any matters; when they speak,
they always seem to know more than they do; and when they are silent, you would
think 'em wise enough to resolve the most knotty Questions. Nevertheless there
are some famous Universities in Spain, amongst which they reckon, Saragossa,
Barcelona, Salamanca, Alcala, Santiago, Grenada, Seville, Coimbra, Terragona,
Evora, Lisbon, Madrid, Murcia, Majorque, Tolleda, Lerida, Valantia and Occa:
There are but few famous Preachers; here and there you will meet with some that
are Pathetical: But indeed, let these Sermons be good or bad, the Spaniards
that hear 'em will perpetually beat their breasts with an Extraordinary
fervor, and even disturb the Preacher with the grievous Cry which their
troubled Consciences make them utter. I am willing to believe that there are a
few that have some compunction, but in my Conscience, I doubt far less than
they make show of: They never leave off their Swords, either when they go to
Confession or the Sacrament; they say, they wear 'em to defend Religion; and in
the Morning before they put them on, they kiss 'em and make the sign of the
Cross with them; they pay an excessive Devotion to the Blessed Virgin, and put
an extraordinary confidence in her; there is hardly any Man that does not wear a
Scapular or some embroidered Image that has touched some of those that are held
to be miraculous; and tho otherwise they do not lead lives very regular, yet
they will not forbear praying to her with a trust, that it is she that must
protect and save 'em from the greatest Evils; they are very charitable, not
only upon the account of the Merits by Alms Deeds, but also by a natural
Inclination they have to give, and a real pain they endure if either through
Poverty, or for any other reason they are forced to refuse any thing that is
asked them; they have also another good Quality, which is never to forsake their
Friend in Sickness; their care and their concern is far greater in such a time,
when doubtless the Presence as well as the Assistance of a Friend is most
wanted: So that Persons that do not see one another four times in a Year, yet
are constant in their visit three or four time every day; when one is under any
affliction, and that they can become useful to each other: But as soon as they
are well, they resume the same way of living they used before they were sick.

Don Frederick de Cardonna, of whom I now talk to ye, Dear Cousin, as if he and
you were well acquainted, is returned; He has brought me a Letter from the
fair Marchioness De los Rios, who without doubt, is still one of the prettiest
Women in the World, and who is not weary of her retirement, I also by him heard
from the Archbishop of Burgos, whose Merits are uncommon; and he added, that
he came back in the company of a Spanish Gentleman, who had told him some very
wonder-things; amongst others, that every Spaniard who is born on Good Friday,
whenever they go by or through any Churchyard, in which there has been any
body burry'd that was murdered, or if they pass through any place where a
Murder has been committed, tltho the Man who was killed has been taken away,
yet for all that he appears to 'em all bloody, and in the same manner and
condition he happened to be in when he was murdered, and this too, whether they
knew one another or no: This certainly is a very unpleasant thing to those it
happens; but in requital they can cure the Plague with breathing upon the
Party, and do not receive the Infection, although they be with those that have the
Plague upon them: Many People, said he, wondered that Philip the IV. held his
head so high, and stair'd up with his eyes, the reason was, he was born on Good
Friday, and when he was very young he had several Apperitions of of these
Persons that had been murdered; so that with the fright of 'em he had got a
custom (very seldom) to hold down his head: But, said I to Don Frederick, Did
he talk seriously, and as if these things were allowed of every body without
any doubt. And just at I was saying, that it would be worth while to enquire of
some creditable Person about these Matters; Don Ferdinand de Tolleda came into
my Chamber, and so he asked him, and he assured me, that he had frequently heard
folks talk thus of these Matters, but yet he would not answer for the Truth. It
is also said, continued he, that there are a certain People which can kill a
mad Dod with breathing upon him, and that they have a Power to remain in the
Fire without being burnt; and yet I could never see any of 'em that cared to
trust themselves there: But they give this reason, that tho they could safely
do it, yet there would be something of Vanity in it, by such peculiar Favors
from Heaven to distinguish themselves from other Men; and for my part, said I
laughing, I am of Opinion these Men have more Prudence than Humility: They are
afraid (as it is but reasonable) of the biting of the Dog, and the heat of the
Furnace. I am altogher of, your mind, Madam, replied Don Frederick, I can give
little Faith to things above nature.

I do not pretend to make you believe it, says Don Fernand, tho I must tell ye,
I do not find any thing in this Matter more extraordinary than in a thousand
Prodigies which we every day see. Do ye think, for instance, that you ought
less to wonder at that Lake which is near Guadalajara in Andalousia, which
foretells approaching Tempest, by most horrid bellowing and roaring, that is
heard above twenty thousand Paces distance? and what do ye say of that other
Lake which is found upon the very top of the Mountain Clavio, in the Comte of
Roussillon near to Perpignan? It is extreme deep; there is in it Fishes, both for
bigness and shape that are monstrous; when a Stone is thrown into it, there are
Vapors seen to come out with a mighty noise, and to ascend into the Air, and
there convert into the Clouds, which produce most terrible Storms, accompanied
with Thunder, Lightning and Hail. Is it not likewise true, continued he, in
addressing himself to Don Frederick, that near the Castle of Gracimanos, in a
Cavern which is called Judea, not far from the Bridge Talayredas, there is a
Spring whose Water freezes as it drops, and grows so hard, that it becomes a
perfect Stone, which cannot easily be broken, and with which in that Country
they build fine Houses? You have a good Stock of Examples, said Don Frederick,
but if you will, I Will furnish ye with some others for your purpose. Do ye
remember the Mountain of Monrayo in Arragon; If the sheep feed upon it before
the sun rise they die, but if they are sick, and feed there after the Sun is up
they are cured. I must not forget neither the Spring in the Isle of Cadiz,
which is dry when it is high Water, and runs when the Tide ebbs: You shall not
be the only Person, said I, in interrupting him, that shall second Don Fernand
in these sorts of Relations, I must tell him, that in the same Isle of Cadiz,
there is a certain Plant which withers upon the first appearance of the Sun, and
grows green again as soon as Night comes. Ah! pretty Plant, cries Don Fernand
in Laughing, Well, I have enough now to be revenged for all the sport you have
made at my Stories for this Hour together; I declare open War against you about
this Plant, and if you do not send for one hither, I know what I Will believe:
The facetious Humor of this Cavallero made us very pleasantly pass the
Evening: but we were interrupted by my Kinswoman, who returned out of the City,
where she had spent some part of the day at her Lawyers, who was at the point
of Death; he is very old, and a very knowing Man in his Profession: She told
us, that all his Children stood round his Bed, and that the only thing which he
recommended to 'em, was always to preserve a good stock of Gravity; and after
he had blessed them, says he to 'em, what greater good can I now wish you, my
dear Chidren, than to lead your whole Lives at Madrid, and never to quit this
Earthly Paradise, but for the Heavenly: This may show continued she, the
strange Prepossession the Spaniards have for Madrid, and the Happiness they
enjoy in that Court: For my part, said I, in interrupting her, I am persuaded
there is abundance of Vanity in that fondness that they express for their own
Nation, for certainly they have too much Sense not to know, that there are many
other Countries far more agreeable: It is not true, said I, in addressing my
self to Don Fernand, that tho you will not say as I say, that you have the same
thoughts? what my thoughts are, said he in smiling, is no rule for other folks;
I must tell ye, that since my return, I am upbraided by every body with being
no longer a Spaniard: But certain it is, that People being so bewitched with the
Delights and Charms of Madrid, and not having power to forsake it in any season
of the Year, no body has thought of building pretty Houses in the Country
whither they might sometimes retire; so that all adjacent parts about the City,
which should be filled with delicious Gardens and splendid Seats look like so
many little Deserts, and this is the reason also, why the City in Summer as
well as in Winter, is equally crowded with People: Hereupon my Kinswoman said,
she would have me to the Escurial, and that it was agreed on by the
Marchionesses of Palacios and La Rosa, to go two days hence; the Lady your
Mother, added she, in speaking to Don Fernand designs you to make one, and I
indeed to secure Don Frederick, for another, they both declared, that with
abundance of Joy, they would go this little Journey; and indeed, the next day
we went to kiss Queen Mothers hand, and to know her commands for the Escurial:
for you must know, it is the Custom, when one is to go out of Madrid, first to
pay their respects to the Queen. But we had not seen her since her Return. she
looked merrier than she did at Tolleda, and told us, she did not think of coming
back so soon to Madrid, and that now it seemed, as if she had never been out of
it. There was brought before her a Gyant-Woman that came from the Indies: as
soon as she saw her, she caused her to be taken away, she was so affrighted at
her. Her Ladies would make this Colossus dance, who held in each hand two She
Dwarfs that played upon the Castinets and the Biscay Drum, all this was ugly in
the highest degree. My Kinswoman observed in the Queen Mothers Apartment;
things which had been Don John's amongst others an admirable Pendulum Clock,
all set with Diamonds, he made her in part, his Heir, in all likelihood 'twas
to testify his regret for having troubled and vexed her.

The Journey to the Escurial was performed with all imaginable Satisfaction,
the desire of entertaining you with it, hindered me from sending you the Letter
I begun before I went thither; the same Ladies that went to Arranjus and
Tolleda, were very glad to embrace the Occasion of taking the Air a little in
so fine a Season; and we went first to the Pardo, which is a Royal House, the
Building like the rest in Spain is handsome enough, that is, it consists of a
square of foul several Appartments separated by Galleries of Communication,
which are supported with Pillars; the Forniture of it, is not indeed stately,
but there are good Pictures, amongst others, those of the Kings of Spain, in
odd sorts of Dresses.

We were showed a little Closet, which the late King used to call his Beloved,
because in it he was wont sometimes to entertain himself with his Mistresses;
this Prince who was seemingly so cold and grave, that he was hardly ever seen
to laugh, was really the most amorous and the pleasantest of Men. There is a
Garden well enough kept, and a Park of a considerable extent, whither the King
frequently goes to hunt; we were afterward at a Convent of the Capuchins,
which stands on the top of a Hill; this is a Place of great Devotion, because
of a Crucifix which it seems was taken from the true Cross, and which often
works Miracles: After we had said our Prayers there, we descended on the other
side of the Hill, to a certain Hermitage where there was a Recluse, that would
neither see us, nor speak to us; but he threw a Ticket to us through his Grate,
in which we found it writ, that he would recommend us to God. We were all
extreme weary, for we were forced to walk afoot up the Hill, and it was very
hot Weather; we perceived in the bottom of the Hill a very little Cottage by
the side of a Brook, which runs amongst Willow Trees; we steered our Course
that way, and when we were yet a great way off, we could see a Man and a Woman
very well dressed, rise up nimbly from the foot of a Tree where they were set,
and run into that Cottage and shut the Door as hastily as if they had taken us
for thieves; but doubtless it was fear of being known, which made them avoid
us; we went to the Place they had left; being set on the Grass, we fell to
eating some Fruit we brought with us; we were so nigh this little House, that
they could easily see through their Windows what we were doing; there came out
a very pretty Country Lass, and with a Sea-Rush Basket addressed her self to us,
and kneeling, begged some of the Fruit of our Collation for a Big-belly'd
Woman, that would die if we refused her. Immediately we sent her some of the
fairest, and quickly after the same young Girl came again with a Gold
Snuff Box, and told us the Senora of the Casita, that is the Lady of the little
House, entreated us to accept of some Snuff for an Acknowledgment of the Favor
we had done her. It is the Fashion here to present Snuff when they have a mind
to express their Friendship; we stayed so long by the Waterside, that we
resolved to go no further that the Carcuela, which is another of the King's
Houses, but not so handsome as the Pardo, and so neglected, that there is nothing
worth commending, but the Waters; we were ill enough lodged there, though we
laid in the very same Beds his Majesty did; and we were very lucky in taking
along with us all Necessaries for Supper. After that we went into the Gardens,
which are in bad Order, the Fountains run Day and Night, the Water there is so
good and in such plenty, that for as little almost as one would desire, it
might be made as pleasant a Dwelling as any is in the World. But it is not the
Custom in this Country, from the King to private Persons, to keep several
Country Houses in good Repair, they let them go to ruin, for want of some very
small Reparations. Our Beds were so ill, that we were not loath to leave them
early the next Morning to go to the Escurial. We went by Monareco, where the
Woods begin, and a little further is the Park which belongs to the Convent of
the Escurial: For in effect it is one which Philip the II. built among the
Mountains, that so he might the more easily get the Stone which he needed, of
which there is such a prodigious Quantity, that without seeing it, one cannot
conceive it, and certainly it is one of the vastest Buildings we have in
Europe: We went up to it through a very long Walk of Elm Trees, which are
planted in four Rows, the great Gate is stately adorned with diverse Marble
Pillars raised one upon another, till they reach up to the Statue of St.
Lawrence which stands on the top; the King's Arms are cut upon a certain Stone
which is called the Thunder-Stone, and is brought from Arabia, the cutting of
which cost threescore thousand Crowns. It is easy to believe, that having been
at so considerable a Charge for a thing so little useful, they would not spare
any Cost for others which might be necessary and contribute to the Beauty of
the Place. It is a great Square Pile of Building; but beyond the Square there
runs out a Length, which contains the Buildings of the Entrance, and are
contrived to represent the Form of the Gridiron on which St. Lawrence (who is
the Patron of the Monastry) suffered Martyrdom. It is built according to the
Dorick Order, and very plain; the Square is divided in the middle, and one of
those Divisions which looks upon the Order, opens it self both ways into four
other lesser Squares, which are four Cloisters built also according to the
Dorick Order, and who sees one of them, sees all the rest; the Building has
nothing in it, either as to its Design or Architecture, that is extraordinary;
that which is to be admired, is the Vastness of it, being Three hundred and
eighty Paces in the Square; for besides those four Cloisters I have mentioned,
the other Division of the Square, subdivided into two, makes two other Piles of
Building, one of which is, the King's Quarters, and the other is the College;
for there are in it abundance of Pensioners, whom the King maintains to study:
The Friars that live in it are Hieronomites; this Order is unknown in France,
and it is abolisht in Italy, because a certain Hieronimite Friar attempted at
Milan the Life of St. Charles Borromeo: But he did not hurt him, though he shot
at him, and the Bullets pierced his Pontifical Habit; but nevertheless this
Order is here in great Esteem; there are three hundred Monks in the Convent of
the Escurial; they live much after the same way of the Carthusians, they speak
little, and pray much, and Women never come into their Church, but besides they
ought to study and preach.

But there is another thing yet, which makes this Building considerable, and
that is, the nature of the Stone of which it is built. It was taken out of the
neighboring Quarries; it is of a grayish color; the sharpest Air and severest
Weather makes no impression on it, it does not soil or grow dirty, but
constantly preserves that color it had when it was taken up. Philip II. was
two and twenty years in building it, he enjoyed it thirteen, and then died
in it. This Structure cost him six Millions of Gold. Philip IV. added the
Pantheon to it, that is to say a Sepulcher, like the Pantheon at Rome,
contrived under the great Altar of the Church, all of Marble, Jasper and
Porphiry, in which there are six and twenty most stately Tombs inchased in the
Walls; and one goes down into it by a pair of Stairs all of Jasper. I fancied
my self descending into some of those enchaunted places which our Romances and
Books of Chevalry talk of. The Tabernacle, the Architecture of the Altar, the
steps by which one ascends to it, the Pyx or Box in which the Host is kept, and
made all of one single Agat, are so many Wonders. The Riches that are there, in
precious Stones and Gold, is incredible. One single Cupboard of Relics (for
there are four in the four Chapels of the Church) infinitely exceeds the
Treasure of St. Mark's at Venice. The Ornaments of the Church are imbroider'd
with Pearls and precious Stones; and so are the Chalices and Vessels of
precious Stones. The Candlesticks and the Lamps are of pure Gold. There are
forty little Chapels, and as many Altars, upon which are put every day forty
several Clothes and Attires. The forepart of the great Altar is composed of
four Ranks of Jasper Pillars, and one goes up to the Altar by seventeen Steps
of Porphiry Stone. The Tabernacle is beautified with several Pillars of Agat,
and diverse curious Figures of Metal and Crystal. One can see nothing about the
Tabernacle but Gold, Azur Stone, and other Stones so transparent, that through
them the Sacrament (which is kept in an Agat Vessel) is easily perceived. This
Tabernacle is esteemed at a Million of Crowns. There are eight pair of Organs,
the Chairs or Seats in the Quire are made of rare Wood, which comes from the
Indies, curiously wrought after the pattern of those of St. Dominick at
Boulogne. The Cloisters of the Monastery are extreme fine; in the middle
there is a Flower Garden, and a Chapel which opens four ways, whose Roof is
supported with Porphiry Pillars, between which there are Niches, in which are
placed the four Evangelists with an Angel, and the several Creatures made of
white Marble bigger than Nature, who throw out Torrents of Water into Marble
Basins. The Chapel is arched with curious Architecture, and paved with black
and white Marble. There are diverse Pictures of an inestimable value, and in the
Chapter-Room, which is very large, there is besides most excellent Pictures,
two Bass-Reliefs all of Agat, two foot and a half long, which cannot be valued.
As to the Church, it has nothing extraordinary in its Structure; it is bigger
than that of the Jesuits in St. Anthony's Street at Paris, but of the same
form, except that like their House, it is of the Dorick Order. Bramanto the
famous Italian Architect, drew the Model and Design of it. The King and Queen's
Appartments are not stately; but Philip II. intended this only for a House of
Prayer and Retirement, the Church and the Library were the things he took most
care to adorn. Titian the famous Painter, and diverse others besides, have
exhausted all their Art and Skill in curiously painting the Galleries of the
Library, which indeed are admirable, not only for the excellent Painting, but
for a hundred thousand Volumes that are there, without reckoning the Original
Manuscripts of several Fathers and Doctors of the Church, which are delicately
bound and gilt. You Will easily guess at the bigness of the Escurial, when I have
told you that there are in it, seventeen Cloisters, two and twenty Courts,
eleven thousand Windows, above eight hundred Pillars, and an infinite number of
Parlours, Halls and Chambers. A little after the Death of Philip II. there was
taken from the Friars of the Escurial, a certain Estate in Lands (called
Campillo) which the late King had given them; and was worth eighteen thousand
Crowns per Annum, and this was done by virtue of a Clause in his Will, by which
he revoked all the immense Donations, which is his Life time he had given.

The Duke of Bragance being at Court in King Philip the Second's time, he had a
mind they should go with him to the Escurial, that he might see that stately
Pile of Building. And as he that had the care of showing it to him, told him,
It was built in performance of a Vow which Philip II. made at the Battle of St.
Quintin, the Duke replied, He that made so great a Vow, must needs have a great
Terror upon him. And now in mentioning this King, I remember to have heard,
that Charles V. recommended to him the preservation of the three Keys of Spain.
These were, the Streights-mouth, Flushing in Zealand, and Cadiz. The Turks or
Moors have the first, the Dutch the second, and the English had the last, but
the King of Spain soon recovered it from them.

The Escurial is built upon a descent of some Rocks in a desert and barren
Place, and environed with Hills; the Village stands below it, and has but few
Houses in it; it is in a manner always cold Weather there. The extent of the
Gardens and the Park is a prodigious thing to see, in which one meets with
Woods, Plains, and a vast House in the midst, in which the Keepers lodge; it
abounds with all sorts of Deer and Fowl.

After having seen a Place which so highly deserves our admiration, we all left
it; and as we had visited the Royal Houses of Pardo and Carcuela, we returned
over the Mountains, which is a nearer way, but very troublesome. We came by
Colmenar, and coasting along the little River of Guadarama, we past through
Rozas and Aravac^, and arrived at Madrid, where we learnt that the Queen's
Household were just going away to meet her upon the Frontier. We immediately
went to the Palace to bid adieu to the Duchess de Terra Nova, and the other
Ladies. The King had made them all be mounted, that he might see after what
manner they would be on the day of her Entry; for this reason all the Gardens,
and Doors every way were kept close shut and guarded, and no Man was to enter
there. The young Court Ladies looked well enough, but good God! what figures
were the Duchess de Terra Nova, and Donna Maria d' Alarcon, who were the
Governantes of the Queen's Maids; they rid every one upon a Mule shod with
Silver, and all friz'd with a large housing of black Velvet, like that the
Physicians in Paris ride with upon their Horses. These Ladies, dressed like
Widows, (which I have already described to you) very old and ugly, with morose
and imperious Looks, wore broad Hats, tied with strings under their Chins; and
twenty Gentlemen which walked a foot by their sides, held them up, lest they
should fall. They would never have suffered these Men to have touched them in
that manner, had not they feared breaking their Necks. For you must know, dear
Cousin, that though every Lady has two Gentlemen Ushers, and that they go with
them where ever they go, yet they never give them their Hand. They walk by
their sides, and present to them their Elbows wrapped in their Cloaks, which
makes their Arms look monstrous thick. The Ladies do not come near them; but
that which is yet more strange, if the Queen in walking should happen to fall,
unless her Ladies were near her to help her up, though there were an hundred
Gentlemen there, she must be pleased, either to rise by her self, or lie all
day upon the Ground, for none dare take her up.

We spent part of the Afternoon in looking at these Ladies; the Equipage they
had was indeed very rich, but very poorly and dully contrived. The Duchess of
Terra Nova had alone, six Litters of Velvet of various colors, and all
embroidered, and forty Mules, whose houssings were as costly as ever I saw any.
You will not hear from me again, dear Cousin, before the Queen is come hither.
While the King is gone to meet her, and the whole Court is absent, my Kinswoman
will go into Andalousia, about some business she has there. I might send you a
short Relation of our little Journey, if I could be assured it would please
you. I most heartily embrace you.

From Madrid this 30th of September, 1679.
LETTER XV.
THE whole Court is returned, and in my Memoirs you will find, dear Cousin, the
particulars of the Queen's Journey. The King and she were both together in one
Coach, and the Curtains being all open, I saw her at her arrival here: She was
dressed after the Spanish way, and I did not think that she looked less handsome
in this, than in her French Garb; but the King was dressed a-la-Schomberg, which
is the Spanish habit for the Country, and it is almost like the French. I have
heard it told, how strangely the Queen was surprised the first time she had the
Honor to see him; he had on a close body'd Coat of gray Barragon, very short
and wide, Velvet Breeches, Stockings of Pelo, that is, raw Silk, which they
work so very loose, that their Skin appears through them; this Silk is as small
as a Hair, and though they be very strait, yet the King pulls them on at once,
and so he will tear sometimes twenty pair one after another. He had also a very
fine Cravat, which the Queen sent him, but it was tied a little too loose: His
Hair was put behind his Ears, and he wore a gray Hat. All the Journey, which
was very long, they sat close to each other in a large Coach, and seldom could
understand one another but by some certain signs, for the King cannot speak a
word of French, and the Queen could speak but very little Spanish. Upon their
arrival at Madrid, they went to sing Te Deum at our Lady d' Atocha, attended by
all the Persons of Quality, and a multitude of the People, that made the Air
resound with Acclamations of Joy. Afterward their Majesty's went to Buen
Retiro, because the Appartments in the Palace were not yet ready, and that the
Queen was not to remain there till she had made her Entry. This time must needs
have been very tedious to her, for she saw no body but the Camerera Mayor and
her Ladies. She Is forced to lead a Life so much against her Inclinations, that
she has need of all that Discretion and Sweetness of Temper she is possessed of
to be able to endure it. She has not so much as the Liberty to see the French
Ambassador; to be short, it is a perpetual Torment. All the Spanish Ladies love
her dearly, and amongst themselves pity her.

I was sometime ago at the Countess of Villambrosa's, and in a great deal of
Company. The Marchioness de la Fuente came in there, and as they are extreme
superstitious in this Country, so she told them, like one affrighted, that
being with the Queen, who looking her self in a great Glass, and laying her
hand gently upon it, it cracked from top to bottom; and that the Queen beheld it
without being in the least moved, but even laughed at the Consternation that all
the Ladies about here were in, telling them, it betrayed a weakness of Mind to
take such notice of things and Accidents as might proceed from natural Causes.
They discoursed and argued a great while upon this matter, and with deep sighs
said, that their Queen would not live long. She also told us, that the Queen
was much more disturbed at the incivility of the Camerera Mayor, who seeing
some of her Hairs out of place on her Forehead, spit on her fingers to lay them
smooth; upon which the Queen stayed her Arm, telling her in a Majestic way,
that the best Essence there, was not too good, and that taking her
Handkerchief, she was a great while a cleaning that part of her Hair which this
piece of Antiquity had so unhandsomly wet. It is no uncommon thing here, to wet
ones head all over, the better to smooth and make the Hair shine, the first
time my Head was dressed after the Spanish Mode. one of my Relation's Women
undertook this curious piece of work, she was no less than three hours tugging
and pulling my Head, and finding that my Hair, which is naturally curling,
would not comply, without saying a word to me, she dipped a great Sponge twice in
a Basin of Water, and baptized me so handsomely, that I was laid up with a Cold
for a Month.

But to return to the Queen, it would draw pity from one to see how this
Camerera treats her; I am well assured, that she neither suffers her to have so
much as a single Hair curled, nor to come near her Chamber Windows, nor to
speak to any body; and yet the King loves the Queen with all his Heart, and for
the most part eats with her, and that without Ceremony; so that very often when
the Maids of Honor are laying the Cloth, the King and Queen will divert
themselves in helping them, one will lay the Cloth, and the other a Napkin: The
Queen has her Meat dressed after the French way, and the King his after the
Spanish. He has a Woman Cook to dress all his Victuals, but the Queen
endeavors to bring him to like the Ragous that are made for her, but he cannot
abide them. But now you must not imagine, that their Majesty's are surrounded
with their Courtiers when they are at Dinner, at the most, there is only some
Ladies of the Palace, a few Menins, but a great many Male and Female Dwarfs.

The Queen made her Entry the 13th of January; after all the Passages and
Avenues of the great Road which leads to Buen Retiro were stopped, and all
Coaches forbid to come that way, there was a Triumphal Arch built, and the
Queen painted upon it. It was also covered with diverse Garlands, and had several
Emblems and other things painted; it was set in the way by which the Queen must
pass to go into Madrid; on each side there was a sort of a Gallery which had
places contrived in them, to show the Arms of the several Kingdoms under the
Spanish Dominion, joining one to another, by certain Pillars which supported
some gilt Statues, every one of which represented Crowns and Inscriptions which
had relation to those Kingdoms.

This Gallery reached to the Triumphal Gate on the great Road, which was very
rich and adorned with several Statues; where likewise there were four beautiful
and young Maids dressed like Nymphs waiting for the Queen, and holding in their
hands Baskets of Flowers, ready to strew them on the Ground as she past; hardly
was one out of this Gate or Arch but a second appeared, and so for a great way
one after another was seen. These were adorned with the King's Council, that of
the Inquisition, the Council of the Indies, of Arragon, of State, of Italy, of
Flanders, and other Places, under so many gilt Statues; that of Justice was
higher raised then all the rest. A little further was represented the Golden
Age, accompanied with the Law, Rewards, Protection and Punishments. The Temple
of Faith was exhibited in a Picture, Honor and Fidelity opened the Gate, and
Joy came forth to receive the new Queen. There was besides, a Picture which
showed the Reception Solomon gave the Queen of Sheba, and another where Deborah
was giving of Laws to her People. There were also the Statues of Ceres, Astrea,
Union, Virtue, Life, Safety, Time, the Earth, Tranquillity, Peace, Greatness,
Rest Themis, and Liberality. Amongst all the Paintings I took notice of, that
where Aeneas is descending into Hell; Cerberus chained by the Sybile, the
Elysian Fields, where Anchises showed his Son who should succeed him in his
Posterity. The rest were filled with an infinite number of Hierogliphicks. The
Queen stopped at the third Arch, which was over against a very fine Parterre in
her way; in it were falls of Water, Grottas, Fountains and white Marble
Statues. Nothing could be more pleasant than this Garden: It belonged to the
Friars of St. Francis of Paulo, who built it. The fourth Gate was in the middle
of the Place called Del Sol; it was not less glorious than the others by the
Gold, Pictures, Statues and Motto's about it.

The Street where the Furriers dwelt was all full of seeming Animals, though
their Skins was so artificially stufft, that any Body would have taken them for
liying Tygars, Lions, Bears, and Panthers. The fifth Gate, which was that of
Guadalajara had its peculiar Ornaments, and after that, the Queen past into the
Goldsmiths Street, the side of which, was set full of Angels of pure Silver,
there were seen also diverse Bucklers of Gold, upon which were contrived the
King and Queens Names with their Arms, in Pearls, Rubies, Diamonds, Emraulds,
and other Stones so fine and rich, that the Skilful said, there was to the
value of above twelve Millions. In the Placa Mayor there was an Amphitheater
set full of Statues, and adorned with Paintings. The last Gate was near that,
in the middle of the first Front of the Queen Mothers Palace, was seen Apollo,
all the Muses, the Picture of the King and Queen on Horseback, and diverse other
things which I did not mind so much to give you an Account of them. The Palace
Court was surrounded with young Men and Maids, which represented all the Rivers
both great and small of Spain, they were Crowned with Reeds and Water lillies,
with Pots overturned, and the rest of their Attire suitable. They complimented
the Queen in Latin and Spanish, there were also erected in this Court, two
Castles of artificial Fireworks. All the Palace was hung with the richest
Tapistry that belonged to the Crown, and there are but few Places in the World
where there is finer seen, two Chariots full of Muscians went before their
Majesty's.

The Magistrates of the City came out of their Public House in their Robes
which were made of Brocado embroidered with Gold; they wore little Hatts
buttoned up with Plumes of Feathers, and were mounted upon very fine Horses,
they came to present the Keys of the City to the Queen and to receive her under
a Canopy. The King and the Queen Mother went in a Coach all open that the
People might see them, as far as the Countess of Ognates House, where the Queen
came to them.

Six Trumpeters in black and red Suites in company of the City Kettle Drums
mounted upon fine Horses, whose Housings were of black Velvet, marched before
the Alcade of the Court, the Knights of the three Malitary Orders, namely, St.
James, Calatrava, and Alcantara followed after in Cloaks all embroidered with
Gold, and their Hatts covered with Plumes of Feathers; after them went the
Tutulados De Castille, and the Officers of the King's Household, they wore white
Robes, and most of them were Grandees of Spain, their Hatts were trimmed with
Diamonds and Pearl, and their Magnificence appeared every way; they had most
admirable Horses, every one had abundance of Liveries, and their Footmens Suits
were of Gold and Silver Brocado mixed with colored Silk, which looked very well.

The Queen rid upon a curious Horse of Andalousia, which the Marquis De Villa
Mayna, her first Gentleman Usher, led by the Reins, her Clothes ware so richly
embroidered, that one could see no Stuff, she wore a Hat trimmed with a Plume of
Feathers, and the Pearl called the Peregrina, which is as big as a small Pear,
and of an inestimable Value, her Hair hung loose upon her Shoulders, and upon
her Forehead, her neck was a little bare and she wore a small Fardingal, she
had upon her Finger the large Diamond of the King's, which is pretended to be
the fairest in Europe. But the Queens pretty Looks and her Charms shined much
brighter than all the sparkling Jewels with which she was adorned; behind her
and without the Canopy, went the Duchess De Terranova dressed in Duenna together
with Donna Laura Maria D' Alarcon Governante of the Queens Maids; they rid each
of them upon a Mule. Immediately after them the Queens Maids to the number of
eight all covered with Diamonds and Embroidery, appeared upon very fine Horses,
every one having two of the Court walking by their side; the Queens Coaches
went after them, and the Guards of the Lancilla brought up the Rear. She stopped
before the Countess of Ognate's House, to salute the King and the Queen Mother;
she alighted at St. Mary's, where Cardinal Portocarero Archbishop of Tolleda,
waited for her, and immediately Te Deum began, as soon as it was ended, she
mounted her Horse again, and rid to the Palace, where she was received by the
King and Queen Mother, the King helped her off her Horse, and the Queen Mother
taking her by the Hand, led her to her Apartment, where all the Ladies were
waiting for her, and fell on their Knees in all Humility to kiss her Hand.
While I am upon this Head of the Palace, I should tell you, Dear Cousin, that
I have heard there are certain Laws or Rules established in the Palace, which
have been observed there for above these hundred Years without the least
Devotion, they are called the Orders or Ceremonials of the Palace; they run
thus, That the Queen of Spain shall go to Bed at Ten a Clock in Summer, and
nine in Winter. At the Queens first being here, she did not consider the
appointed Hour, it seemed to her Reasonable that the Rule of going to Bed,
should be when one was sleepy; but it frequently happened, that as she was eating
her Supper, some of her Women, without saying a Word to her, would begin to
undress her Head, and others to pull off her Shoes under the Table, and so
hurry her to Bed with that haste, as made her very much wonder.

The King of Spain sleeps in one Apartment, and the Queen in another, but this
loves his Queen too well to lie from her. It is thus noted in the Orders, That
when the King comes out of his own Chamber in the Night to go into the Queens,
He must wear his Shoes like Slippers, (for here they make none of these last,)
his black Cloak upon his Shoulders instead of a Nightgown, (of which no body
makes use at Madrid) his Broquel, or Bucklar (of which I have spoken in some of
my Letters) fastened under his Arm, and his Bottle fastened by a String to the
other: But you must not think this Bottle holds drink to quench thirst, it is
for a quite contrary purpose, which you must guess. With all this Accoutrement,
the King has besides a long Rapier in one Hand, and a dark Lanthorn in the other;
and on this manner he is obliged to go all alone into the Queens Chamber.

There Is another Order in the Ceremonial, which is, That after the King has
taken a Mistress, and happens to forsake her, she must be a Nun, as I have
already told you. I have heard that the late King being in Love with a Lady of
the Palace, he knocked one Night softly at her Chamber Door, as she imagined it
was he, so she would not open it, and only said to him through the Door, Baya,
Baya, con Dios, no quiero ser Monja; that is to say, Go, go, God be with you, I
have no mind to be a Nun.

It is also set down, that the King every time he receives a Favor from his
Mistress must give her four Pistols, you perceive he will not ruin his Estate
thus, and that the Expense he is at for his Pleasure is very moderate. To this
purpose it is publicly known, that Philip the IV. the Father of the present
King, having heard of the Beauty of a famous Courtezan, went to see her at her
House; but being a religious Observer of the Orders, he gave her but four
Pistols, she was very angry at so disproportionate a Recompense to her Merit,
but dissembling her Displeasure, she dressed her self like a Cavallero and went
to see the King, and after she had made her self known, and had had a most
particular Audience of him, she pulled out a Purse of four hundred Pistols, and
laid it up on the Table: It is thus, said she, I pay my Mistresses; so
pretending that this time the King was her Mistress, seeing she came in Man's
Clothes to find him out.

By these Ceremonials, the fixed Time of the King's going to any of his Houses
of Pleasure is known, whether it be to the Escurial, to Aranjues, or to Buen
Retiro, so that without staying for his Orders, all his Equipage is sent away,
and early in the Morning they go to awake him that he may rise and put on those
Clothes that are set down in the Orders according to the Season, and after
that he steps into his great Coach, and so very contentedly goes, where several
Ages past it has been agreed on.

When the appointed time comes to return, though the King is never so well
pleased where he is, yet he must go away, that he may not alter the Custom.

It is also known, when he is to go to Confession, and to perform his
Devotions, at that Time the Confessor comes, and presents himself.

Every Courtier, and even the Ambassadors are obliged when they go into the
King's Chamber to put on certain little Lawn Cuffs, which they wear quite flat
upon their sleeves, there are Shops in the Guard-room, where the Lords hire
them, and return them when they come out. In like manner all the Ladies are to
wear Patins when they go into the Queens presence, I think I have already told
you that these are a kind of Sandals into which the Shoe is fastened, and which
raises them up very high, if they should appear before the Queen without these
Sandals, she would take it very ill.

The Queens of Spain have none but Widows and Maids about them, the Palace is
so full of them, that one can see nothing else through the Latices and in the
Balconies. And here is one thing seems to me very singular, which is, That a Man
although he be Married is allowed to declare himself the Lover or Gallant of a
Lady of the Palace, and for her sake to commit all the Follies and to spend
all the Money he can, without being in the least blamed for it. One shall see
these Gallants in the Court, and all the Ladies in the Windows, where it is
their daily Employment to discourse with, and entertain one another by their
Fingers: For you must know that their Hands speak a Language that is perfectly
intelligible; and as it might be guest at if it was always alike, and that the
same Signs always meant the same things, so they agree with their Mistresses
upon certain private Signs and Actions, which no Body else understands. This
kind of Love is public, a Man must be of a peculiar sort of Wit and Humor
dexterously to manage these Intrigues and to be accepted by the Ladies, for they
are wonderful delicate and nice, they do not talk like other People. In the
Palace there reigns a certain Genius and Strain of Wit, quite different from
that in the City, and so peculiar, that one must learn it as they do an Art or
a Trade. When the Queen goes abroad, all, or however the greatest part of the
Ladies go with her; then the Gallants, who are constantly upon the Watch, go a
foot by their Coach sides, that they may enjoy their Conversation. It is really
good Sport to see how these poor Lovers dirty themselves, for the Streets are
horrid nasty; but then, the more dirty the more gallant. When the Queen returns
home late, there are carried before the Coaches where her Ladies are, forty or
fifty Flamboys of white Wax; and this sometimes makes a very glorious
Illumination; for there are several Coaches, and in every one diverse Ladies, so
that frequently, one may see a above a thousand Flamboys, besides those the
Queen has.

When the Ladies of the Palace are let Blood, the Chyrurgeon takes a mighty
care of the Ligature, Fillet, or any Cloth or Handkerchief upon which any of
the Blood of the fair one is has fallen; for he never fails to make a rich
Present of it to the Cavellero that loves her, and this is looked upon to be a
worthy Occasion for a Man to ruin himself to all intents; there have been some
so extravagantly foolish, as to give the Chyrurgeon the greatest part of their
Plate; you must not fancy this is only a Spoon, a Fork, or a Knife, which may
be the Stock of a great many we know; No, no, I assure you, this extends to the
value of Three or four thousand Crowns; and this is a Custom so rooted amongst
them, that a Man had rather feed upon nothing but Radishes and Leeks all the
Year long, than not to perform what he is obliged to do upon these sort of
Occasions.

Few of the Ladies of the Palace leave it without being very advantagiously
married; there are also the Queens Menines, who are so very Young when they
come to her, that she has some not above six or seven Years old; these are
Children of the highest Quality, I have seen some of them more beautiful than
the God of Love himself was ever painted.

On some solemn Days, when the Ladies of the Palace go abroad, or when the
Queen gives Audicnce, every Lady has the Privilege to place by her sides two
Cavelleros who put on their Hats before their Majesty's, although they be not
Grandees of Spain; they are called Embevecidos, that is, Drunk with Love, and
so transported with their Passion, and the Pleasure of being near their
Mistresses, that they are incapable of minding any thing else, they are
permitted to be covered for the same Reason that mad Men are, who understand
not their Obligation to Decency and good Manners; but yet to enjoy this
Liberty, they must have leave from their Ladies, otherwise they dare not
presume to attempt it.

There is no other Diversion at Court than Plays; but during the Carnaval, they
empty Eggs by a little hole in the Shell, and fill them full of sweet scented
Water, and then stop them up again with Wax, and when the King is at a Play, he
throws these at every body, and every one in imitation of his Majesty throw
them likewise at one another; this perfumed Rain makes the Air very sweet, but
withal wets People pretty handsomely, and this is one of their greatest
Pastime's, there is hardly any body at this season but what carries a hundred of
these Egg-shells, that are either filled with Orange-flower, or some other
sweet scented Water, and as they go along in their Coaches throw them in Folks
Faces: At this time the People also please themselves after their fashion; for
example, they will break off the neck of a Bottle, and tie the part that is
within the Wicker, to the Tail of a Dog, and sometimes you shall see above two
thousand run after him.

The King's Dwarf is the prettiest that ever I saw, his Name is Lovisillo; he
was born in Flanders, he is extreme little, and exactly well proportioned; he
has a handsome Face, an admirable Complexion, and not only wittier than one can
imagine, but withal very wise and knowing. When he goes to take the Air,
there is a Groom to wait on him, who rides upon one Horse, and carries another
before him, which is so very small, that he may properly be termed a Dwarf
Horse, and is as handsome for his kind as his Master is for his. This Horse is
brought to the Place where Lovisillo is to mount him, for he would be almost
tired if he was to walk so far; and it is really a great pleasure to see the
Dexterity of this little Animal and his Master, when he orders him like a
managed Horse. I do assure you that when he is upon his Back, they do not both
make above three quarters of an Ell in height. He said very seriously the other
day, that he would fight the Bull at the first Bull-Feast, for the sake of his
Mistress Donna Elvire. This is a little Girl about seven or eight years of Age,
but wonderful beautiful. The Queen commanded him to be her Gallant. It is a
great Happiness for this Child that she is fallen into the Queen's hands. I Will
tell you how it happened.

The Fathers of Mercy went to redeem a certain number of Slaves which they
brought to Madrid: and according to their Custom of coming through the City in
Procession, the Queen chanced to cast her Eyes upon a Captive Woman which led
two little Girls by the hand; they seemed to be Sisters, but there was this
difference between them, that one was extreme handsome, and the other as ugly.
The Queen made her come to her, and asked her if she was the Mother of those
two Children; she answered, that she was Mother only to the ugly one. And how
came you by the other, said the Queen? Madam, replied the Woman, we were in a
Vessel in which there was a great Lady big with Child, but we did not know who
she was, only by her Attendance, and the Richness of her Clothes, it was easy
to think she must be of Quality. After a long and sharp fight, we were taken,
the greatest part of her People were killed; and she was so frighted, that she
fell in Travail, and as soon as she was delivered, died. I was by her, and
seeing this poor little Creature without a Nurse, and ready to perish, I
resolved to nourish it up with my own, if 'twas possible. As soon as the
Corsaires were Mast^rs of our Ship, they divided the booty amongst themselves;
they were in two Vessels, and so each took away with them the Lot that was
fallen to them. Those remaining Women, and other Servants which belonged to
this Lady were on one side of the Vessel, and I on the other; so that, Madam,
continued the Woman, I was never able to learn what or who the Person was,
whose Child I saved. I now look upon her as my own Daughter, and she believes I
am her Mother. So charitable a Deed, says the Queen, shall not go unrewarded; I
shall take care of you, and the little Incognito I will keep. And indeed the
Queen loves it so extremely, that the Girl always wears very rich Clothes. She
follows her Majesty every where, and talks to her with that grace and freedom
as sufficiently declares her to be of no mean Original. Perhaps time my
discover who she is.

Here are none of those solemn and pleasant Festivals which are at Versailles,
when the Ladies have the Honor to eat with their Majesty's. All is very
reserved in this Court, and in my Opinion, nothing but a general and constant
habit could prevent abundance of things from being extreme tedious to them.
Those Ladies which do not actually dwell at Court, never come to it, but when
the Queen sends for them, and she is not allowed to send for them often
neither. She lives for the most part without any other Company than her Women,
there was never any Life more melancholy than hers.

When she goes a hunting, (and you must know, that of all the Queens that have
reigned in Spain, she is the first that has had this Liberty,) and is come to
the place appointed for mounting on Horseback, she must set her feet upon the
Coach boot, and so throw her self upon her Horse. It is not long since she had
one, that being a little shy and skittish, would start away as she leapt upon
him, and so she had a most grievous fall. When the King is there, he assists
her, but no body else dare come so near the Queens of Spain as to touch them
and help them on Horseback; they had rather they should be hurt, and that their
Lives should be exposed to the greatest danger.

She has fourteen Matresses or Quilts upon her Bed; there is neither Flocks nor
Feather-beds used here, these Quilts being made of Spanish Wool, which is the
finest in the World; they are not above three fingers thick, so that her Bed is
no higher than one of ours in France. They make these Matresses so thin that
they may the more easily be turned and removed; and indeed I have observed that
they keep hollower, and are not near so hard.

It is the Custom in Madrid, for the Master or Mistresses of the House to go
before those that come to see them; they think this is a piece of great
Civility, to leave, say they, a Person in the possession of all that is in the
Room. As to the Women they do not kiss one another in their Salutation, they
only present their hand without Glove.

They have another Custom, which I think odd and peculiar enough, and that is,
when a Daughter has a mind to be married, and is the eldest, and has already
made her choice, though both her Father and Mother are against the Match, she
need only go to the Curate of the Parish and tell him the Matter, and the
business is done. Immediately he takes her from her Parents House, and either
puts her into a Convent, or to some devout Lady, where she remains for a little
time; afterward, if she perseveres in her Resolution, the Father and Mother
are obliged to give her a Portion suitable to her Quality and their Estate, and
in spite of them she is married. Partly upon this Account it is, that such
care is taken to keep their Daughters close, and to let no body speak to them,
and so to make it difficult for them to take any measures for the management of
an Intreague. Otherwise, provided the Cavallero be a Gentleman, it is
sufficient, and he may marry his Mistress, though she should prove to be the
Daughter of a Grandee of Spain.

Since my being in this Country, I think I have not neglected informing you of
every thing; I will now proceed to finish my Memoirs of the Court of Spain,
seeing those I first sent you please you so well. I shall send you the rest as
fast as any thing happens and offers it self, that is worth your Curiosity and
notice. I do also promise you to write you that Relation you desire of me. But
for all these little Trifles, I must beg you, dear Cousin, to grant me
something that is considerable, and that is, the Continuation of your
Friendship, for which I have a just value.

From Madrid this 28th of September, 1681.
FINIS.

