An ACCOUNT OF THE Taking of Slego. And of the farther Advices that are come
from The Camp before Limerick.
Published by Authority.

Dublin, September 19. 1691.
LAst Night arrived here an Express from the Earl of Granard, with an Account,
that upon his arrival before Slego with a body of the Army and Militia,
consisting of about 3000 men, who had been joined by Baldarock O Donnel, who is
entirely come in to us, and 1000 of his men, the Irish quitted the Town and
retired into the Fort; That his Lordship had thereupon caused a Battery to be
raised against it; but that the Irish choosing rather to submit in time than to
let things come to Extremities, surrendered the Fort on Tuesday the 15th of this
Month, and marched out accordingly to the number of between 5 and 600 men; they
have left in the place 16 pieces of Cannon, 30 Barrels of Powder, more shot in
proportion, and a great quantity of Provisions, and have obtained almost the
same Conditions that were Granted (...) Galloway, in which, diverse other small
Garrisons between that Place and Slego are included, upon condition they
Surrender within 24 hours after Sum(...) Above 100 of the Garrison deserted the
Night the Fort was Surrendered.

We have an Account from the Camp before Limerick of the 16th, that our cannon
continue to play with great Effect, that the English Town is ruined, there
being scarce a house remaining entire in it, and a great many of the Ga^^^^^n
killed, and that besides the burning of the Enemies Magazines of Biscuit ^^d
Brandy on the 12th, our Bombs had set Fire to and blown up a Magazine (...)
Powder they had in the English Town, where a breach is made of above (...)
Yards: They say also that some of our Forces were going to pass the Shan(...)
to attack it likewise on the County of Clare side.

Printed by Edw. Jones, in the Savoy, 1691.


