An Account of the Victory obtained by ne KING in Ireland, On the First day of
this Instant July, 1690.
Published by Authority.

ON the 30th of June 1690, by break of Day, the King marched from his Camp at
Ardee toward Drogheda, where he found the late King James's Army Encamped
along the River Boyne, above the Town, but it being late before the Foot and
Artilery arrived, His Majesty could do no more that Day, then visit the posture
of the Enemy, and the Fords thereabouts, which He found very difficult to pass:
His Majesty encamped his Army in reach of their Cannon, which had almost given
us the most fatal blow in the World, His Majesty receiving a Shot on His Right
Shoulder; the Wound was large, but not deep, raised only the Skin, and as soon
as it was dressed, the King took Horse and continued on Horseback for four Hours.

In the Evening His Majesty Commanded Count Schomberg with the Right Wing of
the Horse, two Regiments of Dragoons of the left Wing, Trelawney's Brigade of
Foot, and five small Field Pieces, to go early the next Morning, being the
first of July, to 2 or 3 other Fords, about 3 Miles higher than our Camp, and
there endeavor to find a passage, and either attack the Enemy in the Flank, or
at least oblige them to decamp. The Count upon his arrival found 8 Squadrons of
the Enemy ready to receive him; but in a little time, and without much
Resistance, he beat them off, and passed the Ford, driving them before him, and
drew up his Men on the other side, ready to march toward the Enemy, as soon as
he should receive the Kings Orders, to whom he sent the News of it. Upon this
the Enemy detatched a great number of their Troops, who put themselves in
order, as if they would give Battle; His Majesty understanding that the Right
Wing had passed the Ford, and was Posted over against the Enemy, commanded
three Attacks to be made; the first at a good Ford, before a small Village
which the Enemy had advantageously possessed; at the second, the Foot waded up to
the Armpits; and at the third, the Horses were fain to swim. The Dutch
Regiment of Foot Guards past over first, with the Water up to their middle,
bearing all the Enemies Fire, and not returning it till they came up close to
them. Hereupon all that were in the Village, and behind the Ditches gave back;
but before the 3d Battalion of the said Regiment had passed the Ford, five of
the Enemies come up at the distance of a Pikes length, to beat us back, but our
Men Fired so thick upon them, that they were forced to retire with the loss of
a great many Men, and one of their Colors; after this our Men advancing beyond
the Villages, were twice vigorously attacked by the Enemies Horse, but all in
vain: In the mean time the Danes came up to the Left, as also the Brigades of
Hanmoro and Melionere to the Right; the first were attackt only by the
Dragoons; and the other by the Horse, neither of them could do much, because
they had no Pikes. In the mean time Thirty Officers, and others of the Enemies
Life Guard, coming fiercely up, were all killed but five, who endeavoring to
escape through the Village, unfortunatly met with the Duke of Schomberg, who
was there killed with a Pistol Shot; but excepting this great loss, we have
little to complain of. The Guards abovementioned, who have chiefly suffered
lost but one Captain, and four other Officers hurt; in the other Regiments,
Colonel Calimot is Wounded, two French Captains killed, and one Brandenburg
Captain killed, and another wounded, The King then marched with the few Horse
he had about him, and with 17 Battalions of Foot to the Assistance of those
Troops which were engaged with the Enemy, who in the mean time had not advanced
much toward our Right Wing; whom His Majesty reinforced with 12 Battallions of
Foot, and 9 Squadrons of Horse, and with them marched against the Enemy, who
without staying till he came near them retired immediately in great haste, and
as much Confusion. Our Horse pressed on overtake them, leaving even the Foot
behind, and taking only five small Field Piec^^ which did some Execution. After
which our Dragoons backed by the Horse, attack their Rear Guard, at which time
the King appearing with His Troops upon the Mou^tain, they all fled; the
Country being full of Boggs and narrow Passages, and the Irish ^eing naturally
good Footmen, they easily escaped. Our Foot pursued them to Dulee, which is
four Miles distant from the place where we first attackt them, and here the
King stayed, the Horse still pursuing them four Miles further, until the Night
coming on pated them. The King then Commanded the Horse to return to the same
place where he Foot remained, and sent to the Camp at Drogheda for the Tents
and Baggage, intending to encamp there, and rest his Troops for a Day, they
being much tired, and then continue His March in pursuit of the Enemy. We
cannot as yet particularly say what the Enemy has lost; we have many Prisoners
whose Names we know not. Lieutenat General Hamilton is one of them, and he
says, That the Lord Carlingford, and Colonel Parker are killed. We have taken
many Chariots, and Tents, much Cannon, Baggage, Ammunition and Arms, the number
whereof we do not exactly know. His Majesty has Commanded the Town of Drogheda
to be attackt, in which there is a Garrison of about 3000 Men.

Some other Particulars mentioned in a Letter, dated at Duleek, Three Miles
South of Drogheda, and seventeen Miles from Dublin, July 2. 1690.
WE have taken Lieutenant General Hamilton, and do believe, That the Earl of
Carlingfoord, and Lord Dungan are killed; we have taken 8 or 9 of the Enemies
great Guns, 5 or 6000 of their Arms, 70 or 80 Wagons, besides great Store of
Tents and Baggage, some Plate, etc. Near this place was the greatest struggle,
and the greatest number of Arms taken, those of two Regiments being found here
laid down in perfect Order. Their Horse made a good Retreat, conducted by the
Count de Lauzun. The King was in the Head of all this Action, pursuing the
Enemy from Hill to Hill, for 7 Miles about, and came not hither till about 10
at night, His Majesty has given Orders for sparing all that lay down their
Arms, and just now a Scots Soldier is to be hanged in the Face of the Army, for
killing seven poor Wretches that were not able to escape out of Ardee. We have
taken some inferior Officers, and killed others, but have lost the Duke of
Schomberg, who was slain yesterday about Noon. Thirty of the Dutch Regiments of
Foot Guards having passed the Boyne at the Ford, about a Mile above Tredagh,
His Grace Rode after them with a small Attendance; the Regiments of Cambon and
Hanmer, with some others, followed him. The Duke had not above 300 behind him
when first the Enemies Horse made a desperate Charge, in which he received two
outs in the Forehead, but not very considerable, the French behind him firing
very fiercely; it is thought he received from one of them the Wound of which he
died; a little before Dr. Walker, who behaved himself so Gallantly in the
Defense of Londonderry, having passed the Ford, received a Wound in the Belly
and died of it. The business of this day had often stopped, if His Majesty had
not with great vigor pursued the Enemy, and by his own Example encouraged his
Men. Last night he stood so near the Enemy when they were drawn up, that a
Bullet from a long Gun touched his Boot, and shot a Horse that was next to him
in the Leg. The Wound in his Shoulder was dressed this Morning, and is in a fair
way of being healed in 2 days His Majesty has sent Colonel de la Melinere to
summon Drogheda, and to let them know, That if they force him to bring his
Cannon, they must expect no Quarter. We hear, that one of the Regiments in
Garrison there consists of new raised Men; if we gain the place, we expect great
stores of all sorts which are laid up there.

P. S. News is just now come, that the late King James retired yesterday to
Dublin, and that he has quitted that place to day, and is gone toward Athlone
and Connaught.

Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, Anno DOM. 1690.


