THE ATTESTATION OF THE Ministers of the County of Somerset, Joining (according
to their duty) with the Reverend Ministers of LONDON, And all other their
Brethren in the several parts of this Kingdom: Who declare themselves for the
Truth of God, Against the Errors, He^esies, and Blasphemies of the present
Times.

LONDON: Printed by Fr: Neile for Tho: Underhill at the Bible in Woodstreet.
1648.

THE ATTESTATION of the MINISTERS of the County of Somerset joining (according
to their duty) with the Reverend Minister; of London, and all other their
Brethren in the several parts of this Kingdom, who declare themselves for the
Truth of God, against the Errors, Heresies and Blasphemies of the present Times.
WE Ministers of the Gospel in the County of Somerset, Brethren and Companions
in tribulation, and in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, being deeply
sensible of, and heartily sorrowful for, the high inundation (and which is
more sad, the much sought for Toleration) of Errors, Heresies and Blasphemies;
the neglect and contempt of Gods sacred Ordinances; the slighting and vilifying
of our solemn Covenant; and other abominations in this Church; Have thought it
our duty to join with our reverend Brethren of the Province of London, a Cloud
of faithful Witnesses gone before us, in giving our Testimony to Gods eternal
Truth, now turned, by many, into a lie; and in disclaiming and detesting those
Errors by them mentioned, and all other contrary to sound Doctrine and sincere
holiness; Lest, if we should hold our peace, the stones should speak, and God
call heaven and earth to witness against us because of our backwardness to
witness for Him, and to set to our seals that He is the only true God, and He
whom he has sent, Jesus Christ. With them therefore We detest the recited
Errors, and attest the same holy Truth, by subscribing our Names, and
Presenting this our Testimony to common view, that our minds may be publicly
manifest to the encouragement of our own Charges to stand fast, and the stay of
the most grievously-languishing Church in this distracted Kingdom. Wherein
(notwithstanding) this hope remains to support our hearts, that the pious
Ordinance of Parliament, setting apart a day of Humiliation for the suppressing
and preventing of Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies; and the most earnest
prayers on that day poured forth to the God of Truth for the removal of such
abominations, together with our Solemn League and Covenant, laying upon us the
greatest engagement to endeavor their extirpation; And lastly, the much longed
for (and now hoped for) settling of Church Government, will (at length) more
prevail (through the blessing of God) for their utter abolition, then all
importunities of men not considerate, for a most unwarrantable Toleration.

Samuel Crook Rector at Wrington. Richard Alleine Rector of Ditcheat. Anthony
Parker Rector of Blagdon. Samuel Tilly Rector at Compton Martin. William
Gregory Pastor of Backwell. William Thomas Pastor at Vbley. George Newton
Minister of Taunton-Magdalene. Robert Tyrling Minister of Taunton-James. Joseph
Owfield Minister in Taunton. Samuel Oliver Minister at Wells. John Chetwind
Minister at Wells. Richard Alleine Pastor of Batcombe. Purefey Midleham
Minister of Westbury. Thomas Codrington Pastor of Keinsham. Jacob Tomkins
Minister of Crewkerne. Samuel Pretty Minister of Weston Zoyland. John Moore
Minister of Aller. Henry Ieanes Minister of Chedzey. Bartholomew Yoe Minister
of Selworthy. Alexander Robinson Pastor at Porlock. Nathaneel Conduit Minister
of Aishil. Robert Balsome Minister of Shepton-Mallet. Edward Bernard Minister
of Stowey. Richard Cheswell Minister of Chelwood. Richard Popioy Minister at
Langridge. Samuel Westobye Pastor of Nailsy. William Long Minister of Prieston.
William Parker Minister of Brewton. Christopher Read Minister of Wanstrow.
Richard Fair clough Pastor of Mels. Nathaniel Abbot Minister of Pilton. Edward
Morgan Minister of Pill. John Whitborne Minister of Croscomb. Richard
Batchelaur Minister of Cameley. Matthew Alflatt Minister of Clutton. Thomas
Creese Minister of Combehay. Thomas Snead Minister of Lameyat. John Darby
Rector of Abbes-comb. David Williams Rector of Horsington. Peter Bradford
Rector of Maperton. Joseph Swaffield, Preacher of the Gospel. Henry Albin
Preacher of the Gospel. Edward Bennet Minister of Southpetherton. Hugh Pearde
Minister of West-Harptrey. Thomas Ladde Minister of Satford. John Luffe
Minister of Glaston. William Wright Minister of Froom Selwood. John
Northesworthy Minister in West Buckland. John Baker Minister at Curry Mallet.
John Norman Preacher of the Word at Bridgewater. Robert How Minister of
Thornfalcon. Thomas Forward Minister of Pitmister. John Langford Minister of
Exford. George Bindon Preacher of the Word at Angarsleigh. Timothy Batt
Minister of Ilmister. Thomas Lie Minister of Chard. John Pinny Minister of
Norton. Josiah Wyat Minister of Puddimere Milton. Matthew Randal Minister of
Higham. John Langdale Minister of Cricket-Thomas. John Torner Minister of
Cricket-Malherb. Christopher Laurence Minister of Odcomb. Joseph Shallel
Minister of Chaffecomb. James Eliot Minister at Shepton. Thomas Budd Minister
of Kingsbury. Thomas Beadon Preacher at Staplegrove. William Chapel Minister
of Kingstone. Steph: Berrier Minister of Yatton. John Dolling Minister of
Roburrough.


The Copy of a Letter wherein this Attestation was sent up.
BEhold a troop comes! We march at last in a full body. I hope no man will say
to us, as one to his loytering Soldiers, Quae vos tam sera moratur segnities?
Or as an other to his lingering Citizens, Why are ye the last, etc. If our
hands could have been listed, as soon as our hearts concentred, we would not
have lain in our houses, when the servants of the Lord are encamped in the open
fields. Or could our actions have held pace with our affections, we would not
have been, post principia, nor brought up the Rear in this most important
engagement against the potent prevalency of so impotent, and impudent an
Enemy, that threatens confusion to Law and Gospel; tramples upon Order and
distinction, sleights both God and man, Et coesum territat armis. Backwardness
in the soldiers of Jesus Christ for such a cause, might justly make us liable
to the curse of Meroz, because we came not forth timely to the help of the Lord
against the mighty. Specially since one Zamzummim, one Goliath of Gath (who
gives out himself ( Magus-like) some great one; and vaunts himself six cubits
and a span higher then any of those o^ the now scorned Mi^istery, ^steemed but
as gr^sh^p^ers in His sight) dare publicly in Pulpit and Press, defy the
Armies of the living God, the chari^ts and ho^semen of Israel! What do the
rabble of the sons of Anak (which like Aramites fill the Country) croaking
like frogs, and unclean spirits of devils, in every County and corner of these
Kingdoms? The Court of Rome heretofore justly blamed Leo the 10th, that he
applied not present and powerful remedies against Luthers heresy (as they
called it). Their reason was good, That in matters of faith and Religion, the
least errors were not to be neglected (how much less the greatest?) and the
remedies against Schism and Heresy should not be delaved the least moment.
Nam quae nascentibus utiliter adhibentur, inveteratis aegerrime conducunt.

And truly the slow and gentle oppositions, which have been made by this Church
and State, have rather beightned then weakened the disease; rather kindled then
quenched the flames; rather encouraged then silenced the Adversaries. God grant
it may not be laid to our charge.

Yet we hope your charity, will not impute our late appearance, to any want of
love, and zeal to so good a cause; but to the wideness of our County, our
seldom meetings, and sad distractions. Neither let us be deprived of the
honor, to follow you, the Antesignani, and Captains of the Lords host; and to
concur with the rest of our reverend Brethren of other Counties and Kingdoms,
for that Truth of God which is more precious then our lives, and against that
poison of error that rages in every Congregation through the Kingdom, and eats
out the bowels of Peace and Truth. Many hands have made long work, ^et we hope
strong work, that the guiles of hypocrisy, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it. The way of God is incorrupt. The Word of the Lord is tried.
He is a shield to all that trust in Him.

I am your assured, etc.

FINIS.

