At a General Meeting of the Lords and Others, Commissioners for Rebuilding the
Cathedral Church of St. Paul in London, at Guildhall, Thursday, July 5. 1677.
PRESENT The LORD MAYOR of London, Earl of Craven, Lord Bishop of London, Lord
Bishop of Rochester, Sir Joseph Williamson, Sir Charles Harbord, Sir John
Birkenhead, Sir Thomas Exton, Sir John Frederick, Sir George Waterman, Sir
Nathaniel Hern, Sir Thomas Player, Sir John Cutler, Sir Christopher Wren, Mr.
Dean of St. Paul's, Dr. Edward Layfield, Mr. Auditor Phelips.


ORDERED, THat a brief Declaration of the State of the Account of all Moneys
received and paid, as well for and toward the Reparation of the Cathedral
Church of St. Paul in London, before the great and dreadful Fire, as for and
toward the Rebuilding thereof, with other considerable Works and Expenses done
and disbursed since that time, be drawn up, Printed, and Published, for
information of all such as desire to be satisfied in the Proceedings therein,
and have or shall hereafter contribute toward so pious and honorable a Work.

In pursuance of which said Order, the said Account is stated as follows,
viz. l. s. d. l. s. d. THE CHARGE THere was paid into the Chamber of London,
since His Majesty's Restoration to the Seventh day of July, 1677, by Gifts,
Legacies, and Subscriptions, 16007: 05: 09 41343: 04: 09 Received also by the
Imposition of Coals, at 4 d. per Chaldron, to the said Seventh of July, 1677,
24500: 00: 00 And received more for old Materials (being either useless or
cumbersome) 00835: 19: 00 The DISCHARGE There has been paid and expended, in
and about the Reparation of the Church, begun in the Month of August, 1663,
until the time of the Fire, which was all destroyed and lost, and for several
Works in the Ruins after the Fire, until the last day of April, 1674, the
repairing of the West End of the Church which fell down, recovering 194 Tuns of
Lead melted in the Rubbish, repairing the Convocation-House, new building of
Offices, etc. for the Work, and many other necessary Works being included
therein, 14738: 07: 01 38292: 08: 05 Paid and disbursed also, in and about the
Rebuilding the said Church, from the First day of May, 1674, (when the new Work
was first begun) to the Third of July, 1677, wherein is included the Charge of
the Scaffolding to the great North Gable-End, and taking down the same, with
other high Walls adjoining to it, and also the taking up of 8500 Cubical Yards
of old Foundation-Walls, Carting away above 20000 Loads of Rubbish, and several
other considerable Works, not altogether relating to the bringing up the new
Work: So that upon a strict Account the Charge of the new Building only,
amounts to little more than 20000 l. but the aforesaid Charges being added to
the same, makes 23554: 01: 04 Since the beginning of this new Work, there has
been wrought and set up 37000 superficial Feet and upwards of old Stones for
outside Work, and 35000 Feet and upwards of new Stones, containing 3500 Tuns
of new Portland Stones, and other Stones. In all which Works are contained 8600
Rods of Rubble-work in the Foundations and inside of the Walls, each Rod being
272 Cubical Feet, the whole making 20600 Tuns of old Rubble Stones, the
Foundations being 22 Feet deep below the surface of the Churchyard, and in
many places 35 Feet deep. There has been spent in the said Work 7500 Hundreds
of Lime, 400 Thousands of Bricks, 4400 Tuns of Sand and upwards, besides three
times the quantity of old Sand sifted out of the Rubbish.

The Work now in hand contains the Chore, being 170 Foot long, and 121 Foot
broad, with great Vaults underneath, and is raised 24 Foot above ground: The
greatest part of the Foundations of the Cross-Isles are laid, and the Dome,
which is 108 Foot in Diameter within the Walls, is carried up to the same
height with the Chore, together with the Chapter House and Vestries. So that
the whole Foundation of the Fabric, so far as is now begun, extends from East
to West 320 Foot, and from North to South 310 Foot. There remains only the
Foundations of the Body of the Church to the Westward, being about one third
part of the whole Building; and room is making for it, by taking down the
Remainder of the old Ruins.

The REMAINDER And there remains in Cash in the Chamber of London, and to be
accounted for, the Seventh of July, 1677,

Over and besides what has been received upon Account of the Coal-Cash, or
otherwise, since the said Seventh of July last, and is not yet put to Account.

3050: 16: 04 MEMORANDUM. The Particular of all the Receipts are to be seen in
the Chamberlain's Office in the Guild Hall of the City of London, where all
Moneys given for this Public Work are received by the Chamberlain of the said
City, whose Acquittance is a sufficient Discharge.

And all the Accounts of the Payments and Disbursments made by the Clerk or
Play Master of the Works, out of such Moneys as he receives from the said
Chamberlain, are fairly Engrossed in Vellam, and are declared and signed by the
Lords and Others appointed Commissioners for the said Work, and are remaining
in the Office of the Works, there to be seen by any that desire to promote the
same.




