Appendiae.XIV. f. 178.
An Account of what the subduing the Rebellion of Ireland, begun the 23d. of
October, 1641. has cost, and what Damage the Prostants there have sustained
thereby, and what Lands have been forfeited and disp^sed of to Adventurers,
Soldiers, and other Engln, and what to the Irish, and now in their possession:
Abstracted out of the Accoun^s of Moneys in the Exchequer, during such timers
any regular Accounts were made up, and by probable and rational Estimates, for
the time in which no Accounts were kept, by reason of the general Rebellion and
Confusion, and out of the Surveys, Decrees, and Settlements, made by his
Majesty's Commissiones, for executing the Acts of Settlement and Explanation in
Ireland.

l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. 1. Moneys received and issued from the 6th. of
July, 1649. to the 1st. of November, 1656. being 7 years and 4 months,
according to an Account thereof, remaining as a Record, in the
Auditor-General's Office in Ireland. Transmitted out of England, in specie
1566848 13 4 3509396 17 0 2201258 3 0 Assessments in Ireland. 1309695 14 11
Rents of forfeited and sequestered Houses, Lands, Fishings, etc. 161598 8 7
Tithes sequestered 135524 3 2 Customs and Excise 252474 18 10 Preys of Cows,
Horses, and other Goods, taken from the Reb^ls, and for other casual Revenue
083258 18 Money issued in England toward transporting Armies, raising
Recruits, buying and sendin^ over Provisions of all sorts for the Army, and
other Moneys issued by Warrant from the then Council, or the Committee of the
Army in England, which was not accounted for in Ireland, the Warrants and
Accounts being never transmitted thither, of which there is a Reference in the
account of Record, in the Exchequer abovementioned, which is estimated to be
as much, if not more, than the above sum of 3509396 17 0 In that all Cloths,
Linen and Wool^en, Stockings, Shoes, Boots, Horses, Saddles, Arms,
Ammunition, Tents, Bread, Cheese, and all other eating Provis^ons, were sent
from England, and the price thereof deducted from the weekly Pay of the Army,
and not brought ^o Account, and so estimated as above 3509396 17 The Charges of
the Armies in the several Provinces of Ireland, from the 23d. of October, 1641.
the time the Rebellion broke out, to the 6th. of July, 1649. from whence the
Account is stated, as above, being about 7 years and 9 months, when no regular
Accounts were or could be kept, by reason of the Confusion in which the Kingdom
was by the Rebellion, there may be by probable Estimate added, without any
Allowance, for Provis^on of all sorts, after the Rate of what was paid the Army
after the 6th. of July, 1649. when Provisions were deducted 3760068 The Loss of
Rents for 14 years, from October 1641. until the year 1655. reckoning the L^nd
but at 12 an Acre yearly, is 76082646 and reckoning all the Corporations,
Houses and Tithes, but at a Mo^ety thereof, comes to 11412396 9 Besides the
Loss by the Devastation of Houses, Orchards, Gardens, Improvements,
Housholdtuff, Corn, Cattle, and the impairing the value of Land unto that time,
not to be estimated, but in reason to be accounted, as much as before is
comput^d for all other Charges, Losses and Expenses, if not much more, the same
extending to the whole Kingdom.

a. Acres 2. By the Surveys of Ireland, there is in Ireland, as forfeited by
the Rebellion, and belonging to Protestants, not forfeited, of
Plantation-Acres, accounting 21 Foot to the Perch, and 160 Perches to the Acre,
in the respective Provinces, the quantity of Land hereafter mentioned. Leinster
2603520 10868949 Munster 3255874 Vlster 2777875 Connaght 2231680 The which
Lands are divided and distributed, as by the Surveys and Records of the Cour^
of Claims will appear, as follows: To the Protestants, and others, that
proved their constant good affection, including the Bog^, Loughs, and Mountains
in Ireland 6110292 10868949 To Adventurers 396054 2717549 To the Officers and
Soldiers 1442839 To the Officers that served his Majesty against the Rebels in
Ireland, before the year 1649. 278041 To his Royal Highness the Duke of York,
as Regicides Lands 111015 To Protestants on Provisoes by the Acts of Settlement
and Explanation 383975 To the Bishops for their Augmentations, of which some
have possession 118041 Reserved to his Majesty as un-disposed, upon the account
of Lewis Dyke, and Thomas Conyng^m, being set out on fraudulent Adventures
14006 Lest of course Lands un-disposed, the Title to the greatest part whereof
was doubtful 73578 Restored unto the Irish upon Decrees of Innocence 965270
2041108 Restored to them by special Provisoes in the Acts of Settlement and
Explanation 408083 Set out upon their Transplantations of Connaght and Clare,
over and above what is confirmed English Protestants, who purchased Interests
there from the Irish 667755 So that the Irish, notwithstanding the Rebellion,
and their great complaints of losing all t^eir Lands, are restored unto, and
possessed of, almost one half of all the Lands formerly accounted forfeited by
the Rebellion. Besides, that the 27175^ Acres granted to the English, has cost
as before (besides the loss of hundreds of thousands of Men murdered by, and
killed in subduing the said Rebel the sum of 2219125830And accounting the said
2717549 Acres to be worth 12 d. per Acre, one Acre with the other yearly, they
will ^ome to 1358769 which for the Purchase thereof, at 10 years Purchase,
comes to 135876410 After which Rate, the Lands granted to the Engl^^s;h and
Protestants, are not the 15th. part, of what the Money expended in subduing the
said Rebellion, would have bought, and accounting the Devas^^tions, and the
loss of many thousands of Men's Lives for nothing.


