JVLY 8. 1648.

A TRUE RELATION Sent to the Honorable Committee AT DERBY-HOVSE OF THE GREAT
VICTORY OF The Parliaments Forces against those of SURREY: Where was about
Twenty slain, amongst whom the Lord Francis is one, and two or three eminent
Persons, One hundred taken Prisoners, and Two hundred Horse, and their
Carriages.

Die Saturni, 8 Julii, 1648.
At a Committee of Lords and Commons at Derby-House.

ORdered, That this Relation be forthwith Printed and Published.

GUALTHER FROST Secr'

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
July 8. 1648.

A true Relation of the great Victory of the Parliaments Forces against those
of Surrey.
IT pleased the Right Honorable Committee of Derby House to employ me in the
business concerning the proceedings of their Enemies in Surrey, and Sir Michael
Levesey has sent me to make this Relation.

Upon Thursday last by one of the clock he sent Three Troops of his own
Regiment with me from Hounsloe to Rigat, to possess my Lord Monsons Castle, and
also to prevent the Enemies intentions at their pretended Hors^-race upon
Banstead Downs; but notwithstanding our haste, the Enemy got in before us, to
the number of Six hundred, as we made them when they drew forth o'th Town; and
we beat off their Guard from Red-hill, and faced them upon the same: The Enemy
was afraid of us, and we of them, doubting them too strong for us to handle: So
that I sent to Sir Michael Levesey and Major Gibbons, to speed up with all the
force which might be, who accordingly with much cheerful readiness performed it
Major Gibbons the same night marched to Rigat, thinking to meet with the former
said Three Troops, but he found the Town neglected by us, and also quitted by
the Enemy.

Upon Friday morning the Enemy having Intelligence, That none of the
Parliaments Forces had entered the town, very early marched from Darking with
their whole Forces, thinking to possess Riga^ again, and had so done, had not
Major Gibbons with his own Troop, and two of Col: Riches entered the place
between the Intelligence and their march, but finding themselves deceived, they
marched the ready road for Kingston: About Two hours after this, the whole
Forces for the Parliament: (viz.) Five Troops of Horse and Three Foot companies
of sir Michael Leveseys regiments, two Troops of Col: Riches with Major Gibbons
his own Troop, marched from their Rendezvous at Red-hill within half a mile of
Rigat, and made such haste that our Forlorn of Horse were ready to tread upon
their heels before they got to Ewel, and had some small skirmish with the Enemy
in the Town, took some six Horses, and as many prisoners, and so urged the
Enemy upon the march, that they took many others near Nonsuch park. Sir Mich:
Levesey seeing the Enemy make more haste then good speed, prosecuted them the
more sharply with his Van Division of Horse: The Enemy drew up their Horse upon
a Hill in the midway between Nonsuch and Kingston, and faced us; our Van
Division of Horse drew near them in good order, both Parties sending out single
men, who played valiantly, whilst the Bodies on either side seemed to stand in
suspense; our Commander in chief had reason to suspend the Fight till his Foot
and his Rear-division of Horse were come up, besides we were to clamber a
pretty Hill: Yet at last Providence guiding us, our Forlorn advanced,
consisting of Fifty Horse, commanded by a Cornet in Colonel Riches Regiment,
who charging the enemy with much resolution, was as gallantly received, Major
Gibbons seconded him with his own Troop, and by it spoiled the Enemies hopes,
the rest of the Forces followed of that first division, and wholly routted the
Enemy; it was as sharp a charge (whilst it endured) as ever I saw since these
unhappy Wars in England; the pursuit was violently maintained, and had not the
Enemy ordered their flight better then their march, our Horse had fell into
Kingston with them, but they sent their Foot beforehand into Kingston, who at
our entrance into the Town repulsed us at the Turnpike, and our Foot not being
yet come up, Sir Michael Levesey drew up several Divisions of Horse in the lane
before Kingston, thinking to fall upon them that night, but the Foot came not
up seasonably: we supposed the Enemy had prepared too well for us, so that we
drew off all, save one Guard of Horse into a Close within half a mile of the
Marketplace, thinking to make some further attempt this morning, but the Enemy
answering not our Alarm, the Guard of Horse advanced into the Town, and found
it quit of the Enemy; they left near one hundred Horse in the Town, with their
Carriages, and placed a cart full of seage and other combustible matter upon
the Bridge, for favoring their flight, over which they are marched.

There were about Twenty slain, amongst whom the Lord Francis is one, and two
or three other eminent persons.

There was taken of prisoners about One hundred.

Of Horse Two hundred.

The Enemies strength left him I conceive Three or Four hundred.

This Account is witnessed by Jews Awdeley Major.

Sir Michael Levesey answered my desire, in leaving twenty Foot Soldiers for a
guard at Rigat Castle, Mr. Fenneck a Country Gentleman has the ordering them,
until the Honorable Committee shall otherwise appoint.

FINIS.

