THE CATHOLICS PLEA OR AN EXPLANATION OF THE Roman Catholic Belief.
Concerning their Church, Manner of Worship. Justification. Civil Government.
Together with a Catalogue of all the Poenall Statutes against Popish
Recusants. All which is humbly submitted to serious Consideration.

By a Catholic GENTLEMAN.

London Printed for H. J.

Persecution for Religion condemned, etc.
WHen I consider how tenderly our Savior Christ recommends the precept of
mutual love to all that profess his Name, making it the Character of his
followers, By this all men shall know that you are my Disciples, if you love
one another, John 13. 35. And when I reflect how highly the great Apostle Paul
exalts the same commandment, abridging into this one precious syllable, the
whole duty of a Christian, All the Law is fulfilled in one word, Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self, Gal. 5. I cannot sufficiently wonder, to see
most Christians in this present age with fire and sword persecute each other,
only upon the account of Religion: how are we degenerated from the primitive
Believers, who would rather have given their own lives, to persuade their
Enemies to piety, than sought to take away the lives of their Brethren, to
force them to Hypocrisy?

Yet has it pleased the Lord Christ in our days, upon whom the ends of the
World are come, to infuse the like tenderness into the breasts of many
conscientious and godly-minded people of this Nation, who seeing the deformity
and unreasonablenesse of those cruel Maxims, that preach ruin and destruction
for the least difference in belief) cease not to pray unto the God of heaven,
and solicit the Governors of the earth, that an impartial freedom and
absolute incoercency in matters of Religion may be firmly and irrevocably
established for all that profess the Gospel of Christ.

For encouragement of which holy design, woven out of the bowels of mercy, and
for determent of those tempestuous spirits, that with thunder and lightning
strive to storm men's consciences, I have endeavored in this short Discourse to
demonstrate, That Conscience-persecution amongst Christians is clearly
repugnant to the Light of Nature the Law of God, and the Evidence of our own
Principles.

Demonstrative Reasons against forcing of Conscience.
1 SInce we have so happily shaken off that intolerable Yoke of Popish
infallibility ( which neither we nor our Fathers were able to bear) it is
become to us not only tyrannical, but absurd, to compel others to a way, that
our selves confess may possibly be erroneous; we see one Parliament repeals
those Articles of faith which a former enacted; that form of worship which the
Laws of the last age introduced, is now generally exploded, nay, the very last
reformation settled with so solemn a Covenant, and carried on with so furious a
zeal* is already by better lights discovered to be merely humane, and therefore
deservedly laid aside: The late Synods Confession of faith (hatched by so many
years sitting) is now learnedly examined and indeed for a great part solidly
confuted, by Mr. W. Parker, and other learned persons, in print; how
preposterous is it then to constrain a soul, not only to forsake his
conscience, which may be truth, but drive him contrary to his own heart, to a
way that may be error.

2 Since the Word of God is the sole rule of Faith, and no humane authority so
highly empowered, as to bind up our assents to whatsoever interpretation it
shall please propose; it clearly follows, that as all the children of God have
equal interest in the Testament of their Father, so no one amongst them has
any right to impose a force upon the judgment of his brother: One holds Baptism
of children to be necessary, another esteems it unlawful, a third denies both
these Opinions, admitting well that it may, but not that it must be done: they
confer Texts, look into Original Tongues, pray incessantly to God, and profess
solemnly the sincerity of their intentions; yet after all their diligences and
devotions, steadfastly remain in their former persuasions; Truly for my part, he
that should advise persecution in such a case (unless his fire brought light
too with it, to demonstrate the truth) would scarce satisfy my suspicion, that
his coals were fetched from the infernal pit.

3 If we reflect upon the difficulties that encounter us in the way to truth,
for strait is the gate, and narrow is the path, and withal consider the
shortness of our sight, for here we see but in part, and understand but in
part, there will appear more reason to endeavor the mutual assistance and
support, than malicious ruin and destruction one of another. However, since
all have neither equal depth of natural judgment, nor the same measure of
supernatural illumination, but the Spirit blows how and where it pleases;
we ought not to attempt so high a presumption, as to despise or persecute our
brother for his innocent and blameless mistakes, lest we be found to fight
against God, who is the free disposer of his gifts; we know the way of man is
not in himself, Ier. 10. 23. but his steps are ruled by the Lord, Pro. 20. 24.
and therefore certainly, did we bear a due respect to God, we would be content
to wait his leisure, who has engaged himself by his Apostle, Phil. 3. 15. If
any man be otherwise minded, God shall in time reveal even this unto him; let
us therefore entertain such an one, who proceeds in the simplicity of his
heart, with Milk, till he grow stronger to digest strong meat.

4 All compulsion upon the Conscience returns us flatly to our old slavery
under the Prelates, nay more, to the implicit faith of the Papists, with this
only difference, that we are worse than either, because our consciences accuse
us of doing that which we condemn in others; for whatsoever I am constrained to
swear or profess more than I am convinced of, proceeds from as great a tyranny
as the High Commission, and is as blind an assent, as can be matched in the
grosest Popery, and dare we think that doing the same thing we judge in others,
we shall escape the judgment of God? Romans 2. 3.

5 Force is punishment, and consequently not just, unless the offense be
voluntary: but he that believes according to the evidence of his own reason, is
necessitated to that belief, and to compel him against it, were to drive him
to renounce the essential part of man, his reason. Why should we be commanded
to try the spirits, 1. John 4. 1. to prove all things, 1 These. 5. 21. If there
be not a faculty in the Soul to judge for her self? why we are enjoined to hold
fast that which we find to be best, if after our most serious and deliberate
election we shall be whipped out of our Conscience by penalties? To what purpose
do we preach poor souls into just so much liberty of Scripture, as may beget
their torture, and not permit them to rest where they find satisfaction? either
prohibit to search at all, or leave us sensible of some benefit by teaching: To
believe what appears untrue, seems to me impossible; to profess what we
believe untrue, I am sure is damnable.

6. As it is certain, whosoever swerves from the dictate of his Conscience
commits a grievous sin, Romans 14. So without question they that endeavor by
force or artifice to draw any man to profess or act contrary to what his foul
believes, are as deeply guilty of the same crime. When you wound the weak
consciences of your brethren, you sin against Christ, 1 Cor. 8. 12. How
dangerously then do they expose themselves to the just indignation of God, who
by Oaths, Imprisonments, Forfeitures, etc. both drive others, and fall
themselves into eternal perdition? How desperately do they attempt to
extinguish the light of Nature, which indispensably obliges all men to deal
with others, as they would be dealt with themselves, a light placed by God in
clear and candid souls to shine and guide them, but in black ones to condemn
and burn them. I shall close this discourse with the advice of the Apostle,
Romans 14. 13. Let us therefore use our judgment rather in this, that no man put
a stumbling block before his Brother.

2. Unanswerable Texts of Scripture against coercency in Religion.
NOr are these so excellent and important truths built only upon the firm
foundation of solid reason, but also upon the infallible authority of evident
Scripture, 2 Timothy 2. 24. etc. The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be
gentle unto all men, apt to teach, forbearing, in meekness instructing those
that are contrary-minded, if God per adventure will give them repentance, to
the acknowledging of the truth, that they may recover themselves out of the
snare of the Devil, who are taken captive by him at his will: And another
Apostle forbidding us to condemn one another, says ( James 4. 12.) There is
one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy: who art thou that judge
another? And in Paul to the Romans, 14. 4. Who art thou that judge another
servant? to his own Master he stands or falls, yea he shall be holden up,
for God is able to make him stand; one man esteems one day above another,
another esteems every day alike; let every man be fully persuaded in his own
mind; have thou faith? have it to thy self before God, happy is he that
condemns not himself in that which he allows, that is, whose conscience
inwardly accuses not his outward profession. The same most zealous Preacher of
the Gospel returns so condescending and moderate an answer to a case of a far
harder sound than we undertake to maintain, that it sufficiently proves he took
his gentle pen from the soft wing of the Dove, 1 Cor. 7. 12. etc. If any
brother has a wife that believes not, and she be pleased to dwell with him,
let him not put her away; and the woman that has a husband that believes not,
and he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave him; but if the
unbelieving depart, let him depart; a brother or a sister is not in bondage in
such cases, but God has called us to peace; for what know thou O wife,
whether thou shall save thy husband? and what know thou O man, whether thou
shall save thy wife? as God has distributed to every man, as the Lord has
called every one, so let him walk, and so ordain I in all Churches. What can be
said more efficaciously to oblige Christians, in charity and meekness to
forbear one another, than so express an Injunction of so great an Apostle, to
live peaceably even with an Infidel? And again 2 Cor. 1. 24. He denies that
even the Apostles themselves have any sovereignty over the Conscience, but only
Commissions to assist the conscientious, not that we have (says he to the
Corinthians) Dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your joy; therein
exactly observing the Orders which Christ gave to his Apostles, Go and teach,
not compel; and if any one receive you not, shake off the dust of your feet,
not trample upon them, as dust under feet. Mat. 10. 14. Constaut to which
Doctrine of Meekness, our Savior thus instructs his Disciples, Mat. 23. 9. Be
not called Rabbi (that is, Masters in spiritual matters) for one is your
Master, even Christ, and all you are brethren. To this belongs the patient
forbearing the tares, and letting them grow together with the wheat till the
time of harvest, as also that admirable president of mildness toward the
Samaritans, who refused to receive even Christ himself, whereupon the Disciples
James and John would immediately command fire from heaven to consume them, as
in the days of Elias, but our merciful Lord rebuked their zeal with this sweet
and tender reply, You know not what manner of spirit you are of, the Son of man
is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them, Luke 9. 54. which one
example abundantly satisfies al objections drawn from the practice of Elias,
Iehu, the sons of Levi, etc. in the Old Testament, for as they had an express
command from God to warrant their Zeal, we have an express warrant from Christ
to command us mecknesse. If any one shall shuffle in a suspicion, that this
moderate temper was meant only for the times of persecution, when the
Christians had no temporal Power; let him first confess that those were the
best and purest times, and then show a Warrant dormant under our Saviors hand
(that is in his Gospel) to Commissionate his Disciples as soon as they should
get the sword into their hands, to cut the throats of all disobeyers, and I
submit; but if they can cite no such authority, let them freely acknowledge
that persecution for Conscience is an unwarrantable tyranny over the just
privileges and liberty of a Christian.

3. Our own Priuciples against constraint upon the Conscience.
COnsonant to these reasons and clear Texts of Scripture, are the Principles of
all the godly and well-affected of this Nation: to begin with them to whom we
ow this liberty of discoursing, the unparellel'd Army, in all whose
proceedings, and Declarations (especially since managed by the prodigiously
successful hands of the two later Generals) their Motto has been Liberty to
all tender and oppressed Consciences, the glory of which so dazles the eyes of
our enemies, and encourages the hearts of our friends, that notwithstanding
whatever other disadvantage, we still find the Author of our Victory mindful
of the word which himself gave to our Army, The meek shall inherit the Land; of
which short Texts written in our Ensigns, we may read a clear and perfect
Commentary in the Proposals of the same still-triumphing Army, 1 Aug. 1647.
when penetrating exactly into the true state of the Question, they prudently
distinguish between quiet exercisers of their Consciences, and active
prejudicers of the Commonwealth, and thereupon offer their earnest desires,
that all co^rcive power, and all civil penalties for nonconformity be wholly
repealed, and some other provision made against such Papists as should disturb
the public peace.

Many and wonderful are the deliverances which our good God has dispensed to
his servants, in reward of this their inclination to mercifulness, yet amongst
all the glorious appearances of the Lord for his people, none can be found more
eminent than the renowned victory over that rigid and severe Kirk-army of the
Scots, September. 1650. who declining the mild counsel of our Savior, to
possess their Souls with patience, deservedly lost their lives by violence, a
fatal argument, deciding manifestly this very controversy in favor of
meekness, where the maintainers of compulsion were no less ingeniously than
cruelly confuted, whilst assuming to themselves a Power to force our souls,
they could not so much as defend their own bodies.

In memory of which great Salvation from the pride and fury of the Presbyterian
Priesthood, the Parliament, as a new Covenant of Thanksgiving for so seasonable
a mercy, in the same month enacted an abolishment of diverse rigorous and penal
Statutes, contrived on purpose by the haughty Prelates, to break the hearts of
those, whose consciences they ^ould not bend; which one Act has won more ^earts
to acknowledge and love the authority of the Parliament, than all their
stupendous victories have ^rced bodies to confess and fear their Power; and
(...) it be not checked by limitations and partiality in ^e execution, will
render them absolute Masters of ^ll that understand their own felicity: for
what can (...) imagined more welc^me to a Christian people ^ewly delivered from
an Antichristian bondage, than (...) see themselves infranchised into a holy
Liberty of ^oceeding sincerely according to their conscien^s in the Worship of
their God?

Wherefore as we are full of joy for so excellent an Act, by which (as the
Apostle says) we are called unto Liberty, so we are full of hopes to be
perfectly happy, by the free and universal observation thereof, without the
least self-interest or respect of persons, being so conformable to the constant
received Maxims and solemn deliberate profession of the Parliament, as appears
by the Declaration of the Lords and Commons, in answer to the Scotch Papers, 4.
Mar. 1647. where folio 43 the Discipline of Ecclesiastical Censures, and all
other punishments for matters of Religion are disclaimed, as grounded upon
Popish and Prelaticall Principles, not to be revived under any image or (...)
whatsoever: and a little after folio 63. they proceed in the same sense, we
shall not be afraid at the day of Judgment, that we have been more forward to
set Christ a^ liberty, than to cast him in prison, it being better in our
opinion (where the case is not very clear) to leave God to deal against many
errors, than to use his authority for the suppressi^g of one truth; the
weapons of fasting and prayer being both more Christian, and more available in
such cases, than those of force and violence; and ye^ more fully (if possible)
in another Declaration in answer to the letters of the Scots Commissioners, 17
Febru^ 1648. As for the truth and power of Religion, it being (...) thing
intrinsecall between God and the Soul, and the matters of Faith in the Gospel
being (...) ^s no natural light does reach unto, we conceive there is no human
power of coercion thereunto, nor to restrain men from be^lieving what God
suffers their judgments to be perswa^ded of. Words of that solid weight and
precious value as deserve to be engraven with letters of gold, and religi^ously
observed for ever by all tender consciences, as a^ Oracle.

Conformable to the aforesaid Principles, is that ex^cellent Doctrine and
advise set down by Mr. Parker an^ his Brethren, in their Examen of the late
Synods Confession of Faith, in these words, page 128. Liberty of Conscience may
be infringed, first by seeking violent means to alter conscientious men's
judgments, and their present persuasion; for it is the office of him who is
the Lord of conscience, to lighten and change men's minds, when and how he
pleases, Phil. 3. 15. Let us therefore as many as be perfect be thu^ minded,
and if in any thing you be otherwise minded, God shall reveal this unto you.

2. By inciting another by like forcible means to will and to Act against his
Conscience, and much more by imprisonment, mulcts, terrors, or threats, Romans
14. 15, 20, 21. For this is to make him destroy his Soul, verse. 20. 23.

3. We may not disturb the peace of men's Consciences, or make their hearts sad
with our invectives, or menacing them causlesly with terrors from the Lord,
Ezechiel 13. 32. Because with lies ye have made the hearts of the righteous
sad, whom I have not made sad. etc. And in page 230. thus, But we would not
have you assume to your selves* (...) attribute unto others, a Power to Lord it
over men's Faith and Consciences, especially when men walk obediently toward
those that are in places of Rule and Authority, and live a godly, sober,
honest, peaceable, and unblameable life. If men will do wickedly, and defend a
liberty in Christ so to do, let them be liable to the Sword of Justice for so
doing. But far be it from us, so much as by example, to draw a weak Brother, a
Saint and fellow servant of the Lord, whom no man can accuse, but for his
differing judgment, to do any thing against Conscience, whereby he should
^ondemn himself, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 14. How much more ought Governors
to be tender and abstemious in the use of violent and coercive means, to
precipitate men into such perilous and destructive courses! All authority is
given of God for men's welfare, and much more for the preservation, and not the
destruction of the soul.

By these considerations (I conceive) is clearly domonstrated the freedom of a
Christian Soul in he^ commerce for heaven, which since the merciful bounty of
God holds forth indifferently to all, the cruel covetousnes of man ought not
to obstruct to any; surely it is the worst of Monopolies to lay impositions
upon the way to Paradi^e; Christ by his death, removed the Angel that chased
from thence our first parents; and shall any of us take the Flaming Sword into
our hands, to sheath it in the bowels of a poor Pilgrim, who with a sincere
heart travailes to the same Country, only because he goes no^ in our company?
In my Fathers house are many Mansions, says Christ, why may there not be as
many paths that lead to them? If they that have no Law, shall be judged without
the Law, ^ertainly they that unblameably mistake the Law, shall be tried
according to those Expositions which appeared unto them to be the meaning of
the Lawgiver, (for the sense is the Law, and not the letter) specially having
so gracious a Judge, who has already declared by his Apostle, 2 Cor. 8. If
there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to what a man has, and
not according to what he has not.

Wherefore let us not by a sudden violence break into pieces the consciences
of our brethren, but mildly tha^ them into a cordial and ingenuous unity, that
righteousness and peace may flow together in the same chanel, and not as broken
Ice dash one against another: let us patiently expect, till the Lord be pleased
to take off the veil from their hearts that are otherwise minded, and not by
forcing their judgments, add to their veil of ignorance a worser of
hypocrisy; it being now a common ^^eriment, that generally the issue of
compulsionary and forced conformity closes in this, to make some few
counterfeit Protestants, and a great many real Atheists; whence it is clearly
concluded, that the only true means of winning souls to God, is the Gospellary
way of meekness and persuasion: and indeed it may worthily be esteemed the
prime miracle of Christianity, that a person so humble as our Savior appeared,
without the help of Kings and Princes, without the enchanting words of man's
wisdom, without the affrighting threats of fines, imprisonments, and deaths,
(though all these were absolutely subject to his pleasure) should conquer
Powers, and Principalities, should out-charm the Magic of humane eloquence,
and by the admirable success of his mildnes, condemn all those politic
Religions, that confess their own crazines, by using cruelty to support them:
whereas to reduce the disobedient only with the spirit of gentleness and
admonition, or at most desertion, argues indeed a Divinity in the Author, and a
Purity in the Ordinance: and here we may fitly apply the words of our Lord,
John 14. If it had been otherwise, I would have told you: If the way of
planting my Faith had been by imposing penalties on the hearers, and not rather
by exposing the Preachers thereof to dangers, I would have told you: If the
means of preserving Religion had been by watering it with the blood of
refusers to embrace it, rather than of those that sought to propagate it, I
would have told you either by my example (all the world being in the power of
my Deity) or by my doctrine, all justifiable proceedings concerning the
government of my Flock, being derived from the warrant of my Word. Thus we see
our gracious Lawmakers, faithful and coustant in his own Principles, The Son
of man came not to destroy men's lives but to save them. Thus we see our own
duty to learn of him, for he is meek and humble of heart; let us not therefore
judge one another any more, but use our judgment rather in this, that no man
put an occasion to fall, or a stumbling block before his brother, Romans 14. 13.
Let us always remember the advertisment which the beloved Disciple gives to
all his fellow servants of the Lord Christ, John. 13. 10. The servant is not
greater than his Lord; If you konw these things, happy are you if you do them.

Of tender Consciences.
THese few unpolisht lines, which I here present for encouragement of
tenderness, I desire may not be strechd to draw in a wild and extravagant
licentiousnes, since they aim no farther than to hold up a Liberty to such only
as profess Christ, and walk before the Lord in the integrity of their heart,
who by the following marks are easily discernable from all those that for their
blasphemies in Doctrines, and debauchery in manners, are worthily excluded from
the benefit of this Indulgence.

Supposing first, as confessed by all understanding men, that tenderness of
conscience is not the same thing with truth of judgment, (else there could be
but one only kind, because truth is but one) but it signifies a proceeding bona
fide, without sinister respects, or dissimulation, seeking before all things to
know God, and fearing above all things to offend him. And secondly, since in
our enquiry, to whom belong^ so honorable a title, we cannot pierce into the
inward thoughts of men, we must give sentence as they appear to us, which rule
in cases of this quality is in it self sufficiently certain; however, it is the
only means God has allowed our nature to guide her resolutions in the judging
of others.

The signs then of tender Consciences are these: If they lead regular,
virtuous, and peacable lives; If their Opinions be not justly accusable of
self-interest or licentiousness, but rather require of them a prudent and
religious severity against the inclinations of corrupted nature; If their
judgments be steady, not fanned to a new sense with every breath of wind; If
they continue in the same persuasions at their death, which is no time for
dissembling, at least we ought to judge so; If they not only die in their
Faith, but for it not only give away good part of their estates charitably, but
suffer all to be taken away patiently, and all this for Christ's sake, or (to
speak more closely) for that which they believe to be his will and commandment
no higher testimony of a true and real sincerity can possibly be given, or
easily imagined; and whosoever doubts after such evidence, (chiefly if many
concur in the same way) deserves to be condemned, as the most passionate,
malicious and uncharitable person in the world; for though one man may value
his fancy above his life or estate, yet it is very near an absolute
impossibility, that many (especially if they be discreet and rational in other
negotiations) should agree to undo themselves for a mere conceit, did not they
seriously believe it more imports them to keep their Faith, than ^ole their
Fortunes.

By these rules we may easily conclude the admission of those pious and
religious persons, who were imprisoned and persecuted by the late Prelates,
into the number of tender Consciences; as also those precious servants of the
Lord, who by a voluntary banishment left their friends and country, to plant
the liberty of the Gospel amongst the savage Heathens of America.

Whilst I was finishing these lines aworthy friend of mine came to honor me
with the civility of a visit; to whom reading these last two or three
confiderations, he told me, that as he believed the Characters I had given of a
^ender Conscience were most evidently true, and to all unbaised-minds perfectly
satisfactory, yet they were appliable to a sort of people in this Nation, whose
being discountenanced, is thought so profitable to the State, and so pleasing
to a certain froward part of the Ministry, that he feared my Reasons might
encounter some opposition, unless they met with very ingenuous and
dis-interessed Readers; plainly telling me, that the measures I had cut out for
tender Consciences, would fit the Papists as well as if they had been made for
them: For who live more peaceably with their neighbors, (says he) who deal more
justly with all men than they? who are more constant in their Religion, and
more scrupulous in the observances of their Law, than they? who suffer for
their Faith, more than they; nay, at this time, who besides them? They submit
their understandings to the definitions of their Church, and their wills to the
obedience of its Discipline, in Fasting, Confession, and many other burthenlom
duties, all which are very disagreeable to the Dictates of flesh and blood, as
containing the real practice of the highest self-denial that can be imagined:
And for the serious hour of death, I must confess, I have known many of us
turn Papists upon our deathbed, but never in all my life so much as once the
contrary; and to speak ingenuously, I have often observed, that they who go
(...) us to them, seem (which you make the only judge) more spiritual, retired,
and devout than before they left us; whereas of the Papists that become
Protestants, (besides the worldly designs they may easily be thought to have)
most commonly they grow more licentious, both in faith and manners, especially
the Priests, who seldom or never are converted, if once past the age of
marrying.

I, who had always believed the punishments laid upon them, were reducible to
civil crimes, though defended by them as points of Religion, resolved to
follow those so certain and evident Principles, which I had already framed (for
discerning of tender consciences) whithersoever they should lead me; and
therefore desired my friend to bring me to the knowledge of some moderate and
discreet Papist, that I might examine their Tenants, not doubting their easy
exclusion from the privileges of tender Consciences: this my friend immediately
did, recommending one to me, a morally honest and understanding man, though
(says he) a little abused in his Religion, and a great deal for it; After we
had met, and agreed to discourse with all freedom, the Recusant began with a
short story of the present sufferings of Papists; Whereof (he said) Some are
sequestered for Delinquency, and those of all Cavaliers (caeteris paribus) the
most severely, though of all the most excusable, beccause wholly depending upon
the pleasure of the late King, and infinitely obliged to his Royal Lenity;
noting it as an unanswerable argument of their fidelity and gratitude toward
such as deal with them in mercy, as also that their declining to receive the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, for which they have heretofore been so
violently persecuted, proceeded not from any aversion to civil obedience, but
because there were mingled in those Oaths certain expressions of a pure
spiritual nature, repugnant to their Consciences, and altogether unnecessary
to the common security.

Others are equally punished, that is, their whole estates sequestered, allowing
only a fifth part for their wives and children, though in true reason they are
altogether justifiable, having never been in any Engagement, but found only in
some Garrisons of the King, whither they were driven for refuge, being put out
of the protection of the Parliament by public Proclamation, their houses
every where rifled, their goods plundered, and lives endangered by the
Soldiers, whose condition seems clearly to be within the equity of that
Article of the Armies Proposalls, Aug. 1647. That the Kings meniall servants,
who never took up Arms, but only attended on his Person, according to their
Offices, be freed from Composition; much more those who had both the civil
reason of duty, and the unanswerable argument of necessity, to plead for their
discharge: And (which is yet more hard) some Recusants of this Class, who
never bare Arms, but were only found in Garrisons, for their own personal
security, as aforesaid, are now ranked among the highest Delinquents, and their
Estates to be sold, such are Sir Henry Beddingfield, Mr. Bodenham, Mr. Gefford,
etc.

As for the single Recusants, two thirds of their estates are seized upon, only
for the Cause of Religion, under which notion are included all such as were
heretofore convict of not resorting to Common Prayers, or do now refuse the
Oath of Abjuration, a new Oath made by the two Houses, when the former kind of
service was abolisht, wherein the practice is strangely severe, for upon bare
information, the estate of the suspected is secured, that is his rents, etc.
suspended, before any trial, or legal proof, even in these times of peace, and
being once thus half condemned, he has no other remedy to help himself, but by
forswearing his religion, and so by an Oath a thousand times harsher than that
Ex Officio, they draw out of his own mouth his condemnation.

When the Sequestrators have thus seized into their hand two thirds of the most
innocent Recusants lands and goods, then come the Excizemen, Tax-gatherers, and
other Collectors, and pinch away no small part of the poor third penny that was
left them; so that after th^^ deductions I have known some estates of 300
pounds year, reduced to less than threescore, a lean pittan^ to maintain them
and their Children, being persons for the most part of good quality, and civil
education: and as for Priests, it is made as great a crime to have taken Orders
after the rites of their Church, as to have committed the most heinous treason
that can be imagined, and they are far more cruelly punished than those that
murder their own Parents.

Besides these extreme and fatal penalties that ly upon the Recusants merely
for their conscience, there are many other afflictions whereof few take notice,
which though of lesser weight, yet being added to the former, quite sink them
down to the bottom of sorrow and perplexity; as their continnall fear of
having their houses broke open and scarcht by Pursuivants, who enter at what
hours they please, and do there what they list, taking away not only all the
Instruments of their Religion, but oftentimes, Money, Plate, Watches, and other
such popish Idols, especially is they be found in the same room with any
Pictures, and so infected with a relative superstition.

Another of their afflictions is, that they, I mean these single Recusants,
have no power to sell or mortgage the least part of their Estates, either to
pay their just debts, or defray their necessary expenses, whereby they are
disabled of all commerce, and their credit being utterly lost, (upon which many
of them now provide even their daily bread) they must needs in a short time be
brought to a desperate necessity, if not absolute ruin; and if any, the most
quiet and moderate amongst them, should to desire to transplant himself in a
milder Climate, and endeavor to avoid the offense that is taken against him in
his own Country, he cannot so dispose of his estate here, as by Bill of
exchange, or any other way, to provide the least subsistence for himself and
his Family: A severity far beyond the most rigid practice of the Scotch Kirk;
for there (as I am informed) the persons of Recusants are only banished out of
the Kingdom, and prohibited to reside at their own homes above forty days in a
year, which time is allowed them for the managing of their estates, and their
estates allowed them for their maintenance abroad: A proceeding which their
Principles would clearly justify, if they could justify their Principles. But
in England, where compulsion upon the Conscience is decryed as the worst of
slaveries; to punish men so sharply for matters of Religion, contrary to the
principles publicly received, is a course that must needs beget over all the
world a strong suspicion and prejudice against the honor and reputation of
that State, which at the same time can practice such manifest contrad^ctions.

To this deplorable condition ( said he almost weeping) are the English
Catholics now reduced, yet they hear all, not only with patience, but even
silence; for amongst the printed complaints so frequent in these times, never
any thing has been seen to proceed from them, though always the chief, and
now the sole sufferers for their Consciences, except (not to be altogether
wanting to themselves) some modest Petitions humbly addressed to the
Parliament, though such has been their unhappiness, that more weighty affairs
have still disappointed their being taken into consideration; else were they
admitted to clear themselves of the mistakes and scandals unjustly imputed to
them, they would not doubt fully to satisfy all ingenuous, and unpassionate
men, nay even whomsoever, that were but moderatly prejudiced against them.

To this I answered, that as every one sees the severity of the Penalties which
Papists suffer, so for my self, I believe the tenderness of their Consciences,
because they suffer: and upon this ground we see our Judges and Committee Men
allow Deeds, where they find clear proof of a valuable consideration. But
Idolatry, and the destructive Principles concerning Civil Government, seem to
me the two points that are only and altogether intolerable in that Religion.

Whether Papists be guilty of Idolatry in the Question of Angels, Saints, and
Pictures.
THe Papist here first took for granted, which indeed I could not deny, that if
any Opinion be probably true, persecution in that case is certainly unlawful;
because otherwise both sides, for both are probable, if one be, might
justifiably persecute one another, to the utter destruction of all Society: and
after returned this answer to my first objection.

We reverence indeed ( says he) the Angels and blessed Saints, with a respect
far more than we use to men, because far above their Dignity, but infinitely
below the adoration we give to GOD, because infinitely below his excellency.
All the mistakes in this controversy arising from hence, that the language of
men has more distinctivenesse and variety than the gestures of their bodies,
and yet is far less copious than the thoughts of their minds; whence it is
they so frequently apply to most different conceptions the self-same words and
postures of body, as the titles of sacred Majesty, most High, most Mighty,
given to Kings and States, the style of Grace to Dukes and Archbishops, of Lord
to Noblemen, Generals, Ambassadors, etc. of Worship to Gentlemen of quality,
and such as bear any considerable Office in the Commonwealth; so kneeliug to
Parents, standing bare to the Parliament and other Courts, bowing to one
another, etc. All these very expressions are the same we use toward God
himself, and pass innocently, when rightly understood; but to a scrupulous and
wilful spirit, how offensive would this one word Worshipful be, if it be
reflected with a little rigor and frowardness upon it? Now as every old woman
has capacity enough to make a different apprehension betwixt going to speak
with one at the Lion in Cheapside, and going to see the Lion in the Tower; so
may any the most simple Catholic in the world, by a very little teaching,
learn to distinguish the Crucifix which he sees in the Church, from Christ whom
he believes to be in Heaven, and consequently in no more danger of committing
Idolatry to that Picture, than the other of fearing to be torn in pieces by the
Sign.

Upon this Argument of the Papist, I called to mind what I had read my self in
Scripture, how the Prophet Balaam fell flat upon the ground, and adored an
Angel, Number. 22. 31. and Joshua gave the same honor to another, that styled
himself Captain of the Lords Host, and therefore could not be the Lord, Ios. 5.
13. nay, he was commanded yet further, to put off his shoes, because the
ground was holy, by the presence of an Angel; these examples, I confess, being
related in the Bible, without the least note of reproof, enforce us to admit
several degrees of worship, infinitely differing in the intention of the mind,
though very little in outward expressions; now by whatsoever names we
Protestants shall agree to call this behavior of Balaam, Joshua, and even all
the Jews before the Ark and Cherubins, I see plainly will fully express, and
shrewdly justify (at least from Idolatry) all the approved practices of the
Papists, which truly cast up, as far as I can discern, amouut to no more than a
reverence toward Saints and Angels, suitable to the excellency of their State;
and for Churches, Altars, Pictures, etc. only to an Ecclesiastical kind of
good manners. And by the Light of Nature thus for seems to me evident, that all
honor or dishonor done to the Image reflects upon the Principal, since not one
amongst us but would condemn him for a Malignant, that should shoot at my Lord
Generals Picture without Temple Bar, and if any should reprove him for his
temerity, we would presently conclude such person well-affected to the present
Government, and not at all sequestrable for Idolatry, unless we could prove
that the abused and doting people superstitiously adored the painted cloth,
which kind of worship, I am satisfied, no Recusant gives even to the Picture of
our Savior.

Lastly, I think it probable, not certain, as the Papists do, that the second
Commandment intends not to forbid any such inferior spiritual civilities,
because wise Governors contrive their Laws against those vices, to which they
see their Subjects particularly inclined; and therefore downright Idolatry, by
offering Sacrifice to Gods made with hands, and reposing confidence in their
assistance, being the common sins of those times, it is probable we ought to
interpret this Precept, as a provision against Heathenish Idolatry, not against
such kind of reverences as the Jews by Gods own appointment used before the
Ark and Cheruoins.

Agreeable to this, is the Opinion of the learned Master Hobs in his Leviathan,
where fol. 360. he affirms, that to worship God in some peculiar place, or
turning a man's face toward an Image, is not to worship the place or Image, but
to acknowledge them holy, that is to say, set apart from common use; for that
is the meaning of the word holy, which implies no new quality in the place or
Image, but only a new relation by appropriation to God, and therefore is not
Idolatry. But to worship God, as inanimating or inhabiting such place or Image,
is Idolatry; as also to worship God, not as in animating or present in the
place or Image but to the end to be put in mind of him or some of his works, in
case the place or Image be dedicated or set up by private authority, and not by
the Authority of them that are our Sovereign Pastors, is Idolatry: For the
Commandment is, THOU SHALL NOT MAKE TO THY SELF ANY GRAVEN IMAGE.

Thus in my judgment does that learned Protestant absolutely clear the Papists
of Idolatry, though perhaps he had more precisely expressed this last way of
transgressing the second Commandment, if he had called it will worship rather
than Idolatry, because there is only a want of Commission, no excess in the
degree of reverence: And though afterward he condemn praying to Saints
departed, as Idolatry, yet it is only upon a particular supposition of his own,
that there is yet no such thing as Saints in Heaven.

When I had read this passage of so famous an Author to the Recusant, he to
requite my civility, immediately showed me the words of the Council of Trent,
which he said differed nothing at all from Mr. Hobs, and very little from me:
For as I thought, that the exhibition of some inferior kind of reverence
toward Churches, and other Instruments of piety, was probably unforbidden; so
that Council decrees the absolute lawfulness thereof, in the 25. Session,
where to the Canon concerning Images, are added these words of explanation: Not
that there is believed any divinity or virtue in them, for which they ought to
be worshipped, or that they are to be petitioned for any thing, or any
confidence ought to be reposed in Images, as of old was done by the Gentiles,
who placed their hope in Idols, but because the honor exhibited to them is
referred to the Prototypes they represent, that so through the Images, which we
kiss, and before which we bare our heads and kneel down, we may adore Christ
and venerate his Saints.

Upon occasion of which words, the Papist assured me, that in no Council is
used the phrase of Religious worship, when they treat of these questions, nor
any thing concerning them commanded as necessary, but only their lawfulness
declared, that such as find benefit by their assisting the memory, or exciting
the affections, may safely use them, the rest may let them alone, provided they
censure not the practice of others, over whom they have no jurisdiction, nor
condemn the judgment of the Church, who has jurisdiction over them.

And hereupon we both agreed in this collateral observation, That if all
modern Controvertists would restrain their disputes to positions generally
received as of Faith in the Church, of which they are members, attending only
to her expressions, and not to the terms of particular Writers, the differences
amongst Christians, so fatal to the peace of Europe, would be both less
numerous, and far more reconcilable.

Whether Papists be guilty of Idolatry in the Eucharist.
BEfore we could proceed to the second part of this Question, the Recusant upon
some occasions was obliged to go into the Country, whence he sent me this
following paper:

Since it is concluded between us, that Probability exempts from persecution, I
shall endeavor to prove that the Real presence of our Savior in the
Eucharist, is at least a probable Opinon; and in order thereunto, cite the most
express and direct terms of the holy Scripture, as first the promise of our
SAVIOVR, Joh. 6. 5. The bread that I will give is my Flesh, which I will give
for the life of the world; and ver. 55. My Flesh is meat indeed, and my Blood
is drink indeed. Secondly, The performance of that promise, in the words of
Institution, Take, eat, this is my Body; punctually repeated by the other three
Evangelists, Mat. 26. 26. Mar. 14. 22. Luke 22. 19. And thirdly, the places
declaring the use of this Sacrament in the Apostles time, 1 Cor. 10. 16. The
Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of
Christ? and the bread which we break, is it not the participation of the Body
of the Lord? 1 Cor. 11. 29. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords Body. Thus the great
Apostle S. Paul, and all the four Evangelists unanimously teach the Doctrine of
the Real Presence, and not one single place produceable that in direct terms
calls the Eucharist a sign or figure of Christ's Body, notwithstanding
maintainers thereof, admit no proof as authentical but the precise text of
Scripture, yet in this so important controversy they fly to Logical
inferences, and Philosophical discourses, and so make their own reason the
Judge, and not the Word of God, rendering by their new and private
iuterpretations this great Sacrament inferior in dignity, not only to the
Paschal Lamb, a type of Christ, but even to Manna, which was but a figure of
this very mystery.

Surely, if we shall add to so many and evident texts of Scripture, the
constant judgment of the Fathers, and the universal practice of the whole
Christian world for above a thousand years (since so long is acknowledged the
absolute Reign of our Religion) we may safely conclude the Doctrine of our
Saviors presence in the Eucharist to be at least probable, and consequently
Catholics in no wise accusable of rashness or obstinacy, in believing a
Position so efficaciously recommended unto them.

But admitting the Doctrine of non-reality to be true, ( said the Letter of the
Recusant) yet ought not Catholics to be judged guilty of the sin of
Idolatry, because their adoration is not intentionally directed to any
creature, but to the Person of Christ our Lord: and if He be not there, their
worship is mistaken in the place, not in the object, and therefore a^ most an
error of fact, and no formal Idolatry which no temperate Judge will impute
unto sin, much less our merciful Redeemer, who came to save, not to destroy,
who accepts of the good meaning of his servants though mingled with humane
infirmities, as when Abimelech mis-took Sara from her husband, being informed
by Abraham that she was his Sister; the sincere and conscientious King received
absolution from God himself, upon this account, that he did it (says the text)
in the simplicity of his heart, Gen 20. 6. which seems an express and
infallible decision of this Controve^sie, that men may be unhappy by being
deceived, but are not guil^y, unless they deceive themselves.

This kind of reasoning prevailed somewhat the more with me, because the
Apology of the reformed Chu^ches of France, expressly approves it, saying, if
an Apostle had by mistake adored some other man res^mbling Christ, when he
lived on earth, his error would have excused him. Daille chap. 11. As on the
other side Mary Magdalens not adoring Christ, when he appeared to her in the
habit of a Gardener, John 20. 15. was never accused as a defect of devotion;
wherefore since the Papists all profess not to terminate their adoration in
the species of Bread and Wine, nor any other creature, but in the blessed
person of our Lord, I conclude them erroneous in their Doctrine, but not
Idolatrous in their practice, to be pitied as Souls misled, not persecuted as
malicious.

Nor can I satisfy my conscience, since to this point the Opinion of the
Papists is no more opposite to us, than that of the Lutherans, why we should
freely allow communion to these even of spiritual things, and in the mean
while not afford them so much as the liberty to possess their own temporal
goods. The Lutherans believe our SAVIOR to be as really in the Eucharist, as
he was upon the Cross, but do not adore him; the Papists both believe and
adore; for my part, I should clearly, either do both, or neither, at least I
shall never be brought to this partiality, to cherish the one as brethren, and
persecure the other as enemies, especially when I consider the Christian
proceedings of the Protestants in New England, Virginia, and the other
Plantations in the Indies, where we abhor to destroy the Natives, though
confessedly Idolaters, but rather strive to convert them, by holding out the
truth in love.

Whether Papists are inconsistent with Civil Government.
BY the next Post I received from the same hand another Letter concerning the
common objection, that Papists hold many principles destructive to civil
Society; wherein the Recusant protesting first solemnly, as in the sight of God
and his holy Angels, to use all ingenuity and candor in his relation of the
Catholic Doctrine, earnestly entreated me to give credit to his report in the
matters of Fact, and for the right, to judge freely, as I saw cause.

We will divide ( says he) the main Question into two points, as it relates
either to our equals, or Superiors: for the first touching Commerce and
Conversation, we absolutely disclaim that scandalous opinion, That no Faith is
to be kept with Heretics; and flatly deny, that our engagement, promise, or
contract, may lawfully be broken by our selves, or dispensed with by any Power
on earth, to the prejudice of a third person, of what Religion soever; and for
equivocation, mental reservation, etc. I am confident, though I have not here
any opportunity to look into Books, that no General Council mentions either
any such word, or any such thing; Schoolmen indeed dispute frequently such
subtilties, which by men of different principles and affections in Religion are
easily mis-understood, and often perverted, but amongst Catholics every one
has liberty to deny them as he pleases, without any prejudice to Faith; and
though those speculations generally deserve encouragement, yet when they arrive
at a certain degree of niceness, they rather become an innocent curiosity,
than profitable employment; and in such an infinity of opinions, as Catholic
Writers have leisure to publish, it is impossible, but that through passion,
unwariness, or humane frailty, some mistakes must escape, and then the
unhappiness is, that prejudice^ and captious Readers applying their Whole
study to find faults, forget the good and wholesome notions they meet, and
remember nothing but the errors.

As to the second branch concerning our duty to Magistrates, we deny, says the
letter, any earthly power can dispense with our civil obedience, and
acknowledge our selves bound, not only to the Law of Nature, but by the
express word of God, to render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, to be
subject not only for fear, but conscience sake; What Christian Prince or State
is there in the world, whom the subjects serve with more fidelity than the
Spaniard, French, and Italian, all Catholic Dominions? and particularly in
England, where we are some of Paul, and some of Apollo, and some of Cephas,
what comparison is there betwixt the behavior of Catholics, toward H. 8.
Edw. 6. and Eliz. and the fury of Lutherans and Calvinists in Germany, and
indeed wheresoever they are discontented, yet there is a vast difference, as to
Government, between these two cases, to oppose by force the introducement of
innovations, by which the peace must needs be endangered, and to attempt by
force the extinguishment of an ancient Religion, whereof the people are
universally in quiet, and immemoriall possession, the one drives others out of
possession, the other maintains himself in, the one invades his neighbors
rights, the other defends his own.

How many modern experiences (the easiest argument to be understood, and surest
to be relied on) clearly resolve this question; if we but consider the union of
hearts, and common interests of State, between the Protestant and Catholic
Cantons of Switzerland, where very many Churches serve by turns upon the same
day, for the exercise of both Religions, dividing every Sundny morning into 2
parts, and assigning to each about 3 hours for their devotions; wherein they
are so punctual to maintain equality, that if the Protestants have the first
three hours one morning, next week they are to have the last; and this they
continually practice, without enterfering or offending one another.

To this so pregnant example (sufficient of it self to clear the consistency of
these two Religions) I shall further add their fair comportment, one toward
another, in many Provinces and Free-Towns in Germany; but most remarkable is
their friendly and peaceable living together in Holland, even during so long
and dangerous wars with Spain; Spain the chief protector of the Catholic
faith; Spain the most zealous propagator of the Pontifical authority; to whose
dominion if the United Provinces should again return, certainly the Catholics
there might prudently promise to themselves all possible advantages; yet
notwithstanding so great occasion of jealousy, the States (than whom none are
more vigilant over their true interest) have not only with security, but
exceeding henefit to their Commonwealth, tolerated the Catholics of quiet
conversation, to live freely amongst them. And on the other side the
Catholics, ingratitude for so favorable a treating, have exactly corresponded
to the mercy of their Magistrates, with a most constant, sincere, and faithful
obedience.

To none of these suspicions are the Recusants of England in the least measure
obnoxious, because whatever change of Government can happen, they must expect
but a milder degree of disaffection toward them, at most a sufferance, no
encouragement, or particular confidence; and infallibly, if the rigor of the
Laws (made upon far different motives which are now no ways pressing) were
qualified to a temper of mercy, that the Catholics might enjoy but half the
Liberties to which they were born, they would be the most quiet and useful
Subjects of England, since their Religion obliges to obey the lawful commands
of their Superiors, not only for fear, but conscience. Nor did ever the very
worst of them stir in any sedition at any time when they were admitted to but
half the common rights of Englishmen, nor were they many that ever attempted
their own relief by enlarging their Countries peace, all the rest sitting
quietly and patiently under the burdens which the heavy hand of those times
continually heapt upon them.

Now that the crimes (though never so heinous) of a few discontented and
desperate spirits should be imputed to their Religion, whose principles
expressly condemn such conspiracies, seems extremely rigorous; but when to those
dishonorable imputations are joined intolerable penalties both upon our lives
and estates, and not only against the then living Catholics, but all their
posterity to this very day, surely it must needs appear the most harsh and
severe proceeding that ever was practiced in the world. Wherefore I shall close
this second Letter with my humble prayers to the gracious Redeemer of our
souls, that you would cease to impute all our faults to our Religion* and we
begin to commit no other faults but our Religion, so should we happily overcome
our own infirmities, and fully satisfy your jealousies.

When I had well perused this Gentleman's discourse, and attentively read his
Letters, I must freely confess I could not have believed that either the
Papists had suffered so much from us, or been able to say so much for
themselves, I do not mean in order to prove the truth of their Religion, but
the unreasonablenesse of our persecution; since really to my understanding, our
jealousies of their obedience seem as unecessary unto us, as prejudicial to
them; for I am confident there is no Religion in the world, but by good Laws
against breach of peace, and due execution of them, may be made consistent with
any Kingdom or Commonwealth whatsoever. Who more opposite in belief then
Christians, Jews, and Turks, yet we see by experience that Jews are not
inconsistent with the Government of Christians, nor Christians with that of the
Turks, no not such Christians, as are here in Question, Papists.

As concerning the Doctrine we charge upon them, of the Popes power over
Supreme Magistrates, I had the fortune some few years since to meet with a
paper that clearly answered all my difficulties, wherein were written the
Negative subscriptions of many English Recusants against these three following
Propositions, as no part of their Faith or Religion, the Subscribers being both
in number and quality sufficient to represent the whole body of them in this
Nation.

1. That the Pope or Church has Power to absolve any person or persons from
their obedience to the civil and political Government established, or to be
established in this Nation in civil and political affairs.

2. That by the command or dispensation of Pope or Church, it is lawful to
kill, destroy, or ^o any injury to person or persons living within the Kings
dominions, because that such a person or persons are accused, condemned,
censured, or excommunicated for Error, Schism; or Heresy.

3. That it is lawful in it self, or by dispensation from the Pope, to break
promise or oath made to any of the foresaid persons, under pretense that they
are Heretics.

These they utterly disclaim and renounce as no part of their belief,
professing under their hands their readiness to abjure (if the State should so
require) the prac^ise and execution of them all: which gave me so much the more
satisfaction, by how much it was besides my expectation, nor have I now any
thing to say against them upon that account.

And indeed, if we consider these differences between us impartially, our
suspicions are not only confuted, ^ut shamed by own daily experience; for we
trust Pa^ists in all Negotiations, as indifferently as Protestants, ^ay even
our Travelers and Merchants beyond Seas (where the Papists are Masters)
converse and traffic ^ecurely with them, and yet I never heard the least
complaint of any one single Protestants being cheated ^y them, upon pretense of
exemption or dispensation and therefore since they practice not that part,
which may sometimes be profitable, J cannot think they hold to no purpose, that
which is always prejudicial.

For my small experience in the world, all the objection that ever I heard of
against the credit of our Papists was their being disabled by sequestrations to
pay their debts, not taught by their Religion to deceive their Creditors.

If their Doctrines were so destructive to civil Society, as our accusations
pretend; how comes it to pass that our fundamental Laws were enacted by them,
who invested the Supreme Authority of this Nation with so Honorable
Privileges, and yet provided so prudently for the just security of the people,
against the unjust encroachments of Prerogative? from whom have all those
excellent customs and Statutes of this Nation descended upon us? is it
possible we should derive all the ancient Privileges of Parliament, and
Liberties of the Subject, contained in Magna Charta, etc. from the times their
Religion governed the Land, and yet say now their Religion is inconsistent with
the Government of the Land? as it is very true, that sometimes the Popes power
here was abused to support a temporal interest, so it is evident to those that
know History, that his mediation has been avaliable, both for the preventing
and reconciling of our differences, as well with ou^ neighboring Kingdoms, as
amongst our selves.

Nor is it possible that any Model of Government should be absolutely proof
against all exceptions, but (...) the experience of five or six hundred years
some abuse^ will certainly happen; whence it is easy for a severe observer to
gather objections enough to puzzle the mos^ able and politic Statist in the
world to answer, especially if they be managed with dexterity and eloquence
a^mongst a half witted and stubborn people, who neithe^ can guide themselves,
nor will be led by others, nor blind enough to be ignorant, where they are, and
yet too short fighted to see whether they go; unhappy chiefly in this, that
they are tender in the sense of any present evil, and wholly incapable of
foreseeing the destruction that follows their impatience.

Hear what is said charitably of the Papists in the foresaid Examination of the
late Synods confession of Faith ( p. 266.) The Papists believe in the same God
with the Protestants, even in the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, though
they differ in some Articles, or branches of Articles of their belief, and in
their way of worship; yea some of the Papists are regenerate, conscientious,
and virtuous persons.

Wherefore (I humbly conceive) our Magistrates and Ministers ought sincerely to
enquire into the truth of things, and make a conscience of judging or preaching
otherwise then secundum probato, and not upon bare jealousies, or the blind
opinion of the Vulgar, condemn any freeborn member of this Nation, farther
then he shall be proved to be guilty: Nor do I helieve it reasonable, to charge
every unjustifiable action of particular Papists, or extravagant opinion of any
private writer amongst them, upon the whole body of their Religion; The Decrees
of their Councels, they profess to be the only absolute declarers of their
Faith, amongst whose determinations there are faults enough which they strive
to defend, no need of imposing upon them errors, which they flatly deny; Let
us lay our hands upon our own heats, we our selves want not our capriches and
exorbitant conceits, which ought ^ot to be imputed to the whole reformed
Religion, but to the imperfection of humane Nature, easily deceived with the
Color of truth, and passionately in love with its own invention.

Besides, instead of jealousies and dangers, I cannot see but great security
and advantages would accrue to this Nation, by treating in mercy all peaceable
Papists; the Pope would be deprived of that specious pretext of releiving his
distressed Flock; the Princes and States of that Religion, would for honor as
well as Conscience, upon all occasions, express their satisfaction to see them
mercifully used, whom for their profession they account brethren* and for their
susterings, Martyrs, The Protestants in other Countries would be more assured
of the freedom they enjoy, and more hopeful of obtaining new increases of
their Liberty; The Papists of England would be bound by their own interest (the
strongest obligation amongst wise men) to live peaceably and thankfully in the
private exercise of their consciences, and, becoming gainers by such
compassion, could not so reasonably be distru^ted, as the Prelaticall or
Presbyteri^n Party, who must needs reckon them selves no small losers, in that
the reins of Authority are taken out of their hands, which they had by turns
abused into mere whips for their brethren.

Of the one we have had too long experience in their High Commission,
especially since its power was overgrown by the conspiracy of the Star Chamber,
a Court where Fines were imposed, not according to the quality of the offenses,
but of the judges, who thought it below their honor to punish under thousands
of pounds for every Peccadillo.

Of the other, though our trial has been short, yet it was very smart, and
lives still in the memory of England which is evry day refresht by the present
practice of Scotland, where the Kirk has condemned all that differ in the least
title of her humor, crying Anathema Maranath^ upon all the Congregations of the
Saints, as appea^e^ by their Synodical Act set forth in Jan 1650. and sent to
their brethren in Edinburgh, where, having first called our ways abominations,
and our selves a perverse Generation, and branded those few honest Scots, who
suffered themselves to be undeceived by the reasons and civility of our Army,
with the infamous name of A^ostates they proceed to the most bitter, malicious
and scandalous words that an enraged Scot can utter, speaking thus to their
Party: We exhort you, and by all the power over you we have in the Lord;
require you, carefully to avoid all familiar converse of every degree, above
all, that you beware to join with them (those that adhere to the Parliament of
England) in any public or private exercise of Religion, those who will
adventure to touch pitch, may be defiled before they be aware: those who will
not abstain from the Harlots, shall not be innocent: Take heed (dearly
beloved) of them that are led by the subtilty and depth of the Devil, and among
all his instruments, we entreat you to avoid none more then these miserable
Apostates of our own Nation, for we conceive none more fitted to work mischief
among you then this sort of men. And in their motives or grounds for a Fast in
June 1651. their expressions against us are no less bitter; see how their
zeal boyls, while they are but a kindling, while we choke the fuel in its
own smoke; how will their fury run over, when the fire shall by any success
be raised into a flame! how will they drown the whole Country in an inundation
of more then Antichristian slavery!

But because I perceived by a passage in the Recusants discourse, that nothing
lay more heavy upon them than the new Oath of Abjuration made by the
Presbyterian Party in the beginning of the late troubles; I shall adventure
humbly to move some Quaeres thereupon, transcribing first a true Copy of the
Oath it self.

I A. B. Do abjure and renounce the Popes Supremacy and Authority over the
Catholic Church in general, and over my self in particular; and I do
believe that there is not any Transubstantion in the Sacrament of the Lords
supper, or in the Elements: of Bread and Wine; after Consecration thereof by
any person whatsoever; and I do believe that there is no purgatory; and that
the Consecrated Host, Crucifixes, or Images ought not to be worshipped, neither
that any worship is due unto them? and I also believe that Salvation cannot be
merited by works, and all Doctrines in affirmation of the said points, I do
abjure and renounce without any equivocation, mental reservation, or secret
evasion what soever, taking the words by me spoken, according to the common and
usual meaning of them. So help me God.

1. Whether this Oath do not flatly contradict the known Laws of the Land, by
enforcing a freeborn English man to accuse himself, with so strong and
dangerous a temptation to perjury, where the choice is only this, either
forswear your Religion, or ruin your estate; a severity that far exceeds the
tyranny of the Prelates, whose indignation stayed it self upon the exterior
nonconformity, whereas this passes on to constrain the inward belief of the
mind, which God (the searcher of all hearts) has reserved to himself, and all
this, in Questions no ways concerning either Idolatry* or the security of the
State, as Purgatory, and the Doctrine of merits; for that conscience that is
not wide enough to swallow all the Oath, how great soever the part is that he
can digest, it will do him no good.

2. This Oath being wholly Negative, and no positive Articles established by
the Pa^liament, to be proposed to all as the touchstone of Faith, whether it be
conscientious to oblige the Papist to swear away his own Religion, before we
have provided another for him?

3. Whether it be conscientious or reasonable for us to enforce this Oath on
the Papists, since we have many godly persons of our own party, who will not
take it, and others who wills not swear at all, Hear what is said in the
Examination of the before-mentiond Synodical Confession, page 238. There is a
g^eater restraint laid upon us now than in the Old Testament. Mat. 5. 34. James
5. 12. which has made some to shun Oaths, though called to swear by the
Magistrate in matters lawful. And again, that it is a sin in those, who impose
unnecessary, subtle and ens^aring Oaths, Zach. 5. 3, 4. There is a curse gone
out against swearers, as well as against thieves: bebecause-of needless
swearing, as well as false swearing. a Land is made to mourn, Jer: 23. 10.

4. Since all these Negatives are not clearly set down in Scripture, as
Fundamental points of Christian Faith, but deduced from passages, to which the
Answers are believed as probable by them, as the arguments by us, why should we
so cruelly persecute one another for Doctrines, that are either obscurely
revealed, or not necessarily enjoined.

5. How shall we defend the Oath against this Objection, that any Jew, Turk, or
Infidel may take it lawfully, according to their principles, nay will delight
to swear against so many points of that Church, which (by reason of their
confining Territories) mainly opposes them; nor have we any Law at all (to my
knowledge) for which Jew, Turk, Heathen, or the most gross Heathenish Idolater
is sequestrable, nor any penal Oath against the most extravagant blasphemies,
that a loose wit can imagine, and a profane tongue utter, as Ranters,
Anti^rinitarians, and the like? What can be more destructive to the very
foundation of Christianity, than the profane and scandalous blasphemies of Mr.
Fry, a late Member of Parliament, who publicly in print not only denies, but
derides that Supreme Mystery of Christian Religio, the sacred Trinity, calling
it a chaffie and absurd Opinion, etc. yet the mercy of the Parliament contented
it self with a moderate and favorable punishment, excluding him only from
sitting amongst them; and if his Dignity and public Character had not
rendered him obnoxious to the crime of scandal, he might perhaps have remained
as free from trouble, as all the rest of his Opinion do, who never yet have
suffered the least molestation for the greatest exorbitances that can be
devised.

In particular at the Quarter Sessions at Westminster, on the 24 of June 1651.
there were five Ranters convented before Colonel Baxter and other Justices, and
sufficient proof, that they had maintained that one Robins a Glasier was a
Prophet, and that his wife was with child of the Messiah, with such other
blasphemous stuff: but four of these, not then absolutely asserting these
Opinions, nor yet denying them, but evading the several questions demanded of
them by the Bench, were discharged, the fifth was committed (as he well
deserved) not for his Opinions, but for calling the Justices Traitors, etc. On
the same day a Gentlewoman great with child, and some others, were also
convented for a supposed hearing of Mass, on the day commonly called
Christmas Day, 1650. at the then French-Agents in Long-Acre; and though there
was no direct proof that they were at Mass, but at Mattins or Prayers before
Mass, yet Colonel Baxter did maintain against some other of the Justices, that
Mattins and Mass was all one, and so the Gentlemen and the rest were fined one
hundred marks apeece, and sent to prison, according to the rigor of the Statute
in that behalf formerly made: The severity of which last proceeding, and the
partiality of the first, needs no Comment.

Why must the Papist be thus singled out from all the rest, and peremptorily
forced to this hard choice, of either forfeiting his estate, or forsaking his
conscience? If we fear their increase, we overvalue their Religion; If we doubt
their disturbing us, we undervalue our own strength; abundantly sufficient are
the means which God has put into our hands, to secure our selves from a few
disarmed Papists; abundantly sufficient were this only provision, to exclude
them from Offices of importance, and execute severe punishment upon such as
should actually attempt any thing to the discomposure of the State.

Nor can such gentleness and moderation toward quiet Recusants, be justly
accounted a toleration of them, because (I conceive) that word signifies an
absolute equality in all civil respects betwixt Subjects of different
judgments in Religion, else the present sufferings of Papists, paying their
two thirds, might by the same frowardness be accused as a toleration, whereas
the penalties indeed are altogether intolerable. Not to inflict the utmost
severity of punishment, is not presently to be reputed an allowance of the
crime: God himself suffers all the sins we commit, but approves none of them;
we our selves daily permit mischifs to avoid inconveniences, and for that
reason we prohibit not Mass in the houses of Ambassadors, nor punish Usury,
though the Statute it self, 13. Eliz. 8. brands it with the name of Vice, and
most Divines hold it a detestable sin, expressly forbidden by the Law of God.

A conscientious way of settling Religion proposed.
IN the same place where God commands children to obey their parents, he
forbids parents to provoke their children. Ephesians. 6. And where he exacts
fidelity in servants, he likewise requires moderation in Masters, nay more, the
Text includes even bondmen and slaves, enjoining the Masters to forbear
threatening, knowing that their Master also is in Heaven, neither is there
respect of persons with him: thus clearly does the word of God condemn as well
harshness and cruelty in Governors, as stubbornness and treachery in
Subjects: so that there is also a tenderness of conscience requifite on the
Magistrates part, to proceed sincerely and purely for the good of the people,
that he may truly say with the Apostle, I seek not yours, but you, 2 Cor. 12.
1. And again verse. 17. Did I make a gain of you, by any of them whom I sent
unto you? in which two lines we are plainly advertised of the chief danger
which Superiors ought carefully to avoid, that neither themselves, nor their
under Officers make a profit of men's consciences concerning matters of Religion.

Since therefore the only tolerable design of the Corrector in such cases is
the benefit of the sufferer, it necessarily follows, that before we can with
the least color of justice inflict a penalty upon any different profession, we
ought to use all means possible to recover them to truth, and therefore our
first work should be to collect a body of positive Articles, evidently
contained in Gods Word, and absolutely necessary to man's salvation, it being
very improper, to pen the public form of Faith in the Negative, because my
believing Christian truths makes me a Christian, and not my dis-believing the
errors that oppose it, else he that believes nothing at all would be the best
Christian.

In order to which collection, the most religious way is, that every one that
will modestly, may safely propose and discuss those difficulties he meets with
in Gods Word, and if after all possible diligences of study, meditation and
prayer, no satisfaction or union follow in any point, it is an evident sign the
question is either obscure or unnecessary, and then provide for the peace of
the Commonwealth, and submit the rest to the pleasure of God.

When we have agreed upon a summary of belief, according to these three
conditions, Positive, evident, and fundamental, (with which the Creed,
commonly called the Apostles, suits best of any I ever saw) then ought the
Magistrates hold forth in the spirit of love and meekness, those so clear, and
important verities, and if any shall be found dissenting (which I am confident
will be very few) let us follow the Apostles rule in punishing, a gentle one it
is indeed, but powerful, to These. 3. 6. Witbdraw from such a one, that he may
be ashamed, and verse 15. Esteem him not an enemy, but corr^ct him as a
Brother, at worst, rebuke him sharply. Tit 1. 13. and after the first and
second admonition reject him, Tit. 3. 10. that is, leave him to the hardness
of heart: if his Conscience grow tender, it will check; if obdurate he will
soon break out into lewdness, and then be justly pun^shable by the law, as
other criminal Malefactors, only we must be careful not to anticipate his
condemnation before he be legally convinced of some actual offense against the
public repose

If we suspect the disaffection of any Party, as the Papists, let us first make
it their interest to love their Country, by treating them at least mercifully
in it, and then we shall have a fair try all of their fidelity; I do not know
one example, where, to a Prince or State that used them well, they have shown
themselves ungrateful.

And though it be the duty of every Christian to love his enemy, and do good to
those that persecute him, yet surely it is a hard saying, and the most sincere
professors of any Religion whatsoever find difficulty enough to observe it;
even Protestants as well as Papists know how to fall out with those Magistrates
that oppress them, else how shall we excuse the civil Wars of France, Germany,
Holland, etc. if we have not recourse to the harsh usage of their Superiors;
nor need we seek the reason of these disorders amongst the articles of any
parties Religion, when by the instinct of Nature, not only man, but even the
most trivial creature that seems to have no interest in the world, attends with
diligence to the preservation of of it self; who can blame the humble worm that
whilst we walk fairly by, it prostrates it self before us, and lowly creeps
upon the ground, if when we tread upon it, it lift his head, and strive to
wring it self from under our cruel feet? Notably to this purpose is the old
example of the Privernates an ancient people of Italy, who having rebelled
against the Commonwealth of Rome, and being almost quite reduced by force of
Arms they dispatch their Ambassadors for terms of peace; the Senate sternly
ask them, What new peace they could expect, who had so insolently infringed the
old? To which they stoutly answered, we must now take such conditions as you
please to give; if they be moderate, you shall find us faithful; f^too heavy,
we shall observe them only till we may safely break them: Which free and
generous expression induced that wise Senate to assign them their own demands.
This so full and pregnant instance I humbly offer, as most worthy the imitation
of our English Senate, that even to Recusants, who engage to live innocently
and quietly amongst us, such reasonable conditions of subsistence may be
allowed (since they are equally with our selves born to the freedom of this
Nation) as their consciences be not violated, their spirits inbittered, nor
humane infirmity tempted to despair; let us rather encourage them to come to
our meetings, and freely propose their difficulties, which now they dare not,
for fear of discovering their judgments, to the ruin of their estates. Let us
use the same gentleness here in England, that his Excellency the Lord General
practices in Scotland, toward those that are not only otherwise minded in
Religion, but contrary minded in civil concernments, and actual in arms to
maintain their opposition; he invites them to conferences, and himself with
admirable temper and moderation manages, the discourse, allowing free liberty
of reply to the adverse party, without passion, bitterness, or threatening, and
though he find not the event answerable to his endeavors, remains at least
satisfied in his conscience, by having given a reason of his actions; and whom
can we better imitate, then so great an instrument of the liberty we all
enjoy? or wherein can we follow him with so much praise both of God and man, as
in the mildness of his spirit, by which he conquers more powerfully, than by
the sharpness of his Sword? have not the Papists understandings as well as we,
which our arguments may rectify? have they not souls to save, which our
charity may gain to heaven? why do we not erect a Committee to purchase Souls,
as we have contractors to sell lands? why is there not established a Committee
of Salvation, as well as of Indemnity, where the questions of Religion may be
freely discust, and the distresses of a tender and innocent Conscience
impartially relieved? if men dealt mildly, and only by the Gospel way of
persuasion, surely there would in time grow society, Commerce, and mutual
confidence, and so frequent opportunities of clearer information; when once all
jealousies and misunderstandings of one another shall be laid aside, the
differences amongst Christians will soon be reconciled, if not to an absolute
and precise unity of Faith and Doctrine, yet at least to a blessed union of
peace and love.

Oh how much better and more admirably divine is the gentle method of the
Christian, how to propagate it self in plain evidence of ^he spirit, then the
unnatural Turkish cruelty, of taking children from their parents, or the
unworthy Machiavilian policy of taking the inheritance from the children! or
lastly, which is worse than either, the barbarous Hethenish tyranny of shedding
of blood, and tearing limb from limb merely upon the account of Religion.

Nor can I find any satisfaction in that shuffling and hipocriticall
distinction, invented by the Lawyers to deceive the common people, whose
simplicity and innocence they easily beguile, by pretending that none are
executed for Religion, but for offending against the Laws? what can be more
palpably false, or devilishly malicious then this? who does not see, but by
this rule those bloody tyrants, Nero, Dioclesian, and the rest of the ten
infamous persecutors, must be canonized for good and conscientious justicers,
because they judged according to Law? who does not see that by this rule those
glorious Martyrs, who watered the Christian Faith with their precious blood,
must be accounted traitors because they suffered according to Law? nay even the
cursed Jews, who crucified our blessed Savior, impiously alleged the selfsame
reason for themselves, We have a Law, and by that Law he ought to dye, Ioh. 19.
7.

Nor can I forbear to confess how extremely unwelcome that scurvy news was to
me, of one Wright a Jesuit, being drawn to Tyburn as a Traitor upon a hurdle
for his Religion, on the 19 of May 1651. because I had so often commended the
moderation of the present authority, as having never spilt one drop of blood for
Religion: and though the Sequestrations of all peaceable Recusants were flatly
against our Maxims, yet the pressing necessities of the State, and their
purpose (which I always believed) of taking away all penalties upon the
conscience, after a short time, when the Government should be a little better
settled, exceedingly qualified the harshnesse of those pecuniary severities; but
now with grief I must lay down my arms, and with shame revoke all my arguments
which I have hitherto used, to lessen the injustice of our sequestring for
conscience, and pacify the ruins of many welaffected and religious persons,
who highly disliked even that Soul-money, as King James used to call it,
wherein as I have had no small success, so now I cannot with a safe conscience
endeavor any more, lest I should cooperate to deceive the people;
Sequestrations I confess did shrewdly crack, but this killing has broken quite
in pieces all our Principles. Against what have we principally fought all this
while, but coercencie in religion? For what have we made so many tedious
Marches, and Declarations, but Liberty of tender Consciences? Is this to hold
forth the truth in love? Is this to instruct in meekness, as becomes the
servants of the Lord? let us take heed how we fall into the hands of the living
God, let us always remember that voice speaking within us, They shall be
judged without mercy, that have showed no mercy.

Besides the sharpness of the sentence, the very Trial (as I am informed) had
many singular and unusual passages, as that nothing was proved against the
Prisoner, but that a great many years ago he had said Mass in Flanders, and
this only by one Witness, and one who in open Sessions professed a particular
pique and quarrel toward him, alleging an old grudge as one of the reasons why
he came up out of the Country to swear against him, no disturbance of the
public repose, nor so much as the least breach of peace laid to his charge,
but only his being a Priest, and in England: And that this was his only crime,
is unquestionably clear by the Ministers charitable offer at the Gallows, That
there was yet time enough for him to save his life, if he would renounce his
Religion, and become a Protestant; which he resolutely denying, as against his
conscience, was first hanged amongst the Thieves and Murderers, and then
quartered as a Traitor; and yet both Sheriff, Jury, Judge, and every one that
cooperated to the execution, all seriously profess, that nothing is so dear to
them, nothing so reasonable in it self, as incoercencie in matters concerning
the salvation of our souls. I pray God we be not too guilty of having a form of
godliness, but derying the power thereof. I pray God these severe and
ungos^ellary proceedings (especially this last of blood so displeasing to the
Spectators, and unprofitable to the Authors) become not in time a prejudice to
our Bret^ren beyond the Seas, a discontenting (...) our friends at home, and a
scandal to all the world; for that very day of the Priests execution I oreheard
a nimble-witted man say these words, Since we are come to this pass, that we
can fight against the Covenant for Reformation of the Kirk; sequester men for
Recusants, and continue their Sequestrations, whether they continue their
Recusancy or no; make a close peace with Spain, and openly hang up Jesuits,
SIT ANIMA MEA CUM PHILOSOPHIS.

Surely it were far better to let the Papists for a while practice their kind
of Christianity, than upon a sudden deprive them of the only Religion to which
they are accustomed, and so endanger the driving of them to Atheism, instead of
reducing them to Protestancy.

Besides, how easily may the like severity be exercised against our selves, if
any Power disaffected to godliness should gain authority over us? It is but
straining the word Recusant a little above the common note, it is but making
out holy Conferences Treason by Statute, and then all the precious Saints and
dearest servants of the Lord, may be hanged, drawn and quartered by Law, and
yet at the same time our Executioners may profess (as seriously as we now seem
to do) Liberty of Conscience; only they will think it reasonable to be their
own interpreters, and cons^quently intend by this charming sound of Liberty, an
absolute and uncontrollable freedom indeed, but to be enjoyed by none but
themselves. How do the Papists themselves in France outgoe us in their tender
and moderate behavior toward the Protestants of their Country,
notwithstanding former provocations to jealousy in the last Civil Wars? nay
notwithstanding present provocations by our severity against all of their
profession in England, they dispute openly and frequently together, not only
the Clergy, but Tradesmen one with another; at many of which conferences I have
been present in Paris, where every one freely defended his own Opinion, so
civilly and peaceably, that I never returned from the place of those
discourses, without exceeding comfort and satisfaction, thinking often with my
self, it were a fashion as worthy to be transported into England, as any our
Gallants bring from thence.

At the end of the Dispute, (which is not upon any solemn challenge, but
casual, though very often) if either party seem unsatisfied, his liberty is
inviolably preserved, without seizing upon a penny of his Estate (which there
is accounted but a politic covetousness) or touching so much as a hair of
his head, (not to speak of spilling his blood for a different opinion) which
they detest as a most abominable cruelty, but with a courteous friendlinesse
and mutual compassion, part in as perfect charity as they met, each hoping and
praying for the others conversion; in the mean while the King allows a certain
number of public Churches to Protestants, and as much liberty in private for
the exercise of their Consciences, as any disagreers from the common belief of
the State can reasonably desire.

Nay, even the Spanish Inquisition (so universally abhorred) practices all
imaginable means toward the accused, to reduce his judgment to theirs, before
they pronounce theirs against him, and upon conformity immediately acquit him;
whereas our Conscience-sequestrations are laid on without any disputing, and
hardly taken off upon never so much conforming; which very thing I have heard
some Presbyterians object to us, thought themselves made the Abjuring Oath on
purpose to pinch the Papist, yet they said it was intended only for times of
War, when all other ways, either of convincing by reasons, or convicting by
Law, were obstructed.

And, proceeding upon the same subject, they alleged diverse Papists by name,
who have not only gone to Church, but taken both the Communion, Oath of
Abjuration and Engagement, and all this undeniably proved by sufficient
Testimony, yet after solemn debate upon their Petitions in Haberdashers-Hall to
be no longer punished, since they were no longer guilty, the Commissioners
declared that it was not expressed in any Act or Instructions from the present
Parliament, what should amount unto, or be adjudged by them to be a Conformity,
and therefore they continue the sequestrations as formerly, notstanding such
conformity as aforesaid; In particular, on Wednesday the second of July, 1651.
It was the case (says my Presbyterian friend) of one Smith a suspected Papist,
who had Lands in the Soke of Winchester sequestered; upon his appeal at
Haberdashers-Hall, he produced sufficient proof that he had been several Lords
days at Church, and had twice taken the Oath of Abjuration, but one of the
Commissioners made answer, that this was not enough, he must also take the
Communion, otherwise must continue sequestered as a Papist; whereto Smiths
Council replied, That if it were a mark of Papists not to have received the
Communion, we are (said he) all Papists in our Parish, for we have had no
Communion in our Church those four years; And it is very probable that that very
Commissioner who made this objection, has not of late, and perhaps will not
receive the Communion in manner as is prescribed by the Statute: and certainly
it is a very sad case for us to force others, under so great a penalty, as the
Sequestration of their Estates, to do that which we will not do our selves: all
the relief and hopes that Smith and others in his condition (who have both gone
to Church, and taken the Communion, and Oath of Abjuration) have received at
the said Hall, is, that the said Commissioners have promised to move the
Parliament, to know what shall amount unto a Conformity; and it might also be
desired, to know what Religion the Papists (in case they be forced to leave
their own) shall conform unto, since we have three several Religions, that at
present seems to have an equal power or influence; the Prelaticall or old
Protestant (as some call it) is established by law; the Presbyterian carries the
vogue in the Pulpit; but the Independent has the power and Countenance of the
State. Certainly the abovesaid strange proceedings must needs appear, both to
all reformed Churches abroad, and to very many conscientious people at home, as
savouring of a design to make sure of the Papists estates, whatsoever becomes
of their souls.

And all this while we hold forth meekness, and all this while we cry up
Liberty of Conscience! Is it possible we should so far forget our principles,
as to seize the estates of our neighbors and kindred for Religion, and at the
same time profess to venture all our own, to purchase freedom of Religion? is
it possible we should expose our own lives in so long and dangerous a War, to
establish and secure Liberty of Conscience; and at the same instant of time,
hang, draw, and quarter men for their Consciences? how shall we answer at the
day of Judgment, our shedding so much blood to deliver our Country from
cocrcency im^matters of belief, if as soon as the power is in our hands, we
imbrue them in the blood of our Countrymen merely for their Religion? have we
so soon forgot those sharp reproofs of the Apostle, Romans 2. Behold you are
called Jews, and rest in the Law, and make your boast of God, you know his
will, and approve the things that are more excellent, you are confident that
your selves are guides of the blind, and lights to them that are in darkness,
instructers of the foolish, and teachers of Babes, who have the form of
knowledge and of truth in the Law; you therefore who teach another, teach you
not your selves? you that preach a man should not steal, do you steal? you that
abhor Idols, do you commit sacrilege? In the day when God shall judge the
secre^s of men by Jesus Christ, how can we answer that excellent and
self-evident precept of nature, Do as you would be done unto? God is not
mocked; he promises indeed, that the meek shall inherit the Land, but surely
means not such as seem meek only to inherit the Land.

Thus sharply went on my angry Presbyterian, and I confess I was extremely
ashamed to hear him say so much reason, that used to speak nothing but passion,
and to see my self so confounded by one, that I have always overcome with ease
upon any other subject, and should have liked far better his observations
(which with grief I acknowledge to be too true and open to all the World) if
they had come from an indifferent and unfactious spirit, because I suspect they
may perhaps proceed rather from envy toward the gainers than pity upon the
losers: for during the violent, and therefore short, dominion of the
Presbyterians, never were more cruel torturers of the Conscience than they,
never a more tyrannical Tribunal than their Iure divino Assembly, and classical
High Commission; but the hand of the Lord stopped them in their full cariere, and
by woeful experience they now find the truth of Gods threatenings, If you bite
and devour one another, take heed you be not consumed one of another, Gal. 5.
15.

Wherefore it shall be my daily prayer to our great and good God, that he would
graciously inspire his servants, who now sit at the Helm, to prevent the like
heavy judgments upon themselves, and seriously considering that both their
allegiance to Reason, their duty to God, their Engagement to their own
Principles, call so loudly upon them, they would fulfill now our joy, and
complete the good work so happily begun, by putting the tender-conscienced and
peaceable-minded people of this Nation into a condition of perfect security for
matters of Religion, which cannot be effected without a general Act of
Conscience-indempnity, firmly to be established as a fundamental Law of the
Land, for all that profess the Gospel of Christ.

Postscript.
SInce there is scarce one whom something in these few sheets will not please,
nor very many whom something will not displease; they therefore freely submit
themselves, not only to the Judgment of the Civil Magistrate, but of every
civil man; and I have (according to the Order of Parliament) hereunto
subscribed my name,

William Birchley.

Persecution for Religion condemned, etc.
IN the precedent part of this Discourse, I have demonstrated (according to
that light which the Lord Christ has infused into my Soul) how much coercency
in Religion is repugnant to the Law of Nature, and by many evident and
unanswerable Texts of Scripture, showed, how displeasing it is to God, how
improper to advance the power of godliness, and how extremely disagreeable to
the sweet Spirit, which guided our Lord Jesus in the propagation of his Gospel.
And after in the same little treatise I proceed to prove (by the express words
of the Parliaments and Armies Declarations) that the great Principle wherein we
glory, and which* we have so long fought to establish, is a perfect
Gospel-freedom, and absolute deliverance of the Conscience from all Tyranny and
Oppression.

Which Discourse as I composed in all humbleness of spirit, and afterward
offered to the gracious Redeemer of our Souls, who gave me the strength and
power to finish it to his glory: So I find not only my self (for which I humbly
thank the bounty of my God) confirmed in my former judgment, but others in
some measure convinced in theirs, of the unreasonablenesse and sin of
Conscience-Persecution.

Concerning which pious and modest temper of mutual forbearance, I shall only
add to what I have mentioned in the former part, this plain and familiar
Observation, That as the surest mark of a tender conscience in our selves, is
a tender spirit to others, so the most infallible sign of a hard and stony
heart in our own breasts is, when we slit in pieces and shipwreck the
Consciences of all that touch upon us: But praised for ever be the Name of our
God who still proceeds to guide and illuminate his Chosen, graciously disposing
them neither to presume upon themselves for their knowledge, nor be cruel
against others for their ignorance, but humbly adore and wait upon the Divine
Providence in the disposure of all things: which fills my soul with exceeding
joy when I consider it to be the general sense of all the truly Godly and
well-affected in this Nation, that no quiet and peaceable Christian be deprived
of the chief content and comfort of this life, which certainly consists in a
real and impartial, yet unoffensive, liberty to serve his God according to
his conscience. Many Petitions I could here cite in affirmance of this Truth,
from several Provinces of this Land: but I shall trouble the Reader only with
these two, the first was presented to the Parliament upon the six and twentieth
of March 1649. from the County of Leicester, wherein, though I were none of the
subscribers, yet I did both by my self and friends, promote is what I could, as
conceiving the requests of it, both just and reasonable: it bore this Title,
The humble Petition of diverse well-affected of the County of Leicester, in
behalf of themselves and the Nation.

ANd the seventh Article or Branch of the Petition was this. 7. That every one
may enjoy the just freedoms to worship God according to his word, without any
Coercive or Restrictive courses to the contrary.

The Petition being read, the Gentlemen that presented it were called in, and
Master Speaker, by Order of the House, gave them hearty thanks, etc.

And on the 2 of April following, a like Petition was presented, entitled, The
humble Petition and Representation of several Churches of God in London,
commonly, though f^lsly, called Anabaptists, which was also graciously accepted
by the House, according to the Merit of so conscientious a suit, and the
justice of so glorious a Parliament.

At which time we happily began to shake off that intolerable burden of
Isachar, the Presbyterian government, which has bin since in a good measure
effected, through the blessing of the Lord Christ, and pious care of his
instruments, the Governors of this Commonwealth.

Insomuch as no persons of what society or persuasion soever in this Nation,
are at present persecuted for their Conscience only, or difference in outward
worship, but the Papists, whom I am therefore (according to that Principle
(...) charity which absolutely commands my spirit,) obliged to make the chief
subject of this discourse.

In order to which performance, I have (since the writing of my former sheets)
often waited upon God in humility of spirit, and endeavored to inform my self,
as much as I could of the truth, and particular manner of their sufferings and
to that end have sometimes purposely attended at Haberdashers hall to hear
their Cases pleaded, where though I suffered some persecution from the crowd
and noise of that place, yet far more was the grief of my mind to behold so
many distressed suitors, whose Countenances were made sad by the fear of a
fatal Order for their impoverishment.

But before I proceed to any of those particulars, I must (at least in my own
judgment) clear the Papists of obstinacy and non-submission to the present
government, wherewith they were by some accused, as a sufficient ground of all
their punishment; from which imputation I shall easily deliver them by
transcribing a Copy of their Petition, which they have with much diligence and
humble importunity, addressed to very many members of Parliament, professing to
wait only the happiness of an opportunity to present it to the House, and being
a Paper at least 5 or 6 months old, and delivered to so many persons, with
whom I have the honor to be acquainted, it fell by chance into my hands,
having I confess of late entertai^ed a particular delight and recreation to
pass some part of my time in such curiosities.

To the Supreme Authority of this Nation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth
of ENGLAND.
The humble Petition of the Roman Catholics,
Shows,
THat your Petitioners have long waited some happy leisure, when there might be
a hearing allowed them of their many sad pressures, the weight whereof has sunk
them so ruinous^^ low, that they are utterly disabled to discharge their many
debts, make the least provision for their Children, or relieve themselves;
reduced to extreme necessities.

That even such of your petitioners* as are sequestered for delinquency, have
still comforted their sorrows with this hope* that at last they should
certainly be received to mercy; since the general VOTES for composition of the
17. of MARCH 1648. seem clearly to imply them capable thereof, when the Rules
concerning them should be agreed upon.

That now the wisdom of the Parliament applying it sel^eto establish the
people of this Commonwealth in a quiet and settled condition, your Petitioners
take up an humble confidence that they alone shall not be excluded from so
universal a benefit.

And therefore humbly pray, that the Laws, and proceedings concerning them may
be taken into consideration, and such clemency and compassion used toward them
by composition or otherwise, as in the judgment of (...) honorable House may
consist with the public peace, and your Petitioners comfortable living in
their native Country.

And they further humbly pray, that it would please the Parliament to vo^chsafe
them the permission of clearing their Religion from whatsoever may be
inconsistent with Government, which will assuredly be done to full
satisfaction, if there may be a Committee appointed, by this honorable House on
whom they may have the Privilege (...) attend,

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, and^^
THis to my sense bears it self with so much respect and submissivenesse in
the style, that it can no ways be interpreted mis-becomming the duty of good
and peaceable subjects; and for the matter of the Petition, it seems to my eye
so reasonable, that I cannot believe, but after a little patience, till other
more general (...) a^^ord the Parliament leisure, it will certainly receive a
satisfactory and releeving Answer; Especially since not only such Papists,
whose moderate delinquency leaves them some hope of mercy, nor such who for
preservation of their lives, were forced to fly into the (...) Kings Garrisons
without ever acting any thing against the State, but even the most innocent,
who all this while have sat still under so many pre^lures, and never were
charged with other accusation, than their Religion, yet all freely and humbly
submit in this Petition to the absolute pleasure of the Parliament for rules of
Composition, and this (as to the single Papist) for an offense, which in no
other Society of Christians in this Nation is accounted any crime at all; being
merely their different judgment in Religion; a proceeding wherein cer^^inly we
shall use too much severity, and partiallity, if we make it not only
unpardonable, but unredeemable.

In the close of their Petition they humbly beg the favor of an opportunity to
satisfy the Parliament in the point of consistency with Civil Government, which
being the chief Objection that (without passion) can be made against them,
surely we should not take offense, at their most diligent applications, and
utmost endeavors, to deliver themselves from so destructive a charge, laid
upon their Religion.

And as a further evidence of their readiness and earnest desires to perform
that which their Petition offers, I am informed diverse of considerable quality
amongst them were then in town unanimously agreed upon this following
Explanation, to declare and witness to the world the perfect consistency of
their Religion, both with civil Government, and civil society, joining also in
the same Paper, the like expressions of their Belief concerning some few other
points which they were informed to be more obnoxious to exception, than the
rest; As the undervaluing of holy Scripture, and over-valuing the authority of
the Church: Invocation of Saints and Angels, and worship of Images; and above
all, the proud opinion of Merits: This Paper they drew up as a preparatory to a
more full and perfect clearing of their Faith from those prejudices and
misunderstandings, which ordinarily men of different persuasion entertain,
especially in Controversies about matters of Religion.

The Paper, containing certain Doctrines of the Papists, and by them delivered
to diverse persons of quality for their particular satisfaction.
WE believe the holy Scriptures to be of divine I 2 Pet. 3. 16.
inspiration and infallible Authority; and whatsoever is therein contained we
firmly assent unto, as to the word of God, the Author of all Truth.

But since in the holy Scriptures there are some things hard to be understood,
which the ignorant and unstable wrest to their own destruction; we therefore
profess (for the ending of controversies in our Religion, and settling of peace
in our Consciences) to submit our private judgments to the Judgment of the
Church, represented in a free General Council.

2. II ^ Tim. 1. 17.
We humbly believe the sacred Mystery of the the Blessed Trinity, one Eternal,
Almighty, and Incomprehensible God, whom only, we adore and worship, as alone
having Sovereign Dominion over all things, to whom only we acknowledge as due
from men and Angles, all glory, service, and obedience, abhorring from our
hearts, as a most detestable Sacrilege, to give our Creators honor to any
creature whatsoever.

And therefore we solemnly protest, that by the prayers we address to Angels
and Saints, we intend no other than humbly to sollici^e their assistance before
the Throne of God, as we desire the prayers of one another here upon earth, not
that we hope any thing from them, as original Authors thereof, but from God the
Fountain of all Goodness, through Jesus Christ, our only Mediator and Redeemer.

Neither do we believe any divinity or virtue to be in Images, for which they
ought to be worshipped, as the Gentiles did their Idols, but we retain them with
due and decent respect in our Churches, as instruments, which we find by
experience, do often assist our memories, and excite our affections.

3. III Romans 3. 24
We firmly believe, that no force of nature, nor dignity of our best works, can
merit our Justification, but we are justified freely by grace, through the
Redemption that is in Jesus Christ.

And although we should by the grace of God persevere unto the end in a godly
life, and holy obedience to the Commandments, yet are our hopes of eternal
glory still built upon the mercy of God, and the merits of Christ Jesus.

All other merits, (according to our sense of that word) signify no more, than
Actions done by the assistance of Gods grace, to which it has pleased his
goodness to promise a reward; a Doctrine so far from being unsuitable to the
sense of the holy Scriptures, that it is their principal design to invite and
provoke us to a diligent observance of the Commandments, by promising heaven
as the reward of our obedience, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Godliness is profitable to all
things, having the promise of this life, and of that which is to come. And,
Romans 2. 6. God will render to every man according to his deeds, to them, who by
patient confidence in well-doing seek for glory, and honor, and immortality,
eternal life. And again, Romans 8. 13. If you live after the flesh, you shall
die, but if through the spirit you mortify the deeds of the body, you shall
live. And Heb. 6. 10. God is not unjust to forget your work and labor of love,
which you have showed for his name, etc. Nothing being so frequently repeated
in the Word of God, as his gracious promises to recompense with everlasting
glory the says and obedience of his servants; Nor is the bounty of God barely
according to our works, but high and plentiful, Luke 6. 38.
even beyond our capacities, giving full measure, heaped up, pressed down, and
running over into the bosoms of all that love him.

Thus we believe the merit or rewardablenesse of holy living (both which
signify the same thing with us) arises not from the self-valu^ even of our
best actions, as they are ours, but from the Grace and Bounty of God; Luke 17.
10.
and for our selves, we sincerely profess, when we have done all those things
which are commanded us, we are unprofi^able servants, having done nothing but
that which was our duty; So that our ^oasting is not in our selves, but all our
glorying is in Christ.

4. IV Exodus 20. Mat. 19. Eccles. 12. 13.
We firmly believe, and highly reverence the Moral Law, being so solemnly
delivered to Moses upon the Mount, so expressly confirmed by our Savior in the
Gospel, and containing in it self so perfect an Abridgement of our whole duty
both to God and man.

Which Moral Law we believe obliges all men to proceed with faithfulness and
sincerity in their mutual contracts one toward another; and therefore our
constant profession is, that we are most strictly and absolutely bound to the
exact and entire performance of our promises, made to any person of what
Religion soever; much more to the Magistrates and Civil Powers, under whose
protection we live, whom we are taught by the Word of God, to obey, not only
for fear, but conscience sake; and to whom we will most faithfully observe our
promises of duty and obedience, notwithstanding any dispensation, absolution,
or other proceedings of any foreign Power or Authority whatsoever.

Wherefore we utterly deny and renounce that false and scandalous Position,
that Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, as most uncharitaly imputed to our
practices, and most unjustly pinned upon our Religion.

These we sincerely and solemnly profess, as in the sight of God, the searcher
of all hearts, taking the words plainly and simply, in their usual and
familiar sense, without any Equivocation or Mental Reservation whatsoever
THese expressions, concerning four of the most offensive points wherein the
Papists differ from us, have I confess given me a great and unexpected
satisfaction; And though I remain in the same mind as to the erroneousnesse of
many of their Tenets, yet I see we may easily be too passionate in the degree
of detesting any different opinion, since every error is not presently to be
censured as an unsufferable abomination; and too severe in the degree of
persecuting the dissenters from our own judgments, as if they were unworthy to
breath the same air with our selves.

Certainly, many Protestants, who quietly enjoy a just and unmolested freedom,
approach very near to the first assertion of the Papists, whilst some both
Writers and Discoursers, profess to submit their private judgments
unappealably to a truly-free General Council, that we might once have an end
of all strife and contention about matters of Religion; others refer themselves
without further instance to a Provincial Assembly of Divines, and very few but
will prefer the judgment of the supreme Authority of this Nation, before their
own particular sense, readily conforming to that Declaration, which the
Parliament shall hold forth to be the true meaning of the Scripture: So that
almost every one agrees in the acknowledgment of an external Authority to
decide such Controversies as arise out of the different interpretation of Gods
word, which is the main exception against the Papists, in that they pin their
Faith upon the Churches sleeve, and yield a blind obedience (that is without
appealing any further) to her determinations.

And for the second branch, I am sure many Protestants continue still those old
customs of baring their heads when they come into a Church, nay of bowing at
the name of Jesus; Practices that ly open to the greatest part of those
objections, whichour more godly and conscientious penns make against the
Papists in the question of Pictures; yet I hope there will never be the least
thought entertained of imposing penalties upon the private and unscandalous use
of any such Ceremonies: rather let us apply our endeavors to open their eyes
with a mild and gentle hand, than beat them out with the club-fist of the Law.

But when I reflect upon the third conclusion in the Recusants paper, I am
astonished to consider how education with a little mixture of Passion or
interest, makes every slight distemper amongst Christians so desperate, that it
often becomes irrecoverable, and endangers both the health and life of
Christianity. Surely in many things we strangely mistake one another. I
profess sincerely, I should be so far from seizing on the Estate of a Papist
for refusing that part of the Oath of Abjuration, wherein he is compelled to
renounce the Doctrine of Merits, that I am resolved to suffer a thousand
deaths, rather than abjure so great and manifest a truth, according to the
sense wherein they explain themselves, or affirm so great and manifest an
Error, according to the sense wherein we explain our selves. For when we
censure the doctrine of Merits, we understand by that word, our Deserts, as they
exclude the merits of Christ, and abstracting from the Covenant God has been
pleased to make with us in his Son, and in that sense we justly condemn all
opinions of Merit, even of the best works, as presumptuous and Luciferian; but
I now see when the Papists affirm that good works are meritorious, they include
both the promise of God, and the merits of Christ Jesus, and in effect when all
is summed up, it amounts only to this; that God has graciously promised, and
will faithfully keep his word, to reward all those with eternal life that
believe in him, and obey his commandments. In this sense the Papists hold
mercifullnesse to be meritorious, or avaylable to salvation, because the
Scripture says, Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. Mat.
5. 7. In this sense the Papists hold patience in affliction to be meritorious
or avaylable to salvation, because the Scripture says, Blessed are they who
are persecuted for Righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
Mat. 5. 10. And this (as I am informed by very understanding men amongst them)
is the real truth of their Doctrine, concerning Good works, which in my
judgment differs nothing from ours, but only in the unsavory and proud sounding
word Merit.

The last Clause of the Papists Noat, which I have transcribed, is so full and
satisfactory, that if they will be as good as their words, I shall neither fear
to have such neighbors, or need any Magistrate fear to have such subjects.

And to prove their trustiness and fidelity, in the observance of their
Oaths, I cannot imagine a more evident demonstration, than that they make a
conscience of what Oaths they take; he that swears any thing without
distinction, may justly be suspected to be as false to men, as he is fearlesse
of God, whereas no cleerer argument can be alleged in the behalf of any, that
they intend to keep all the Oaths they take, than this, that they will not
take all the Oaths you offer; surely if either the Pope or their own
Consciences could give them this extravagant privilege, to be bound by no Oath,
they might without difficulty take any, and if they were allowed by their
Religion to swear any thing, certainly they are all worse than mad, if they do
not immediately post away to Haberd^shers-hall, call for the Oath of
Abjuration, swallow it down quickly without any chewing, and so save at least
50000 l. a year in a morning.

In the late Kings days, many Papists were smartly punished for not taking the
Oath of Allegiance, none for observing it, nay I have heard some Papist
D^linquents argue for themselves, that the utter ruin, which now endangers
their whole estates, proceeds solely from their performing to the late King
that service, which he called Allegiance, and this is yet a higher proof of
their fidelity in their promises, since they adventured with so much hazard to
keep that Oath in substance, which they refused with almost as much hazard to
take, because against their Conscience in some circumstance.

And now let any one judge indifferently, whether they that firmly believe all
the holy Scriptures of the old and new Testament, worship and adore only one
God, rely upon Jesus Christ for their sole Mediator, and profess it their duty
to observe the Commandments of the Moral Law, may not reasonably be suffered
to live in their native Country with the peaceable enjoyment of their
Consciences in their private houses, especially those who will quietly submit
to such cautions and restrictions, as the Commonwealth shall require for
prevention of scandal, or disturbance of the public peace.

Besides I am persuaded a far less liberty will oblige the Papists, than
content any other, because hitherto all liberty has been wholly denied to them,
and wholly allowed to every one else; So that they will gladly receive, as a
mercy and favor, what others challenge as a right, and their affections being
once purchased at so cheap a price, as a little private exercise of their
Conscience, free from the fright and smart of penalties, I am confident they
will neither be such fools, as to forfeit their liberty, nor so ungrateful as
to forget them that gave it; since out of all our Histories not one example can
be assigned, that they ever offered to move the least sedition, in a time when
they enjoyed but half the liberties of freeborn Englishmen.

Therefore I shall close my thoughts upon this paper, with a short and free
conclusion, which I conceive abridges in few words the whole difficulty betwixt
subject and superior; The Magistrate that protects any sort of people in his
dominions, may justly require their service, and safely rely upon their
obedience, but if he persecute them, whether Protestants or Papists, he will
soon find, that, as he may violently force their compliance, he can never
prudently rest upon their affections.

But I must here beg leave to be dispensed with in my promise of ending this
period, till I have added this observation, how many Modern Authors of good
account amongst us, have positively held forth to the people (as an
unquestionable truth) that the Papists by their principles, are not obliged to
keep faith with Heretics; and I must acknowledge I was once of the same
opinion concerning them, principally relying upon the credit of Mr. James
Howell, an ingenious traveller in most of the Popish Countries, which makes me
the more wonder, that he should take such an erroneous opinion upon trust, and
assert it in print near the end of his first part of Dodona's Grove; where he
says, That one of the Canons of the last great Council (which must needs be
the Council of Trent) was, that HAERETICIS NON EST TENENDA FIDES; The esteem I
had entertained of that Authors ingenuity permitted me not to acquiesce to some
Recusants verbal denial of this assertion; but (for more ample satisfaction
in this so important a point) I took the pains to peruse some of their best
writers, and found them unanimously agree, that Faith is not only to be kept
with Heretics, but even with Turks, Jews, and Infidells, and that
indispensably: neither could I find one tittle to that purpose in any Canon or
Session of that last great Council, (as he calls it) but to the contrary; For
both in the 15 and 18 Session, the Council says expressly, that whosoever shall
violate the least point of the Public Faith, given for the security of all
Protestants, that should repair to that Council, should be subject to those
penalties, QUAS IURE DIVINO ET HUMANO AUT CONSUETUDINE HUJUSMODI SALVORUM
CONDUCTUUM VIOLATORES INCURRERE POSSUNT, ABSQUE OMNI EXCUSATIONE AUT QUAVIS IN
HAC PART CONTRADICTIONE. By which it evidently appears, that the Council
supposed, as a thing known and certain, that whosoever should violate his faith
promised to Heretics, was not only punishable by Humane Laws, but even by
the Divine Law it self.

And certainly if it had been my unhappiness to have done any sort of
Christians so much wrong in public, my conscience (coming afterward to be
better informed) would oblige me to a public reparation; for though we use
no such confession, as the Papists practice, yet the Law of natural reason
binds us to as punctual an observance of restitution, as any Papists
whatsoever, and that even to Papists themselves, when we do them any injury.

But for a final dispatch of this point concerning the Papists indispensable
obligation of performing their promises, it was my fortune to light upon a book
of one Paul Layman a German Jesuit, and an Author of great esteem amongst the
Casuists (who treating of dispensations lib. 2. tract. 3. cap. 12) sets down
these very words, DICO QUARTO, SI CATHOLICI CUM HAERETICIS PUBLICUM FOEDUS
INEANT, NON POTEST PER AUTHORITATEM PONTIFICIAM SOLVI AUT RELAXARI; If
Catholics enter into any public contract with Heretics, it cannot be
dissolved or dispensed with by the Popes power. And some few lines after,
proceeding upon the same question, h^ pronounces downright, ABSOLUTE NEGARI
DEBET ID (viz. REMISSIONEM FOEDERIS,) A SUMMO PONTIFICE FIERI POSSE; It ought
absolutely to be denied, that it is in the Power of the Pope to obsolve from
such contracts. And again, FIDES PUBLICA HAERETICIS DATA INVIOLABILITER ET SINE
ULLO DISPENSATIONIS REMEDIO SERVANDA EST QUAMDIU IPSI SERVARE PARATI SUNT:
Public Faith given to Heretics ought inviolably and indispensably to be
observed so long as they are ready to perform their part. And concludes, that
even Jesuits, as well as other Doctors, hold the Popes power to be limitable,
and not so Almighty as the World usually believes concerning them. The same
Doctrine is repeated in the Abridgment of Laymans book entitled Compendium
Moralis Theologiae Pauli Layman, folio 265.

The Papists having given so much satisfaction by their Petition and other
Paper, but much more by their submission to, and peaceable demeanor in this
Commonwealth, as it stands now established; I must appeal not only to the
Parliament, and that great Instrument of our freedom my L. G. Cromwell, but to
all conscientious men whether these Papists may not reasonably hope so much
mercy, as not to be by penalties debarred the private exercise of their
Consciences, with their doors shut, and such other cautions and circumstances,
as the State shall be pleased to ordain for Regulation of Soul-freedome; since
it is evident that Christian liberty may be lawfully governed, though it be
also as evident that it cannot lawfully be taken away, so that every peaceable
spirit have liberty enough, and yet the licentions Liver not have too much.

Such moderate and orderly freedom might charitably be allowed to the quiet
Papist from persons that afford far more advantages to far more dangerous
enemies, the Scotch or rigid K^rki^^s, who have several times engaged against
us in open field, and by many plots and secret contrivements endeavored (as
much as in them lay) to subvert the present Government; yet after so many
victories obtained against them and the reducing of the greatest part of their
Country to the obedience of this State; The Ministers (as says a letter the
21th of Febr. 1651, from an Officer of our Army at Edenborough) are violently
bent their own way, and preach damnation to all Complyers with us in any thing.

And let any indifferent person read the strange proceedings of the Presbytery
of Aberden against Sir Alexander Irvin, Lord of Drum, published in the
Diurnall, 26 Ian. 1651, he will (I am confident) highly applaud that ingenious
letter from an eminent Officer of our Army dated at Edenborough, the 21th of
the same month, and published in the next weeks Politicus, which has these
very words. You would wonder to observe the strange Pride and proceedings of
the kirk-Clergy, the ingredients of whose constitution admit of many more
grains of gunpowder, than you shall find in any Jesuits in Christendom: so
that if they be not closely looked unto, they will set all on fire again.

And in an other letter dated 12th of April, 1652, from Dalkeith in Scotland,
and printed in the next weeks Diurnall, is this excellent observation; Believe
it, all our other Enemies are tame beasts to the high Presbyter, and yet with
the winding and turning of a religious pretense and an artificial zeal against
Heresy, he will like a tame snake (if not warily avoided) get into your
bosom, etc.

Continually every week come still fresh and loud complaints from our friends
and Officers in Scotland of the stubbornness of a certain froward and resty
party in that Nation.

Yet notwithstanding the pertinacy and malice of these Kirkists, such of them
as have not appeared in actual arms against us are so far from being
sequestered, that many of them enjoy great places of honor and benefit under
our Government. And (such is the States mercy toward them) that the
Commissioners for settling the affairs of Scotland by their declaration of the
21 February, 1651, grounded upon the Declaration of the Parliament of the
Common wealth of England have expressed a particular regard and indulgence to the
whole Nation; in these words. That such Ministers whose Consciences oblige them
to wait upon God, in the Administration of spiritual ordinances, according to
the Order of the Scottish Churches, with any that shall voluntarily join in the
practice thereof, shall receive protection and encouragemens from all in
authority, in their peaceable and unoffensive exercise of the same: as also
others, who not being satisfied in Conscience to use that form, shall serve and
worship God in other Gospell-way, and behave themselves peaceably and
unoffensivel therein.

And we do lastly declare, That all Merchants, tradesmen and handicrafts men,
not having in lands and goods above the clear value of 500l. sterling, and all
other persons not having in lands and goods above the clear value of 200l.
sterling (not being prisoners of war, or Soldiers of fortune in Commission)
who shall in pursuance of the said Declaration live peaceably, and yield
obedience to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England exercised in
Scotland, shall not only be freed and discharged from all forfeitures and
confiscations of their Estates, for any thing formerly done by them, in
reference to the wars, but be received into the protection of the Parliament,
and enjoy such liberties and immunities, as also such leases and grants of
confiscated and forfeited lands, as upon consideration of their respective
qualities and deserts shall be thought fit, etc.

In the first branch of this Declaration such a Conscience-security is held
forth, as (according to my soul) ought not by the Laws of Christ be denied to
any peaceable Christian, and I extremely rejoice in the spirit of our
Governors, for so noble and charitable a proceeding; yet I plainly see, that
they to whom this favor is allowed, are both different from us in the
Principles of their Religion, and opposite to us in their National affection;
whereas a far lesser mercy is denied to our own kindred and allies, to our own
Countrymen, born to the same freedom with our selves, who have in a much less
measure offended in matters of hostility, nay diverse of them not at all, who
yet would be content, and thankful for a small part of that favor, which the
Parliament so bountifully bestows upon strangers.

By the second Branch very many of that Nation, who have bin in actual arms
against us, and perhaps wounded or slain our friends in open Batells, will
receive an immunity (for 500l. Sterling is a great estate in Scotland;) Whereas
many of our own Country, who never lifted up hand against us, have two parts of
their estates with rigor sequ^stred, and that without so charitable a
distinction, as to free the poorer sort, whose estates are of less value than
500l. For our merciless Sequestrators have tripar^ited even the day laborers
goods and very household-stuff, and taken away two Cowes, where the whole stock
was but three.

Passages observed upon Cases depending at Haberdashers-Hall.
I Must confess I had not so much time to spare as I could have wished, yet
for some weeks I attended at Haberdashers Hall for better satisfaction: but to
make a full discovery of all the proceedings there, is beyond the level of my
discourse: I will only promise in what I say, not to exceed the bounds of truth
and modesty. The present Commissioners, for ought I could discern, are civil
persons, and most of them apprehensive of others sufferings, but seem to say in
many hard cases, that either their Instructions or Commission binds them up
from being able to give relief, or the obligation to the Oath they take will
not permit them to show that tenderness and compassion, which otherwise (I am
persuaded) their Consciences would carry them forth to practice, since most of
the suitors that come before them appear so miserably ruined, that the very
distressednesse of their condition is motive enough to incite the Mercy of
their Judges, especially, their crime being only the refusal of an Oath (...)
which they solemnly profess is against their Consciences, and I am sure is
against o^^ Laws; And truly, as often as I reflect upon the strange severity of
that Oath, my So^^ goes forth in pity toward them that are concerned in it;
since even their thoughts a^^ not free, but an absolute force laid upon the
most inward cogitations of their hearts, and themselves compelled to condemn
themselves by accusations wrested out of their own mouths.

Upon the ceasing of the former Committees Authority, these seven (who now
(...) Judges of Delinquency and Sequestrations) were empowered about 25
January, 164^ since which time they and their sub-commissioners in the several
Counties have made many new discoveries both of Delinquents and Papists
estates, either not before sequestered, or not compounded for at the full value,
but I observed that they who were ^equestred or had their rents or goods
unduely taken from them, in the time of the former Committees for
Sequestrations, how unjustly soever, could not be releeved by these
Commissioners nor any other power but by the Parliament it self.

It was the Case of Mr. Robert Knightley a Recusant only, a great part of whose
Mansion house in Essex was pulled down to repair the Fort at Tilburie, for which
he petitioned (...) pittance of 100 l. per an. only allowed, out of his own and
fathers estate.

In February 1651, Mr. James Hanham of the West petitions the Commissioners at
Haberdashe^s hall to this effect, That he had never acted any thing against the
Parliament, yet two parts of his estate were sequestered with such rigor for
his Recusancy, that he could not possibly subsist with necessaries by the
remaining thirds, when taxes and other charges were deducted: That he was
therefore constrained to borrow 50 l. upon Bond, and having disbursed 15 l. of
the money, it seems the Sequestrators got notice that the Petitioner had
somewhat in his house worth a new sequestration or review, as they call it,
thereupon they search his trunkes, find the remaining 35 l. pull out the guilty
bag, and two parts of it they sequester into their own pockets, to the use of
the Commonwealth, and for releef therein Mr Hanham appealed, but found no
redress at present, more than an Order for the sub-Commissioners in the
Country to examine the business and certify, etc. At the return of whose
Certificate, I leave the Petitioner to expect his doom.

On the 31 of March 1652, the Petition of one Hamond or Ammot was read, to this
effect, That the Petitioner never did bear Arms or assist the Enemies of the
Parliament, yet his estate had lain under sequestration ever since the year
1645, and not one penny allowed him for his maintenance. That the Petitioner,
being a Recusant, did in the time of the late war continue at his own house, as
long as he could without apparent danger of his life, but considering how
obnoxious even the most peaceable of his Religion were to be affronted and
ruined, by the daily mischeifs they received from some disorderly soldiers,
and especially seeing one of his neighbors (a Recusant) slain at his own door,
the Petitioner did then, and not before, fly for protection to a Garrison of the
late Kings, without acting any thing in the least kind against the Parliament.
And therefore humbly prayed he might have a fifth of his estate and the arrears
allowed him to buy bread. But it not appearing to the Commissioners that he had
wife or Children, their answer was, they had not power to grant him any releef.

Nor do I believe this man's case to be singular: For I am well satisfied, that
a great part of those Papists, who are sequestered as absolute delinquents, were
never in actual arms against the Parliament, but only fled to the enemies
Garrisons for shelter, yet no qualification or difference in punishment is
hitherto allowed them, which would be to my understanding very just and
reasonable; Since whoever did observe the fury and rage of most of our common
soldiers (at the beginning of the late troubles) against many of that party,
will easily conclude the Papists had reason to distrust their own personal
security amongst them. And for instance, I remember an officer of my
acquaintance under the Earl of Manchester told me, that at their taking of
Lincoln from the Cavaleers in the year 1644, he was an eye witness of this
Tragedy. The next day after the Town was taken, some of our common soldiers in
cold blood (meeting with Mr. Price of Washingley in Huntington ^hire a Papist)
asked him, Art thou Price the Papist? I am (said he) Price the Roman Catholic;
whereupon one of them immediately shot him dead.

In the same month of March there happned at this Hall a very hard case, which
was of a maidservant (whose name I do not remember) but her Petition was to
this effect; That her Father and Mother both dyed, when she was but 16 years of
age, and being very poor, they left the Petitioner only some old clothes and a
little household-stuff, in all not above 5. or 6. pounds, after whose death of
Petitioner, being an Orphan, betook her self to service, and having served
seventeen years, for the annual wages of 7 Nobles, the Petitioner had by her
frugaliy increased her small patrimony to 20 l. which being placed in the hands
of A. B. and of late discovered to be the Petitioners money, and the Petitioner
a Recusant; She humbly prayed that they would please to take the sad and
disconsolate condition of a poor Orphan into their charitable consideration,
whereby the extremity of the Law might be qualified to so merciful a temper,
that she might not be utterly ruind, by losing in a moment for her Conscience
what she had been so long in gathering by the sweat of her brows. But the
Commissioners, (though perhaps other wise willing) concluded they had not power
to give her any releef, more than the bare thirds, unless she would take the
Oath of Abjuration; A thing as far at least above her understanding, as it can
be against her Conscience,

If it be unreasonable (as many well-affected seem to urge) that the Priests and
Ministers (who do or at least should perform some spiritual offices for the
good of the Soul should tyth a tenth part of the husband-mans labor: How much
more unreasonable is it, that a poor silly maidservant should thus, merely
upon the account of Conscience, be sequestered of two thirds of that, which by
many years labor she had gained and reserved, as a suport against the
necessities of old age.

On the 16th of April 1652. The Case of Mistress Church of Essex, a Recusant,
was heard, whose Petition spoke to this effect; That her late husband in his
life time settled a lease of Muck-hall (or such like name) in Essex of
considerable value upon her in lieu of joincture, for diverse years yet in
being, and was held of the late Dean and Chapter of Paul's; That Alderman
Andrews or Mr. Nathaniel his son had bought the reversion of those lands at
Gurney house, and had since taken a lease for 7 years of the Commissioners for
Sequestration in Essex of the whole present possession, without the Petitioners
consent or knowledge, and without any regard to her thirds; And that the said
Mr. Andrews having now possession of the whole estate, had demolished the
Petitioners Mansion house, and did refuse to pay the Petitioner her Thirds,
whereby she was driven to a necessity of wanting bread, being a distressed and
friendlesse widow of almost 80 years of Age; She therefore prayed her thirds
and the arreares, and that the said lease might be annulled, etc.

The first was charitably granted, but as to the Lease, and what her thirds
should be, she was left to the Mercy of Mr. Andrews, who I fear does forget
what the Father of Mercyes says in Jeremy 22. 3. Execute judgment and
righteousness, and deliver the spoiled out of the hands of the oppressor, and
do no wrong, (...) no violence to the stranger, and fatherless and widow,
etc. And in Matt. 23. 14. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, For
ye devour widows houses, and for a pretense make long prayer; Therefore ye
shall receive the greater damnation.

That which in this case did most exact my observation, was, That Mr. Andrews
(a person of quality) should make use of his power against a poor widow, and
should be present, and openly avow the taking of her estate over her head, with
so little regard to the thirds, which is allowed her by the Act of Parl. and so
much to his own benefit; without which, it is like he would not have taken it,
and with which the Petitioner must needs suffer.

From Haberdashers hall give me leave to make a step into Morefields, where on
the 19 of May 1650 being the Lords day, Rich. Ledsam and one Lea^^eater, two
Pursuivants, apprehended Robert Segar, a poor old decrepit man, upon a
suspicion (and it was but a suspicion) that he had been at the Spanish
Ambassadors at Mass; upon this bare surmise the poor man was searched, and in
his pockets they found an old Prayer Book, whereupon he was carried before a
justice of peace, and committed to the Galehouse at Westminster, where he lay
in the Common Gaol, till the quarter Sessions in January 1651, beign full 20
months, without any discharge or proceedings against him, and at that Sessions
was acquitted by proclamation, through the mercy of Justice Scobell, but was
deteyned Prisoner (until April 1652) by Mr. Weeks the keeper of the prison for
the rent of his lodging, for which the said keeper demanded 14 pence a week,
besides fees, and yet (as I am credibly informed) the old man lay on the boards
in the Common Gaol, and had no other pillow for his head, but a hard Stone, for
which he must now pay more than he is worth, or continue till he perish in
prison, being above 86 years of age.

And now I am at the Gatehouse I shall give you the supplement of a like sad
story, mentioned in the 21 page of the first part of this Moderator, concerning
a great-bellyed gentlewoman, committed to prison on the 24 of June, 1651, her
name upon enquiry I find was Delavall, an English woman, but her husband a
Frenchman; she was committed also to the Gatehouse, and with much importunity
got leave by Petition to go out upon bail, till she was brought to bed, but
was an actual Prisoner full 7 months of the 12, which is prescribed by the
Statute, and the Fine of 100 Marks stood charged upon her, til she was releeved
by the late gracious Act of General Pardon and Oblivion, (an Act that no less
obliges all the People of this Nation, to forget their private injuries, than
to remember the public mercy of the Parliament:) and all this poor Woman's
sufferings merely grounded upon a bare supposition, that she had been at the
then French Agents in Long Acre at Mass, without so much as one witness that
there was any Mass said there at all, It being the truth of the case (if I may
believe their most serious Protestations that they were only at their other
private devotions.

But to return to Haberdashers hall. I perceived in my observations there, that
besides the cases before recited, it was a familiar thing to see Papists (I
mean single Papists, without the adjunct of Delinquency) outed of the
possession of the two sequestered thirds of their estates, by any stranger that
would offer in the box but 12 pence more than the owner; which has made diverse
owners strain themselves to give more rent to the State, than they could
possibly make of the two parts, rather than be outed of the possession of their
Ancient patrimonies; And some of them have assured me, that it happens very
often, that neighbors, either through covetousness of revenge (for who can
live so innocently as to procure no Enemy, at least so happily as to have
none,) set themselves to outvy the owners, and then recompense the loss they
have in the great rent they pay, by mi^using the lands they hire in despite of
the owner.

Besides many times when the proprietors have with much charge and long
attendance obtained Leases of the two parts for 7 years in the Country, in
pursuance of the Act of Parliament; after improvement of their estates by good
husbandry, they are again outed, and their Leases made void at this Hall, under
pretense of the want of some formality of Surveying, posting, boxing, or the
like, which it seems the Instructions from these Commissioners do hold forth
to those below, yet those Instructions are not made public, whereby the
parties interessed might be advised how to proceed regularly and certainly in a
business, that so much concerns their subsistence.

Nor are the Recusants permitted to sell any of their Lands, by Fining for the
two parts, though for payment of their just Debts, nay though they should be
willing to transport themselves beyond the Seas; By which disablement to sell
or Morgage the least pile of grass they possess, many well-affected suffer
much prejudice, by non-payment of their true and ancient debts, but diverse of
the Papists are thereby driven to such extreme necessities, that they have
exposed their bare Thirds to sale; though I perceive few Purchasors will meddle
therewith, unless upon very disadvantagious terms to the Seller, because the
Purchasers say, they are sure to contract a charge and trouble to themselves by
their attendance at this Hall: For in such case, if the Papist can gain the
favor to have his Thirds partitioned from the other two; yet (as I heard it
argued) the State might, when he had sold such divided part, or by good
husbandry improved it, evict it from him, and assign him another Thirds of the
same Lands, that perhaps has been wasted by ill Tenants; For I found this also
much complained of among the Petitioners, that the Sequestrators or such
Strangers to whom the Two parts are often demised, rarely or never bestow any
Money on repairs of the two Thirds, but take the Rents, as long as the Houses
or Lands will yield any; which is one reason, why such Customers many times
out-bid the owners for the renting those two Thirds; the owners being always
careful to keep up the Houses, and direct their Husbandry to the best
advantage and embetterment of the Lands.

Others I observed to complain much of the long attendance, and great charge
they were at in gaining their Thirds, and an allowance of their Mansion Houses,
and of the many malicious and false accusations that Informers were permitted
to bring in against them: As (if I mistake not) I overheard some of the
Solicitors say, that the Lady Saint John's, or her Husband Mr. Arundell, had
been accused for Delinquency five or six several times, and still cleared it.
Witnesses have been often suborned to false accusations, and yet when the party
injured (after long attendance and expense) has cleared himself of the
Calumny, and consequently proved the malice of the Informer, no reparation
would be allowed for so dangerous a slander; Insomuch that upon the whole
matter I have heard a Recusant (with tears in his Eyes) profess seriously,
that so much attendance and charge was required in getting their Thirds, and
such continual fears and vexations attended their condition, that if he could
by manufacture or any other honest calling get a livelihood, he should easily
resolve to let his Third part go after the other two.

The Commissioners themselves (sitting in a treble capacity; First for
Compounding with Delinquents, Secondly, for Advance of Money upon the fifth and
twentyeth parts, and Thirdly, for Sequestrations) can only spare Wednesday
Mornings, for hearing Petitions upon Sequestrations, and commonly there is not
a Committee (which must be at least four of the seven Commissioners) till after
ten of the clock, by which means they can scarce afford two hours in a Week
for the dispatch of that employment. So that whenever a Suitou^ delivers in
his Petition, it is usually a full Month, if not six Weeks before its comes to
be heard in course, and a great part of this time he must attend, and perhaps
retain Council several days before his business will be heard.

These complaints (for ought I could possibly be informed) are not only true,
but far short of what this sort of people suffers; which so much the more
afflicts my Soul, by how much I consider the sufferers to be Christians and
Natives of England.

I omit to speak of the sub-Commissioners for Sequestrations in the several
Counties of this Commonwealth, as having hitherto had little means to inform
my self of their several proceedings, and considering them obliged to pursue
the Instructions they receive from those above; only this I can say of some of
them, whom I have conversed with, that they seem to grant, that Sequestration
of Papists Estates, upon the sole account of Religion, is not in their opinion
warranted by Gods word, but rather the contrary; And yet these men continue
their employments, which I fear will expose them to the censure of worldly
minded and avaricious selfe-seekers: And I pray God that whilst they charge
others with Idolatry, they be not found guilty of it themselves, Ephesians. 55.
since the Scripture says expressly, that a Covetous man is an Idolater.

But it being apparent that the Oath of Abjuration is the wrack which torments
so many Consciences, I did therefore in the former part of this Discourse
propound some Quaeries upon that Oath, and shall now humbly add, (as not
improper for this subject) what the before mentioned Sir Alexander Irving
lately said, in answer to Master John ^ut, Moderatour of the Presbytery of
Aberdeen, concerning constraint of conscience and enforcing Oaths: his very
words are these. I do acknowledge (...) which you say concerning Oaths, that
God is honored by them, yet that must receive some limitations, or else it
would prove very false, they must be taken in Judgment, in truth and upon
necessity: Now I appeal to your own Consciences, whether ye have observed
these Conditions in your urging so many dreadful Oaths upon this miserable
Nation these years bypast, not only in the Covenant, but in your solemn League
with your Presbyterian brethren of England, whereby yoe enforced all men to
swear to establish by Arms, that Tyranny there, as ye had done here: how many
have ye enforced (by threatening and Execution of your Kirk censure and the
severity of the Civil Law, following upon them, depriving men of their
Estates) to swear and subscribe to all ye enjoined or could invent, albeit ye
knew them to be of far contrary Judgments, wherein ye did imitate that
feigned and false Mother, who before Solomon was contented to have the Child
divided, whereby her Hypocrisy was found out by that bre^e Prince: By which
means ye have made this Nation guilty of perjury, besides many other heinous
sins: I wish to God you had remembered or would yet remember, how much you
cried out against the Tyranny of Bishops, (when they were urging some of your
number, who were refractory to Episcopacy) that there should be had some regard
to tender Consciences, which were of another Judgment: But so soon as ye had
got the power into your hands, neither Minister nor Lord, Man, Woman or Child,
was spared, nor any regard had unto them, whatsoever quality or condition they
were of, all were forced not only to obey you, but (which is the greatest
tyranny over men's Consciences) they were made to swear, that they thought, as
ye would have them, albeit to your own knowledge many thought the contrary
etc. The whole Answer, which bears date, 20. January 1651. is worth the
reading, and is Printed in the Diurnall, Numb. 118. I pray God a great part of
the same arguments may not be turned against us, for enforcing this Oath of
Abjuration so positively against men's Consciences.

And since we all say, that we abhor to violence and force any ones
Conscience farther then to secure the public peace, and that only as
necessity shall really appear, and not upon any Voluntary or Counterfeit
pretense, I cannot see how the taking of this Oath availes to make a man,
either a better Neighbor or a better Subject, and should be glad to know,
whether the Parliament will trust honest Sir Richard Minshew, Dr. John Friar,
etc. any more now, then before they took that Oath, and became outward
Conformists: Since it is but too probable, they do it not upon any Conviction of
Conscience, but rather against Conscience, merely to save their Estates from
Sequestration; And if so, none can deny, but that it is the highest degree of
perjury, and a spiritual Murder of the Soul; Then let us sadly consider, how
disadvantagious to the work of the Lord, and scandalous to the eyes of men it
will be, for us to fill up our Congregations with such unsanctified Members:
The ingenious Author of Mercurius Politicus, (Numb. 99. page 1554.) has an
admirable Discourse upon this Subject. If we seriously reflect (says he)
upon the design of God, in bringing Christ into the World, we shall find it
was to set an end to that pompous administration of the Jewish form; that as
his Church and people were formerly confined within the Narrow Pale of a
particular Nation, so now the Pale should be broken down, and all Nations
taken into the Church. Not all Nations in a lump: nor any whole Nations, or
National Bodies to be formed into Churches: For his Church or people now under
the Gospel, are not to be a body Political, but Spiritual and Mystical: not
a promiscuous confusion of Persons taken in at adventure, but an orderly
collection, a picking and choosing of such as are called and Sanctified, etc.
Not a company of men forced in by commands and constitutions of wordly power
and prudence, but of such as are brought in by the power and officary of
Christ's Word and Spirit. For, he himself has said, My Kingdom is not from
hence; My Kingdom is not of this World, etc. And therefore that hand, which
has hitherto presumed in most Nations, to creat a power called Ecclesiastic,
in equipage to the Civil, to ^ear sway, and bind men's Consciences to certain,
Nations ordained for Orthodox upon civil penalties, under color of prudence,
good order, discipline, preventing of heresy, and advancing of Christ's
Kingdom; and to this end has twisted the spiritual power ( as the call it)
with the worldly and secular Interest of State; this (I say) has been the very
right hand of Antichrist, opposing Christ in his way, whose Kingdom, being not
of this world, depends not upon the helps, and devises of worldly wisdom. Thus
that excellent Pen. And a quick sighted and judicious member of Parliament, in
my hearing, being made acquainted (as with a supposed grateful news) that some
such indiferent Christians, as Sir Richard and the Doctor, had taken the Oath
of Abjuration and conformed, said; Truly our purchase therein is very little,
and the Bapists less, much less.

And it may be worth the observation, whether these persons do amend their
lives or grow wor^e after such change: I am sure I have heard some discreet and
precious people say, they would much less trust them now, then when they were
constant to their professions; Upon a belief, that those who will not
(according to the inward dictates of their Conscience) keep faith with God,
will much less do it with men.

In confirmation of this assertion, I may here ci^e the case of Mr. Anthony,
Roane, who was executed at Usk in Monmouth sheire on the 4th. of April 1650,
for poisoning his Wife; This Gent. the very home before his execution, made a
public confession to this purpose; That he had been bred a Roman Catholic
from his infancy, and continued in that Religion till some two or three years
before his death, when, being overcome by an unhappy necessity of preserving
his family from beggary, he forsook the Belief of his own Soul, and went to
Church to save his Estate; after which, the (Devil taking advanage upon him in
this disturbance and anxiety of Spirit) he confessed that he had fallen into
many great Sins, but denied the guilt of that horrid crime of poisoning his
wife, for which he was condemned to dye; delivering further with a kind of
confidence, that if he had had the grace to have continued constant in his
Religion, he believed ^e had never so highly transgressed the Commandments of
his God, nor come to so unhappy amend. And openly declared (with much seeming
repentance) that he dyed in his old Religion.

And it is a general observation among the Papists themselves, that many of
them, who strain their Consciences to such compliance, do come to untimely
ends; as I confess we have lately had an unhappy instance, Slain in a Duel
by the Lord Shandois, 11 May 1652.
in the unfortunate death of Mr. Henry Compton.

Certainly this is a sad consequence of wresting the inward persuasion of poor
Souls from that Belief, which their own Conscience tells them is true, thereby
making them less careful of their own salvation, and their honesty and
credit of less reputation, even with those, who force them to this change. For
the heart of man is so frail and deceitful, that it seldom is drawn by
violence from those principles, which it has long been used to esteem and
practice, but becomes slack and negligent in what concerns the other World,
and by degrees grows very often wholly insensible of any thing, but sensuality.

Upon the news not long since, of some Papists taking the Oath of Abjuration
and frequenting the public places of meeting, I conceived my self
sufficiently furnished to answer a certain old saying, which a Recusant of my
acquaintance used often to repeat in my hearing, that SANGUIS MARTYRUM EST
SEMEN ECCLESIAE: This upon all occasions he applied to the sufferings of
Papists, both here in England and ten thousand miles off in Japan, in which two
Islands have of late been sharper persecutions, (said he) for matter of
Religion, then in any other place of the World; This he continually insisted
upon, as a Sovereign remedy for all his sorrows, nor could we ever beat him
from this last hold, wherein he fortified himself, SANGUIS MARTYRUM; etc. nay
more, he sometimes ventured to affirm with strange assurance, this assertion,
that his Church increased and prospered still, even whilst it was actually
under the greatest pressures, that his Church was, as the Palm tree, the
heavier weights are laid on, the more it flourishes. I having gotten this
advantage by the late coming in of some Papists to our Religion, went presently
on purpose to my Recusant to put him to the question, and as it were a little
triumphing, demanded what he thought now of his old Latin Proverb (in which
he had formerly seemed to place so much confidence) and whether the Palm tree
did not sometimes break a twigg by laying on so many weights; To which he
replied with a little suddenness and Choler, That some dead or Cankereaten
Branches, as they can bear no weight, so they can bear no fruit, even whilst
united to the Stock, and much less after their division: But soon recovering
himself to his usual temper, he calmly, yet earnestly undertook, that as
there have been at least twenty Priests put to death in England ^ince the
beginning of this Parliament merely upon the account of their Religion or
function, so he could name a far greater number of persons of quality, who
have in the same space of time reconciled themselves to the Catholic Union.
When I urged him to the proof of this assertion, he imediately delivered me a
list of twenty Priests, who during these late revolutions have been hanged,
drawn and quartered either for taking orders beyond Seas or exercising them on
this side the Seas, and withal promised (upon the allowance of a little time
for recollection) to furnish me with a Roll of some names, who have lately
declared themselves Catholics, undertaking, if he was deceived in any name,
to recompense such Error, with the interest of two for one, unless he might
be dispensed with upon the inconveniency of discovering those, who can no
longer live unruined for their Religion, then they are unknown to profess it.

The Priests executed inseverall places Since the Year. 1641. were these.
Executed at Tyburne. Mr William Ward. Mr Raynolds. Mr Roe. Mr Edward Morgan.
Mr Bullaker. Mr Holland. Mr Heath. Mr Francis Bell. Mr Dueket. Mr Corbet. Mr
Mouse. Mr Phillip Powell. Mr Peter Wright.
Executed at York. Mr Lockwood. Mr Caterick.
Executed at Lancaster. Mr Green, Executed at Dorchester. Mr. Barlow. Mr.
Reading. Mr. Whitaker. M. Thompson.

Besides Master Thomas Vaughan (after very hard usage aboard Captain Mo^^o^s
Ship) soon after dyed at Cardiffe in South Wales.

Dyed Prisoners in the Common-Gaole at Newgate since the year 1641.
Mr John Goodman. Mr Henry Myners. Mr Peter Wilsford. Mr John Hamond. Mr
Colman. Mr Rivers, etc.
Besides diverse who are now continued in prison.

Now I humbly thank the Lord Christ, there was only one of these Priests (whom
I mentioned in the first part of this Discourse) put to death, since this
Nation was established in the present Government, and I wish from my Soul, that
his life had also been spared; since my obligations to this Commonwealth and
the present Governors thereof are such, that I am bound every day to offer up
my sighs and prayers to the Lord, that no blood of any peaceable Christian be
split for the only difference of judgment in Religion: For certainly
whosoever shall practice such cruelty, will be called to a strict and rigorous
account at the judgment of the great Day. Jude 6.


But proceeding to require of my Recusant the performance of his word
concerning the late Converts he so much gloryed in, I merrily t^^^atned him,
that if he observed not his promise, I would presently not only suspect some
secret evasion in him, but cry out against all Papists as juglers and
equivocaters, or else, I being an Heretic, no Faith was to be kept with me,
and though the present matter be of a trivial Consequence, yet we knew the
Welchman stole Rushes to keep his hand in ure.

He first seriously redeemed his word by delivering me this following
Catalogue, and then merrily answered my jeasting, with wonder at my hardiness,
how I durst stay in London, since the last letters from Amsterdam discover so
dangerous a plot intended by the Papists and Cavaliers against this Town, they
have these many Months held a secret intelligence with all the Engineers and
Mill-makers of Holland, and hired them forthwith to prepare a thousand such
Engines as we use to quench scare-fires, and these Van-Trump (who has been a
long time Popishly affected and a rank Cavalier ever since he was Knighted)
undertakes to bring up so privately to the very Bridge, that in one night they
may be planted all along the River, and drown even Paul's it self, by
squirting all the water in the Thames upon the City. Now if you ask a Papist
whether he know of any such conspiracy, he will presently cast about in his
thoughts to retrive some mental reservation, and then down right deny that
ever he heard any such thing. But to return from this feigned Story of the
Recusant to the real History of his new Proselites, amongst whom he reckoned
these following: But pretended prudentiall reasons to excuse his concealment of
many others.

1. The Countess of Denby. 2. The Lady Kelimekin. 3. The Lord Cottington. 4.
Thomas Vane, Doctor of Divinity. 5. Hugh Paulin De Cressy, one of the late
prebends of Wyndsor. 6. Sir Marmaduke Langdale. 7. Sir Francis Doddington. 8.
Sir Theophilus Gilby. 9. Mistress Bridget Feilding. 10. Doctor Baily. 11. Doctor
Cose^s only Son. 12. Dr. Goff, entered into the Religious order of the
Oratorians at Paris. 13. Master Peter Glue of Balliol College in Oxford. 14.
Mr. Richard Nicolls Bachelor of Divinity of Peter-house Cambridge. 15. Master
Richard Crashaw, Master of Arts of Peter-house Cambridge, well known for his
excellent Poems. 16. Master William Rowlands of Exeter College, in Oxford. 17.
Captain Thomas Cook. 18. Master Edward Barker of Caius College, Cambridge.
19. Master Temple. 20. Master Osborn^, etc.
I must ingenuously confess, I knew not well what answer to make the Papist in
this point, but still to express my dislike of such persecution even of any
sort of Christians: And am very confident, that were they treated more
mercifully and invited to come to our spiritual conferences, (which my
Recusant told me he would not at any time refuse, were it only to discourse
in an amicable Christian way the points in difference between us) we should
gain more of them to us, or at least hinder the growth of their Religion more,
then any tortures of body, or Sequestration of their Estates are like to do.

Nor is it reasonable to exact of such as dissent from us any other kind of
presence at our Exercises, then to propose their difficulties in a modest and
peaceable way, and patiently to hear our Answers; without expecting they
should presently join with the Congregation; for that were to oblige them, to
profess before they are satisfied, and practice, before they know what it is
they do; Whereas the Scripture commands us first to try all things, and then
hold fast that which is best.

Some, who have not only the form but the power of Godliness in this Nation,
have of late (in order to the advancement of Christ's Kingdom) been induced to
move and endeavor a readmittance of the Jews amongst us, in hope to be happy
instruments in their conversion, which the Scripture holds forth in the 11. to
the Romans. And why shall we not also (upon like grounds of Christian Charity)
endeavor the conversion of all other people of different persuasions in point
of Christianity, by being merciful unto them, as our Heavenly Father is
merciful Luke 6. 36.

But nothing so afflicts my spirit, as to consider the cruel gripes we give
the Papists, in respect of the light hand, which the Turk himself bears over
his Christians; To which purpose I shall here humbly offer an exact Parallel of
the Papists suffering in England, to the Condition of the Christians (...).
First clearing one easy objection, whereat some Godly people seem to scruple;
They think the Papists here suffer for some other fault, and not only for
difference of Judgment in Religion, which is an evident mistake; For if their
burdens be not laid on for their different Judgment, why are they taken off,
when they conform in their judgment? why should their receiving the Oath of
Abjuration diliver them from all penalties and Sequestrations, if those
penalties and Sequestrations be not inflicted upon them nearly for holding some
opinions, which that Oath obliges them to ^^ounces. Others even of the best
affected have ^ften in my hearing affirmed, that certainly that Oath was only
intended, as a means of discovery, or the Magistrate to know, in whom he may
con^^der; But why then is it used so much beside their opposed intention? or
what need of annexing any ^^nalty, which surely is the greatest hinderance of
discovery; For were there no danger in being a ^nowne refuser of that Oath, few
would be so diligent in concealing themselves, sest they should be ^nowne to
refuse it. Nor indeed, in this Oath ever offered to any upon the single ground
of diffidence in their affections to the present Government, but only to such
as are suspected of Popery.

But to return to the Comparison I began to mention between the state of
Papists in England and of Christians in the Turks Dominions, I find by the
best information I can gather, the Great Turks manner of bearing himself to
his Christian Subjects to be strangely more temperate and less accusable of
cruelty or covetousness, than we Christians use to one another; for as our
Travailers unanimously relate, the whole Annual Fine that any Christian pays
the Grand Signior upon the score of Religion, comes to no more than a Zeccheen,
which is less than our Angel.

And yet what ever we can object against our Papists, the Turk may with at
least as much reason charge upon his Christians; Some Ancestors of the
Christians have heretofore taken up Arms, and conspired with Forraigners
against the established Government of their Country; and yet the Mohammedan
(whom we so much abominate as tyrannical and barbarous) can forgive the
posterity of such undeserving Parents, and let them live quietly under so small
an annual tribute for their Religion: Whereas our selves (whom we so highly
commend for Christian meekness and charity) can never forget the Crimes of a
few Papists, never give over punishing the Children for the faults of their
Fathers. The Christians under the Turk, cannot certainly be free from
suspicion of being disaffected to their Magistrate, both upon former practices,
and the Principles of their Religion; yet rests he satisfied with disarming
them, and excluding them from all Offices of Trust, and Places of Importance,
to the interest of Government. Whereas we are so far from contenting our selves
with such prudentiall cautions for our security, that we proceed to seize upon
the best part of their estates, which in a short time must of necessity reduce
them to absolute ruin and desperation: And yet there is one considerable
ground of suspicion altogether unapplyable to the Papists of England, which is,
that the Turk came from a strange Country, to invade at once both the Empire
and Religion of the Grecians; whereas the Papists are all Natives of this Land,
borne with the same title to the Common liberties, that our selves have, and
for Religion they only stand peremptory in their old way, professing to be
altogether unsatisfyed concerning the Reformation we hold forth unto them: Nor
do the Turks insist upon that common Objection, That Christians no where
suffer Turks; and therefore no reason they should tolerate Christians, as
tasting more of Womanish spite and revenge, than manly Nobleness and
Gallantry: How would these unhappy misled Souls exceed us Christians in
moderation toward such as are otherwise minded, if they had read that Golden
Rule of our Savior, that we should render good for evil?

But the inhumane practice of the Turk in taking away so many Children from the
Christian Parents is extremely cruel and detestable, though as Sir Henry
Blount (a person both completely learned, and perfectly civil,) observ^s in
his Voyage to the Levant, when that custom was first introduced, many politic
reasons might be alleged to excuse (not justly) so wicked and tyrannical an
institution, if he could have so much as excused his wicked and tyrannical
usurpation; The Christians being then very numerous, and by a barbarous
stranger newly deprived of the Dominion of their Country; All which
circumstances naturally increase and heighten the suspicion of an Usurper,
whose sight was certainly far less sharp than his Sword, if he did not
clearly see, that his new conquered subjects might perhaps for a time want an
opportunity, but neither will, reason, nor strength to attempt, by his
expulsion, the just recovery of their own liberties.

But since the affairs of Turkey are so established, that the Musselman has no
longer any jealousy of the Christians, those unnatural cruelties of Plundering
the Parent of his Child, are altogether laid aside, and the Christians
permitted to purchase with ^ small fine a dispensation, and every one now
enjoyes this comfortable Liberty, as they give their Children Birth, so to
guide their Education.

Not one of these considerations, but argues in ^avour of the present Papists
amongst us; Not one of ^hese exceptions are they obnoxious to, their number
being small and inconsiderable, their posture naked and disarmed, and the door
long since by other powers shut against them, to all advantages in the Nation;
By which means they have neither so much disobligation to the present
Government, nor any possibility to work the least disturbance of its Peace.

And therefore, however upon the first Reformation it was necessary to take a
sharp and resolute course for diminution of the Papists power, yet since they
are reduced to so low and weak a condition, that we cannot handsomely even
feign a danger from them, it is become now unnecessary, and consequently (by
our own maxims) unlawful to continue the same penalties upon them; No other
cause being truly sufficient to justify our punishing others, but a true
necessity of preserving our selves.

And these I conceive may by the reasons, why the Papists have of late made
their addresses to the Gentlemen, that are appointed by Parliament for
Regulation of the Laws, building their hope upon this ground, that as the
causes of so great severity against them are ceased, the sad and ruinous
effects may no longer be continued; And certainly they could not have chosen a
more proper way to obtain relief, than the applying of themselves to that
Committee, it being compounded of persons, whose abilities bear an excellent
proportion to the greatness of the Work they have undertaken, having in one
half year seen further into the defects of our Law, and the excesses of its
practice, than many Ages formerly have been able to discover, and whose
integrity is so remarkable, that in the short space of a few Months, they have
designed a perfect reform, of more Errors, than many Ages formerly have been
willing to search into. So that as their Charity has already provided a
favorable course of mercy for the poor, their extreme industry and sincerity
promises a speedy settlement of an equal and impartial course of justice for
all others. To this Committee the Recusants presented these two following
Papers, the first of which began with this Title.

The Honorable Committee for Regulating the Laws, is most humbly desired by
the Catholic Recusants to take this Schedule of the Penal Laws against them,
into their just, serious and favorable Consideration.
1. THE second refusal of the Oath of Supremacy punished as high Treason, 5
Eliz. 1.

2. To maintain or extol Authority in the Sea of Rome, the second time, high
Treason. 5 Eliz. 1.

3. To obtain or put in ure any Bull from Rome, high Treason, 13 Eliz. 2.

4. To persuade or recon^^le, or to be reconciled to the Roman Religion, high
Treason. 23. Eliz. 1 and. 3. Jac. 4.

5. For Jesuit or Priest made by Authority from the Pope, to come or remain in
the Kings Dominions, high Treason. 27. Eliz. 2.

6. So for remaining in a Seminary six Months, after Proclamation, and
afterward returning, high Treason. 27. Eliz. 2.

1. For concealing of a Bull or other Instrument from Rome, or Reconciliation
offered, punished as misprision of Treason. 13. Eliz. 2.

2. To maintain or conceal those who persuade or are Reconciled to the Roman
Religion, misprision of treason. 23. Eliz. 1.

1. To Receive, Relieve, or Comfort Jesuit or Priest, knowing him to be such a
one, punished as Felony. 27. Eliz. 2.

2. To refuse to abjure the Realm being commanded, or to return without
License, Felony, 35. Eliz. 1, 2.

3. To go and serve a Foreign Prince, having not before taken the Oath of
Alegiance, and entered Bond not to be reconciled to the Roman Religion, Felony.
3. Jac. 4.

1. The first refusal of the Oath of Supremacy is punished as in case of a
Praemunire, which imports a forfeiture of all Lands and Goods, imprisonment for
Life, and a Deprivement of the benefit of the Law. 5. Eliz. 1.

2. To set forth or defend power spiritual in the Seco^ Rome, Praemunire. 5.
Eliz. 1.

3. To bring or receive any Agnus Dei, Crosses Pictures, or such like from
Rome, Praemunire. 13. Eliz. 2. 23. Eliz. 1.

4. To aid any person who has put in ure any Bul^ from the Sea of Rome,
Praemunire. 13. Eliz. 2 23 Eliz. 1.

5. To send, or give relief to any continuing in Colleges, or Seminaries
beyond Seas, Praemunire, 27. Eliz. 2.

6. Refusal of the Oath of Alegeance upon the second tender, Praemunire. 3.
Jac. 4 and 7 Jac. 6.

1. For not discovering of Priests made beyond the Seas, imprisonment 27. Eliz.
2.

2. Upon indictment for Recusancie by Proclamation, Imprisonment. 29. Eliz. 6.

3. For refusal to go to Church, or to be present at the reading of the
Common Prayer Imprisonment without bail 35. Eliz. 1.

4. Those that are not able, or fail to pay their forfeitures, are to be
Imprisoned, until payment or conformity 23. Eliz. 1.

5. Women Covert Imprisoned for refusal of the Oath of Alegeance. 3. Jac 4

6* For non-payment of twelve-pence for every Sunday, Imprisonment. 3. Jac. 4.

7 Woman Covert convicted for Recusancie imprisoned till her Husband pay ten
pounds a month, or a third part of his Lands. 7 Jac. 6

8. Standing Excommunicated for Recusancie, House may be broken up for his
app^ehension. 7. Jac. 6.

1. Those who shall forbear to come to Church, by the space of twelve Months,
bound to the good behavior, with surety in the Kings B^nch. 23. Eliz. 1.

1. Every Recusant is confined to five miles compass for Life. 23. Eliz. 2.

2. To ten miles distance from London. 3. Jac. 5.

3. Not to come in the House, where the King and his their apparent is. 3. Jac.
5.

1. For absents from Church Service every Sunday twelve-pence forfeited. 1.
Eliz. 2.

2. And for every Holiday, twelve-pence forfeited. 3. Jac. 4.

3. For absence from Common Prayer every month, twenty pounds forfeited. 23.
Eliz. 1. and 3. Jac. 4.

4. For default of payment of twenty pounds a month, all Goods, two parts of
Land, and Leases forfeited. 29 Eliz. 6. and 3. Jac. 4.

5. At the Kings election to take or refuse twenty pounds a Month, or to take
two parts of the Recusants Estate. 3. Jac. 4.

6. All Coppy-hold Lands of Recusants forfeited. 25. Eli. 2.

7. The forfeitures of the Ancester charged upon his Heir being a Recusant. 1
Jac. 4.

8. A conformed Recusant forfeits for not receiving the Sacrament, according to
the Service Book, the first Year twenty pounds, the second Year forty pounds,
the third Year, and every Year after, sixty pounds. 3. Jac. 4.

9. To the Presenter, out of the Recusants Goods, forty shillings forfeited. 3.
Jac. 4.

10. For every Recusant Sojournor and Servant ten pouuds for every month
forfeited. 3. Iac. 4.

11. Two parts of Dower or Jointure of a married Woman forfeited. 3. Jac. 5.

12. For coming to Court, a hundred pounds forfeited. 3. Iac. 5.

13 For not Baptising of Children according to the Service Book publikly within
a Month after their Birth, a hundred pounds forfeited. 3. Jac. 5.

14. For Marrying otherwise than by a Minister, a hundred pounds forfeited. 3
Jac. 5.

15. For Burying out of the Church or Church-yard^ 100 l. forfeited. 3. Jac. 5.

16. For sending Children beyond the Seas without License, 100 l. forfeited. 1.
Jac. 4.

17. For maintaining a Schoolmaster, not going to Church or allowed to teach,
for every month, ten pounds forfeited. 23. Eliz 1. and 29. Eliz 6.

18. And forty shillings per diem forfeited by the Scoole master, and Recusant
that keeps him. 1. Jac. 4.

19. All Goods and Lands during Life, for breach of confinement, forfeited. 23
Eliz. 2. and 3. Jac. 5.

20. The like Forfeiture for going, or sending Children beyond the Seas, to be
bred in Popery. 3 Car. 2.

21. For residing within ten miles of London, 100 l forfeited. 3 Jac. 5.

22. For practicing any Function expressed in the Statute of 3. Jac. 5. a
hundred pounds forfeited. 3. Jac 5.

1. Disabled to reverse indictment, for want of Form or other defect 3. Jac. 4.

2. Disabled from the practice of several Functions whereby to gain their
livings, viz. from practicing Common Law, Civil Law, or being a Steward,
Attorney, Solicitor, or Officer in any Court; From practicing Physic, or being
an Apothecary; and from bearing any Office in Camp, Troop, or Band of
Soldiers, or in any Ship, Castle, or Fortress, etc. 3. Jac. 5.

3 By the Wifes Recusancie, the Husband disabled from public Office, or Charge
in the Commonwealth. 3 Jac. 5.

4. By Marrying otherwise then as the Church of England aloweth, the Husband
disabled to be Tenant by Curtesy, the Wife disabled to have Dower, Joyncture,
Freebanks, or any Part or Portion of her Husbands Goods. 3 Jac. 5.

5. Disabled to suc or prosecute Actions, to present to a Benefice, to be
Executor, Administrator, or Guardian. 3 Jac. 5.

6. Children sent beyond the Seas without License, are disabled to take benefit
of Gift, Conveyance, Descent, or Devise. 1 Jac. 4. and 3 Jac. 5.

1. Notwithstanding these forfeitures, Recusants are left subject to
Ecclesiastical Sentences. 23. Eliz. 1. and 3 Jac. 45.

By the greatest part of pecuniary forfeitures, they are subject to greiveous
vexations of Informers. The Statutes of double Subsidies, considering their
other payments, are exceeding heavy.

Besides all these Laws, the late Ordinances of Sequestration upon refusal of
the Oath of Abjuration, by which, two third parts of all their Estates real
and personal are forfe^ted. 1 April 1643. and 19. August 1643.

An Oath made by the Presbyterians, and intended only for the time of War. An
Oath by which we are forced to accuse and condemn our selves without any Legal
proceedings or witness against us. An Oath by which we are punished, not for
p^blishing any Opinion to the disturbance of others, but only for believing:
which is to accuse and condemn men for the Thoughts of their Hearts. An Oath
that contains in it matters of highest difficulty, yet are young and ignorant
persons, and even Women, without the least preceding Instruction, equally
forced to take it, or punished for refusing it.

And in the Instructions to the Sequestrators 22. October 1643. they (...)
charged to seize and secure the Estates of all such persons, whom they suspect
to be within the Reach of the Ordinance, and so leave them to the after Game
of clearing themselves as well as they can; which is to punish before Trial,
nay even before Answer of the accused.

In company of this long Roll of penal Statutes (made in former times upon
particular occasions) they presented also certain Arguments to induce a
mitigation of those Laws, so frightfull even in number, but far more ha^sh and
churlish in their Nature; upon the head of which second Paper was this
Inscription.

Some few Motives, why Roman Catholics should not be forced out of their
Consciences by Penalties imposed upon them merely for Religion.
ALL Persecution for Religion is clearly repugnant to the Principles of
Freedom, 1. Principles of the present Government.
so often and solemnly declared by the Parliament and Army, and now universally
received by all the Moderate and well tempered People of this Nation: Nor can
it agree with the duty of any peaceable spirit, to distrust the performance of
so charitable a promise.

Many and evident Texts of Holy Scripture 2. Scripture
(even according to the interpretation of the more conscientious Protestants)
expressly condemn all compulsion upon the Conscience, recomending mildness and
charity, as principal perfections to a Christia Magistrate.

Besides these, Catholics have many considerations to be reflected on of a
more particular advantage to their condition.
THe Crime imputed to them is only their continuance in that Religion, 1.
Ancient and quiet possession.
which the whole Nation (till this last age) universally professed, ever since
its conversion from Paganism; And though time precisely considered, make not a
Religion true, yet certainly it may pretend to a fair title of exempting it
from persecution.

The Principles of their Religion are under all Governments the same, 2.
Unchangeable.
and in their nature absolutely incapable of change: so that the Magistrate
once rightly informed of their Doctrine, and satisfied by promise of their
fidelity, may rest secure, that no danger can arise from them by innovation.

Since the points in controversy are generally thought not clear but
difficult, 3. Education.
especially by such in whom education (if it were no more) has fixed a strong
apprehension of the reasonableness of their cause, it would appear severe (if
not unreasonable) to force them by penalties to any new way, or, altogether
restrain them from continuing in their old: Persuasions of that kind, as by
degrees they sink into the Heart, so gently by degrees they are to be removed.

Since they seriously and constantly profess, 4. Satisfaction in their
Religion.
that after all their Prayers to God, and diligent reading of his Word, they
cannot find the least satisfaction in any other Religion, but that their
Souls enjoy a perfect peace and serenity in their own; it seems very
unsuitable to Christian Charity, either to compel them to a Religion, Where
their Consciences cannot live in repose, or restrain them from a Religion,
wherein only they find comfort here, and hope salvation hereafter.

Since all the signs and Marks of tender Consciences are most apparently
discernable in Roman Catholics, 5. Tender Consciences.
they cannot but hope, the Charity and indulgence universally held forth to
tender Consciences, will not universally be denied to them; they all suffer
for their Consciences an impoverisht and afflicted Life, and many of them a
cruel and ignominious death; and can any rational and unpassionate person see
so much suffering for Conscience, and say the Sufferers have no Conscience?

As for the Religion, it allows no voice or licenciousnesse against the Moral
Law (the proper subject of the Magistrates care) but strictly requires a
Religious severity against the corrupt inclinations of Nature, and a
Conscientious observance both of the Law of God and Man.

Not one of all the Nation, 6. Even the most disaffected have Liberty.
how different soever in Religion, how disaffected soever to the quiet of this
Commonwealth, but enjoyes (by 'its allowance and protection) a perfect quiet
for his Conscience, only the Roman Catholics, though they have generally
taken, and punctually kept the Engagement, are singled out to misery and ruin,
merely upon the account of Religion.

Yet cannot all the heavy pressures they have so long endured make them lay
down their hopes to be at last relieved, especially from those, who profess
themselves not only bound by the light of Nature to deal with others, as they
would be dealt with themselves, but by the Law of Grace, even to render good
for evil.

The causes of imposing penalties upon Catholics being now wholly ceased, 7.
Causes of punishing ceased.
they humbly hope it cannot be thought too great a boldness in their duty to
Petition a readmittance to the Common Rights of free borne English men; since
there is neither any Catholic Competitour for the Crown, nor any such
detestable Conspiracy, as some few of their Religion have been formerly guilty
of: So that there remains no other charge, but that of Conscience, to exclude
them from the full enjoyment of their privileges of their Native Country.

No question can be made of the fidelity of their Engagement, 8. Their
Fidelity.
who esteem the keeping of an Oath sacred: and what stronger testimony can be
given to the World, than that of Catholics in freely offering up their
Estates to seizure, and their persons to all the inconveniences of a
persecuted Life, rather than against their Consciences dissemblingly to swear
one Oath: for could they with the Popes dispensation, or their own mental
reservation (which they are charged to be still furnished with for their own
advantage) abjure the doctrine they believe, there remains nothing now to
distinguish them into that sad and miserable condition they are reduced to.

Were all burdens taken off from the Consciences 9. Advantages at home and
abroad.
of such as shall engage to live peaceably and unoffensively in their Country,
this Nation would rather improve its security at home, since coercency in
matter of belief has always been the chief cause of our troubles; And for
abroad, the same reason that begets a conceit of danger from the Catholics
correspondence with Foreign Princes, will convince a benefit, if by mercy they
be obliged to employ their credit in the service of their Benefactors.

Reasons why Composition is preferrable before Sale.
AND now we beg pardon humbly to Compounding more beneficial to the State.
offer up to the consideration and Compassion of the indifferent the most
afflicted condition of many Catholics, whose Lands are now designed to be
sold for their Delinquency. Most of which in the beginning of the late War
(seeing themselves unprotected by the Parliament, and exposed to the plunder of
the then Soldiery) fled into the Kings Garrisons to save their own lives,
without taking up Arms to offend others. And even they who actually engaged
for the King (the sole disposal of all penal Laws being in his power) were
owners both of their Lives and Fortunes merely at his pleasure, and yet
notwithstanding so great a Plea for their excuse, as the supreme Law of
self-preservation, they are all ready humbly to submit to Composition: A
proceeding which they hope will be condiscended unto, since it is as well
apparently more beneficial to the State, as less destructive to the
compounders. For,

After all just Claims and true Debts allowed, and the vast expenses of
Surveyours and other Officers deducted, the clear profit that arises upon
Sale, is, by experience, found to come far short of what was expected. And
this after a tedious controversy about the allowance of encumbrances, very
chargeable to the Suitors and altogether unprofitable to the Commonwealth.

Besides Catholics are generally Tenants only for Life, and as generally
subject (before the late troubles) to very many Engagements really and
unavoidably charged upon their Estates, and unless such encumbrances be
allowed, thousands of well affected People will be disappointed of their justs
debts.

Whereas by seting Rules for Composion a greater sum may be raised, and
every one immediately bring his Money into the public Treasury, without any
further Charges, Delay, or Trouble, either to the Commonwealth or Compounders.

The Compounders will have a stronger Obligation to live quietly hereafter,
both by the fine they part with, and the Estate they retain, advancing so much
to purchase their Peace, and having still something to lose, if they break it.

The State will by this show to all the World, that they seek only the
security of the Government established, and not the ruin or utter extirpation of
any private Family.

These Motives and Reasons I have both seriously thought upon in my own
spirit, and often conferred about with others, and after all my endeavors I
find them so reasonable and satisfactory, that I confess they have not only
moved my Bowels to a compassion of such sufferers, but truly even to a zeal of
their relief, so far I mean, as that they, who neither disturb the public
Peace of the Commonwealth, nor refuse their Contributions to maintain it,
should no longer be compelled by Oaths and Sequestrations to act against their
consciences.

Besides these diligences of late used by the Papists, in order to the
obtainment of relief from the Committee for Regulation of the Laws; they
prepared also certain Proposalls, with intent (as I understand) to present
them to the Committee for propagation of the Gospel, but being called into the
Country by an urgent and importunate occasion, I am disabled to give any
farther account concerning their Proposalls, not knowing either how they were
accepted, or indeed whether they were actually offered, and therefore can only
furnish you with a faithful Copy of the Paper it self.

To the Honorable the Committee for Propagation of the Gospel,
The humble Proposals of the Roman Catholics.
1. SInce all compulsion upon the Conscience is clearly against the Principles
both of Parliament and Army, as appear^^ by the Parliament^ Declaration in
Answer to the Scotch Commissioners, 17. Feb. 1648. in these words,

As for the truth and power of Religion, it being a thing intrinsecall between
God and the Soul, and the matters of Faith in the Gospel such as no natural
light can reach, we conceive there is no humane Power of coercion thereunto,
nor to restrain men from believing what God suffers their judgment to be
persuaded of.

Among the Proposals of the Army, 1. Aug. 1647. This was one, That all coercive
power, and all civil penalties for nonformity, be wholly repealed, and some
other provision made against such Papists as should disturb the public Peace:

And since by the Experience of Germany, Poland, Switzerland, Holland, France,
etc. The Consistency of diverse Religions under one Government is evidently
proved, as well where the Protestant commands the Roman Catholic, as where the
Roman Catholic commands the Protestant.

It is humbly offered,
That no penalty be imposed upon any, professing the Gospel of CHRIST, merely
for d^fference of judgment in matters of Religion.

2. The public use of all Churches, and the entire benefit of
Church-endowments being wholly submitted to the disposure of the State.

It is humbly offered,
That no person, believing in Christ Jesus, and living peaceably, and
unoffensively, be by any penalty restrained from the quiet exercise of his
Conscience in his private House; observing therein such Rules as the State
shall think fit to appoint for preservation of the public Peace; A practice
which by long experience in Holland is found both satisfactory to the people,
and secure to the Governors of the Common wealth.

3. Since the Law of God is so far from allowing any penal sentence to be
grounded upon the enforced Oath of the party, that it expressly forbids any
offense whatsoever to be tried by the single testimony of one witness. Deuteronomy.
19. 15. Mat. 18. 16.

It is humbly proposed,
That an Oath be exacted of any person, compelling him under forfeiture of
Life, Liberty, or Estate, to swear against his Conscience, or to accuse and
condemn himself, especially in matters that concrn his inward belief.

4. Since in all Religions there are still found some scandalous livers, and
that our Savior pronounces the Woe against him only, by whom the scandal
comes, Mat. 18. 7. Luke 17. 1.

It is humbly proposed,
That whoever shall offend against the Order of so mild and Christian a
settlement, may be severely censured, but that others (though of the same
judgment in Religion) be no farther made subject to the punishment, than
proved guilty of the crime.

In stead of my opinion concerning these four Proposalls of the Papists
(because to my sense they carry in themselves both their own evidence and
justification) I shall beg the Readers permission to set down a particular
conceit, which I have often observed to be very well relisht by all that have
examined it. That doubtless there is no way more suitable to the first
Principles of all Reformed Churches, no way so probable to satisfy all
Consciences, as not to impose any other Obligation for proof of conformity,
than this profession to believe the holy Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament to be the Word of God, and to live according to the Precepts plainly
contained therein; this acknowledgement to be expressed in general terms
without descending minutely to particular questions, which have certainly been
the chief cause of so many Controversies and Divisions in the World.

And now I humbly appeal to the honorable and religious Committee for
propagation of the Gospel, Whether the sweet Spirit of the Lord Christ (who
gave his Apostles no further power, 2 Timothy 4. 24.
than to relinquish such as refused to hear them) be reconcilable to the
former practices of the high Commissioners, or the present practices of our
Sequestrators; Whether, when the great Apostle Paul prescribes the Servants of
the Lord to forbear, and in meekness instruct those that are contrary minded,
he should be thus cros-interpreted, that the Estates of those who are
contrary minded, be first secured or forborne, and then after a time quite
taken away, to instruct them in meekness, or how to bear patiently the loss
of the vain and transitory riches of this World.

And now I humbly appeal to the honorable and learned Committee for regulation
of the Law, whether (since all those penalties which the rigorous humors of
former Ages have, under pretense of zeal, imposed upon the Conscience, are
either by disuse forgotten, or by express Act of Parliament revoked) the
Papists alone should still be continued under the same severities, nay their
burdens increased by the strange method of the new proceedings toward them,
their Consciences being now not only punishable in the Common way of
indictment, but compellable even to accuse themselves by the new Presbyterian
Oath of Abjuration, against the known Principles of the ancient and reverend
Laws of this Land.

And now with an humble confidence, I appeal to the renowned Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, whether in this general Jail-delivery of the
Conscience from the tyranny and oppression of the Prelates, the consciences of
Papists alone, ought still to be kept in prison? Whether, when all the fetters,
which the Rigid Kirkesmen had bought up in Scotland, are broken in pieces just
as they were locking them fast about our Consciences in England, the
Consciences of Papists alone ought still to be continued in chains? Whether,
when all the Societies professing Christ Jesus, and living obediently to the
Magistrate, and peaceably one with another, are protected in the quiet and
unoffensive exercise of their Consciences, the Papists alone should be forced
under the penalty of so great a ruin, not only to profess, but swear against
their Consciences? A course that in a short time will unavoidably bring them
either to absolute beggary, or, which is worse, to hypocrisy, or, which is
worst of all to perjury.

All the people of this Nation look upon you as their common Father, all
promise themselves liberty and protection under your Government, (though some
may justly be excluded from sharing in the Government.) Were there in my Family
one child that professed to find satisfaction in the way of the Papists, and
lived dutifully to me and lovingly with his Brethren, I should account it a
great unnaturalnes to deprive him altogether of his portion, much more of that
which he has received from the bounty of any collateral Kinsman, or acquired
by his own particular diligence and improvement; And though some Papists have
heretofore been truly chargeable with heinous crmes against their Country, yet
why should our Justice overreach to condemn all, for the offenses of a few?
If they have formerly abetted competitors to the Crown, why should the
punishments so long outlive the fault? certainly of Offenders being dead,
their trespasses should rather be buried in their Graves, and not like Ghosts
walk to affright and pinch their Children.

It is time we should now mix a little mercy to allay the fumes of so much
justice, which otherwise will not ascend to the Almighty's Throne in the odor
of sweetness.

It is time we should begin to imitate the pattern* which our merciful God has
set before us in his own practice, when he commanded the destroying Angel to
sheath his Sword, with this compassionate Motto, It is enough.

It is time we should begin to answer the bounty of our God, 18. Mat. 23.
who has so freely given us the blessings of ten thousand Talents, by freely
forgiving our Fellow Servants the small sum of 100 pence. 1 Kings. 19. 11, 12.
Let us not invade or storm the Consciences of our brethren; for the Lord was
not in the great and strong wind that rent the Mountains and brake in pieces
the Rocks: Let us not shake the inward peace of any quiet and unoffensive
Christian; For the Lord was not in the Earthquake: Let us not kindle in our
Hearts a devouring flame of uncharitable zeal; For the Lord was not in the
Fire: but let us compose our affections to the soft and gentle Key of Love and
mutual forbearance; 5. Mat. 44.
For the Lord was in the still small Voice. Let us always attend to this still
Voice of the Lord, speaking within us, do as you would be done unto; Let us
always attend to this small, but sweet Voice of the Lord, calling upon us,
Love your Enemies, Bless them that Curse you, do good to them that hate you,
and pray for them that dispitefully use you and persecute you, that you may be
the Children of Your Father which is in Heaven; For he makes his Sun to rise
on the Evil and one the Good, and sends Rain on the Just and on the Unjust;
For if you love them which love you, what reward have you? do not even the
Publicanes the same? and if you salute your Brethren only, what do you more
than others? do not even the Publicans so? be you therefore perfect as your
Father which is in Heaven, is perfect.

Postscript.
IT was the will not providence of the Lord (to whose dispensations as well of
Justice as Mercy we must resign our little interests) to call me suddenly into
the Country upon a sad and mournful Occasion, which utterly defeated my
purpose of reviewing those few Lines: And therefore, after my humblest
submission of them to the Judgment of the Supreme Authority, I am encouraged
to presume the Courteous pardon of the Readers, especially if (since it is
truly a kind of Death to me to Live out of London) he will please to
consider this as a posthumous Pamphlet, containing the serious though
indigested thoughts of

Will. Birchly.


