Aut NVNC, Aut NVNQVAM. NOW OR NEVER: For if not Now, INSLAVED EVER.

LONDON Printed in the Year, 1648

Aut Nunc, Aut Nunquam. NOW, Or NEVER: For if not Now, Inslaved EVER.
BRave Cavaliers, look about yoe. The game goes well on your side. That Black
cloud which hung so long over you is now dispersing; your fortunes that have
been at so long and low Ebb, are now arising. The hopes of those Malicious
Traiteurs, wholly declining. That General, whose continued success never to
this hour, admitted a retreat, is now defeated. Victorious Colchester remains
unstormed: Kent repents her of her easiness in subduing. v Suffolk repents her
of her weakness in complying. Both these have vowed to redeem their fame, or
dye in the field.

Look about you, and behold what a gallant Cavalry, and in what confluence, and
with what confidence they come to meet you; with what compliance they invite
you.

Brave Northern blades are advanced to join with our Southern Spirits --
Hounflow Heath, Dunsmore Heath, Black Heath, all Heaths, Boys, are their
Randezvouses. There they expect you; where Honor will receive you: and where a
cheerful calm crowned with the graceful palms of an Honorable peace, shall
period those Brackish storms which did formerly encounter you.

A pursuit after loyal fame admits no fear. See what a noble confluence of
bravely minded Citizens invite you to accompany them! The City-aire cannot
detain them: neither the persuasions nor long reasons of seditious Skippon
decline them. These are steeled with true resolution; for to dye on the
feild-bed of Honor, is a brave conclusion. These see their Prince restrained;
when Prerogative Royal should enlarge his Subjects Liberty: deprived of that
which he might bestow on others. No Loyal Subject can see this with dry eyes.
This it was made these brave Royallists conclude: and from that conclusion to
advance hither: That the Princes cure, ought to be the Subjects care. His
service, their solace. Neither was it upon low grounds, whereon they built
their foundation (...) and upon which they are resolved to rise or fall. For
they have taken a full veiw of those high and heinous insolences,
insupportable indignities, nay, treacherous plots and Machinations not only
practiced but ready to be executed (if a divine hand had not diverted the
stroke) upon his Majesty's Sacred Person; holding him too unworthy to live,
because too worthy of their love. These, besides that Servile Yoke, whereto
their necks have been too long accustomed, too assiduately acquainted, have
invited, nay enforced these undaunted Cavaliers to sue for peace with Swords in
their hands; with redress of those crying crimes Nothing may be more truly
related more justly aggravated, nor ruth fnlly instanced, for I my self know
the place, where since these Civil Wars were commenced The Master of the
House ninety years old, in standing with the strength he had for the defense of
his daughters honor, was cruclly Murdered, her Daughters ravished, and to
complete this Barbarism, his house wholly Plundcred
Blood, Oppression, Rapes, Rapine, with whatsoever the riot of a Licentious
State could produce.

The King must be freed his Privileges restored, His Forts and Castles
repaired: his Loyal Subjects righted, Satisfaction rendered: and those Sage
Benchers, whose crammed coffers have recruited these Mischiefs, spunged. Such
Asses milk will be infinitely Sovereign for the consumption of a Cavaliers
estate. The Blue-bonnet means to have a whole share too. Reformation is a
specious pretense: but the establishment of a Religious Presbytery, deserves a
bounteous Booty. Solvat Ecclesia.

They for whom they row ought to pay their fare. These, who set them on work:
are to pay them their Wages. Mean time, we stand here all engaged for one
quarrel. Stakes are not to be paid till the Course be done. Our cause is too
good, to entertain a distrust: Or to admit a parley: A spedy surrender, or no
quarter.

O how these Parliamentary Treaties have deluded us! Petitions upon Petitions
with humble thanks returned to the Petitioners, by the oily mouth of their
long-lung'd Speaker, for their care of the public being the very business
which they had at the same time taken into consideration, and now transmitted
to Darby House [their Oracular Committee] and after due debate to be resolved
-- God knows when. But now comes Cyrus Sword that cuts that Gordian knot and
divides all rightly to a thread. Those delatory Pleas might have taken place,
without admittance of Reply, so long as that brave consistory were Masters of
the Militia and Navy: But those wooden Horses no sooner left them, then their
Bilbow Blades were turned into Wooden Swords. Their late invincible Atreus,
their formidable Black-Tom, who was formerly so impatient of a repulse must sit
down with it, His late City-guards skulke for fear to be apprehended, as some
of their Cumrades lately were, for the Sacriledg they had committed.

But phoh! I was nearly stifled with the vapor exhaled from the Senate House.
Some aromatic fume or frankincense for those two conclaves of the consulls.
They are in a pitiful pickle. -- Prosperity comes neither from the East nor
the West: nor any coast else for their interest. What Sour faces too, and
pitifully complaining Elegies make other Independants for the Death and
Burial of their Anarchiall Protector CROMWELL. But no remedy, the Subtillest
Sconc't Traitor breathing cannot avoid Mortality.

Go too then Boys, -- Either NOW or NEVER, for if not Now, inslaved ever.
Omit not the least minute of opportunity: Hearts and hands Prayers and Powers
march along with yon, to expedite your victory.

YET one word to you, Grand-Sedentary Delinquents. You brave State-Rufflers,
who are so far from paying tribute to Caesar, as you make Caesar's Subjects
tributaries to you: you, who have sit far longer then the State intended, and
brooded more Sects, Schisms and Divisions then ever Parliament (without
exception of that mad one,) to this day engendered. you, Hen. 3.
who have occasioned more blood shed in one year, then all our Civil Wars
acted in all our Forefathers time. you, who under pretense of Reforming
churches, have chaced Religion quite out oth' Church. you who have depopulated
Towns, ruinated Cities, obstructed traffic, and rubrict your victories with
the blood of Innocents. you, who have made so many Fathers, their Sons
Survivers. you, who have devoured Widows Houses: and divided the inheritance
of Orphans among your Spoylers you, who have made the City your Stalking Horse,
to work your own Interests. Return, return with tears in your Eyes: reverence
in your knees: and zeal in your Hearts. As Patience has armed his Majesty
amidst all his sufferings: So his Native goodness will cloth him with a
princely compassion toward most of those by whom He has suffered. Minds nobly
qualified, are ever more apt to remit then revenge. Some, indeed, there are,
who (co leave Presidents to Posterity, how high and heinous an Offense it is to
spurn at Majesty) must be balter'd. For their rebellious insolences have been
of that irremittable nature, as their impunity might call the judgment of a
State in question. One or two exuberant branches may be well spared to save the
Vine.

But if these Motives have no influence over you, reflect upon your own present
condition. A House dvided cannot stand: And pray you, tell us, what
irreconcilable differences have been raised among your selves? How diametrally
opposite have your Votes and Voices been one to another! Members, [like so
many lopt branches shred from their Root] expuist the Houses for cleaving to
their first principles; yet upon better consideration, called back again, to
make the weaker party stronger.

But how can it be expected that there should be Unity of opinion, when your
Principles are groanded in Ignorance? For should we go by the Poule, and cull
out most of the Lower Siedge in both Houses: and Catechize them fully touching
their Tenets either of Presbytery or Independency: we might without breach of
Charity, couclude, that their Answer would be the very same, which Candaces
returned to Philip: Act ^.1^. Mat. ^6.^0.
How should we understand these things without a Teacher? Or as Peter answered
the Damsel: We wot not what you say.

Mean time, these Nominall Professors receive in them pretended Notions of
these undetermined Principles. But it is worthy our Observation, to take a
Survey of their differences a rising from a calm time, when no Enemy is in
view: and at other occasional Seasons, when they hear considerable Forces
approaching. For then must HEROD and PILAT be made friends. Difference in
opinion must not beget a distance in their affection. They must be called home
from their Exile to the Capitol: and with such mutual Salutes, cheerful
countenances, and graceful regreets, as the Thanks their ingratiating delivery
returns to our City and County-Petitions cannot be more sincerely cordial.
And now so long as it lasts, these two several Tribes must join in their
Tenets. Enemies abroad make Peace at home.

Points of Faith which were never yet held Orthodoxall, may without Scruple of
Conscience admit dispensation. Their Principles, indeed, were grounded upon a
Presbytery: but the Catastrophe closes with Independency: and yet only so long
as it appears stronger, and weighs heavierith, Skale. [A brave frame of State!
A wonderful Chymick extraction! Where one King is dilated to many: and many
strangely elixir'd and resolved to none. If ever Sovereignty suffered under
such Alchimy,

I appeal to all grounds of humane policy.

But the report of a Foreign force is the only cement that Soulders up this
difference of Opinions. The noise of our Bonny-Blew-Capps marching over Tweed,
is of as considerable fear to our feverish Consuls, as ever the report of
Caesar's passing over Rubicon was to the Italians. No more branching.

The Independent and Presbyterian be all one. One Faith, one Form of
Discipline. Their Loyalty and honesty divided equally to an hair breadth least
one should malign the Other, for being either more honest or loyal then the
other. And to knit the joints of their fraternall League more strongly, they
have lately entertained a New Creed: and in such a firm Iuncto: that neither
of them henceforth is to question what the other believes: because the one
knows not well what the other holds.

But all this curiously woven artifice of State Policy will not do the seat.
Let them run on in their Maze of mischief, canonizing their rebellious Saints:
Ordering Public Thanksgiving for shedding the blood of Honor: complying with
City and County, and fooling them with trifling delays, upon some hopeful
design: the success whereof might make them more peremptory in sleighting the
instancy of a peaceful Treaty. But what is all this but to scatter dust in the
air? This will not serve their turue. Those Adjacent Counties by which they
were assisted: That City by which they were recruited: that Navy by which they
were secured, have now with clearer Eyes discovered their fearful
projectments.

The horror of their desperate and unparalleled practices has awak't them. One
drop of blood t'ane from an innocent Prince is of that deep dye, such holding
tincture, as it imprints revenge in a Vermillion color.

Heavens judgments may sleep, they cannot slip: Nor need we doubt but that
these hainouse and hideous plotts have been treacherously contrived seriously
intended, eagerly pursued, and if they had not by Gods goodness been strangely
disclosed, timely prevented, had been as tragically acted. For else, how had
Rolph been so justly accused: and in opinion so generally impeached?

Would not the display of these inhumanities, quicken the Spirit of the
remissest Royalists.

Those impious Speeches, (not to be repented with out horror) lately and
confidently utteredby that forlorn Miscreant in Coven Garden, might be here
inserted; publicly protesting, That he hoped ere long to wash his hands in
the Kings Blood. Yet this impiety passes with impunity; being for ought we
hear, as yet unquestioned at least uncensured
Again to observe how these Villains are shrouded and Palliated! How some
labor to mince them; others to suppress them: all malignantly affected, to
excuse them: nay, to asperse the Accuser, and vilify his testimony, whose
loyalty induced him to disclose it, and who with his blood will be ready to
maintain it.

I could here take occasion of taxing that triffling penny-sheet man, for his
egregious folly and foppery (If the Creature were worthy my reproof) who being
as it seems in fee with Col. Hammon, that rigid keeper of his Majesty in the
Isle of Wight, has published a Tale, without head or tail, under the name of
W. Rishton entitled HIS MAJESTY'S DECLARATION in the ISLE of WIGHT, concerning
Col. Hammond and Mr. Osburne, and touching the preservation of his Royal
Person from Poison etc. Wherein no less impudently then weakly, he takes upon
him from the Kings mouth to vindicate the innocence of Hammond, a man of such
matchless curtesy and affability as his Majesty could not well Imagine his
present restraint to be a place of captivity.

A man so conscientious of his ways: as for him to enter into any such
confederacy with Major Rolph or any other Assainate in such a bloody and horrid
design, as was fuggested, was so far estranged from his thoughts, as no man's
honor could be more injuriously impeached. For the King himself holds him for
an honest moral man; a faithful Governor; one who would not betray his trust
for an Empire. Besides all this; Mr. Troughton the Governors Chaplain, told
his Majesty, that he hoped there was not any about him, who durst entertain a
thought of doing hurt to his person (it being a thing so inhumane and
barbarous) the King answered, that he hoped there was not any that was so
cruelly minded.

Grave Chaplain, Gracious Governor! For this Chaplain, he is known to be a
fugitive fellow, one, who while he Sojourned in the Northparts; was commonly
known by the name of the Conventuall-Belman, for his zealous care of
assembling, furnishing, and frequenting private couventicles. But afterward,
being accused, impeached, and to be publicly punished for scattering
Scandalous libells with other misdemeanors, he fled for refuge into these
parts, where he has attained this unexpected Honor of being made Chaplain in
ordinary (as no Chaplain more ordinary) to this Governor: and where in the
judgment of those that know him, he can Preach to the full better then he can
Read.

Now for this Declaration of his Majesty's in vindication of Colonel Hammon,
it is merely hammar'd from the Forg of their accustomary lies- Hammon labors
to clear himself before his time. These Paper pellets. must not do it. His
and Rolphs clearenesse will appear very shortly; if Truth the Daughter of
Time, may be admitted to come to a Discovery.

Now, What kind of men may these be, who are such Vindicators, nay, prime
Agitators in these acts of High Treason; but such, whose private interests and
treacherous ambition have brought a flourishing State to this forlorn
condition?

Here you shall find one (to render every of them their distinguishing notion)
a subtle winding Snake, who has got the Art how to insinuate into the bosom
of any active Member: and to oblige too by pretensive, curtefies, which he
never means to perform, an Instrument of acquiring his own ends. This
Anarchiall Achitophel, though his desires close with nothing less then
Monarchical government, yet his protests imply a defire of Sovereignty. But
his bosom friends, whereof he has but a very few, to whom he dare communicate
his thoughts, know right well, that he hates nothing more then an absolute
Regal power. Thus cunningly he appears least, what he is most: Seeming most
what he least is.

For such State-politicians here grow rare,
Who be the same they seem, seem what they are.
It was said of Catiliue, that he spoke much and did little; but contrariwise,
Iugurth spoke little and did much. A barking Dog is least to be feared.

Whereas the State-Artists, when they are stillest and calmest, are ever most
to be suspected.

There is an other too, who desires much to second him; but falls far short
of him. One, who in his time has done Service for the State: yet found so
remiss in his Commands, as he suffered in the opinion of the Houses: and at
last, with much a do, after a long perplexive Answer to his Weighty Charge, he
purehas'd his intempnity, but with as much difficulty as (dam him) Pembrooke
got his delivery.

The Third you shall find a severish runegade; One who knows what Treason
means; yet is more apt to conceal it, then to plot it; and less apt to Act it,
then either to conceal it, or Plot it.

But Protestations upon his Honor with other Subordinate Votes, have for the
present by chance saved him; till these neare-approaching evil days (to use
the new phrase of the time) otherwise secure him: Only know thus much, that he
can pocket the injuries done to his own Person, or Treason to his Prince, with
as much patience, and disloyal Silence, as any Flap-fly Lord of them all.

Shall we stepped down to the Lower Stege, though the Subtiler Sophisters? we
shall find there too a Leash, amongst other yelpers of the same Litter, of as
active My medons, as those cunning Terriers were, who gave the first sent.

First you shall meet with, is a Sneeking Sollicitous Rooke, who for Lucre has
sold his Honor.

One made to bait their pretended Delinquents when they come to the Stake. But
had he sailed away upon the Stating and closing of Hammonds case, it might have
fared better with his fame, though worse with his Fortune.

For the Second, He Is a prating pertifogger; Sometimes a gangling member of
the Pachequer Chamber; but now his own fortunes, by the Parliaments pention,
have raised this impertinent Speaker to the Seazure of a vast Exchequer. I
refer you to Holland, where you may find it.

Mean time, his over-hacney'd Lungs gasp for respiration, he longs infinirely
to have a progress to the Bath; if his gains would give him leave. Or rather
to the German-Spaw; if he might have Sea-rome; but he despayres of both.

For the Third and Last, though neither least nor best of that last; is an
unclean Beast. One, who ruminates nothing but sense who holds all Idols
abomination, but a wench. one who affects no Elocution so much as Treason. He
loves strong lines, but twisted together with such Snarles, as they will go
very near to hang him. (...) The Martin is ever said to build her nest in
clean places: but this is no such Clean Bird; for his Mouth is the very
Common Sewer of Treason, his breast the very Brothell of all pollution.

Now, you have heard their discovery: and you bless your selves from them, as
from Thunder: yet most of these are mealy-mouthed, and will cry Peace, Peace,
when their hands are preparing for Battle.

Quicken then your hearts and hands, sharpen your Swords: Crush the Serpent in
the Egg; nay, these Scorpions in their full grouth; Leave neither top nor
branch. Calidon Country, City, brave Cavalry, all stand for you.

NOW THEN OR NEVER: FOR IF NOT NOW, INSLAVED EVER.
FINIS

