The Humble PETITION Of the Worshipful Thomas Adams, John Langham, and James
Bunce, Aldermen of London.

Presented to the Lords at their Bar on Tuesday APRIL 25. 1648.

Wherein is declared their firm resolution to stand for the defense of the
established Laws of the Land.

Also their Protestation against the Lords Jurisdiction over them or any other
Commoners in Criminal Cases.

With their Appeal from the Lords to their proper and competent Judges (a Jury
of their equals) and Judges sworn to proceed according to the known Law of
England.

Together with A Salva Liberate by them sent to the Lieutenant of the Tower,
APRIL 23. 1648.

The second Edition corrected.

Unto which is annexed a desire to have them read in all the Parish Churches of
England and Wales.

London, Printed for J. Norris, April 25. 1648.

A Salva Liberate Sent to Colonel Tichburn Lieutenant of the Tower, on Sunday,
April 23. by Thomas Adams, John Langham, James Bunce, Aldermen of London, now
Prisoners in the Tower.
Being occasioned by the receipt of a Paper sent unto them by the said
Lieutenant wherein the said Lieut was seemingly authorized to carry them before
the Lords on Tuesday next, being the 25 of APRIL.
To our honored Friend Col. Tichburn Lieutenant of the Tower.
SIR,
WE received a Paper from you, seeming to authorize you to carry our persons
before the Lords, to answer to a Charge: We are constrained to inform you here
by, that our persons ought not to be hurried to and fro, or disturbed at the
pleasure of any man, neither can we yield obedience to the commands of any,
which are not Legal; and therefore in case you intend to disturb us on Teusday
next, we expect to see a legal Warrant from some person or Court, which have a
Jurisdiction over us in case of a real or supposed Crime: And we must acquaint
you, that the Lords have no legal power to summon us to answer to any crime
whereof we are accused or suspected: and therefore you must expect to answer
for whatsoever injury you offer to our persons, and know hereby, that we shall
not voluntarily go from hence to Westminster by virtue of the paper received,
but shall suffer you to carry us, if you shall send force which we cannot resist.

From our Chambers in the Tower of London, April 23. 1648. Your Friends and
Servants, Thomas Adams, John Langham, James Bunce.


To the right honorable the Lords assembled in PARLIAMENT. The humble Petition
of Thomas Adams, John Langham, James Bunce Aldermen of London, etc.
Shows,
THat if your Petitioners shall submit to your Lordships Jurisdiction over
Commoners in those criminal cases or Novalisms in Law, entitled Articles of
impeachment of high Treason and other misdemeanors; They shall not only be
Phe-loes de-ses, but also shall murder the persons, and ruin the estates of
all the free born people of England; and that which is more, They shall betray
the Common Law, which is the Supreme Authority (under God) of the Nation, and
the inheritance of every Free-mans posterity: And that which is worst of all,
they shall be instrumental to pull down all the Judicatories of the Kingdom, and
reedifie an Arbitrary Government many stories higher then ever the Star
Chamber, High Commission or Council Table were; and by the same rule that your
Lordships have fined several Commoners 500l. a man for not kneeling or
submitting to your Lordships Jurisdiction in criminal cases, for which there is
no Law, nay, which is absolutely and apparently against the fundamental Laws of
the Land, and the ordinary rule of your own Court of Judicature, usually
referring those causes which appertain to the Common Law, to the other Courrs
of Justice, especially if the People desite it, so you may fine their fellow
Citizens, and Commoners of England as many millions, and take away the lives
and estates, of all as well as some, to the Perpetual destroying and inslaving
the whole Kingdom. For by the 29 Chapter of the great Charter, all Commoners
are to be tried by their equals; and there are 30 Sessions of Parliament which
confirm the great Charter, being a Statute declaratory of the Common Law,
especially those eminent Laws, wherein your Lordships had your shares in making
of them, viz. the Petition of Right in the 30 Caroli, and the Act for
abolishing the Star Chamber, and regulating the Counsel Table, in the 17.
Caroli, in which many Statutes are enumerated, That Commoners ought to be tried
by their equals, by Bill of Indictment or writ original, and by those of their
neighborhood; And all Decrees and Judgments made contrary thereunto, are
declared thereby to be null and void in Law, which bars all Presidents: And by
several Declarations and Ordinances your Lordships have declared, that
Ordinances are no Laws, but temporary, during the Wars; and the cause of
necessity being taken away, your Lordships have promised the free people of
England, that they shall be governed according to the known Laws of the Land,
as it appears in the Ordinance dated the 15 of January, 1647. And it is against
the Law of God, Nature and Nations, that any person or persons should be Judge
and Parties, Examiners and Accusers in their own cause, or to be tried any
otherwise then by a known Law, for where there is no Law there is no
transgression. It is declared by Sir Edward Cook, that the Parliament cannot
make a Law against the Law of Nature, which is custom according to Right and
necessary Reason. That Presidents are nothing in comparison of the Common and
Statute Laws, being known Maxims in Law, A facto ad jus non valet Argumentum;
Gubernandum est legibus non exemplis: Articles are nothing in Law but mere
Innovations and Prerogative extrajudicials, especially when ordinary persons
are in question. The old Maxim in Law is, Non recurrendum est ad
extraordinaria quando fieri potest per ordinaria. And your Lordships are not
only sworn, but have imposed several oaths, as the Protestation, and Solemn
League and Covenant, upon the free Commoners of England; to defend the
fundamental Laws of the Land. And they are confident your Lordships will be
very tender of the preservation of the great Charter, in which is wrapped up
our lives, liberties and estates; Your noble Predecessors being so glorious and
famous Instruments in assisting the PEOPLE, in purchasing the same.

Concerning the point of Presidents, which is all can be said for your
Lordships, we shall give you this Answer.

1. It is observable, that most Commoners, which have submitted to your
Lorships Jurisdiction, were in the time of the Civil Wars, Flagrante Bello, not
by compulsion, but by voluntary Petitions of the Commons in a summary way, to
the King in person.

2. One President against your Lordships Jurisdiction is of more consequence
then a thousand for it; The reason is plain, because all Courts of Judicature
are bottomed upon the Law of the Land, and it cannot be supposed that any Court
can be miscognizant of its own Jurisdiction. Your Lordships have confessed in
Sir Simon de Berisfords case, that it is against the Law for Peers to try
Commoners, and your Predecessors have promised upon record, that they will never
do the like again, though that occasion were superlative.

3. The Corporation of Cambridg was accused before the King and Lords for
complying with the Rebels of Essex, Kent and Hartford, their Council pleaded
against the Jurisdiction of the Lords House, in the point of Treason, and the
King and Lords allowed of the Plea, as appears Rot. Parl. 5. Rich. 2. numb. 45.

4. As there are many presidents more may be alleged, that Commoners have
denied your Lordships Jurisdiction, and that your Lordship have transmitted
such cases to the Common Law, if desired by the free people; so there can no
president be shown that Commoners, which have refused to be tried by your
house, have been overruled by them in point of Jurisdiction.

5. There was never President, since there were Parliaments in England, That
the same Session of Parliament has imprisoned, fined, or any otherwise
diss^i^ed or destroyed any man for obeying or executing the Laws, Ordinances,
or orders of the same Parliament. And there are many Ordinances in force, which
indempnifie all those which have acted by the authority of Parliament, viz. May
26. 1642. 1. part Book Decl. p. 281. June 14. 1642. p. 377. All honest
Ministers and true hearted Englishmen, that love the Laws and Liberties of
their native Country, are earnestly desired in all the parish Churches and
Market Towns in the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales to read the
foregoing Petition publicly and openly, that so the people thereby may be
instructed in their Laws and Liberties.


The Premises considered;

Your Petitioners being free Commoners of England, according to the known Laws
of the Land (de Jure claim their birth right, which is to be tried by God and
their Country, in His Majesty's Court of Justice, by the sworn Judges of the
Law, and a Jury of their equals of their own neighborhood, where the pretended
fact was done, the Courts of Justice being open.

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.

