THE Address of Condoleance TO His MAJESTY, BY THE Dissenting Ministers.
May it please your Majesty;
THO we come in the Rear of the Train of Mourners, to pay our Tributary Tears
for the unvaluable Loss in the Death of your Royal Consort, and our most
gracious Queen, yet our Resentments of it are with as tender a Sympathy as are
in the Breasts of any of your Subjects. This gives the sharpest Accent to our
Passions, that the Considerations which are most proper and powerful to allay
our Sorrows, exasperate them: for while we remember what She was, how general
and diffusive a Blessing to three Kingdoms, the severe stroke of Providence in
taking Her from us, is most afflicting. Such a Concurrence of high Perfection
shined in Her Person and Actions that would have made Her Illustrious in a low
Condition; and in Her exalted Station they were attractive of the Eyes and
Admiration of all. Her Mind was above the Temptations that attend the Throne.
Majesty was mixed with that condescending Humility. that tender and beneficent
Goodness, that She was easily accessable to all for their Relief and Support.
Her Piety and Purity were so conspicuous, Her Affections were so composed and
temperate, that the Court, that is usually the Center of Vanity and
Voluptuousness, became virtuous by the Impression of Her Example. Her
Conversation was so regular, that Her Enemies (if Goodness in such a bright
Eminency had any) could not fasten a Taint upon Her. Her Royal Endowments for
Government, Wisdom, Magnanimity, Vigilance and Care in managing Affairs of
State (without which the highest Princes are but civil Idols, useless and
unprofitable to the World) these were in such a degree of Excellency; that in
your Majesty's constrained Absence, while you were defending the Interest of
Christendom, against a potent Enemy abroad, with the Sword of War, She sweetly
ordered all things at home with the Scepter of Peace. She is gone, and must
return no more: O astonishing Grief! But it becomes us with humble Submission
to acquiesce in the Divine Disposal. The Will of God is always directed by
Infinite Wisdom, and is the Rule of Goodness. We must refresh our Sorrows with
the hope that She is entered into her Saviors Joy, whom She imitated and
honored, and that She is made happy in the Love of God and the Light of his
Countenance for ever.

We humbly beseech your Majesty to accept the renewed Assurances of our
inviolable and constant Fidelity to your Person and Government; and that we
shall influence all that are within our compass to persevere in their Duty: We
shall earnestly pray to the blessed God to keep you in the best Protection, his
encompassing Favors; to support your Spirit with Divine Comforts, and to
continue long your precious Life, so necessary for preserving the pure
Religion, and the Civil Rights of this Kingdom.

Edinburgh, Reprinted in the Year 1695.


