A Modest Reply, Humbly Offered, As an Answer to, and Confutation of Seven
ARGUMENTS Collected and Delivered by Mr. Samuel Lawrence, in a SERMON preached
at his Meeting House in Namptwich, October. 16th, 1691, whereby he would show,
That the Infants of Professing Christians ought to be Baptized: WITH AN
APPENDIX OF Seven ARGUMENTS, SHOWING, That Infants ought not to be Baptized.

WITH A SEASONABLE WORD to my Brethren of the Baptized Church, presented by the
most Unworthiest of her Servants, S. A.

Coloss. 2.8. Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit,
after the traditions of men, after the rudi^ents of the world, and not after
Christ.

Jude 3. Contend earnestly for the faith, on^^ delivered ^o the saints.

LONDON: Printed for the Author; and a^^ (...) ^ld by Tho. Pebian, at the Bible
in Gheapside, near Bread-street-e^^. ^692.

Mr SAMVEL LAWRENCE,
SIR,
IF I am more bold then welcome in the Liberty I take in directing these Lines
to you, I am sorry, but must be content, and with Patience am resolved to bear
the weight of your Censure; which I can more easily do, then think, that such a
Man as you, should with such Fondness, upon no better Grounds, and in so
unusual a Heat, express yourself so Unsuccessfully as neither to Convince your
Adversaries, nor Please your Friends.

But knowing, with many others, that this comes not with a Surprise upon you,
long since acquainting you with what is now brought to light, shall not stand
to make any Apology, nor for the Author, who never intended the Project of this
Undertaking till now, being informed of his Death whose Pains I had desired,
but by the Disposing-Hand of Providence in vain, and therefore have now
adventured myself, believing through the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is
most seen in the Weakness of his Creatures, that necessary Supplies would be
given to engage in a Cause that so nearly concerns his Honor and Interest in
the World.

Had it not been undue Reflections from the Pulpit, invading the Right of my
LORD, and impairing, as much as in you lay, the Credit of his Holy Ordinance,
together with the Manners of some of your Friends, who being present when you
preached that Sermon from the 1 Cor. 7.14. and as Vessels filled with Wind,
that must either vent or fly, not contented within their own Confines, but
trespassing upon their Neighbors Borders to proclaim their own Folly, (I had
almost said together with yours,) boldly affirming, That you had assigned
Scripture enough for Infant Baptism, these Lines had never taken Wing.

But the very act of Providence which brought your Sermon-Notes and Bible to my
hand, was such as gives ground to conclude, that it was the Divine Pleasure,
the Structure you had built upon so sandy a Bottom, should at once be cast into
the Sea of Confusion. And to be silent, seeing his Right is under so manifest
an Invasion, must bespeak us to be the most base of Vassals; for who is it that
is bought with Moneys of another, from amongst the Gally-Slaves, to enjoy
Freedom, but will ever account himself obliged to maintain his Redeemer's
Honor against all that shall offer to detract from, or lay a Blot upon it: How
much less then shall the Redeemed of the Lord be still, who are under a greater
Obligation by how much more great the Redemption-Price is, that was given? So
that how ever Unfit in myself, yet from the Bond I am under, and the Nature of
the present Exigence, (am forced) with Cresus his dumb Son to speak. -- Yet
from that Respect I have always born to you, and still do, I could sincerely
wish you were not the Man I have to do with; but since it is so, I have acted
with as much Candor as becomes me, the Nature of the Cause considered, having
not raked in the Ashes of your Reflections, but wish they may lie and die, as
they shall for me, unless new ones give life to the old; but hoping better
things, and that you will not think the worse of your own because it brings
Interest along with it, wishing you seriously to consider those Words of our
Lord, Mat. 5.19. Whosoever therefore shall break one of the least of these
commandments, and shall teach men so, shall be called the least in the kingdom
of heaven. And together with Mat. 15.8, 9. In vain do they worship me, teaching
for doctrines the commandments of men.

So in love I commend you to God, and the Word of his Grace which is sufficient
to instruct you in all things necessary to Salvation, through Christ, for whom I
am all Men's, more especially yours, S. A.

TO THE READER. Friends and Brethren, more particularly you who were present at
the SERMON preached from 1 Cor. 7.14. by Mr. Lawrence at his Meeting House in
Namptwich, October. 18. 1691; for whose sakes, next to the Glory of GOD, and our
LORD JESUS CHRIST, I have wrote these Lines as an Answer to his Seven
Arguments, whereby he would prove, That the Infants of Professing Christians
ought to be Baptized.
BRETHREN,
I Have reason to believe, that you are in good earnest for Salvation, and to
secure your precious and immortal Souls from Loss and Ruin, knowing that they
once lost shall be no more capable of Repair* Matthew. 16.26. and that its not
the whole World, though it could be given by one damned Soul to procure a
Change of State; Wherefore, as a learned Man says, As the Worth and Loss of
Heaven can neither be imagined or valued, so the dreadful and perpetual Pains
of Hell can neither be measured nor declared. To obtain the one, and escape the
other (sure then) should be the principal Design and Business of every one of
us in this Life.

The thing is possible, and true Happiness next to GOD's Pardoning Grace in
CHRIST JESUS, consists in our Knowledge and Practice; not that Knowledge will
profit other ways then as it is accompanied with Practice: Therefore says
CHRIST, If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them, Joh. 13.17.
Neither will Practice avail, but as it is Conformity to that perfect Law and
Rule which He has given us, by which whosoever orders his Conversation aright,
shall see the Salvation of GOD, Psalm. 50.23.

So useful is Holy Scripture which GOD has given us as his Standard to measure
all things that relate either to Matters of Judgment or Practice by, that
without them we are wholly in the Dark, as to the Nature of all Positive and
Instituted Worship; as Solomon would have been when he was to build the LORD a
House, had he not received a Pattern for his Direction in doing all things that
appertained thereto: Now as all things was to be done according to the Pattern
given of old in the House of GOD, so nothing ought to be done now in the House
or Worship of GOD, but what he has assigned by Pattern and Direction in his
Word: Wherefore says he, To the law and to the testimonies; if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them, Isai. 8.20. To
do more then he has required, or to do one thing that is not required for
another that is, will be found in a Day of Trial, equally Abominable with a not
doing his Requirements at all. It Is certain all Persons and Things shall be
pronounced good or bad, as they have or have not agreed with this perfect Law
of GOD's Word; all Decrees of Councils, all Doctrines of Men, all Controversies
in Religion, must be brought to the Test, and abide the Award and Determination
thereof. Now that I may not detain you here, let me humbly and earnestly beg
three things of you:

(1.) That you will pass Judgment upon what is commended to your view in the
Arguments for, with the Answer and Arguments against Infant Baptism, according
as they bear proportion to GOD's Sacred Word, and not as they accord with
far-fetcht Consequences and doubtful Conclusions, which at best (in Matters of
Worship) can prove but one uncertain Medium and forged Warrant, which through
the unwearied Industry of some skilful Artificers is made fatal to many, even
such who do either affect Art above Truth, or such who have not skill to
discern, and so become no less deceived then certain Country Peasants in some
former Troubles in France, of whose Folly Epistle to Jesephus.
one tell us, They attempting and entering into a City not far from them, and
lighting into an Apothecary's Shop, furnished with all kind of Drugs and
Dainties, and being allured by the pleasant Odours, and delight of the
Confections, they tasted, and supposing all to be of the same kind, took and
swallowed down every thing; whereupon some fell sick of Fevers, some grew
Frenzy, and many lost their Lives to please their Appetites, at least he that
escaped best gave occasion of Laughter to the Lookers on. -- What use I shall
make of this shall be only to put you in mind, that it is recorded for the
eternal Commendation of the noble Bereans, That they would not receive any
thing, though offered by a Paul, until by searching the Scriptures they had
found whether those things he taught were so or no.

(2.) In reading of these Lines, that you would lay aside all Prejudice that
may possess your Minds either against the Person or Subject, else the Mind by
it will be rendered utterly incapable of making right Judgment, or receiving
Truth though it presents itself with never so much Plainness and Evidence.
Prejudice was one, if not the principal Cause why the Jews rejected CHRIST.

(3.) Having thus discharged your Minds of what may hinder your Profit, be
earnest with GOD in Prayer to help you rightly to discern between the Mystery
of Godliness, the Iniquity that is contained and detected in the Scriptures;
and then I trust the Plainness of Dress, in which these Lines appear, will not
be of considerable Disadvantages to the Truths contained therein, for the more
false any thing is, the more artificially it had need to be set off and
adorned: A blear'd Eye loves not to look on the Sun. Art and Humane Eloquence
may tickle the Ear, and well-pollish'd Discourses may affect the Fancy, and yet
prove but a mear Sound of Words and empty Husks; remembering it is said of Lacon,
Hearing a Nightingale sing, by the briskness of its Warbling, and delicate
Notes, and the clearness and quavering Cadency of its Voice, judged it a good
Prey; but when he found and saw it to be of so small a Size, he disdainfully
left it, and said, Thou art a Voice and nothing else.

Therefore where the Evidence of Truth appears, refuse it not because offered
in, and presented under the Disadvantage of an unpollish'd Style, but let the
Reason of what is said be considered.

And that the LORD may give you Understanding, shall be the Prayer of him that
wishes you present and eternal Peace from GOD the Father, through our LORD
JESUS CHRIST, in whom, though the Unworthiest of his Servants, I am yours, S. A.

A Modest Reply, TO Mr SAMVEL LAWRENCE HIS Seven Arguments. FOR Admitting the
Infants of Professing Christians into the CHURCH of CHRIST by Baptism,
delivered in a SERMON by him preached in Namptwich, October. 18th, 1691.
AS it may be safely concluded, that the great Interest of Man's present Peace,
and eternal Felicity, is eminently concerned in Religion and Godliness, even so
all true Religion is taught, and takes its Being only from Divine Revelation,
which God in former Ages, and diverse manners gave out, until the Knowledge of
his Will was most perfectly revealed in and by his Son, and our Savior, Heb.
1.1, 2. who in Faithfulness to his Church discharged the Trust committed to
him, ceasing not to make known to the least Jot and Tittle every thing which he
received or heard of the Father, Joh. 15.15. He alone being found worthy to set
up a Standard, and to become a Lawgiver and Statute-maker unto all
Generations, in things partaining to the Worship of God; who no sooner had
transmitted the Mind of Heaven to the Children of Men, by a sure and perfect
Law, but it passes the Royal Assent, he fixes the Seal of his own most precious
Blood unto it for its Confirmation, and then by the Father is advanced to the
highest Dignity and Glory, as a convincing Evidence not only of his Son's
Faithfulness, but the Purity and Perfection of that Law which he has enacted
as the only Mediator, to the end Man should be perfect in the whole Will of God.

And in further Testimony thereof, how great has Heaven's care been throughout
all Ages, in preserving the Scriptures clean from those Corruptions and Errors
which the Heart of Man (though learned, if unsanctied) is too apt to dote on, and
cleave unto; it is no less then wonderful to consider in whose hands the Sacred
Scriptures in past Ages have been lodged, and by whom they have been handed
down to us, that they have yet strength so loudly to bear Witness against
Errors entertained with such Fondness, and maintained with such Heat as of
late has appeared, particularly in the Defense of that Unscriptural Practice
of Infant Baptism; and that there is not yet so much as one Word to be produced
as their Warrant in doing (what) they have so earnestly contended for, strongly
argue, that God has marvelously overruled the Heart and Hands of all
heretofore concerned in that blessed Work of Translating the Scriptures into a
Language known and understood by every one of us.

And as to the Sufficiency of Scripture, as it contains all things necessary to
be believed, known, or done either for Salvation, or Church Communion: I know
not, that what is said in the sixth Article of the Church of England, is
foreign to the Judgment of any Professing Christian, saving those of the Papal
Communion, and some few of late sprung up, who through Temptation and the
Delusion of their own Hearts, have rejected the Word as it is contained in the
Scriptures of Truth as Useless; the one accounts it insufficient to direct us
in all things necessary, and therefore to the Word they join their own
Traditions for the rendering it a more complete and perfect Rule; the other
accounts it Useless, and therefore directs all for Instruction to the Dictates
of the Light within: Of both these I have only to say, (Lord) deliver my Soul
from coming into their Secrets.

But you and we being agreed in all things touching the Authority and
Sufficiency of the Scriptures, I presume from thence an equal Freedom in us, to
refer the Trial of the things wherein we differ, to the Determination of Holy
Writ, being firmly resolved for myself to abide by its Award, sincerely
desiring that nothing may pass for Truth but upon their Testimony.

Now I shall not take notice of any thing you offer in your Sermon preached
from 1 Cor. 7.14. Else were your children unclean; but now are they holy;
before you come to state the Question, (1.) Because I would not have this Paper
to swell into too great a Bulk. (2.) Because there is not any thing material
but what I shall meet with under one or other of your Arguments, shall
therefore recite your Doctrine, which was this:

Doctrine, That the Seed of Professing Christians have a Right to Baptism, and
ought thereby to be admitted into the Church or Body of Christ.

Whether your Text does preach the same Doctrine you do from it, I question,
and conclude, that there is no more akin between your Question stated, and
your Words rightly considered in their proper place, then there would have
been, had you drawn the same Conclusion from the first words in Genesis, which
tells us, That in the beginning God made the heaven and the earth; as I trust
hereafter will be made evident to every judicious and unprejudiced Reader.

You proceed and say, Here I shall not undertake to produce all the Proof that
is for it, nor answer every Quibble that is brought against it; but lay that
Foundation which if of God stands sure, and if it stands, the contrary must
needs fall.

Ans. That you have produced more Proof then the Scripture affords you for your
Practice, is plain; and Scripture-Arguments that strongly make head against
your Practice, be by you accounted Quibbles, is not strange, but very strange
it is that you see cause to query, whether your Foundation be of God, and yet
dare lend a hand to support a sinking and falling Dagon; The Idol could not
stand before the Art, (even so Lord) in this our day, let Error fall before
thy Truth; and help you so to discern the Sandiness of that Foundation upon
which all Error, with that of Infant Baptism is built, as that you may better
improve the Certainty of its Ruin then those biggotted Priests and blind
Philistines did the Fall and Ruin of their adored Dagon, 1 Samuel 5.3, 4.

I now come to your seven Arguments you offer as Proof and Evidence, though
reasonably we might have expected for Proof and Confirmation of a Doctrine of
so great moment, two or three Witnesses from Holy Scripture; but knowing that
no such Evidence is to be found there, we shall (weigh) and allow of your
Authority, provided your Arguments are strongly concluded in, and truly deduced
from the Scriptures; and because I would not in the least be thought to injure
you in my Reply, I shall at large recite your several Arguments, and so well as
I can, with the help of some Collections, endeavor the Confutation of them.
And you say in your

First ARGUMENT,
(1.) I argue from the Command of Christ, Matthew. 28.19.20. For (1.) the Command
is so general as to include not exclude Infants, surely they will be allowed to
be a considerable Part of the Nations. (2.) Christ does here prescribe the way
of gathering his Church, and preserving it to the end of the World: now his
Church consists of Infants as well as grown Persons; and both are to be dealt
with according to that State: As to grown Persons, First teach them and baptize
them, as to Infants, finding them Disciples baptize them in order to their
being taught when capable of it. (3.) All Nations is set in Opposition to the
Jewish Nation; therefore, as the Disciples would have understood what and whom
Christ meant, if he had said, Go circumcise all Nations, etc. So, and its
observable that Baptism was of use amongst them, though not a Sacrament before,
as Maimonides speaks, That they baptized the Infant or little Stranger upon the
knowledge of the House of Judgment, i. e. on their desire in behalf of their
Children. (4.) The Practice of the Apostles in Baptising whole Houshoulds, is a
plain Comment on the Text, and shows how they understood it. Acts 16.15.33. 1
Cor. 1.16. (5.) Infants are Disciples, Acts 15.10. together with their Parents,
therefore may be baptized, if not Disciples of Man's making; so neither was
Paul yet, of God's making who graciously accepts them, and takes them into his
Covenant. If any (object), That such Disciples are meant as are capable of
observing Christ's Command. Ans. It Is true, as to grown Persons with whom the
Apostles had most to do, in gathering a Church out of the World to Christ, but
as the Proselites were first taught and then circumcised, but there Children
were first circumcised before they were taught, so it may and ought to be here
nothing in Christ's Commission gainsaying it.

First ANSWER.
Whether all that you have said here does not directly tend to darken
Knowledge, I refer to your own Conscience, and shall leave all wise men to
judge when the Text is read, and the order of it laid down.

Our Lord Jesus Christ, after he had declared himself invested with absolute
Power given him of the Father, to be Sovereign Lord, and supreme Lawgiver to
the whole World through all Ge-Generations: He says, as Mat. 28.19, 20. Go ye
therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you: And lo, I am with you always, even unto the end
of the World.

This Command is so extensive as authorizes the Apostles of our Lord to take in
by Baptism all Nations Discipled, or so many of all Nations as should be made
Disciples; but how it includes one Infant, that neither is made, nor is capable
(as such) of being made a Disciple. I see not (otherways) than as Infants are a
considerable part of all Nations, and if therefore to be baptized, then are all
Nations to be baptized by the lump, (even) Infidels, Idolaters, profane and
abominable persons, as they are a part, yea, the greatest part of all Nations:
And this will as truly follow as the other, if this Command may be understood
without restriction, but if not, then the limitation must needs lie in the
Word, which says, Teach or (Disciple); then neither the Infant nor profane
person can be admitted by this Text, if the Order in which it is laid down be
duly considered, which is thus: (1.) Our Lord Jesus commands them to (go) to
all Nations. (2.) To teach all Nations, or Disciple them. (3.) That they
baptize such so taught or Discipled. (4.) That they shall further Teach and
Instruct such baptized Disciples to observe all other things that Christ has
commanded.


Now, that this, and no less than this, is intended here* will appear with
great Evidence from the Consent of such as dissent from us: And therefore Mr.
Baxter speaking of this Text, shows the several Work and Duty of the Apostles,
in their several Places and Orders, who tells us in his second Disputation of
Right to Sacraments, Page 149, 150* Their (1.) Task is to make Disciples, which
Mark calls Believers. (2.) Their work is to baptize them, whereunto is annexed
the Promise of Salvation. (3.) Their work is to teach them all other things
which are after to be learned in the School of Christ. Further says he, To
contemn this Order, is to contemn all Rules of Order; for where can we expect
to find it, if not here? I profess my Conscience is fully satisfied from this
Text, that it is one sort of Faith, even Saving-Faith, that must go before
Baptism, the profession whereof the Minister must expect. And in his Poor Man's
Family-Book, page 168. says, The Church never knew any Baptism, but such as
was joined with a present profession of present Faith, Repentance, and
Renunciation of the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, and a total devotedness to
God and Christ, with more to this purpose.

And the Author of the Annotations began by Mr. Poole, upon this Text, expressly
says, I cannot be of their mind, who think persons may be baptized before they
be taught, we want Presidents of any such Baptisms in the Scripture, though
indeed we find Presidents of persons baptized, who had but a small degree of
knowledge of the Gospel, but it should seem, that they were all taught, and
then baptized. Now what this Author says farther with reference to
Infant Baptism, because they are a part of all Nations, I leave, as that which
may justly evidence him guilty of Self-Contradiction and Inconsistence.

You add further, That Christ is here prescribing a way to gather his Church,
and of preserving it to the Worlds end; and That the Church consists of
Infants, as well as grown persons.

Answ. As to the first, we grant, that Christ here is prescribing a way of
gathering his Church, but that his Church was made up of Infants as well as
grown persons, (professing Believers) is a bold Assertion, and a mere
Imposition upon your Auditory, having not the least Light or Evidence, nor
being able to give so much as one Instance of any one Infant that was ever
admitted, by any of the Apostles, a Member of any Church by Baptism in their
days: Could you do this, you would do something to purpose; but to undertake
this Task would be to labor under an utter Impossibility, knowing the old
Maxim, that says, That which appears not, is not.

You further say, Had Christ said, Go circumcise all Nations, the Disciples
would have understood what and whom he meant.

Answ. It seems then, in your Apprehension, the Apostles were ignorant of what
Christ meant, and what they did in pursuance to his Command they did at a
venture. Is not this peevish Reasoning, and a manifest impeaching Christ and
his Disciples? Was Christ so dark and unintelligible in what he commanded them,
that they could not apprehend him? Is not Go teach and baptize all Nations as
easy to be understood, as Go circumcise every Male at eight days old? Surely
they did understand Christ, and you may, if you will not put out your own Eyes,
which I entreat you to have a care of, lest continuing to preach up, and
practice things contrary too, or at least not agreeable with the Doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles, you become culpable, and so liable to that Anathema
pronounced against all, though an Angel from Heaven that shall preach another
Gospel, Gal. 1.8. And Maimonides tells you no more than what we allow you, That
the Jews of old did baptize the Proselyte and little Stranger, but in that they
did not use Baptism as a Sacrament, as you your self acknowledge, is a
Tradition of the superstitious Jews, an Authority sufficient to warrant you in
your sprinkling Infants as a Gospel Ordinance. Sure, Sir, this your Practice,
as well as some of their Traditions, bespeaks Christ's Command to be void, and
of none effect, and in plain terms gives the Lie to Mr. Baxter, and more, in
their Comments upon the Commission of Christ: For Mr. G. Lawson, in his Magna
Charta dedicated to Hen. B. of London, page 27, 28. tells us, That the word
Teach before baptizing imports a teaching with success, so as to cause the
persons taught to learn, i. e. to receive their Doctrine, understand it, approve
it, be convinced of the Truth of it, and be converted by it, so far as to be
made Christians. And so the Apostles understood Christ, as is evident by their
whole practice; and if you dare not say, that they were mistaken in the mind of
Christ, I am sorry you give me occasion to tell you, that you are; and as a
Friend, I advise you to correct the mistake you are under, and act for time to
come more conformably to Christ's Doct^in and his Apostles Practice.

But you further urge, The practice of the Apostles in baptizing whole
Households, for your practice in baptizing Infants.

Answ. That Households was baptized we grant, but that Infants was in those
Houses is more than you can prove, and the best ground you have for your
Practice here, is Probability; there may be and may not be, is too slight a
Ground to build so great an Ordinance upon as Baptism: We could give you an
account of as many Households in this County, if not in this Town, that are
baptized, and that have no Children in them, as you read of in the Gospel; but
admit there were Children, which remains for you to prove, yet it follows not
that they were baptized, it being usual in Scripture to take a part for the
whole; as 1 Samuel 1.21. says, All the House went up to offer the yearly
Sacrifice; yea, the 22, 23. Verses say expressly, That Hannah and her Child
Samuel went not up, (yet all the House.) So Luke 2.1. In those days went out a
decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the world should be taxed; yet who will
understand any other part of the World than that within his own Dominions, and
within the bounds of his own Territories (yet all the world.) And so in many
other places. But to speak of these Households in particular, will, if I mistake
not, turn your own Artillery against you, which we shall do in a few words; and,

(1.) To the Household of Lydia. It Is said she and her Household was baptized,
Acts 16.15. but no ground to conclude that there were any Infants there, but a
fair ground to suspect the contrary; and that she might be a Maid or a Widow,
there being no mention made of her Husband, and she reckoned the Head of the
Family, which is not proper where there is a Husband; besides, she was a
Trader, and at this time many miles from home being now at Philippi, but was of
the City of Thialira, as ver. 12 compared with the 14. so that if she had any
Children, it is probable she should carry them about with her from place to
place, whither she went to trade and merchandise; most likely she should leave
them at her abode in Thialira, and not that she would be cumbered with the
trouble and care of her Infants in her Travels to traffic: But that this may
issue with Evidence against you, the Apostles, in the last Verse in this
Chapter, they went into the House of Lydia, and when they had comforted the
Brethren, they departed: So that it is plain those of Lydia's Household were
Brethren, and the Brethren were capable of being comforted, which Infants are
not in the sense of that Text.

A second Household is that of the Jailer, in the 33d Verse of the same Chapter,
the Jailer and all his were baptized straightway; (all his) that is, as one
observes, his Wife, his Servants and Relations, for to them it may more
properly refer than to his Children, who whether he had any is uncertain, but
whether he had or not, it is not material in this Case; for in v. 32. it is said
expressly, And they (i. e. Paul and Silas) spoke unto him the word of the Lord,
and to all that were in his House; which cannot be imagined they should do unto
Infants: And v. 34. says, He rejoiced believing in God with all his House: So
then all that were baptized in his House, were such as heard the Word of the
Lord, and rejoiced believing in God, which Infants are not capable to do. But

A Third Household is that of Crispus, Acts 18.8. And Crispus the chief ruler of
the Synagogue believed on the Lord with all his house, and many of the
Corinthians hearing, believed, and were baptized. Though it be certain, that
he, with all his House, was baptized, from 1 Cor. 1.14. yet from this Text it
is not so plain, that he, with all his House, was baptized, as that he, with
all his House, believed on the Lord. And that such as believe were fit Subjects
of Baptism, who denies? But,

A Fourth Household is that of Stephanas, 1 Cor. 1.16. says Paul, And I baptized
also the house of Stephanas. Now, if any enquire what is said of this Household,
to hinder but that Infants might be there and consequently baptized? why
enough, and that which may satisfy all men, that there were no Infants here;
for the Apostle says in the 16th Chapter of this Epistle, and 15th verse, Ye
know that the house of Stephanas were the first fruits of Achaja, and that they
addicted themselves to the ministry of the Saints. Which Infants, as such, will
never be capable of doing, but are to be ministered unto: Therefore how great an
Uncertainty do the Patrons and Defenders of Infant Baptism labor under! Hence
it was that the worthy Dr. Hammond grants, that no concluding Argument can be
deduced from the baptizing whole Households, for baptizing Infants; and
certainly the Doctor concludes but rationally herein, knowing that a clear word
of Command is necessary to constitute a Gospel Ordinance; as you your self have
fully acknowledged in time past.

I now pass to the last Branch of your Argument, wherein you say the Infants of
Professing Christians ought to be baptized, because they are Disciples, which
you would insinuate from Acts 15.10. which I find thus worded: Now therefore
why tempt ye God to put a yoke upon the neck of the Disciples, which neither
our Fathers nor we were able to bear.

What is here in all this Text to prove Infants Disciples? Not one tittle; the
Disciples here spoken of are those Gentiles that were converted to the Faith at
Antioch, who met with some disturbance, occasioned by some that came down from
Judea, urging the necessity of Circumcision, saying as Verse. 1. That unless ye
be circumcised ye cannot be saved: Hereupon Paul and Barnabas contends with
them, and says, Why tempt ye God to put a yoke upon the neck of the Disciples,
in imposing the observance of Circumcision, with the other Ceremonies of the
Law upon the Gentile Church? For the Yoke spoken of by the Apostle lay not
strictly in Circumcision, but in keeping of the whole Law, whereunto they were
firmly bound and obliged by Circumcision, Gal. 5.3. which Infants were never
capable of doing, neither in the least are here intended; for though this
Church at Antioch is made up of Disciples, we believe; but that one Infant is
here included we deny: For when the Dissension grew hot between Paul and
Barnabas, and the men that came down from Judea, the Disciples determined to
send Paul and Barnabas up to the Council at Jerusalem, to enquire as to that
matter, ver. 2. and in the Third Verse you read, That the Church or Disciples
spoke of in the Second Verse brought them on their way; and when they returned
with their Answer from the Council, you read in the 31. ver. that they rejoiced
for the consolation; and in the 32. ver. that Judas and Silas exhorted the
Brethren, and with many words confirmed them; all which Offices performed, and
Comfort received, Infants can no way be capable of, neither can be intended in
this place by the Disciples.

Besides, to say Infants, as such are Disciples, is insipid, and contrary to
the true import of the word, being rendered by all Lexicons and Dictionaries
that ever I saw, which tell us, that a Disciple is a Scholar or Learner. 66
Epist. to Dard.
Austin says, That those who go about to make Infants Disciples, do not only
lose their pains, but expose themselves to laughter: And though it be true,
that all Disciples are of God's making, and not Man's, as you say Infants are,
and Paul was, yet we tell you, that Infants neither are nor can be made
Disciples without a Miracle, according to the sense and signification of the
word; neither are any made so, as to be fit Subjects of Baptism, till they have
been instructed by Man what to do; as appears from the Commission and Paul's
own Case; for, upon his enquiring what the Lord would have him to do, you read,
the Lord sends him to Damascus, and there, says he, it shall be told thee what
thou must do, Acts 9.6. And accordingly the Lord sends Ananias to meet and
instruct Paul, as ver. 10, 11. I come to your

Second ARGUMENT.
I argue from the nature of the Covenant and Baptism, as its Seal; the Covenant
belongs to them, therefore its Seal, Genesis 17.7. Acts 2.39. The Promise is to
you and your Children, etc. Its true primarily, and principally it belongs to
the Parents, who can come in and agree to it, and seal, but so as to include
their Seed: If you have a Lease in which your Childrens Lives are put together
with your own, will any say the Childrens are not in, because the Parents have
been the principal Actors? (1) So that this is nothing but what is common
amongst Men. (2) GOD has dealt thus with Man all along in the Covenant of
Works with Adam, in the Old Testament with the Patriarchs or Fathers, and can
we think He has altered his Methods? What Evidence can be brought of that? (3)
It is but reason it should be so, for Children are a part of their Parents till
they come to stand on their own Legs, and act for themselves. (4) The thing
signified does belong to Infants, as the pardon of Sin, Regeneration, and the
Kingdom of Heaven, etc. therefore the Sign if the greater, then the less. If
any object, That for the same reason they may come to the Lord's Table, because
they have the thing signified; Ans. Weakly argued, because that though the
thing signified is the same, yet the sign is different, and they may be capable
of the one, that are not of the other: Because they receive Milk, are they
therefore fit for strong Meat? (2) may they not be taken in at the Door, and
washed by Baptism, because unfit, by reason of their Age, to come to the Lord's
Supper.

Second ANSWER.
If you would carefully examine and look into the nature of this Covenant
mentioned Genesis 17. you will find it such as yields not your Infant Seed the
least Right to Gospel Ordinances, it being a Covenant peculiar to Abraham,
which God made with him for his natural Seed, his Children according to the
Flesh, wherein we have God promising unto him a very numerous and honorable
Issue, v. 5, 6. (2) That as God has graciously condescended to become a God in
Covenant to Abraham, even so He will continue to be the God of his Seed after
him, ver. 7. from whence it is evident, that God has chosen the whole
Offspring of Abraham, in a peculiar manner, to be his Vovenant People, by
virtue of that Covenant that He made with him for himself and his Seed; and
therefore (3) God on his part promises to plant and settle the Seed and
Posterity of Abraham in the promised Canaan, which was a Blessing peculiar to
that People, made sure to them by a Covenant-promise on God's part, ver. 8. as
a Token whereof, he gives them Circumcision to be kept and observed by them,
through their Generations, as ver. 9, 10. And this we judge easy to make
evident, were that our Business, though there be something of the Covenant of
Grace intermixed with it.

But if by Covenant, Genesis 17.7. you mean the Covenant of Grace made in Christ,
the alone Mediator unto Eternal Salvation, why then we cheerfully assent, that
the Children of all professing Christians are included, and heartily believe
that the Infants of others are not excluded, this Covenant with Abraham being
but a recital of that which God made with lapsed Adam, which was the Covenant
of Grace in the first Edition of it, Genesis 3.15.

And Mr. Baxter is so far from thinking that any are excluded the Grace of this
Covenant, that he affirms, The Law of Grace was as truly made with all men in
Adam, as the Law of Innocence was; and that all were really alike in Adam; and
that Cain was not the Serpents Seed merely for original Sin, and as born of
Adam, as Abel was; nor did God make him the Serpents Seed by Reprobation, but
that he made himself so by superadded Sins against the Redeemer and Law of
Grace.

So that if a being in the Covenant of Grace be a sufficient ground to baptize
any, why then it is confessed, that all Infants have equally a Right to Baptism.

But it is humbly offered, That neither Baptism now, nor Circumcision in its
place, was given as a Sign and Seal to the Covenant of Grace; for though the
efficacy of its Grace did reach innocents and Believers in all Ages, yet what
Ordinance was ever annexed to it as its Seal through the several Ages from Adam
to Noah, in which Ages lived Abel, Seth, Enoch, who by Faith walked with God,
and Noah, with whom this Covenant was renewed, Genesis 6.18. and from Noah to
Abraham, and from the time that Abraham had this Covenant ratified by a sure
Promise of a faithful Seed, before the Covenant of Circumcision was given out,
which was about 25 years.

A Seal it was to Abraham of the Righteousness of his Faith wherewith he
believed whilst uncircumcised; so the Holy Ghost applies it, Romans 4.9, 10, 11.
Verses, but to no other Person as a Seal as I know of. Nay, to imagine that
Circumcision was a Seal proper and peculiar to the Covenant of Grace, must
needs be a Mistake, else the Patriarchs of old, Melchisedeck King of Salem, and
Priest of the Most High God, an eminent Type of Christ, just Lot, and Job God's
righteous Servant, of whom it is said there is none like him in all the Earth,
could have laid as good a claim thereunto as any besides; but Circumcision
never received its Being as a Seal annexed to the Covenant of Grace, for had it
been given as a Token peculiar thereto, it would have remained (I presume) as
unchangeable as the Covenant itself, and would not have vanished away with the
other shadows of the Mosaical Dispensation. So that though we grant your
Infant Seed to be in the Covenant of Grace, yet because of their Interest
therein, it follows not that they have a Right to Baptism, that being now no
more a Sign peculiar to the Covenant, than Circumcision was, that is now
abolished; for were it a Sign, then the Covenant once had two Signs annexed to
it, as proper and peculiar, even from the time of the institution of Baptism to
Christ's Death; till then Circumcision was in force, and how absurd is this to
imagine? Neither is Baptism any more a Sign which you grant Children than the
Lord's Supper, of which you most uncharitably deprive them, for they who in a
Gospel sense have a Right to the one, have no less Right to the other.

Besides, the Seed promised to Abraham, in the Covenant of Grace made or
renewed with him, is a spiritual and believing Seed; and so the Holy Ghost
expressly tells you, if you dare depend upon his Testimony, Gal. 3.6, 7, 8, 9.
of whom Isaac was the Type, not a carnal and fleshly Seed, figured by Ishmael,
as is obvious in the Allegory explained by the Apostle Gal. 4. from 22, to 29.
And as it is Faith only which denominates a person to be the Child of Abraham,
Gal. 3.7, 9. so it is Faith only that bespeaks a Person to be a fit subject for
Baptism, as Acts 8.37, 38. Could any person show where the Holy Ghost calls
Baptism a Seal, 'twould be of some service to your Cause, but as that cannot be
assigned, so Baptism cannot be any more than Circumcision was, a Seal; for the
proper use of a Seal is to confirm, ratify, and make sure Bonds and Contracts,
etc. But, I pray, what is it that Baptism confirms, ratifies, and makes sure
unto Children, more than what is through Grace made sure to them, to wit,
Eternal Life by Jesus Christ without Baptism? It Is true, by Faith in Baptism we
put to our Seal, but there is something else which God annexeth as his Seal,
whereby he seals up Believers, the alone Children of Abraham, and confirms
them in the sure hope and expectation of Eternal Life, viz. the Holy Spirit,
Ephesians. 1.13. and Chap. 4.30. Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby you are
sealed to the day of Redemption. Many may be baptized, that are not of the Seed
promised to Abraham, as many such heretofore have been to instance only in
Judas, Simon Magus and the foolish Virgins, but the Holy Spirit is given to
none as a Seal, but such who by believing are not Bastards, but the true Sons
of Abraham.

Furthermore, if you consider the nature and scope of the Covenant made with
Abraham, it must needs make void your manner of arguing, because it is said to
Abraham and his Seed, Therefore say you to us and our seed. But now consider,
are each of you by this Covenant made the Father of a blessed Seed, as Abraham
was the Father of the Faithful? Or can you claim the Promise for your selves
and your Seed, according to the Tenure of Abraham's Covenant, and as he might
(know) but we must rest in a relation to him, as Children, and so receive his
Blessings, i. e. the Blessings promised to him for his Seed, and that by means
of our own Faith, and for our selves alone? Believers, because they are
Abraham's Seed, are blessed with faithful Abraham, Gal. 3.9. And if we are
Christ's, then are we Abraham's seed and heirs according to promise, ver. 29.
So much to the Covenant and its Seal.

You add, The Promise is to you and your Children Acts 2.39.

Ans. If by Promise you mean the Remission of Sin, and the Gifts of the Holy
Ghost, spoken of in v. 38. we are of your mind, That they belong to every
penitent and believing Jew: Even so to every penitent and believing Gentile,
the Wall of Partition being now taken down, is this Grace extended, as is plain
in the close of the Verse, Even to as many, (i. e. Jews or Gentiles) as the
Lord our God shall call. But does it follow hence, that any person ought to be
baptized before Repentance, whereas it is our being renewed by Repentance and
Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, that evidenceth our Right to the Grace
promised, and Baptism is prescribed to be performed as a Duty by such, for the
obtaining the Grace promised? But if you say it does follow, I demand why John
did treat any of the natural Offspring of Abraham so roughly as he seems to do,
calling them a Brood of Vipers, and as such, rejected them, requiring them to
bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance, Mat. 3.7, 8, 9. And does not Acts 2.38.
as plainly say, Repent and be baptized? Is not therefore to baptize any without
the least show of Repentance in the Subject, to invert the Order of the Holy
Ghost, it being certain, that you and your Children, in the 39th Verse, is not
so properly you and your Infant, as you and your Posterity? I wish it were not
to be said of you in this case as Stephen speaks of some Jews in another, Ye
stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy
Ghost; as your Fathers did, so do ye, Acts 7.51.

You proceed, telling us, That God dealt thus with Man in all Ages, in the
Covenant of Works with Adam, in the Old Testament with the Patriarchs or
Fathers, and can we think He has altered his Methods? What Evidence of that?

Ans. That the Transactions of God with his People and their Seed in all Ages,
has been in a Covenant-way, and will be so to the end of the World, and that
our Seed is interested in the Grace of the same Covenant that Adam and the
Fathers were in all Generations; God has not altered his methods at all, with
respect to the Covenant he has made, which is unalterable and everlasting as
David says, 2 Samuel 23.5. As you had an Interest in the Covenant of Grace, so
have your Infant Seed, but should they live to forfeit their Interest in that
Grace by actual Transgression, as you and I have done, may not God direct to
the use of such Mediums as Faith, Repentance, and Obedience are, for the
Sinner's Recovery, and give out such Laws and Ordinances as is consistent with
his own Grace and Wisdom, upon his dissolving of one Church Frame, and erecting
another, without the Sinner's control?

You say, Children are a part of their Parents, and of the same Condition with
them, etc.

Ans. If this pass for right Reason with you, it will not so with me, neither
will it at another turn pass for good sense with you. We grant, that Children
are of the same nature (humane) with their Parents, Bone of their Bone, and
Flesh of their Flesh, but not always of the same state with their Parents.
What think you? Was Cain of the same Condition with Adam, Ishmael with Abraham,
Esau with Isaac, Absalom with David, Manasseh and Amon with Hezekiah, or good
Hezekiah with wicked Ahaz, or good Josiah with his wicked Father Amon, or those
Children of Israel who entered and possessed the promised Canaan with their
wicked Father, whose Carcasses for their Sin fell in the Wilderness. How
directly opposite is this your beloved Notion to that Rule of perfect
Righteousness and Equity, which God has laid down in that 18th of Ezekiel,
wherein he attesteth, that all Souls are his, as v. 4. and that the soul of the
Son shall not dye for the sin of the Father; intimating, that the Father by
becoming a wicked Apostate and abominable Idolater, may change his own State,
and forfeit his own Interest in the Covenant, but thereby shall not weaken his
Child's Interest in the Covenant, which abides firm unto Eternal Life,
notwithstanding any Sin in the Father; nothing can ruin that, but the Child's
own Disobedience, as the whole Chapter shows.

Nay, if the good and happy estate of Infants depends so much upon the
believing of mediate Parents, is not the Salvation of such Infants rather to be
imputed to their Parents believing, than to Christ in dying? But this your way
is not God's way, for God claims a Right to, and a Propriety in the Children of
an Apostate Israelite, as well as the Children of his faithful Servants; which
could not be, should the Covenant Interest of Children be suspended upon the
defection of their immediate Parents; but so it is, Ezekiel 16.20, 21. Moreover,
thou have taken thy sons and thy daughters, whom thou have born unto me, and
these have thou sacrificed unto them, to be devoured: Is this of thy whoredoms
a small matter, that thou have slain my Children?

You add, That the thing signified belongs unto Children, to wit, Pardon,
Regeneration, and the Kingdom of Heaven, if the greater, then the less.

Ans. That the Grace of Pardon belongs to Children we believe, flowing purely
from the Grace of God in Christ to them, and not by virtue of any Act of Faith
in their immediate Parents; That the Kingdom of Heaven also belongs to
Children, we fully consent to with you; but that Regeneration does belong to
Children, or the Duties of it is any where required of them, I profess my self
a Stranger; and that this may issue, I do sincerely promise, that when you can
by good warrant prove it the Duty of Infants to be regenerated, and that such
are regenerated, according to the true sense of that word, to be one with you
in the baptizing of them.

As to the Objection formed in the close of your Argument, I judge it stands
strong against you, till you have given us a more convincing Answer, than
telling us it is weakly argued, amounts to, appealing to your own Conscience,
whether Infants, with respect to Spirituals, are any more fit for Milk than
strong Meat, whilst capable of neither; and whether the Prerequisites necessary
to Baptism be not superior to the Capacity of Children, as those necessary to
the Lord's Supper, whether an actual Dying to Sin can be any more the work of
an Infant than Self-examination. I now come to your

Third ARGUMENT.
I argue from Circumcision; Baptism comes in the room of Circumcision, Col.
2.11, 12. they belong to the same Covenant, they have the same Nature, the same
Ends and Uses; there is no essential Difference, therefore there is the same
reason why Children should be baptized now, as that they should be circumcised
then; and had it not been so, doubtless the believing Jews would have made a
scruple of it, and debated with the Apostles about it, as they do of other
matters, and that would have occasioned a more full Decision of the Point; but
there was no occasion given them to raise Scruples, and therefore we hear
nothing of it. [Objection.] But there is no Command. [Answ.] A general Command
there is for the making it an Ordinance, a particular Command there did not
need, as to the determining the proper Subjects of it, because it is what might
easily be gathered from the foregoing practice of the Church: And that there is
no particular Command, is an Argument to me, that though Christ changed the
outward Signs, yet not the Subjects, for if it had been so, he would have told
us. And that there is no little weight in these three Scripture-Arguments, and
over, that which is equivalent to an express Command. -- I spoke to wise men,
judge ye what I say, 1 Cor. 10.15.

Third ANSWER.
If Circumcision be the best Authority you have for Infant Baptism, as I think
it may be, or at least as good as any, in another Case, I should mightily pity
you, to think how poor a shift you make to prove a New-Testament-Ordinance by
an Old-Testament-Writ, and an abolished Ceremony. Is not this as good Arguing?
The Lord's Supper comes in the room of the Passover; the Children eat of the
Passover, why not of the Lord's Supper? But that Baptism comes in the room of
Circumcision is not in the least proved, nor can be from Col. 2.11, 12. for
there the Apostle is speaking of a Circumcision, then and to this day in force,
to wit, the cutting of the foreskin of the Heart, a putting off the Body of
Sin, in token whereof the believing Colossians are said to be buried with
Christ in Baptism.

Besides, that Baptism comes not in the room of Circumcision, is further
evident, as they were both in force together, from the time of Baptisms
institution to the end of our Savior's Life; whereas if Circumcision had been
a Type of Baptism, the Shadow must have vanished when the Substance was come,
but no man will say, that Circumcision was abolished, until Christ by Death
nailed it, with other Ordinances that was against us to his Cross.

You add, They belong to the same Covenant.

Ans. That they may appertain to the Covenant, as annexed thereto by positive
Institution, we believe but as we told you before, neither of them as Signs and
Tokens proper and peculiar to the Covenant of Grace, and therefore can belong
only to them to whom they are assigned. --

You say, They are of the same nature.

Ans. Is not this to say the Ministration of Christ is as legal as the
Mosaical, contrary to Heb. 8.6, 7. and so on. If Flesh and Spirit, Legal and
Evangelical, be one in Nature, then Baptism is the same with Circumcision.

You add further, They have the same Ends and Uses.

Ans. How that appears I know not: Was not this one end of Circumcision, to
confirm unto Abraham and the Jews, in their successive Generations, that Christ
the Promised Seed should come of the Line of Abraham, according to the Flesh;
whereas Baptism has no such End, therefore the Analogy betwixt them are not
the same as you imagine: However from what you have said you conclude, there is
the same Reason that Children should be baptized now as circumcised then, if
you have the same warrant for the one as for the other: I confess, the Reason
is the same, else not; for the trial hereof, I will briefly enquire (1.) what
it was that made Circumcision the Duty of Children; (2.) the Qualifications
that gave Children a Right thereunto. But,

(1.) That which made Circumcision the Duty of Children, was not their
Covenant Interest, as we have before showed. Had that, the Patriarchs,
Melchisedeck, Lot, and Job, had had an undoubted Right thereto, and their
Posterity, as they were of the same condition with them, as before you have
argued; but it was the positive Command of God, given out to Abraham in Genesis
17.10. Every Man-child amongst you, says the Lord, shall be circumcised. Here
Circumcision is introduced by Divine Institution and Appointment; and that you
may assuredly know who are the Subjects hereof, the Lord plainly tells them,
every male Child amongst them shall be circumcised, the time when is expressly
set down, viz. at eight days old, v. 12. They were not to do it sooner, nor
deferr it longer. And as the Law is thus express for the Male Children, through
their Generations, even so it is as positive for those born in their Houses,
that are not of their Seed, and the Stranger that is bought with their Money,
v. 13. and also for the Proselyte, Exodus 12.48, 49. And to oblige all to the
due observance of this Law, the Lord joins a severe Threatening of disinheriting
or cutting off every uncircumcised Male Child amongst them, (or rather every
man amongst them that circumcised not his Males) else the Commination would
turn its edge against the Child for the Parents Fault, knowing the Child could
only be passive in the thing. Thus you see by what Authority Circumcision was
practiced.

(2.) The Qualification that gave Children a Right thereto, was not their
Covenant Interest, for then their Females had the same Right as their Males;
besides, by virtue of the Institution, such were to receive Circumcision, as
you will have much ado to believe were interested in the Covenant, to instance
only in Ishmael and Esau, and the words of the Apostle, that says, All are not
Israel that are of Israel.

Abraham's whole Male natural Seed must needs be circumcised; yet who will
imagine, that the numerous Issue proceeding from him were so interested in the
Covenant, as Abraham and the Faithful were, neither was any thing of Duty
required as a necessary Prerequisite to qualify Abraham's Seed for
Circumcision, more than a descending lineally from him; a being his Children
according to the Flesh, qualified them for, and interested them in the Blessing
of the Covenant of Circumcision, which are inferior to the Blessings of the new
Covenant and Gospel Ministration: So that it is evident the carnal Seed of
Believers can obtain no greater Privilege, than the Seed of Abraham did by the
Covenant of Circumcision, whose Privilege reached not to an Interest in
Gospel-Blessings (or the New Covenant) unless they had obtained that Right for
themselves by believing, otherwise, as one says well, they had no more Right
to them by their natural descent from Abraham, than Ishmael had in their
Covenant of Peculiarity.

And as of old Circumcision was not to be administered to any but those
appointed by the express Will and positive Law of God; neither ought Baptism
now; nor can any man conclude from a good ground for Infant Baptism, till as
good Authority be produced for it, as they had of old for circumcising the
Males of Israel.

You add further, Doubtless if it had not been so, the believing Jews would
have debated with the Apostles about it, etc.

Ans. I confess, had they not learned better Manners, and been of much a better
Temper than many in our days, they would not only have debated but quarreled
with them, as some do, thrusting away Truth as a Troubler of their Coasts, as
the Gadarenes did Christ; but the Believers of old learned Christ to better
ends, than to maintain unnecessary Debates with the Apostles, being satisfied
from the nature of the Gospel Ministration, that there was no room for
Controversies in Christ's changing the Subject as well as the Ceremony; and you
may see that Point as fully decided and resolved as they did, would you rid
your mind of Prejudice, and with a single Eye look into the Commission where
Christ bids them to make Disciples and baptize them, and into the general
Practice of the Apostles, which did perfectly correspond with the Command,
which Command was made the Rule of their Proceedings, and not the demolished
form of the Jewish Church: And Christ, in faithfulness to his Church, and in
mercy to little Infants, has as evidently changed the Subject as the Sign,
Mark 16.15, 16. which in conjunction with the general Practice of the Apostles,
in that they never baptized one Infant, puts the thing out of doubt. Thus, I
hope, your three topping Arguments are fully answered, which you say are
equivolent to an express Command; an Assertion so impudent, that I pray God it
may not be laid to your Charge; for there is not any thing said in all of them,
but what may bespeak you to need, that some one teach you which be the first
Principles of the Oracles of God, Hebr. 5.12.

And now Brethren, I hope, as wise men, you will judge, and seriously consider
what is said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things, 2 Timothy 2.7. I
now come to your Argument of lesser magnitude.

Fourth ARGUMENT.
Little Children belong to the Kingdom of Heaven, therefore are of the Church,
and ought not to be excluded, but admitted by Baptism, Matthew. 19.14. They, how
little soever, have an interest in the Privileges of the Gospel Dispensation,
as well as they had under the Law formerly, and accordingly are as capable of
Eternal Blessedness in Heaven, and the same Objections lie against their being
saved, as against their being baptized, viz. That they cannot actually believe,
Mark 16.16. If any object, Christ means Children in Humility, not in Age, as he
does Matthew. 18.2, 3. Answer, That cannot be so understood here; because he here
speaks of such as were brought unto him, and he took into his Arms. Besides, it
would not then be a sufficient ground for the check he gives his Disciples.
(Objection). But he did not baptize them. Answer. We do not know that he
baptized any. He did that which was greater, and that which makes them
qualified Subjects for Baptism; for grant to them a Church Relation, and
Baptism will follow upon it; if one stands good, the other will; and that is
what we plead for from this Text.

Fourth ANSWER.
That little Children, as such, belong unto the Kingdom of Heaven, we descent
not from you one jot in this Truth; for since Christ has said, that of such is
the Kingdom of Heaven, we joyfully and steadfastly believe the certainty of it,
and that little Children are of the Church of God, i e. the Universal and
Invisible Church, which contains all the Elect of God, known and unknown known
unto us, and that to the most remote Corners of the Earth, in which blessed
state they abide, though their Parents may suffer a change of state by sin, yet
that alters not the state of Children, nor nothing can, till by their voluntary
departure from God in choosing sinful ways, they destroy themselves. To prove
Infants (as such) in a visible state of Salvation, we conceive not difficult,
the words of Christ strongly concluding it.

But if by Church you mean the visible Church of Christ, and do say, That
because little Children are of the Kingdom of Heaven, that therefore they are
of the visible Church, as that most be intended, because of your pleading for
admission for them, then I conceive your Conclusion to be most untrue. (1.)
Because, to say the Fleshly Seed of Believers are born within the Pale, and
Members of the Church of Christ, is a Doctrine Foreign to that of the Gospel.
(2.) Because such a Doctrine, in a great measure, destroys the right end of
Baptism, which is to make them Members of it, that are not, Acts 2.41. and 47.
and not to bring them into the Church, that are in it already. (3.) Because
Infants, as such, are not capable, and fit matter to make right Members of the
Church of Christ under the Gospel: For, says the Apostle writing to Church
Members, Ye also as lively Stones, are built up a Spiritual House, an holy
Priesthood, to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ,
1 Pet. 2.5. which Infants can neither be nor do. (4.) To say Infants are
Members of the visible Church, is incongruous to all Definitions that ever I
met with of a Gospel Church, as I might show by some of your own. I forbear to
name ours, as that which may not pass with you for current, therefore shall
assign only that of the Church of England, as an Evidence against you, which
speaks in the Nineteenth Article, as follows:

The visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of faithful Men, in the which
the pure Word of God is preached, and the Sacraments be duly administered
according to Christ's Ordinance, in all those things that of necessity are
requisite to the same. -- which strongly bespeaks the Church of Christ to be
exclusive of Infants.

Further, your grant that Children before Baptism belong to the Kingdom of
Heaven does call into question that part of the Church Catechism which teaches
her Catticuminies to say, That in their Baptism they were made Members of
Christ, Children of God and Inheritors, or (Heirs) of the Kingdom of Heaven;
and if they are Members of the Church, as you confess, they belong to the
Kingdom of Heaven, is not your own practice as foreign; when as, in your
baptizing any, do tell the People that thereby that Child becomes a Member of
the Church of God; a goodly favor you do 'em indeed by Baptism, you make them
what it seems they were before, and no more by your own Grant. --

Again; That your Conclusion is not true, that says, Because little Children
are of the Kingdom of Heaven, therefore they are of the Church, and ought to be
admitted by Baptism, is further evident, in that there are many that shall be
saved, as have not the least show of Right to a Place in, and to the
Privileges of the Church of Christ, of which Infants are some who have not
fined actually against the Law of Nature; and the rest are those Heathens who
do live and walk up to that Light and Law of Nature which God has placed in
them, who are not blessed with the Gospel Light, nor any Divine Revelation, over
and above the Light of Natural Conscience: and surely some such there may be,
of whom the Apostle speaks Romans 2.14. who do by Nature the things contained in
the Law; and with reference to such, in all probability, Christ spoke, saying,
Many shall come from the East, and from the West, meaning the most remote parts
of the Earth, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom
of Heaven; but the Children of the Kingdom shall be cast out, Matthew. 8.11, 12.
If it be granted that there may be any such, it is evident the Kingdom of Heaven
will be a Receptacle for them; but who in the least can imagine that they have
any right to Gospel Privileges? so that your Conclusion must needs fall. A
right to Heaven from this Text is granted them, but it yields them not the
least Evidence of a Right to a Church Relation and Privilege. So that I
conceive all your pains in pleading from this Text vain, and in all that you
have said, to be but like one that beats the Air. A gallant Vapor,
brandishing a Sword that has no Enemy to strike at, 1 Cor. 9.26.

You say the same Objections lie against their being saved, as against their
being baptized, if they cannot actually believe Mark 16.16.

Answer; That Faith in Jesus Christ is made the Condition on which all Men must
be saved to whom the Gospel either was, is, or ever shall be preached, is
certain; yet as the Gospel never was appointed to be preached to Infants, as
such, neither is it by you, nor any Man in this day; so it is not required any
where of them to believe in order to their bring saved. If it be, who required
it? and where? And since their natural Capacities is such as renders the work
of Believing impossible to them (without a Miracle) whose Faith shall save
them, their immediate Parents, nay, rather the Faith of our remote Father, to
wit, Adam; as his Unbelief at first destroyed them, so in likelihood his Faith
should interess them in the Grace of Eternal Life: but we say the Faith of
neither; for the Faith and Righteousness of all believing Parents in the World
considered in one, will not be of Merit sufficient to save one Victim, Ezekiel.
14.14. No, this Benefit flows purely from the Fountain of all Grace, and is
conveyed to them by another Stream, to wit, God's free and full imputing the
Righteousness of Christ, the second Adam, by whose Righteousness, Life, and
Meritorious Death they are inverted with a Justification unto Life Eternal,
Romans 5.18. As by the offense of one Judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation,
even so by the Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon all Men unto
Justification of Life. Were it so that the Faith of Parents did entitle their
Children to Salvation, how unworthily would it reflect upon our Lord Jesus, as
if he could not save Innocent Babes without their Parents believing, and
strongly conclude God to be more prone to Severity then Mercy, in saving a very
few, i. e. the Children of believing Parents, and Eternally damns all the rest
from their Mothers Womb for what they could not help, viz. a remote Fathers
sinning, and an immediate Fathers not believing; but how contrary is this to
that God, whose Mercies are over all his Works, Psalm 145.8, 9. So that it is
evident the Salvation of dying Infants is sure, though they believe not in the
sense of that Text, Mark 16.16. or with that Faith which alone qualifies a
Person for Baptism. So I come to your

Fifth ARGUMENT.
The Children of Believers are said to be holy, this is plainly set down in the
Text, which cannot be meant, are Legitimate, not Bastards, for that could not
be accounted, if both the Parents had been Unbelievers, neither was that the
Question which the Apostle here handles. Neither can it be understood
absolutely of real holiness, for then Parents could convey Grace to their
Children, and a gracious Man could not have graceless Children; but it must be
meant of foederal Holiness, as they who were born of the Jews, were Jews not
common and unclean as Heathen, but accounted as in the Church, and within the
Covenant, so that you that are born of Christians, are to be accounted
Christians, therefore have a right to the Privileges of Christians. (2.)
Scripture does explain and confirm this, Acts 10.15, 28. and Romans 11.16. if the
Root be holy, so are the Branches. And it is very observable, that of the little
that is spoke of the case of Children in the New Testament, all is for it, and
not one word against it.

Fifth ANSWER.
That the Children of Believers are holy, we believe and that their Holiness is
founded upon a better Basis than the Faith of their immediate Parents; and also
that it is different from that of their Parents; and such a Holiness as is so
far from inrighting them to Baptism, as that till they come to sin, it does
much rather exempt them: For if Baptism be a Sign that signifies to all that
submit to it, the Remission of Sins, as Scripture sufficiently shows, Acts
2.38. and Mark 1.4. etc. then I pray of what use can Baptism be to those who
are under no actual Commission of Sin, and as such, needs no sign of Remission
of them.

But if with Austin, you say, they have Original Sin that must be washed away by
Baptism, why then their Holiness before Baptism is nothing but Uncleanness,
agreeable with some of your own Coments upon Psalm 51.5. Behold, I was shapen
in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me. So that it is plain they have
no Holiness to inright them to Baptism, but rather need Baptism to make them
holy.

Further, Consider how manifest a Contradiction the Patrons and Defendors of
Pedo-baptism meet with from each other, not knowing where to find a stay for
it is Support. How does Austin thwart you; you say they that are born of
Christians are to be accounted Christians, that is, they are Christians, or
ought not to be so accounted. And he tells us, as my Author quotes him, in his
Book De Verb. Apost. c. 24. -- the Question being, Whether the Infants of
baptized Christians were holy? he says Not; because as the Circumcised begot
only the Uncircumcised, so neither did the baptized beget baptized, or (holy
ones) the terms are equivolent; the Reason he gives, None is new born before he
is born. And further proves it by these two Illustrations; (1.) That the purest
Wheat that is most purged from Chaff or Husk, yet being sown, brings forth
Grain that has Chaff and Husk. (2.) That the best Grapes that are sown brings
forth wild Grapes. And there is reason to believe, that most of the Fathers, in
this particular, was of Austin's mind, as might be gathered from the consent of
whole Councels; take one for all, that is, the Affrican Council, where Austin
was both Present and President; they thus Decree:

All that affirm young Children receive Eternal Life, albeit they be not
renewed by Baptism, they are accursed, etc.

And notwithstanding the show of kindness you extend to Infants in your Coment
upon the Text, I am persuaded you are also of Austin's mind; for if I mistake
not, in your second Argument, you talk as if they must be washed by Baptism;
but I tro for what, if they be not unclean, but holy.

Further, Every Holiness gives not a right to Baptism. You confess the Holiness
in the Text is not a Moral or Real Holiness, which only opposes Sin, Pollution,
and Uncleanness of Heart and Life; so Holiness is proper only to the Adult. The
Vessels of the Sanctuary are as expressly said to be holy, as the Children in
the Text; see 1 Chronicles. 22.19. and Ezra 8.28. then see how unsound you argue,
saying, The Children of Believers are holy; Ergo, They ought to be baptized.
The Cups and Vessels of the Sanctuary are holy; therefore they ought to be
baptized. Now to every considerate Man, is not the one Conclusion as truly
deducible from the quality, as the other. Who but Men willing to be deceived
will conclude any more for the one then for the other? Austin telling you,
whatsoever this Holiness is, 1 Cor. 7.14. it is not of power to make
Christians, or remit Sins.

But you proceed and say, It is not Legitimate Holiness, neither is that the
Question that the Apostle here handles.

Answer. Surely Sir you shoot at Rovers, and in this have spoken foolishly with
your Tongue: Is not Marriage, and Matters relating thereto, the Subject of this
whole Chapter? and does the scope and design of it, bespeak the Apostle
laboring the removal of some Doubts and Difficulties that many were under at
Corinth, that were turned from Idols to God, though but young and weak in the
Faith; therefore they write to the Apostle for satisfaction in Matters and
Things they were doubtful of. And what more plain from the manner of the
Apostle's addressing himself to them in the first Verse, Now concerning the
things whereof ye write, etc. One, amongst others of these things, we may
rationally conclude was, Whether a Husband or a Wife, closing with Christ by
Faith, and leaving their Yoke Fellow in Unbelief and Idolatry, might lawfully
cleave to them, and cohabit with them, as their true and lawful Yoke-fellows,
and as before they did, being both in Unbelief; or whether they must not rather
leave or disown them, as to that Relation, because of the spiritual difference
that is now betwixt them.

Now whether this Doubt amongst them at Corinth might arise upon their
accidental hearing of what God made the Duty of Israel in the Reformation in
Ezra's and Nehemiah's times, that they should put away their idolatrous Wives,
as Ezra 10.3. I leave.



And to the matter proposed by the Corinths, the Apostle advises, That the
Believer by no means shall depart, if in case the Unbelieving Party still
please to abide and cohabit with them, as verse. 10, 11, 12, 13. And further to
resolve them in this matter, he renders them a twofold Reason in the fourteenth
Verse: (1.) The unbelieving Husband is sanctified by the believing Wife, and
the Unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the believing Husband. Which is, as if he
had said, You are as truly Man and Wife in God's account now as you were
before; your Marriage as honorable, your Bed as undefiled, your living and
lying together as unblameable in the sight of God as ever; the Husband and Wife
as truly sanctified a Companion for each other, notwithstanding the difference
between them in Matters of Religion; which the Annotator on this Text, in the
Second Volume of Mr. Pool's Work, says, The Believer, without Offense to the
Law of God, may continue in a married state with such a Yoke Fellow,
notwithstanding their disposition in Matters of Faith. And Erasmus, with
others, tell us expressly, That Children are legitimately holy; agreeable with
that in Malachy 2.15. where the Lord himself calls the Children born in lawful
Marriage a godly Seed. Therefore as a (2.) Reason, the Apostle removes the
Absurdity that the scrupulous Converts at Corinth feared, saying, Else were
your Children unclean, but now are they holy: i. e. Were it so as you fear,
that desparity in Matters of Religion dissolved the Marriage Bond, why then
your Issue would be born in Uncleanness, and bear the Blot of Bastardy upon
them. But to remove this Scruple, and satisfy that there abode is as
warrantable as ever, says elsewhere, Your Children were unclean, but now are
they holy. Now as the Husband and Wife are sanctified to each other, abiding in
that honorable, or holy state of Matrimony, the Children born unto them are
holy, which needs no longer to be feared by you, as Holiness and Sanctification
opposes the Uncleanness of Fornication, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3, 5.

Now I pray, Sir, if this be not the Question that the Apostle here handles,
will you show us what it is, or cease to darken Counsel by words without
knowledge.

You proceed, and must needs have this to be Foederal Holiness, explaining it
thus, As they that were born of the Jews, were Jews, not common and unclean as
Heathen, but accounted as in the Church, so that you, that are born of
Christians, are to be accounted Christians.

Answer. The Heathen were bad enough, is granted, and that you need not make
them worse, believing you will never be able to prove the difference so great
between the Issue of Jews and Gentiles, that had an equal advantage of being
born of Parents that were lawfully married, what degree of Sanctity descended
upon the Jews in lawful Marriage, more then upon the Offspring of the Gentiles
under the same Circumstance, I know not; and yet I believe Israel was a People
blessed with an Eminent Holiness above the Gentile Nations in common. But then,
that peculiar Holiness streamed to them from another Fountain than merely being
born of the Jews in holy Matrimony, to wit, the Grace and Love of God, in that
he was pleased to choose them, before any other Nation, to make them his
People, and accordingly blessed them with holy Laws and Ordinances, as Psalm
147.19, 20.

That every one born of Jewish Parents was a Jew, is not doubted, but that the
Jews were Church Members by their Birth, is not so easy; for if they were
Church Members so soon as born, they had a right (I conceive) to the
Privileges thereof. But with respect to the Passover, we are expressly told,
that no uncircumcised Person shall eat thereof, Exodus 12.48. And that such as
are born to you English men, are English men, and so accounted, though born in
France, Spain, or Ireland, where such born of English Parents, even disdain to
be accounted but English; but that such as are born of Christians, are
Christians, is a Paradox, and absurd with a witness, considering that no less
then a believing the Doctrine, and an imitation of the Life and Manners of
Christ, can truly denominate a Man to be a Christian. At this rate, a Man that
is an Idolater begets an Idolater, and an Hypocrite begets an Hypocrite.
Strange Divinity!

And as to the Text you cite, Romans 11.16. it favors not your Conclusion at
all, for if by First Fruits and Root, you will understand those holy Persons
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, yet its evident the whole Lump and Branches were not
so, by their manifest rejecting the Lord Jesus Christ; for amongst whom did he
meet with more notorious Enemies then amongst the Jews: Did their tempting,
belying, betraying, accusing, condemning, and executing the Lord of Life,
bespeak them to be a holy Lump, which in your sense they must be, as they
proceeded from a holy Root, to wit, Abraham, notwithstanding the many
Insolences and Indignities wherewith they treated the Lord Jesus. How directly
opposite is this to what Christ says of the Jews, the natural Seed of Abraham,
who notwithstanding that, tells them, That they were of their Father the Devil,
John 8.44.

But by that Scripture we may understand, that as God did look favorably on
Abraham, the Root of that People, so also he does favor the Branches of that
whole Nation that sprang from him, and therefore as some of the Jews had
received Christ, and were thereby interested in the Divine Favor, so the words
rightly understood are an Encouragement to the Unbelieving Jews that stand of,
to come into Christ, assuring them thereupon, that he would not reject them,
but take them into his Favor, as Branches that proceeded from so holy a Root;
they also contain an Argument to take off the Gentiles that were come in, from
judging and censuring the Jews upon their Rejection, and being Cast off; for
though God in Justice has cut off the obdurate Jew, and graciously taken in
the Gentiles through believing, yet from that favor he anciently bore toward
that People, he will not have the Gentiles to despise them, who is ready to
receive them into favor as Branches springing from so holy a Root, if they
continued not in Infidelity, which is evident in this and the following Verses;
so that all the Scripture speaks of Infants right to Baptism, whether more or
less, or nothing at all, it is evident you have said nothing to purpose from it.
I pass to your

Sixth ARGUMENT.
What hinders but that the Children of professing Believers may be baptized?
Nothing on God's part; who has declared himself ready to receive them, and
take them into Covenant, together with their Parents, and said, That of such is
the Kingdom of Heaven; nothing in the Sacrament, they may have all that is
essential unto Baptism given unto them, as well as to Adult grown Persons;
nothing on the Ministers part, but they may baptize Infants as well as grown
Persons; and nothing on the Childrens part, as has been shown; they are
capable of it, and have a right unto it, as they were capable of Circumcision,
and had a right to it.

Sixth ANSWER.
As to the first of what is contained in this Argument, of their being taken
into Covenant, and belonging to the Kingdom of Heaven, is sufficiently spoke to
already, in my Answers to your Second and Fourth Arguments: A word or two to
the Querest, demanding what hinders. Methinks this Question is so fully
resolved by the Holy Ghost in that Eighth of the Acts, verses 36, 37. that no
thinking Man could, without blushing, have so interrogated. However, if you are
willing to know, I will tell you, and amongst many things, there is one that
may warrantably hinder, and that is a total want of Command from God for your
Authority; could you once preface your practice with a Thus says the Lord,
every Mouth would be stopped; but till then, we humbly desire, who has
required this at your hands, it may be worthy your search; for sure that which
God never had a will to require, he will never have a heart to accept: if
things but half done in pursuance to his Command, be a rejecting his Authority,
as in the Case of Saul, how much more a doing things in his Name to which he
never directed: If the Lord delights not in the Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices
he once required, comparatively to an obeying his Voice, how much less will he
delight in Works of Supererogation, in things done over and above in what he
has commanded. See 1 Samuel 15.22, 23. But if you assign the Commission of
Christ for your warrant, is it not plain from thence, that you have broke his
Law, and changed his Ordinances, and that at best you do but one thing for
another, which is not one jot the better; for this cause the Earth is defiled,
and the Land mourns; for truly may the Lord say, as Isaiah 24 5. They have
transgressed my Laws, and changed my Ordinances. Sir, That an express Command
is necessary for the warranting your practice, is no more then what you have
acknowledged, (viz.) That it is the Command of God only that can constitute an
Ordinance of God, which you affirm your sprinkling of Infants to be; therefore
assign your Command, as you would the Lord should not say of you, as of others
in another Case, They have done that which I commanded them not, neither came
it into my heart, Jer. 7.31. Neither will you ever be able to quit your selves
from the Guilt of Will Worship, which we justly charge upon you; which truly
defined, is, as I shall give it you from the worthy Doctor Hopkin, late Bishop
of London Derry, as I find it in his Exposition upon the Ten Commandments,
(worthy to be printed in Letters of Gold) page 142. who says,

Will Worship is nothing else but an inventing and ascribing any other Worship
unto God, besides what he has been pleased to Command and Institute. God
says, Will worship, what it is.
he will not be worshipped according to our Fancies, but his own Appointment;
for as we must have no other God besides the true, so that God must have no
other Service performed unto him, besides what himself has required and
prescribed; for this were to impute folly and weakness unto him, as if indeed
he would have Servants, but knew not what Service to enjoin them.

And by this time I hope you may see what may hinder, if not, may not I as
industriously inquire why Nadab and Abihu might not bring strange Fire to the
Lord's Altar, I know of no express Command of God hindering, and yet for their
unadvised attempt, the Lord sends Fire from Heaven and destroys them both, Lev.
10.1, 2. Let us therefore fear to do any thing in the Worship of God which he
has not commanded, nor conclude our selves safe, though he has not in so many
express words forbid it. To do what he has commanded is our work, not what he
has not prohibited, else where would our wild Inventions terminate.

Further, If this be not sufficient to hinder, I pray what may hinder your use
of the Cross in Baptism; Is that Ceremony any more incongruous to holy Writ
then your own practice? And why find you fault with the Church of England for
the use of their Ceremonies, whereas many of them are so indifferent in
themselves, that for ought I know they may, or may not be used. Nay, if any
thing can warrant you, short of a Command of God, to set up this or that in the
Worship of God, as an Ordinance of God, may not the Church of Rome pretend to
as good Authority for any part of their practice that is not in so many express
words forbid, especially their Baptizing with Salt and Spittle, as you can for
yours. I do sincerely profess, were I satisfied that either Custom or
Consequence were a warrant sufficient to bear you out in this particular, I
should reckon my dissenting from the Church of England (where I may be as holy
as I will or can) might be justly imputed to my Ignorance or Pevishness.

You add, Nothing in the Sacrament may hinder, they may have all that is
Essential to Baptism given to them, as well as the Adult and grown Persons.

Answer. Sir, It is strange that you should so thwart your own practice; for I
presume there is not any whom you Baptize, but you do it upon a Profession of
Faith, if not their own, yet their Parents; so that your own practice bespeaks
Faith essential. And Mr. Baxter in his Poor Man's Family Book, page 168.
affirms, The Church never knew any Baptism, but such as was joined with a
present profession of present Faith and Repentance, and Renunciation of the
Devil, the World, and the Flesh, and a total devotedness to God in Christ. Also
the Church of England in her Catechism, to this Question, What is required of
Persons to be baptized? The Answer is, Repentance, whereby they forsake sin,
and Faith, whereby they steadfastly believe. Which, with Acts 8.36, 37. Acts
2.37, 38. and Romans 6.4. is evident that Repentance, Faith and devotedness to
God is necessary; but how does it appear that Children are capable of these
things? When did any Child give you the least Evidence that he Believed,
Repented, Renounced the World, the Flesh, and the Devil? and that before he can
possibly know the nature, or evil, of the one, or the other. Remember, Sir,
that which appears not, is not; nor let it suffice that the Parent believes for
the Child: for I pray, why may not the Parents Baptism pass current for the
Child, as the Parents Faith.

You add, Nothing on the Minister's part, but they may Baptize Infants as well
as grown Persons.

Answer. I confess some Ministers by permission, and through the liberty of
their own will, may do what they please; but in that case, what they do is
neither in obedience to any Command of Christ, nor in Imitation to any Example
of the Apostles, who neither did, nor durst do it, but had it been in their
liberty, without controversy they had done it, and then their president had
been sufficient. But though Paul shunned not to declare unto the Elders and
Churches the whole Counsel of God, Acts 20.27. yet the Baptizing of Infants no
where appears, to be either any part of the Lord's Counsel, or his Ministers
Practice; therefore as you would have a comfortable Evidence that you are the
Lord's Minister, it becomes you publicly to enter your Protest against this
practice for the undeceiving of many; and for the future, that you presume to
do nothing in his Name, but what you have his Authority for.

You say further, There is nothing on the Childrens part, as has been shown,
etc.

Answer. As has been shown there is nothing on the Childrens part that renders
it needful; and as they need it not, so they have not the least appearance of
right to it.

As to their Capacity, being the same with them that received Circumcision, I
conceive it to be a wide mistake; for they received both Capacity and Right for
Circumcision from the words of Institution, and not because they were either
able or unable immediately to answer the Obligation they were laid under by it,
which was to keep the whole Law, Gal. 5.3. Therefore, as your Infants now are
able to do no more then they did under the Law, and you having no Institution
and Divine Authority for your warrant, bespeaks both their incapacity and want
of right; but as to your Females, I perceive they have both a larger Capacity
and Propriety than those of old, in that yours must be baptized, though the
others were never circumcised. I pass to your

Seventh ARGUMENT.
I may add, That the practice of the Church of Christ, both primitive and
modern, is a good Comment on all these Texts, and though it is not the
Foundation we build this Doctrine upon, yet it may help to strengthen and
confirm us in the belief of it in dark and difficult Cases; especially we
should have regard what has been the Stream and Current of the godly Learned
in all Ages, the way of good Men, for wise Men to walk in. Mr. Baxter says,
That for his part he cannot find in his small reading, that any one Divine, or
party of Men, did certainly oppose or deny Infant Baptism for many hundred
years after Christ; and adds, that you cannot prove so much as one Man, except
one Herimarus, that did once oppose or deny Infant Baptism, from the Apostles
days till about Luther's time; but I could quote you Justin Martyr, Origin,
Jerome, Cyprian, and S. Augustine, the great Lights of the Church, all for it.

Seventh ANSWER.
You are pleased, I perceive, to restrain the Churches of Christ to the
conventions of your own practice, and to exclude all differing with you in the
point of Baptism; so that many Churches, as perspicuous as your selves,
especially in a trying season, have little thanks to give you for your Charity
toward them: however, since you make not the practice of preceding Churches
the Basis on which you build, only call them in for Light and Evidence to help
you in Cases dark and difficult, as by your own Grant, as well as Mr. Baxter's,
That the Baptizing of Infants is, if it be an Ordinance at all, it is next to a
Miracle, that all the famous Lights shining in the Churches, have not given so
much light and clearness in this thing of so much weight and moment, but that
it should still be found so dark and difficult, as it appears to this day; and
when a Star will arise to make it more clear then it is, I know not.

But in fine, to persuade your Brethren into a good and firm opinion of it, you
tell them that you could quote Justin Martyr, Origin, Cyprian, Jerome, and S.
Augustine all for it; to tell them you can do it, is much easier than to do it:
And to tell you by the way, if you have read the Fathers, you know in your
Conscience, that though some baptized Infants in the Third and Fourth
Centuries, for particular ends, yet none in those Ages practiced Infant Baptism
as a Gospel Ordinance, if any before Austin, as may be showed from Dr. Taylor's
Testimony, with others. Therefore to come to a Conclusion, though I might give
Instances at large from Tertullian, with all, or most of those you name,
together with Nazianzene, Ambrose, Athanasius, and many more, as they are
handed to me, all bearing head strongly against your practice; yet take one for
all, which sways much with me, as I find it quoted by Mr. Baxter, and you may
read it in this order of words in his Saints Everlasting Rest, page 143. viz.

In the primitive times none were baptized without an express Covenanting,
wherein they renounced the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and engage
themselves to Christ, as you may see, says he, in Tertullian, Origin, and
Cyprian, and others at large.

Now, Sir, I would ask you, whether Mr. Baxter never read of any that opposed
Infant Baptism; whereas he tells you, That none of old were baptized without an
express Covenanting. Certainly you have either mis-quoted Mr. Baxter, or else
he greatly forgot himself when he said as you speak of him; yea, he proceeds
and names Justin Martyr in particular in the same Book and Page, speaking of
the order and manner of baptizing the Aged, and how we are dedicated to God,
being renewed by Christ, says he, we will now open unto you.

As many as being persuaded do believe these things to be true which we teach,
and do promise to live according to them; they first learn by Prayer and
Fasting to beg pardon of God for their former sins, our selves joining also our
Prayer and Fasting; then they are brought to the Water and born again (or
baptized) in the same way as our selves were born again; for they are washed in
water in the Name of the Father, the Lord and God of all, and of our Savior
Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Ghost. Then we bring the Person thus washed and
instructed to the Brethren, as they are called, where the Assemblies are, that
we may pray both for our selves and the illuminated Person, that we may be
found by true Doctrine and by good Works worthy observers and keepers of the
Commandments, and that we may obtain Eternal Salvation. Then there is brought
to the chief Brother, so they called the chief Minister, Bread and a Cup of
Wine, washed, which taking, he offers Praise and Thanksgiving to the Father,
by the Name of the Son and Holy Ghost; and so a while he celebrateth
Thanksgiving; and after Prayer the whole Assembly says Amen. Thanksgiving
being ended, by the President or chief Guide, and the consent of the whole
People, the Deacons, as we call them, do give to every one present part of the
Bread and Wine, over which Thanks was given, and they also suffer them to bring
it to the absent; this Food we also call the Eucharist; to which no Man is
admitted but only he which believes the truth of our Doctrine, being washed in
the Laver of Regeneration for remission of sins, and that so lives as Christ
has taught. This then, says Mr. Baxter, is no new and over strict way, you
see.

Thus I have done with your seven Arguments, believing (through the Mercy of
God) might what is said be impartially considered, be sufficient to bring us to
that Unity of Judgment in all the Truths of Jesus Christ, and Conformity in
Practice that might render us more serviceable in carrying on that Interest in
the World for our One and Only Lord, which would be mighty conduceable to his
Glory, and a full Evidence, through Grace, of our own Title to that Glory which
shortly will be revealed in him, unto whom be given all Glory in the Church
throughout all Ages, Even so. Amen.

An APPENDIX. Seven Arguments showing that Infants ought not to be Baptized.
First Argument. IF Christ in the Commission Matthew 28.19. commands his
Disciples to baptize none, but the very fame persons he commanded them also
first to teach, and make Disciples by teaching, then that place is a plain
prohibition, and not a precept to baptize Infants, for Men cannot teach or
disciple Infants.

But Christ there commands his Disciples to baptize none but such as he
commands them also, first to teach and make Disciples by teaching, therefore
that place is a plain prohibition, and not at all a precept to baptize Infants.

If it be required, we shall give you proof enough hereof out of your own
Authors, as well as others.

Second Argument. If Infants ought to be baptized, then Infant Baptism is of
Divine Institution; but Infant Baptism is not of Divine Institution, therefore
they ought not to be baptized.

The Major is true, if as you say there is but one Command for Baptism, viz
Matthew. 28.19. which appears by the foregoing Argument to be a plain
prohibition of Infant Baptism.

The Minor is true, because no Man can show any Institution of Infant Baptism.

Third Argument. If Infants ought to be baptized as agreeable with the Command
of Christ, then it is agreeable to the practice of the Apostolical Churches;
but Infant Baptism is not agreeable to the practice of the Apostolical
Churches, therefore Infants ought not to be bapized as agreeable to the Command
of Christ.

The Major is true, because the Apostolical Church did observe T.G. all that
Christ commanded in the Case of Baptism.

The Minor is true, because no Man can show that the Apostolical Churches did
Baptize so much as one Infant.

Fourth Argument. If Infants ought to be Baptized, then Infant Baptism is a
part of Divine Worship, either natural or positive; but Infant Baptism is no
part of Divine Worship, either natural or positive, therefore they ought not to
be baptized.

The Major is true by your own grant, that Infant Baptism is an Ordinance of
Christ.

The Minor appears thus; If it be any part of Natural Worship, it is to be
found either among the Heathen that have not the Law, or certainly among the
Patriarchs who were before the Law. --

But it has not been known to either of them.

(2) If it be a part of Positive Worship, then it becomes so by Precept and
Command, but there is no Command, if there be assign it.

Note, All Commands are either Express or Implicit: An Express Command
requires the performance of it; an Implicit Command, shows that some have been
commended in the practice of it, or blamed in the neglect of it; but you can
show neither.

I shall take leave to wave a term, and so turn the edge of Mr. Baxter's Sword
against you, in my fifth and sixth Arguments, which I find in his Plain
Scripture Proof, falsely so called, p. 130.

Fifth Argument. That practice which goes upon mere uncertainty, and has no
Scripture Rule to guide it, is not according to the will of Christ; but the
practice of baptizing Infants goes upon mear uncertainty, and has no Rule in
Scripture to guide it, therefore its not according to the will of Christ, nor
ought Infants to be baptized.

Sixth Argument. That practice which does necessarily fill the Church with
perpetual Contention, as being about a matter that cannot be determined by any
known Rule, is not according to the mind of Christ: But the practice of
baptizing Infants is such as will necessarily fill the Church with perpetual
Contention, as that which cannot be determined by any known Rule, therefore it
is not according to the mind of Christ; nor ought Infants to be baptized.

Seventh Argument. That practice which renders the practice of Christ, and his
true Followers, who were baptized in Rivers (or much water) superfluous or
ridiculous, and which agrees not with the word Baptize, when used in the New
Testament to express the act done, in that Ordinance, is contrary to the
Command of Christ.

But the sprinkling of Infants now used by you, renders the practice of Christ,
and his true Followers, who were baptized in Rivers, or much Water, superfluous
or ridiculous, and agrees not with the signification of the word Baptize, when
used to express, according to the New Testament, the act done in that
Ordinance; therefore Infant Baptism is contrary to the Command of Christ, and
ought not to be.

The Major is true, because Christ has Commanded nothing that reflects
dishonor upon his own practice. -- The T.G. Minor is true, because if
Sprinkling a little Water upon the Face only be sufficient, then Immersion or
Dipping in the River must needs be superfluous, etc. Neither can the word
Baptize and Rantise, with any equity of Speech or good Sense, be used to
express the same Action.

Now how poor and paultry soever our Arguments against your practice, as you
term them, may be, I leave to consideration, judging these sufficient to
justify all in refusing Infant Baptism; and if possible, to persuade you more
effectually to endeavor the restoration of this Ordinance to its pristine
Purity, in which you will do well: And so Farewell.

The CONCLUSION. Being a Word to my Brethren of the Baptized CHVRCHES.
INto whose of your hands soever these Lines may come, with them I greet you in
the Lord, through whom, from God the Father, I sincerely wish you an increase
of all Grace and Peace, praying that you may keep your selves in the love of
God, and in a patient waiting for the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

And that we may be without blame in that day, let us in this day, Brethren,
consider our Calling, and the Obligation we are laid for ever under, by that
Grace which God through Christ has so freely and fully imparted unto us, so as
that every one of us may fill up our places in the Church of God, adorning the
Truth which we profess, as it is in Jesus, ordering the affairs of our whole
Conversations with circumspection, expressing Piety flowing from hearts sincere
toward God, and Humility, Love, and Reverence toward all Men, in all things,
a defect in either of these may justly make way for a, What do ye more then
others.

Without controversy, if any People in the World have the true Form of
Godliness, you have; and in holding fast the Form of sound words, ye do well,
but better in making manifest the Power of Godliness, without which the true
Form will not avail, but turn to our detriment. I design not to impeach any of
you, though I would to God there were no cause; but earnestly persuade to a
more complete and constant Conformity to Christ our Head, not only in Doctrine
but in Imitation, that Holiness, with the Fear and Favor of God, may fill our
Assemblies and Houses to their utmost Borders, and our Hearts being filled with
Love thereto, we may at all times, by good Conversations, show forth our works
with meekness of Wisdom, James 3.13. This would certainly render Arguments for
Truth more powerful and convincing, and atract and win upon the hearts of the
more considerate and wise, though not one with us in holy Baptism; whenas
Profaneness, Folly, and Uncharitableness in Israel will dis-ingage and harden
more than a whole Volume of the most pregnant and invincible Arguments will
make to yield. Therefore, Brethren, as we are called to Holiness, let us
expressively evidence, that what we know of God in Christ, is more than
speculative. And to that end,

(1.) Be ready unto every good Work that refers to your Duty to God, in that
relation you stand in to the Church of God.

(2.) Be truly generous and wise in your deportment toward all Men, especially
the more Sober and Religious; avoid Censoriousness and Unwarrantable Judging of
such; treat them in love, as Brethren, and occasionally, as you have
opportunity, contend earnestly for the Truth, yet without heat and passion.
Maintain your Communion entire, and Separation complete from all whose fear,
more or less, in the Worship of God, is taught by the Traditions of Men, and
not after the Traditions given us by Christ and his Apostles; yet in all things
wherein we are agreed, let us walk, uniting in Affection, till God shall reveal
the rest unto them, praying earnestly that God would cause the Beams of Gospel
Light powerfully to dart into the Minds of all, helping them by Divine
Illumination to discern Truth's shining Beauty and Excellency, that all Error
may fall before it, as Dagon did before the Ark, and that none may find either
heart or hand to support it, that Christ's own Fold may be filled with his own
Sheep in this our day; yea, through the Increase of Knowledge and
Righteousness, let Honor and Glory be given to the Lamb, and all the Earth
know that the Lord alone is God. Amen.

FINIS.

