Midd' ss. Ad General' Quartenal' Session' Pacis Dom' Regis and Dom' Reginae,
tent' pro Com' Midd' apud Hicks's-Hall in St. John's-Street, in Com' praed' Die
Lunae, scilicet Vicessimo Septimo Die Junii, Anno Regni Dom' and Dom' nostr'.
Gulielmi and Mariae, Dei Gratia, Ang. Scot. Fran. and Hib. Regis and Reginae,
Fidei Defensor' etc. Quarto; coram Joh. Dom' Ossulston, Jacobo Mundy Arm. Ric.
Bulkely Bar' Car. Lee Mil' Guil. Pritchard Mil' Jac. Smith Mil' Johanne Elwes
Mil' Thoma Row Mil' Carolo Umfrevile Mil' Thoma Lane Mil' Thoma Owen, Samuele
Buck, Thoma Johnson, Jacobo Cardrow, Lancelot Johnson, Craven Peyton, Andrea
Lawrence, Johanne Pery, Maynard Colchester, Josepho Offley, Johanne Herbert,
Theophilo Eyton, Thoma Hariot, Thoma Smith, Thoma Hall, Radolpho Bucknal,
Rogero Jennings, Nic. Grice, Henrico Hawley, Richardo Woodward, Richardo
Shoreditch, Joh. Wilson, Waltero Brydall, Richardo Milner, Gulilelmo Allestree,
Gulielmo Withers, Gulielmo Underhill, Georgio Bohun, Leonardo Hancock, Edwardo
Chamblaine LL. D. Thoma Alston, Johanne Duvall and Gideon Harvey in Medicinis
Doctore Arm. Justic' Dictorum Dom' Regis and Dom' Reginae ad pacem in Com'
praed. conservand' nec non ad divers' Felon' Trangrs' and al' Malefact', in
eodem Com' perpetrat' audiend' and terminand' assign. etc.
WHEREAS their Majesty's, both by their several Letters and Proclamations, have
from time to time been graciously pleased to declare their earnest desire, That
all the Laws against Vice and Profaneness be duly Executed, and have expressly
Commanded us Their Majesty's Justices of the Peace of this County, to take the
most effectual Care for the due Execution thereof: And whereas this Court in
pursuance of Their Majesty's Commands, have by their Order, bearing date the
Tenth Day of July last, Commanded all High Constables, Petty Constables,
Headburoughs, Churchwardens and other Officers within this County, to Use
their utmost Diligence, for bringing to condign Punishment all the Offenders
against the said Laws, which upon the Oaths of diverse credible Witnesses (as we
are informed) has through the diligence of the Officers, in diverse parts of
this County had this good effect, that many Houses of disorderly Tippling,
Debauchery and Gaming have been suppressed, and very great Numbers of Bawds,
Whores, and other Lewd Persons, profane Swearers, Cursers, Drunkards, and
Prophaners of the Lords day, have been Convicted and Punished according to Law;
Yet notwithstanding in some other parts of this County, through the Negligence,
Connivance and Evil Practices of the Constables, Headburoughs, Churchwardens
and other inferior Officers of such Places; the Offenses aforesaid have
received great encouragement, and such Lewd Offenders as had been so
suppressed, have been yet received and permitted there to continue such their
Lewd Practices. This COURT therefore taking the same into their serious
consideration, and being steadfast in their Resolutions, effectually to carry on
a Reformation of manners by the due punishment of the several Offenses
aforesaid, in all parts of this County, the same being a Work acceptable to
Almighty God; and so earnestly and piously recommended by Their Majesty's, Does
Order and strictly Require, all High Constables, Petty Constables,
Headburoughs, Churchwardens, and all other Officers, to be diligent in making
more frequent searches after such as keep Houses of disorderly Tippling,
Debauchery and Gaming, and such as haunt the same, and of the said Offenders,
and of all profane Swearers, Gursers, Drunkards, and Prophaners of the Lords
Day, and to give due Information thereof, from time to time, to some One of
Their Majesty's Justices of the Peace of this County, That no Partiality,
Connivance, or underhand Practices, by private Notice to Offenders, or any
other ways, by such Officers may prevent the. Conviction, or Detection of them,
but that the several Offenders may be punished, according to Law; And whereas
the public Sports, and playing of Boys, and others, on the Lords Day, in
Churchyards and elsewhere, is a great Contempt to the Worship of God, and
tends to the Corruption of Youth; The said Officers are therefore hereby
Ordered, and Required to take notice on the said days, of such disorders, and
to disperse such Prophaners of the Lords day, or to apprehend them, and to
bring them before One of Their Majesty's Justices of the Peace for this County;
that they may be proceeded against according to Law; And we being resolved to
proceed with all due strictness against all such Officers is shall be found
faulty in the due observance of this our Order, do recommend it to all persons
who shall at any time hereafter have Knowledge of any of the Offenses
aforesaid, or of any neglect or undue Practice of any Officers aforesaid,
whereby the Conviction or Punishment of any of the said Offenses shall be
hindered, or avoided, that they will give timely Information thereof, to some
One of Their Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said County, from whom they
shall receive all due Encouragement; And whereas the keeping of Music Houses
of late practiced in several public Taverns and Alehouses within this County,
to which there is a great Resort of Idle and D^ssolute Persons, is of very ill
Consquence, and tends to the Debauching and Ruin, especially of the younger
sort of people, of both Sexes, and does also occasion many Quarrels and Riots,
to the great disturbance of the public Peace. It is hereby further Ordered,
that the several Officers aforesaid, do make a due Return to some Justice of
the Peace in their respective Division of the Christian Name, Surname, and
Place of abode, of all Persons keeping the said Music Houses, and of such as
frequent the same, to the end they may be prosecuted according to Law; And it
is further Ordered by this Court, that the Clerk of the Peace for this County,
do forthwith cause this Order to be Printed and Affixed upon the great Gates of
Hicks's-Hall, the Church Doors, and all other Public Places of each Parish
within this County, and distributed to the several High-Constables within this
County, who are Ordered by this Courr forthwith to send the same to the several
Petty Constables, Churchwardens and Headburoughs within their several
Divisions, to the end Public Notice may be taken thereof.

per Cur' FOX.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Braddyll. 1692.


