THE Address And Petition OF MR GEORGE SETON The Delegate of the Jurant
Episcopal Clergy in the North, with some Reflection on the same, By a Person
qualified according to Law, and sincerely weell affected to this Church.
Unto His Grace John Earl of Tullibardine, His Majesty's High Commissioner.

The Humble Address and Petition of Mr. George Seton, Minister of the Gospel
for himself, and in Name of his Brethreen and Constituents qualified according
to Law, and well affected to this Church.

THE Thoughts of those Desolations and Divisions, with which this poor Church
is harassed, are very grievous to Us, and to all Good Men; Because thereby the
common Enemies of our Religion, and of Europes Peace, have their Mouths opened
to Blaspheme. Many Thousands of Souls are become as Sheep without a Sheepherd,
Atheism and Irreligion lift up their heads; The Floodgates of Wickedness are
set wide open, and a deludge of Sin menaces Ruin to a wretched Nation; a
Ferment of dangerous and discontented Humors grows a pace, and a Fire kindled
in our Bowels, is like to Consume us, and the Noise and Billows of our
Contentions swell so high, that the calm Voice of Charity cannot be heard, and
the sounding of her Bowels seems to be gone, and angry Zeal, to have usurped
the place of that Wisdom which is from Above; That Wisdom whose endearing
Character it is, to be Pure and Peaceable, Gentle and Easy to be Entreated

Yet amidst all the Pressures that deject our Minds, We count our selves Happy
in this, That we have a King, whom GOD has Eminently Blessed, with Pity to
Compassionate, and Wisdom to heal our Maladies; And that as a signal Instance
of his Religious Care to put an end to our Lamentable Confusions, He has well
and wisely Chosen Your Grace to Represent His own Person and Authority, in this
Current Session of Parliament

The Evils we bewail and complain of, The Animosities and Heats which divide Us
Churchmen, and the Jarrs which form Parties and contending Factions in this
Kingdom, are not to be composed by the Authority of Public Sanctions, or the
imperious Language of Armed Force, or the Rude Clamours of the unskilful
Multitude, or the perplexing debates of the most Learned Disputants. These have
been often weighed in the Balance of Experience, and all of them found light
and unsufficient Remedies; Charity alone can heal our Breaches.

Were Pride and Malice, and Self-love expelled from our Breasts to make room
for the Benign Inspirations of that Heavenly Grace, which thinks no Evil,
which though it suffer long, yet is still kind and Complaisant, which becomes
all things to all Men, that by all means it may gain some, and which shall not
fail to Flourish and Triumph, when there shall be no use either for Faith or
Hope: Did we hearken to its soft Whispers, were our Opinions and our Conduct
regulated by its Charming Influences, This disconsolated Church should put on a
Gladsome Countenance, we should have Beauty for Ashes, and the Oil of Joy for
Mourning, and the Garment of Praise in stead of that Spirit of Heaviness and
Reproach, which now sits fast to us. Such Peace on Earth and good will amongst
us Fellow Christians, and Fellow Protestants, would excite to new Anthems,
those kind and Blessed Ministers of Heavens Court, who rejoice at the
Conversion, though but of one Sinner.

Then (and not till then) may we hope that Satan shall fall as Lightning before
our feet, that Atheism and Prophanity, and irreligious Boldness shall not dare
to show their Faces, but that the Gospel shall run prosperously, and be
Glorified.

Whereas, whilst we stand fighting for little Matters, whilst we place the Sum
of Religion in those things, which do not at all concern its Substance, whilst
(Procrustes like) we will agree with none, but such as are commensurat to the
Bed of our own Opinions, whilst we pay no regard to the Doctor of the Gentiles,
his most Christian Exhortation, whereunto we have attainned, let us be of the
same mind, whilst so much shrewdness of disposition Reigns in us, let us Preach
and Pray our very Bowels out, let us dress the Threatenings of the Law, with the
most frightful Rhetroick, let our Pulpits be surrounded with Flame and Terror,
let us Thunder against Rebellious Siners, all the Curses that were once
pronounced on Mount Ebal, or let us study to allure out Hearers unto Obedience,
with the most liberal Promises of the Gospel: All the Charms and Powers of our
most commending Eloquence, will be damped and foiled by the Blemishes of our
own Lives, by the rugged and unchristian temper, by the Malice and Vain Glory,
the Pride and partiality, the Bigotry and Self-Love, to which people cannot but
descry that we are Slaves and Votaries.

Your Grace has already by His Sacred Majesty's Order recommended in open
Parliament, Charity and Moderation, and the ending of unkindly and unseasonable
Controversies amongst us Churchmen, and we have much Encouragement to believe,
That Your Grace has therein acted a part most suitable to the Attractive
Mildness of Your own Pious and Peaceable Temper.

By the same Royal Order, Your Grace has owned a Power and special Commission,
to pass such Acts as may tend effectually to curb all kinds of Vice and
Prophanity; And with Joy, we behold in Your Graces Person and Conversation, a
Noble Pattern of Solid Virtue, a Compassionate Goodness, an unaffected Air of
Humility, a Generous Candor, an Unbyassed Mind, and a warm Zeal to do some
signal Service both to King and Country, in the High Character You are now
Clothed with.

When the Almighty Ruler of the World, the Infinitely Wise and Just Disposer of
all Events, thus Graciously Calls on us, and excites us to show our selves good
Men, and good Ministers, by the Light and Authority of so great Examples, by
Duty we owe to GOD, and to our own Souls, by the Dishonor Religion suffers,
through our Scandalous and Uncharitable Strifes, by the Desolations of an once
flourishing Church, by the awful sense we ought to have of these Spiritual
Dangers, to which weak Christians are Exposed, whilst they see us ready to bite
and devour one another, and by many other concurring circumstances, if passion
and prejudice keep such an Ascendent over us, as that the ways of peace be
still hid from our Eyes, and we will not hearken to sober Counsels, GOD cannot
but be highly displeased with us, Shame and Guilt, and the fears of a future
Reckoning must at once Confound us, the present Age will Condemn our obdurate
Stiffness, and after Generations will Curse our reproachful Memories.

May it please Your Grace to appoint a Conference betwixt an equal Number of
us, and our Presbyterian Brethereen; And as we have always hitherto showed our
selves Lovers of Peace and Union, upon Terms that in Conscience we could agree
to, so we hope it shall further appear, that others and not we are to be
blamed, if a desirable Period be not put to those Schisms, which distract and
divide this Church. IF Mr. Seton had not in the Title told us that he was a
Minister of the Gospel, the gaudy Affectation and Froath in the Style and Dress
of his Paper, would never have given any Wise and Good Man ground to imagine
it, the same looking more like the Stage and Romance, than the Form of sound
Words. which should discover a Divine: How much soever he may fancy the Doctor
of the Gentiles to favor his Design, I am sure Paul, called to be an Apostle
of Jesus Christ, his Speech was not with inticeing Words of man's Wisdom.

If we look to the Narrative of his Petition, one might expect that we had got
a Person so fully in Love with Charity, which he says, alone can heal our
Breaches, as that he had a good share thereof himself, and that while others
did not regard its calm voice, yet he himself would hearken to its soft
whispers, but if you look to the import and Insinuations thereof, without any
breach of the Apostle Paul's Charity, we will find neither Wisdom, Truth nor
Charity, He may have something of Jacob's Voice, but Esau's Hands; for these
wordy Complaints of the want of Charity, either have a meaning and hint at
Persons and Things which are real, or else all is only a flowrish of his Pen,
to let the World see how passionately he would complain of the want of Charity,
if she were a Stranger in the World, and if he have no other design than this
last, neither Wisdom, Truth nor Charity do appear.

But I have the charity to him, to believe his Complaints have a meaning, and
that he thinks some People or other are so uncharitable, as that he has
sufficient Ground to open the Floodgates of his Rhetoric against them, who
they are he intends to wound, though he gives us an account, under the Envelop
of such general Words, as when he shall have occasion for the same, may
charitably extend themselves to bring in others under the Character, than such
he does really design, thereby to furnish himself a Back door; yet its very
sure the present Government both in State and Church, and those entrusted with
the same, are the Objects of his Complaint. You may indeed think him sometimes
pretty square in taking in himself, and these he does represent, while he
wishes Pride, Malice, and Self love expelled from our breasts. And you would
think him very self-convict of many grievous things, while he says, that People
cannot but descry that we are slaves and votaries to a rugged and unchristian
Temper, to Malice and Vainglory, to pride and Partiality, to Bigotry and
Self-love; but this is only the Gentleman's Complysance, you must not with an
angry Zeal, be so uncharitable to think him, and his Constituents so full of
Pride and Partiality, for the Title (that they are qualified according to Law,
and well affected to this Church) and the Epilogue, as we have always hitherto
showed our selves lovers of Peace and Union, upon Terms that in Conscience we
can agree to (and Charity will seek no other) so we hope it shall further
appear, that others, and not We are to be blamed, if a desirable period be not
put to these Schisms, does hold forth the Innocence of the Gentlemen, so
neither he, nor any of his gang are the men; nor ought these of the late
Episcopal Clergy, who are turned out for their disloyalty by the State, and
censured for their Immoralities by the Church, be thought to be the Authors of
these things he complains of, for its their removal which makes the desolation
of an once flourishing Church: In a word the men who have made these
desolations* by turning out his old Brethren, are these whom he would reach,
and since King William came to the Throne, and Presbytrie got up, there has
been nothing but barassing this poor Church with Desolations and Divisions, and
because Presbyterians have caused all this Ruin on the Church, therefore so
peaceable a man as Mr. Seton may expect, that at least they will allow a
Conference, seeing he calls them his Brethren, but yet such Brethren as he
desires no more of them than an equal number at most:

Now, that Mr. Seton should have in this Petition so loaded the Government, in
Church and State, is as far from that Charity and Wisdom which he so
recommends, as it is from that Truth, which the Character of a Minister should
in a peculiar manner mind him of, is it Charity, by calumnious Insinuations, to
wound a Church he pretends to be wellaffected unto, and to traduce those
Ministers whom he calls Brethren, by representing them to be the Authors and
Fomenters of Division and Schisms, and that publicly, not only by a Petition
to His Majesty's High Commissioner, but printing the same to the World, when
neither Mr. Seton, nor any of his Constituents, since they were qualified
according to Law, did ever apply to any of the Judicatories of this Church, or
to any Minister thereof, either to be United themselves unto the Church, and
received into the Government, to which they are now Schismatic, or yet so much
as to confer with any Presbyterian Minister, upon any terms of Union, or to do,
or offer any thing which might tend, either to the propagating of the Gospel,
curbing of Prophanity, or more full settling of the Church. Does not the
tendency of this Petition give ground to believe, that the Presbyterian
Ministers are so implacable, that they would not all this time confer with
those Episcopal Brethren, and that on the other hand, these charitable and
peaceable Episcopal Brethren were following all Methods of Peace, when he says,
We have always showed our selves lovers of Peace and Union, I am sure no
Stranger will read this Address, but must conclude (if all he says be good
Coin) that the Presbyterians have been disturbers of the peace of the Church,
and that all the Atheism, Prophanity. Ignorance and Irreligion, which does
lamentably abound, is to be laid at their door. But though he could make this
heavy Charge good, which he will never be able to do, yet where is this Charity
in him, toward these his Presbyterian Brethren, to insinuat such shrewd things
of them, without ever complaining to themselves, without ever (with the calm
Voice of Charity) bespeaking and entreating to lay afide their angry Zeal: How
frequent soever Charity be in his Words, I think I do him Justice, when I say
there is no true Charity in all his Paper, and that there is more of
calumnious, censoriousness, and shrewdness of disposition discovered by him, in
the strain of his Discourse, than there has of angry Zeal been seen in the
present Judicatories of the Church, against Mr. Seton and his Constituants.

But to come more closs to Mr. Seton, How will he vindicate himself, and his
Party, from being the Authors and Fomenters of the Divisions of the Church,
and also uncharitable and unjust Calumniators of the State; when the World
knows, that Our Pious and Wise King, and the present Parliament, to put an end
to all that Persecution, Bloodshed, Barbaritie, Prophanity, Atheism and
Irreligion, which did so much abound in the late Reigns, and was chiefly
occasioned by the late Bishops and their Accomplices, and to stop these
Floodgates of Wickedness, which were set open and to prevent that deludge of
sin, which menaced Ruin to a then wretched Nation, did therefore send these
Bishops and their Government a packing, and did settle the Church on its
ancient Foundation; it having been often weighed in the Balance of Experience,
that where the present Church Government has been justly and duly Exerced,
Saton has fallen as Lightning. Atheism and Prophanitie have not dared to show
their faces.

Its likeways undenyably true, That neither our King, Parliament, nor Church,
did let angry Zeal so usurp the place of Wisdom, as to find all those who had
complied with, and submitted unto Prelacy, equally guilty with their
Ring-leading Bishops; and therefore they not only did not spew them out with
them, but to deserve the Character of Wisdom, were so gentle and easy to be
entreated, as both to continue them in their Charges, and give them
Opportunities and Invitations to be united unto, and sharers in the Government
of the Church; and it might have been expected, that when both State and Church
has fixed and accorded on these terms of Communion and Union, that either so
peaceable, charitable, and condescending Men, as Mr. Seton and his Brethren
would have come in to the Church on these Terms, or at least been quiet without
complaining.

Many in the World, and even the greatest (and I am sure the best) Bishops in
England thought these Terms settled by the King, Parliament and Assembly, so
Christian, just, rational and condescending on the Government and Churches
part, as might have satisfied all true Lovers of Peace and Religion, and such
as conscientious Men might accept of and thereby in some measure put an end to
the Divisions of the Church: yet peaceable Mr. Seton and his Constituents, will
not only despise and neglect these Means of the Churches peace, but will still
complain that others kindle and keep up the Fire.

But farther our King did with Pity compassionate, those whom his Wisdom could
not heal of their Maladies, and found out a way how these who had neglected to
render themselves useful to the Church should not be altogether Ruined
themselves, unless they did it with their own hands, and therefore makeeth a
Charitable offer unto them, that who ever like Mr. Seton, and his Constituents
would own the Government of the state should enjoy in the Church the Charges
they possessed, tho they did neglect to capacitate themselves to be sharers in
the Government of the same.

The Church Judicatories likewise have exerced that temper in their procedures,
as to give many demonstrations of a readiness in them, to have as many of these
who had submitted to Prelacy kept useful as they could find to be Men of
Probity, Sincerity and Worth; and after all this for Mr. Seton to raise this
Clamor and Dust, argues neither Charity nor Probity.

I will not call it Irreligious Boldness, but Impudent and Imprudent It is for
Mr. Seton to make this Clutter, who himself was personally desired and invited
to unite with the Church by the Committee of the General Assembly for the
North, anno 1694. and both refused these Terms, which the Law, and the Church
required, and entered and combind with others in that Illegal Protestation
against and Declinature of the Authority of that Judicatory, settled by the Law
and Authority of that same King, whom he would make us believe he thinks
himself happy in having, and which Protestation Mr. Seton knows was by the
same Parliament, after a full hearing, found to be seditious, unpeaceable and
illegal; and for which, some of Mr. Seton's fellow Protestators were justly
censured by it. And for Mr. Seton, conscious of his own guilt, to address his
Majesty's High Commissioner this same Parliament sitting, in such a strain as
does reflect upon both Church and State, Is such a piece of Charity and Wisdom,
as some desire not to imitate.

But what is the Conclusion Mr. Seton draws, after he has given the
Government and Church so many indirect Thrusts, he humbly desires his Grace, to
appoint a Conference betwixt an equal number of us and our Presbyterian
Brethreen. Now any man would think the honest man is indeed in earnest for a
Conference, and for what end, even to put a desirable Period to these Schisms,
which distract and divide this Church: and no doubt, he is for the immediate
ending of unkindly, and unseasonable Controversies amongst Us Church men, and
His Grace to be the Umpire.

If I had not heard of a Protestation drawn, and ready to be presented in March
1691, to the Commission of the Church, which was to have met at Aberdeen at
that time, (had it not been impeded by some charitable and peaceable Men)
wherein they declare that their Consciences scrupled to own Presbyterian
Government, and particularly Lay Elders, as they are pleased to call them, and
that Mr. Seton, and some of his Constituents were of that Number, and that he,
and the same gang, did solemnly Address the General Assembly in January 1692,
and then acknowledge that Assembly, consisting of the same Presbyterian
Ministers and Lay Elders, to be a lawful Assembly, and lawful Government, and
offered to join and concur therewith as such* without any scruple of
Conscience; and that constant and conscientious Mr. Seton, was with the rump of
his Party, one of fourteen who delivered in the same Protestation, drawn 1691,
to the Commit of the General Assembly for the North at Aberdeen, in anno
1694, as if it had been fresh and new, wherein, Mr. Seton and the rest have the
old scruples at the Government, and cannot in Conscience comply with their 1692
years Consciences: If I had not had the misfortune to have heard these things
of him, and such an uncharitable Memory as to remember them, I might have been
more ready to believe Mr. Seton in earnest. Before I hearken to the soft
Whispers of Charity toward him, and be convinced of his sincerity, it will be
necessary to satisfy my Reason of these doubts; I doubt he designs a
Conference, thereby to put a Period to these Schisms in the Church; when he
knows very well, that none of the Presbyterian Brethreen can confer with him
in name of the Church, and as thereto authorized by the Government thereof: He
is not ignorant that a General Assembly only can delegate such a Power, as to
confer in the Name of the Church; and to confer as private Persons will never
end the Controversies, so I demur that his design is any Conference at all: and
how discreet has he been to his Grace, let the World judge, for if these
Conferrees are to confer with a public Character, he desires of his Grace a
thing impossible for him to grant, and therefore impertinent to be sought. If
there be only two or three Presbyterian Brethren desired to discourse of
Church Affairs, as private Persons, with Mr. Seton and his equal number, His
Grace's being taken up with the weighty Affairs of the King and Parliament,
might have pleaded with Mr. Seton, not to give him the trouble to do that which
would at all time be an unsuitably mean employ for him, and which might with
more ease and charity on Mr. Seton's part been sought of his Presbyterian
Brethreen, who, had he asked the same of them, would not have refused him; none
of them yet have, and I am confident of many of them at least, never shall: But
Mr. Seton, it may be does think, he and his Constituents will have greater
Advantage, by making a braving offer of a Conference, which he concludes will
not be granted him, by the thing it self. It Is somewhere else than either with
his Grace, or the Honorable Estates of Parliament, that he expects his
Petition will have charming Influences; he hopes the Charms and Powers of his
most commanding Eloquence will take, where a just and true Representation of
the Practices and temper of his Party, will not be so diligently communicate,
and ushered in with such Pomp and Fast of Words.

I doubt Mr. Seton's design, when he so unequally demands a Conference betwixt
an equal number of us and our Presbyterian Brethreen, seeing the Government of
the Church is settled in the Hands of Presbyterian Brethreen by Law, and they
in a fixed Possession of the same, and acting therein with that success, as is
the envy of Mr. Seton, and his Constituents; and such as with the blessing of
God, will in a small time fill these Vacancies, which the disloyalty and
prophanity of these who were Mr. Seton's old Friends and Allays have made in
his Country, with men, I hope of another stamp- Mr. Seton knows, the
Parliament as well as the Church, has laid down another way of Application,
than the demand of a Conference of an equal number, as if his gang and the
Church were on equal Terms; But he has in some measure gained his Point, if he
make some in another Country believe that the Episcopal Party are still so
considerable in Scotland, as that notwithstanding the Government of the Church,
has for several years been settled in the hands of Presbyterians, and been
countenanced and cherished by the State, yet they think it their due (due to
their greater numbers, better cause and most commanding Eloquence) to demand of
a High Commissioner (and in the view of a Parliament, who have so much Favored
Presbytrie) such a Conference; He knows that in this Country it will not
take, The Parliament and Church have determined concerning the goodness of his
cause, and he speaks sad truth, when he says, their commanaing Eloquence will
be damped and foild by the Blemishes of their own lives; and when the Numbers
of his Constituents shall be enquired into, he cannot let see so many Duzons of
them qualified according to Law, even with the Civil part of Qualifications, as
there are Hundreds of his Presbyterian Brethereen; And some of his Constituents
lying under the just Censures of the Church, whom after they had not the
confidence to defend themselves at the Bar, he now brings in as his Brethreen
to confer as recti in curia.

I will not allege that some others of his Constituents are persons, who do
like ways well deserve the highest Censures of the Church, but some of these
few of his Brethereen, who go under that Character of being Qualified according
to Law stood accused of the grossest (...), of Drunkenness, Swearing and
Uncleanness, before a Judicatory of this Church, which their tender Consciences
thought it not fit to appear before, eand own as a Judicatory, and there
appeared little difficulty to prove the same; And if Mr. Seton have not these
Men to make up his Constituents, he has but a very small Number.

I doubt still that a Conference is really designed, because if it be,
something then must be proposed by Mr. Seton to put a desirable period to
these Schisms: Now its easier for Mr. Seton to soar in the Clouds and keep in
the Generals, then come to particulars; It seems that the Wisdom and Compassion
of our King and Parliament, has not yet found out the true Remedies to heal
our Wounds, Mr. Seton has not confidence, that the Authority of public
sanctions will be effectual, though I am of the opinion that a just and
Charitable Execution of them would mightily contribute to our Peace, you will find
the Parliament must alter their Terms, and yet that would not do to satisfy Mr.
Seton and his Men, but this I dare say would effectually quiet and excite him
to new Anthems the change of the present Government; the Re-establishing of
Bishops and all the old Clergy would recover an once Flourishing Church from
its Desolations, then a a pure and peaceable, gentle and easy Government would
possess the Throne: but as yet the King and Parliament seem not thereto
inclined, Mr. Seton must propose some other thing.

What if peaceble Mr. Seton desire to put a period to the Schisms by this
means. That every Man and every Minister might have the Liberty to follow their
own Inclination, and these who desired Bishops and Episcopal Clergy might not
be deprived of so great a Blessing, and Mr. Seaton would be so Charitable (at
least for this Session of Parliament) as to allow some Angry zealous Bigots a
gentle touch of Presbytry, providing it offended no body, and then when every
body got their will all would be pleased; But I am of the opinion, more peace,
then that would produce, may be had at an easier rate.

In short, So many difficulties arise in any particular Grounds for a
Conference, and Mr. Seton will be in such a strait to get his Charity to his
own Constituents on the one hand, so largely extended as to secure them, be
their Immoralities what they will from the cloutches of angry Zeal, and his
Complisance on the other hand is such, as not directly to spit in the face of
Authority, Civil and Eclesiastick, tho he be ready enough to spurn at them with
his Heels, that I believe, if you will let the peaceable man alone, he will not
much press a Conference; he has made the offer, printed his Petition, sent it
up last Post to London, he has waited as long as he thought fit, and the care
of the Church will call him home.

But before he go, I would let him and his gang see, that all Presbyterians are
not so full of angry Zeal, as not in some measure to be Easy and Gentle, and
therefore I would charitably advise him and his Friends to lay aside their
Illegal as well as Unchristian combinations to Re-establish Episcopacy in
Scotland, which Tyranny now called Jacobitism and Prophanity will always
attend. Let them by their practices and temper show some of that Charity and
Peaceableness his words pretend to, let them strive and endeavor in Preaching
of the Gospel to come to their Flock, in the demonstration of the Spirit and of
Power, rather then with the Charms and Powers of most commanding Eloquence; let
a Gospel-adorning conversation manifest that there is some thing of the Life of
Religion amonst them; and for my part they shall be dear to me, and honored by
me, though they should never come to be of the same judgment, as to the
Government of the Church: And if any of them by the Grace of God working in
their Hearts manifest such a Disposition, (what ever their former Actions and
Opinions have been) and desire to be sharers of the Government of the Church,
thereby only designing to be in a better capacity to propagate the Gospel,
destroy Atheism, curb Prophanity, Banish Irreligion, and heal the Wounds of
this Church, if they then be not welcomed by Church-Judicatories, it will be
time for them to complain of the want of Charity, But if after all the
Experiences both Mr. Seton and his Constituents, and his Presbyterian
Brethereen have got, that the present Church Government has made the most
vigorous opposition to Atheism and Profanity, been the most faithful Asserters
of the Truth, and strongest Bulwarks against Popery, Socinianism, Arminianism
and all other Errors, and is founded on the most lasting (...) of Union and
Peace. Men will (...) refuse to embrace these just and reasonable Terms,
settled by the State and Church, and oppose this poor Churches wrestling out of
the Ashes, to which Religions Enemies had reduced Her, and delay Her Triumphing
over all the Works of Darkness, I appeal to God the Searcher of all Hearts, to
Angels and Men, to our Gracious King, to His Grace His high Commissioner, to
the Estates of Parliament, and to the Consciences of our Enemies, if the
Presbyterian Ministers, and the Church-Judicatories ought in Charity to bear
the Burden of the Blame.


