A LETTER Sent to the Earl of WARWICK, From the Captain, Officers, and Company
of His Majesty's Ship called the LION, Declaring their Resolution for the
service OF THE PARLIAMENT, WITH The Earl of WARWICKS Answer thereunto.

7 Julii, 1648.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter from Sir
George Ayscue, and the Lord Admirals Answer to it, be forthwith Printed.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
July 8. 1648.

To the Right Honorable, Robert Earl of Warwick, Lord High Admiral of England:
May it please your Honor,
ACcording to your Lordships command, I am returned from Milford with the Lion
to Portsmouth, where I shall wait your farther pleasure; and understanding
there the present condition of Affairs, and how that many Seamen having been
seduced by the subtilty of those that have been always professed Enemies to the
Parliament and Kingdoms happiness: Which being rightly understood by the
Officers of this Ship, as also by the common men, they have thereupon
unanimously joined with me, Humbly to beg leave of your Lordship, to make this
our profession to your Honor, as being our hearty and zealous Resolutions, That
as it is a great grief to us, that any of our calling, who has been famous
formerly for their faithful Service to the Parliament, should now be cheated
into disobedience, of which we hear that diverse of them do already repent: And
we doubt not of your Lordships favor to such poor misled people: So we shall
desire your Lordship, That we who do abhor the thoughts of any unfaithfulness
to the Service of the Parliament, and who are ready to the last drop of our
blood, according to the Covenant which we have taken, to be obedient and
serviceable to their commands, In giving all possible assistance toward the
reducing of all Revolters and Refractory persons to their due obedience: So we
hope that the scandal and foulness of this Revolt in others, shall not be on us
a stain in the Parliament and your Lordships opinions: which if your Lordship
please to testify to us your assurance of, you will give us a great
encouragement, and lay a perpetual obligement on us, whose Names are hereunder
written, and who assuredly are the Parliaments and your Lordships most humble
faithful Servants,

George Ayscue Capt. Tho: Penrose Lieut. Michael Isles Minister John Rochester.
Io: Lathbury Gunner John Pack Carpent. James Johnson Boats. Will: Hinney Purser.
Jo: Haselock chirurg. George Evered Masters mate. Richard-Inon Masters mate.
George Fen corporal. Vincen Cocket Cook.


To my very loving Friends, The Captain, and Officers and Company of His
Majesty's Ship, The Lion.
After my hearty commendations,

I Received your Letter, and thereby very great satisfaction, touching the
integrity of your affections to the Parliaments Service, having made so eminent
a Declaration thereof, as amounts to the honor of your persons and professions:
I am very glad that you have conceived so true an apprehension of the nature
and rise of the revolt of those Ships that have deserted their duty, it
proceeding from false and lying suggestions, and tending as to the dishonor of
the Nation, so to the just shame and ruin of those who persist in such a
disobedience: That you do abhor the act, I am fully satisfied from your own
expressions; which as they hold forth much respect to the Parliaments commands,
so you may be confident, they will be returned in all ways of encouragement;
and believe it, you will find by experience, that the faithful adherence to to
the Parliament, will appear the greatest advantage to the happy settlement of
the differences betwixt the King and the Kingdom, and that those who withdraw
from their service, are the greatest obstructers of that Peace which they
pretend too: For my own particular, you shall never want that respect from me,
which may approve me a faithful servant to my trust, and to your selves;

London, 30 June, 1648. A very loving friend, WARVVICK.

FINIS.

