blazon of the Old Bailey blazon of the City of London
London ss. Ad deliberationem Gaolae Domini Regis de Newgate tentam pro
Civitate London, apud Iustice-Hall in le Old Baily, in parochia Sancti
Sepulchri in Warda de Faringdon extra London, die Mercurii, scilicet decimo
sexto die Aprilis, Anno Regni Domini nostri Caroli, dei gratia Angliae,
Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, fidei defensoris, etc. vicesimo primo;
Coram Thoma Atkin Majore Civitatis London, Nicholao Raynton milite, Isaaco
Pennington locum-tenen. Turris London uno Aldermanorum dicte Civitatis, Iohanne
Wollaston milite, Iohanne Glynne Recordatore dicte Civitatis London, Iohanne
Cordell milite, uno Aldermannorum dicte Civitatis London, Thoma Soame milite
altero Aldermannorum dicte Civitatis London, Iohanne Gayer, milite altero
Aldermannorum dicte Civitatis London, and aliis sociis suis Iusticiariis dicti
domini Regis ad Gaolam suam de Newgate de prisonibus in eadem existentibus
dliberand. assignatis.
FOr the better ordering, establishment and service of the Watches, to be from
henceforth duly observed and kept within the City of London and Liberties
thereof: It is Ordered and declared by this Court as follows, viz.

1. That the number of men to watch every night in every Ward throughout this
City and liberties shall be as hereafter is expressed, viz.

Algate 34 Dukes place 10 Aldersgate 44 Martin le Grand 12 Bishopsgate 80
Broadstreete 30 Billingsgate 30 Bridge within 25 Bassingshaw 12 Breadstreete 26
Cornehill 16 Candlewicke 24 Cordwayner 24 Cheap 25 Colemanstreete 32
Cripplegate within 40 Cripplegate without 90 Castle Baynard 40 Dowgate 36
Farringdon within 50 Muckwellstreete 4 Blackefryers 14 Farringdon without 130
White friars 8 Bridewell Precinct 8 Bartholomew the Great 10 Bartholomew the
Less 4 Limestreete 11 Langborne 34 Portsoken 60 Queenehithe 40 Towerstreete 40
Vintrey 34 Walbrooke 20

2. That the Alderman, Deputy, and Common-Councell-men of every Ward, or the
mayor part of them, shall appoint a certain place within the Ward where the
Inhabitants that are so appointed to watch shall first meet, and shall also
appoint to what places they shall afterward go unto, to watch in the said
Ward, and that the Beadles, the day preceding every watch, shall give to all
the Constables of each Precinct in the Ward, a list of the names of every
Inhabitant that is to watch each night in the several divisions of the said
Ward, that every Constable may know what persons he is to warn to watch every
several night, and that the Constable do the day before his watch night warn
them accordingly. And this Court does declare, that every Watchman of any of
the Wards aforesaid, is to do his service in watching throughout the whole
ward without limitation or confinement to any particular place or Precinct of
that Ward. And the Inhabitants of every Ward are from henceforth to take notice
hereof, and are Ordered and requested to do accordingly, notwithstanding any
pretense of privilege to the contrary.

3. That the Watches shall be set, and continued for the times by the Law
appointed.

4. That two, or more, honest able men shall be nominated in every Ward, by the
Alderman, Deputy, and Common Council men or the mayor part of them for the
time being, to take care, and oversee that the Watches appointed in every Ward,
be from henceforth duly kept, and that the Constables, Beadle, and Watchmen,
perform their duties, and therefore for that purpose a list shall be delivered
unto the said Supervisors in writing under the hands of the Alderman, Deputy,
and Common-Councell-men of the names and Sirnames of the men so appointed to
watch; and of the several places where they are assigned unto, to watch every
night: Which said Supervisor shall take notice of the said Inhabitants that
absent themselves at any time from watching. And likewise of such Constables,
and Beadle as shall at any time be remiss or negligent in performance of their
duties; and from time to time shall present the names of such defaulters to the
Lord Mayor for the time being, or to some other of his Majesty's Justices of
the Peace, that punishment may be inflicted upon the said defaulters, according
to law: And that the said Supervisors respectively (if occasion shall be) shall
prosecute, and give in evidence against every such Delinquent where occasion
shall require.

5. That the Beadle shall in the presence of the Constable and one of the
Supervisors so to be appointed, call over the names of those whose course shall
be to watch each night respectively, as well at the hours appointed for their
meeting in the evening, as also at the time appointed for the breaking up of
the Watch in the morning. And that they the Beadle and Constables, or one of
them in case the Supervisors be absent, at any of the said times shall take a
note in writing of the names of such of the Inhabitants then appointed to
watch, as shall be absent from their Watch at the hours appointed evening or
morning, or any part of the night, and shall deliver the laid note the next day
to the Supervisor, or Supervisors, that they may prosecute against them as
before is directed.

Printed by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON. 16. April
1645.


