James Acontius a Reverend Divine
Engraving of portrait

SATAN'S STRATAGEMS, OR THE DEVILS Cabinet-Councel DISCOVERED.

Whereby he endevors to hinder the Knowledge of the Truth, through many
Delusions.

Wherein is laid open an easy way to end Controversies in Matters of
Conscience, by setting down the right order of Disputation in Points of
Religion, that so Truth may be known from Error.

Worthy to be perused by all Christians of different Judgments, in this
juncture of time.

Together with Arguments to each Book, for the ease of the Reader.

By Jacobus Acontius, a Learned and Godly Divine banished for the Gospel.

As also the Testimonies of some Ancient Divines, Together with an Epistle
written by Mr John Goodwin. And Mr. Durte Letter touching the same.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock, and are to be sold by G. Calvert, 1648.

To the Right Honorable The Lords and Commons of England, in the High Court of
Parliament assembled.
THis Discourse (Lords and Commons of England) deserves, and desires your
perusal and Patronage: It deserves the former, forasmuch as the welbeing of the
Common wealth, is therein much concerned; it desires the latter, as being like
to meet with such measure as he met with, who found cause to say to the
reverend and learnned sons of Abraham, that sat in Moses Chair; Ye seek to
kill me, a man that has told you the truth, which I have heard of God. If it
seem in some places knotty; be pleased to remember, the Author was an Italian,
to which Nation, subtilty in reasoning, seems natural, and let the goodness of
the Kernel, excuse the hardness of the Shell. If any particular persons, or any
sort of men now upon the Stage, shall seem to be pointed at herein, be pleased
to take notice, that it is now eighty four years since this Treatise was
penned. It has been twice or thrice Printed beyond the Seas in the Original
Latin, and once in this Kingdom. This is the first time it has endeavored to
speak English. If this essay shall find acceptance, the Translator intends to
go in hand with the remaining Books, God affording life and opportunity. In the
mean time and ever, his humble and hearty suit, to the mighty Councellor and
Prince of Peace, shall be; that he will be pleased by his Spirit, to be present
at all your Consultations, and to grant, That forasmuch as you have hitherto
prudently steered the Ship of the Commonwealth through tempestuous Seas, and
magnanimously defended the same against the Assaults of many cunning, strong
and furious Pirates; You may not come to let her split upon the shore, but that
she may be by you safely landed in the fair Haven of Righteousness and Peace.

Your Honors humble servant, in reference to the Public, The Translator.

To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Capt. General, And the Right Honorable
Oliver Cromwell, Leiut. General of all the Forces in ENGLAND, raised by
Authority of Parliament, for defense of the Commonwealth.
Far renowned Commanders,
COnsidering the Honorable use which divine Providence has made of your High
Valor and Prudencies, in perserving the Liberties of this Nation; and how much
it concerns the Commonwealth, that Personages of such eminency be rightly
informed in Matters wherein the Common good is so highly interessed; The
Translator of this Discourse thought it his duty, in reference to his end in
this Work (which was only common profit, and which he thought he might better
advance by translating an Excellent, then making a bad or mean Book) to present
the same to your serious perusal; and withal, to testify his thankfulness for
some favors formerly received upon occasion of a particular address. This is
all he has to say, save, that he is

Your Excellencies and your Honors most humble servant, in reference to his
Countries good, The Translator.

To the Rt. Honorable John Warner, Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON.
Right Honorable.
THe benefit which the City of London, and consequently the Nation has reaped,
and is like yet farther to enjoy, by your Lordships prudent and wel-tempered
Government, has encouraged the Translator of this profitable Discourse, to
commend the same unto your Honors perusal, whereby your Lordship may be
confirmed in that same Christian Moderation which is so commended in you, and
be directed how to steer your course, in respect of different opinions in point
of Religion; so as may be most for the general good of the City, committed to
your care, for your Lordships honor, with peace of conscience here, and the
facilitating of your account at the day of Christ; which is the prayer of

Your Honors most humble servant in reference to the public good. The
Translator.

TO THE READER.
Good Reader,
AMongst the many strains of that unreasonableness in men, which renders the
days we live in, so calamitous and sad, there is scarce any more deplorable or
comporting with our misery, then for men to have their mouths wide open in
declaiming against what they are pleased to call Errors and Heresies, and their
ears fast shut against all Christian means and directions, either for the
discovery and eviction of them to be such, or for the suppression of them,
being so evicted. There is no question to be made, but that there are many vile
imaginations of men, which exalt themselves against the knowledge of God,
walking up and down amongst us, which their fathers and friends have baptized
by the names of New Lights: On the other hand, as little question there is, but
that there are many ancient Truths, also pleading restitution after a long and
injurious ejectment, unto their native Honors; which because they plead in form
a pauperis, and paucorum, are not only denied Christian audience to their
Pleas, but reproached also with the opprobrious terms, of old accursed Errors
and Heresies. Now when men make no scruple or Conscience to bind up God and
Belial, Christ and the Devil together in one and the same bundle of
condemnation, because they are both alike troublesome and offensive unto them,
do they not provoke both the powers of Heaven, and the powers of Hell, at once
against them? Or are such men like to prosper in their days? In vain do they
blow a Trumpet to prepare the Magistrate to battle against Errors and Heresies,
whilst they leave the judgments and Consciences of men armed with confidence
of Truth in them. If men would call more for light, and less for fire from
Heaven, their warfare against such enemies would be much sooner accomplished.
For he that denied the one, has promised the other, ( Prove. 2.3, 4, 5. Jam.
1.5.) And amongst all Weapons, there is none like unto light to fight against
darkness. But whilst men arm themselves against Satan, with the material
sword, they do but insure his victory and triumph.

They that desire to serve as good soldiers of Jesus Christ, against Errors
and Heresies, must first conscienciously study the Christian Art, and Method of
this Warfare; otherwise, they may easily build up what they go about to pull
down, and make Balaams expedition (yet upon worse terms) who was sent to curse,
and yet in conclusion, blessed altogether, Numb. 24.10. It is hard to say,
whether that hand which desires to be lifted up against Error and Heresy, with
success, had more need of softness or strength. Few men's Errors find access to
their judgments, but by the way of their affections, He that will the Judgment
win,
With the Affections must begin.
Nor will it be easy for men to come at them to dethrone them, but by making
their approaches the same way; I mean, by making friends of their affections,
that they may not side with their Judgments against them.

I have not met with any Author comparable to this now in thine hand, for a
Christian genius and dexterity, in teaching that desirable and happy Art, as
well of composing differences in matters of Judgment, as far as a composure in
this kind may with the honor of Truth be admitted; as of opposing that which
is not meet to be admitted to composition. He intituleth his Book Stratagemata
Sathanae, Satan's Stratagems: He might as properly with respect to the matter of
it, have styled it Stratagemata Christi, the Stratagems of Christ, inasmuch as
the wisdom which is revealed from Heaven, for the countermining of Satan in his
attempts upon the precious souls of men by errors and heresies, is here drawn
out in such happy directions and instructions for that purpose, that had they
their weight and worth in practice and due obedience, the Kingdom of Error and
Heresy would soon be shaken.

If any man listed in this warfare, being of Iehu's complexion, cannot endure
to march against his Enemy with a sober pace, and had rather be tossing
Firebals of Granado's, then weilding the Sword of the Spirit; this Author is
like to find small thanks from such a person; ten to one but he will Ier. 8.18
smite him with the tongue. To such an one I would make no other Answer, but
that of the man that had been healed of blindness, to the Pharisees concerning
our Lord; Whether he be a sinner or no, I know not: one thing I know, that
whereas I was blind now I see. Whereas I was ignorant in many things which it
concerned me to know, about opposing Errors and Heresies, I now understand them.

Reader, though I am none of those that are facile Prove. 6.22 26.
to strike hands, or become surety for debt, yet thus far I dare engage for the
Treatise in thy hand, that if thou will diligently peruse it, it shall
recompense thee with a better thing then Repentance for thy pains. The Father
of lights and God of Truth according to the unsearchable riches of his Grace in
Christ, break up at last all the fountains of the great deep of Truth and open
the windows of Heaven, that knowledge may fill the Earth as waters cover the Sea;
keep thee and me from the danger and defilement of Error and Heresy; and
vouchsafe us the honor of being instruments in his hand, for the preservation
of others also from the same misery.

Thine, to serve thee in the Faith and Love of Jesus Christ. J. GOODWIN.
From my Study Colemanstreet, LONDON, Feb. 9. 1647.
The Testimonies of the famously learned Petrus Ramus, a French Protestant
Martyr, slain in the Massacre of Paris for the witness of Jesus; and of Mr
Comm^nius (a learned and godly German Writer, now livi^g and of great fame for
his labors in the Reformation of Learning) concern^ng the Worth of our AUTHOR.
THe name of Jacobus Acontius has now of a long time been fameously known to
the world by the excellent Monuments of his Wit.

I took great content to hear tell of the Humanity and Grace, together with the
various and profound Arts of Jacobus Acontius. P. Ramus in an Epistle to our
Author being in England, which is extant in a Collection of Epistles and
Orations of P. Ramus and And. Talaeus in 8o.

Scripturientis nostri aevi cacoethe offensus Jacobus Acontius, Vir
excellentissimus provideri posse optabat, etc. that is, Jacobus Acontius, a
most excellent man, offended at the scribbling sickness of our Age, wished that
order might be taken, etc. Johan. And Commenius in the Preface to his Idea or
Epitomie of Not. Philosophy, at the beginning.

The Testimony of certain most eminent French Divines concerning this Treatise.
WIth the reading of Acontius his Book of the Stratage^s of Satan, I was not
only my self exceedingly refreshed, but having commended the same to the
reading of some of our Divines of greatest Reputation and Learning, they
exceedingly approved both the modesty of the language and the Prudence of the
Discourse it self. I am possessed with an earnest longing to know and peruse
all Acontius his writings: Pet. Ramus in Epistola ante citata.

A Letter of the learned and judicious Mr DURY (one of the Assembly of
Ministers) to Mr SAMUEL HARTLIB touching the Author.
Dear Friend,
I Am heartily glad that some body has taken the pains to translate into
English Acontii Stratagemata in these times of strife and confusion: The Author
was an excellent man, and thoroughly knowing in many Sciences; his excellency
did lie in the depth and solidity of his Judgment in every thing; and in the
Piety and Moderation of his spirit in Matters of Religion. At the breaking
forth of the Gospel, when he did live, many that were convicted of the errors
of the Church of Rome, were staggered at the Truth, and the profession thereof
by the Reformed Churches, because of the manifold disputes and the disorders
found amongst them, and ever since continued by the subtilty of Satan, who not
being able to hinder the breaking in of more light, does endevor to make it
either ineffectual or hurtful to the salvation of men's souls. As it was then,
so it is now, at every Period of our Reformation; he does make every Truth a
Matter of Strife; and what he cannot suppress by the power of ignorance, he
endevors to pervert by the evil use that men make of knowledge, to disappoint
them of the end for which God has given it. This wise man in his time did
discover Satan's aim, and warned his Generation faithfully, and chiefly the
Watchmen, of the grand adversaries design against them: But how much this
Admonition is laid to heart, does appear by the Distempers of all places,
whereof both the Causes and Remedies are here discovered and offered to the
Churches, but minded almost by none. However some there are, at all times, and
will be, who will be affected herewith; and God is able by their means to
qualify the spirits of others, and to cast Satan under the feet of his Elect
and Faithful servants, in his own time. Therefore it is very useful that such
Testimonies as these should be extant; and now to us, they are very seasonable,
although perhaps in haste we shall see no great fruit thereof. But our comfort
is, that although the Kingdom of Heaven is as a grain of mustard seed, yet it
grows at last to be a mighty great tree, so that the fowls of heaven lodge in
the branches thereof. Therefore we must not be we^ry in well doing; for we are
sure that in sowing this seed we shall not lose our labor; because the promise
is, Gal. 6.9.
that in due time we shall reap, if we faint not. To be carried along with the
stream, or to be silent when matters are not carried according to our mind, is
no hard matter to any that has any measure of discretion; but to row against
the stream, to labor against wind and tide, and the whole current of an age,
and that without offense unto any, and that strongly and irresistibly (as in
his Age Acontius did) is not the work of an ordinary Courage; therefore such as
own him in his way are the more to be commended. I shall therefore entreat you
to remember my love and service to your friend who has taken this profitable
pains to translate this excellent piece of Learning, and thank him from me for
it. I make no doubt but it will be convincing sufficiently to such as are free
from hardness of Heart in the ways of factiousness; and are not blinded with
carnal ends, in the prosecution of Religious Controversies.

The Grace of God be with you, and bless your Friends Endevors. I rest,

Your Faithful Servant in CHRIST, John Dury.
From S. James's Feb. 9. 1648.
The Authors Preface.
IF any man shall happily wonder at the rashness or fool-hardiness of him, who
has hoped to accomplish so endless a work, as to collect and commit to writing
the Sratagems of Satan, which is all one, as if he would undertake to draw the
Ocean dry. I would have that man consider with himself a little, whether or no,
by how much the Arts of this cunning old cheater, are more numerous, various
and mysterious; we ought not to take the greater heed to save our selves from
him? This I suppose he will confess: But how shall we take heed, if those Arts
of Satan be unknown? Might we not justly fear, that there might be most danger,
where we least suspected any? That where we did think to escape, there we
should fall into some hidden snare? Which is too often seen in many persons,
and they none of the simpler sort, but even the most eminent in the Church of
God. Since then it lies us in hand to look to our selves, which we cannot do
without this knowledge, we are necessitated to try, if by any means we may
attain the same; and to beg of God (to whom every thing is easy) to be our
assistant herein. Whose help having frequently implored, we hope we have not
lost our labor, but that all good men shall bless God with us, for putting
this thought into our mind, and graciously prospering our endeavors. One thing
there is, which of a long time, has much afflicted my Spirit: for every man is
sensible, how much the welfare of the Churches depends upon those that are of
eminent authority, so that if they stand, all things cannot but go well; if
they fall, every man almost will be overwhelmed in their ruin: Whence it is,
that Satan aims chiefly, and almost solely at them, leaving nothing
unattempted which may defile, mar and corrupt them. And in case he do not
always loose his labor, but sometimes gains the victory over them; those
Stratag^ms, whereby he does it, cannot be laid open, but the failings of the
vanquished must likewise be discovered, which discovery, how hateful a thing
it is any man may easily conceive: For as any reprehension is ever displeasing
to the nature of man: so is it then especially distasteful, when it is unusual
and beside expectation. Now what is there can be done more unwonted and less
expected, then for a man to reprehend those whom all good men do admire and
very much reverence; to whom it seems to appertain to prescribe Laws to others,
rather then to have Laws set to them: to teach all men rather then to learn of
any one? Yea, but (you will say) such men will be so far from taking any offense,
that if you shall show them any failings, out of their humanity and prudence
they will give you many thanks; indeed that is my hope. Yet is it a matter of
greater moment then men are lightly aware of, to incur the il-wil of persons of
such authority and reputation. Howbeit, I am much more troubled to consider the
over eager inclinations of some men, who account such as they have once begun
to admire, to be no longer men but gods, against whom, if a man speak but a
word, he is looked upon as if he blasphemed God himself. What should I do in
this case? Should I, to avoid ill will, forbear to discover such snares, as
Satan sets to catch men in, not only to their own, but the whole Church of
God's ruin? What were this less in me, then to hold confederacy with Satan,
and to conspire their destruction? I have showed all the favor I could, which
was, to use as much gentleness as I could possible: I have spared men's names,
and mentioned only the things themselves, wherein I perceived the snares of
Satan to lie hid. Now, if so be any man shall interpret himself injured, by the
reprehension of such things wherein he may be some ways concerned, let him but
think with himself how justly and honestly he shall make any such
interpretation: Verily, he may with as much reason, justify the complaints of
Drunkards, Adulterers, Homicides, and all other flagitious persons, against
those whose duty it is to inveigh against the bad manners and wickednesses of
men; then which what could be more absurd? But (thou may say) what if those
things thou speak against, deserved not such a reproof? Surely, if any such
thing be, when I shall know as much, I shall be very sorry for my oversight. For
I am no such man as to think that I cannot err. Sure I am, it has been none of
mine intent, either openly or closely, to provoke or offend any man. I take him
to witness that knows all things: so that who ever he be, that has any the
least drop of Christian clemency, ought easily be moved to pardon me in such a
case. Howbeit, just it is, that he that shall be touched by the things we
handle, do not make himself judge, but refer the matter to the judgment of such,
who are herein, in respect of their own particular, nothing concerned. And far
better it is for us, amongst our selves, to note the slips one of another, and
lovingly to labor for an amendment, then to wait til our Enemies shall thereby
take occasion to rail against us and our profession with a venomous tongue. Yet
will the Papists, into whose hands this discourse shall come, laugh to see our
wounds laid open. But, it is better they should laugh at our wounds, whiles in
the mean time they are curable, then that we should suffer them, for want of
medicines, to exulcerate and become incurable, and so make them laugh at our
destruction. I would only say thus much to them, that when they have
sufficiently lamented their own maladies, I will give them free leave to
recreate themselves with laughing at ours. Let them turn over the ancient
histories, and see if the Church of God were ever in so good an estate, but
that there were therein many things which might deserve the grief of every good
man; and finding the condition of the Church to have been always such, what
cause is there for them to wonder, if we are not in every part sound. But let
them laugh that list. Our endeavor should be, by removing all just cause of
reprehension, not so much to suppress their laughter, as by all excellency of
examples, to invite them, together with us, to come unto Christ. And that thou
may not fear any sharpness of language in this Discourse, know, that we
endeavor no other thing so much, in all this work of ours, as to reduce all
those which handle any points in the Church, whether by word or writing, to the
greatest mildeness and gentleness that may be. How unseemly therefore, and how
unjust a thing would it have been, if I had refused to be subject to that Law
which I had set to others? How justly might that proverb be laid in my dish,
Physician heal thy self? But to come to the pain: In this Treatise (Reader) we
present thee with those Stratagems whereby Satan lies in wait to overthrow the
Kingdom of Christ, and in such sort, to root it up, as it were, out of the
world, that it might never be again repaired; and to set up a Kingdom of his
own and to maintain the same, if not all of them (for that were an impossible
thing) yet I am persuaded the most principal. And, that thou may wonder (shall
I say, or rejoice) the more thou shall find them marshalled in such order and
method; that thou shall find them to make a certain kind of Art. We have added
cautions for the avoiding of them, and they are such as (if I am not mistaken)
whosoever shall not slight them, may have good ground to hope, that though Satan
plot never so much, yet he shall but lose his labor. In some cases peradventure,
when the caution seemed manifest enough of it self by the rule of contraries,
we have forborne to put our selves to unnecessary labor. Some things indeed
there are which for want of examples may seem somewhat obscure: which exam les
were therefore omitted, because, such as we found ready to our hand, could not
(as we conceived) be alleged without the offense of some men. Which thing
(lest our labor might be fruitless to them ward) we were carefully to shun; in
some cases we could not conveniently feign examples; in others, though we might
have done it, yet we feared, lest they might occasion new contentions; which I
wish we have not too much occasioned, notwithstanding all our care to the
contrary. But if thou shall read the Discourse frequently and attentively,
there will be nothing, which thou shall not at length understand, even without
examples. Some will wish that this Argument had been handled more largely, and
that not without just cause; to such, all that I shall answer is this, that I
have done what the time would permit me; if I would have deferred the
impression, the work might have appeared to the world, at least more polished
and exact; but forasmuch as I conceived that it greatly concerned the common
good of all Christians, that these Stratagems should see the light with all
possible speed, I was wiling rather to set at naught mine own reputation, then
to defer the Edition the least moment. If the Lord shall afford me any leisure,
I shall endeavor that they may hereafter come forth more complete and better
adorned: In the mean time (gentle Reader) take in good part this abortive
birth, and join thy godly prayers to mine, that the Lord would be pleased to
furnish me with somewhat beter and more profitable, then what, for the present,
I am able to present.

Satan's Stratagems: The first Book.
The Argument.
THe end Satan aims at in all his Stratagems. The Nature of Man since the
fall, how fit for Satan to work upon. The ways and means Satan uses to attain
his end. How true opinions concerning religion come to be changed into false.
Deceitful and invalid Arguments, Passions and Affections of the mind, A good
opinion of those that are erroneous, An evil opinion of those that hold the
truth, lying signs and wonders what force they have to change men's Judgments
from truth to Error. Satan's devices to make disputes and debates, intended for
the clearing of truth, to serve his own ends in the advancement of Error. Many
prime persons, Pillars of the Church, whiles they Zealously as they think
maintain the cause of Christ, do drive on and advance Satan's designs. A
passionate indiscreet opposition, a great encreaser of Sects. No unnecessary
Controversy ought to be raised. An opinion ought not to be condemned for
appearing new, but must be examined by the word. A very hard thing to embrace
Truth when it has the appearance of an Error. To reject what ever savours of
Novelty, will cause, that remaining errors shall never be purged out of the
Church. How erroneous persons are to be prepared to receive a sight of their
errors. What caution is to be used that we oppose not truth under the name of
error. What ought to be accounted knowledge, what opinion. What Man is most like
to find the Truth. Most men suppose they are led by the word and spirit to
think as they do in matters of Religion, whiles their Judgments are biased by
Antiquity, estimation of men's learning, Multitudes of those that judge so or so
etc. He that would have his Judgment swayed by Gods spirit, must pray earnestly
for the spirit, and cast out of his consideration whatsoever is not of God nor
his word, as if there were no such thing in the world. He that has attained to
a clear and perfect knowledge, cannot suspect himself of error in that point.
Before a man oppose a tenet as erroneous and impious, he ought seriously to
consider, what assurance he has of the error and impiety of the said point. A
man may pray long for the knowledge of the Truth before the wisdom of God may
think fit to discover the same unto him. God is free to discover the truth to a
man when and by whom he pleases, yea by him whom he opposes as a seducer. In
controversies of religion Satan can play the part both of opponent and
defendant in respect of one and the same tenet. We must first hear and examine
a point before we condemn it, and never say it is an old Error and has bin often
confuted, for it may have bin an old truth ill defended. Controversies soon
raised, hardly laid. Before we oppose an error we must consider of what moment
it is. Vain questions and tenets not to be confuted, but avoided. Satan labors
to persuade a man, that every opinion he takes up, is a most serious and
weighty point, without the knowledge whereof there can be no salvation. Rules to
distinguish curious unprofitable questions that are to be avoided, from sober,
serious, and profitable ones that ought to be handled. The End of all Christian
Doctrine. What ever is profitable to that end is useful to be known. An
enumeration of useful Doctrines. A Doctrine that reaches no further then
speculation, is vain. Every Doctrine that any ways makes for the attainment of
the aforesaid end, is not of such moment, as that a controversy should be
raised therabout, forasmuch as some other Doctrines unquestioned may perform
the same service. Passion in the Persons dissenting makes a point in
controversy seem far weightier then in truth it is, which may be seen in the
eager bickering of the Ancient Christians about Easter day and other matters of
small moment. The right way to bring men from vain and unprofitable questions.
What Ministers, Professors in Universities, Writers of books ought to do to
that end. To stand long upon and to affect to make many Sermons upon one text,
a great occasion of starting curious and unprofitable questions. Large
Commentaries guilty in the like kind.

LIB. I.
THe best way to find out the devils Stratagems, is to ta^e into serious
consideration, what the end is at which all his consultations aim, which is
not Very hard to tell. For, seeing that he is defined in Scripture A MANSLAYER
from the very BEGINNING, what can we think he should rather aim at then the
DEATH of MAN and that ETERNAL. Being therefore as the oldest so the craftiest
fox in the world, we may assure our selves that nothing can escape his
endeavors which may prove pernicious to mankind to be put upon; and as certain
it is that he endeavors to divert them from, whatsoever may prove conducible
to their Salvation. Now the Salvation of Man consists in obeying God, as his
death and misery in disobedience. Would thou obtain life (said our Lord) keep
the Commandments (by Commandments or Law in this place we understand,
whatsoever we are commanded not only to do or not to do, but to believe) whence
it follows that the MAN-KILLERS grand design is to keep us from obeying the
commands of God. Now the Commands of God may be violated as soon by those that
know them not as by those that know them, for though he be much the greater
delinquent who disobeys that command of God known, then he that through
ignorance transgresses; yet shall not ignorance make any one guiltless, for it
is almost impossible that any one should be ignorant without his own fault.
Howsoever, certain it is, the ignorance of Gods Law and the violation thereof
are so nearly allied, that the one is mutually the others cause. By not knowing
the mind of God, thou do that which moves his anger often times when thou
think highly to please him, for which cause amongst the rest, thou art
deprived of all light of sound judgment, and daily overwhelmed with more gross
and palpable darkness. If thou know his law and do not obey it, it will by
the just judgment of God come to pass, that thou shall fall from the knowledge
thereof and slip into some great errors.

This then being the end of all Satan's Counsels, forasmuch as it is MANKIND
he labors to undo, that we way more easily understand his deceits, let us
diligently consider the nature of MAN. Though MAN at the first was created of a
good, right and every ways perfect Nature and disposition, yet breaking the
command of God, he became of another NATURE quite contrary, exceedingly corrupt
and liable to all manner of vice. Hence it is, that (1) he loves himself
immeasurably, but with a kind of blind and intemperate affection, wherewith
being led, he loathes his true good, and seeks his own hurt and damage. (2) As
our first Parents credited the Serpent when he said, as soon as ye shall taste
the fruit ye shall be as it were Gods knowing good and evil; so has there ever
since stuck such a persuasion in Mankind, that every man takes himself to be a
kind of Diety. which disposition upon the least occasion, presently discovers
it self. For as soon as he is a little advanced in dignity, or has but scraped
together some considerable heap of Earth, he judges every body bound to give
him all the respect that may be, yea to seek his commodity with their own loss.
If he get a little Learning, presently he imagins he knows all things, and he
alone; so that the whole world ought to be governed by his wisdom, leaving
nothing undone which may beget such an opinion of him, not knowing or little
caring how unjust he is in so doing. (3) He is wonderfully addicted to bodily
pleasures and exceeding intemperate in the use of such things as are thereunto
conducing. (4) He loves this life and thereabout spends all his thoughts, not
so much as thinking of the life to come. He dreams this life will last for ever,
and though he see daily millions of men fall before his eyes, he cannot be
brought seriously to be persuaded, that himself came into the world upon like
terms of mortality. (5) And since he sees that riches will furnish him with what
ever he desires, and while they do so they must needs wast, and that an
infinite quantity is requisite toward the expense of an endless life, hence it
is that he has an insatiable desire to gather wealth. Some such conceit it was
together with a strange weakness of mind, that made the Sovereignty of the
whole world seem too too little for Alexander the great. (6) In reference to
the knowledge of God and his will, of his own proper good and evil which
consists wholly in the favor or offense of God, he is altogether blind,
thinking himself in the mean time as quick-sighted as an Eagle. To give assent
unto truths of this nature, and to reject the contrary errors is as repugnant
to his disposition, as it is for heavy things to fall Heavenward. Not that he
hates truth as truth, or is delighted with lies as lies, but because of the
corruption of his Judgment in things of this nature taking truth for falsehood,
and falsehood for truth it self. (7) And look how he himself is disposed, though
he perceive it not, so he imagins the blessed God to be, worshipping him
accordingly with Gold, Silver, Precious stones and Jewels; with great, costly
and magnificent buildings; yea and sometimes with such things, as should one
man honor another with, it would be interpreted a great reproach and mockery.
He will needs have him to be a visible God, and therefore paints him and shapes
him out according to his own fancy. He cannot in good earnest persuade himself
that God knows, cares for, or moderates the affairs of mankind, that he will
give rewards or inflict punishments: whence it is, that neither by pious
affection to God, nor through fear or punishment, can he be drawn to forbear
such practices, as are declared offensive to him. (8) Each man's sight fails
him when he should see these faults in himself, but he needs no spectacles to
spy them in another. Other men's doings he is apt to misconstrue, being
exceeding suspicious; yet if a man once begin to think highly of, and attribute
much to another man (especially in matters of religion) therein he will
over-shoot all bounds of reason, and make that man a kind of a God. Other ways
he wishes well to none but himself, and would have no body else excel in glory.
Whereupon if any profit or praise accrue to another, he becomes envious and
hinders what he can the increase thereof. He diminishes the praises and
augments the failings of another, using calumniation. (9) If in any matter he
be never so little opposed he is exceeding prone to wrath and hatred, neither
can he easily remit his stomach, but rather whets himself more and more to
blood, slaughter and all kinds of cruel revenge. Thus is man of his own nature
above measure arrogant, high-conceited, intemperate, coveteous, unsatiable,
desirous of what is another man's, a supplanter, liar, contentious, envious,
revengeful, murderous, blind, rash, obstinate, ungodly, and born to all
mischief. In a word, the nature of man; such as now it is, is not much unlike
the Nature of the unclean Spirits. True it is, notwithstanding, that such vices
as we have or might have named, do not all alike appear in all men, but some
show themselves more in some men then in others, and some are not at all seen
in some men, by reason they want means or opportunity to practice them.
Constitution of body, education, custom, study, and such like are of great
moment, both to render a man prone unto, and to withdraw him from vices, yet is
there not any man in whom the seeds of all vices are not found. Howbeit there
are yet remaining in man some footsteps and prints of his first nature, as a
kind of obscure knowledge of what is just and unjust, honest and dishonest, that
good deeds deserve praise, and ill deeds punishment. He seems to have a natural
desire of knowledge and understanding. He has in him a certain kind of ability,
from things, perceived by the sense to arrive to the knowledge of insensible
things and so to raise himself to a certain kind of knowledge of the divine
Nature it self. He has some suspicion that there shall be a life after this,
which shall ever last, attended with happiness to the good, with misery and
torments to the wicked. This is manifest by the Poets fables, whose discourses
being accommodated to the opinions of the People, make frequent mention of such
things. With this slight opinion of another life goes hand in hand some little
desire of Salvation, wherewith provoked he enquires after the means of
worshipping and procuring the favor of God. But the truth is, these remainders
of man's pristine goodness, are kept under by so great and manifold oppositions
of depraved nature, that in most men they wholly vanish and come to naught, and
though in some they strongly resist the corruption of nature, as may be seen in
Socrates, Seneca and others, yet in their strength never so great, as without
the assistance of God to be of any moment to procure Salvation. Rather by the
event it appears, Man is thereby led into greater darkness. Now this is that
which vexes Satan, that God of his infinite goodness bearing an extraordinary
affection to mankind, chooses himself out of Mankind servants, ever and anon, on
whom he bestows the knowledge of his Law, and whom he sends to instruct the
Nations of the world.

Man's Nature, then being such as we have shown, and the End of all Satan's
consultations discovered, the next thing we have to consider, is by what way he
seeks to attain unto this end. Two conditions there are, in the one of which
the people are always found, in the Light of truth, or in the Dark of errors
and Ignorance. Neither is there ever so much light, but that some mists of
ignorance remain (which we thought necessary to give warning of, least in
speaking of that lightful condition of men, and making mention of error, we
might be thought to handle things out of their place) Now when the people enjoy
the Light of Truth, Satan endeavors to overwhelm them with darkness; if they
be already in the darkness of Error, his scope is that that darkness may for
ever remain. Now a man may walk in the darkness of ignorance, either exercising
no Religion, or a corrupt and false one. Again, a man may be without Religion,
either having never heard of such a thing as we call Religion, and never having
once thought of such a thing; or understanding the notion, but denying that
there is any such matter, as do those monsters of men, who either deny that
there is a God, or that he cares for the affairs of Mankind, Yet that there
should be any Nation so brutish, as not to think of God, seems incredible; but
that there is never wanting a parcel of desperate fellows, that persuade
themselves it is a vain and silly thing to think of God, is more manifest then
to need any proof, these are the Devils drudges he makes use of for the
accomplishment of any, the most abominable wickednesses.

After that the true Religion has been extant in a Nation, to the end that
Nation fall therefrom into Errors, it is necessary their judgments alter. Now
this change is either observed by the people, or not observed. If they observe
it, there must needs be some cause, why they should leave that Doctrine they
had approved, to embrace some other false and impious. Now the causes that true
opinions in matter of Religion are changed for false, are false arguments,
passions and affections of mind, such as are desire, wrath, hatred; a good
opinion of such as err, a bad opinion of such as teach the truth, and lying
signs or wonders. False arguments we account such, from which untruth is any
way inferred, which may come to pass diverse ways. For either all that is
alleged is false, as in this inference: the Mass ought to be retained, because
the Church of Rome has used it ever since the times of the Apostles, and what
ever has bin of ancient use in the Church of Rome, ought to be retained: or
that which is alleged is in part true, and partly false: as in this inference,
because the Apostles ordinances are to be practiced [which is true] and
confession of a man's sins in the ears of a Priest is an ordinance of the
Apostles institution [which is false] therefore this custom of confessing sins
in the Priests ear, ought to be retained. Again, all that is brought for proof
may be true, and yet nothing to the purpose; as if a man should say, we are
bound to observe difference of meats according to the prescriptions of the
Church of Rome, because fishes, herbs, Roots, and the like do nourish less then
flesh and eggs. Or lastly, the arguments may be such, as may seem to prove
much, when indeed they prove just nothing, such as the Arguments of Sophisters
use to be. As if a man should thus reason, No Christian man ought to marry a
Christian woman, because every Christian woman is his sister, and for a man to
marry his sister, is utterly unlawful. Now the motions of men's minds, which
give occasion to change true opinions into false are diverse; whereof some are
referred to the teachers of truth, some to the teachers of error, and the rest
to the Doctrine it self, whether true or false. The doctrine of truth is apt to
be hated, because it accuses a man, forbids him such things as he is delighted
with, and commands such things as he must do against his will. Now that doctrine
which a man hates he will easily forsake. Contrarily, men are apt to love false
doctrine, because it gives reyns to their sinful pleasures. It begets an ill
opinion of the professors of the truth, when they appear to give little credit
to what themselves teach, which comes to pass, when their life opposes their
Doctrine, and they seem to be acted rather by their own commodity and false
interests, then any love to Religion it self. Likewise the teachers of truth
loose their credit, when God seems not to like of their doctrine by loading
them with calamities and afflictions, but this is only with such as estimate
things rather by their own natural judgment, then the rule of Gods Word. The
Contrary to these, beget a good opinion of erroneous teachers. As for false
signs they are such as are either reported falsely, or being the contrivances
and jugglings of men or devils, are thought to be wrought by God himself.

Furthermore such considerations as make men alter their opinions, must either
come into men's minds of their own accord, or there must be some few seducers
which propound them to the rest, as it usually falls out; otherwise impossible
it is any notable change should happen. Now seducers do either teach openly
against the doctrine received, or privately; with, or without any opposition.
But that any should be able publicly to contradict the doctrine received,
without any resistance, it is requisite that there be no difference of wits
among the people, which is impossible. And if so be that those which oppose
such a teacher prove more potent then the favorers, they will be an hinderance
to the seducer. Neither is it to be doubted, but that, when as the true worship
of God is amongst a People, if any one shall spread false tenets, there will be
more opposers then favorers; unless happily the whole multitude be very
ill-affected, and the seducer use much cunning to that effect, as if he shall
first gain a great opinion of his own wisdom or holiness, or shall abuse the
Authority of such as are so accounted of, which was the practice of those of
old, who brought unto the Churches letters pretended to be sent by the
Apostles, or thrust upon them other writings with lying titles, and by such
impostures seduced the simple. Of this sort was the Gospel of Nicodemus, the
Travels of S. Peter and the like. Nor were whole books alone fathered upon
those that had no hand in them, but many were occasioned to complain, that
their own proper writings were depraved. So among the writings of Augustine,
and many famous men besides, many bastard tracts are foisted in, and many
places of their own works are corrupted. Yea such was the impudence of some,
that even whilst the Authors were living, they inserted into their works, such
tenants as themselves would have to be believed, which was Origens Lot, as
himself complains. Otherwise, it appears not how errors can be spread abroad at
first, save among a few, and that privately. And though some seducer may
privily turn away a few from the Doctrine received, yet can he not so do by
many without being discovered; whence it comes to pass that a sensible mutation
cannot be made without Controversies. Now they that oppose a seducer, do it
either by Reason or by Authority; by Reason, when a man by word of mouth or
writing, maintains the doctrine received, and resists the new, using to that
end either arguments or testimonies; by Authority, when those that are the
overseers of the Churches, or the Churches themselves, do by common vote
condemn that same new doctrine as impious and repugnant to the word of God, and
when the Magistrate shall under penalty forbid the same to be taught or
maintained.

Now look as if seducers be in a right way resisted, all the Councels of Satan
are frustrate; so most like it is that hereabout Satan imploies all his
crafts, and makes use of his utmost subtilty, to cause, that whatsoever shall be
done by way of opposition, shall not only not hinder his designs, but help
forward and promote them exceedingly. Wherefore it will be labor well bestowed,
to understand by what stratagems he endeavors to bring this to pass. First,
therefore in regard of Reason which uses to be opposed to seducers, by way of
disputation, either face to face, or by writing; certain it is, that such
reasoning is then of force to resist the false doctrine, when it does aptly lay
open both the weakness of those foundations upon which it is built, and the
strength of the grounds which uphold the Doctrine received: as also when those
who are dealt with, shall with a quiet mind and uncorrupted judgment diligently
weigh the same. Unless, therefore the Reasons be such as we have said, and the
speech of the Arguers shall have power to reduce the adversaries to that same
tranquillity of mind, and soundness (that I may so speak) of judgment
aforesaid; if it be such as shall rather work the contrary effects; so far shall
such reasoning prove from resisting, that it will in a wonderful manner favor
the designs of Satan. Now to weigh and measure out, what kind of reasoning is
suitable to the adversaries genius and judgment, and what not, no man is able,
unless he himself have his mind composed and serene, remembering withal, that he
is bound and that withal diligence to make such enquiry. Since therefore it is
requisite to this purpose that the opponent be calm and composed in his spirit,
we must not omit to show what things they be that use to trouble the mind of
such an one. And for the most part, he will be in a passion, if it stand with
his private interest, that there be no change made in the doctrine received,
which is true concerning all that execute the office of Teachers. For a change
of Doctrine cannot be effected, but their dignity and estimation must suffer an
eclipse, as though they had taught falsities, yea and their profit will be much
impaired. Again his love to his own doctrine will make him scarce of ability
patiently to endure a contradictor; and look how likeness of manners, studies,
opinions prevail much to beget love, so all dissimilitude is apt to procure
hatred. To all which if reproaches and accusations from the Adversary shall be
added, of necessity the minds of the opponents will be moved much more.

Neither shall thou be ever able to any purpose to weaken a false assertion,
unless thou first understand what it is; now he that does not with attention
and patience listen, that does not suspend his judgment til the defendant have
finished his discourse, cannot sufficiently understand what it is which he
affirms, but whiles at every word spoke, he will be divining at the others
meaning, and suffers his judgment to outrun his adversaries words, he shall not
confute his arguments, but those which by his own rashness and false
interpretation he has feigned to himself. And these miscarriages then fall out
when we hate our adversary, and when we contemn him especially. Now the
principal and almost only cause of contempt is when we take too much delight in
our own abilities, and arrogate unto our selves, a greater share of science or
judgment then is fit. And if there be any vice unto which a man is naturally
inclined, it is arrogance, which gathers strength and growth by diverse means.
As first, if many men have a very great opinion of any one, and few there be
that think otherwise of him, and they of very mean account. Of kin hereunto is,
when a man conceits himself to have given some great and certain proof of his
own wisdom and judgment, which thing befalls them who always or very often have
appeared conquerers in disputation, and who frequently speaking in public
before the people, seldom or never meet with any that do contradict them; for
unless such men watch themselves with a great deal of prudence, it can hardly
come to pass but that they will think themselves to be the only wise men, and
slight, and set at naught all others in comparison. That Proverb is
sufficiently known, Obsequium amicos, veritas odium pa^it, Flattery gains
friends, Truth makes foes: whence it comes to pass that those whose condition
is such, that they seem able to do a man good or hurt, to procure his commodity
or hinderance, his honor or disgrace, scarce any body will contradict such men,
rather multitudes will flatter them. Neither would I have thee think (reader)
that it is necessary that thou become the Pope of Rome, that thou may be
flattered. For in as much as now a days not very many study Religion, saving
such as have resolved to become Churchmen, more mindful of their belly for the
most part then any thing else; those men by whose vote or recommendation,
Church-imployments are obtained ( viz. the Ministers of every Parish of most
note) though otherwise they are of no great wealth, yet shall you see them no
less clawed and flattered by most men, then if they were to deal with that Idol
of Rome, gaping after the fattest Benefices. What think you they would do, if
some great revenues were joined with the power, such men have to prefer to
livings or places in the Church. Neither is it a light matter, that (as now the
case stands in many places) every man's life and reputation, lies open to the
lash of those they call Preachers; so that if a man displease them, and so come
under their censure, he shall quite lose his credit: whence it is that every man
had rather have them his friends then his Enemies, and scarce shall you find any
one that will oppose them, unless by some very urgent occasion thereunto
induced. To all which occasions, if any considerable learning be concurring,
which of it self alone, as Paul testifies, though not by its own fault (for it
is a great gift of God) but through the corruptness of man's nature, is wont to
puff a man up; without doubt Arrogance and Insolence will be very much
augmented. Whereupon, if such a man as one of these, shall be set to oppose a
seducer, unless he warily consider with himself, what operations, Authority,
Learning, Wealth (if he be rich) and reputation use to have, it will be little
less then a miracle, if he behave not himself insolently and arrogantly,
charging his adversary with what ever shall come to his tongues end, and yet
exceedingly taken with his own discourse, so that he alone must speak, often
times triumphing before he has gotten the victory, whence it may fall out that
a good cause having got a bad champion, shall lose somewhat of its reputation.
Yea and we find by experience, that when a man is certainly persuaded of a
thing, and has reason so to think, he cannot but stand as it were in
admiration, that there should be any one that cannot see what he sees,
whereupon unless as soon as he has in a word hinted his reason, his opposite
grants him his saying, as though it were manifest that he refused out of
perverseness and obstinacy, he grows all in a choler, and ten to one if he come
not to reproach and railing. Now for as much as a mind moved and disturbed with
passion can neither understand nor rightly judge of what is said; if the
erroneous person, over and besides the weak, unfit confutation of his Error,
shall have his mind disturbed with evil language (which is frequently done by
those that find themselves to have the advantage of the ground) much less will
he be able to acknowledge his Error. Such also is the disposition of man,
naturally prone to pride and over great haughtiness of mind, that, if it were
possible, he would be thought in every thing to go beyond others. So that much
against his will it is to give the pre-eminence to any, or to confess his
failings, and look what thing a man has least mind to do, it will be most
difficult to make him understa^d that it is his duty to do the same. This may
be seen in those that go to law about any matter; how hard a thing is it to
persuade him that makes an unjust claim to what is not his own, or that will not
part with what is another man's, that he deals unjustly? And look how much
greater the heat of his mind is grown by contending, by so much the more hard
it will be to make him give place to reason and equity. So that if so be, over
and besides, that thou shall unaptly and darkly lay open and prove his error to
the person erring, that thou shall disturb his mind by cutting language, this
inconvenience shall be added, namely, that thou shall unseasonably aggravate the
greatness and foulness of his Error, wondering that any man could ever be so
blockish and sottish as to be so foully overseen, with such like expressions;
by thus doing thou shall deprive him of the remainder of his judgment and make
him stark mad. So that he shall be able to do nothing less then so much as
suspect, much less acknowledge and confess his Error.

If therefore such things as these shall be allowed in our debates: that, he
which being in an Error himself has seduced others, shall not have his Error
clearly demonstrated unto him; he which takes upon him to oppose shall not
understand what the seducer affirms and so shall not refute it, but what himself
by a false suspicion has imagined, and shall defend the doctrine received not
with such reasons as he ought to do, but with such silly ones as rashness and a
mind madded with anger could collect, which may be easily refelled; and the
erroneous person shall have cause to think himself not vanquished, but with many
and grievous injuries after an insolent manner abused: such disputes, however
they may seem intended to resist the Devil, yet are they so far from
frustrating any of his plots, as that nothing could be invented more expedient
to promote his designs. For they do not fight against Errors but make them
invincible; they do not pluck them up but spread them abroad; they do not
destroy, but propagate them, and that in a wonderful manner. They render Errors
invincible, because when the person erring finds it easy to avoid the dint of
such arguments as are brought to oppose him, it gives him great occasion to
think that there cannot any thing more strong be objected against him; and when
he shall see confuted, not his own reasons, but I know not what other arguments,
such as he never so much as once thought of, he may very well think the cause to
be, that not having any thing they could oppose against his arguments, and yet
desirous to seem to have answered them, they have cavilled at and
mis-interpreted his words. Hereupon he is altogether compelled to conclude with
himself, that not he, but his opposites are in the Error. And if there be
joined sharp, insolent, and injurious language, yea and, it may be, threats too
and such like, what can he do other but strongly persuade himself that his
adversaries being unable to defend their cause by dint of Argument, have
guarded and fortified themselves merely with force and insolence. And since
hatred is bred of injuries, what is there that can settle Errors with greater
pertinacy? And when a man shall leave his posterity, heirs both of his Errors
and his Hate; it comes to pass that they can never be rooted up out of the
minds of men. Thus is the people divided into Sects which hate one another with
deadly feud, abstaining from no kind of injuries, and taking the more liberty
unto themselves in this kind, in that men do not observe how in so doing they
obey their own passions, but think they very much please God; whereas, in the
mean time, by this means they incur the wrath of God daily more and more, and
become enveloped with thicker clouds of darkness. Such disputes do spread
Errors abroad, because the clamours there made, the brawls thence arising
afford much occasion of discourse to many people, and according to the
diversity of men's minds and Judgments matters are very variously both reported
and resented. And it is wont to fall out, that if many dislike the Error, yet
some will approve of it, yea and some will as much disapprove of the means used
to resist the Error, viz. insolence, reproaches and the like, as of the Error
it self, and will thereupon begin less to like of those that set themselves to
oppose the Error, whence it may come to pass that they may the more easily
admit some other Error afterward. He that likes the Error, can hardly refrain
in his narrations to favor that part he approves, so as to add, leave out,
change many passages at his pleasure, and thus by a kind of Contagion the evil
is spread far and near. In a word, by controversies ill-managed, errors are
propagated and bred diverse ways. For first, he that opposes himself against an
Error, can hardly avoid but that he himself shall fall into some Error, either
because (as the Proverb speaks) while he shuns Charybdis, he slips into Scylla,
ignorant to keep the mean, as that man should do, who in opposing those that
attribute all to the Word of God, and the reading thereof, not marking the
necessity of the Spirit of God to be their guide and interpreter, to the right
understanding; should endeavor to reduce the minds of such men to the mere
inspirations of the holy Ghost; whereas the spirit is so far to be looked at,
as that the written word be not contemned and lose its dignity, as if it were a
matter of humane invention, and not of divine tradition; or because he will
grant somewhat to the Adversary not to be granted, which some of the ancient
Fathers peradventure did, who in such a manner resisted the Philosophers, as
that they defiled the purity of Christian tenets, with Philosophical
ratiocinations. Likewise it may fall out, that whiles thou think to express
that Doctrine which thou hold for truth, with more significant and clear
expressions, then it is in Scripture expressed, and better to shun occasion of
cavil (for the wit of man will ever be more wary and wiser then God) thou will
use such words or forms of expression, as from whence another less true and
godly tenet may sometimes be collected. Furthermore, whereas on both sides they
are wont to produce many allegations, each for his own judgment as the case
requires: if it fall out that striving shall sharpen and inflame their minds,
you shall soon see on both sides many matters affirmed and denied, which in a
calm mood they would never have affirmed or denied; as the Poet spoke, Furor
arma ministrat, Rage weapons does afford. Every dart accidentally offered is
caught hold on, fury suffers not a man to mark what an one it is: and what ever
has rashly escaped a man, especially in the interim of the dispute, Pride will
have it ratified and firm, and thereupon new controversies arise, and new
errors in like manner without end. Yea it is seen that by disputes both the
matters themselves and men's wits are confounded, truth is lost, and many are
brought to that pass, as to persuade themselves that nothing can be certainly
concluded, and so to cast away all care of Religion. Yea and it seems
impossible to fall out, but that whiles men are perpetually wrangling about
some one point of Religion, they will slight and forget many others, and they
perhaps of the chiefest note; and it will grow to a custom, that a godly man
shall be distinguished from an ungodly by this one thing (be his life what it
will) in that he seems to abhor, and exceedingly loath that Doctrine, which in
some one or two points is accounted heretical. O that we could but see at one
view, how many and how great overthrows Satan has given to the Kingdom of
Christ, what desolations he has made by this one weapon of Controversies; he
must be a man of iron that could choose to weep. Nor do I now complain of those
fanatical spirits, the emissaries of Satan, who never cease sowing curious,
vain, and impious controversies: (for from them, what other could a man
expect) but of those rather, who being such as love the true worship of God,
deal unadvisedly in point of Controversy, and never observe how through a
certain care of Gods glory, and the preservation of sound Doctrine, though very
rash and headlong, they do many things, whereby whiles they think they do
bravely advance the cause of Christ, they so far notwithstanding do the work of
the Devil, as that he can hardly tell what to desire more. Neither do I speak
verily of a sort of common unexperienced pastors, but of some prime ones, the
pillars of the Church, and they not only of this present age but of all, the
Prophets and Apostles excepted. For I desire to take leave sometime to bewail
the Churches condition, and to bestow my tears upon the common calamities. He
that shares not in this fault, let him know we meddle not with him in this
place, we accuse none by name; yea and whoever they be that are thus faulty,
whatsoever we say, therefore we say it, not to inveigh against them or to cause
them to be censured; but that we might take away that corruption from out the
Church, then which there cannot be a more deadly plague. We have not here
denounced war against the persons of men whom we desire to be both saved and as
much as may be honored, but against Satan. We prosecute only the things
themselves (as we have said) which cannot be let alone without the certain ruin
of the Church. Now if any shall suppose that this cannot be done, but they must
be pointed at, as it were, with the finger; I would fain know of such men,
whether of the two be more just and fitting, for me to regard their credit and
estimation or the common good and preservation of the Church: without all
question if they be such indeed, as they would be taken for, lovers of God and
of his honor, they will not only take in good part this service of ours, but
also render great thanks to God, that by some one at length (whoever he be) he
has manifested, that those counsels are not from him, which they would have
judged so exceeding necessary for the Churches welfare. But if they be such
(which I in no wise suspect) as esteem of their own dignity above all things
else, it could not stand with my duty to prefer their reputation before the
honor of God and the safety and good estate of the Commonwealth. Neither verily
was there any cause for me to prize their favor and good will above the favor of
God himself. O the sottishness and stupidity of man! The Gospel had gotten
possession of the whole world almost; so many contentions arose, so many
strifes, so many brawls concerning the punctilio's of Religion and matters for
the most part of small moment, that by little and little it has been almost
lost, only a certain few remainders were in a corner with much difficulty
reserved. In our Age likewise, by the incredible goodness of God, some light
arose upon us: What do we? Frighted by the example of our Ancestors do we
diligently inquire how it came to pass, that the professors of Christianity
were first torn into Sects, then lost both all regulation of manners and their
pious holy doctrine together, so that the most part of them retained not so
much as the name of the Gospel? O unheard of sluggishness never to be enough
lamented with tears of sorrow! As if we had no example whereby to beware, we go
on with our eyes shut in the very same steps to overthrow all. Neither do we
slip any practice whereby we may make greater desolation then ever. How many
sects arose there of old, and grew to a vast greatness, at whose beginning, if
the Controversies had bin managed with some mildness and gentleness, with
patience, modesty, and Peacefulness, we should never have heard of so much as
their very names? But we, as soon as any one seems to set his foot beside the
Path, we think there is no other course to be taken, but straightway to sound a
defiance, to fill the world with railings, reproaches, clamours; what ever
comes to our tongues end, that we deem most fit to resist the Error, whereas
often times nothing can be less to the purpose: likewise men of Goatham, we bring
oil to quench the fire. Whereas now or never, when we stand most in need of
sober advisement, let us abandon wrath, away with Arrogance, away with
clamours, and let Reason alone bear sway in this business, neither let Satan,
but the spirit of God guide our Reason.

And in the first place let us beware again and again, that no unnecessary
Controversy be raised. What if somewhat offend thy ear as strange and
uncouth? The apprehension of thine own abilities, must it presently set thee a
work to oppose it? An unfitting Master, by whose persuasion and the Devils
instigation upon every the least occasion, thou should rashly turn al topsie
turvie. I tell thee it is a small matter, it is a dangerous business, there is
more need of Council then temerity in such a case. For what if so be, that
which thou have heard, have some appearance of novelty, when as there is indeed
no such matter, because thou interpretedst the words of him that spoke it,
different from his meaning? What a madness then would it be, when there is
agreement in the things themselves, to make contentions about words, and to
play at fifty-cuffs with the Clouds. If thou had but gone to the man, and
ask't him friendly and courteously what was his meaning, he explaining his own
words, all occasion of Controversy had bin taken away. Yea if so be there be
somewhat which is indeed new, it is not presently the most advised course, to
give ear to that same crafty sower of contentions, sounding to battle; but
since as we have said, a people is never in so great light, but that there are
some mists of darkness; we must first diligently examine, whether it agree with
that Doctrine which is comprehended in the Scriptures, least it should fall
out, that whiles we shall think to resist an Error, we become resisters of the
truth. Now there is no man but will willingly confess, that the truth ought
never to be opposed, whatsoever show of Eror it may seem to have, howbeit to
avoid so doing when occasion shall require is the hardest thing in the world.
For whatsoever Doctrine any man has once drunk down, he cannot persuade
himself that it is untrue, but that what ever differs therefrom is false, and
such as he is bound to oppose that it may not be believed. Now if all men shall
be thus disposed, as to reject what ever savors of novelty, whatsoever Error
shall be in the Church, it can by no means be extirpated, but rather, out of
that one, many will by little and little sprout forth. What is there then to be
done? Certainly this is undeniable, that if they which err were so affected,
that they would patiently with quiet and composed minds hear such as differ
from them, and diligently examine the force of their Reasons, as those that
(whatsoever they think of themselves) may possibly be in an Error; it will fall
out that the greater part will be withdrawn from their Errors: and that
therefore it is that they abide so obstinate in them, because they cannot so
much as suspect any Error; so that whosoever would teach contrary to their
judgment, they judge him to be presently suppressed, not once having his cause
heard. Who sees not therefore, that it is good advice for such men, not
presently to reject what ever they hear different from their own persuasions;
but to pause a while and think every man with himself; to me indeed such things
seem true which I have hitherto with the multitude believed; but what if that
befall me which betides very many, that I should most err in that whereof I
seem to be most certain. Why may I not hear the man first? why should I not
weigh what he says. Paul's precept is, Despise not Prophesies, prove all
things, hold fast that which is good. 1 These. 5.
Now I would very fain know of thee who ever thou art, that certainly think
thy self free from all Error; do I say think, yea rather who see and
feel as much; which way think thou may persons erring be brought to
suspect that they are in an Error, that so they may be more attentive to such
as would deal with them? I suppose thou will grant by this Reason, that very
many men do err, and they not only of the unlearned vulgar sort, but very
learned persons (which the almost infinite number of Controversies agitated
amongst them witness) so that while they think themselves to be undoubtedly in
the right, they may be notwithstanding involved in greatest Errors; and that
they are wise, who remembering that they are men, and may be deceived as soon as
any others (though they know not themselves to err) yet as being in a
possibility of Error, do give diligent ear to such as profess to teach them
better, and that so, as not to allow of any thing without diligent search, and
imploring the help of Cod to that effect. Go to then; with whom would thou
that this Reason and instance should be of force? with them that think aright?
I suppose thou will not say so, but with them that err. But this is that I
would know, viz. how thou can make this Reason more prevalent with those that
err, then with such as err not? can thou do it by alleging that they are in
an error? they cannot think it possible that they should err; and that is it
which the Reason produced aims at, to bring them into some suspicion of Error.
if so be then, that those who err, do think themselves to be as far from Error,
as they that think aright, yea verily for the most part are more confident of
the two, for a fool (as the wise mean speaks) is delighted with his own
reasonings, but a wise man asks counsel; truly, I can see no other way, in case
Error be in the Church, to make it to be acknowledged, then to make this
general conclusion: that forasmuch as it is a property of Mankind to err, no
one person that is but a mere man ought to be so confident, as to persuade
himself he cannot err, and that what ever come into Controversy, he should but
in vain give ear to what any man shall say concerning the same. But we must not
(will thou say) doubt in the Doctrine of Religion, but know assuredly what to
hold. So say I too, and therefore this knot is very hard to unty. To resist the
Truth, and not to acknowledge and reject an Error, if there be any that can make
it appear, is a very great evil. But impossible it is, that he which errs
should acknowledge his Error, before he come to think it possible that he may
err, whereby he should be content to give ear to any that would convince him;
and yet a man must not waver in the Doctrine of Religion: which way now, and by
what third shall we get out of such an intricate labyrinth? Let us not despair
yet, we must, and will find a way out. Thus much we have concluded upon, that
truth is never to be opposed, and that he which errs, whiles he is in an Error,
cannot understand he errs; likewise that it hinders much the acknowledgment of
the truth, for any one to persuade himself strongly that he is in no Error, and
that the right way, and first step to the acknowledgment of an Error, is to
have a suspicion thereof. Shall we then allow a perpetual hesitation in matters
of Faith? That we will not neither. I conceive it rather our duty to endeavor,
to attain to the most certain knowledge that may be had. What other course shall
we take? For as much as a man may, concerning a point, be either well persuaded,
believing as the thing is, or ill, believing otherwise then the thing is; and
for as much as he that is well persuaded may be either perfectly persuaded,
which befalls him that has obtained a certain and clear knowledge, or
imperfectly persuaded, which is seen in them who embrace the truth indeed, but
are led only by opinion, not being able to give a sure reason why they so
think: certain it is, that man who has so sure a knowledge, as to be able to
render true, constant, and infallible causes of his judgment, cannot be brought
to doubt, or to be seduced concerning the point. Whence it follows that
whatever counsel you ca^ give him, that he suspect himself of error, it can
noway hinder him in respect of those things whereof he has such knowledge; much
less can it hurt him that is tainted with ill opinions. For he that so errs, as
to suspect himself of error, does not now altogether err, but inclines partly
to error partly to truth. It remains then that we consider, what we may think
of such, as embracing true opinions, have not however attained to the perfect
science of the things themselves. In such persons truly suspicion of error is
no other then a certain approach to error, which in it self we cannot but judge
naught: howbeit for a man falsely to arrogate unto himself knowledge, when he
has only an opinion, is an error. Now as error cannot be good, so it is an
evil thing to be in danger of any pernicious error. But he that is led by
opinions only, and is not sure of what he holds, may possibly be led into
error. He is then in danger lest it may so fall out, whereas the best way is to
be free from all danger. Whereupon, like a^, though all pain be reckoned among
evils, yet if it be undergone for the removing of some grievous disease, it
appears in the notion of a great good; so, opinion being an infirm and feeble
knowledge, and if not a disease yet a constitution of the mind near approaching
to a disease, he that shall cast into a man's mind a suspicion of error, by
instancing in so many men, that while they dreamed of nothing less, did yet
walk in greatest darkness; to the end he may show him the way to attain to a
sure and steadfast knowledge: we ought to judge this man, not to give pernicious
but healthful and very necessary counsel. To the end therefore that thou may
not oppose at any time, and trouble a man that would teach the Truth, either
thou must of necessity attain unto a certain firm knowledge of what ever may at
any come time into Controversy in the Church, which what a piece of work it
will be any man may judge; or certainly if at any time thou shall hear any matter
which sounds new in thine ear, before thou condemnest it, thou must pause a
while and think with thy self what kind of knowledge thou have of that thing.
And lest thou be deceived, taking a vehement persuasion for certain science,
let us consider what we are to account science and what opinion; and this it
becomes us to do, not as Philosophers, but as the Disciples of Christ. There is
nothing more certain then that we (in point of Religion) can hold nothing for
certain but from the testimony of Gods Word. This many texts of Scripture
witness: let these few serve in stead of many. David himself King of Israel and
a famous Prophet, when he had resolved to build a Temple to the Lord; yet could
he not divine the mind of God in that point: Neither did Nathan a great Prophet
likewise come nearer the mind of God, in his exhorting David to perform his
purpose; for by him God forbad David to build any Temple, which is a
considerable instance. Now of Joshua the successor of Moses, it is written that
he was endued with the spirit of wisdom, and that God promised to be with him
perpetually, yet is he commanded to have regard to fulfill the Law which he had
received from Moses, and not to turn from it to the right hand or to the left;
and the reason why is added; that thou may know (says the Lord) what thou
ought to do. Whence we may understand, that then we are sure of thing if we
have a Word of God for it. But how plainly have we this in another place? My
thoughts are not like your thoughts, Isaiah.
says the Lord: neither are my reasons like your reasons; but look how much
the Heaven is higher then the Earth, so much are my thoughts above your
thoughts, and my reasons above your reasons. Neither is it sufficient in any
sort to build upon the divine Scriptures on any fashion; but it is needful that
we attain the knowledge of them by the interpretation of the holy spirit; for as
much as we see so many differing judgments in matter of Religion, even amongst
the most learned and most exercised in the reading of holy Scriptures. For Paul
testifies; that only the Spirit of God knows the things of God, 1 Cor. 2.
neither does man's sense understand the things of the Spirit; neither can he
understand them, for they seem to be foolishness unto him: but the spiritual
man judges all things. Whereupon James exhorts him that wants wisdom to ask it
of God. From all which it is gathered, that he has the knowledge of divine
things, who both depends only on the Word of God, and has attained the true
understanding thereof by help of no other interpreter but the Spirit of God
himself. And all this will they willingly grant to whom we now address our
speech. But here is coucht a great difficulty. For many persuade themselves
that they can prove what they hold from testimony of Gods Word, and that the
spirit of God is their guide and teacher to furnish them with the understanding
thereof, who notwithstanding err monstrously. They suppose they begged of God
for his Spirit and that they have placed all their confidence in his
assistance, who are not aware in the mean while that their trust has been in
any thing rather then in him. But before thou can conclude of a surety that
thou have obtained his Spirit and learned any thing by the guidance thereof,
what ever thing there is which might move thee to think so or so, or confirm a
persuasion taken up, such as is an opinion of thine own or another knowledge,
judgment, spirit, holiness; likewise the multitude of those that think as thou
think, or of those which praise thee, admire thee, depend upon thy judgment;
also the long while that the opinion opposed has been in repute; finally,
whatsoever is not God or his Word, from it thou ought to withdraw thine
eyes, thy mind, and all thy thoughts, no less then if there were no such thing
in the world; and then all other hope and confidence being cast away, to fix
thine eyes and mind on God alone, to depend only upon him, and thus affected in
this posture to ask his Spirit. Thus if thou shall do, if frequently, if
seriously, if believingly thou shall do it; then may thou with good reason
conclude, that thou art not possessed with any pernicious Error, or in case
thou art possessed with any, that it shall be made known to thee. But these
things are such as we can with much more facility express them in words then in
deeds, so liable is the disposition of man to Error; yea so apt naturally is he
to put trust in any thing rather then God. In a word, so sly, so industrious,
so well furnished is Satan with diverse Arts to deceive: that when thou have
done all thou can, it will be an hard matter in some point or other not to be
overseen. Which I would not have any man think, I therefore speak, as supposing
there can be no certainty in divine matters, which conceit I am as far from as
he that is farthest. But this is that which I would by no means suffer, that he
which as yet is arrived unto no certainty, and is peradventure plunged as yet
in false opinions, should arrogate unto himself knowledge; but I would have him
endeavor to get it indeed, and endeavor as he ought to do. He that has once
attained clear and certain knowledge, exhort him as long as you will, and let him
endeavor as much as he can to suspect himself of Error, yet shall he never be
able to entertain any such suspicion of himself. Such kind of exhortations
then, can move suspision only in them, who either err or have not yet attained
firm and constant knowledge, but may attain the same as yet: to whom whiles the
right way of attaining thereto is shown, and they are admonished of what blocks
and trapps in their way they ought to take heed, truly I cannot see but that
the counsel we give them is very safe and profitable. Wherefore that a man may
not any ways offend by opposing the Truth either in public or private, by word
of mouth or by writing, I would persuade him by all means possible, that
whatever his judgment be concerning Religion, he would examine particularly by
what Reasons he has bin moved to be so persuaded, with what diligence, with
what assurance of the spirits assistance, he has searched the Scriptures, with
what circumspection and prudence, he has withdrawn his eyes from whatever is
neither God nor his Word, also with what confidence he has powered forth his
prayers to God, in a word, how far he is assured of whatever he holds. How be
it, when thou shall have done all this with as much care as possible thou can
(modesty being always pleasing to God and he of such a nature as that he cannot
despise the prayers of that man, who begs a daily increase of the certainty of
his faith) if yet somewhat appearing new and therefore false and impious shall
wound thine ears, as yet I conceive it the best way, that before thou oppose,
thou pause a while and think with thy self again and again, what assurance thou
have, that such a speech is false and impious: and that again thou wrestle with
God by most fervent prayers, that if thou be in the right, he would confirm
thee therein more and more; if humane frailty have overtaken thee, that he
would open thine eyes and give thee so much light, as to acknowledge and
renounce thine Error. For if we who are evil (as our Lord said) are so
affected, that we give good things to our children, so as when they ask bread
we give them not a stone; nor a serpent when they ask a fish: What shall we
think of our heavenly Father? Shall we think that he, while we never leave
asking of him the certainty of the truth, being enflamed with a desire of
obeying his will, and fearing lest by Error we should wage War against the
Truth; shall we (I say) think, that in stead of assurance of the truth he will
give us errors, in stead of light he will send us darkness? How far were this
both from his infinite goodness and his most faithful promises? Again, since
(as we have said) we can be assured of nothing unless we be taught of God,
neither can we in our prayers limit God a time within which he should teach us,
though we have turned away our sight from all things besides God, though we
have placed all our confidence in God, it may notwithstanding come to pass,
that we are not as yet taught by God, but that he is about to teach us by him,
whom we account to be a seducer; for if he had already taught us, he would have
added so much light and certainty, that we should have had no reason to doubt;
only let us beware lest Satan put a trick upon us; we must remember what a
crafty fox he is, how old an impostor, how plausibly (to use the Apostles
phrase) he can deceive in the person of an Angel of light: and let us make sure
account that no body can beware of him too much. Let us abandon that same
expression, its an old Error frequently confuted, long since confuted; what if
so be the point have been hitherto ill-maintained, what if hitherto Satan has
played the part of Opposer and Maintainer himself alone. But be it so, suppose
it to be an Error; if it be but to draw the persons erring by thine example
unto that same gentleness and readiness to hear which is requisite, that they
may not be obstinate toward such as would inform them, be thou thy self so
gentle, as first to hear and understand before thou condemn them. If it be but
that they may not have reason to complain, that their cause has been condemned
before it was heard. What? will the Truth become less apparent by the often
discussion, and not rather every day more certain and clear? Nothing verily is
more easy then to begin a contention, but when it is once begun it is far more
hard to end it, So that Solomon spoke to this purpose most fitly, when he
compared the beginner of strife to him that opens a way to water (suppose
collected into some great and vast lake) for at first indeed the matter may
seem small and contemptible, but the water makes it self a larger and deeper
passage, grows stronger and stronger, bears away the banks, lays wast all it
meets with, eats it self channels, covers the fields with sand and mud, plucks
trees up by the roots, throws down buildings and makes a rueful spectacle where
ever it comes; just so from small and contemptible beginnings of Controversy
and strife, we see at last the whole world filled with dissentions, calumnies
and clamors. So that he which conceives not himself bound to shun the moving of
a controversy, as being one of the greatest evils, unless he be merely
compelled thereunto, shows himself to be either a man of no judgment, or one
that cares not a rush for the Churches welfare. Wherefore though it be apparent
that it is a false Tenet which is spread abroad, yet before thou begin to
contend in the least measure about it, thou must consider of what moment and
weight the thing is. For concerning vain questions we have a command of Paul,
not to refute whatever shall be falsely asserted, but to avoid the questions
themselves. So that I conceive our duty only is to endeavor that men's minds may
be diverted from such curious unprofitable questions, not so much in regard
they may be false, but rather lest they vainly consume precious time, besides
that it often falls out that while men strive about the slightest matter that
can be, while men's wits are disturbed by the heat of contention, such things
may be rashly alleged on both sides, as being of greater weight, may not a
little impair the purity of Doctrine. Add herunto that men fall as soon to
reproaching, railing, scolding when they contend about a tale of Robinhood, as
when the controversy is concerning the most weighty subject, which are faults
that a Christian heart ought exceedingly to abhor. But here you will say is the
great difficulty, the great labor to distinguish between questions unprofitable
and questions that contain matter of damnable Error. For whatever a man shall
pitch his mind upon, presently Satan endeavors to persuade him that it is a
weighty point, so that unless he know assuredly what to hold, he cannot assure
himself of any hope of salvation. Verily this is my judgment, that he, who not
out of vain curiosity or ambition to become a subtle disputant in matters
divine, but out of true piety toward God and an earnest desire of his own
salvation is exercised in the reading of the Word of God, will easily know what
questions are foolish and vain, and which are unworthy to be handled. But for
as much as many are much to seek in this point, not without the Churches great
detriment; it will not be impertinent, to make enquiry after some sure way
whereby a man may without mistake discern the one sort of questions from the
other.

This then is past peradventure, if there be some one thing, at which as the
mark and end all the Doctrine of Christianity does aim, whatever thing being
known conduces nothing to the attainment of that end, all questioning about
that thing will be vain. Wherefore it concerns us to see, if there be any such
end; what it is, and what those things be which may conduce thereunto. Now John
testifies that such an end there is, and what it is, in these words Many other
signs also Jesus did, which are not contained in this Book, but these are
written that ye may believe that Jesus is the Messiah the Son of God, and that
believing ye may obtain life by him. By which words we are plainly taught, that
the end and scope of Christian Doctrine is eternal life, whereupon it follows,
that whatsoever may be of any use for the attaining of eternal life, that thing
may be accounted profitable to be known, and whatsoever can confer nothing to
that end ought not to be regarded. How now! (may some man say) not a word of
the honor and glory of God in this consideration? I answer; whatsoever things
make for the glory of God, without doubt, the knowledge of all such things
further our salvation, neither is the glory of God in any thing more manifested
then in the salvation of man. If so be then there be any thing that we are
obliged to do to the end we may attain eternal life, for as much as we cannot
do that thing, unless we shall understand that it is our duty so to do the same,
it is necessary that we know so much. And for as much as God has made a Law
which who so keeps not exactly, has imposed upon him the punishment of eternal
destruction; which Law because a man cannot keep, and there is some other
thing, which if he do he shall notwithstanding obtain salvation; he ought to
understand both that he cannot satisfy the Law, and what that other thing is
which if he shall do will be a means to save him. And seeing that same other
thing is; if he shall be persuaded, that the Son of God being made man satisfied
his Father in respect of the punishment due unto his sins, and that he is by
his blood made clean from all the defilement of sin; howbeit holiness of life
and innocence of conversation is required, not that in confidence thereof we
should promise our selves salvation; but that our manners may be such as
becomes the children and servants of God, bought with so great a price: These
things (I say) being so, it is necessary both that a man know the promises
which are made concerning Christ, and that he be not ignorant wherein holiness
and innocence of life and conversation do consist. And for as much as there are
many things which may either induce us to place all hope of our salvation in
Christ and (according to our power) to keep the commands of God, or hinder us
from so doing and delay us, it is very profitable to know what those things are
which may either help or hinder. Now we are persuaded to place all our
confidence in God and enflamed to love him, by which love we are drawn to
endeavor obedience to his Commandments, by the knowledge of his nature, not as
Philosophers desire to know it that they may subtly argue about it, but so as
to understand how he is beyond all conceit wise, good, gentle, merciful, how
exact and punctual he is in keeping his promises. That his nature is such his
works witness, viz. The Creation of the world and all things therein contained,
but especially examples of his care for such as have worshipped him with a
pious and holy fear, how he has helped them in times of exigency, how he is
wont to defend them from the lying in wait of the Devil and the world; also how
great and grievous sinners he has upon their repentance comforted and saved;
how great a hater nevertheless of sin he is wont to show himself; and the like.
To the knowledge of his nature, the remembrance of his frequently repeated
promises being joined, does exceedingly confirm and strengthen faith, and
forcibly puts men upon a serious resolution of amendment of life. Hereunto may
be added the explication of Prophesies, especially such as concern the present
times, which being a clear testimony of the providence of God, make exceedingly
to the confirmation of men's minds. Whatsoever matters of this nature are very
profitable to be known and discoursed of by all men at home and abroad in
private and in public. And because we can perform none of those things lately
mentioned, unless assisted by the help and spirit of God, and God will have us
ask this spirit and assistance of him, we must both know that God would have us
so to do, and keep in mind the promises that he will give us these things upon
our asking, in a word, we must in no case be ignorant in what manner we ought
to call upon God and how we ought to render to him thanks for benefits
received. Contrariwise, we shall be much hindered concerning the premises, if we
shall judge otherwise concerning the nature of God, concerning his will and
whatever may come to pass, then his Word directs us. A great hinderance too is
the corruption of our nature, which very forcibly withdraws our mind and
thoughts, yea ravishes us to contrary intentions. Whereupon we being
necessitated to wage perpetual war with our inbred pravity, to the end we may
render our nature subject to the divine will, it is in like manner very
necessary that we know our natural sinfulness and whatever the Scripture shows
us for the mitigation and subduing thereof. And for as much as it is not
sufficient that a man care for himself alone, but every man is bound according
to the measure of the spirit he has received and the course of life whereunto
he is called to seek the good of the whole Church, not only of the Members
thereof now living, but likewise of posterity; whatsoever is of that tendency
as to make any doctrine profitable to life hard to be attained, or may give
occasion either to forsake or lightly to esteem the same, it is of great
consequence that we be not ignorant thereof. And in as much as the Scriptures
admonish us that we have a great and most cunning adversary (who is named from
his enmity) who without ceasing plots against us whereby to ruin us and divert
us from God; who can doubt but that it will be very profitable, well to understand
his arts and by what wis om they are to be avoided? in a word, no doctrine can
be profitable unless it have some use; if it consist only in speculation and
tend to no a^tion, it is to be accounted vain and foolish. Yea verily, every
doctrine that may any wise refer to the attainment of salvation is not to be
counted profitable, to as that it should be requisite to han^ e (...)
cu^^^usly, o^, diffe^^^ce ^^ne, that (...) mu^^ labor to assure our selves what
to hold but this condition must be adjoined, that there be not other points
that will easily supply the defect thereof. That this is so, appears, because it
being necessary that we should believe that Jesus is the Messiah the Savior
foretold by the Prophets, and to this end all the miracles which he did were
directed, that thereby it might be known who he was, yet were they not all
committed to writing, but such and so many as were sufficient that men might
readily know who he was. So that if so be any should content that our Lord
wrought some miracle not mentioned in those books which we have of his life and
doings, it would not be worth the while to search out the truth of that matter,
or to make Controversy thereabout, forasmuch as though it should be found to
be true, there could be no other profit reaped thereby, but that Jesus should
be proved to come from God, and to be the man he pretended himself to be, which
thing many other miracles do so fully witness, which are out of question, that
greater certainty cannot be desired: on the contrary, though we had no
assurance of any such miracle, the Authority of other miracles recorded in
Scripture by the holy penmen thereof, is not a jot thereby diminished. Whereby
it would come to pass, that whether we shall believe that miracle or believe it
not, we should neither win nor lose by the means. And forasmuch as, in case
Christian Doctrine should seem to contain any absurdity, or to maintain
contradictions, it would hinder those that are unconverted from embracing the
same; whatever tends to the removing of such absurdities, and to reconcile such
contradictions, cannot but be profitable, Unless happily such reconciliations
cannot be accomplished without great stirs, Controversies, and dissentions. By
such like ways then, it seems easy to know profitable questions from vain and
unprofitable, provided that men's judgments be not before hand disturbed with
partiality and the heat of contention; and before they have already begun to
contend about the point in question, as about some weighty matter: but when men
are once bewitched as it were with the opinion hereof, their inbred pride,
hatred, indignation, custom in Error, and Satan suffer not their judgment to
execute its office. Who amongst us at this day does not admire, that the
ancient professors of Christianity did contend with such heat and earnestness
of mind, about the day on which Easter (as they call it) was to be celebrated,
and about other matters of very light concernment; whereas in those times, they
were thought very weighty points: we looking upon them with unbiassed
judgments, plainly perceive, what an unworthy thing it was for the Church of
God to be divided into sects, upon so slight occasions. My advise therefore is,
that as soon as thou shall perceive somewhat untrue to be taught, before thou
set thy self to contradict it, thou consider if it be not a matter of little or
no weight, and if it be, that thou make no contention about it; or, according
to that opportunity which the time, place thine own person, and his thou shall
deal with, may afford, that thou do only exhort the man to leave such
speculations and apply himself to more weighty matters, and I would have thee
do it as artificially as may be, so as not to put him into any passion. But the
true way of bringing men from vain questions is this; if those whose place it
is either to teach the people, or to read divinity in the Schools, and those
that apply themselves to write, omitting curious questions, and abandoning vain
ostentation of wit, would insist upon and urge only such points as tend to the
confirmation of faith, to the exptirpation of vice, to instill the fear of God,
cherish piety, comfort the afflicted, and keep them from desperation, to keep
such as would be counted Christian brethren, in brotherly love, with a sweet
harmony of affections, and the like. Neither are these Subjects such as are to
be slighted for their commoness. For in the first place, though the heads
themselves of such Doctrine are not very many, yet they are of very large
extent, and then, all weary somness in the auditor may be taken away by the
variety of handling them; especially if the preachers of the Gospel shall mark,
what Doctrines at every season the people most stand in need of. As in case
they be lift up by prosperity, and give the reyn to luxury, let them fear them
by the prophetical threatenings, and so reduce them into order. If affliction
lie heavy upon them, let them be comforted: If they languish with sluggishness,
let them be stirred up to honest employments. If they seem too intent upon the
world, let them be admonished of the shortness of this life and diverted from
too much care for worldly things, and thus let them insist upon such Doctrines
as are most suitable to every season. Neither see I cause why we should count
those arguments too common, which can never sufficiently be imprinted in our
minds. So that time will always be wanting for such arguments, so far shall we be
from wanting matter to take up the time, though we keep within the bounds
prescribed. Now this is that which may often give occasion to start vain
questions, if in expounding the holy Scriptures to the people, a man shall as it
were make a Law to himself to dwell long upon every word without distinction;
which seems now to be the common practice. For when they cannot always find
profitable matter to discourse of, they are forced to give way to curiosity.
Such men there be happily, who being full of matter and abundant in wit, and
therefore able to take an occasion of discoursing upon what Subject they
please, from any text or word; may handle largely any Scripture, without just
cause of reprehension. But this is not every man's Lot (as it is in the Proverb)
Non omnibus datu^ est adire Corinthum. They that are not so well stored, shall do
much more discreetly, if they will suit their endeavors to their abilities.
Where many things profitable to be heard suggest themselves, let them insist
long, if the text afford not many things, let them not be ashamed to put a
little shoo on a little foot, and to proceed in their explication the faster.
For what matters it, if having made twenty Sermons upon some one Chapter of the
Gospel, thou shall go over the next in one discourse? The holy Ghost would not
teach all things in every place, but one in one place, another in another.
Neither let they knowledge be all powered forth upon one place, though thou
might do it handsomely enough, much less be thou so absurd and unreasonable,
as to desire rather to descend to foolish commentations, or to inculcate such
matters as all thy auditors ears are already full of, then to be thought not to
have made many Sermons upon the explication of every word. Some offend in this
kind to make foolish ostentation of their fullness, others offend by giving more
heed to the example of some preachers, then to what is necessary to be done.
Yea and much greater occasion there is of such curiosity in respect of those
which expound the Scriptures in Universities. For since there be already many
commentaries upon them in print, which the Students themselves may read, and
the professors are loath that their labor should be thought vain or of small
necessity; that they should only repeat other men's expositions, meditations,
arguments, and their very words; but desire still to have somewhat which the
Scholars shall not find in their books: besides that they are compelled to make
things change their places, bringing what has been fore-alleadged upon one
place to the explication of another; that they may set forth their own
acuteness, they do either invent objections that they might answer them; or
they coin new words and new manner of expressions, or they raise new
Controversies. Better it were in truth, that there were no professors at all,
then any such as these. For what other thing will they effect, then to reduce
the study of Religion into sophistical vanities? What would you have them do,
may some men say? What! truly any thing rather then thus to mispend their
leisure. What should I desire them to do, but not to deprave, not to pervert
such things as have bin said to the purpose, and in fit place, not to darken
and obscure them by idle questions. And if any thing has slipped former
Expositors, if they see any thing which they did not, herein let them make
proof of their own diligence. But there is yet a worse fault then this; many
think it not enough to teach thus by word of mouth, but they will have their
commentaries in print, setting out large volumnes, that matter of wrangling
does every day increase. How many Commentaries have we already upon Paul's
Epistle to the Romans? Every day some or other new one comes forth. For every
man that with some applause expounds it in the Schools must needs set forth a
Commentary. Howbeit should you collect what he explains more aptly then others,
or what he brings wholly of his own; your gleanings will be very slender. The
rest will be what other former writers either upon the same or some other place
had formerly discoursed. And whereas our later Expositors do of purpose abstain
from the words of the former, and they for the most part had prepossessed the
most fit forms of speaking, which relished more of the spirit and were most apt
to move affection; these must of necessity use less fitting phrases, such as
savor only of a vain ostentation of wit, but leave no sting of affection in the
minds of the Readers. Those who err in this kind through defect of judgment,
supposing themselves not unprofitably thus employed, may with admonition be in
some sort excused. But as for such as are spurred to write by ostentation and
ambition, I shall not stick to count such men among the prime plagues of the
Church, as persons most wickedly hireing themselves out to do the Divils work.
But let us now proceed.

Satan's Cabinet Counsel. The second Book.
The Argument.
WHen upon serious examination we have found that a point in question is an
Error of weighty concernment, what course we are to take. Satan's aim is first
to make a man embrace an erroneous doctrine: If he cannot do that, his next
endeavor will be to inflame him with an inordinate, turbulent, passionate spirit
of opposition against the said Error, whereby whiles he thinks to suppress it
he shall exceedingly assist Satan in the propagation thereof. He that spreads
and teaches an Error may be a dear, child of God, though left for a time. A
pious person may and ought to be exceedingly moved to see the Name and Truth of
God blasphemed by a spreader of erroneous tenets, but it must be with a zeal
rightly qualified, and which comes not from Satan, but the Spirit of God. The
nature of a right zeal against a Seducer. Great difference to be made between
him that being deceived himself deceives others, and him that willingly,
wittingly and maliciously seduceth. How a malicious seducer ought to be dealt
with that he may desist from seducing. Reproaches and criminations, not only
unprofitable but hurtful both in respect of the seducer, the seduced, and those
whom we would preserve from infection. If any good do come by reproaches and
revilings, it may be otherwise and by better and safer ways obtained. To brand
any man with tokens of infamy, belongs to none but the Magistrate: It ill
becomes any private Christian, especially those that are teachers of others.
They must be free from all appearance of evil, and rather Gods then Men, that
shall work any good upon seducers and seduced persons by reproaches. Two things
of greatest importance to reclaim a seducer, viz. to produce such
demonstrations as may have greatest power to convince him of his Error; and to
provide that he may consider the same with a calm, quiet, untroubled spirit. We
must therefore carefully avoid any words or behavior that may move him to
passion. We must avoid cavilling at words and drawing absurdities from his
assertions. Many men delighted by mis-interpreting their adversaries words, to
infer some great absurdity. Many oppose their own imaginations in stead of
their adversaries errors. If our adversary assert any thing which seems very
absurd, we ought to suspect that we do not rightly understand him, and rather
to desire him to explain himself then to triumph over the supposed absurdity.
God reveals matters divine to babes and sucklings. Our adversary is much
wrought upon when he sees we perfectly understand his meaning. Our chief
endeavor ought to be perfectly to know what and how he holds. A great fault to
charge our adversaries with holding such things as to our understandings seem
to follow from their tenets. We ought barely to report their sayings without
addition, detraction or alteration. All desire of victory to be banished from
Christian d^bates. We must take heed we be not ashamed to acknowledge what we
were before ignorant of; nor to learn the truth by the meanest instrument. We
must not be over confident in our assertions. Affirm or deny without
exclaiming, was ever the like heard, will any man say so or so etc. We must use
our adversary not contemptuously but with civility and humanity. Our endeavor
in every controversy must be that Christ may overcome, being willing to be
accounted the of scouring of the world, so truth may be advanced. In every
Controversy a double combat, between us and our dissenting opposite, and
between us and Satan. For a man to give ground in di^putation, is not so
shameful in the sight of others as in his own Account. What a man loses in
reputation of learning and knowledge, he gains in the estimation of candor,
ingenuity, sincerity when he lays down an Error. What meditations we ought to
be conversant in before we begin a dispute, to the end we may neither our
selves be moved, nor move our adversary to passion. A man's nobility, Wealth,
Authority, Reputations are the weapons wherewith Satan. fights against him. The
grand combat in all disputes is with Satan. The main quarrel, is not so much
the point in question, as the Peace and Tranquillity, and safety of the Church
of Christ. A disputant must take heed of being too wise in his own eyes. No
vice so hardly rooted out of a man's spirit as Arrogance. A medicine against
arrogance. The top of humane wisdom to suspect a man's own wisdom and seek
Counsel. We cannot dispute with any person so despicable, but look how much we
think our selves wiser then him, by so much he takes himself to be wiser then
Us. The use of this Observation.

LIB. II.
IN the former book we have discoursed concerning unprofitable questions, how
they may be distinguished from profitable ones, and how they ought to be
avoided; it follows now that we should declare what may befit a godly man to
do, if it shall appear that the business in Controversy be a matter of great
weight. And here doubtless, if thou will give ear to Satan, he will endeavor
to advance his designs exceedingly by thy means. So that, some error shall not
be extirpated, but spread abroad far and near, yea and become as it were the
seed of many other errors; so that contentions, discords, variance, sects,
devastations, and mighty hurliburlies shall thence arise; and to the end he will
labor might and main, that no moderate, circumspect, grave counsel may take
place; but that all things be transacted rashly, without advice, confusedly.
What now shall a Christian and prudent spirit do in this case? Shall he think of
obeying Satan and furthering his counsels? Will he make him his Counselor and
Captain? Will he not rather with all diligence of mind provide that all things
be managed with the greatest discretion possible? So that not a word, as near
as may be, shall pass which is not exactly fitted by reason and polished? Will he
not weigh with himself again and again what is needful to be done? Here, here
indeed is need of prudence, resist the beginnings whiles the flame is yet small,
if thou shall let it alone a little while and give fuel to it likewise, who
shall be able to quench the Fire? These things I say are to be foreseen in time.
If thou shall hear any impious Doctrine, what think thou will the speech of
Satan be in thy heart? He will try peradventure, if he can bring the Error in
credit with thee also: but if he find the doors shut on this side, and shall
thee another way; O abominable wickedness! (will he say) O this fellow deserves
that the Earth should open its mouth and swallow him up quick, that durst once
speak such abominable words; it is pity he were not burnt with fire from Heaven:
The basest and wickedest fellow that ever the Earth bare! Is it possible that
any man should so much as once think of such things, much less account them
true? If thou give way to such thoughts as these, what can thou do or say
which will not occasion a thousand mischiefs? Persuade thy self, that the Spirit
of God is not author of such councels but Satan. Such thoughts are not fit to
take away the evil, but to increase it more and more, and render it incapable
of all cure. Somewhat else there is to be done to remedy this evil. And first,
how know thou, but that this man happily (what ever he may seem to be) is one
of Gods elect, whom God indeed has suffered to fall, out of some secret but
most wise and loving purpose of his own, that he may raise him again with much
more glory? whom did thou but know to be such an one, could thou
entertain any inhumane thoughts against him, who is ordained to the possession
of the glory of the Elect, and to be an inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven,
against thy brother, against a member of Christ, against a servant, yea and a
son of God? But (thou will say) by this reason the Magistrate must suffer
thieves, robbers, cutthroats and other criminal offenders, for as much as all
such may be of the number of the elect, such as may in time be reclaimed. I
answer; a godly and wise Magistrate when he punishes such like offenders, he
does it not to satisfy his own hatred, but executes that office whereunto he
is called of God, knowing that he is bound to obey Gods revealed will whatever
his own reason may notwithstanding prompt him unto. Even as Abraham was ready
at Gods command to offer his most beloved and most innocent son Isaac. And in
the mean time he omits no office of humanity toward such as are to be put to
death. But thou will say further: Can the ears then o^ that man which loves God
hear accursed speeches against God, and be no more moved then if they nothing
concerned him? I answer and grant, that a man ought to be moved and vehemently
moved in such a case, but would not allow that motion to be a rash headlong
zeal, but a zeal guided by the most accurate reason, not of Satan's but of the
Spirit of Gods begetting. If thou had a brother or a son rather, whom thou
exceedingly lovedst; thou could not see him catch a dangerous fall, but
(especially in case he were therewith grievously wounded) thou would be much
moved, but with what kind of motion or affection? So as to inveigh against him
with harsh language, to overwhelm him with revilings and reproaches? Yea rather
thou would run to him and raise him up as gingerly as thou can. Thou
would bid him be of good cheer, and leave nothing undone which might free him
from, or at least mitigate his pain. Thou would spare no pains and watch with
him whole nights together. And in case the anguish of his wound shall make him
froward, thou will nevertheless remit nothing of thy great tenderness over him.
Such would I have the motion of thy mind to be, to be grieved at the fall of
thy brother; to be grieved that God is offended; to be grieved for their sakes
whom he has mis-taught so a that they are in danger to lose their salvation.
But let the effects of thy griefs be, that thou endeavor with all thy might
either wholly to remove or to lessen the evil; and that thou take heed again and
again (as in a business wherein thou can not err without great danger) that
thou neither do or speak any thing which may increase the same, nor of which
thou can not foresee some certain hope of profit; and that thou will so order
thy self, that in case thou shall at any time observe, that what thou did to
a good end had a bad issue, thou will be content with the hazard of thy
reputation to correct thine Error.

Furthermore, three things seem to require our consideration: what course is to
be taken concerning him that sows Errors; what is to be done concerning such as
have assented unto Errors; and what concerning such as are in danger to be
infected. Concerning the Author of the Error, thou must be exceeding careful,
what end and scope all thy counsels aim at. Many weighing what a destructive
thing Error in Religion is, and consequently what damage he brings to the
Church of God who disperseth Errors, they think nothing can be enacted too
severely against him. Whereupon at every first word they break out into
railings and reproaches, and fill the world with outcries, and a man would
wonder how they please themselves in so doing, and how rarely they conceive
they have defended the cause of Christ. Neither do these men much regard,
whether a man teach false out of ignorance, or to serve his own lust. Yea
rather as though they were assured that never any such thing is done but out of
malice, they deal with every one as with a malicious seducer. Hence come these
kind of expressions: The filthy beast was not ashamed to speak so and so. The
most cunning impostor has left nothing unattempted whereby he might poison
simple people, with the like expressions; and a man would wonder to see how
fluent some men are and copious in such kind of Rhetoric. Now if so be a man
shall think that he teaches true and godly doctrines and that he is well and
holily employed, for this cause, by all the reasons he can he will endeavor to
cause his Errors to be received and conceive that he deserves much praise for
so doing. If therefore thou shall fall foul upon him, averring that he deals
maliciously, impudently and wickedly, he will think himself to be exceedingly
injured. Whereupon he will be moved and inflamed with anger and determine with
himself to maintain his Error come what will come, and to bandy back the
injuries with a large requital. Then will the people also take several sides,
and all places will be disquieted with contentions, scoldings, exclamations; So
that no good, much hurt will follow. Wherefore, as thy aim ought to be, that he
which sows Errors may not escape a just and deserved censure; so ought thou
to deal much otherwise with him that being deceived himself deceives others,
then with him that does it maliciously, and not to punish any for malice till
that malice appear manifest, and it is the part of a wel-disposed mind in a
doubtful case to incline to the more favorable construction, so as rather to
make supposition of Error then malice. Furthermore, those men are wont to incur
great hatred and to bring great calamities upon themselves who labor to broach
new Tenets, so that he which should take any pleasure to stir up the hate of
men against himself and to make himself to be inveighed against, must be a
strange kind of man. Wherefore no man ought to suppose such a thing of any man,
unless upon very great probability. And if it be a matter of Error and not of
malice, verily thus I think, that if there be any thing in which clemency is to
be used, here it ought to take place. Suppose a man fearing God, that look what
himself accounts true and saving doctrine, would fain (if it were possible)
that all the world might know and approve the same: in such a case, if you
consider the mind of the man, will not any harsh dealing toward him appear to
be inhumanity and cruelty. God has not endowed him with more wit or judgment,
neither has he imparted to him a greater measure of his Spirit: if then thou
shall be angry with him, thou will seem to be angry not so much with him as
with God that has given him no greater ability. Now if so be thou look at the
issue and fruit, nothing is more unprofitable then anger, indignations and
invectives full of criminations and reproaches. But if so be there be knavery
in the matter, I shall readily grant, no censure can be grievous enough, no
punishment can be invented so severe, but to be many degrees short of so
horrible wickedness: That there should be any man whom neither the fear of God
nor the salvation of men could any ways move, but whiles he satisfies his own
lust he sets all at six and seven. Howbeit, in case a man be worthy of great
censure, it may not be expedient forthwith to deal with him according to his
deserts. All things (says the Apostle) are lawful for me, but all things are
not expedient. So that we must consider again and again, what is most
expedient, what regard is to be had of the person, what the time, what the
place calls for, which things a mind disturbed with anger or any other passion
cannot discern. For anger darkens a man's sight, duls, troubles and corrupts the
judgment, is the worst counselor that can be at all times and in all affairs.
Be it that a man deserve to be stoned to death, to be torn in pieces limb from
limb, this may be done by the sentence of the Magistrate, without wrath,
without insultation, without railing. For what need is there of these
affections, the enemies of all sound judgment? So shall it be done with greater
gravity and profit, and the punishment will seem to have proceeded not from the
lust of man but from right reason it self. So likewise shall the example of such
severity take much stronger impression in the minds of men. Now these are the
things we ought to have a care of, that he which has seduced the people,
seduce them no more, but may suffer truth to take place; that those which have
been seduced may be brought back again to the truth; that such who are yet
sound may be armed against the contagion of Error. Whether or no it be also
requisite that by some fitting punishment, as with a bridle, the daring of
extravagant wits, should be curbed from blurting out whatever comes into their
pates, we shall hereafter take into consideration. It may so fall out, that God
wills that some should be sharply reproved, that at the last day they may have
the less excuse and undergo the more severe punishment: Yet, as no man living
can say who those persons be, so no man ought to be moved with the
consideration of such; if there be any such whom God would have so severely
chidden, he will stir up such as shall do it, only let us take heed that Satan
deceive us not, and that we permit not his instigations to be obtruded upon us,
as if they were the breathings of the holy Ghost.

Now that thou may know by what means thou may withdraw a malicious seducer
from seducing the people; thou must understand and consider, that he which shall
set himself to commit so great a wickedness, must be a person extraordinarily
Impious and void of all fear of God; concerning him therefore, whether present
or absent, if thou shall speak according to his merit, if thou shall paint him
out in his colors, and he forthwith shall abstain, what think you his meaning
is? Will he not seem openly to confess himself guilty of those crimes which thou
have charged him with? Is it possible thou should promise thy self so much
moderation, so much relenting in a man void of the fear of God? May thou not
with much more reason expect, that he will endeavor to clear himself of all
crimes objected against him, and lay many more to thy charge? Will he not beat
his brains night and day to invent calumnies wherewith to defame thee? And what
is there so far from Truth, which a craftily-composed discourse cannot make to
appear probable? And when as Angers and Hatreds shall increase here and there,
when as daily vehement accusations shall be heard on both sides, the people shall
be divided into contrary factions, what shall thou gain thereby, which a man of
a sound judgment would not much repent him of? If then there be any hope (which
is very small) to withdraw such a person from his enterprise, it does not herein
consist, in discovering and laying to his charge his malice; but herein rather,
if forbearing to speak of his fraud and malice, thou shall in the first place
so defend the truth, and render it so clear that it may be almost felt: if thou
shall do this with the greatest dexterity and gentleness that may be: for as it
is hard to procure from a wicked nefarious person, a willingness to appear
vanquished by argument, and to have bin in an Error; so should thou
foolishly hope, that he would be content to have it thought that wittingly and
willingly he has, through excess of wickedness cheated the people. In like
manner, toward the reducing of such as have bin seduced, I cannot see what
good can be wrought by reproaching the Author. For it is commonly seen, that he
which assents to any man's tenets, does reverence that man and count him worthy
of honor and praise; so that if you shall go about to disgrace him with
reproaches, he will say thou do him great wrong, and will be displeased with
thee therefore. Now who knows not that good will and hatred, and other passions
of the mind have great power to sway the judgment this way or that way? Nor can
I understand of what greater use it will be toward the preservation of those
that are as yet untainted. For its almost impossible that a speech full of
revilings and accusations, should not flow from Anger, or some vehement motion
of mind; now where such motions are, its a wonder, if all things be said with
due circumspection, and not rather frequent oversights be committed, either by
not rightly repeating the Seducers words, or not fitly answering his Arguments,
whereby (as we have showed) many inconveniences arise. And many men there are
who are offended with all bad language, be there just cause, or be there not,
for so speaking: and they will think ill of, and disaffect that man, in whom
they see a propensity to revile. Which, what else is it but to be the readier
to assent unto those whom thou laborest, with all thy might, to disparage with
reproaches? Especially if they shall have the Art, slily and craftily to
counterfeit some kind of modesty and patience. I confess indeed with some,
Criminations are of that force, that they cannot hear so much as the name of
those that are reproached, without trembling; so far will they be from suffering
themselves to be by such persons seduced; but this falls out only then for the
most part, when the persons criminating are in high repute for their
uprightness, holiness and innocence, so that it may seem impossible that they
should be drawn by any means to do injuriously toward any; which opinion
settled in the minds of the people concerning thee, thou may with much more
ease falsely ascribe and arrogate, then procure unto thy self. For even we our
selves oftentimes do not sufficiently know, by what spirit we are led; and be a
man never so innocent, he shall never be able to hinder, but that many things
designed with all possible sanctity, shall be mis-interpreted by the common
people. And those persons themselves who by means of crimes alleged, have
withdrawn all credit from the parties accused, would in all likelihood have
done the like, when they had heard their tenets related, and without
crimination, by sure and certain arguments and testimonies, heartily and
civilly refuted.

Hitherto (I conceive) we have cleared, how that from bad language, very many
and great evils arise, and that the profit from thence arising is either none
at all or very little, and that it may more certainly by other ways be
attained. It remains only that we speak of that same reason which is alleged,
why such language should be used, viz. because by such kind of censures, the
Authors of new tenets are curbed. And in the first place I desire it may be
noted, that we do not in this place treat of the office of the Magistrate; it
is the duty of private men which we handle in this place, and of such to whose
care the instruction of the people in piety is committed. Concerning the
Magistrate we shall speak hereafter. Now then, forasmuch as it is not in the
power of any one, save the Magistrate, to censure or punish malefactors; other
men must take heed they put not their sickle into that field which belongs not
to them. There is to this purpose, an excellent passage of Cicero in his fourth
book of Commonwealths: Our twelve tables (quoth he) contrariwise, enacting
very few faults punishable by Death, made this for one; if by any practicing or
libelling a man should defame any one, or charge him with any heinous offense.
A gallant law! forasmuch as the lives and conversations of men, ought to be
subject to the Law, and the legal decisions and inquisition of Magistrates, not
to the wits of Poets and pamphleters; neither ought any thing to be
reproachfully charged upon any one, save with condition, that he may have
liberty to answer and make his defense in open Court. Is a man's reputation so
slight a matter, that it should he open to every bodies lust? If the supreme
Magistrate of the Common wealth should set himself to disgrace and defame
whomsoever he pleased (though there might be reason enough so to do) without
process of law, who would not say he played the part of a Tyrant rather then a
King? That therefore which the chief Magistrate cannot do but by manifest
tyranny, shall any private man be suffered to do the same, shall it be permitted
to him to do it, whose office it is, not so much by words as his own example to
train the people in all Honesty and Moderation of mind? It is indeed the part
of a Pastor, to reprehend, to chide, to rebuke, but he ought to do it not as an
enemy, but as a father; so far forth as may be necessary and profitable for the
amendment of those he has to deal with. And he ought to remember, that it is
not his, but the Magistrates office to censure or punish any one. And in case
he shall plead that it belongs to him; let us consider with what success he shall
use such a power in respect of the end proposed. I shall not deny, but that many
men, terrified by the example of such persons as they see by such dealing,
brought into great disgrace and hatred, may become thereby less, daring to vent
such things, as curious studies frequently suggest: howbeit, unless the lives
of such who are the Censurers, be void not only of vice but suspicion too, and
unless their holiness and innocence be in all things apparent, so that they
shall rather show themselves to be certain divine creatures then of Mankind; I
conceive they shall advance very little by such a course. For it will just so
fall out, as when a man shall stop the passage of a river with damms: the waters
will seem for a while to be restrained of their course, yet will they seek a
passage on all sides, and to be sure, swelling higher and higher, they will
overflow the bay, and at length having eat through and throwndown the damms,
with mighty violence will they break forth, and make, by many degrees, greater
waste, then if their course had never bin restrained: for the man whose liberty
is curbed by such a bridle, for a time indeed he keeps himself quiet, but it is
much against his will, and he collects poison by little and little, wherewith
being filled he must of necessity pour it forth, and it proves so much the more
deadly, by how much the longer he kept it in: forasmuch as hatred against such
as he conceives tyrannically to rule over him, is the cause, that, he is averse
unto, and abhorrs their opinions. Hereupon he endeavors by all the cunning ways
possible, first, to draw away, now one, then another to his side; and so the
evil grows by little and little and gathers strength, til at length the sect
fears not to discover it self, and to disquiet the Commonwealth; which is
plainly seen, among many other instances, in the so late sedition at Munster.
And a wonderful thing it is, with what arts Satan furnishes these kind of men,
and with what success he furthers their designs: which if those men would more
advisedly weigh, who judge reproaches to be of such force to preserve the purity
of doctrine, they would, happily, be less delighted with them then they are. In a
word, as I deny not, but that sometime, sharp reproofs ought to take place, so
I Avouch, that all those conditions do very seldom concur which are requisite,
that they may be in the least measure beneficial. And to pass over the
consideration of their profit, a great and wonderful is that, which Jude in his
Epistle mentions, that Michael the Archangel contending about the body of
Moses, durst not rail upon Satan himself, but desired God to rebuke him. What
hare-braind men are we! how much greater things dare we not only against Satan
(which yet were a great arrogance, to take more liberty then the Archangel
thought fit to use) but against men, it may be no less dear to God then we our
selves are. Would we but weigh this one example, and then consider, what
liberty we use in mutual reproaches; verily, that man must be very blind, that
sees not, how that this same custom of evil-speaking comes from no other
spirit, but that of the Devil. But, forasmuch as we have declared, that what
ever we do upon the report of some Error spread abroad, we ought to consider
the end we ought to aim at in every thing, and that we ought among other
things, to endeavor that the party erring may be drawn from his Error; to which
purpose bad language and insultations profit not, but rather do very much hurt;
let us now make enquiry, what is most fit to be done in such a case.

Now there are two things requisite to reduce a person erring from his Error;
first, such demonstrations as may be of force with one of his judgment, to
discover his error unto him; secondly, that he may weigh such demonstrations
with a perfect and sound judgment. But if so be the demonstrations shall not be
suited to a man's understanding, or he shall not weigh them, or in case he do, it
shall be with a prejudiced and corrupted judgment, we shall miss of our intended
scope. Further, his judgment shall then become sound and incorrupt, when God
shall have healed it with his spirit, and have rendered it capable of the truth;
as also when it is not vexed with any jealousies or passions. Here therefore
nothing is more to be avoided, then that we speak or do any thing which may
wound his mind and estrange his affections; such are all words that may imply
our bearing any ill-wil toward him, such as may gall and accuse him of deceit,
ignorance, impudence; or, in a word, any ways blast his reputation. We ought
rather by all kind of humanity and respects, invite him to gentleness,
moderation and goodwil; whereunto charity will best instruct us, provided it be
sincere, void of ostentation; which virtue whosoever is not assured that he is
furnished with, let him not once meddle in this design til he have attained it.
And if so be thou can see nothing in the party that may deserve thy love,
consider what there is in God and his only begotten son, whose workmanship he
is, that may command thy affection. Were it not the pleasure of God that this
man should live, either he should never have bin born, or presently expired
upon his birth, or at least never have lived til this time: whereas now thou
see how God nourishes him, how he causes his sun to shine upon him as much as
upon thy self, and how thousands of ways he makes him partaker of his
liberallity and goodness. Shall it then become thee who art the servant of this
God, to be otherwise affected toward such an one? How know thou (as we said
before) but this man may be a sheep of the Lords fold, which, how ever at
present he wanders from the flock as one distracted, shall at length be found by
that best of the shepherds, healed and brought back to the flock? And if the
case be such, do thou not discern our Lord himself, in the person of such an
one, coming to the weak and sick to make trial of thy love, which he intends to
commemorate at the last day? And forasmuch as thou art not able to judge whether
it be thus or no, it is enough for thee, that possibly he may be such an one;
so that what ever kindness thou shall show him, the Lord may reckon it as done
unto himself. Thou ought not therefore to look upon his person, but upon the
person of Christ whom he represents, and to remember how great his love has
bin to thee: insomuch as he refused not, being himself just and innocent, to
dye for thee an unjust person, and the greatest of sinners, especially by so
cruel and bloody a death. Oh, had we but the least suspicion concerning any
man, that he should hereafter be a King, yea the best of Kings; suppose his
present condition to be never so mean and obscure, how far would we be from
contemning such a man? And what I pray you, is the dignity and sovereignty of a
King, compared with that dgnity and luster which is laid up for Gods elect? And
shall we account that man unworthy of our humanity and good will, who, for ought
we know, is born to this glory? Again, it will be very effectual to move thee to
a gentle opinion concerning such a man, if entering into thine own heart, thou
shall take a diligent and strict survey of all thy actions, of thy whole life
and cogitations, and examine them by the Law of God. And if so be thou shall
find thy self tainted in the presence of God with many and great sins, and yet
do comfort thy self, that he will not deal severely with thee, nor punish thee
according to thy deserts, but rather carry himself toward thee, as a tender
God and Father: why may thou not hope, that he shall be partaker of the like
gentleness? And since, in regard of this hope of thine, thou look upon thy
self, as one no ways to be despised; what reason is there, thou should not
judge the same of another? Further, with such meditations as these, we must ioyn
frequent and fervent prayers to God, that he would soften our heart, and would
plant therein, with his own hand, a true and living charity, which will direct
us unto such apt and convenient ways of dealing with our brother, that it will
be a miracle if we do not shortly reclaim him. And whereas no man can
understand the things of God but by the spirit of God; before we begin any
dispute, let us wrestle with God by prayer, taking to our assistance some other
godly persons, that he by his spirit would be present with the person erring,
and open his heart and eyes, that he may acknowledge the truth; yea, and we
ought to exhort him to make the like prayer to God in his own behalf.

As for demonstrations, they will be then available to manifest the truth, when
God is their Author, as it is written; I will instruct you with such a tongue and
such wisdom, that no body shall be able to resist you. And again, as the rain
and snow descend from heaven, and return not thither again, but do moisten and
soften the earth, making it to bud, and bring forth, and yield bread to sustain
the life of man; so my word that proceeds out of my mouth, shall not return to
me fruitless, but shall accomplish all my will, and shall prosper toward those
to whom I shall send it. Here then we see that prayers are again necessary unto
the Lord, that he would not only open the heart of the person erring, but also
suggest unto us such words as maybe most fitting to demonstrate the truth. And
if it shall not seem absurd to allow some place for such arts, which though they
be termed humane; yet if a man shall no other ways use them, then as knowing
that while he plants and waters, it must be God that can give the increase, and
putting all his confidence in him; no man can deny but they are the gifts of
God: I shall further add, that those demonstrations have power to persuade,
which taking their rise from things evidently known, and from such places of
Scripture as are most clear and incapable of different interpretations, in a
due order, and with a perpetual connection; no medium being overpast or
misplaced, do arrive unto the point in controversy; or else which shall begin
at the Tenet to be disproved, and some other point out of all question,
inferring by degrees, until such time as the party erring shall be brought to
some great absurdity; which when by no means it can be maintained, it is
impossible but the party dealt with shall confess; that somewhat untrue has bin
laid down, especially if this shall be done with words and expressions, noways
obscure, doubtful, or intricate, but plain, clear and familiar. Howbeit (to say
the truth) few there are, that can thus do, and the reason is, because there
are very few, that had not far rather be writers and speakers then Meditators.
Now it is not enough, if the argument which thou shall bring, shall seem unto
thee to the purpose, but it ought to be accommodated to the wit and judgment of
him that is to be persuaded therewith. As for example: if thou happily shall so
prize the Authority of Origin, as to think thou ought to credit what ever he
says, and shall alleadg some place of his writings wherein he seems to take thy
part, this may seem to thee, to make much on thy side; but if he with whom thou
have to deal, shall give little or no credit to Origin, this Testimony will stand
thee in no stead, and as little shall thou prevail, if having to deal with a
Turk or some other enemy to Christianity, thou shall make use of Testimonies of
Scripture. Thus likewise it will come to pass, if dealing with reasons, thou
shall take such things for grant, which, howbeit to thee they seem out of
question, yet thy Adversary is not persuaded of their truth. For thou ought
to assume such things as are true, not only in thine own, but in his account
also. As if thou shall say, we must not confess our sins to a Priest, because
God has not commanded it; and there stop: for he which does not as yet know,
or at least for the present remembers not, that we ought to observe nothing but
what God himself shall command, will not a whit be moved with that reason. There
is a like, but more obscure passage in Tullies book called Laelius; the words
are these. Scipio denied that any speech could be more contrary to friendship,
then his that said, a man ought so to love, as remembering that he may hate
where he loves; neither could he persuade himself, that (as it is believed)
Bias should utter any such thing, who was accounted one of the seven wise men,
but that it came from some base ambitious spirit, from a man that would reduce
all things to his own power. For how is it possible any man should be his
friend, to whom he conceives he may become an enemy? Yea, he must of necessity
desire and wish that his friend may frequently offend; that he may give him the
more occasions to reprehend him. Again, he must of necessity be vexed, greived
and moved to envy, by the well-doing and profit of his friends. So far Loelius.
Now a man will wonder how these absurdities should follow from the speech of
Bias; whereas happily had the Argumentation bin complete, all occasion of mervail
would have bin taken away. And that thou may understand, what the way of
prevailing in this case is, what reasons will move thine Adversary, and what
not, thou must be very well acquainted with what he says and thinks; as also
(beside the Controversy in hand) what other opinions he holds, what those
things be whereof he is most certainly persuaded, and what his judgmnet is. Now
there is nothing so usual in disputes, as for to cavil at one another words,
and to collect absurdities. Whence, for the most part, it comes to pass, that
opposition is made, no: so much against what is affirmed, but against what thou
by a false interpretation have feigned to thy self. Which kind of practice
whereunto can it tend, but (as we have said) to provoke thine adversary to
choler, to confirm his confidence and peremptoryness; and to open to thy self a
window whereout to cast a thousand follies, not a jot to the matter in hand?
Thus to do, is to imitate unskilful physicians, who little examine the nature
of the disease; appoint remydies, nothing to the purpose, and in stead of
curing kill their Patients. Yet some men are exceedingly conceited of
themselves, if mis-interpreting their adversaries words, they can infer some
great absurdity therefrom. Howbeit, this custom ought to be left to vain
Sophisters. In matters of this nature, of such weight and concernment, let it
not be thy aim, that thou may seem to have confuted the error by hook or by
crook, on any fashion; but let thy endeavor be to confute it indeed, and in
truth, so as thine adversary may not have a word to say for himself, which thou
shall never accomplish unless thou give diligent heed, rightly to understand
thine opposites words. And if so be he seem to utter somewhat that is very
absurd, thou ought to be the more fearful, least thou mis-understand him,
and rather to desire him to explain his meaning; then to fall upon the bones of
the absurdity, when thou art not yet certain, that it is thine adversaries
meaning. And when the controversy is managed face to face, herein commonly is
the grand miscarriage, that a man persuades himself he can at the first word,
divine what his adversary would say, before he hear him out, and would be
presently at the Answer: whence it comes to pass that clamours are raised,
choler is moved, and all the labor is lost. Away then with this rash
forecasting, and let us stay til our time come to Answer. Others when they have
produced an Argument, will needs triumph before the Victory, not able to stay
til the other reply. Because they can see no way to avoid the dint of their
Argument, they think surely, no body else can. Out upon such lightness! we
cannot every man know all things. For supposing thou know more then I in all
other matters, what wonder is it, if I happily know more then thou in this one
point? What shall thou get by this thine eagerness, saving to lay naked, like a
fool, thine own Arrogance, Insolence and crabbed condition? If in worldly
matters, Experience has taught this proverbial Lesson.

-- Et quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus
Even honest Homer's sometimes napping took.
And this Saepe etiam est stultus valde oportuna locutus:
A fool often times to purpose speaks.
what shall we think in matters divine, of which the truth it self thus speaks;
That it has pleased his heavenly father, to hide his secrets from the wise,
and to reveal them to babes and sucking Children? Now we find by experience,
that if thine adversary observe that thou understandest his meaning, what he
holds, and by what reasons he is induced so to think, and shall see thee
notwithstanding, ready to contradict and oppose him; it will be almost
impossible, but he will abate much of his confidence. He was formerly persuaded,
that in case his fancies were rightly understood, every one would assent unto
them; but now when he sees him that understands them, refusing to give his
assent, he cannot choose, but wonder. Which what else is it, but to make some
kind of doubt, least his Tenets be not so sound as they ought to be? Hereupon
likewise he is inflamed with a desire to know what it is thou have to object,
which desire has made him fit to understand thee, and being come so far, the
business is wel-near accomplished. My judgment therefore is in overthrowing an
Error, that the chief labor ought to be rightly, to understand what is
affirmed, according to the meaning of him that spoke the words; not how thou by
a crafty cavil may interpret the speech: yea rather, if any violence should
be offered to the words, I would much rather they should be drawn to serve the
purpose of the speaker, then to any other intent. Among other faults committed
by misunderstanding our adversaries words; this is a frequent one, when we
thus reason with our selves; if it were as that man affirms, this and that
would thereof follow, and then look what inferences we make in our own
understandings, we attribute them unto our Adversaries, and waste away the time
in confuting such things, as they peradventure never once so much as thought
of, whereby we do both provoke them, and render our selves ridiculous; which
the better to understand, this example may be of use. Because the Papists say,
that sins committed after baptism, must either be expiated with good works by
us wrought, or after death, by the fire of Purgatory; if we shall thus infer; If
it be necessary that any sins be expiated, either by our doings or sufferings,
then Christ has not taken them away, and then he has not performed what he
came into the world for, viz. to abolish the works of the Devil, and therefore
shall say that the Papists deny that Christ did that he came into the world to
do: we shall so far say true, inasmuch as they do in some sort deny that Christ
has done, what he came into the world for, because it follows from what they
hold; yet shall not our saying be punctually true, inasmuch as they do not
expressly say so, and it may be, think not so neither. So that if we shall
proceed with many words to blame them for such collections, as if they were
their positions, they will say that we are mad. What shall we do then in this
Case? Report what they say without addition, diminution or alteration. And if
so be absurdities shall follow from their words, they are to be collected only
to this end, that it may appear, that what they hold is false. Such ingenuity
is amiable what ever thing be controverted; as for the Disciples of Christ
reasoning about matters Divine, no ornament in the world can more become them.

Furthermore, Desire of Conquest ought to be banished from all Christian
disputes: let all thy care be, that truth may overcome; neither let it concern
thee, whether she be discovered by thee or some other man; persuade thy self
that thy reputation shall be sufficiently provided for, in case God may have
that honor which is due to him; which is much advanced, when Truth is rescued
and vindicated from Imposture. Wherefore, in case it fall out, that by means of
the dispute, thou come to know that thou wast ignorant of before, beware thou
shame not to acknowledge it; never care who it is thou must give way unto. Know
thou, that it is a most honorable thing to be taught of God, be it by what
instrument soever. Let them be ashamed that will not learn. If thou art ashamed
of him, whom God shall use as his instrument, assure thy self, it is not man but
God whom thou contemnest, whose severe vengeance thou shall not escape, unless
with a reverent mind thou embrace his proffered favor. And to the end thou
may do this the more easily, when o^casion shall require, it will be much to
the purpose, if thou shall avoid such things as increase the difficulty to
practice the same; such as these: to averr any thing with great confidence, so
as often to protest that thou will account it a great offense, an heinous
crime, yea mere madness for any man to contradict thee; to call him a block
that cannot understand it, and the like. For it will afterward seem very
grievous, to appear to have shot so wide of the mark; so that it is far better
to speak warily at all times, not so as to seem always to doubt (for that were
not commendable) but barely to affirm what thou conceivest to be the truth, and
in like manner to deny such things, as thou conceivest to be false, and to
alleadg Arguments and Testimonies, on the one side or on the other: only
abstain from such expressions as these; what an impious thing is this? What
rashness? What impudence to affirm so or so, and the like. The Mathematitians
use most sure demonstrations and infallible, yet shall you never hear them utter
such a word; for such speeches add nothing to the certainty and clearness of
the demonstrations. If it may be free for us to assent unto the Truth, when
ever it shall be made known unto us, and to embrace a more true opinion, then
what for the present we hold, why should we by means of such rash speeches bind
our selves, as it were by a Law, with great obstinacy to adhere unto a false
one? Pertinent hereunto seems that advice of Solomon. Take heed thou entangle
not thy self in contention, least proving over weak thou be ashamed, and at a
nonplus. And forasmuch as we cannot know what things those are wherein we err,
that in speaking of them our discourse may be circumspect, as it ought to be in
such matters, we shall never use this caution when there is need, unless we shall
accustom our selves, what ever matter we reason about, to avoid such kind of
expressions, as most dangerous rocks. Again, the aforesaid difficulty is much
increased, if we shall greatly despise our Adversary; so that it will be much
more civil and discreet, with whomsoever we have to deal, to contain our selves
within the bounds of modesty; and to abstain from all signification of
contempt. And forasmuch, as do what we can, we shall hardly obtain the power, to
seem vanquished without great reluctation, we ought to arm our minds against
this assault, as firmly as we can, with some prevalent reason, by frequent
meditation, deeply imprinted in our mind; nor do I know any more forcible then
this; to call to mind, that this whole life, of ours, lasts but for a moment,
being like a stage play, where Princes, Kings, Serving-men, Ladies,
Waiting-women are brought upon the stage; when the play is done, the players
casting aside those persons they acted, are either all equals; or he
peradventure which was King of the play, is now of a more base condition, then
he that played the part of a servant. Now in case some one of the players should
find himself much agrieved to act that part which seems dishonorable, and had
rather offend him, by whose favor he shall be raised out of the dust, and by
whose displeasure he shall become miserable all his life time; will not all men
account him out of his wits, who shall prize more the vain ostentation of an
hour, then so many commodities of life? And is there not here the same or far
greater madness? Be thou the Conqueror or Conquered, how long will the glory or
the disgrace endure? And in case thou shall wittingly oppose the Truth, and by
so doing shall make God thine Enemy, what will become of thee, wretched man that
thou art? By thy obstinacy it may fall out, that the Truth shall remain
oppressed, and an innumerable company of people by this means perish; which will
be so many accusers against thee at the last day. Who would not tremble every
joint to think of this? Away then with all such kind of peremptoriness, and let
every man resolve with himself, to make no account of his own reputation in
this case, but to make it his whole desire that in all disputes Christ may have
the better: neither let him care to become the offscouring of the world, so
that in all things the name of God may be honored. Thou art netled perhaps,
that he should get the victory, whom peradventure thou did ere while lightly
esteem in comparison of thy self. And is it so indeed? Have not thou another
much greater combat with Satan? He has singled thee out, as it were a certain
Fort, which by all engines and endeavors he will endeavor to Conquer: and thou
stand upon thy guard. Now if so be thou shall oppose the Truth known,
through the pride of thy mind; Shall thou not dishonourably surrender thy self
unto thine enemy, to such an enemy? Shall thou not betray thy Fort: And this in
the sight of thy general, from whom nothing is hid? Is there nothing in this
case, that may vex and afflict thy mind? Consider again and again the choice
thou art put unto. There is a double fight in which thou art engaged, thou
can not in both be Conqueror. If thou art resolved to become victor on that
side, by the oppression of Truth, most sure it is, thou shall be overcome in
this other duel with Satan. But if so be thou can not be content to be
vanquished here, of necessity thou must strike sail, and submit thy self in the
former. Which, that thou may do with a more contented mind, consider with thy
self, that thy giving way, will not seem so shameful to others, as it does unto
thy self: for who knows not, that nothing is more proper to mankind then to
err? And that in every Controversy it is expected, that the one side will be
vanquished? So that it will not be much wondered at, if thou shall be overcome
rather then thy adversary: and though it be a disgrace to be vanquished, yet is
it a thing very praiseworthy, and that which is apt to procure great good will
from all good persons, if thou shall be so ingenious, as willingly to give
place to the Truth, being once manifested. So that in case any loss be
sustained in respect of thy fame and reputation, in point of learning, it shall
be abundantly recompensed with the commendation of thy goodness; which thou
may easily understand to be of more worth of the two; forasmuch as every man
abhorrs a wicked person, how learned soever he seems to be; whereas all men
account a good man, though void of all learning, worthy both of Love and
Honor. Neither ought thou to persuade thy self, that it will not be known
thou art vanquished, unless thou thy self give ground: yea rather, by how much
the more thou shall struggle, by so much the more will thou discover thy
stifneckedness and baseness, and give thine adversary the more occasion to
publish the same, and give the more occasion to many speeches, which will not
make much for thy reputation. So that in the Conclusion, thou shall neither be
able to maintain the reputation of thy-learning, nor choose but to undergo the
hateful censure of perverseness and obstinacy. If thou shall frequently meditate
on such things as these; it will be a miracle if the inbred impotency of thy
mind be not much abated; So as thou shall be able to suffer the Truth to
overcome, with a contented mind, when occ^sion shall require.

And forasmuch as it is very hard in disputes, both not to be provoked, and not
to provoke; we must labor by such meditations as these, like as it were by
certain medicines, to prepare our mind, that we may not be overtaken withsuch
miscarriages. Wherefore when thou art to enter into a dispute, thou ought to
imitate a valiant and wary Champion, that is to fight insingle comba^: for he
will bethink himself of all the several Arts of striking and thrusting, and will
study how to defend himself against every one. He will likewise consider what
parts of his body are worst armed, and in which parts a wound will prove most
dangerous, thereby to use the greater care in their defense. Moreover, he will
whet his mind to the combat, and resolve either to vanquish his adversary, or
valiantly to lose his life. So ought thou to think with thy self, and set
before thine eyes what ever may happen at thy dispute, which may inflame thy
mind with anger, darken thine understanding, and fill thee with perturbations;
as that thine adversary may reproach thee, that he may charge thee to deal
impiously, impudently or wickedly; that he may term thee a silly ignorant
fellow, a block, a sot; that he may basely deride thee; that he will cavil and
wrest thy words; in brief, that he will use thee with all kind of insolence, and
yet must thou resolve with thy self, not to be moved at any thing, but rather
with all gentleness and patience to persist to the end. Have thou Nobility or
wealth, Authority or Reputation, or any other thing which may mak^ thee think
highly of thy self, make account that on that part thou art unarmed, liable to
injury; and that there, if thou take not heed, thou shall be wounded. And thy
way of defending thy self, is to understand that these are no other then Satan's
weapons, wherewith he will fight against thee; which will then want all power of
hurting thee, when thou shall perfectly understand what vain and empty things
they are. This one thing ought to be engraven in thine heart, that thou have
not to deal with the man, with whom thou must dispute, but with Satan himself,
and that the main quarrel is not that point about which thou shall argue, but
many more matters, and of greater concernment. How that Satan's aim is from one
contention to raise infinite, to inflame men's minds with wrath, to rend the
Church into Sects, to stir up seditions, and erect Tyrannies: in a word that
he aims at nothing but mighty combustions and devastations. And that
therefore, he will not bring upon the stage one contentious person or two, but
very many, each more wayward then other more obstinate, more seditious. And
that the top of his design, is not to darken the point in question (for that is
the smallest thing he aims at) but much more to vanquish thy patience, which
being vanquished, he may easily obtain his other ends. Go to then, what is the
duty of a good Soldier in this case? To be white-live^'d? To be wearied out?
To give ground to the Enemy? By no means in the world: but by how much the more
eagerly and fiercely he sets upon thee, by so much the more do thou call thy
wits about thee, and buckle thy self to fight against him. Which thou ought
to do with the more alacrity, forasmuch as the Apostle James gives us most
certain hope of victory; where he says, if we shall resist the Devil, he will fly
from us. Oh that this one thing were well rooted in our minds, that what ever
Controversy be agitated, we have not to do with him that moves it, and that
the Controversy is not about one point of Religion, but that thereby Satan
seeks occasion to raise contentions, sects, brawles, combustions, and the
subversion of the Kingdom of Christ, of the Commonwealth of Christians. Of
what force would this one consideration be toward the mollifiing our minds,
and the composing us more and more to gentleness, and a quiet and circumspect
manner of disputation! Now among other things which make a disputant very
froward, Arrogance challenges the first place, if thou shall think thou know
all things, and contemn every body else in comparison of thy self. Which humor
is often augmented by wealth, Magistracy, great benefices, reputation, and
other things of like Nature. With which persuasion, if thy mind shall be
besotted, thou shall not be able to suffer any man to speak one whole sentence,
ere his mouth be well open; thou will suppose thou sufficiently understandest
what he was about to say, and what he might have further added. And with one
word, with one word say I? Yea rather with one laugh, one wry look, one gesture
or other, thou will imagine thou have abundantly confuted him: and whatsoever
thou shall affirm or deny, if any one shall be so hardy, as to mutter any thing
to the contrary, he shall be accounted guilty of high Treason and Sacriledg. Thy
Adversary in the mean time, will be so far from being reclaimed from his Error,
that thereunto great indignation will be joined, and a firm purpose to maintain
his Tenets with whomsoever he can, since he cannot in thy presence; and if he
may not openly, at least privily, to divulge them far and near: which disease
is exceeding hard to be prevented. For as any man is high in Authority, and
speaks from a more elevated place, he conceives he ought to seem in like manner
wiser then others, and would commonly, that his Authority should serve in stead
of Reason. Howbeit, we must oppose this mischief, from whence almost infinite
evils arise, and they very destructive. And first of all, thou must often
think, how silly a thing it is, if either thou wallow in wealth, from thy
riches; if thou art a Magistrate from thy Magistracy; if thou have Benefice
from thy Living; or if thou art a Gentleman from thy Gentility, to Arrogate
unto thy self any wisdom or knowledge. Of what kin is wisdom to any of these
things? The whole world will tell thee, that unless thou have Wit, unless thou
have had Teachers, unless thou have undergone long and diligent pains, those
things cannot avail thee. And for reputation, what is it but the Testimony of
the Multitude? A goodly witness of thy sufficiency, which sometimes it self, is
little less then stark mad! But if thou will give ear to him that only cannot
deceive, nor be deceived, thou will find neither wit nor study, nor teachers to
be any thing, but that all rests in the Spirit of God alone. So that if he only
shall afford thee plentiful assistance, though thou shall have no help besides,
thou can not but be exactly wise; if he alone shall be wanting, thou can not
choose but be an Arrant fool, however furnished with abundance of all other
assistance. Why then should these empty names blow thee up? Verily, inasmuch as
nature without any external assistance, flatters every man more then enough,
and makes him think himself very wise, we must take heed, least that by a
foolish relying upon such things, our natural infirmity be increased. And
whereas if we consider the other faults of man's nature, we shall find them all
to be deep-rooted, and hard to be, I will not say rooted up, but even in part
lopped off, and diminished. I am yet of opinion, that if Arrogance be compared
with the rest, they will appear to be very loose, and removeable in comparison;
for if thou shall be inflamed with anger, if thou conceive hatred, if thou
steal, if thou kill; thou can not but know that thou committest these crimes:
so that if thou shall often commit such acts, thou can not but know, that thy
mind is inclined to hatred, theft, bloodshed; and may try the mastery with
thy self, and by little and little, endeavor to attain to better dispositions
and manners: but in case thou shall be possessed with too great a conceit of
thine own wisdom, it will be as hard for thee to be persuaded, that thou do
so err. For if in any point thou shall err, it will be as hard a thing while
thou errest, to make thee understand that thou do err, as to make thee live
and not to live, at one and the same instant; for to err, and to acknowledge
thine Error, were the same, as to err, and not to err. It may come to pass
indeed, that after thou have remained for a time in thine Error, thou may
repent and acknowledge the same. But God knows how few Errors come to be
acknowledged by those that err. And concerning those few Errors which we
acknowledge, that self-love which is bred in our bone, is never wanting of an
excuse; so that every man will lay the fault any where, rather then in his own
judgment, whence it comes to pass, that he cannot discern how he Arrogates unto
himself, more then is meet: and forasmuch as the disease is hidden, the
medicine is not so much as sought after. And truly in this case, I cannot see
what other way any good is to be done, but by that course we formerly
mentioned, which, because it ought to be deeply imprinted in our minds, it must
not seem irksome to make repetition thereof in this place: And that was this.
Since we see, that all the affairs of man's life are full of dissentions, in
things divine and profane, public and private, in peace and war, at home and
abroad, and yet there is but one Truth in all things; of necessity, very many
must err. And forasmuch as for the most part, those that are judged to excel
others in wisdom, are at difference among themselves; it must be concluded,
that many also of those that are accounted wise, do err. And inasmuch as one
man errs in one thing, another in another, and therefore those things in which
every man errs, must needs be many; and because none so excels in wisdom, but
he may be subject to humane frailty, when he least suspects himself; Reason
thus with thy self; all other men err, and that frequently; and it cannot
betide a very wise man of exact judgment to err often: there is not therefore,
a man who has attained to so great wisdom, but that he comes far short of the
top, and yet there is no man but at^ributes very much unto himself, and in so
doing, is exceedingly mistaken in his opinion. What therefore will thou judge of
thy self? Will thou not thus think? I am a man too; that therefore which is so
proper to man, must of necessity be in me too, though I observe it not, that
so thou may labor to weaken the force of thine Arrogance. But there is in
man a kind, of I know not what spirit, an egregious flatterer, and very crafty,
which in the midst of such meditations as these, mutters I know not what in his
heart, which he does in such a manner, as that his speech is more moving,
affecting, and intoxicating, then discernable. Yet if thou can reach his
meaning, thou shall find he speaks to this effect: true indeed it is, there is
no man but is deceived in attributing too much unto himself, howbeit this
Arrogance is far from thee, thy case is far different, who art led by a special
instinct, which will not suffer thee to mistake in judging. And so great is the
force of this enchantment, that though thou shall strive long and earnestly
with thy self, yet shall thou hardly be able to lay down any little portion of
this vain persuasion. But of this thou ought to be certainly persuaded, that
by how much the less thou suspectest thy selt of Arrogance, by so much the more
Arrogant thou art, for whilst thou think well of thy self, the wise King
Solomon reckons thee amongst the number of fools. A fool (says he) is pleased
with his own reasonings, but a wise man seeks Council. So that the top of
humane wisdom seems to be, for a man to suspect his own wisdom, and to know
that he stands in need of the Counsel of another. Which Text verily ought
continually to be opposed against that most wicked spirit, that he may not
estrange thy mind from modesty.

And that thou may the better understand, that modesty is altogether
necessary in disputes; I will add one thing, which at the first view, may seem
very absurd, though nothing in the world is more certainly true: whosoever thou
art, thou can not maintain a Controversy with any man about any point, but
that, look by how much thou think thy self wiser then he, by so much on the
other side, will he think himself to be wiser then thou. The reason is at hand;
for if thou consider the point in Controversy, did but he think that thou
could judge better then himself, he would assent unto thee, and there would
remain no difference. But inasmuch as he dissents from thee, he must needs
conceive himself to judge better, in other things happily, he may seem to prefer
thee before himself; but he does not do it indeed, and in Truth: for if each of
you shall reckon up his opinions, in such points wherein you shall both agree, he
will approve his own judgment as much as thine, and in such, wherein he shall
differ from thee, he will questionless prefer his own judgment before thine,
and so will take himself to be the wiser of the two. This is most manifest in
our passing of our judgment concerning writers. For, so far thou will praise
any Author, as he shall satisfy thy judgment, and so far thou will dislike him,
as he shall not content thee, so that every man's rule, whereby he measures what
is right or wrong, is his own judgment. Which being so, who ever the
Controversy be with, suppose he be the most ignorant fellow in the world, and
suppose thou take thy self to be one that can speak Oracles; look how ill
thou can bear it, to be contemned by him, as ill will he take it, to be
contemned by thee; and peradventure he will take it so much the worse, by how
much he has bin less ingenuously brought up. Shall I tell thee in a word, how
thou ought to deal with him, so as to avoid bitterness? Imagine the case to
be quite contrary; suppose him to be such an one as thou take thy self to be;
thy self to be such as thou deemest him, and then look what behavior of thine
would become each of you, if the case so stood, endeavor with all thy might to
express. If thou shall not thus do, a thousand to one, thou shall not avoid,
insolently to carry thy self. Whosoever shall daily meditate of these things,
and carefully exercise his mind in the practice of them; he doubtless (if I am
not mistaken) shall become an excellent disputant, very fit by way of reasoning,
to resist the growth of Errors. Of which way of resistance by Reason, seeing we
have sufficiently treated; we are in the next place to speak of Authority.

Satan's Cabinet Counsel. The Third Book.
The Argument.
WHat Course a Church of Christ may take, to resist the spreading of false
Doctrine. Great care to be had, no person or Doctrine be unjustly condemned.
Small Errors ought not to be so severely censured as greater. Most men account
him a patron of Errors, that will not make a Mountain of a Molehill. Of what ill
Consequence it is to account a point to be fundamental, and necessary to be
known to salvation, when it is not such. The truth of a point one thing, the
weight and consequence thereof another. Scriptures asserting the truth, do not
consequently assert the weight of a point. The Scriptures can only declare the
weight of a point, and how we are to improve them to that end. Whether in case
it appear, that such or such a thing must needs be so or so, it follow, that
that thing must needs be known to salvation? In Case it appear from Scripture,
that a Point ought of necessity be known to salvation, whether are all truths
following therefrom, of like necessity to be known and acknowledged? A man may
firmly hold a position, and deny such things as necessarily follow therefrom,
so long as be shall not discover the necessity of such Consequences. What Points
are in the Scriptures held forth, as of necessity to be known and believed to
salvation? Men may be saved, though they mis-understand some points, and hold
some Errors. It is very remarkable, that our Lord gave the tokens of his body
and blood to his Disciples, when as yet they knew not that his Kingdom was a
spiritual Kingdom, nor yet that the Gentiles should be saved by him, and that
in a peculiar sort before the Jews. An enumeration of such points as the
Scriptures account needful to be known and believed to salvation, and of such
as to the ignorance whereof damnation is threatened. What points they be which
following from the former, by way of consequence, are like wise needful to be
known. In all other differences, we are to hold a brotherly peace and union. It
is needless, and endless to reckon up such points as are not necessarily to be
known to salvation. To believe a point, is not to repeat the words, but to
embrace the sense of them. Of what moment that Controversy is, between the
Lutherans and Calvinists (as they are termed) about the presence of Christ's
body in the Sacrament, whether the erring party, err damnably. Before we
condemn any man for an Error, we must be very well assured, that it is such an
Error, as deprives of salvation. Many points held necessary to be known to
salvation, which cannot by any Text of Scripture beproved to be such. What did
the believing thief, the Eunuch baptized by Philip, the harlot that washed our
Lords feet, the Palsied person that was healed, know and believe concerning
Christ? A person that errs damnably, and cannot be reclaimed, ought to be
excluded a Christian Congregation, whether he promise not to seduce, or do not
so promise. He that errs in a point not fundamental, if after admonition he
cease not by spreading his Error to trouble the Church, he ought to be cast
out. He that errs an Error not damnable, and makes no stir by seducing, must
be retained in Communion. All means must be used to reduce a person that errs
fundamentally, before he be cut off from Communion of the Church. Care must be
taken, that they Arrogate not unto themselves the judgment of any doctrine or
person, to whom it belongs not in such cases to judge. It belongs to the whale
Church to judge in such a Case. What the Magistrate may do to resist Errors.
When it is once grown in use, to determine Controversies by the sword, what
ever Doctrine comes to be the Doctrine of the major part, and stronger side,
who ever shall oppose the same, will be counted an Heretic, and all his
Arguments and Scriptures produced, shall be answered by none but the Hangman.
Better never any Heretic be punished by the sword, then such a door set open
to the bloodshed of professors of the Truth. Putting Heretics to death, in
stead of suppressing, often times increases them. Pastors are thereby made lazy
and unlearned, and to lose the use of their spiritual weapons. Afflicting
Heretics, hardens them in their Errors, because afflicting is the portion of
those that profess the Truth. Of putting a seducer to death under the old
Testament, and of the beating down the City that falls to Idolatry. Of the
reason of that Law, that all Israel may fear, and do no more so. The Parable of
the Tares discussed. It cannot be understood of Adulterers, Thieves and such
like offenders. It must be understood of false Teachers. We cannot justify the
breach of a manifest Universal Law against bloodshed, by our interpretations of
an obscure, particular Command. Great difference between an Heretic and an
Apostate, from the true God and true Religion. The Magistrate cannot doubt of a
man's being an Apostate, in case he be, but of his being an Heretic, he may well
doubt. Few Magistrates able to judge of an Heretic. Who ever bears the sword,
will be thought to hold the Truth, and all that are contrary-minded must be
Heretics. The Magistrate greatly concerned to examine what his duty is in this
point. Wherein the danger lies, that if the tares be plucked up, the wheat also
should be plucked up. He that cannot judge who is an Heretic, cannot determine
what Doctrine is Heresy.

LIB. III.
HAving divided the Authority, whereby false Tenets are opposed into that of
the Church, and that other of the civil Magistrate: we shall first speak of the
Church. If therefore any one shall teach such things as are not agreeable to the
Word of God, to the end such Doctrines may not prevail; two things the Church
may do; damn the Doctrine as erroneous and impious; and cut off the person from
the body of the Church, as a withered branch; in which proceedings there may be
a triple Error committed. First, if any Doctrine or person be unjustly
condemned; secondly, if they be otherwise condemned then stands with justice;
thirdly, if they be condemned by other persons then they ought to be. In the
first place, any thing is unjustly condemned, if it be not false; which Error
how to avoid, may be known by what has bin said in our first book. Again, a
matter is unjustly condemned, if the sentence be more grievous then the matter
requires, which is in Controversy. For all points of true Doctrine are not of
one kind. Some are so necessary to be known, as that all ought to hold them
firm and undoubted. Others there are which being controverted between Church
and Church, do not break the unity of Faith. Now in case an Error of this kind
shall be so sentenced, as if it bereft the persons erring of all hope of
salvation, the judgment will not be right. Here we are to consider, whether it
make any matter in such Cases, to give just or unjust sentence. Most men, if
thou shall not account every Error to be of the largest size, they will say thou
maintainest Errors, that thou art a patron of erroneous persons; whose godly
care to preserve the purity of Doctrine, truly I commend: notwithstanding, I
conceive it will be labor well bestowed, to examine more surely, whether in so
doing a man be indeed a patronizer of Errors. Doubtless, concerning any point,
every man inclines either to the negative or affirmative, to the one side or
other, or he is in doubt concerning that point. Now he that doubts, if he shall
be persuaded, that in case of Error, there is certain danger of damnation,
though there be not, he will be dej^cted in his mind. which dejection is so far
from assisting his mind in right judging, that it exceedingly hinders the same.
For every perturbation of mind, weakens the judgment, and casts a mist before
the Soul, and is ever joined with a distrust of Gods mercy to the party, then
which, what can less conduce to salvation? Yea rather, what does more hinder?
What a door is thereby opened for Satan, to overthrow all the miserable man's
hope, and cast very many pernicious thoughts into his mind? I confess, it is
possible that a mind so dejected, may lift it self up to God, and both implore
and obtain his assistance, for to come to a sure knowledge of the Truth. But
though this may befall some, who can deny but that it may betide some, as we
said before. Touching those that have attained to know the Truth, the point
being (as we make the supposition) not of necessity to be known, they are not
delivered from any very great danger; but those that have occasion to distrust
the mercy of God toward them, their salvation is in very great danger. Whence
it follows, that such as doubt of any point, are more harmed, in case they shall
judge that necessary to be known, which is not; then if they shall esteem it to
be of no greater weight then indeed it is. And he which is persuaded of the
Truth of such apoint, though he take the false part; he conceives he shall
offend God, if he shall not endeavor, as much as in him lies, to persuade all
others of the Truth of that which he conceives himself to understand; and
therefore he will endeavor to do it publicly, if he may be suffered, at
least, he cannot but do his best privately, which he would never go about, or
to be sure, not with so much earnestness, if he did esteem the thing to be of
less moment. Now, for such in whom an Error has taken root; what is there that
can so hinder them from being reclaimed, as to think that they cannot change
their judgment without loss of their Salvation. Therefore it is, that they dare
not hear him that would teach them better. And refusing so to do, what way is
left to reduce them? Such as think aright, I confess, by how much greater
weight they conceive any point to be of, will so much the more unwillingly give
ear to any that shall call their judgment into question. But in case the matter
shall be of less consequence then they suppose, herein their mistake will be very
hurtful; in that they will separate the parties so erring, from the rest of the
body of Christ, to wit the Church; will contemn them, will hold them accursed:
and they will be forced to make a sect by themselves, then which nothing can be
more destructive: For we see what deadly enmity is between sects. And hatred is
the cause, that what ever is affirmed by one sect, is apt to be suspected by
the opposite sect, and to be contradicted. And whatsoever has rashly bin
uttered, base pride, and affectation of Contrariety, will not suffer it to be
re^racted, but will have it, with all pertinacy, maintained. And when once it is
grown into a custom, that for every difference of judgment, one man will condemn
another, you shall see sects spring out of sects daily; which multitude of
sects, out of a despair to find the Truth, has occasioned very many men to
throw aside all thought of Religion. So that if any man do seriously weigh, how
much the multitude of sects do hinder the course of the Gospel, together with
the hatreds and dissentions that are between them; he will easily understand,
that nothing can be more accommodated to the Counsels of Satan, then such rash
judgments, from whence the sects arise. It is far better to esteem everything
by its just value, and neither to increase nor diminish the same. Which
resolution is the more to be prized, inasmuch as Christ himself, being the only
maintainer of pure Doctrine, needs not the assistance of any false persuasion
to that effect: for what defense can a lie afford? The matter then thus
standing, we must in the next place enquire after some way, so to balance and
poise the weight and consequence of matters, as that we may not err in this
case.

Now in the first place, this ought to be laid down for a sure rule; that if we
shall depart from the Divine Oracles, contained in the holy Scriptures, there is
nothing whereto we may safely trust; there is nothing but what is liable,
either to fraud or Error: Gods Testimonies are only sure, they only are of that
worth, that the Conscience of a man may rest upon them, and quiet it self. And
doubtless, if there shall be such a Cuntroversy about any point of Religion, as
that some shall say, it is a point so necessary to be resolved about, and to
know the Truth of, as that he which shall not understand and close with it,
cannot be saved possibly; others, though they are of the same judgment, for the
point it self, shall yet deny, that it is of such weight, and rather conceive
that such as judge amiss thereabout, may attain salvation: and ought
notwithstanding to be reputed members of the Church: In case (I say) such a
Controversy arise, when both sides cannot be said to judge according to Truth,
the one or other must of necessity err. Wherefore, to be certainly informed,
which part thinks aright, will be to know some what; even as, to be at a stand
and doubt herein, will be to be ignorant of somewhat; whence it must be
concluded, that we cannot come to certain knowledge in this point, unless there
be some word of God extant to guide us. Now we must be sure to mark in this
place, that a point of Religion, and the judgment which is made concerning the
weight and consequence of that point, are very different things. As it is one
thing to say; A Christian ought not to be Circumcised; another thing to say, if
ye be Circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. For he which had heard, how
that a Christian must not be Circumcised; might yet think, that though a
Christian should not be Circumcised, yet if a man judge that he ought to be
Circumcised, it were not much material. But having heard that other word; If
you be Circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing, he will now understand the
matter to be of fargreater importance. And inasmuch as a Doctrine is one thing,
and the judgment and estimation of the weight of that Doctrine is another: if
it shall be put to the question, concerning any Tenet, whether or no it be a
point which ought of necessity to be known; as for example, that it is lawful
to swear before the Judge; it will be nothing to the purpose, for a man to bring
many Texts to prove, that an oath in point of judicature, ought not to be
refused; for it will be said by one or other, that I grant, neither do I any
ways make scruple thereof, but I would be resolved concerning the weight of the
thing, whether it be a matter of such consequence, as that, in case any man
shall be persuaded, that he ought not in any case to swear, and shall remain in
that Error, there is no hope of his salvation. So that such proofs are in this
case requisite, not which evince, that a man ought to swear before the Bench
(for that is not the thing in question) but which prove, that he which is
persuaded he ought not to swear, shall be damned, such as there is concerning
the not retaining of Circumcision.

Now a point is then to be accounted proved by divine Testimony, when the
Testimony or Text cannot be true, unless the point in question be true, which
may come to pass, both when the Text shall contain the very thing, which it is
brought to prove, as also when it shall lay down that, which being granted, the
other must of necessity follow; as for example: we are to prove that a man is
accounted just by believing, and not by the works of the Law, we alledg the
words of Paul; We judge therefore, that by faith, a man is justified without the
works of the Law. This Testimony expresses the very thing which we would prove.
But suppose it were to be proved, that a man is justified only by faith, and
one did thus reason: Unless there were only one way of Justification, and that
by Faith; the Apostle had foolishly inferred, that forasmuch as the just should
live by faith, and that works were not faith, therefore no man living is just
by the works of the Law; but it cannot without great wickedness be charged upon
the Apostle, that he reasoned foolishly; there is therefore righteousness in
faith alone, and so a man is justified only by faith. Now this Testimony of
Scripture, cannot be said to contain that which it is brought to prove, but yet
it affirms such things as being granted, the point in question must needs
follow. But if so be, that which is brought as a Testimony may be true, while
the thing it is brought to prove may be false, that thing cannot be said to be
proved, by such a Testimony; so that, if a man to show that the Pope has
Authority to make new Laws, wherewith to bind the Consciences of men, shall cite
that place, what ever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; it will
be therefore denied, that that place proves the point in question, because
power of binding might be given to Peter, and yet no power be given to the Pope
to make new Laws.

Now a thing may be expressed, either by comprehension under general terms, or
word for word; for when as the general term [Law] comprehends, as well those
Laws concerning Conversation, as those concerning religious Ceremonies; as well
Divine Laws, as Humane; that Christ shall not profit him, who shall place his
Righteousness in keeping the moral Law; is in general terms comprehended in
that speech of the Apostle, where he denis that they have any share in Christ,
who place their Righteousness in the works of the Law. And that a man is
justified by Faith, is in so many words comprehended, in that passage of the
same Apostle. We judge therefore, that a man is justified by Faith, without the
works of the Law.

Furthermore, as concerning our present occasion; I find that one thing may
follow from another, two manner of ways. One is, when a matter is laid down as
necessary to be known, which cannot yet be understood and believed, unless some
other thing shall be first understood and believed; for in such a case, the
latter is to be reckoned among such things as are of necessity to be known.
Thus; inasmuch as it is necessary, that we believe that Christ is rifen from
the dead, and we cannot believe that, unless we shall likewise believe that he
died, it is altogether necessary that we believe he died. The other way is
this; if we find expressly set down, that a matter more doubtful then the point
in question, whether it ought of necessity to be known, is to be known
necessarily, yea if it be notless doubtful; for that which is less doubtful, or
at least, not more doubtful, must be as necessary as the other.

But some may demand; whether in case it be apparent, that such a thing must
needs be, or such a thing ought to have bin done, it ought therefore to be j
dged, that such a thing must necessarily be known by us. I will explain my
meaning by a comparison. Physicians cure him that is sick of an hot disease, by
cooling medicines; neither is it any matter, though the Patient be ignorant of
the faculties of such medicines, provided he make use of them. We in like
manner were sick of a certain disease, being liable to death by sin; many
things may be reckoned up, which that we might be saved, ought both to be, and
to be performed; As that our sins were to be abolished, and that by a Man void
of all sin, and of infinite virtue and power, and he therefore to be the son of
God, yea God himself, and the like. But let us lay down among the rest, that it
was altogether necessary that he should be accused, and in a judicial way,
sentenced to suffer death. Some man (I say) may demand; whether or no, that,
look how necessary it was, that our Lord should die, being condemned to death
by a Judge; it should be as necessary for a man to know, not only that he died
of any fashion, but as one accused, and judicially condemned: or whether we may
not as well be ignorant of that circumstance, as a man sick of an hot disease,
may, without prejudice, be ignorant of the faculty of such medicines as are
administered unto him; as also whence, and how they were provided. Doubtless,
that it may evidently appear to us, that these things are likewise necessarily
to be known, either we must have a plain Text of Scripture that shall pronounce,
whatsoever is necessary to be done, that also (to attain salvation) must
necessarily be believed; or we must conclude, that because it is said in
Scripture, that such a thing was necessarily to be done; it therefore follows,
that it must necessarily be known. But there is no Testimony of Scripture, that
I know, which pronounces, that what ever ought to be done, ought to be
believed; and whether or no, because a thing is pronounced necessary to be
done; it therefore follows, that it must necessarily be believed, we may thus
resolve our selves; suppose it is thus written in Scripture, It was altogether
necessary for the taking away of the sins of men, that Christ should be
condemned by the Judge, and so suffer death; if he had died otherwise, then in a
judicial way, his death would not have profited mankind. Now some man would by
this Testimony prove, that unless one believed that Christ suffered death,
being condemned to die, he cannot be saved. The question therefore is, whether
that Testimony do prove any such thing, or no. But it is apparent, that no such
thing is by this Testimony proved; forasmuch as the Testimony may be true,
while that which it is brought to prove it, is false; that speech which is
contradictory to that which is to be proved, being not contradictory to that
which is used as a Testimony. For, since it is one thing, that Christ ought to
die in a judicial way; another thing to believe, that he ought so to die; he
that says, that man may be saved, who was ignorant that Christ's death was in a
judicial way, contradicts not him that says, it was necessary that Christ
should die, being condemned; and there is nothing to hinder, but that both
those propositions may be true. Which being so, we cannot conceive that this
Testimony proves, that he which shall not believe that Christ died, being
condemned in judgment, cannot be saved. Whence it follows, that to prove that
something ought of necessity to be done, or to be, is no Argument that such a
thing ought of necessity to be believed.

Some may further demand; whether in case it appear from Scripture, that a
Doctrine ought of necessity to be known, we should account whatsoever may be
collected from that Doctrine by necessary inference, to be in like manner
needful to be known; in which ease we must observe, that look how (as we said
before) a Tenet is one thing, and the estimation of that Tenet is another
thing; so it is one thing for a point or Doctrine to follow from another point,
another thing for a speech to follow expressing the weight of that Doctrine;
now this latter kind of consequence, ought not to be doubted of. For since it
is written, Christ shall profit you nothing, who place your Righteousness in the
Law, and Circumcision is an Ordinance of that Law; if any one should say, that
it is possible for him who places his Righteousness in Circumcision, to receive
profit by Christ, he should contradict the very words of Paul. But our question
is concerning such inferences as are the Consequences of some Doctrine it self,
which ought of necessity to be known. Inasmuch therefore, as to grant the
Antecedent and deny the Consequent, is to affirm contradictions; he which
denis, that which necessarily follows from a Doctrine that ought to be known,
he may not seem truly to believe the said Doctrine; and therefore not in a
possibility of salvation. But I answer; seeing that I grant the Antecedent
point which is necessary to be known, though I deny that which seems unto
thee necessarily to follow therefrom, why should thou not as well say, that I
do not in truth deny, that which I seem to deny? Since (I say) to grant the
Antecedent and deny the Consequent, cannot stand together; why should the
denying of the Consequent rather seem, a denying of the Antecedent, which I
confess to be true, then the affirming of the Antecedent should seem to be an
affirming of the Consequent, which I affirm to be false? for it is as true,
that the affirming of the Antecedent affirms the Consequent, as it is, that the
denial of the Consequent denies the Antecedent. Now it is cicar, that he which
understands that such a thing follows from such a thing, cannot possibly affirm
the one, and deny the other. And if so be any man conceiving the Antecedent to
be true, will not admit of the Consequence; the reason hereof is, that he does
not discern, that the one follows from the other; for, to see that this follows
from that, and to account that true, and this false, were no other then to see
it, and not to see it, which is impossible. Now that it may fall out, that what
necessarily follows from some Tenet, may not by some man be discerned so to
follow, is so certain as nothing more; for how many things are there, both in
the Methematicks, and other Arts, which being undeniably demonstrated to be
true, are yet both unknown, and unbelieved by many men, which understand not
their Demonstrations. As for example, that the body of the Sun, is by many
parts greater then the whole Earth. And if so be any man shall affirm things
contrary to what are demonstrated, as that the Sun is greater then the Earth,
he shall affirm things contrary to prop^sitions, so evident and certain, as it
is impossible any man should not understand them to be true, to wit, those
maxims out of which the said things are demonstrated. But therefore it is,
that those maxims to some men are evident and firm, who will not believe such
things as follow from them by necessary cons^quence; because they are not aware
of that straight tie and fi^m connection, which is between the said maxims and
such things as follow therefrom; otherwise, since no man is ignorant of the
truth of those principles, from whence the Demonstrations are raised, every
body would know the truth of such things as might be demonstrated, and so we
should have all men Geometricians, Arithmeticians, all men Musicians and
Astrologers. And because it may fall out, that what follows from some other
thing, may not be discerned by some man to follow the same; and he may
therefore believe the former and not the latter; doubtless it is no proof, that
because a man denies a necessary Consequence, he must therefore deny the
Antecedent, being a point which ought of necessity to be known; especially, if
he shall be so strongly persuaded of the truth of the Antecedent, that rather
then he will deny the same, he will allow of the Cons^quent for Truth. But in
case he would rather deny the Antecedent, then allow of the Consequent, the
case is d^fferent: So to do, were at least not fi^mly to believe the
Antecedent. It is manif^st therefore, that such Testimonies of Scripture as
prove, a point ought necessarily to be known, do not prove, that such things as
necessarily follow, are of like necessity to be known. This part of our
discourse is subtle and acute, requiring that the reader give great heed, to
the end he may understand the same: howbeit, it is very necessary to be known,
for the taking away of rash judgments, by means whereof the Church is torn in
pieces into Sects.

These things being thus cleared, we are in the next place to enquire, what
those points be, which are propounded unto us in the Scripture, as so necessary
to be known and believed, that he which shall not know and thoroughly understand
them, ought not to be accounted one of Gods servants, or a member of his
Church; and whosoever shall believe them, all may be judged capable of
Salvation, though he very much err in all other points. Concerning which
question, I would much rather hear the judgments of other men, then propound
mine own to the rash, and happily, irreligious censures of many: howbeit, the
hope of procuring the Tranquillity and peace of the Churches of Christ, has
more prevailed with me, then any private respect of mine own. We do not
prescribe any thing to any man, as a decree, from which he may not dissent; but
look what the Lord has vouchsafed to discover unto us, we thought good in such
wise to propound; as to be ready with a very good will, to give credit, and
place to him that shall propound matters of greater certainty. Our endeavor,
truly, is not by all means possible, to obtrude our own judgment upon men, and
to make, that it may be of authority; but rather that Truth it self may be
brought to Light. For look as it often comes to pass, that a musician that
could not be entreated by any means to play a lesson; if some unskilful person
shall be his untoward fingering of some in-it-self, excellent instrument, grate
and vex his ears with his rude scraping, will take the instruments in hand and
begin to play: even so, our hope is, that in case we shall seem to have said
little to the purpose, in a matter which, without all Controversy, is of the
greatest moment that can be; we shall at the least, provoke some man of greater
spirit and wisdom, to accomplish with good success, what we had unhappily
undertaken. In the mean time, we do again and again beseech all pious and good
men, that what ever they shall think of our judgment here delivered: they will
notwithstanding, take in good part our care to preserve peace and concord: and
that not of any kind, but such as may become Christians, and that they will join
with me by fervent prayers, to beg of him who is the only Author, as of all
other good things, so likewise of peace, that he would at the length bestow the
same upon his Churches, to the praise and glory of his own name. Let us weigh
then, and examine such places of Scripture, wherein Salvation is either
promised or denied, because of believing, or not believing.

Our Lord says: Be ye sure of this, he that hears my words, John 5.
and believes in him that sent me, he shall enjoy eternal life, and shall not
come into Judgment, but is passed from death to life. Again, John 6.
This is the will of him that sent me, that whosoever has seen the son, and
has believed on him, shall obtain eternal life. And again, Go ye through the
whole world preaching the Gospel unto all: be that shall believe and be
baptized, shall he saved, he that believes not shall be condemned. Which places,
and their like, it may be questioned, how they ought to be understood: For some
man will a k, what it is to believe in the Son of God or his Apostles: for even
he doubtless believes, who is persuaded, that the person speaking ought to be
credited, as one that speaks only the Truth, although he unde^stand not what it
is he says. In which sense there is no Christian, not one, but so far believes
the word of God, as not to doub^, but whatsoever is contained therein is true:
there is not, in the mean time, one perhaps, there never was, who understands
the true sense of every place. Much more may that man be said to believe, who
being pe^swaded of the Truth of the speaker, does likewise understand that
which he speaks. Now I conceive it is out of Controversy, that every man ought
to hold for Truth, whatsoever the Son of God has taugh^, either by himself or
by his Apostles. For these things cannot stand together, that any man should
believe, that Jesus is the Son of God; and nor p^rswade himself, that what
ever he says is true, and that he is adorned with all kinds of virtue. But
whether or no it be likewise necessary to Salvation, to know what ever our Lord
commanded as well in person, as by his Apostles, and rightly to understand the
same; so as to embrace the same, not only with a confused, that is to say, a
general, but with a distinct and particular faith; this is that which may be
questioned.

Now it is altogether necessary; that, either whatsoever things are set down in
Scripture, are all necessary to be known; so that a man may not be ignorant of,
or mis-understand any of them under pain of damnation; or that such things are
of a different nature; so that some of them are altogether necessary to be
known, and highly to be accounted of others; howbeit profitable to be
understood, and such as are no ways to be slighted, yet are they not altogether
so necessary; yea rather, although there happen to be some Error concerning
them, the person so erring may notwithstanding be saved. And our Lord himself
professes, that he teaches nothing, John 17.
but such things as he had received from his father; and look what he had
received from his Father, that he delivered to his Disciples, and that they
embraced it, and did believe that he was sent from his Father: and therefore he
prays for their salvation, and for the salvation of all those likewise, who
should believe through their preaching. And to the Apostles, this command was
given; Go ye through the whole world, declaring the Gospel to all persons, and
teaching them to observe whatsoever I have commanded you; he that shall believe,
and shall be baptized, shall be saved: he that shall not believe, shall be
condemned. In which words is employed, that unless a man shall understand and
believe all these things, he shall not be saved; so Paul, when to the Jailer,
asking what he should do, he bad him believe in the Lord Jesus, and so he
should be saved, and his family; is afterward said to have instructed him in
the Doctrine of the Lord: So that the meaning of those words, believe in the
Lord Jesus and thou shall be saved, must be this; embrace the faith and
Doctrine of Christ and thou shall be saved. And that this is so, seems
especially proved, by what the same Apostle elsewhere writes: If any one shall
teach you otherwise then we have taught, let him be accursed. For he teaches
otherwise, who mis-interprets any part of that Doctrine. On the contrary, even
as Paul, to prove that righteousness was not by the Law, among others, uses
this Argument: If so be the inheritance belonged to them that kept the Law:
since no man could keep the same, no body could be saved: wherefore since the
promise must not be void, there must needs be another righteousness then that
by the Law: In the very self same manner we may reason in this place: that,
forasmuch as no man can rightly understand all that the Lord has commanded;
and it is necessary to salvation, that a man understand all things rightly, and
err in nothing, therefore no man shall be saved: But certain it is, Rev. 7.
a very great and innumerable company shall be saved: it must needs therefore
follow, that men may be saved, though they do not rightly understand some part
of that which the Lord has delivered, and be possessed with some Error. And
Paul witnesses that in this life we know things, but in part, and not fully, 1
Cor. 13.
and we prophecy but in part. But what could we desire more plain then this?
Our Lord before his death testified, that his Disciples had embraced all those
things, which, he having received of his Father, had declared unto them, and
praye^ for them: howbeit they did not as yet understand, that Christ's Kingdom
was spiritual, not worldly: neither did they know, that the benefits purchased
by Christ, did belong unto the other nations of the world as well as to the
Jews. Which things notwithstanding, he had taught them, and they were matters
of very great concernment. It is manifest therefore, that when our Lord said,
his Disciples had received such things as he had taught them: his meaning was,
such of them as were of necessity to salvation; not that they had wholly
attained to the knowledge of all that he had taught them. Hence it must be
concluded, that all things which Christ taught, were not so necessary to
salvation, as that, if a man were ignorant of some part of them, he could not
be saved. And it is very well worth our observation, that, when as the Disciples
did not as yet understand that Christ's Kingdom was spiritual, and that the
Gentiles were in a special manner to be shaters in the salvation purchased by
him: he did notwithstanding distribute unto them the representative figures of
his body and blood.

Inasmuch therefore, as it is out of all question, that every Truth of God is
not of like condition and rank, but that some must of necessity be known and
perfectly understood, some may be without inevitable damnation unknown;
doubtless it is necessary, either that we should have some mark of difference
whereby to distinguish the one from the other, or we must take it for granted,
that those points of Christian doctrine are only necessary to be known,
concerning which there are special and particular testimonies of Scripture
signifying the necessity of their knowledge. As for any general note or
difference, though I have diligently enquired into the matter, yet have I not
been able to find one. For, if any man shall say that all the principal heads of
doctrine are to be reckoned among the necessary points; his saying will be very
true, yet not a whit satisfactory. For I shall presently demand, which are those
principal points? And if any doctrine be called into question, I shall desire to
know whether it be one of those principal ones: I shall ask him by what note or
mark I may know, whether it be to be reckoned among the principal or not: So
that we are still as far to seek as ever. For it is all one to be in doubt which
are those points of doctrine that ought of necessity to be known, and to doubt
which are the chief heads of Religion, both are alike obscure, so that the one
cannot receive light from the other. We must therefore make diligent enquiry,
what things they are by name which must be of necessity known and believed.

Our Lord says: Herein consists life eternal, if they shall know thee the only
true God, John 17. Joel 2.
and him whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. And the Prophet says, Whosoever
shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved. And the Apostle; This is
that doctrine of Faith which we publish abroad, that if thou shall both confess
with thy mouth, that Jesus is the Lord, and shall believe with thy heart that
God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. But that place of John
is very remarkable: and many other miracles did Jesus in the presence of his
Disciples, which are not contained in this Book: But these are written, that ye
might believe that Jesus is the Messiah the Son of God, and that believing ye
might obtain I fo by his name. In which place we may observe: First, That
whatsoever things are written of Jesus, are written to this end, that men might
believe that Jesus is the Messiah the Son of God: Secondly, That if any man
shall believe, that through him he shall obtain salvation, that man shall not be
frustrated of his hope: John 11.
So that, when Peter had confessed that Jesus was the Christ, the Son of the
living God, he was pronounced Blessed, forasmuch as that knowledge of his was
not from Man, but from God. So Martha, after that our Lord had told her, that
he was the Resurrection and the Life, and that if any man believed in him,
though he were dead, yet he should live; and all that should live, and believe
in him should never dye: She made answer, I believe that thou art the Messiah
the Son of God, who were to come into the world. And to the Thief, who begged
of Lord, that he would remember him when he came into his Kingdom, he gave this
answer; Luke 23.
This I promise thee, that thou shall be with me this day in Paradise. And the
Eunuch after he had confessed, that Jesus Christ was the Son of God, Acts 8.
he was baptized. Likewise, when four men carrying the pulsied man, and
endeavoring to bring him to be cured, were not able to come near for the press,
but let him down in his bed through the roof into the midst before Jesus: Jesus
knowing their so great faith, said unto the man: Son, thy sins are forgiven
thee. By which place we may conjecture what was the faith of that palsied
person. For he believed (in all probability) that that same man, whose name was
Jesus, came from God and was in favor with God; and therefore he hoped that by
his means he might recover his health. But that he knew all those things which
the Church has for a long time accounted as articles of Faith necessary to be
believed to Salvation, how likely a matter it is, I leave it to every man to
judge. There are likewise many other texts to the very same purpose. For to that
same unclean woman, that washed our Lords feet with her tears, it was said: Thy
Faith has saved thee The same was spoken to that other woman having the flux
of blood, who hoped, If she might touch the hem of his garment, she should be
healed. The same was done to that one of the ten cleansed lepers, who returned
thanks to God. And John says, Hereby ye shall know the Spirit of God; whatever
spirit shall confess that Jesus Christ is come, and that he is made man, that
Spirit is of God; and again; Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of
God, God abides in him and he in God. Also Paul denies, That any can say that
Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Spirit. And forasmuch as Abraham is called
the Father of Believers, and we are taught chiefly by his example, that
Righteousness consists in Faith: Truly it will be labor well bestowed to
consider, what that was, which when he believed, it was counted unto him for
righteousness. He was promised that he should be the Father of many Nations; he
was promised that happiness should betide to all the Nations of the world by
his seed: Finally, he had the Land of Canaan promised to him, and very great
prosperity: But of those points of Religion, which it is judged every body is
bound to know upon pain of damnation, we read not a word. Yea, and the mystery
of Salvation it self by his seed is very closely and obscurely promised. And,
truly these are the only points which I find in the Scriptures, recorded as
necessary to be believed for the attainment of Salvation. Let us now consider
who they be, unto whom in Scripture Salvation is denied in respect of unbelief.

Unto the Apostles it was said in general terms; Go ye through the whole earth,
publishing the Gospel to all persons, he that shall believe and be baptized,
shall be saved; but he that shall not believe, shall be condemned. Which words, as
is manifest by what we formerly said, are not so to be understood, as if he had
said: He that shall not rightly understand whatever you shall teach, but shall in
some point mis-interpret your words, shall be condemned: but by the word
[Gospel] we must understand, that same blessed message of redemption by the
name of Christ. He that shall believe, that by the name of Christ he shall be
saved, he shall be saved; he that shall not so believe shall be condemned. In the
same manner are those words of Paul to be expounded, Gal 1.
If any shall teach you different from what you have learned, let him be
accursed: as if he should have said: If any shall teach you, that you must
obtain salvation by any other way, then by faith in the name of Christ, let him
be accursed. Howbeit, whosoever shall teach any thing otherwise then the
Apostles taught, although it be none of the principal heads of Religion, yet is
he so far forth to be accursed, in as much as all false doctrine comes from
none but the Devil, the father of lies. But it is not presently to be concluded
that such a person is quite out of the way of Salvation; for our Lord rebuking
Peter himself because he dehorted him from suffering death, calls him Satan.
John 6.
More particularly, our Lord says, Unless you shall both eat the flesh and drink
the blood of the Son of man, ye shall not obtain life. Which imports as much as
if he had said, Unless ye shall believe that I am the Son of God, and that I am
sent from God my Father, and that you shall obtain Salvation by my Name, you
shall not obtain life. And again, Unless ye shall believe that I am he, ye shall
dye in your sins. 2 John 2. 1 John 4.
And John says, Who is a liar, but he that denies Jesus to be the Son: And,
hereby shall you know the Spirit of Go^; whatever spirit confesses that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, is of God; But whatever spirit shall deny that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, Gal. 5.
the same is not of God. Paul adds; If you be circumcised, Christ shall profit
you nothing. And a little after, Ye have no part in Christ, who lace your
righteousness in the Law, ye are fallen from Grace. And Peter, there is no
other name among men under heaven, Acts 4.
by which we can be saved. By which testimonies of Scripture we are taught,
that such places as witness that he which believes that Jesus Christ is the Son
of God shall be saved, are not so to be understood, as that if a man shall so
believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, as he believes that Julius Caesar
was the first who brought the Roman Commonwealth into bondage, and made himself
Emperor of Rome, or any other matter wherein himself is not concerned, that he
shall be saved: but that he truly believes that Jesus is the Son of God, who
believes it as a thing that concerns himself; that is to say, who believes that
he, whom we call Jesus, is the Son of God, his Jesus and his Christ, that is,
his Savior and his King, in whom alone he places all the hope of his Salvation:
Unless we shall admit of this interpretation, neither Paul's nor Peter's words
will hang together.

These very few points are all that we can find expressed in Scripture, as
being necessary for every man to believe, to the end he may be saved: viz. That
he acknowledge the one only true God, and him whom he has sent, Jesus Christ
his Son, being made man: and that he believe that God has raised him from the
dead, and that by his name he shall obtain salvation, and that he place not his
righteousness in the works of the Law: But that he be verily persuaded, that
there is no other name under heaven, whereby we can be saved. Now let us make
enquiry, what other thing there is, that being inferred from these, may be in
like manner necessary to be known. And forasmuch as the Scriptures teach, that
every man is liable to the severe judgment of God, as being, by reason of the
fall of Adam, born in sin, and of such a natural constitution, that he
continually offends God, and consequently guilty of eternal punishment; and
since they further teach, that this world at length coming to an end, all
persons shall be raised at the last day: the just unto eternal happiness, the
unjust and wicked unto eternal torments: No man can understand what it is to be
saved, neither consequently what it is he should believe, unless he have some
tolerable knowledge, both of his own condition, of the Law of God, and of Gods
purpose to judge the quick and the dead. For the Apostle declares, that from the
Law springs the knowledge of Sin, and he should not have known Sin but by the
Law. But it follows not, from what we have laid down, that such a degree of
knowledge, either of the Law of God, or of man's natural condition, is necessary:
as that, if any man shall err in the interpretation of some Commandment of God,
or in judging of the nature of man, and the abilities thereof, he cannot be
saved. Thus much only follows, that a man ought to believe, that he is liable
to eternal condemnation, and to trust he is freed therefrom, by Christ, and by
his benefits ordained unto eternal blessedness. Again, seeing Paul says, that
they have no title to Christ, who place their righteousness in the Law, in the
Law, I say of God; What shall we say of them who place their righteousness in
the Laws, mandates and inventions of men? They may doubtless much rather be
said to have fallen from the righteousness and benefits of Christ. Semblably,
since the Scriptures teach, that by the name of Christ alone, we must hope for
salvation: it follows, that he that shall hope for salvation by the name of the
blessed Virgin, or Peter, or Paul, or any Saint whatsoever, has no share in
Christ. Likewise, it being a thing necessarily to be believed to salvation,
that Christ was raised from the dead: and it cannot be understood, that any is
raised to life that was not first dead; it follows, that it ought of necessity
to be believed that he dyed. In a word, forasmuch as our Lord has commanded,
that all be taught the Gospel and baptized in the name of the Father, Son and
holy Spirit whose work this Faith is; inasmuch as he opens our hearts, and
reveals unto us this goodness of God toward us; both this command ought to be
known, and that it is the holy Spirit by whom we believe, and by whom God dwells
in us: and whom, we ought by incessant prayers to beg of God, that he would
bestow him upon us. I confess ingeniously, I cannot find any other points, that
I can from Scripture demonstrate, and prove to be of necessary knowledge to the
attainment of salvation. If any man can show any more, there is nothing that I
would sooner wish, then to understand what ever other points there are, over
and above what we have laid down; and to hear those Texts by whose authority
we are obliged to acknowledge them for matters that ought of necessity to be
known. Now for us to reckon up particularly all such points as we judge not
necessary to be known, to the end a man may be saved: there is no necessity,
neither were it convenient, and it would be an endless work. A right line is
the measure both of right and crooked. Only to the end, that it may be the
better understood, when any points comes into question, how it may be manifest,
to be either of necessity to be known, or not of necessity, we will examine and
couple of Doctrines, to the end, that as we shall try these, all other may be
tried.

Sabellius (as Vigilius Martyr Bishop of Trent relates) did so acknowledge the
Father, Son, and holy Spirit, as that he would not have it to be understood,
that the Father was one person, the Son another. But he said, that he who was
the Father filled the womb of the Virgin, and in that man whom he assumed, is
termed the Son: when as not two persons, but one Father is understood by both
terms. And he that thus understands the matter worships but one God. Some man
may therefore enquire, whether or no this point be of such concernment, as that
it is necessary for him that would be saved, not to err therein: that is to
say, whether Sabellius, holding such an Error could be saved: or whether he
ought absolutely to be reckoned for an Heretic, as hitherto he has bin ever
accounted. We have already proved, that it is necessary, that men should
believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. But to believe, that he is the Son
of God, is no to pronounce these words, nor yet in thought to give unto Christ
the title of Son of God: but rather by a sincere faith, to attribute unto him
that which these words signify. Now the word Son, signifies not any such
thing: I say, the notion of that word is not such, as that any person may be
understood to be his own Son; neither can the term [Father] be so understood,
as that any one should be his own Father; but he is called a Son, who has for
Father, not himself, but some other person; and he a Father who has for Son,
not himself but some other. Forasmuch then as Sabellius did confound the Father
and the Son, and denied that they were two distinct persons; it is very plain,
that he did not believe that Jesus was the Son of God, which it was altogether
necessary for him to believe. By which example we are taught, that concerning
such points as are propounded unto us by God, as necessary to be believed; we
ought diligently to examine what the words signify, least retaining only a
certain vain shadow of words, we come to deny the things themselves by those
words intimated; let us labor to understand the words, that we may sincerely
embrace the things themselves. Having examined this Tenet, let us consider
another point, which, as these times go, is perhaps, no less worthy of our
knowledge.

There has been a long and very Tragical controversy about the interpretation
of those words, Take, this is my Body. Let us consider therefore whether this
be a matter of such consequence, that therefore men should rend themselves one
from another, vex, disgrace and account one another as enemies. Howbeit, it is
not necessary that I should in this place discover my self of what side I am:
only I shall so far profess my self to be of both parts, inasmuch as I make no
question, but that both belong to the true Church of God. Now I shall deal with
each side by it self apart, and though I may grant that both parties do
otherwise say right, and truly interpret the words of Christ: yet I shall show,
that neither party ought to condemn the other, or account it guilty of an
Heresy? Come on then, to begin with you, who admit of no Trope in our Lords
words, but judge, they ought to be understood according to their plain natural
meaning: you do not only say, that such as account our Lords words tropical, do
mis-interpret the same: but you seem to judge of them, as of persons, the most
erroneous in point of Religion that can be: you think you cannot find words bad
enough, to express your hatred against them according to their deserts. Put the
case, that with this their so great Error, they may notwithstanding obtain
Salvation, and belong to the Church of God? How can they (will you say) who
account the Son of God himself, either to be a liar, or a vain speaker,
foolishly uttering contradictions, and such things as are quite contrary to all
sense and reason? Alas, miserable men that we are, how far does hatred,
springing from our differences, transport us? If men question the
interpretation of some words, must they needs make Christ a liar? Which of
those men, whom you account Adversaries in this point, did ever deny, that
either in these or any other words Christ should be believed? Did such a
conceit ever enter into any of their minds, as once to suspect such a thing?
Could they fear that he should be a liar, for whose name they would suffer the
most grievous torments which Tyrants could inflict? Away with such a peevish
and altogether unjust interpretation: the Controversy is concerning the
meaning, not the truth of the words, then which they willingly confess nothing
is more true. But (you will say) the words are so clear, so plain and manifest,
that it is impossible for a man not to understand their meaning. To you that
understand them they are plain and clear, to him that otherwise understands
them, they are not so clear, or if they be, it is in that sense in which he
takes them. Wherefore of necessity thus much must be granted: that the
difference is only about the meaning, and not about the Truth of the words.
Thou therefore that say, that such as deny the corporal presence of Christ
in the Lords Supper, are Heretics, and cannot be saved: by what Testimonies of
Scripture can thou prove what thou say? Our Lord himself promises eternal
life to all that call upon his name, who believe that he is the Son of God,
who place the hope of their salvation in him alone, not in the works of the Law
or any other thing. This faith, this hope, those constantly profess whom thou
call Heretics: by what Testimonies of Gods Word art thou induced by thy
judgment to deny them salvation? Produce one word out of the holy Scriptures,
which says, that such persons shall not enjoy eternal life. Thou may not
pronounce so from thine own head: do thou think, happily, that it is impossible
for that man to call upon the name of the Lord, and to put all his confidence
in him, who cannot understand, nor consequently believe, that his body really
present, is distributed in the Sacrament? What should hinder him? But if thou will contend, that he that believes not the latter, cannot believe the former:
I would very fain hear, how thou can prove what thou say. But in case,
that faith unto which our Lord does promise salvation, may stand without the
confession of his bodies presence in the Sacrament; and yet thou ceasest not to
account persons so believing, to be no members of the true Church of God:
consider with thy self again and again, if thou do not really pollute thy
self with that same crime of making Christ a liar, which thou art accustomed
falsely to charge upon others.

I come now to those who say the words are tropical, who, because it is
affirmed that the body of Christ is present in the bread, at the same time in
very many places, do gather many very great absurdities; but especially this,
That such a position denies the humanity of Christ. Wherefore, inasmuch as this
point concerning the Son of God, his being made man, and raised from the dead,
is necessarily to be known and believed: they deny that such as affirm such a
presence of Christ's body can be saved, unless they shall repent. Such
absurdities as they gather from the affirmation of Christ's body (whether they
err or not in so doing) experience does manifest, that they can by no means be
induced, but to think, that they really follow from the said position. Let us
grant therefore, that such absurdities do all of them undoubtedly follow the
foresaid presence. But supposing all this, must they therefore that hold the
real presence needs be Aliens from Christ? They must needs, (say thou) for
that condition which they attribute to the body of Christ, that it can be in
many places at one and the same time, overthrows the humanity of Christ: so
that he which says, Christ's body may be in diverse places at the same time, does
as good as say, that Christ's body is no body: and if Christ has not a true
body, he is not true man, and if he be not now true man, either he was never
made man, or if he were, he arose not from the dead: both which Doctrines, we
before showed are necessarily to be believed. Wherefore, since no man can
believe contradictories, they not believing the Humanity and Resurrection,
being necessary points, cannot be saved. Those men truly, press the matter
vehemently; howbeit, let us make trial, if we cannot make it appear, that hope
of Salvation may stand with such gross Errors. Whereas therefore they say, that
it is impossible for men to believe things that contradict one the other, that
is then true (as we showed before) when they see the contradiction between
them. For I confess, that a man cannot believe, both that Christ has a true
humane body, and that he has not. Howbeit, such things as are truly opposite
one to the other, may notwithstanding seem unto many men, void of any such
opposition. And in case they are not discerned to be contradictory, the one to
the other, nothing lets, but that men may believe them to be both true; so that
though it be granted, that these Tenets oppose one the other, and cannot stand
together, that there should be a true body, which notwithstanding may be in
diverse places, at one and the same instant, yet may they seem not to be
opposite; so that men may believe, that our Lord has a true humane body, and
yet that the same body maybe in diverse places at one and the same time.
Forasmuch therefore as they believe, and that most strongly, that Christ is
true man, the Son of God, and raised from the dead, and all other things which
the Scripture holds forth as necessary to be believed; what reason have thou to
deny that they may be saved, even in this their Error? It is clear therefore,
that as well those which hold Christ's body to be in the Sacramental bread, as
those which deny the same, although it must needs be, that one side err, yet
are they both (if otherwise conscionable observers of our Lords commands) in
the way of Salvation. In which regard, they are bound to love and reverence one
another, as brethren, the servants of God, and members of Christ. If they shall
mutually vex one another with revilings, reproaches and cursings: if they shall
go on to exercise enmity one against another, they shall not escape the just
judgment of God. Wherefore, I pray and beseech both parties by Christ Jesus:
that laying aside all hatred and rash judgments, they would strive to go beyond
one another in offices of Love. Let us abandon bad language, scoffs, contempt;
so will it certainly fall out, that such as err, shall at the length be brought
to acknowledge the Truth: If we shall but once be united in heart and affection,
the Lord will not deny us any favor or success; neither will he ever suffer,
that such, as out of true love endeavor to draw their brethren out of Error,
shall reap no fruit of their labor.

Now look how we have discussed these two points, viz. the Error of Sabellius,
and the Controversy about the corporal pre-presence in the Sacramental bread;
it will be easy for any man in like manner, to judge of what ever other points
shall come into Controversy. For concerning what ever Error shall be questioned,
we must enquire, whether or no, the person so erring may not believe all such
things, as to the belief whereof Salvation is promised; that in case he may, we
may persuade our selves, that he errs not in a point necessary to be known unto
salvation: but if not, that he errs in a necessary Doctrine. Howbeit, whosoever
would condemn any man for any Error, ought to consider again and again, what
assurance he has, that such an Error cannot stand with salvation. Do but
consider, when as our Lord says, come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will give you ease: Shall any man be so foolhardy, as to dare to
pull back him that is coming, and of his own head to say to him: Oh! do you
hear, it will be in vain for you to go unto Christ, who do not believe this or
that point? Who art thou that wilt hinder another man's servant from coming at
his Masters call? With what confidence take thou upon thee, to divine at the
will of God, not being very clearly manifested unto thee? Must you, according to
your fancy, set bounds to the goodness, mercy and kindness of God? He unto whom
it belongs to give life, calls all unto him; and will thou, by I know not what
exceptions of thine own devising, limit those graces, which he promises, but
limits not? What do thou, in so doing? Doubtless, as much as in thee lies;
thou robbest a man of his life, not of this life which is rather a death then
life, but of eternal life, and the Kingdom of Heaven, adjudging him to eternal
torments; neither is it to one alone, thou art so injurious, but to thousands
happily. Thou maimest Christ in so many members, thou rendest the Church into
Sects, and pavest a way to infinite mischiefs. And if our Lord so severely
menace such as offend the least; what think thou shall become of them, who by
their rash judging have drove men to make Sects, without any necessary cause so
requiring? Woe unto them: And if so be the way which we have set down, to
distinguish between points necessary to be believed and not necessary, seem not
to be sufficient; do thou, if thou can, produce a better, one more sure, firm
and constant. If thou wonderest, that among such points, which we have reckoned
up as necessary to be known, thou do not find certain other points of
Religion, very highly accounted of; Read over diligently the whole Old and New
Testament, and search thoroughly by what Texts thou can prove, that those
points are so necessary to be known: that he that understands them not, cannot
be saved. Consider what knowledge the People of Israel could have of them from
the Old Testament, who were notwithstanding to be saved, by the same faith that
we are. Consider again, what the thief could know, when it was said to him,
this day shall thou be with me in Paradise: Or the Eunuch when Philip baptized
him: Or that woman to whom, when she had washed our Lords feet, it was said,
thy faith has saved thee: Or she that was wasted away by the bloody issue: or
the Palsied man, with many others, whose sins were forgiven them merely upon
their confessing the name of the Lord. It is also observable, what the reason
should be, that whereas these points which we have set down as necessary, are
so frequently repeated in Scripture, and required of necessity to be known;
those points which some men so highly account of, are not in like manner
required. If those books had bin written by the wit of man, which we account
(as indeed they are) sacred, we should say that honest Homer had took a nap and
forgot himself: But they are indicted by the Holy Spirit. This therefore is not
come to pass by chance, but by the sure counsel of God: who, had he intended
that those points should have been of like estimation, he would at least in
some one place, plainly have signified his mind. Which since he has not done,
what is man that he should be able to conjecture Gods mind? These things ought
not to be measured by our wit or judgment, but by the wisdom of God revealed
unto us from heaven: it alone must be regarded, what ever reason may dictate.

But if so be any one shall err in a point that ought necessarily to be known,
and cannot be reduced to a right judgment, no man ought to question but that
such a person may be justly condemned and cast out of the society of the godly.
And that not only, if being admonished, he shall go on to seduce others, but
also though he will be silent: for what participation can the Church of God
have with him unto whom eternal life is not promised? But if the point, about
which some man erres, be not in the number of those that must needs be known;
in this case, I conceive we must use a distinction. For if he that thinks
amiss, and cannot be reduced, shall likewise endeavor to seduce others, having
been often admonished to desist; I see no reason but that he may and ought to
be cast out of the Congregation: For such an one exceedingly offends the
brethren: and though the matter be not of the greatest weight, it follows not,
that the error is not pernicious; for look how one point of knowledge springs
from another, even so do errors arise of errors; and what is there, wherein
the glory of God is concerned, that ought not to be of great moment? But if so
be he seduce not others, so long as he holds those points that are necessary to
salvation, he may be yet in the number of brethren: What if they shall cut him
off? They shall (as much as in them lies) cut a living member from the body of
Christ, which were very unjust, neither is there any precept of God commanding
such a thing. And so much of a just and unjust judgment: Now let us consider,
for our orderly and just proceeding thereto, what we ought to do, and what to
avoid.

For the matter of tenets: if some very pernicious errors arise, there is
nothing hinders, but that we may forthwith make head against it, and teach the
people what a doctrine it is, that they may take heed of it. But the man is not
to be cast out, until such time as, according to the rule of the Gospel, all
courses have been tried to reclaim him; and if we are forced to proceed to an
ejection, we must be careful that nothing be done, whereby any hinderance may
arise to the Church. Now it is very clear, that by how much the greater
ill will any man shall bear toward the Church, by so much the more may the
Church look to be molested by him, that he will more desperately and eagerly
plot against her, privily seducing al he can, and by calumnies endeavoring to
render the Church hateful, and the like. Now by how much the more sharply any
man is dealt with, by so much the more will he be moved against the Church. In
consideration whereof, my judgment is, that the Heretic shall in such sort be
condemned, as that the cause of his condemnation being simply signified, no
kind of reproach be used, and that this be done with intimation rather of
grief, then of any anger or hatred: in such manner as the judgment may be full
of gravity, but void of all passion and sharpness. But we have before spoken,
when we handled the duty of a private man, that which is suitable to the present
occasion, and have showed how always more hurt then good comes by sharp
language. In a word, we must take heed lest those men arrogate unto themselves
to judge either of the doctrine, or of the man, unto whom it does not
appertain. For, doubtless it belongs not to any private person, nor yet to two
or three, but to the whole Church. Let two or three Prophets speak (says the
Apostle) and let the rest judge.

And this is the course the Church ought to take for the resisting the growth
of errors: We are now to speak of the Magistrates duty. An argument (if there
be any) full of controversy, intricate and of very great concernment. Such as
cannot away with the doctrine received, be their judgment better, or be it
worse, find themselves exceedingly grieved that they may not be suffered for to
speak their minds. On the other side, those whose doctrine both the Magistrates
and people approve, and also esteem of their authority; since they cannot
without great grief, nor many times without some diminishment of their
reputation, hear controversies daily raised; unto such the use of the sword
cannot but seem very necessary to repress such as will not rest content with
the doctrine generally received; and it is commonly seen that as any thing is
subservient unto the interest of any persons, such persons are soon persuaded,
that that thing is justly put in practice, Wherefore, since that a man's own
commodity coming into consideration, permits him not to judge so justly as is
fit, our thoughts must by all means possible be withdrawn from such
considerations; and if this be hard to be done, the next hereunto is, that in
thought at least every one change his own condition, and make himself of the
other part, and so set himself to consider both what may be most convenient to
be done, and what is most agreeable to the Law of God. If therefore liberty or
tolleration seem like to be convenient for thee: imagine thy self to be in his
condition who allows of the doctrine received, and would have it preserved,
and that there are certain men who daily vex thee, men of no judgment, of no
spirit, void of shame, making a perpetual noise, and excessively troublesome;
Tailors, Fishermen, Butchers, Cooks, silly women, confidently argue about the
chief heads of Religion, meddle with every thing, call all into question,
deceive the simple, breed innumerable scandals. Doubtless if thou shall (as we
have said) imagine thy self to be in such a condition; a thousand to one, but
thou will conceive that it is absolutely necessary to bridle so great
licentiousness. But if thou shall afterward cast thine eye upon such places
of Scripture as are commonly believed to arm the Magistrate against corrupters
of religion, happily thou will much more be inclined so to think and to judge
that such a course will be very profitable. He which conceives the doctrine
commonly received to be true and sincere, and judges that it were wisely done
for the preservation thereof, to put heretics to death: let him think with
himself, that it may notwithstanding come to pass, that by little and little,
while the pastors slumber, the doctrine may be corrupted, and the Church
degenerate from her ancient piety. For as soon as the Church obtains some short
peace and tranquillity, discipline is slackened by little and little, piety
grows cold, and a wonderful forgetfulness of God and his Law creeps into the
minds of men: which ingratitude since God cannot let go unpunished, he
withdrawes his Spirit, and gives freer scope unto seducers, by whose craft and
subtilty it comes to pass, that, though the same doctrine seem to remain, yet
it is by degrees changed and corrupted; now, where it is grown into an use to
decide controversies in Religion by the sword, whatsoever doctrine in time to
come shall be commonly received, whosoever shall oppose that doctrine, be it
right or wrong, he shall be accounted an heretic; and what ever texts of
Scripture or arguments he shall allege for himself, the hangman must be the
only man that shall answer all. And so it will come to pass, that look what
formerly was a just severity, will be turned into a monstrous and horrible
cruelty. Imagine thy self therefore to have fallen into those times, wherein it
is unlawful, for such as think aright, to oppose such errors as are commonly
received and if they shall dare so much as to mutter in the least degree, the
sword, the gallows, the faggot shall be at their heels: No place is allowed to
plead their cause; and it shall come into thy mind, that such great tyranny had
its original from the punishing of such as were heretics indeed; verily thou
would rather wish that no heretic had ever been punished, then that such
tyranny should come into use. It is llkewise to be considered, how little
oft-times the success of putting heretics to death, answers the expectation
of such as practice it. For when a man understands that he cannot safely
publish his opinion, he will not discover the same at all times, in all places,
or to every one he meets with: but he will first try how they are affected, he
will by little and little insinuate himself, and if he find himself mistaken in
the party, he will make trial elsewhere. But if he sees, that ear is given
to what he says, he will make his progress by degrees, until he be wholly
possessed of the parties mind; and thus will he practice with a second, and a
third; and such as shall he make companions of his error, those commonly he will
make his partners in spreading the same abroad, corrupting others, and
propagating the sect; so that before the Magistrate shall come to hear that one
is seduced, sometimes a great part of the people is misled, and the wound
become almost incurable. And since these things are done privately, not so much
as those that are over the Crhurch can use the remedies proper to them, viz.
the power of the Word: for though they hear some rumors, yet can they not
distinctly understand what is done; what Arts the seducers use, with what
arguments they press their tenets, no man can relate. For, such as ean,
neither will nor dare; they that would, know them not, and for the most part
relate only their own suspicions or fictions: and suppose the Pastors have some
grounds to proceed upon; forasmuch as they are exceedingly hated by those whom
they should heal, and looked upon as tyrants, all their labor is lost,
especially if (as is commonly seen) sharp language and reproaches shall be
added. Moreover, when Pastors shall place their hope of prsereving their
doctrine, and resisting heretics by the sword, and shall not see any great
need of learning to that intent, they addict themselves to idleness, and so by
degrees a general ignorance follows: so that Satan may afterward easily
obtrude any superstitions and errors. Neither is it lightly to be passed over,
that forasmuch as it is commonly the lot of godly persons to suffer
persecutions, reproaches and afflictions for religions sake, hereby, as by a
most manifest token, especially if with a courageous and cheerful mind they
undergo them, and their conversation be unblameable, they do exceedingly
justify their cause with simple people; whiles on the contrary part, those
from whom they suffer such things, can hardly avoid the imputation of great
injustice and tyrannical cruelty. By which means it comes to pass, that many
are daily exasperated, confirmed in error, and rendered wholly incurable. For
we have too many examples before our eyes, which if any man shall diligently
weigh, verily he will find small cause much to desire the use of the sword, for
the extirpatioh of heresies. In a word, that thy judgment may be pure and
sincere, thou must bring thy self to such a pass, as not to desire it may be
so, rather then so: but this alone, which way soever the matter fall, which
side soever prevail, that such tenets may be established, as are agreeable
with Gods Word, and make for his glory.

Certain it is, that seducers were by the old Law punished with death, and in
case any City should be drawn from the right worship of God to worship idols,
the Law commanded that that City should be destroyed and burnt up, never to be
built again. But some suppose that Law was of force only until Christ, and
that it ought not to take place under the New Testament: the ground of their
conjecture being this, that the Israelitish nation was a type of the Christian
Church, and that they had promises of earthly sensible things, such as were of
use in this life, and that their sacrifices were of the same strain, and in a
word, all their services: which nevertheless did signify things invisible
appertaining to eternal life. Which being so, they collect, that that
corporal punishment was likewise a type of eternal damnation; and that
therefore this law, with all others ordained to figure out things to come, had
an end at the coming of Christ: Which conjecture seems to me so probable, that
I should not tell how to reject it, did not the reason, in the Law set down,
oppose the same. For thus it is in the Law: that all Israel hearing, may fear,
and do no more so for the future. Which reason, truly, is always of force: so
that though the Law it self be expired, yet the Magistrate has as much
authority to make another to the same purpose, as he has authority to make
laws against murderers, adulterers, and other criminal offenders. Howbeit,
the words of our Lord seem to persuade the contrary, where he propounds the
parable of the tares. For to the servants demanding whether they should go and
pluck up the tares, the householder is said to have answered, that they should
not go, lest gathering the tares, they should pluck up the Wheat. Which place
whiles some interpret one way, and some another, we may perceive how great a
difference there is between gathering of testimonies of Scripture to establish
an opinion which a man has already fixed in his mind, and to make use of them
merely for the clearing of the truth. Now, the way to find out the truth, were,
if when thou have found an exposition which seems to make for thy opinion, thou
should assume the person of the party dissenting, and diligently consider
what might be said against it, and not presently applaud thy self in thine own
exposition. Hence it would come to pass, that those which dissent should not
always dissent, but such as err would at last give way to them that judge
aright. But for the most part, we care more for Victory then Truth. And
forasmuch as the solution of the question in hand seems wholly to consist in
the exposition of this text; we must beware again and again lest interest blind
our eyes, and that we bestow not less time and study in the examination
thereof, then the cause requires. That exposition truly which those give, which
say, that Christ does not here exclude all rigor, but that he shows, such
evils are to be suffered, which cannot without some great mischief be
corrected; seems not suitable to the words of the Householder: for he does not
say, Come on, go your ways and do it, but take heed lest with the tares you
pluck up the Wheat; but he absolutely forbids them to meddle in the business:
and wills that both the tares and the wheat should grow until the harvest.
Whence it appears that great violence is offered to the words by such an
exposition. Neither do they seem to expound those words more fitly, who affirm
that they are to be understood of the universal purging of the Church, which
our Lord would have deferred till the day of Judgment; not forbidding, in the
mean time, the purging of particular Churches. Neither do I think it requisite,
we make any long enquiry, how truly the servants of the Householder are said to
mean the Angels; let us rather with attentive minds consider what ^t is which
is forbidden: Hence we shall soon see who they are that are forbidden. Clear it
is, that the Wheat is the godly, the tares the ungodly; but whether all kind of
ungodly persons, or some one sort of them, we shall see hereafter. And the
field is the world: To take therefore the tares out of the field, is to kill
the ungodly, to pat them out of the number of those that live in this world.
But our Lord forbids that, and would have them grow with the Wheat until the
time of harvest, and not separated till then. But (thou will say) he forbids
the purging and clensing of the whole field, but not of particular Churches.
Suppose then that men shall be so diligent in clensing particular Churches,
that none shall remain uncleansed, will not the whole become by that course
cleansed? But thou denyest that that can be done: yet suppose it may; thou must
of necessity grant, that when every particular Church shall be cleansed, the
whole Church will be likewise pure, which being done before Harvest time, would
cross the will of the Lord; forasmuch as, look what he would not have done
before Harvest, he wills as little that it should be done by men, as by Angels.
Now if so be any Magistrate shall go about to cleanse, not the whole Church
which is not in his power, but that which he can, what other thing shall he do,
but, as much as in him lies, resist the will of the Lord? And truly how small
soever the part cleansed shall be, it will be a part of the whole; so that he
that shall do herein what he shall be able, it may well be said, that if he
might have had his will, the whole should have been purged. By all which it
appears, that this exposition cannot be allowed. Others would have it, that it
is only forbidden to pluck up the tares by war. But forasmuch as the words do
as well express that way of plucking up the tares, when a particular person is
censured and put to death, as that of plucking them up by war; he that would
have the words of the Householder to be understood only of the former, bringing
no sure reason why he so interprets, ought to be accounted a guesser rather
then an expounder. For the words are to be taken according to their evident
sense, unless some sufficient reason do dissuade: so as if they be general,
we must understand the speech to be general: if the Law distinguish not, we
ought not to distinguish. How then shall we expound this Parable? Those words
(say thou) Let both grow until the Harvest, cannot be understood according
to the letter, that the wicked should be suffered to grow as much as the godly:
So far you and I are agreed. For I see what absurdities would follow, if all
the Magistrates authority, and all discipline were removed. Howbeit, plain it
is, that a certain kind of ungodly persons are here intended, who though they
may seem such as ought to be cut off, yet it is forbidden them to whom that
work should belong, to cut them off. Now this cannot be understood of
adulterers, thieves, and other flagitious persons, since its manifest that
Magistrates are ordained by God, and are his Ministers for the punishment of
evil doers, neither do they bear the sword in vain: yea, though it should
appear that he which has committed adultery, murder, or other crime, were of
the Wheat, by his notable repentance, the Magistrate is not therefore bound to
spare him; neither truly will any man in his wits deny, but that monstrous
wickednesses ought to be restrained by the avengement of the sword. And if so
be the Parable cannot be meant of all ungodly persons, it is necessary that
those whom it intend, sshould be by some note of difference distinguished from
al other. Now from whence may this difference be rather taken, then from that
thing wherein godly and ungodly persons do most differ one from another? But,
what is that? Is it not in the doctrine of Religion? with respect whereunto the
one sort is called pious, the other impious. But there are two, kinds of
impious persons, for some are estranged from the true religion, both in name
and in truth, as the worshippers of Idols, and the Turks, but especially
Atheists: others, are in name and profession Christians, but in deed and in
truth they are nothing so, their doctrine being corrupted with great and foul
errors, which kind of persons we call Heretics. The former sort may again be
divided into two parts. For some of them have never professed the Christian
Religion others have Apostatized therefrom. Since therefore we are to
distinguish men according to their religion, either we must hold that both
these kind of ungodly persons are meant in the Parable, or that one is
understood: that we should say both are understood, the words of the Parable
give us little encouragement: for they speak of such seed as the enemy had sown
among the Wheat: so that it is manifest they mean such kind of impious persons
as converse among the godly, that is, the true Christians, and adorn themselves
with the name of Christians, of which kind are Heretics. And this truly is
very suitable to the nature of tares: for they say that these tares are nothing
but Wheat or Barley corrupted by the over-moisture of the soil, and soaked with
frequent rains; so that heresy could not have been set forth by a more fit
comparison: so that this speech is all one, as if the servants should have
asked their Lord, whether or no they should kill Heretics, and take them out
of the way. That this exposition is neither absurd, nor unsuitable, but rather
the necessary interpretation of the place, I conceive every one will perceive,
that weighs the words with no other desire but to find out the truth. The Enemy
is said to have sown his own seed amongst the good seed: among the seed (I say)
which the Lord had sown. Now the word, Seed, is taken sometimes for that out of
which any thing grows, (and this its proper acceptance:) sometimes, but
improperly, it is taken for that which grows out of the seed. The seed which
the Lord sowed, to speak properly, was the Gospel which he preached, as it is
taken in the Parable next before: but in a less proper expression, the seed
are they that believed the Gospel. So the Devils seed, speaking properly, are
false doctrines scattered amongst Christians, improperly the Devils seed are
they who embrace false doctrines. Now, that the faithful are called the Lords
seed, the ungodly the seed of the Devil, in respect of that seed from which
their godliness and ungodliness springs, is clear, in as much as both the
good and bad herbs are said to have grown up after the sowing of seed; and
because the servants wondered how the tares or cockle sprang up, since there was
none but good seed sown, and bad plants could not grow but from bad seed. So
that it is manifest by what has been said, that by the tares none but
Heretics can be understood. The old Law then (will thou say) and its reason
is abrogated, by this of our Lord. But what if, notwithstanding all that has
been said, both Laws may be still in force, and the latter derogate nothing
from the former? It would (I suppose) seem very strange. But what if it may be
so? And what is there that may be alleged why this exposition should not be
received as true? Come on then, let us examine whether this Law may stand with
that of the Old Testament, though it forbid Heretics to be killed. Now
against whom was the Old Law given? verily against such as either drew away
others from the true God to worship Idols, or at least being seduced
themselves, had forsaken him. But we do not term such offenders Heretics,
but Renegadoes and apostates; there is in that law no mention of heretics But
God (will you say) does as much abhor that worship, which is not according to
his own commandment, as he does the worshipping of other gods. Very well;
suppose it: What will you infer? Does it thereby appear, that the law which was
made against Apostates, must be executed against Heretics? An Heretic is
not comprehended in the name or notion of an Apostate, neither is he mentioned
in any other word of the Law. And if so be thou will needs draw the law to mean
him, that can thou not do from the proper force of the words: But (as Lawyers
speak) by way of extension and large interpretation. But it would first be
known, whether every Law will admit of such extensions, and if not every one,
which may admit of them, and wherefore or upon what ground; and whether or no
in this Law those things are found, in regard of which an extension is to be
made. Doubtless, if thou shall accommodate the Law to that which the words do
not signify; thou must do it only by a conjecture at the mind of the Lawgiver.
But, with what Lawgiver art thou here to dealt? With such an one verily, as at
whose mind to guess is the hardest thing in the world: So that all such
conjecturing cannot but be very doubtful. And besides, since there is extant a
general law, that forbids killing, we should not come to the shedding of blood
by the authority and warrant of a doubtful law, but of one very clear and
plain. And all this difficulty would remain, though we could perceive no
difference between the case of an Apostate, and that of an Heretic. For we
might justly suspect, that, though we could not see it, there might yet be a
wide difference. Neither should we run headlong to make an extension of a law
to take away a man's life. But what, if there are not wanting large differences
by us discemable? For an Apostate, does not only forsake the true worship of
God, but refuses to give any credit to the Word of God: with an Heretic the
Authority thereof remains firm: so that thou may find other weapons
wherewith to vanquish an Heretic, besides stones and swords; but other
weapons wherewith to an Apostate, thou have none. In which respect peradventure
it was, that God would by the most grievous punishment terrify a man from al
thought of forsaking his worship, and denying to give credit to his Word, and
would not however that an Heretic should be subject to like penalty. Hereunto
may be added, that the Church reaps no benefit by Apostates, but by Heretics
much, especially in this particular, that by means of the godly are provoked
more seriously and diligently to search the Scriptures, who would otherwise
addict themselves to sloth, and by degrees become ignorant of all religion. But
this is of greatest weight, that the Magistrate cannot be so mistaken, as to
conceive that a man apostatizeth from the true religion, or sollicites others
to apostatize, that does not so do; whereas he that erres not may easily seem
to him to err, or he that erres but a little, may easily seem to him to err
very grievously, which the many controversies even amongst the most learned,
wherewith the Church is evermore exercised, do plainly prove. Now, when I say
the Magistrate may err in such a case, I put no fault in the word of God, as
if it were not clear and true, but in the Magistrate himself; in as much as he
brings not such instruction, nor such a spirit to the interpretation thereof,
as he ought to do. For how few of these men that exercise the office of
Magistrates, though they profess the Gospel, do study the Scriptures as they
ought to do? How few of them are eminent for piety and prudence? So that from
them no other but a rash and injust judgment, in a matter of this nature, is
to be expected? But, you will say, the question is not, whether every
Magistrate have authority to proceed against such as he shall account for
Heretics; but the question is of a truly pious and prudent Magistrate, and of
such as are Heretics indeed. I hear what you say: But who is there bearing
the sword, that will not be accounted godly, and that will not account for an
Heretic whosoever thwarts him in matters of Religion? So that this will
unavoydably follow, that, look what authority you allow a pious Magistrate
against true Heretics, that will every Magistrate usurp against every one
that shall diffent from him, be his judgment what it will be. For as much
therefore as we have showed, that we might not safely make an extension of the
Law, though we could observe no difference between an Apostate and an
Heretic: What shall be done now we see so much difference? It is clear
therefore from the premises, that the old Law remains in force, or that at
least the like may be renewed, and yet Heretics are not to be put to death,
forasmuch as the case of an Heretic, and the case of an Apostate are
different.

But some may demand, whether or no it may then at least be just to proceed
against an Heretic when being commanded to be silent, he shall
notwithstanding go on to infect as many with his poison as he can? A question
of great concernment, in the solution whereof to err will be of dangerous
consequence, on which side soever the error light. For if it be the will of
God that Magistrates should punish Heretics that seduce; the reason is,
because it will make for the good of his Church, and for his own glory; so that
if the Magistrate shall therein be negligent he will be liable to under-go
severe punishment from God: But if it be the will of God, that they should not
be punished, doubtless he has weighty reasons why they should not: so that
the Magistrate shall not cross his will without punishment. Wherefore it lies
the Magistrate in hand to be very careful, that he go not about to guess at the
mind of God by his own wit or judgment, but that he attain to the understanding
thereof by a diligent search and discussion of Gods Word. And since it is
clear, that by the tares is meant Heretics, unless somewhat else had been
added, besides the forbidding to kill Heretics, the true way of
interpretation, accommodated to the ordinary manner of speaking, would
manifestly require, that we should understand the Law (for so we would call the
Householders forbidding to pluck up the Tares) to forbid the killing of
Heretics as Heretics* or because they are Heretics. As, if the Law should
forbid to kill a thief, we would understand, that the Law forbids that he
should be killed for his theft. But in case any man, besides his being an
Heretic, would teach contrary to the Magistrates command, the words of the
Law so interpreted, would not seem to save him harmless; as in case a man
should to his theft add murder, that law which forbids the putting a thief to
death would not save him. But the reason and cause is added, why the Father of
the Family wouid not have the tares plucked up, viz. left with the tares the
wheat also should be plucked up* that is, lest with Heretics such should be
killed as are not Heretics, but the sons of God. Out of this reason
therefore, we must fish for the right interpretation of the Law. Now the most
Interpreters conceive that the danger of the mistake in killing a child of God
for an Heretic, lies here, in that he who is an Heretic to day, may
hereafter, if he live, repent: and that this is the reason they are not to be
killed; which opinion I conceive is well refuted by such as say, that if heed
were to be taken unto such repentance, it ought to be as much respected in that
old Law concerning Apostates, and such as draw men from the worship of the true
God, as in this new Law. And since there was no consideration had of such
repentance in the old Law, it is like there was none had in this. Whereunto may
be added, that he that is to day an Heretic: If he be in the number of Gods
Elect, he cannot be put to death: but that all that is necessary to be known to
salvation shall be revealed to him before: if he be none of Gods Elect, there
remains no hope of his repentance. So that this seems no just reason, why an
Heretic should not be put to death. Now, unless there be a respect had unto
the repentance of an Heretic, there is no other danger to be feared, but
this, that the Magistrate may at one time or another, account him for an
Heretic that is not an Heretic, either because not he but the Magistrate is
in the error, or if he be in the error and not the Magistrate, the error is
not so great that he ought therefore to be accounted an Heretic. And if this
be that which the Householder, viz. our Lord aimed at, verily he has
peremptorily declared that Magistrates are no fit Judges of doctrines; and has
forbidden them to exercise any such jurisdict on. But if any man shall still
contend, that respect was had to the repentance of the party erring, yet shall
he not thereby be able to prove, that no consideration was had of that other
reason, viz. the possibility of mistaking one that is no heretic for an
heretic. The Law forbids heretics to be killed, lest that with the heretics be
killed, such as are not heretics. By what way or means therefore soever it may
come to pass that the one be killed in stead of the other, that way or means may
be said to belong unto the Law, as a reason thereof. The Law speaks generally
without distinction: so that hewch will take upon him to distinguish, not having
a manifest reason to warrant him; seems to be a guesser rather then an
expositor, and cannot avoid the imputation of Rashness. For as much (I say) as
the Law speaks generally without any distinction, it must be generally
understood without making any difference or distinction. He that shall take so
much liberty unto himself, as rashly at his own pleasure to invent
distinctions, cannot be said to expound, but by a cunning kind of cavillation
to go about to evade the words of the Law. In which respect, and considering
the premises, we must conclude, that whether the matter of repentance were
considered or not; yet that there was regard had to that error of the
Magistrate, whereby he might at one time or another put to death for heresy
him that is no Heretic; and consequently, that judgments of this nature
pertain not to the Magistrate, nor to any Men, but to the Son of God alone, who
at the last day by his Angels will separate the tares from the wheat, and cast
them into the Fire. Now, if so be the Magistrate be not a fit judge to discern
between him that is an Heretic, that he may kill him, and him that is not an
Heretic, that he may spare him; how can he be fit to judge between a
sufficient cause to make an Heretic, that is to say, an heretical tenet, so
as that he may under a penalty forbid the same to be taught, and an
unsufficient cause or tenet not heretical, so as that he may allow the same?
For what is it to know an heretic, but to know the cause which makes an
heretic? What other thing is it to err in the knowing of an heretic; but to
err in the knowledge of the causes for which men are to be accounted Heretics?
But let us look into the business a little more narrowly. For it is certainly
manifest from the words of the House-holder, that he commanded his servants not
to pluck up the tares, etc. that he gave this command not for the sake of the
tares, but of that corn which through error might be taken for tares. For his
will was (to speak plainly) that true Heretics should be spared, that by this
means the safety of the true servants of God might be provided for. He denied
unto pious and prudent Magistrates the power of punishing Heretics, lest by
their example ungodly and Imprudent Magistrates should abuse the said power
against the pious servants of God. For as much then as, that Law was made for
the sake of Gods pious servants, lest at any time by a perverse erroneous
judgment, they should be put to death as Heretics: We must take heed how we
allow of any such interpretation thereof; as that, whiles the Magistrate shall
in all appearance be obedient unto the Law, the Lawgiver shall notwithstanding
miss of his end for which he made the Law. But if so be, the Magistrate shall
so interpret the Law, as to conceive, that he ought indeed to spare Heretics
that keep their heresies unto themselves, and endeavor not to persuade others
to embrace them; but that he ought to put them to death, if they will teach
their errors; shall the safety of the godly be by this means provided for and
secured? Surely no. For Laws of Magistrates with such a Proviso, as often as
the truth shall, come to be called heresy, will be the death of Gods servants:
For to whomsoever the truth shall be by God revealed, he ought not to bury his
talent in the earth, that is to say, he ought not by silence to dissemble the
truth to him revealed: But Gods will is, that it should be acknowledged before
the sons of Men and revealed. So that it cannot otherwise fall out, but that,
if the Magistrate shall, account some good and faithful servant of God for an
Heretic; he not withstanding any penalty denounced, will endevou^ to persuade
as many as he can, of the truth of that doctrine which the Magistrate accounts
heresy. Whence it will come to pass, that whereas the Law was made for the
good of such persons, none shall receive less advantage thereby then they. It
must be concluded therefore, that this interpretation can be no ways agreeable
to the intent of the Lawmakers, but rather that it is most contrary thereunto.
Yet is it not my intent, that godly Magistrates should carry no stroke in the
Kingdom of Christ: many other things there are, which they both may and ought
to do: As to punish irreverent speeches against God, to punish such as forsake
the whole Christian religion, and ^uch as dare to persuade others to forsake
the same. If any external worships are set up, any Images erected, these they
ought to abolish; to keep off the violence and injuries of impious persons from
the heads of the godly; to maintain public peace and tranquillity, is their
duty, and such like. But for them to assume unto themselves to be judges of the
controversies of such men, as submit themselves to the Authority of Gods Word,
and make use of the Testimonies thereof; they shall do well to weigh seriously
what it is which they assume, and how great a liberty they allow unto
themselves. Some there are that suppose, in case the sword shall not be
unsheathed, all Religion will soon be lost: how beit we shall much wrong our
Lord, if we suspect that he is asleep, that he cares not at all for his people,
or that he cannot preserve his own Gospel without the sword; as if the Word
had no mettle or force, but that all a Christians hope were placed in the
sword. For if, after that Satan by his enchantments had possessed the world,
and himself was become Lord and Ruler; the power of Gods Word was such, that it
was able to cast Satan out of his strong and exquisitely-fortified kingdom;
shall it not be able to defend the Kingdom of Christ, against the blunted and
broken darts of Satan? Let us be of good courage; our Lord does not sleep but
watch. If we shall put al our confidence in him, if we shall fight with his
Word, if being acted by his Spirit (whom we must obtain by continual prayers)
we shall diligently and prudently avoid all those policies of Satan, of which
we have hitherto treated; verily there will be no cause why we should be afraid
of heretics; let but truth warily enter the combat with Imposture, and she
must of necessity at last obtain the victory. Wherefore, if there shall daily
appear such as move new questions, raise new controversies, bawle at the
Pastors, bark at them, and molest them: let them think thus with themselves:
What is Satan's drift in all thi^? Sure he comes in opposition of the truth of
the Gospel; but is that all he aims at? What if so be that this be his aim,
and some other greater thing be also by him endeavored? Namely (and that with
thy assistance) that he may lay the foundations of such a tyranny, as he
intends, when time shall be, to exercise against the servants of God, wholly to
extinguish the Gospel with the professors thereof, and to make himself absolute
Lord of the world. Come on then, what will thou that boastest of thy care of
Gods honor, do in such a case? Thou that pretendest so much to prize the truth
of the Gospel, that would be thought to regard nothing but the good of the
Church of God? What will thou (I say) do in this case? Will thou go and join
forces with Satan? will thou hire thy self to serve him, will thou supply him
with tools, stones and mortar for his building? Will thou moile and sweat at
the same work with the drudges and slaves of Satan? will thou in good deed,
that thou may avoid some momentany short troubles, assi^t Satan to lay the
Foundation of so great a mischief? what if this likewise be by him aimed at,
even to wreath out of thy hands those weapons which he most dreads, and to put
thee upon the use of such as he fears not a jot, yea, rather which he wholly
contemns? Now, without all question, he cares not a rush for swords and such
like terrible tooks; there is nothing which he more fears, and which he is
less able to resist then the Word of God. But as soon as the Ministers shall
have obtained thus much, that whosoever shall dare to mutter any thing against
their doctrine, the Executioner shall presently be called for, which by his
halter or Ax alone shall resolve all doubts, and unty all knots; what great
study of the Scripture will they then use? Doubtless they will plainly
perceive, that they have small need so to spend their time. For they shall be
able to obtrude upon the poor silly people, any thing they can but dream of,
and yet nevertheless maintain their dignity and reputation. Woe be to us and to
our Posterity, if we shall cast away this weapon wherewith alone we are allowed
to fight; wherewith fighting we are always sure of victory. But such (will you
say) is the troublesomnesse and impudency of some persons, so insufferable,
that they must of necessity be restrained with other kind of weapons, beside
the Word. Shall I tell thee what I think of this speech of thine. It is just as
if some soldier, presuming to excel all others in military valor, should say,
that his enemy fights so eagerly, so stoutly, that he must of necessity throw
away his weapons, and become subject unto him. Oh gallant Soldier! What else, I
pray you, is Satan's endevor: what would he rather employ himself about, then to
excite the wickedness of men, to provoke the servants of God, with the higest
hand of provocation possible? Now, if they shall rigorously prosecute the work
of Satan, shall we likewise do that which he most of all desires. This is it
which Satan mainly endeavors, even to wrest away the weapon of the Word from
us, and that we may descend into the lists aga nst him, armed with such kind of
Ammunition, as he slights and contemnes. Shall we therefore, because Satan
labors with might and main to this effect, and brings into the field the
fittest soldiers for such a purpose: Shall we, I say, submit unto his will, and
casting away those weapons wherewith alone we may win the field; shall we catch
hold of such weapons, wherewith we shall soon be put to the worse, and which
will be turned to our own throats? Nay, but let us hold fast this weapon of the
Word of God: Let us fight with this alone, herewith alone let us do our
endeavor to slay Satan himself, and all his Emissaries. Let us endeavor to
learn all the most convenient ways of striking and warding with this weapon;
all the Arts of offense and defense: Of which matter we have already
sufficiently discoursed.

And, as it is a thing not appertaining to the Magistrate, to make himself
Judge of doctrines, and to use violence toward the Teachers, much less does
it belong to him to use such violence, at the discretion, and upon the
judgment of others. As in case he should commit the care of Religion to
certain persons, and be ready himself to draw the sword against whomsoever they
shall persuade him, or should arm them to the same effect. How well he will be
able to justify his so doing to the King of Kings in that day, which will be
very terrible to the wicked, and joyful to the godly, we may thus judge.
Suppose thou thy self being a King, and to go into a far Country, should
commit the care of thy Kingdom, Household, and all thy affairs to the fidelity
of one of thy servants; and he should delegate the administration of all to
some other servants, such as came next to hand, of whose wisdom and
faithfulness he had no assurance; yea, or to the fittest that he could choose;
himself in the mean season being busied about matters of the smallest
concernment; and when all were like to miscarry, he should suffer the same
course to be continued: when thou should come home and take knowledge hereof;
could thou possibly allow of the doings of that servant of thine? For though
thou should find all safe and well, would thou not so account of that
servant, as if all things had fallen out cross and contrary? But what if some
very great damage, some shameful miscarriage had happened? Of how great
punishment would thou judge that servant to be worthy? And is not the Church
of God Gods Kingdom, his Inheritance, his Delight and Joy? Is not all the
dignity and comeliness of the Church placed in the purity of her Doctrine, and
the framing of her Worship, according to the Word of God? And what is there in
the Administration of a Kingdom, which in comparison hereunto, is not a very
light thing, and of no account? Go to then, how can thou know that any man is
of a right judgment in matter of Religion, so as that thou may safely commit
thy sword unto his care and trust, unless thou thy self shall first of all
declare, what is to be held therein. But if thou shall commit affairs of such
moment to their fidelity and discretion, whose inner parts thou do not know:
yea, if thou shall commit them to whomsoever, and thy self mind other matters,
what account will thou give of thine administration? Especially, if while thou
shall be naping, and nothing minding any such matter, pious doctrine shall be
suppressed as impious, and impious doctrine shall be established for pious: so
that thence will follow the slaughter of many godly persons taken for
heretics, and the perdition of an innumerable company of people by false
doctrine; which people the Son of God made such reckoning of, that he stuck not
to lay down his life for them: how severe think thou shall thy sentence be?
verily this is my judgment: Whatsoever does any way concern the glory of God,
be it, that the liberty of heretics in spreading false doctrines is to be
restrained, or any other thing (as far as the nature of thy office may require
or permit thee to act) that cannot be by thee omited without a great fault; yet
will the fault be a thousand times greater, if thou shall therein make use of
another man's knowledge, rather then thy self to use all means possible to
understand what ought to be done; and if thou can not be satisfied in thine
understanding, it will be, by much, the safest way to interpose no authority of
thine in such a business, either by thy self, or by others. Now, by what more
clear example could Magistrates possibly have been admonished, to confide in no
man's judgment, then this, in that the Son of God himself by such negligence of
the Magistrate, was given up to the judgment, or lust rather of his most unjust
enemies? Take ye him (says Pilate) and according to your law judge him. Take
heed thou think not thus with thy self: We live now in a most clear light of
the Gospel: now the Pastors are most holy: now all is safe. What? shall we
think that Satan snorts and sleeps? And to attempt nothing whereby to lay the
foundation of some new Kingdom, whereby to erect some new tyrannies; to hatch
some new Monsters? Now that is a known saying, That a small Error at the
beginning, in the end comes to be of the first magnitude: And inasmuch, as all
things of this nature are of very great moment, whatsoever business shall offer
it self, I would exhort the Magistrate, That he would by most fervent prayers
ask counsel of him who can never deceive, and act nothing unless he were
assured that he were in the right. And in case after all, he shall be of this
judgment, to think he ought to prescribe what doctrines ought to be taught, and
what not; he must at least be very wary, lest Satan do here gain upon him,
either by making him to put his own opinion at such a distance from the
Heretics, that while he shun Charybdis, he fall into Scylla; or to allow the
Heretic somewhat which ought not to be granted; or to use such words and
phrases, as may occasion some new doctrine, himself intending no such matter;
or to establish that doctrine as necessarily to be believed, which himself has
by necessary consequence, to his thinking, drawn from the Scripture, there
being, in the mean time, some error in his collection or inference. And to the
end, that he may not incur any of those errors or the like, let him examine,
how far he is assured of the truth of every point, by such ways as we formerly
delivered. Furthermore, it seems to me an excellent Caution, That whatsoever
shall be laid down as agreeable to the Word of God, may be expressed with the
same words and phrases which the Spirit of God uses in the Scriptures.
Otherwise, it is almost impossible, but that the wit of man will intrude some
thing of its own; which if it do, an error is committed almost incurable. And
heed must be taken, that the Heretic be not declared to hold, or prohibited to
teach any other thing, then what he holds and teaches for the avoiding of such
inconveniences as we have before recounted.

One thing there is, which verily I could never understand but to be altogether
void of reason; That he who is thought to have taught something false and
impious, should be forced to recant, which if he do, he shall not be punished.
To what purposed, I pray you, serves this practice? What good is there gotten;
if for the avoiding of punishment, against his conscience, an heretic shall
recant his opinion? There is only one thing that may be alleged for it, viz.
That such as are possessed with the same error and unknown perhaps, will do the
like in their own hearts, yea, will counsel others to do the same. That opinion
must needs have a very light impression, which can so easily be plucked out of
men's minds. Have we no reason to suspect, that such a recantation is rather
for fear of punishment, then from the heart? Will there not rather much
heart-burning by this means arise, if the Magistrate shall seem not only to
kill the body, but to plot the ruin of the soul? Are we indeed so ill
furnished with weapons to vanquish errors, as to be forced to defend our selves
with a lie, to put our trust in Recantations feigned through fear? But some may
say: This is not that which we desire, to force men to any kind of
Recantation; but that an heretic may acknowledge his error not so much with his
mouth, as with his heart: this were excellent indeed, if thou could bring him
to it. But what work is there for threats or blandishments in this case? These
have some power indeed to prevail with the will. But thy business is with the
Understanding, it is changed neither by threats, nor flatteries or allurements.
These cannot cause that, what formerly seemed true, should now seem false,
though the party may very much desire to change his judgment. Which if it seem
a new and wonderful thing to thee: I shall not need many Arguments to convince
thee of the truth thereof. You suppose, that a man may change his judgment when
he will, without any new reason to persuade him to think otherwise: I deny that
he can so do. Make you therefore an experiment upon your self, and see if you
can for the least space of time draw your self to think otherwise then you do
in the question between us, so as to make your self believe as I do, That a man
cannot change his judgment when he pleases: without question you shall find
that you cannot do it. But take heed you mistake not an imagination for a
persuasion; for nothing hinders, but that thou may imagine what thou will. I
pray thee likewise to consider again, That in case thou fear any thing, as for
example, lest some business may not have a good issue, lest something should
come to pass much against thy mind, so that thou can not sleep for the
trouble thereof: thou need but change thine opinion concerning such a thing, so
as to hope that all will be well, and thy trouble shall be at an end. O most
easy and ready medicine, to take away the greatest part of that trouble of
mind which men sustain in this life! O short Philosophy! If whatsoever evil a
man shall fear may betide him, he may believe (if he will) that it will not
come to pass: whatsoever molests a man because he takes it to be evil (when as
oft-times there is no evil in such a thing;) he may persuade himself when he
pleases, that it is not evil. But experience shows that none of these things
can be done. Wherefore, if an heretic cannot, though he would, cast away his
error, unless reason compel him: why trouble you the poor wretch, to make him
lie, and so to offend God, yet more and more? Verily, it cannot be denied, but
this was the devils invention, whereby he might compel the servants of God, for
fear of punishments to renounce Christ. So that I wonder some men could not
perceive as much, though otherwise wise enough. How much better would it be, in
case there were no question, but that a man might be put to death for matter of
Religion; to deal with him according to Law, whether he recant or recant not,
neither to invite him, so much as by a word, to a Recantation, any otherwise
then that he may be won to the truth, and his soul saved: which also were to be
done not by threatenings, allurements, or through hope, but by the power of
Scripture and Demonstrations.

But as for the authority of the Magistrate, herein it is most necessary, not
to suffer immodesty, or delight to rail and reproach, to escape unpunished, in
whomsoever they shall be found. If a man must needs hear a reproach, let him
hear it where he may make answer, and judicially defend himself; otherwise, the
life and name of a man, his conversation and reputation, ought to be out of the
danger of any man's tongue, or pen. If there be controversies in Religion, let
them contend on both sides with Scriptures and Arguments, but let the
Magistrates look to it again and again, that they may under a penalty abstain
from whatsoever may tend to provoke one another. This, if they shall do, they
shall both render the Church very quiet, and obtain great praise from all
discreet persons. And thus much shall suffice to have spoken of that change of
judgment, concerning the doctrine of Religion, in which, they that have
embraced errors, know indeed that they have altered their judgment, but think
withal, that they have altered to the better; only, the adversaries know that
it is to the worser part. We shall now discourse, how it may come to pass, that
the true doctrine may be adulterated, and we never observe so much: and by what
means we may prevent the same.

Satan's Cabinet Counsel. The fourth Book.
The Argument.
HOw Doctrine may be corrupted, and yet no change appear. The needless
multiplication of doctrines caused through the curiosity of Teachers, is a
great means: so is the negligence and ignorance of the people, trusting too
much to their Pastors. A double Caution to be used: That no change be made in
Doctrine, when it is pure: That in case any change happen, it may be
discovered. An excellent way to keep doctrine pure, is to avoid all curious and
vain questions; to have the scope of Religion always in our eye; and to express
the doctrine thereof in the phrase of Scripture. To discover whether there has
been a change made, we must compare the doctrine of our times, not with that of
our Predecessors and Ancestors, but with the doctrine taught in the times of
the Apostles. Man would always seem more wary and wise then God, in expressing
the points of Religion. The people must frequently be admonished, That the care
of Religion, and reading the Word, belongs not to Pastors alone, but to every
one that intends to be saved. The restoring of that ancient custom prophesying,
one by one in the Congregation, would be an exce^^^ means to discover
corruption of Doctrine. Objections agai^^t the use of prophesying answered. If
prophesying were restored, there would be less need of such mercenary Teachers,
as make a trade of the Ministry. This practice of prophesying was used in the
Jewish Church. Our Lord, at twelve years of Age, was suffered to teach among
the Doctors, having no Office, and unknown, by the privilege of prophesying.
The use of prophesying was continued in Christian societies, till the time of
Constantine at the least. How prophesying ought to be regulated. Every one
ought to submit to the judgment of the Congregation, and how far. Whether
Councils are to be called, and what Authority they have. They may not make new
Laws, nor institute new Worships. Men are not bound to submit to their
determinations in matters under dispute: Yet there is use of them. An Objection
answered. The difference between the Councils of the Apostles, and of those
that pretend to succeed them. The determination of a Council must not rashly be
rejected. Who ought to sit in Councils.

LIB. IV.
WHen the Doctrine of Religion shall be depraved; that yet no change be
discernable, there are many causes; of which some are in the doctrine it self,
others in the manner of the mutation: Some respect those which teach, others
those which are taught. In the doctrine it self, there seem to be these: First,
that it is an heap, as it were, of many things very unlike one to the other,
like so many grains, so that a change may be made by the smallest parts. For
look, as if out of some great heap thou shall daily take certain grains, and
put others in their rooms, the heap will seem to continue as it was, though by
little and little it be changed, and begin to be another kind of heap from
what it was; even so, forasmuch as the doctrine of Religion consists of many
sentences and doctrines very unlike one to the other, though conspiring
together, and tending to the same end: Whiles now this doctrine, now that,
shall be changed and corrupted, the body of doctrine it self (that I may so
speak) seems to retain the same figure, though it be not indeed the same, but
in part altered. Yea verily, one only sentence may be of such weight, that it
being depraved and altered, though no such thing appear, the whole doctrine of
Religion may notwithstanding be by that means corrupted: Forasmuch as without
that sentence, all the rest of the doctrine may become unprofitable, and of no
value. Such an one is that sentence, that, By the blood of Christ alone shed
for us, and his sacrifice offered for our salvation upon the Cross, all our
sins are expiated; which sentence, if thou shall so change, as to say, That our
sins are done away by the merits of our good works, or the intercession of
Saints, of a Christian doctrine, thou will make one altogether Antichristian.
Neither is the doctrine of Religion, in regard that it consists of diverse
unlike parts, subject to secret mutation, only by changing and depraving the
sentences as we have said, but also by adding some sentences, and taking away
others. I do not say, that this depravation can be made secretly in such manner,
as to corrupt the Scriptures. For if that were done, the deceit would be
manifest: But that in speaking and writing, false sentences may be uttered
instead of true, and depraved sentences instead of such as are incorrupt. Now
by how much the heap shall be greater, by so much the harder it will be, in
case there shall be a change, to observe the same. In which respect, the
enlargement of the doctrine helps much to hide any mutation in the same. Now
the doctrine of Religion is enlarged, whiles it is variously handled, whiles it
is drawn forth into many different questions, which sprout one out of another,
and are propagated infinitely. The cause of which mischief is the overgreat
curiosity of men, their rashness, arrogance and ambition; with which diseases
of the mind being madded, we must print and publish whatever we dream of. Yea
verily, if we want matter to write, we unrip other men's discourses, and sew
them together after a new fashion; and had rather do that which is done to our
hand, then be thought to do nothing. Now this is a thing which tends much to
the hiding of corruption of doctrine, when as those false sentences which shall
be put into the place of the true, shall have the appearance and show of truth,
though indeed they are far from any acquaintance therewith. Which is occasioned
diverse ways. The first is, when some true sentence in Scripture shall be
expressed in such words, as admit diverse interpretations, which cannot all be
true, and another sentence shall be composed, agreeable to those words
misunderstood; for by this means, while a very different thing is spoken, the
same thing which is in the Text, seems to be said without any change. In like
manner, when a Text is figurative, so that one thing is meant indeed, another
thing seems to be meant, and a man shall take it in the seeming sense without
any regard to the figure. As if a man should say, That in case any man's sight
be an occasion of sining, he ought to pluck out his eyes, and wholly bl^nde
himself, because it is written, If thine eye shall offend thee, pluck it out,
and cast it from thee. For these words do at the first sight seem to say as
much, whereas their sense is very different, viz. Whatsoever may slacken or
stop a man's progress in the way of the Gospel, he ought to abandon that thing
forthwith; for that it is better to be without that thing then being thereby
hindered in such a course, to lose the Kingdom of Heaven, and to be adjudged to
eternal tortures. In like manner; if, when the meaning of a Text shall be
according to the letter, the words are so expounded, as if they meant
otherwise. As is practiced upon these words, Go and show thy self unto the
Priest, from which, this sentence is drawn, Every man must confess his sins to
a Priest. Another means whereby a false sentence seems to be true, is, when in
the true sentence there is somewhat contained, either expressly or implici ely,
and the false sentence shall be expressed in such terms, as exclude that thing
so contained. (The thing we speak of, so contained, is either an exception, or
a condition, or a circumstance, or some explanat^on.) Or some condition or
exposition, suiting not with the Text, shall be added. Those words of the
Apostle, have questionless an exception or a condition, Be not deceived,
neither whoremongers, nor idolaters shall attain the Kingdom of Heaven, for we
must understand that condi ion, unless they repent. Now if any man should say,
That the sin of uncleanness could not be pardoned, he should speak that which
were agreeable to the words indeed, but far from the scope and purpose of that
Text. In l^ke sort, those words of Solomon need an exposi^ion, The condition of
man and beast is the same, as these did, so do they, both die alike, neither is
a man better then a beast. Now the exposition to be understood is, that thus it
is not absolutely, but for ought which a man's reason can observe to difference
them. Which exposition being excluded, he that shall press the words of
Solomon, shall pluck up all Religion by the roots. Those add unto the true
sentence of Scripture, who say, That those shall obtain eternal life, who
believe that their sins are forgiven for Christ's sake, provided they shall
recount all their sins unto the Priest, and obtain absolution from him. He
changes somewhat of the true sentence, who says, That the Law is therefore
holy, because the knowledge thereof makes a man holy: for it is not therefore
holy, but because it makes a man to despair of his own strength, and brings him
unto Christ, the only means of salvation, and because it shows what things
please or displease God; to the end, we may worship him, not after our own
inventions and constitutions, but according to his command. A third means,
whereby a false sentence is thrust into the doctrine of Religion, appearing to
be true only, instead of that which is true indeed, is, when from some true
sentence a false one is by a wrong inference collected, which collection shall
be used in place of the true one, from which it was drawn. So, when the Bishop
of Rome has gathered out of those words, Whatsoever thou shall bind on earth,
shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever shall be loosed by thee on earth,
shall be loosed in heaven: this sentence, That he has power to make new laws,
and to constitute new heads of doctrine, or as they call them, new articles of
Faith, and to compel men to keep and observe the one, and to believe the other:
This collection or inference of his, he makes account of, as of a sentence of
Scripture. Now there is a kind of false inferences or collections, very hidden
and obscure; forasmuch, as they are partly drawn from suppositions, which are
neither expressed, nor perhaps once thought of by the collectors; yet are such
collections admited without any question, even as if they did arise out of most
certain and clear grounds. This may be seen in that collection we last named:
For, that it may be infered, That power to make laws was given to Peter, it is
requisite, that the word bind should signify to make laws: For so you shall
rightly collect; to bind is to make laws, power of binding is given to Peter,
and consequently of making laws: In like manner you may collect; to loose, is to
repeal laws: now power to loose, was given to Peter; therefore, power to
abrogate laws was given to him. And since it is said, Whatsoever thou shall
bind and whatsoever thou shall loose, it will follow, that Peter may make or
revoke what laws he please; yea the Ten commandmen^s he may abrogate, if he
think fit: Again, That all this may appear to belong to the Pope: another
supposition must be made, viz. Whatsoever authority was given to Peter, the
same is given to the Roman Bishop; since therefore Peter had authority giv^n
him to make or abrogate what laws he please, the same authority is given to the
Roman Bishop. But this conclusion is infered, without any mention of those
suppositions; That to bind, and to loose, is to make, and revoke laws; and
that Whatever authority was given to Peter, is given to the Bishop of Rome.
Neither is every man able to mark in the making of such collections, what that
is which is omited and passed over with silence, as out of all question true,
though it be indeed as false as false may be. Furthermore, easy it is for any
to understand, That the obscurity of sentences or doctrines of Religion, is a
cause, that if any mutation be made, it cannot easily be discerned. Now the
obscurity of Christian doctrine, springs from these grounds. First, because it
handles the things of the spirit, and therefore cannot be understood without
the spirit: which spirit being wanting, though there be a great corruption of
doctrine, yet can it not be discerned. Another ground is, because, being
written in one tongue, we are forced to learn it in another tongue, into which
it is not very aptly translated. And although a man should give himself to
study the Hebrew and Greek; yet seeing they are not now used by any Nation, but
have their Being only in Books, he will never be able to lea^n them so
perfectly, but that the proper signification and various use of many words and
phrases, will be hid from his knowledge. Howbeit, this obscurity we speak of, is
not so great, but that where some portion of the Spirit is present, those
things at least which are necessary to be known for salvation, may easily be
understood. And so much for the causes of not discerning a change in doctrine,
which are in the doctrine it self; we are now to handle such Causes as are in
the manner of the change.

Now the manner of the change makes it undiscerned, for as much as the change
is made by little and little, for, if so be, as we said before, out of some
great heap of grain, every day some few grains should be taken, and as many of
another sort be put in the room of them, who could be able to discover the
mutation? Who is able to discern how much it is that a boy grows daily, or how
much a man declines and waxes old? Now the very self-same thing is to be seen
in the mutation of doctrine: for we shall have a man, to day suppose, who if he
make no other change, will at least invent some general name, for to call such
things by, as agree in nature or in some common reference or respect: which
name will be afterward applied to things very different, and it shall by this
means come to pass, that the nature and notion of the former things will be
obscured: thus did they that first called the holy washing, and the Supper of
our Lord, Sacraments. What hurt could any one so much as suspect from so small
a matter? Howbeit, in process of time, there were those, who supposing that any
sacred and holy rite was intended by the term Sacrament, began to give that
name to laying on of hands, Marriage, Penitence, Confirmation, Extreme Unction:
Whence it is come to pass, that Baptism, and the Supper, having a name common
to them, with other things of much different nature; their true notion is
rendered, dark and obscure. For there remained with the general name, a notion
in like manner general and common to those other things: whereas, the proper
notion, which ought ever to be kept in mind, is forgotten. Hence also it came
to pass, that as it was manifest, that baptism and the Supper were ordained by
our Lord: So was it commonly believed, that all those other things termed
Sacraments, were in like manner by him instituted. At length Bells began to be
baptized: which practice, what else did it, but occasion the simple people to
think, that the baptism of men was of the same importance with that baptism
they saw practiced upon the Bells; whereby, the memory of the washing away of
sins by the blood of Christ, signified by the washing with water, was
abolished? Now, this makes much to hide the cousenage and deceit, when there is
a colorable pretense: So as the innovators may seem not to bring in any new
thing; but to desire the preservation of doctrines, received by some weak
ceremony and observation. Wherefore, when the first Christians, or rather those
which succeeded the first, growing very remiss, in respect of their former heat
of piety (which is commonly seen when men cease to be exercised by afflictions)
and so growing less frequent in the exercise of breaking of bread: some one
peradventure there was who judged it a very good course, that the Priest at
least, should frequently receive the bread and wine in the presence of the
multitude: and by so doing, celebrate the memory of the Lords death: for as
much as it would be all one in a manner, as if the bystanders had all of them
communicated and participated thereof. In which practice, truly a man would not
think there was any innovation, but only a care showed to preserve so wholesome
an ordinance of our Lord from growing quite out of use, which being grown into
a custom; forasmuch as it was done wholly to commemorate that sacrifice which
our Lord offered for us upon the Cross, and the term of Priest was not wanting,
it gave occasion to some, to attribute the name of the thing signified to the
thing signifying, so as to call this performance now no longer the
commemoration of a sacrifice, but a sacrifice it self. Afterward, when it had
obtained the name of sacrifice, who will wonder that it began to be accounted a
sacrifice? And so whiles every day there was innovation made, yet inasmuch as
it was little which was changed, and some very goodly pretext was ever in
readiness, the innovation could not be perceived; so that at length, the most
plain and simple institution of our Lord, concerning breaking of bread, was by
a wonderful metamorphosis changed into that most pompous and laborious business
of the Mass. And who so shall diligently consider, will easily observe that the
like has happened touching all other points. In those that are the Teachers,
in case they corrupt any point, the main cause why such their corruption is not
discerned, is the great opinion which men have of their piety, holiness, and
learning, and their being thought to stand very much affected to the doctrine
received. Now such an opinion as this with the people, a man attains, either by
giving some eminent proof of himself, or by the testimony of such men as are of
greatest repute, or by right, as it were, of inheritance. He gives a good proof
of himself, who does acutely and fluently discourse of matters divine, and by
often citing the Scriptures, and to good purpose, shows himself well versed in
such studies: but especially, if he show himself an eager opposer of such
doctrines as the people abhor, and a great honorer and reverencer of such
persons, as the people highly account of: Now the testimonies of men approved
beget a good opinion in the people, because men are persuaded, That in regard
of their gravity and prudence, they will witness nothing, but that whereof they
have a certain knowledge, whereas notwithstanding it is very often seen, that by
simulation, flattery, and other arts, the overgreat facility of good men is so
overcome, and wrought upon, as that they may be brought to commend such
persons, of whose piety and learning they have small knowledge. In the mean
time, however their testimonies are drawn from them, yet the simple common
people do yield thereunto no less credit, then if they were oracles. Some men
gain a good opinion of themselves, as it were by right of inheritance, when as
they succeed in place, such persons whose life and doctrine have been very much
approved of. For it seems a likely thing, That none but good men should be put
into the place of good men, and so the reputation of honesty and learning is
transfered from the one to the other, even as inheritances pass from the Father
to the children. Nevertheless, even as those who from a low and mean estate,
have by great labors and difficulties attained great wealth, leave their
children, heirs of their goods indeed, and all their possessions, but not of
their industry and wit; forasmuch, as being born in the midst of wealth, they
find no need to exercise their wit: even so those men who are at certain
seasons, stired up by the providence of God to purge the Church from errors,
since they cannot but be exercised with great and knotty difficulties, they
must be of necessity armed with very excellent virtues, and so become famous;
whereas their successors, matters being reduced into order and composed, and
Satan dealing now no longer by force, but by craft and policy (which they are
not aware of) they meet with no considerable occasions to exercise their piety
and prudence. Yet nevertheless, though they be far inferior in virtue, yet in
outward appearance, as they hold the place of their predecessors, so do they
retain their dignity and reputation: and by how much the farther you descend
from those first, so much the more unlike shall you find their successors, and
the more estranged from their virtues. And forasmuch as the same or greater
authority abides, with very little piety, prudence, learning, and hearty
diligence; who sees not, how easily it may come to pass, That they may daily,
through unskilfulness, corrupt many points, and no man discern the same by
reason of their authority and reputation? And to the end, that such like
Pastors may by little and little be brought into place, by whose means, Satan
hopes to procure a greater and speedier corruption of doctrine; it is a great
furtherance, if so be such things shall be annexed to Ecclesiastical Functions,
as shall make them much to be desired: as for Pastors to be highly esteemed of,
to have all men rise unto them, and give them place; if they shall be well
accommodated and live in abundance of wealth; if they shall be accounted such
as ought to censure all, and themselves not to be questioned, without impiety
and wickedness. For who is there that would not exceedingly desire to be in
such a condition? So that in case there be these allurements and the like, as
soon as any place shall be vacant, take heed of thinking that some excellent
person shall obtain the same: he will soonest obtain it, that does best know
how to beat the bush that can sue for it with greatest art. A good and godly
man, though he conceive he may honestly seek it, as minding only the glory of
God, and not his own honor or profit; yet for this cause he will not sue for
it, forasmuch as those that are truly pious, being most of all conscious of
their own weakness, which is always great enough, have a modest opinion of
themselves, and account themselves inferior almost to every one. And if so be
the times prove yet so good, as that offices are bestowed, not upon those that
hunt after them, but upon choice and qualified persons: yet shall not the best
men, even at such a time, always meet with best quarter. Inasmuch as men void
of all craft, and enemies to all bad arts, taking more pains to be good indeed,
then to seem to be so, are easily in the gaining of an estimation of holiness,
out-striped by crafty fellows, ambitious of honor and dignity. For they will
not so cuningly hide their own infirmities, they will take more pains to be rid
of, then to hide their vices, they will not use any policies to procure the
favor of men. He that is ambitious of honor, will most carefully hide all his
vices: he will most diligently addict himself to whatsoever he understands
those men do most approve of who are able to promote him; and will never leave
until, by simulation, dissimulation and flattery, he have gained their
approbation to the full. And by this hidden and more cunning and painful kind
of suing, sometimes wicked persons prevail as much, as they could do, were they
allowed to use an open and free trade.

It remains, that we speak of such causes of the not perceiving, that a change
of doctrine is introduced, as consist in the persons that are taught. Now they
are chiefly two, carelessness and ignorance. Carelessness for the most part
arises hence, In that the people trust too much to their Pastors; and persuade
themselves, that they will not slip into any error, and that therefore they
have small need to have an eye over them, but that they are bound rather to
embrace whatsoever they shall hold forth, without any curious examination.
Hereunto may be added many other businesses, whereunto men addict themselves:
For that saying is of large extent, Where men's treasure is, there is their
heart, and that other, No man can serve two masters. Now, how it may come to
pass that after a people has once had a great knowledge of divine Truths, the
said knowledge may as it were vanish away, besides that cause which has been
even now alleged, we shall in another place make discovery of some other
reasons. We shall for the present add only this one; That the people
themselves are in a perpetual kind of mutation, some daily dying and
departing, others succeeding and growing up in their stead. Whence it comes to
pass, That since the change which is made in every age, is small, either the
people cannot perceive it; or if they do observe it, yet they esteem it not of
such moment, as to think fit to move any difference thereabout. This thing also
is of very great force, to keep the people from taking notice of a change in
doctrine; when men shall persuade themselves, that they are not able to judge of
matters of Religion, as though it is, it is not, and other words used in
Scripture, do not signify the same which they do in common discourse, or as if
nothing could be understood, without some great knowledge in the Tongues and
Arts or Sciences, and as if the power of the Spirit were of no efficacy without
these helps. Whereby it comes to pass, that whiles they think they understand
not even those things which in some sort they do understand, being expressed in
most clear and evident words; they do at length arrive to that blockishness,
that they cannot understand them indeed; so that, though they have before their
eyes a sentence of Scripture so clear, that nothing can be more evident; yet if
they to whose authority they in all things subject themselves, shall say any
thing point blank opposite thereunto, they will give credit unto them, and
imagine themselves not to see that which they see as clear as the light. And by
these means verily it comes to pass, That when the doctrine of Religion is
corrupted, the mutation is not discovered: Furthermore, when the doctrine is
once begun to be changed, it must needs be, that out of one error another
should spring, and propagate infinitely; and God, for just reasons of his own,
blinding them, men bring upon themselves so great darkness, and slip into such
foul errors; That if God out of mercy open a man's eyes, and let him see those
errors he lives in, he can scarcely believe himself, or be persuaded that he
was ever enveloped with such blind errors. Which thing is as true, and as well
to be seen in men of greatest learning and experience. If thou shall thoroughly
peruse the writings of some of the Schoolmen (as they call them) thou shall in
some places meet with so much acuteness, as will make thee admire. Thou shall
see them oftentimes cleave a fine thread into many parts, and accurately
anatomise a flea, and a little after fall so foully, and avouch such
absurdities, That thou can not sufficiently stand amazed; wherefore we must
obey that advice of the Poet.

Principiis obsta, sero medicina paratur,
Cum mala per long as invaluere moras.
Resist betimes; that Medicine stays too long,
Which comes when age has made the grief too strong.
Now there is need of a double Caution: viz. That there be no change made in
the doctrine, when it is pure: And if any change be made, that there be notice
taken of it. Now look what change is made in this kind, all the blame is laid
upon those whose office it is to instruct the people; for though themselves are
the authors of the change, yet will the people impute it to the Ministers
sleepiness, and want of care at least. It concerns therefore the Pastors and
Teachers to be Eagle-eyed, and to be very well acquainted with those causes,
whereby the change of doctrine becomes undiscovered, and to have them at their
fingers ends, and to be wary, that on no hand they may miscarry. Now it will be
an excellent caution for the keeping of doctrine pure, if they shall avoid all
curious and vain controversies: If they shall set before their eyes, the scope
and end of all religious doctrine, and likewise a series or catalogue of all
such things, as make to the attainment of that end (of which we formerly
spoke;) if they shall affect not only the matter it self, but also the words
and phrases which the holy Ghost in Scripture makes use of, and exceedingly
suspect all different forms of speaking. Not that I would have them to speak
nothing but Hebraisms* for so their language would not be plain nor
intelligible; but I wish that they will shun all such expressions, as have been
invented by over-nice disputants, beyond what was necessary to express the
sense of the Hebrew and Greek, and all those tenets which men by their own wits
do collect and infer from the Scriptures. Now of what concernment this will be,
we may gather by this instance: The Papists think it one and the same thing to
say, The Church cannot err; and to say in the words of our Lord, Wheresoever
two or three shall be gathered together in my name, there will I be in the
midst of them. Yet is the difference very great, which may thus appear;
forasmuch as in case any one shall conceive the Church to be the Pope,
Cardinals, and Bishops anointed by the Pope: he hearing the aforesaid sentence,
will judge, that whatsoever they shall decree, ought to be of force. But if he
shall rather mind the words of our Lord, and shall consider that those kind
of men, do regard nothing but their own commodity, wealth and dominion; he will
be so far from so understanding them, that peradventure not being able to allow
the deeds and practices of these men, he will come to hope from those words,
That if himself with some other good men loving God with their whole heart,
shall come together, and unanimously implore the assistance of God, shall be
better able to determine what it is that ought to be believed and practiced for
the attainment of salvation, then if they should persist to put their
confidence in such Pastors. Now this rule, That the words of the Scripture
ought to be used rather then any other, is then especially to be observed, when
any thing is delivered as a certain and tried truth, or as a rule of faith or
life, or out of which any other thing is to be inferred. For in expositions and
explanations, as there is need happily of greater liberty, so is there less
danger if it be taken. For, when as the word of God, and the exposition
thereof, are at one and the same time both together in view, as it were; there
no man can be ignorant, that the exposition is the word of man, so that he may
reject it, in case it seem impertinent. And look by what means a man may hinder
the doctrine of Religion from being changed, by the self same he may find
whether it be changed or no. Now every man ought to compare the doctrine of
that age wherein he lives, with no other doctrine then that which was out of
question spotless, which is the doctrine of the Apostles. Wherefore,
notwithstanding that in our age the Gospel is as it were revived, yet ought not
any man thus to think, That he ought to examine whether the Gospel has lost
any of that purity whereunto it had at this time arrived; he ought rather to
look again and again, whether some corruption do not yet remain, whether it be
not in some part, as yet not sufficiently restored to its ancient purity and
luster: and confidently persuade himself, That he cannot be (that I may so
speak) sufficiently superstitious, in rejecting every word which is not in the
Scriptures. Forasmuch as man will ever be more wise and wary then the holy
Spirit, and can very hardly forbear to mingle somewhat from his own head: so
that whatever comes from man, can never be sufficiently suspected. And because
a thing will be so much the better preserved, by how much the greater is the
number of those that keep it: the people ought often to be put in mind, That
both the reading of the Scriptures, and the care of Religion, belongs not to
the Pastors of the Church only; but that every one that would be saved ought
to make diligent search, whether any corruption be already, or is for the
future like to be introduced; and this to do no less carefully, then if he were
persuaded that all beside himself were asleep: and whatsoever is wont to take
the common people off from such studies, care must be taken that that thing be
wholly taken away. Concerning which matter, we shall more conveniently
discourse anon.

Now, forasmuch as the profit will be small, if some private man shall observe
that an error is introduced, unless he discover the said error, and lay it
open: there must of necessity be some way how this may conveniently be done.
Now there cannot be a more fiting way, then that which Apostle propounds to the
Corinthians. Let two or three Prophets speak, and let the rest judge; 1 Cor. 14.
and if any thing be revealed to him that sits by, let the former be silent.
For ye may all prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be
exhorted. If some one person shall always speak in the Church, and no man at
any time may contradict him; it will be a very strange thing, if that one man
be not puffed up, if he do not fall into such a conceit of himself, as to think
that he is the only man, that he only has understanding, he alone is wise:
that all the rest are a company of brute animals as it were, who ought to
depend only upon him, and to do nothing but learn of him. And if any man shall
think, that himself likewise has some ability to teach, he will account that
man an heinous offender. But what says the Apostle to this? Did the word of God
come from you? or came it unto you only? If any seem to be a prophet, or
spiritual; let him acknowledge what I write unto you to be the commands of the
Lord. But if any one be ignorant, let him be ignorant. Wherefore brethren,
labor that ye may prophecy, and forbid not to speak with tongues, let all
things be done decently, and in order. It is exceedingly to be lamented, That
this custom, and the practice of this command of the Lord, is not again
restored into the Churches, and brought into use. But some men may say; Such is
the rashness of this age of ours, such the boldness, such the impudence, That
if it were allowed to every one to speak in the Congregation, there will be no
end of brawls and contention. Why so? Is a man another kind of creature now,
then what he was of old? Thou will say, he is. For mankind has continually
degenerated, grown worse and worse, and seems now to have attained the top of
corruption. Is it so indeed? But, suppose it to be so. Thou that art the
Teacher of the people, art not thou also thy self made of the same mold? Art
not thou born in the same age? Inasmuch as this ordinance principally was
intended to keep Pastors within the bounds of modesty: that they may
understand, That they are not the authors of the Word of God, that they have
not alone received the Spirit: by how much the more mankind has degenerated,
by so much the greater need is there thereof; for, that there is now, more
rashness, arrogance, pride, then of old; this is true, as well of the Pastors
and Teachers, as of the rest of the people. Art thou a Prophet, have thou any
portion of the Spirit? If thou have not, so unfiting it is, that thou alone
should speak in the Congregation, that there will hardly be found any that
desires rather to be silenc't, then thy self. But if thou art a prophet, if
thou have the Spirit, mark what the Apostle says, Acknowledge (quoth he) that
those things which I write, are the commandments of the Lord. Go to then, On
the one side we have the judgment of our Lord, willing that prophecy (for this
is a word that we are obliged to use) should be common to all, and that not for
the destruction, but the salvation of the Church: On the other side, we have
thy judgment, who fear lest that may breed contentions and confusion; whose
judgment now ought we rather stand to? If thou shall conceive we must stand to
thine: consider what thou assumest unto thy self, and what will become of thy
modesty. Our Lord, it should seem, understood not what a kind of creature man
was; he wanted thy wisdom, b^like, to admonish him of the danger; or happily he
thought not upon that corruption which should befall mankind, whereby such a
Liberty might prove unprofitable. But Paul answers thee, That God is not the
author of contention, but of peace: Who well knowing what might move
contentions, what beget peace, and not loving nor willing to have contention,
but peace, willed that this liberty of prophesying should be in the Church.
What can thou say to the contrary, what have thou to obj^ct against God
himself, will thou accuse him of indiscretion* No man has so wicked a tongue,
as to dare to do it. Yet if thou shall diligently search thine heart, thou
shall find there a certain disposition ready to contend even with God himself:
Which motion of thy heart, must by no means be hearkened unto, but sharply
repressed, and wholly subjected to the Spirit of God. It may seem peradventure
an absurd thing, That after some very learned person has spoken, some
contemptible person shall be allowed to contradict him. Can such a person so do
without great rashness and temerity? Were I to speak according to the judgment
of man, verily I could not deny it. But if we be really persuaded, That the
knowledge of matters divine, ought not to be attributed to our watching,
studies, wits, but to God and to his Spirit, wherewith he can in a moment endue
the simplest person in the world, and that with no more labor or difficulty,
then if he were to give him unto one that had spent Nestors age in study: What
reason is there for me to judge that this man does rashly and unadvisedly, if he
shall arise and contradict? Is not the spirit able to reveal somewhat to him,
which he has hidden from thee? Now, if the spirit have revealed somewhat to
him, and to that end revealed it that he might contradict, that by his means
the thing may be revealed to the Church: shall I say that he has done rashly
in obeying the holy Ghost? And if thou think otherwise, verily thou art not
persuaded that the Spirit is the Author and Teacher of this Knowledge, but that
all the praise thereof is due to studies, watchings, and the wits of men. And
if this be thy judgment, I tell thee again, That thou art not only unworthy to
be the sole speaker, but worthy rather to be the only person not permitted to
speak in the congregation. And that thou may the better understand, that the
most unlearned ought to be allowed to speak, consider, God will have himself to
be acknowledged the Author of his own gifts: he will not have his praise
attributed unto our studies or wits, but unto himself. But if the man that has
spent all his life in study, speak wisely, it is not attributed to God, but to
study: In word perhaps it may be attributed to God, yet not without a vehement
reluctance of our judgment: and this is that which (I say) God will not abide.
But if so be thou shall hear a wise word come out of the mouth of some
unlearned person, thou must needs, whether thou will or no, a^knowledg God to
be the Author thereof. So, when God was minded to give unto Israel a victory
against the Midianites, under the conduct of Gideon; and Gideon had gathered
together Thirty thousand men, lest the Israelites should boast that they had
gotten the victory by their own strength, and not by the assistance of God
(which might have been conceived, if Gideon had fought with so numerous an
Army) he would not suffer him to have above Three hundred, that it might appear
that he was the cause of the victory, and not the number or valor of those that
fought. Now, besides the glory of God, hereby great profit does accrue to the
Church. For if the people shall see now one man, now another, endued with the
spirit, beyond all expectation; many will thereby be encouraged to hope for the
same gift, if they shall ask it; many will learn and profit; and it will
thereby come to pass, that when occasion shall be to choose a Minister, the
Church shall not need to call strange and unknown persons to that office, but
she may have of her own such as are fit to be chosen, men whose conversation
and manners are sufficiently known. And when the number of such as are able to
prophecy, shall be great, the Church will not be forced to use such Pastors as
from their very childhood have proposed to themselves such offices as the
reward of their studies; and addicted themselves to the study of Scripture and
Religion, no otherwise then they would have done to some Trade, whereby they
meant in time to get their living: So that a man can expect but very few of
them to prove other then mercenary or hireling Pastors. Now, that it was the
custom of the Jewish Church, that all might thus prophecy; we may hence
conjecture, in that it is upon Record, Luke 4. Luke 4.
how our Lord, upon the Sabbath day according to the custom, came into the
Synagogue, took a book and expounded a place of Esaias; and how, being twelve
years of age he sat at Jerusalem in the temple among the Doctors, and did
dispute. For he could not so do by virtue of any ordinary office, forasmuch as
his age was incapable, neither did the Doctors know who he was. Yea rather, our
Lord in so doing must needs make use of the power which was granted to every
one to speak. It remained in the Christians Congregations until the times of
Constantine, at the least. Forasmuch as we have these words of Eusebius, Eccle.
hist. lib. 9.
the Writer of Church Affairs, to that effect: If any man inspired by the grace
of God, should speak unto the People; they all with great silence fixing their
eyes upon him, gave such attention, as if he had brought them some errand from
heaven. So great was the reverence of the hearers, such order was seen among
the Ministers. One after another, another after him. Neither was there only
two or three that prophesied, according to what the Apostle said, but to all
was given to speak; so that the wish of Moses seems rather to have been
fulfilled in them, when he said, Would God all the people might prophec^. There
was no spleen, no envy, the gifts of God were dispensed, every one, according
to his ability, contributing his assistance for the confirmation of the Church:
And all was done with love, in such sort, That they strove mutually to honor
each other, and every one to prefer another before himself. But to the end this
common prophesying may be profitable to the Church, we must diligently mark
what the Apostle advises. For a sure thing it is, that the pride of man is so
great, that whatever has once fallen from him, he will by any means have it
stand for a Truth, neither can he suffer that any man should infringe the same.
So that if he might be p^rmitted to judge, that last spoke, it will be a
miracle, if a man in his lifetime should see any one give way to him that
contradicts him: What is Paul's advice therefore in this case? Let two or three
Prophets speak, and let the rest judge. He will not therefore have the same
persons to be parties and judges. And he adds a little after, And the spirit of
the Prophets is subject to the Prophets, for God is not the Author of
dissension, but of peace. So that as soon as any man has spoken his own mind,
he ought to rest himself satisfied with the judgment of the rest, and not
obstinately to make no end of contending: if this be not done, a sure thing it
is, there will be no end of strife. But what if any man will not be content to
submit to the judgment of the rest: Verily I would avouch, that being sharply
admonished, that he disturb not the Congregation, and that he go not against
the command of the Apostle, or rather of our Lord, commanding the spirits of
the Prophets to be subject to the Prophets; he ought to be cast out of the
society, though he should hold the prime place in the Congregation. The people
likewise must frequently be admonished; that liberty for any one to speak in
the Congregation, is not therefore granted by the Apostle, to the end every one
should speak what comes to his tongues end, as if he were in a market; but
whereas he gives liberty to him to speak to whom any thing is revealed, he
would have all rashness and impudence to be laid aside. He that reverences not
the Church of God, let that man know, he despises the Spirit of God, who is
President there; and shall be sure not to escape unpunished. Before a man
propounds any thing to the Church, he ought to consider again and again, how
sure a manifestation he has of that thing, and what ever the matter be, let
him be sure not to forget a sober, modest, bashful behavior, without which
virtues, doubtless no good can be effected. But here we must attentively
consider, both how far a man ought to submit to the judgment of the
Congregation, and who may deservedly be accounted a troubler of the Church.
Verily, I conceive a man ought so far to give way, as that after I have
alleged what I had to say for my opinion, if yet the rest shall not allow of
my judgment, I ought to give over defending of it, and cease to be troublesome
to the Congregation concerning the same: But I ought not to be compelled to
confess that I have erred, or to deprecate any fault, whiles I do not yet
understand that I have erred, for so I should sin against God. He therefore
is a troubler of the Church, that will not, so far as we have expressed, submit
to the judgment of the Church, but goes on to be troublesome; but especially
that man who would exact of another that which he ought not to do; viz. to
recant, being not persuaded that he is in an error. But those men are commonly
reputed troublers of the Church, who refuse to ratify what ever shall any
ways fall out of the Pastors mouths. Again, in this place it may reasonably be
demanded, whether, when that a matter has been once or twice debated, and some
man knowing the judgment of the Congregation, would again reduce it into
Controversy, he ought to be heard, or enjoined silence, and take the matter
for determined. But of this we shall in another place more conveniently
dispute. That which remains, therefore, is, that we wrestle with God, by daily
prayers, to grant that we may have the use of this so sovereign and saving
liberty, so profitable to the Church, and that thereby we may reap abundance
of fruit. And that he would, to that end, tame and break our spirits with his
Spirit, and render them mild and gentle: and not suffer what he has ordained
for the confirmation and establishment of his Church, to be by the
stubbornness and perverseness of our wits and minds, turned to the mischief and
destruction thereof. Now it has been frequently practiced, that when some
difficult point has been to be decided, not only one particular Church should
judge, but a Council of that Province, or of the whole Christian world has
been called. Which, whether it ought to be done or no, and what ought to be the
Authority of Councels, may be by some demanded. That the custom of calling
Councels ought to be retained, seems clearly to me, to be taught by the example
of the Apostles. For, if it were requisite for men endued with so great a
measure of the Spirit, to confer together about matters of Religion in
controversy: It seems, that it ought much more to be practiced by those that
have not such a portion of the spirit: Neither ought we to make light account
of our Lords promise, who has engaged himself, that where two or three shall
be gathered together in his Name, there he will be the in midst of them. But
the question moved concerning the authority of such a Council, is harder. And
for as much as I have not now to deal with Papists, but with such as would
have the truth of the Gospel restored; I shall not need with many words to
demonstrate, that no Council has authority either to make new Laws, or to
ordain new worships. But what shall we say concerning controversies of
Religion, which are raised about interpretation of Scripture? Whether or no,
has a Council authority, in such cases, to determine what ought to be held?
And if a Council cannot do thus much at least, what other use there can be of
Councels beside? And whether there be any difference between the Council of the
Apostles, and those of their successors? If, as certain as it is that our Lord
will always perform what he has promised, so certain it were that such as meet
to consult, would evermore refer all their cogitations to the glory of God, and
place all their hope of discovering the Truth in the promises of our Lord, and
the direction of his Spirit: there were no reason, but that all the
determinations of Councels should be accounted firm and authentic. But
forasmuch as these are the secrets of men's minds and hearts, God only can
know them. And inasmuch as these conditions which are annexed to our Lords
promise, are hidden, the conscience, in this case, has nothing certain to rest
upon. Make it appear to me, that a company, either of Bishops, or any other
men, are met together in the name of Christ; I shall willingly stand to their
determinations; but how will thou make it appear, that they are so met? Because
themselves profess so much; as if a company of ungodly dissemblers would not
say as much concerning themselves. Doubtless it is no ways likely, that God
has imposed such a law upon us; as one time or another, whether we do obey it,
or not obey it, will render us guilty. But such a law were imposed upon us, in
case we were bound to obey a Council, and in the mean time, either the Council
may err, or in case it do err, our obedience shall not find excuse before
God. But, that Councels may err we doubt not; yea verily, nothing is more
sure, then that Councels have often erred. And if we shall give obedience to
the impious determination of a Council, sure we are, that no Text of Scripture
will excuse us: yea rather, we are strictly admonished not to give credit so
much as to an Angel from Heaven, if he would teach us any thing besides what
has been delivered by the Apostles. For the holy Scriptures are set before us,
out of which we are to know the will of God: Which that we may understand, we
are taught to pray to God for wisdom, and the holy Ghost; that we should rest
in the determinations of Councels, there is not a word, that I know, in
Scripture, to warrant us. Now, if so be our obedience to Councels, in case they
determine any thing amiss, shall not be excused: neither have we any assurance
that Councels never err: Neither may it be said, that God has subjected us
unto such a law, whereunto one time or another we can neither obey, nor not
obey without sin: It follows, that none ought to be compelled to stand to the
determinations of Councels. Now since it is all one to say, that a Council has
authority to judge of controversies of Religion, or to say, that every man ought
to obey whatever a Council shall decree; and since we have showed that there is
no Law binding men to give such obedience, it follows, That a Council has no
such authority to judge in matters of Religion. It may further be demanded, what
we say concerning him who is called to the office of a Teacher? whether he
ought wholly to obey a Council, so as to teach nothing different from the
Councels determinations? It were an absurd thing doubtless, for a man to be
bound to teach that unto others, which he himself cannot safely believe: or
shall he be more excused, if he follow the impious determination of a Council
in his teaching, then if he himself for his own particular, embrace and believe
the same? Yea verily much less, for Paul will have him to be accursed who shall
teach any thing beside what the Apostles have taught; or is he rather then the
man that only believes the Council, but teaches not, entangled in this gin or
trap, That whether he obey or obey not, he must offend? or shall he rather keep
himself silent? Woe is me (says Paul) if I shall not teach the Gospel; and Peter
says, We ought rather to obey God then men. It is manifest therefore, That a
Council has not authority so to judge of controversies, as that men should be
bound to obey their decrees. Inasmuch therefore as Councels are to be called
indeed, but not to this end, of necessity there must be some other end why they
are to be called. If so be therefore Councels shall meet, that the
controversies which trouble the Church being propounded, and every one having
free liberty to speak, those to whom the Lord shall please to reveal any thing
to the clearing of matters propounded, may speak and declare their judgment;
and the rest afterward judge; not so, as to vote, and the greater part to make
a Law to necessitate every man to assent (for so the greater part would
commonly be too hard for the better) but that every one might weigh what is
said; to the end, That if he shall find it proved by sufficient testimonies of
Scripture, he may both embrace it himself, and endevor to persuade others to
embrace the same; not by urging the authority of the Council, but by those
Texts of Scripture which he heard alleged in the Council. Doubtless if those
that meet together should make this their aim, although amongst two or three
hundred hypocrites there should not be above three or four persons truly pious,
who heartily seek the glory of God, and put their confidence in the promises
which our Lord has made, praying to him that he would reveal the truth unto
them; they, as few as they be, should not meet in vain, doubtless that so great
number of hypocrites, should not cause our Lords promises to become vain and of
no force. What should be revealed to one, that would all that were docible
embrace; and so Satan should in vain, hope to get the victory by the number and
multitude of persons unskilful, and of his masked and disguised subjects, or by
the outward, dignity of men's persons. There would not then be such a stir to
purchase voices and to make up the number sufficient to carry the matter: but
the care would be rather, how every man might find such ground of Truth, as
upon which he might safely rely. Verily, we should often see, that even by the
meanest and most contemptible of the company, God would dispel great mists of
errors. But so long as most account shall be made of number, and the glistering
of outward dignity; so long as the consent of the major part shall stand for a
law, nothing is more sure, then that Satan shall ordinarily get the victory and
bear away the bell in such Councels. Which way, then, will thou say, may a man
be excluded the communion of the godly, because of some ungodly tenet which he
shall hold? Shall the authority of any particular Church be greater then the
authority of the whole or universal Church: so as that the particular may
condemn both the tenet and the man, and general or Catholic Church may not? I
answer: A particular Church condemning any man, unless their condemnation be
just, they do indeed separate that man from themselves, so far forth, as that
they do not acknowledge him to be one of them, but they separate him not from
Christ: Neither do they pronounce him faulty before God, because he would not
credit them to believe as they did: How justly they reject him, let them look
to it. But when the Congregation justly rejects, it does not therefore justly
reject, because the man will not embrace its tenets, or stand to its judgment:
But because he rejects the doctrine which came from God, and that doctrine of
such consequence, That it ought of necessity to be known to salvation. Likewise
when a particular Congregation, allows of one tenet, disallowes of another, it
does not impose a law upon any man's belief, but only declares its own faith:
to the end, That he which is not of the same mind, at least in the more
principal points of doctrine, may know that he belongs not to that society; for
there must of necessity be some kind of Government, that the Congregation may
not be forced to communicate in Religious Services, with that man, of whom she
is persuaded that he is not any ways related to the Church of Christ, neither
has any right to the privileges thereof. Hence we may easily understand, and
in one word express what difference there is between the Council of the
Apostles, and those who make themselves their successors, be they who they
will. Forasmuch as it was apparent that the Apostles were by name chosen by our
Lord himself, to the office of Apostleship, it was manifest that they were
endued with a large measure of the holy Ghost, which Spirit would lead them
into all truth: Now there is no testimony of any such, concerning any of their
successors: We are left only to conjecture what they are by their words and
actions, which are subject to counterfeiting and fraud: In the Councels of the
Apostles, men were not to mind, so much, what was judged and determined, as by
whom, it was so determined: So that they needed not with many words to render a
reason why they so ordained. Contrariwise in the Councels of their successors,
it matters not so much who they are that decree a thing, as what that thing is
which they so decree, what testimonies they produce from Scripture, how clearly
and manifestly those testimonies do teach the point determined. So, that
doctrine of Luther, That we are saved only by the merits of Christ, is
embraced by us: yet do not we look upon Luther, but upon those testimonies
which are by him cited from Scripture, which also the holy Ghost, that internal
Expositor, witnesses to our spirits, that they teach the same. Otherwise, be
they never so many, let them be pious, learned, holy, yea verily, let them be
angels of heaven, unless thou shall perceive that what they affirm is proved by
the Word of God; there is no reason for thee to suffer thine eyes to be dazzled
with the splendour and pomp of a Council. Howbeit, fitting it is to attribute so
much authority to a Council (unless it be of such as are manifestly enemies to
truth) as not rashly to reject the judgment thereof; but let every man
diligently weigh the same, desiring earnestly the assistance of God, that he
may judge aright. Hence likewise we may conjecture, who ought to be admitted to
a Council. For, since they do not meet to make any laws of Faith, but rather to
pray for the holy Ghost, by whom they may be led into all truth, and in a word,
to learn: It will not be necessary, that he that must be admitted, should be a
Bishop, or an Archbishop, or a Pope, nor yet that he should be famous for
learning; nay rather, no reason there is why any man should be excluded, that
appears to be possessed of any measure of piety, and of the holy Ghost. So, we
see in that same decree of the Apostolical Council, after the Apostles and
Elders, the whole Church is named. For, inasmuch as the holy Ghost is not tied
to any dignity, or to any certain kind of persons. Who knows by whom God will
choose to discover the Truth? And forasmuch as we are not to regard any number
of voices, but only what that is which is said; although some foolish
indiscreet person, or a man that makes only a show of godliness shall be
admitted, they cannot do much hurt; for we must count every man to be such as
his speech shall declare him to be. And thus we have declared, by what means
the doctrine of Religion comes to be corrupted; and what cautions we are to
use, when it is pure, to keep it so.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. l. 6. is not God. p. 3. l. 6. is to take into, l. 27. disobeys the
command. p. 6. l. 32. yet is their strength. p. 8. l. 31. self interests, p.
18. l. 10. like wise men, l. 22. it is no small. p. 22. l. 5. any time come
into. p. 30. l. 8. should contend. p. 31. l. 9. the time, place, p. 36. l. 18.
to that end. p. 37. l. 1. shall set upon the another way. p. 45. l. 15.
wonderful example is that. p. 46. l. 31. best of shepherds. l. 33. to thee
weak. p. 55. l. 24. be so ingenuous. p. 58. l. 1. 2. one whole sentence; ere
his mouth be well open, l. 23. a benefice, p. 65. l. 38. betide others as, p.
74. l. 20. shall by his 22. the instrument. p. 75. l. 37. accounted of; others
howbeit. p. 78. l. 33. of our Lord. p. 82. l. 24. ingenuously. l. 38. a couple.
p. 83. l. 17. is not to, p. 93. l. 7. heretics in the. p. 99. l. 10. to
vanquish an Apostate, l. 16. means of them the. p. 102. l. 35. that when he. p.
108. l 4. and will attempt. p. 135. l. 2. 3. no such testimony concerning any
successors.


