Midd' ss. Ad General' Quarterial' Session' Pacis Dom' Regis and Reginae, tent'
pro Com. Midd. apud Hicks-Hall in St. John's-street, in Com. praed' die
Mercurii scilicet decimo tertio die Januarii Anno Regni Dom' Gulielmi and Dom'
Mariae nunc Regis et Reginae Angliae etc. tertio coram Jacobo Mundy Armig'
Carolo Lee Mil. Johanne Elwes Mil. Johanne Bucknal Mil. Lanceloto Johnson,
Jacobo Cardrow, Henrico Hawley, Rogero Jennings, Roberto Fielding, Nicholao
Grice, Ambrosio Isted, Gulielmo James, Johanne Wilson, Theophilo Eyton, Thoma
Smith, Roberto Fairbeard, Georgio Bohun, Gulielmo Underhill, Gulielmo Allestry,
Johanne Ward, Tho. Row Mil. Tho. Johnson, Johe. Robins Rich. Woodward, Tho.
Harriot, Tho. Franklin, Armig' et aliis sociis suis Justiciar' Dictorum Dom'
Regis et Reginae, ad pacem in Com' praed' conservand' nec non ad divers' Felon.
Transgres. et al' Malefact' in eodem Com. perpetrat. audiend. et terminand.
assign, etc.
WHereas the Queens most Excellent Majesty was graciously pleased out of Her
pious and princely Zeal to Suppress the Profanation of the Lord's Day,
Drunkenness, Swearing and Cursing, and all other lewd, enormous and disorderly
Practices, by Her Pious Letter, bearing Date the 9th day of July last, did
re-mind us of our Duty; and thereby enjoin the Observation of the Laws of the
Land now in Force against the said Vices: Which was received by this Court with
the greatest Thankfulness and Satisfaction. And in obedience thereunto, We did
by Our Order, bearing Date the Tenth day of the same Month Command all
High-Constables, Petty-Constables, Churchwardens, Headboroughs, and all other
Officers, to be diligent in the Execution of the Laws against all such
Offenders, and cause them to be Convicted, and to undergo the Penalties by the
said Laws appointed; and to give account thereof at the several Petty-Sessions
to be thereafter held for this County, which We then resolved frequently to
hold for that Purpose, and hoped from thence that Our Endeavors would have had
a good effect. But since that, by the rash and unadvised actings of several
Persons pretending great Zeal, many illegal and irregular Warrants of
Conviction have been issued out against a multitude of innocent Persons, for
suffering Tippling in their Houses, and Exercising their ordinary Callings on
the Lord's Day, without Summoning or Hearing their Defenses whereby it might
appear, whether they were Works of Charity or Necessity; Or duly weighing the
Circumstances of the respective Cases, and thereby condemning the guiltless
with the guilty, which has exceedingly hindered the good Purposes intended by
the said Order and deterred several well-disposed People from Informing, or
Acting therein. And forasmuch as this Court has from time to time, received
many repeated Complaints from diverse Inn-holders, Victuallers and others, who
have greatly suffered by such oppressive Proceedings. This Court for remedy of
the said Mischief, and to the end that so religious an Intention may not
miscary, does resolve to encourage all manner of legal Information, touching
the Suppressing and Punishment of the said Vices, pursuant to their former
Order; But are of Opinion, That the Conviction for continuing Tippling, or for
Exercising their ordinary Callings on the Lord's Day, ought not to be made on
any Person or Persons before a Warrant or Summons from a Justice of Peace of
this County be first had and served on the Person accused, and Oath made of
such Service, that the Person so accused may be first heard, and the convicting
Justice thereby enabled to make a true Judgment of the Circumstances of every
such Accusation before he makes his Conviction. And for a due Encouragement to
all such Informers, This Court does hereby unanimously agree to deliver all
such Summons under their Hands and Seals Gratis to any Persons requiring the
same. And for the better Encouragement of all Churchwardens, Constables, and
other Officers in searching for, and observing such Prophaners of the
Lord's Day, We their Majesty's said Justices of the Peace do hereby further
resolve, that in our several and respective Divisions, We will from time to
time on request, or, as We see occasion, go along with them in Person in our
several Parishes where we reside to search the several Alehouses, and other
Places suspected to entertain People to continue Tippling, or otherwise
profaning the Lord's Day: And this Court does require all Constables,
Headboroughs, Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor, and all other their
Majesty's Officers to attend the said Service, and to apply themselves to the
diligent search after such Offenders against the said Laws, and all such
Informers who gave former Informations before any the Justices of the Peace of
this County against any such Persons so offending (they proceeding in such a
Legal Way as aforesaid) shall receive due Encouragement and Protection from Us
in our several Divisions within this County: And such Victuallers and
Ale-house-keepers, as shall by the Examinations and legal Methods and Proofs
aforesaid, be duly convicted for suffering Persons to continue Tippling in
their Houses, shall not only incur the Penalty of 10 s. but be Suppressed for
three Years, according to the Direction of the Stat. in that Case made and
provided.

And it is Orderd by this Court, That the Clerk of the Peace for this County,
do forthwith cause this Order to be Printed, and affixed upon the great Gates
of Hick's Hall, the Church-Doors, and all other Public Places of each Parish,
within this County; and to be distributed to the several High-Constables within
this County, who are Ordered by this Court, forthwith to send the same to the
several Petty Constables, Churchwardens, and Headboroughs, within their
several Divisions, to the end, that Public Notice may be taken thereof.

per Cur' HARCOURT.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Braddyll, 1691/2.


