A Fannatick's Testimony AGAINST SWEARING; Being An ANSWER TO FOUR BOOKS,
Published by John Tombs, Jeremiah Ives, and Theophilus Brabourne; But more
especially to that by Henry Den.

By HENRY ADIS, a Baptized Believer, undergoing the Name of a Free-Willer; and
also most ignomineously by the tongue of Infamy, called a Fannatick, or a mad
man.

Above all things, my Brethren, Swear not, Jam. 5.12. For because of Swearing
the Land mourns, Jer. 23.10. -- But speak the Truth every man to his
Neighbor -- Ephesians. 4.25. And lie not one to another, seeing ye have put off
the old man with his deeds, Col. 3.9. And so speak ye, and so do, as those that
shall be judged by the Law of Liberty, Jam. 2.12. LONDON, Printed by S. Dover,
in Martins Le Grand, near Aldersgate. 1661.

A Fannaticks Testimony AGAINST SWEARING.
Henry Den,
THou in the backside of thy Title Page of thy Epistle, speak something of
the deplorable Condition of Thousands of honest, quiet, peaceable People, that
have been driven by Troops into Prison-Holes, both in Cities and Countries (the
which England never saw the like before) And all this occasioned by that late
Fantastical, Wicked, and Bloody Insurrection, which occasioned the Ministers of
Justice (though contrary to all Justice, Equity, and good Conscience) to
Execute their Pleasures (not Justice) upon these Persons, the Innocence of whom
(as thou say) has appeared many ways, as well by the Confession of the
dying Offenders, as by their own Protestations; and the Confession of those men
that would be glad to find occasion against them, but are not able; neither
will they in any thing, save in the things pertaining to the Worship of their
God: Yet, say thou, They are kept in Bonds as with a snare, which at this
day, holds them in, and shuts the Prison Doors against them; in that they (as
thou say) are taught, That it is not lawful upon any Occasion, or before any
Person to take an Oath; insomuch that when the Oath of Allegiance to the KING
is tendered to many who are at Liberty, they rather choose Imprisonment, than to
take an Oath; and many who are in Prison, and have Liberty proffered upon
Condition of taking the Oath, do rather choose to con^inue there, than purchase
their Libertiy with swearing.

And that all may prevent the impendent evil Consequences necessarily
following: Thou say in Page 3. That thou will prove the lawfulness of an
Oath in a serious and weighty Matter, which cannot otherwise be determined.

And in the next place (thou say) thou will Answer those Objections, which
are the Pillars that uphold the negative part.

In all which, that thou have hitherto said, I cannot but commend thee, as once
John the Revelator did those Seven Churches in Asia, Rev. 2. and Rev. 3.
Because thou have said that which is really true, as to the Innocence of that
great number Imprisoned; yet give me leave in the words of the same John, to
let thee know, That there are a few things against thee.

And first, Because that in Page 3. thou speak that which is not altogether
true; in saying, That an Oath is nothing else but a Religious Promise made in
the presence of the living God, whom (say thou) we call to witness the truth
of our words.

In which Assertion thou would (if possible) beget Persons to a belief, that
if a man call one to Witness a thing, that such a calling to Witness is a
Swearing by that Person whom we so call to Witness: As if John Tombs should
make Henry Den a Religious Promise, to Preach at their Meeting at such a time,
and call Henry Adis to Witness this Promise; will Henry Den dare to say, that
John Tombs did SWEAR by Henry Adis, when John Tombs only called Henry Adis to
WITNESS?

But John Tombs, Henry Den, or Henry Adis, either or all of them may Safely,
Honestly, or upon a good Account say, and that without fraud, that such a
Promise was made, and that such an one was Witness to that Promise.

And further, if calling, or setting up a Witness be a Swearing by that
Witness, then Jacob and Laban Swore; Jacob by the Pillar of Stone, and that
heap of Stones, Genesis 31.45. to 49. And I shall Appeal to the Judgment of any
rational man, to judge, whether Laban, in verse. 49. did Swear by the Lord, when
he said, The Lord shall Watch between us? Or, whether he Swore by the Lord in
verse. 50. when he said, the Lord is Witness between us? Any more than he, and
Jacob Swore by the heap of Stones, when they said, This Heap shall be a
Witness: And whether the Apostle Paul did Swear by the Lord, when he calls God
to Record, or Witness? 2 Cor. 1.23. and Phil. 1.8. any more then Jacob and
Laban SWORE by the Heap of Stones, as aforesaid. Or, whether Moses Swore by the
Song of Deliverance, when he said, That that Song should be a Witness against
Israel? Deuteronomy. 31.19, 21.

But I need not say more to this, for notwithstanding in Page 3. thou do
affirm, that an Oath is nothing else but a calling God to witness, etc. Yet in
Page 5. thou tellest us, that the Apostle Paul in weighty matters, frequently
used Expressions equal to an Oath, as in Romans 1.9. where he says, God is my
witness, etc. So that in one Page thou tellest us, That calling God to witness,
is Equal to an Oath; And in another Page thou tellest us, That an Oath is
nothing else but a calling God to Witness.

And so does thy Brother Jeremiah Ives deal with us, He tells us in his Book,
Page 6. positively what an Oath is, from Genesis 23.4. when Abraham caused his
Servant to Swear BY the Lord. And David Swear to Saul BY the Lord, 1 Samuel
21.23. And the Spies Swore BY the Lord to Rahab, Josh. 2.12. And Abraham Swore
BY the Lord to Abimelech, Genesis 21.13.

And yet in Page 10. he Asserteth under his Fourth Reason that he gives, Why
Swearing is lawful, now under a Gospel Dispensation; he Asserteth, that a
Calling God to witness is a Swearing; and yet when he has Asserted it, then he
comes and tells us, that if calling God to witness be not Swearng, he says, he
knows not what is; when in Page 6. he did show what was Swearing.

For John Tombs and Henry Den, may both wear Black Coats, and have humane
Learning, and both may be very like one another (as is supposed they are in
other things also) and may both write in and about one and the same Oaths, as
they do; yet Henry Den and John Tombs are not one in them, although they both
aim at one and the same End by them: And I Query, Whether the Learning ye speak
by, be the Spirits Dictates, because ye speak not the Spirits Language, which
is not Yea and Nay, but Yea and Amen in Christ Jesus, as aforesaid.

I would I knew where to find you; yet by this I see, when persons be out of
Gods way, they begin to be in a bewildred Condition, running to and fro,
sometimes here, and sometimes there; and therefore I must let thee know that
every like is not the same; for another man may wear Black Clothes, and be
endowed with Humane Learning as well as Henry Den, yet not be Henry Den.

And seeing it is so, that many are at a stumble in this juncture of time, as
to taking, or not taking of OATHS; and that chiefly occasioned by the Writings
of John Tombs, thine Epistle, and thy Brother Jeremiah Ives his Great Case of
Conscience Opened: I shall therefore endeavor by divine Assistance, according
to the Ability received, to lay down something to the serious Consideration of
All, nothing doubting but that the LORD, from whom every good and perfect Gift
comes, will make bare his own Arm, and evidence his own Wisdom, Strength, and
Alsufficiency, in his Servants Folly, Weakness and Insufficiency, to the
strengthening those that stand; to the enlightening the Eyes of the Blind; to the
establishing of the wavouring and unstable, and to the recovering of the
Apostatized Back-slider, even to the smiting upon the Thigb, that so the Crown
may be set upon his head, who only and alone is worthy.

In order whereunto I shall plainly, and as briefly as I may, distinguish
between, 1. A Vow, Covenant, Promise, or Engagement. 2. An Asseveration. 3. An
Oath. 4. A Testimony, Record, or Witness. 5. An Adjuration, Charging, Warning,
or Conjuring by.


And first of a Vow, Covenant, Promise, or Engagement.
A Vow, Covenant, Promise, or Engagement then, is nothing else, but a Promise
made either to God, or man; or, an opening the mouth by way of Engaging: for so
says Jephthah, Judge. 11.35, 36. I have opened my mouth to the Lord, and I
cannot go back. And this, I say, may be done either to God or man, and so be
distinguished to be either Divine, or Humane; and that upon Conditions, or
voluntarily and without Conditions; the which being passed, either to God or
man, upon or without Conditions, yet they are as so many Bonds to, or upon a
soul.

And this Bond may be more strictly bound upon a soul, by way of Oath, Curse,
or Execration, as shall be more fully shown hereafter. In order whereunto;
first, consider Voluntary Vows, Covenants, Promises, or Engagements.

1. Voluntary, as David's Vow, Psalm. 132.2. who vowed a Vow to the mighty God of
Jacob. But,

2. Conditional, as Jacobs Vow, Genesis 28.20. And Jacob vewed a Vow unto the
Lord, and said, If the Lord shall without fail do thus for me, then will I do
so and so.

And Jephthahs Vow, Judge. 11.30. And Jephthah vowed a Vow unto the Lord, and
said, If thou shall without fail deliver the Children of Ammon into my hands,
then it shall be, that whatsoever comes forth of the door of my house, to meet
me when I return in peace from the Children of Ammon, shall surely be the
Lords, I will offer it up for a Burnt-Offering. And Hannah vowed a Conditional
Vow, 1 Samuel 1.11. All these Vows were without an Oath.

And all such Vows, whether Conditional or Voluntary, yet they are as so many
Bonds to the Soul, as in Number. 30.3. If a woman vow a Vow unto the Lord, to bind
her soul with a bond, etc. any such Vow, Covenant, or Promise may be further
bound upon a foul with an Oath, as in Numb. 30.2. If a man vow a Vow unto the
Lord, or swear an Oath, to bind his soul with a bond; So that he that makes a
Vow, Covenant, or Promise, binds his soul with a bond: and he that swears
an Oath, to perform that Vow, Covenant, or Promise, binds his soul with a
double bond; So that every Oath is a Vow; because that it cannot properly be
made, but to perform something that is vowed, promised, covenanted, or engaged;
and so the Oa^h includes that thing so promised to perform it, and so becomes
one with it; for break the Oath, when once sworn, and break the Vow or
Engagement; perform the Oath, and the Engagement is made good. Yet every Vow is
not an Oath, because it may be made without an Oath, as in Jacobs, Jephthahs,
and Hannahs Vows, which were Vows without Oaths.

And we find where Vows are made with Oaths, they are generally so
distinguished, as in Numb. 30.2. If a man vow a Vow unto the Lord, or swear an
Oath to bind his soul with a bond, etc. So likewise in David's case, Psalm.
132.1, 2. Lord, remember David in all his troubles, how he swear unto the Lord,
and vowed a Vow unto the mighty God of Jacob: So that here it is distinctly
laid down how he swear unto the Lord, and vowed a Vow; intimating a double tie
or bond upon his soul, as aforesaid.

The like we may see in Isreal's case, 2 Chronicles. 15.12. And they entered into a
Covenant to seek the Lord God of their Fathers, with all their heart, and with
all their soul: this Covenant was a bond to their souls. And in verse 14. They
swear unto the Lord with a loud voice, and with Trumpets, and with Cornets: And
all Judah rejoiced at the Oath; for they had sworn with all their heart.

The like also we may see in Nehem. 10.29. They clave unto their Brethren,
their Nobles, and entered into a Curse, and into an Oath, to walk in Gods Laws.
To walk in Gods Laws was the Covenant, as you may read, Neh. 9.38. This was
written and sealed to: And the Oath, and the Curse, was entered into to perform
that Covenant. So that we see they bound their souls with a double B^^d. And by
what has been said it may appear, that a Vow, Covenant, or Promise, and an
Oath, are two distinct things.

And seeing it is so then, that Vows, Covenants and Engagements are not Oaths,
nor Swearing; this then may serve to set a period to that common saying, That
Swearing is lawful under the Gospel, because the Apostle Paul was under a Vow,
Act. 18.18. and Act. 21.23.

2. An Asseveration.
But, secondly, Every Asseveration is not an Oath, though every Oath is an
Asseveration. An Asseveration then is, when a person shall choose out, sever, or
set apart a person or thing that is certain and known to be, and shall assert
the certainty of something else by the certainty of that certain thing. I say,
an Asseveration then is, when a person shall assert a thing to be a ttuth, or
such or such a thing to be so, or not so, taking up some certain thing to
assert the truth of that Negation or Affirmation; endeavoring thereby to beget
the party or parties spoken to, to a belief of the thing so asserted, to be a
truth: the which for Illustration-sake we will suppose thus; Henry Den tells
Henry Adis, that such a thing is true, as sure as Henry Adis lives. Now can
Henry Adis honestly or sensibly say, that Henry Den did swear by Henry Adis,
when he only asserted the truth of the thing, by that which Henry Adis sensibly
knew was true and certain: And what difference is there if Henry Den had said
to Henry Adis, that the thing was true, as sure as the Lord lives? the
certainty of whose living no rational man will in the least question. And in 2
Cor. 1.18. where the Apostle Paul does affirm, that his preaching to the
Corinthians was not Yea and Nay, but Yea and Amen: And to beget them to a
belief of the truth of what he said herein, he tells them, it is true, as sure
as the Lord is true. Now I shall leave it to the judgment of the Rational to
determine, whether the Apostle Paul did swear by the Lord, any more than Henry
Den did swear by Henry Adis, as aforesaid.

3. Of an Oath.
But, thirdly, Had Henry Den told Henry Adis that such a thing had been true,
and had asserted the truth of it, by the Lord, by Heaven, by Earth, by
Jerusalem, by his Head, or by what else you will suppose: this Henry Den, and
Henry Adis both may positively affirm to be Swearing; And this I can own to be
Swearing, although I do not assert the Swearing by Heaven, Earth, Jerusalem, or
the Head, to be lawful Oaths; no, nor swearing by God neither under a
Gospeldispensation. I say it is the term By, that makes the Asseveration, or
thing severed, singled out, set apart, or asserted, to become an Oath.

I desire to be held excused ^f I give not (for want of Humane Learning) those
proper distinctions and denominations to words, as possibly they may deserve in
such or such places: for I profess ingenuously I know not the difference
between a Particle, as it is so called, nor where or in what places they are to
stand; or how or when they are to be so called; only I shall desire, for
Information-sake, to impart what in mercy is made out to me, for the
Information and Reformation of others; therefore take my honest downright
meaning, and the Lord make it useful.

I say, that which binds up all, is, the term By, which By is that which makes
an Assertion to become an Oath; for it is the Affirmation of a thing not yet
believed to be a truth, by the certainty of that which is a truth, and is set
apart, chosen out, severed or asserted; and by the certainty of it, to prove
the certainty of that which is not yet believed to be true or certain, as
aforesaid: For to say, the Lord lives, is not to swear by the living Lord, or
by the Lord that lives; nor to say, as true as the Lord lives, cannot be
swearing by the Lord that is true who lives: but if I say, By the Lord that
lives, then I swear: So that to name God, Heaven, Earth, or Jerusalem, is, nor
can be Swearing, until I use the term By, as aforesaid.

And this thou say thy self is Swearing, in page 4. where thou speak of
the universality of Oaths, in which thou say must be considered, both
persons, places and times; and in the consideration of persons, thou bring
us, Genesis 22.16. where the Lord swears to Abraham, saying, By my Self have I
sworn, says the Lord, That in blessing I will bless thee: and in Psalm. 89.35.
Once have I sworn by my Holiness, that I will not lie unto David: And the
Angel's swearing in Revel. 10.5, 6. who lifted up his hands to Heaven, and
said, not as sure as the Lord lives, or, I call the Lord that lives to
record, or to witness; but his swearing was on this wise, The Angel lifted up
his hand to Heaven, and swear by Him that lives for ever and ever. And in
Deuteronomy. 6.13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve Him, and shall swear by
his Name.

To Swear then, is to Assert by God, who only is able to Assist, or enable to
what is Promised; therefore it is unlawful to Swear BY any other Creature or
Thing, because that Creature is unable to enable the Creature. And 2dly, by so
doing, the Creature is set up in the Place of the all-Powerful God; and the
Party so Swearing becomes an Idolater.

And thou also affirmest this to be Swearing by a third Testimony, as from the
Prophets, as Isa. 65.16. And he that swears in the Earth, shall swear by the
God of Truth. And Heb. 6.16. Men verily swear by the Greater. So that to swear,
is to assert by a party or thing, severed, singled out, or set apart. And of
Oaths there are several kinds.

1. An Oath of Promise. 2. An Oath of Affirmation or Testimony. 3. An Oath of
Abjuration, to renounce or forswear. 4. An Oath of Execration or Cursing.
1. All Promisary Oaths are, when persons do vow, covenant, or promise, and
bind the performance thereof by or under an Oath; as Josh. 2.12. Now therefore
I pray you, swear unto me by the Lord, since I have showed you kindness, that
ye will also show kindness unto my fathers house; and give me a true token.

2. An Oath of Affirmation or Testimony, to Confirm a Truth, by way of
Evidence, or Witness-bearing to end Controversies, Heb. 6.16. For men verily
Swear by the greater, and an Oath for Confirmation is to them an end of all
strife.

3. An Oath of Abjuration, Renouncing, or Forswearing a thing, 2 Samuel 3.35. And
when all the People came to cause David to eat meat while it was yet day, David
swear, saying, So do God to me, and more also, if I taste bread or ought else,
till the Sun be down.

4. An Oath of Execration or Cursing, Acts. 23.12, 14, 21. But do not thou
yield un^o them; for there lie in wait for him of them more than forty men,
which have bound themselves with an Oath, that they will neither eat nor drink
till they have killed him; and now are they ready l^oking for a Promise from
thee.

And although here is a New Testament Proof for this Oa^h of Execration, yet it
is to be noted, that it was made by wicked men, and therefore no Example for
Gospel Disciples to walk by, for it is the Requirement of the Lord by his
Spirit, that we Regulate according to the Gospel, which says, Swear not, and
Swear not at all, Matthew. 5.35. Jam. 5.12. And this we are required, that we
regulate our Conversation as becomes the Gospel, Phil. 1.27. Now if we have
not a clear direction in the Gospel, to regulate our Conversation by, and in
special in such a principal Part of it as this is, that may so much concern the
Glory of God; then we must conclude, that we are directed to an insufficient
and to an indirect Rule; the which to say I dare not: For I do really believe
him to be faithful, who has by his Spirit in his Servant directed to that
Rule; and therefore I am of this persuasion, that the Rule is a direct Rule,
and a true measure, 2 Cor. 10.12. and that those Requirements in Ma^th. 5.34.
and Jam. 5.12. are positive Directions.

Fourthly, Of a Testimony, Record, or Witness.
Fourthly, As to a Testimony, Record or Witness, I judge I need not say any
thing to in this place, because it is so fully distinguished in Page 8. to be
of another nature, and not at all of the tendency of an Oath; for when I call
one to witness a thing, I do not Swear by him; but I shall refer wholly to the
aforesaid Pages, and shall proceed to what remains.

And therefore shall desire that John Tombs in several of his Pages, and
Jeremiah Ives in his Page 10. do lay these Scriptures, Romans 9.1. Phil. 1.8. 2
Cor. 1.23. to their Pages as a sufficient Answer to them, that the Apostle
Swore not, any more than Jacob and Laban, or John Tombs did Swear by Henry
Adis, as is there cited.

Fifthly, Of an Adjuration, Charging, Warning, or Conjuring by.
Fifthly, To Adjure, Charge, Warn, or Conjure, is no Swearing: As for Example,
briefly thus; A Constable Commanding, Conjuring, Adjuring, or Charging another
of the Kings Subjects in the Kings Name, or by the Kings Power or Authority,
who is the Supreme Power of the Nation, to Aid and Assist him in such or such a
thing, in which he is so Charging, Adjuring, Conjuring or Warning; no man can
sensibly say that he swears by the King: Yet there is an aw put upon that
Subject by the Constable, in Comanding or Adjuring in the Kings Name, or a
Conjuring by the Power of the King, which that Subject is to Obey as he will
answer the Neglect thereof at his peril: that is, if the King should call him
to question for his Neglect of that thing doing, possibly he must undergo the
wrath of the KING, whose Wrath is as the Roaring of a Lion, Prove. 19.12. And as
the Messenger of Death, Prove. 16.14.

And that Command that the Apostle Paul laid upon the Thessalonians by the Lord
Jesus, That that Epistle be Read to all the Holy Brethren, 1 Thessalonians. 5.27. I
judge the Apostle in reason, cannot he said to SWEAR by the Lord Jesus; but he
lets them know, that he had an Authority to Require the reading of that
Epistle, that as it was written by the Incommings of the Spirit of Jesus, for
the benefit of the Sheep of Jesus; So he by the Authority of Jesus, the great
Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls, required the reading of it; because as he
Ascended up on High, so he had given Gifts unto men, for the perfecting of the
Sain^s, for the Work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ.
Ephesians. 4.8, 12. The which po^sibly may be done by Epistle at a distance, as well
as by Preaching being present: And this is that which answers the Requirement
of Christ, that when we are Converted, that then we should strengthen the
Brethren, Luke 22.32. And also seconded by Peter in his First Epistle, fourth
Chapter, and the tenth Verse, where he require^h That as every man has
Received the Gift, so they should minister the same one to another, as good
Stewards of the manifold graces of God. And thus they should feed the Sheep and
Lambs of Jesus, Joh. 21.14. And thus the Apostle Paul commends the things that
he wrote unto them, to be the Commandments of the Lord, 1 Cor. 14.34. For many
things Christ had to say to his Disciples, which they could not then bear,
which were afterward to be Communicated by the Spirit, Joh. 16.12, 13.
According to that of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.21. For the Prophets came not of old
time by the Will of Man, but Holy-men spoke as they were moved by the holy
Ghost; and the same Spirit being the Author of this Epistle to the Church, 1
These. 5.27. Required in the Name of the Lord, or by the Power of the Lord, that
it be Read to all the Holy Brethren.

And the same Apostle, writing to the same Church, in persuading them to a
stedfastness in the way of God, he does beseech them BY the Coming of the Lord
Jesus, and BY our gathering together unto him, that they be not soon moved, etc.

Now, can it be supposed that the Apostle did Swear when he Adjures them BY the
coming of the Lord Jesus; and BY our gathering together unto him? No, For if
any one shall say he did, then he Swore not BY Christ only as he is Lord, but
BY his coming, and BY our gathering together; the which, were Swearing lawful,
to wit, BY the Lord, from Matthew. 5. and James 5. Yet this were to transgress
those Laws which say, Swear not BY Heaven, Earth, nor Jerusalem, nor BY any
other Oath; So that I say, if Swearing BY the Lord should be lawful from
thence, yet Swearing BY the Coming of the Lord; or BY our gathering together
unto him, is utterly unlawful: So that to say that this faithful Servant of the
Lords, whose great Care it was to keep the Churches close to God; to say that
he was thus a breaker of Gods Laws, were, as I judge, to condemn the
Innocent; which is a great Evil, and as great an abomination to the Lord, as he
that justifies the wicked, Prove. 17.15. The confounding of these Vows, Oaths,
Testimonies, Asseverations and Adjurations together, is that which causes
Jeremiah Ives in Page 3 and 7, to affirm that the Lord Christ SWEAR, in saying,
thou have said it; when the High Priest Adjured him BY the living God, that he
should tell him, whether he was the Christ, Matthew. 26.63.

And also that the Prophet Micha swore, when the King Adjured him BY or IN the
Name of the Lord, to tell him nothing but the Truth: And they SWEAR (says he)
when they Consented to Answer to that Voice of Swear, 1 Kin. 22.16, 17. But I
shall herein appeal to the judgment of the Rational, whether either the King,
or the High Priest swore by the living God, when they Charged or Conjured BY or
IN the Name of the living God; any more than the Constable Swears by the King,
when he Commands by or in his Name? or whether it can in reason be imagined
that the Subjects do Swear BY the King, when they do actually Consent to Obey
the King in obeying his Constable, the Kings lawful Officer.

Therefore in this Place, I hope I shall not need say more to these things,
though more might be said; as to Distinguish between a Vow, an Oath, an
Asseveration, a Testimony, and an Ad^uration or Con uration; so that an
Adjruation is not a Testimony, nor a Testimony an Adjuration; For when I call
God to Witness, I do not adjure a person by the Lord, nor by Christ's coming,
nor by our gathering together unto him; neither when I do this, do I make a
Vow, or take an Oath to perform that Vow; and on the other hand, when I make a
Vow or a Covenant to, or with the Lord I do not adjure by the Lord, for if I
do, I would in reason know who I do adjure, for I am the person Vowing, and I
must be the party adjuring; and if that Covenant be with the Lord and my self
only; then I must be said, if I do adjure, to adjure the Lord by the Lord; the
which to say, I shall leave to the rational to judge what it amounts too:
Thus much shall suffice to have been spoken, as to distinguish between a Vow,
an Oath, a Testimony, an Ass^veration, and an Adjuration.

And now having thus distinguished, I shall as briefly as I may, come to the
remaining part of thy Epistle; And first, I shall say something to that Text,
Heb. 6.16. in page 4. Men verily do Swear by the greater, and an Oath for
confirmation, is to them an end of all strife: which words the Apostle
intends not to urge, or to persuade to an opinion of the lawfulness of
Swearing, as Henry Den does, nor need he, for it was that Church of the Jews,
converted to the Faith, and Baptized into the Name of Jesus, for the remission
of sins, Acts 2.41. For as they were Jews, they were under that saying of old,
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him, and shall Swear by his Name,
who were under the Law of Christ, who out of his own Mouth said, Mat. 5.34.
Swear not at all; and for that Apostle to bind so close upon them, for a strict
observation of the Laws of Christ, as he does, Heb. 2.1, 2, 3. Heb. 12.25. and
yet to bring this Text in Heb. 6.13. to persuade to a breach of that L^w, to me
seems a Paradox; I shall therefore come to an examination of the end why those
words were spoken, that so if possibly, we may be instrumental to undeceive one
another; for to take a Text, and to make use of it as some do, for their own
ends, and not to consider the end, why that Text was spoken by the Spirit; is
to go out of Gods way, and to persuade others so to do and Devil-like, to
pervert Scripture, to subvert Souls.

The Apostle in Heb. 6. earnestly persuades that Church to a pressing on to
perfection, being already built upon the foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone: In Heb. 5.12. a d
so on, he blames them for their backwardness and slothfulness in the Way of
God; and blames them for a neglect of that which the great Learned Rabbis of
our times cries out against, Imprisons, and blames us for, now at this very
day; that is, for Teaching; And because we are forward to follow God in his
Requirements, to Assemble together, to build each other up in our most Holy
Faith, according to the direction of the Lord, by his Spirit, Heb. 10.25.
Therefore our Meetings must be shut up, and we must be forced, not only to
neglect them, but also to Swear against them, or else we must be cast into
Dungeons, and Prison-Holes, as it is at this day; my self with many more can
speak it by woeful experience.

I say, the Apostle blaming them, for a carnal neglecting of that duty of
teaching others, the which I cannot but mind by the way; he blames not those
that were already Teachers, for their negligence in Teaching; but he blames
those of the Church, who for the time they had been in the Church, ought to
have been Teachers of others, who had need to have others teach them again
which are the first Principles of the Oracles of God; and are become such as
have need of Milk, and not strong Meat: Whence I would note by the way, that
Teachers in Gospel Churches, are not Taught to Teach in Universities of Humane
Learning, before they come into their Societies; but in the Churches, they,
after they have experienced the Love of God to their Souls, and have made use
of the privileges of the Gospel in the Church, to Prophecy one by one, as
they may do, that all may Learn, and all may be Comforted, 1 Cor. 14.31.
Having, I say, blamed them for their carelessness and backwardness in
instructing and Teaching others, they were also urged, to a pressing on to
perfection, or a building high upon that Foundation they had already laid; the
Principles whereof are laid down, Heb. 1.1, 2. to wit, Repentance, Faith and
Baptism, Laying on of Hands, and to believe the Resurrection of the dead, and
eternal Judgment; and that they might the more cheerfully go on in that way, he
persuades them in verse. 12. That they be not sloathful, but followers of them,
who through Faith and Patience inherited the Promises; and that he might
persuade them yet further, he tells them, that when God made Promise to
Abraham, when he could Swear by no greater, he Swore by Himself, saying, that
in blessing, I will bless thee, and in multiplying, I will multiply thee.

And further, he tells them of Gods Swearing also, as to the setting Christ
apart, a Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchisedec; and upon these two
accounts, the Apostle persuades them to a perseverance in Gods way, in certain
hope of a reaping the benefit thereof in due time; and the better to persuade
them to a belief of the efficacy of Gods Oaths, he by a familiar comparison,
lays before them the effect of Man's Oaths in witness bearing; And therefore he
tells them, that an Oath amongst men, for confirmation, is to them an end of
all strife; as much as if he should have said, if an Oath be of such weight,
and bears so much sway amongst men, carnal, unbelieving, profane wicked men,
as generally men are (for they are either Carnal or Spiritual, believing or
unbelieving) then of what Credit should Gods Oaths be off, for the confirmation
of what he Swears to amongst you Christians, to you Church of the Hebrews,
with you that have owned, and are under the Principles of Christ's Doctrine? for
if we will mind the words, he tells them of the use of an Oath amongst men,
considered as men, not of Christians, nor of Churches, but an Oath to them, not
to you, but to them as they are men, such as he wrote to them of, to them an
Oath is an end of all strife; not to you, neither is nor shall an Oath be, for
confirmation an end of all strife; but let your communication be Yea, Yea, Nay,
Nay, for whatsoever is more then this, comes of evil; for I say unto you.
Swear not at all: So that he lays it not down as a Rule for them to walk by;
and therefore he tells them, what an Oath to them is, so and so; he says
not, it shall be to you so and so; so that he lays it not before them as a
president or a pattern for them to follow, as to the practical part of it, but
that they should make the like use of Gods Oaths, as men do of one another
Oaths, that is, to put the matter out of doubt that is Sworn to; Now God having
Sworn to Abraham, and they being the Hebrew or Jewish Church, and Abraham's
fleshly Seed; so they should take it for granted, that God would make it good,
for God had Sworn it; and as they were a Church of Christ, and in Gospel Order,
and the Seed of Abraham by Faith, so they should take it for granted, and
without dispute, that whatsoever benefit God had Sworn to perform to the Seed
of Faith, by Jesus Christ, our high Priest whom he has Sworn is a Priest for
ever, after the Order of Melchisedec: And being thus laid down as aforesaid;
not that they should Swear as men, or the World Swear, but to make use of what
the Lord Swear to, as men make use of their Swearing, to put out of doubt, that
which is Sworn to, to be a real absolute and final conclusion, and that which
in due time, without dout will be by him made good; and if laid down for this
end, and not as a Rule, Pattern or President for them to act by, why then is
this Scripture made use of, and so often brought to the Eyes and Ears of Gospel
Disciples, to prove the lawfulness of Swearing, contrary to the requirements
of the Lord Christ, and his Apostles, who say, Swear not, and Swear not at all;
and that by thy self Henry Den page 4. John Tombs, in his Book, and Jeremiah
Ives, page 11. and John Sturion and others by discourses, who are Teachers of
Congregations, and Leaders of People, and such as for Humane parts, and
especially for Syllogistical Discourses are eminent, and all or most of them in
Print upon that account: And if either of you judge I have wronged you in what
I have here said, or the mind of the Spirit in the Text, Your mouths are open,
and the Press is free.

In the mean time, I shall in Christian Love earnestly beg you, and either of
you, that you do not so comply with present self Interests, as that you bank
your own Consciences, nor willingly extinguish that Light you have received,
nor publish that in Print, nor privately discourse that which may be
instrumental to draw Souls from their Integrity, by poisoning them with a
carnal Indifferency in the things of God, either by your precept or example, as
some of you have hitherto done, with the help of your Apostatized brother,
Samuel Oats, to the hindering of multitudes from entering into the Church of
Christ, by your so violently opposing that Principle of Laying on of Hands: But
more of that in its due place, the which, that I may come to Henry Den, I shall
say something to thy pleading for the lawfulness of Oaths amongst Believers,
upon the account of the frequentnesse of Swearing amongst Infidels; by which
Carnal Reasons and Arguing, thou may as well plead for the lawfulness of
Jews Worship and Popery, as do the Church of Rome, from the Universality of
their Church, to be the True Church, as with my self several have done.

In page the fifth, thou urgest the use of an Oath, in all Nations whatsoever,
whether Jews, Gentiles, or Barbarians, between Prince and Subjects, Enemies and
Friends, for the reconciling differences, ending of Controversies, and
assureance of Faith one toward the other.

Now (say thou) How great is this Authority? namely, The Consent of all
Nations; It is doubtless, a demonstration of the second Rate at least; some
there are thou tellest us, who account it of the first Rate, viz. That the
Confent of Nations, is to be of Divine Authority; the which, however some may
so assert, yet for thee, who pretendest thy self to be what thou do, and to
say, doubtless it is of Divine Authority, and of the second Rate at the least,
to me it seems no better than Abomination. And that will be evident, when we
consider seriously the sad consequences of it; for Nations generally consent to
Idolatry, as is evident; and this those of the Papal Faction have urged to my
self in several Discourses; to wit, that their way of Worship is the Truth,
because owned generally by all Nations. Now if this general consent of all
Nations, is to be to the Disciples of Christ, of Divine Authority; Then I
querie, first, Whether this be not to cross and make void the sayings of the
Lord Christ, Luke 12.32. Who says, Fear not little Flock, for it is your
Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom; And John 15.19. I have chosen
you out of the world, therefore the world shall hate you; And many are called,
but few are chosen, Mat. 20.16. And strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way
that leads to Life, and few there be that find it; because, wide is the Gate,
and broad is the way that leads to Destruction, and many there be that go in
thereat, Mat. 7.13.

And therefore, Secondly, I querie, Whether it be not of sad consequence, to
take the consent of Nations for Divine Authority, which say, that generally all
the Nations that are in that part of the world called Christendom, are
Christians, and that they are all Believers; when Christ says, that Christians
and Believers are a little Flock, and that when the Son of Man comes, he
questions whether he shall find Faith on the earth, Luke 18.8. and are such as
do generally condemn the Generation of the Just?

The next thing thou come to, in page five, is to prove the lawfulness of
Oaths in Gospel Disciples; saying, What does it prove less, then that the
taking of Oaths is one of the Dictates written and engraven in the Heart of
man, by Natures Finger?

To which I answer, That when persons are wrought upon by true saving,
justifying Faith, then it turns out Nature: I would not here be mistaken, I do
not say, that Grace does make a man unnatural, for that is a distinguishing
character of a Reprobate condition who are without understanding, Covenant
breakers, without Natural affection, implacable-unmerciful, Romans 1.31. So also
says our Apostle, such are without Natural affection, Truce Breakers, false
accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, 2 Pet. 3.3.
but where True Grace comes, it works up Souls to a quickening, who were dead in
trespasses and sins, among whom also they had their conversion in times past,
fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, and were by Nature the
children of Wrath, as well as others; such are raised up together, and are made
to sit together in Heavenly Places, in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2 1, 2. By all
which we see, that what Nature Teaches, is generally destroyed by Grace; that
is, such things as are unnatural, such things as are contrary to the Mind of
God, such things as are contrary to his Requirements, his word of Truth, such
things in which men knowing by Pure Nature, they corrupt themselves, Jude 10.
And for thee to assert the dictates of Nature, to teach Gospel Disciples to
Swear, because Nature teaches them to Swear; to me it seems preposterous, and
that which is inconsistent with the word of Truth: For what Nation is there,
Considered as a Nation, that at this day acts according to pure Light of
Nature? Nay, what particular Persons are there, that act near it, but some few
of that People called QUAKERS only? I shall Appeal to the Judgments of all
herein, and shall justify that People for that, and that above those that do
pretend to a Form of Godliness, and do deny the POWER thereof; for they acting
only and alone by the LIGHT within, and not Conforming at all to that which
the Lord Christ has left in the Holy Scriptures of Truth to be subjected to;
and to which the Churches in the Primitive times have yielded their obedience;
and yet they in most things, as to common actions between man and man, are some
of them found acting justly and uprightly, and far exceeding some of those that
are in Gospel Order; and such that at the Judgment Day will rise up in
Judgment against them, although they themselves expect not to appear there;
for they do not believe that Resurrection.

And for thee to poison a People with such a palpable gross Error, is an Evil
of a Transcendant Nature; and to bend thy Abilities of Humane Learning, as some
others have and do, to thwart the Dictates of Grace, and the Requirements of
the Spirit, in Matthew. 5. and James 5. is a matter of no small dangerous
Consequence: For says our Savior, Whosoever shall break one of these least
Commandments, and teach men so, shall be called least in the Kingdom of
Heaven, Matthew. 5.19. And therefore I shall desire thee to Query seriously with
thine own Conscience, whether thou come not under that Woe of Christ, Matthew.
22.13. pronounced against those who will not only refuse to go in themselves,
nor yet suffer others to enter.

The next thing thou tellest us of to persuade us to Swear, is, that there is
no Nation so Barbarous, but does acknowledge the Religious use of an Oath, in
calling their God to Witness.

To which I Answer; If the Heathen and barbarous People, which have no
knowledge of the true God, do Swear BY their false gods; does it therefore
follow that we, who have the knowledge of the TRUE GOD, and are in Gods own way
and Worship, that we must TAKE EXAMPLE by them to SWEAR BY OUR GOD? And because
they, calling their god to witness to what they do, they look upon that
calling to witness to be SWEARING; must we needs be so senseless as to say, that
calling our God to witness to the truth of what we say or do, that this is
Swearing BY our God?

The next thing that I shall take notice of in Page 5. is, where thou usest
this Expression; Now how can that thing be accounted Evil, which is approved by
all Nations?

To which I Answer, How can thou, O Henry Den, without blushing, and calling
thy Reason to question, Query such a thing? And therefore in thy next words, I
must desire thee to recollect thy Thoughts, and consider what thou have said in
Print, and exposed it to public view.

Thou do desire, That we would Recollect our Thoughts, and Consider whether
we can give one Instance of any one Evil, which has been allowed and Approved
by all Nations?

To which I Answer, The Worshipping of false gods, or the true God after a
false manner, is the general course of all Nations; Now the Worshipping of a
false god, or of the true God after a false MANNER, is an Evil, and a great
one: And we know, that it is the Consent of all Nations, to continue in a false
way, and that in hatred and opposition to the true Worship and Service of God;
the truth of which, I shall leave to the Godly Party to judge of.

And in Page 6. thou Queriest, Why we should think it Unlawful to Swear, when
the Consent of Nations, the Example of Prophets, and Kings, and Righteous men
of old; and in a condinued series, for the most part, until this time; when the
Example of Angels, yea, of Almighty God himself stands all at your Right hand:
What one Practice is there that you have more, and greater Evidence for?

To which I Answer, That all that has been said is to no purpose at all; for
Consent of Nations, can be no Rule for Gospel Disciples to walk by, because
they are required to walk by that Rule, Line, and Measure, that the Apostle
walked by and acted in, who has written and left the same to us for a Rule,
and from which he and they did not dare to derogate, 2 Cor. 10.12. to 17. for
our only care ought to be, that our Conversation be regulated according to the
Gospel, Phil. 1.27. and not by the Light within only, as some would have it;
nor after the manner of the Heathen, as thou would have it, the which thou
endeavourest to persuade Souls to walk by: And therefore Query with thy self,
Henry Den, whether thou art not such an one, who with cunning Craftiness lie
in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4.14. and such an one that goes about to pervert the
Gospel of Christ, Gal. 1.7. And if a Woe, according to the saying of Christ,
shall betide the Servants of Christ, when all men shall speak well of them,
Luke 6.26. Query further with thy self, Henry Den, how far thou art from that
Woe, pronounced against those that are blind Guides, who say, men may Swear,
etc. Mat. 23.16. and so endeavourest to persuade them to Comply with all men in
their Iniquities? And if the Apostle John's words be true, who says, That the
whole World lies in wickedness, 1 John 5.19. and yet thou perswadest us to
walk by their Rule, directing us to it as Good, when the Spirit says it is
Evil; Whether do thou not pull down that Woe upon thine own head, that is
pronounced by the Prophet, Isa. 5.20. Woe unto them that call good evil, and
evil good; that put Light for Darkness, and Darkness for Light; that put
Bitter for Sweet, and Sweet for Bitter? And whether thy deep humane Learning
has not puffed thee up, so as to seem wise in thine own eyes, and so thou
plunge thy self into Woe after Woe? for, Woe to them that are wise in their own
eyes, and prudent in their own conceit, Isa. 5.21.

And further, If the Consent and Practice of Nations be such a direct Rule to
walk by, as that it is of Divine Authority, as thou endeavourest to beat us
into a belief of it is; Why then art thou found under the Baptism of Believers;
the which all Nations, considered as Nations, so much abominate, and walk
contrary to? And whether thy words in print, and thy practice, do not evidently
contradict each other? for by thy own Assertions thou should be an Idolater,
and a follower and worshipper of false gods.

Therefore before I go further, I would desire thee rationally to consider and
judge, whether thou speak by that Spirit, that leads into all Truth? or
whether thou speak not out of a principle of Humane Learning, and as one of
the Disputers of this World, as the Wise, and as the Scribes, which God has
made foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.20. and so art become such an one as our Apostle
speaks of, 1 Timothy 1.7. who desire to be a Teacher of such a Law, as the
Example and Consent of Nations, is to be of Divine Authority, and so to learn
the People of God to swear contrary to the Law of Christ; Whether art not thou
become such an one that know not what thou say, nor whereof thou do
affirm, by thy thus endeavoring to persuade to a disobedience to Christ our
Righteousness, who is made of God unto us Wisdom; whereby we speak
Righteousness, by whom only we are accepted; Sanctification, by and through whom
we are chosen, separated, and set apart; and Redemption, whose Blood speaks
better things than that of Abel, and by which only we are redeemed?

But to proceed: Whereas thou tellest us in page 6. That we have, together with
the Consent of Nations, and the Example of Prophets and Righteous men of old;
so also the Authority of Angels, and God himself standing at our right hand, as
a warrant for Gospel-Disciples to swear. To which I answer, Though we are
required to follow God, as dear Children, and to walk in love, Ephesians. 5.1. To be
holy, 1 Pet. 1.16. and to be perfect, Matthew. 5.48. Yet we are no where required
to follow him in swearing; neither is it a sufficient Warrant for
Gospel-Disciples to swear, because God swore; and if we immitate him, we must
immitate him in the manner and the end of his swearing: Now when the Lord
swore, he swore by Himself; and for me to swear by my self, is to break a Law
of Christ, Matthew. 5.34. Jam. 5.12. which says, Neither by thy Head, nor this,
nor that, nor by any other Oath. Neither can I follow him in his end, for I am
not in such a capacity as he was, or is in; And if I swear by him, I shall
break a Law of Christ, who says, Swear not at all. And if we can neither
follow our Pattern in the manner, nor the end, for my own part, my shallow
capacity is too narrow to apprehend why I should in such a case look upon such
a Leader: For to set a Schoolboy a fair choice Copy, yet if he must not
follow his Master, neither in a choice neat cutting his Letter, evenly and
distinctly, keeping his line and distances, points and stops, how can he attain
to fair writing, and to what end is his Copy laid before him?

And as for Angels, the sons and daughters of men were never, as I know of,
required to follow or immitate them; neither if they were, yet that swearing in
Rev. 10.5, 6. cannot possibly be immitated, which is that one and only time,
that ever we hear of Angels swearing; which was but One Angel, and but Once
Swearing; and yet in page 6. thou tellest us most deceitfully, that we have the
Example of Angels, as if it were a common course for Angels to swear: By which
the World shall see that the Spirit of the Lord spoke a glorious truth in his
servant Solomon, Prove. 12.19. saying, The Lip of Truth shall be established,
but a Lying lip is but for a moment. For the Angels thou speak of, is but
one, and the Oath but one; and that one Oath neither before, nor under a Gospel
Dispensation; and therefore no Example for Gospel-Disciples to follow: for the
discovery of this one Angel's swearing, is by John the Revelator, who saw
things to come; And he that shall assert, that that Angel did, or has yet
sworn, may as safely and as truly say, The great Whore, that Mother of Harlots
and all Abominations, is already brought down (though we see her setting up
daily:) for this Angel shall not swear till she be down; for when he shall
swear, the end of his swearing, shall be to let us know, that time shall be no
more, Revel. 10.6. and this thou urgest, as a President for Gospel-Disciples to
follow; in doing which thou bring it to as little purpose, as Jeremiah Ives
and thy self both, bring and urge that Text of the Prophet, Isa. 65.16. thou in
page 4. and he in page 9. though Jeremiah Ives be as palpably gross as thy
self therein; for in page 7. he gives it in as a third reason why those two
Texts, Matthew. 5. and James 5. does not forbid the use of all swearing, as was
commanded under the Law; because, says he, the Prophets, when he can bring but
one Prophet for his Prophets; no more than thou Henry Den, can bring Angels
for that One Angel, as aforesaid; and Prophesies, as thou say in page 4.
lin. 21. when it is but this one Prophecy, by that one Prophet thy Brother
Jeremiah Ives produced, Isa. 65.16. So that here I must say to him, as before I
said to thee, from Prove. 12.19. That a lying tongue is but for a moment: Angels
and Prophets; as if there were multitudes, when there is but one Angel, and one
Prophet produced, and that Angel and that Prophet, making but two in all, (and
less there cannot be to make the plural number) yet both cannot produce one
good Warrant for what they are brought; for the end why this supposed multitude
of Angels and Prophets are brought for, is, but to persuade Gospel-Disciples to
break that Law of Christ, Matthew. 5. and James 5. and when all is done, when
from this supposed Mountain of Swearing something remarkable is expected to be
brought forth, (to speak metaphorically) it amounts not to so much as a
Mouse; for a Mouse is something in being, but this is nothing at all as to
Gospel-Disciples, for it concerns not their Dispensation in the least; for, as
to the Angel's swearing, as is aforesaid, it is not yet acted; and when it
shall be acted, it shall set a period to time, and it shall not be till time
shall be no more, as to men upon Earth.

So secondly, When that Swearing shall be which is spoken of by that one
Testimony, that one Prophet, called Prophets, that also shall be fulfilled in
such a juncture of time, when the Gospel-Lamps of Profession shall be out, for
it shall be then when there shall be a New Heaven, and a New Earth, as says
Jeremiah Ives himself from that 56th Chapter of Isaiah, ver. 17. It shall be,
that when the New Heavens and the New Earth are created, and when the former
Heavens and the former Earth is forgotten: So that if it shall be then, and not
till then, that the former Earth and Heaven shall be forgotten, that this
swearing shall be that is here spoken of; when they that swear, shall swear by
the God of Truth; And if so, then it is not in truth to be bound upon
Gospel-Disciples: And that ye may know distinctly When it shall be, and Whom
they shall be that shall swear: as to the time when, the Apostle Peter will
tell us, 2 Pet. 3.7. that by the same Power that made the Heavens and the
Earth, they are kept in store, reserved unto fire, against the day of Judgment,
and perdition of ungodly men. And this is that which makes some of us
patiently wait for, and yet haste unto the coming of the Day of God, wherein
the Heavens being on fire, shall be dissolved, and the Earth shall melt with
fervent heat; then it is when we, according to his Promise, look for a New
Heaven and a New Earth, wherein dwells RIGHTEOUSNESS, or CHRIST, who of God
is made unto us, Wisdom, RIGHTEOUSNESS, etc. 1 Cor. 1.30. Who is the Lord our
RIGHTEOUSNESS, Jerem. 23.6.

And as to the persons who they shall be, the 15th verse of the 65th Chapter
tells us, That they are such as shall be called by another name; And this
Evangelical Prophet distinguishes them from the Gentiles, whom we are; for so
says he, Isa. 62.2. speaking of them, And the Gentiles shall see Thy
Righteousness, and all Kings thy Glory; Thou shall also be a Crown of Glory in
the Hand of the Lord, and a Royal Diadem in the Hand of thy God. Thou shall no
more be termed, FORSAKEN, neither shall Thy LAND any more be termed DESOLATE;
For Thou shall be called HEPHZI-BAH, and Thy Land BEULAH: for the Lord
delights in Thee, and thy Land shall be Married: For as a young man marries
a Virgin, so shall thy sons marry thee; (speaking to the Land or Beulah) And as
a Bridegroom rejoices over his Bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee.

And this the Lord has sworn to by his Right hand, and by the Arm of his
Strength, that he will perform it. And this shall be, when he will no more give
their Corn nor their Wine, for which they have labored, into the hands of
their Enemies nor Strangers, when they shall call them, The Holy People, The
Redeemed of the Lord: and their Land shall be called Sought out, a City not
forsaken. So that it shall be scattered Israel that shall thus swear, when his
Name shall be changed, and no more called Forsaken or cast out; but when he
shall be called Hephzi-bah, and that after a Gospel Dispensation, when the
former Heavens and the former Earth shall be forgotten; then also shall your
Angel swear. So that thine and thy Brother Jeremiah Ives great noise of
Prophets and Angels, being but two in all, and one of them named as if he had
sworn a great while since, when in truth they shall neither of them swear, till
the Hand of the Lord shall be known toward his Servants, and his Indignation
toward his Enemies: For, behold! the Lord will come with Fire, and with his
Chariots like a Whirlwind, to render his Anger with Fury, and his Rebuke with
Flames of Fire: for by Fire and by Sword, shall the Lord plead with all flesh;
and the slain of the Lord shall be many, Isa. 66.15, 16.

And now consider, you great Humane Learned men, to what end was this noise of
Angels and Prophets thus proclaimed, to stand at our right hand, to persuade us
to swear, when, upon examination, they know not what they had to do there; the
which if it be thought they have, I shall leave to the Rational to judge of,
whilst I take those other Prophets and Righteous men of old that stand with
them, into question also, to hear whether they can persuade us to swear.

And upon examination, I find that which they have to say to us, is, that they
under that Legal Administration given out by the hand of Moses, had, Thus says
the Word of the Lord for their Warrant, Deuteronomy. 8.13. Thou shall Fear the Lord
thy God, and shall Swear by his Name: And now I must apply my self to Henry Den
and Jeremiah Ives, and let them know, that these Prophets and Holy men of old,
were under the Levitical Priesthood; but now the Priesthood is changed, and as
the Priesthood is changed, so there must needs be also a change of the Law,
Heb. 7.12. So They were under Moses the Servant, but We are under the Son, who
was counted worthy of more Honor than Moses, in as much as he who has builded
the house, has more honor than the house; and though Moses was faithful in
his house as a Servant, yet Christ as a Son over his OWN HOUSE; whose house are
we, Heb. 3, 3, 5. And if the SON make us free, then are we free indeed, John
8.36. Therefore hear what the Son faith, It has been said to them of old time,
that were under my Servant Moses, Thou shall not forswear thy self, etc. But I
say unto you, I that am a Son over mine own House, I who will make you free
from Swearing; and so, or by that means, free from Forswearing; I say unto you,
Swear not at all: So that we being under the Sons Priesthood, we are freed from
all things that were under the Servants Law, and that by the Direction of that
Spirit that was sent to lead into all Truth, and to show things to come, and
that from Acts 15.28. and Acts 21.26. For as touching the Gentiles which
believe, we have written and concluded, that they observe no such things, SAVE
ONLY that they keep THEMSELVES from IDOLS, and from BLOOD, and from things
STRANGLED, and from FORNICATION; And seeing it is so, that thou and thy brother
Jeremiah, do so oppose our Master and his Household, I shall in the Power,
streng^h and might of my Master, examine your grounds as a faithful Sentinel,
before you farther pass our Guard; lest if ye get within us, and by flattery,
Dalilah-like, you bereave us of our strength.

In page 7. Jerem. Ives tells of Voluntary Oaths, the which I say with him,
were lawful, under that dispensation; but he brings nothing at all to prove
them to be so now under a Gospel Dispensation, but his own say-so, only; so
that all that he has done in all the six pages before, was but only to fill
up his two sheets, and nothing at all to the purpose: for our Lord Christ
says, Mat. 5.34. It has been said to them of old time, Thou shall not
forswear thy self, but I say unto you Swear not at all; So that he needed not
have gone so far about the wood, to have proved that which was never denied.
And had he but cut off something superfluous behind, and this before, one pair
of sheets might have served both his and his brother Henry Dens Reasons, to
have lain in against, Mat. 5.34. and James 5.12. And therefore I shall give a
brief account of what he says in opposition to Mat. 5.34. Swear not at all: To
which in page 7. he does answer negatively, that that Text cannot forbid the
use of all Swearing, that was lawful under the Law; his first Reason is,
Because Christ himself Swore, Mat. 26.63. when the Priest said, I Adjure thee
by the Living God, that thou tell me whether thou be the Christ, the Son of
God. And says Jeremiah Ives, Christ Swear in his saying, thou have said, or, I
am.

To which I Answer, That he did not Swear, and that by Jeremiah Ives his own
showing; for in p. 11. l. 1. We shall prove that it was the Priest Swear, and
not Christ: for if the Apostle Paul did Swear when he Adjured, 1 These. 5.27.
and not them he writ to; then the Priest Swear (if Adjuring be Swearing) and
not Christ when he was Adjured; but says Jeremiah Ives, The Apostle Paul Swear
when he Adjured, and this he justifies in p. 11. l. 1. and in l. 17. he
thinks it no presumption to arraign them for Ignorance, that say, the Apostle
Paul did evil in Swearing; the which I will not say, for I really judge as I
have showed in p. 11, 12. that Adjuring is not Swearing; yet by the way, I
would have Jeremiah Ives know, That it would be well for him if he could clear
himself of gross Ignorance, in asserting what he has asserted.

Says he, The Apostle Swore when he Adjured by the Lord.

Now he Adjured the Brethren, for 1 These. 5.27. I charge you by the Lord, that
this Epistle be read to all the Holy Brethren, I charge you: Who? You Brethren
into whose hands it shall come; for compare this with 1 These. 1.1. and you
shall find it was written to the Church, considered as a Church; and as I judge
at this time without Officers, for we read of none they had; for being in the
Infancy of the Church, I judge there were none yet found fitly qualified for
the work, neither in that Church, nor in the Roman, Corinthian, Galatian nor
Ephesian, nor the Colossian Churches; for had there been any, the Apostle
would, I judge, have written to them that were Officers, as well as to the
Brethren, and in this as well as in other Churches to the Elders; For writing
to the Church of Philippi, he writes to all the Saints in Christ Jesus which
are at Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons; and the Lord Christ sending John
the Revelator to the seven Churches in Asia, Rev. 1.4.11. he directs all his
Matter to the Angels of those Churches, Rev. 2.8, 12, 18. Rev. 2.1, 7, 14. But
that Jeremiah Ives might persuade us to a belief in what he has done in
Swearing, is justifiable and lawful; and to persuade others also thereunto, he
has most grossly Adulterated that Scripture cited for his purpose; for says
he, page 11. line the first and second, To Adjure, is to exact an Oath, or to
require the party Adjured to Swear; so that he would make us believe, that Paul
Adjured some other Apostle that he wrote to, to Swear; and therefore he, as I
said before, gives us a wrong sense of the Scripture, for says the Text. 1
These. 5.27. I charge you: the Text says not, I charge thee, but you as
aforesaid; and it is evident that the Text says not, you Apostles, but you
Church, 1 These. 1.1. for then would Jer. Ives in p 11. l. 15. when he said,
That those that said the Apostle did evil in Swearing, would have said Apostles
in the plural number; so that from Jeremiah Ives his own showing, it was the
Priest, and not Christ Swear, when he Adjured, as well as it was the Apostle
Paul Swear when he Adjured the Church of the Thessalonians; If an Adjuration be
an Oath or Swearing, there is much after his Assertion in page 10. l. 28, 29.
etc. where he does cite Romans 9.1. in which says Jeremiah Ives, The Apostle
Swear by Christ; for says he a little before, in line 21. If calling God to
witness to what I say, be not Swearing, I confess (says he) I am ignorant
what Swearing is; and now this is Swearing by Christ, says he, when he called
not Christ, but his Conscience to Witness; and by his own showing, if the
Thing or Party called to Witness, be the Thing or Party Sworn by, then the
Apostle Swear by his Conscience, for so says the Text, Romans 9.1. I speak the
Truth, in Christ I lie not, my Conscience bears me Witness in the Holy
Ghost; so that this is more then ever the Law allowed, which this Text is
brought to prove; So that I may say to Jeremiah Ives, after the manner of the
Speech of the Prophet concerning Esau, Obadiah 6. How are the things of
Jeremiah Ives searched out? how are his hidden things sought out? And this I
would have Jeremiah Ives know, that we are sensible of that according to his
own saying, in page 11. line 18. that he that contrary to the Law of God, will
Swear, will also Lie.

But farther, I would earnestly desire that this be minded, that this Text, 1
These. 5.27. says, I charge you, etc. and this by Jeremiah Ives his own
showing, is equivolent with, I Adjure thee, Mat. 26.63. So that to charge by,
and in ones Name, and to Adjure by, or in ones Name, is all one, to which I
willingly assent; yet this Charging, is no more Swearing by that Party, then is
the said Constables, Charging or Adjuring in the Name, or by the Power of the
KING, Swearing by the King, as in page 11. And if it be Swearing by the King,
yet it is not the party submitting to the said Constables Command that swears
by the King, but the Constable, who in the Kings Name does so adjure or
command, as Jeremiah Ives himself has fully showed, as ye see evidently: But I
hope I have said enough in page 11, 12. to prove Adjuring, No Swearing.

But a second thing I have by way of Exception against the first Assertion,
That Christ swear; And that is this, which I would willingly have well minded.
Jeremiah Ives, both page 7. line 17 and 18. tells us, that it is in the
English; and in page 11. line 9, 10. in Beza's English Bible, it is (says he)
He charged him to swear: So that in plain English, Christ did not swear, for
his Answer was according to what his Command was to us, Matthew. 5.34. Swear not
at all, but let your Yea, be Yea, and your Nay, Nay; and so was his: for
without Swearing, he tells him in so many words, as Jeremiah Ives says, in
page 7. line 21. Thou have said, or, I am, which was no swearing.

I shall now go on in the work a little further, nothing doubting but in the
strength of the Lord, and in the Power of his Might, in Conclusion to overthrow
all Oppositions to the Honor and Glory of my Master, King JESUS.

And secondly, says he, This Text, Matthew. 5.34. cannot take away all Swearing
that was lawful under the Law, because these Commandments contained in
Ordinances were not taken away, till the death of the Testator, Ephesians. 2.15.
till he had nailed them to his Cross, Colossians, 2.19.

To which I answer, That the Lord Christ, on this side the Grave, (which was
before a pure Gospel Dispensation) was laying down Laws, Statutes and
Appointments, that were to be observed beyond the Grave, I mean after his
rising out of the Grave, and under a pure Gospel Dispensation: for that is a
pure Cospel-dispensation, 1 Cor. 15.1, 2, 3, etc. He was before his Death in
this, as in other things, making way for his Universal Commission, Matthew.
28.20. Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you: So
that his Commands were laid down before his Death, on this side the Grave; as
was Breaking of Bread in the Night he was Betrayed, Church-dealing, Matthew.
18.15. And thus, in several cases, he was ordering what should be observed in
his House, when it should become a Gospel-House; And this was no other but the
Pattern in the Mount: As for instance, Suppose a Master of a Family is to go a
great Journey, he tells his Servants beforehand what he would have them to
do in some cases, and gives his Servants a strict charge also how they should
demean and behave themselves in such and such businesses; and tells them
further, that he will send to them further directions, and that by a sure hand,
what they shall further do in order to the well-managing and ordering his
Affairs, requiring their care therein; telling them withal, that his Journey
is of weighty concernment, and that which will conduce both to his and their
future well-being; and so we will suppose him gone.

Just so it was with the Lord Christ, he gave out several Appointments, as
aforesaid, promising that they should hear from him with more Directions, for
so faith he himself, Joh. 16.12. I have yet many things to say unto you,
howbeit you cannot bear them now; but when the Spirit of Truth is come, he
shall guide you into all Truth; -- And he shall show you Things to come. And so
he tells them, Joh. 14.1, 2, etc. Let not your Hearts be troubled; ye believe
in God, believe also in me: in my Fathers House are many Mansions; I go to
prepare a place for you; And if I go to prepare a place for you, I will come to
you again, and will receive you to my self, that where I am there ye may be
also; And I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I go away; and if
I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you: But if I go away, I will
send him unto you, Joh. 6.7. And this we know that our Master, that certain
Nobleman, Luke 19.11. is gone into a far Country to receive for himself a
Kingdom, and to return; and at his return those his Servants that shook off his
YOKE, that would not that his Bonds should hold, those that turn their Backs
upon the MEETINGS of his PEOPLE, for fear of the Corporal Penalty of the breach
of Proclamation, run and hide themselves both from the Folds, and also from the
Sheep of Christ; and those Pastors that fed not his Sheep, his Lambs, his
tender Ones; and those Sheep and Lambs that refused to come to the
feeding-places, but either lay lazing and lurking at Home, or else were
straggling up and down in Woods and Thickets, and amongst Briary Brambles; and
those that Israel-like were ready to run back again to the Fleshpots, the
Garlic, the Onyons, and the flashy, watery, infectious Cucumbers and Melons of
Egypt; those that are willing to save their Lives here, though they lose them
to Eternity: for when he comes, he shall Separate the Sheep from the Goats;
and he shall say to them on his Right hand, Come ye Blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World, Matthew.
25.34. And then shall he bring that Woe pronounced against Careless Shepherds,
Ezekiel. 34.4. to which for brevities sake, I shall desire at your leisures to
refer you to make application according to this our Abominable Backsliding
Times: and though I have been upon a Digression, I hope it may be an Instrument
in Gods hand to lead us the nearest way home.

Neither do I judge it altogether unseasonable to thee Henry Den, nor Jeremiah
Ives and John Tombs, for I fear that he that will be so ready to break a
Command of Christ to Swear for Self-Interest, will be as ready to turn his back
upon the Sheep, as well as on the Shepherd.

And here I must say to thee Jeremiah Ives, as thou thy self say, page 11.
line 18. That he that will swear, will lie; the meaning of it, say thou, is,
That he that will swear wickedly, and contrary to Gods Law, will lie also.
Examine thine own heart, and set a watch before the door of thy lips; and
suffer not thy tongue to cause thy flesh to sin; but smite upon thy Thigh, and
say, What have I done? how am I taken in mine own snare? how am I paid with
mine own coin?

And because of this seasonable word, I shall resolve to be briefer in what I
have to say, as to Jeremiah Ives, being I have distinguished between Vows,
Oaths, etc. having answered Ephesians. 2.15. which is the most material Text to
give satisfaction; to the which, however, if so good an Answer could not have
been given, as is aforesaid, yet by Jeremiah Ives his own showing, it is now
made void since the death of the Testator: for, says he in page 7. line 28.
These Commandments contained in Ordinances, were not taken away till the death
of the Testator, Ephesians. 2.15. And, says he, THESE ORDINANCES that were contrary
to us, were not taken away, till Christ nailed them to his Cross, Col. 2.24.
So that Christ nailed them to his Cross above 1600. years agone; And ever
since, by Jeremiah Ives his own showing, they have been made void: for what he
nailed to his Cross, is blotted out; so that all his great ado that he makes
in his first six pages, and all that is multiplied afterward, is all to no
purpose: therefore I may say to thee, as I said to thy Brother Henry Den, That
God takes the Wise in their own craftiness; and shall let thee know, that by
plowing with Gods heifer, I have made a quick riddance of my work; and shall no
longer fight with him, seeing I have the victory: for if (by his own showing)
they are nailed to Christ's Cross; it is evident, that all that in reason can
be pleaded beyond this, cannot take upon us, unless he can find us an
appointment for the raking it out of his Grave again.

And now I shall in the strength of the Lord, and in the Power of his Might,
cry out and say, Good is yet the Word of the Lord, who said, Matthew. 5.34. Swear
not at all.

And now I shall come to thee Henry Den, for in page 6. thou also bring in
these two Texts, Matthew. 5. and Jam. 5. by way of objection, telling us that
thou have an Exception against the Translation, saying, that the Greek renders
the word, Not at all, wholly, or altogether; so that in the proper speech it
should be read, Swear not wholly, or altogether, let not your whole
Communication be interwoven with Oaths.

To which I answer, That the same sense that thou bring from the Greek may
as well speak the truth, as not at all; for to me it seems to be no more but
this, As if the Lord Christ should have said, It has been said to them of old
time, Thou shall not forswear thy self, etc. but I say unto you, Swear not at
all; (but to prevent the danger of Forswearing) I say unto you, Let your
Communication be wholly and altogether without Oaths. And what does your Greek
Translation wholly and altogether differ from the sense of our Translation?
Does it speak any thing more or less than what the Text says, Swear not at
all, or, Let your Communication be wholly and altogether without Oaths?

Something there is that is forbidden by the Lord Christ, when he says, Swear
not at all.

To which if it shall be answered, that he only forbad Swearing in common
communication, I shall to that say, That that kind of Swearing was never
lawful; And in his forbidding that which was never lawful, he shall reiterate
that which was always unlawful, and had nothing at all to say to it; when he
had nothing at all to say to it, when he had named it, seems to me to be an
Impertinency; and to say that he spoke Impertinencies, to me it seems
altogether Impertinent.

Here are two things spoken of, first, Forswearing: Secondly, Swearing in
Common Converse or Communication; and both being unlawful, we must rationally
conclude, that by the Lord Christ they are both forbidden: and if so, then let
us set our Reason on work, to consider seriously how these two unlawful things
are forbidden: he says not, thou shall not forswear thy self, as it was said
to them of old, to the one; and to the other, Swear not at all; if he had, then
Swearing might have been lawful now as well as of old: for, a forbidding to
Forswear, implies a lawfulness to swear; but if Swearing be not lawful, then
there is no room for a forbidding to forswear; Forswearing is then out of
doors, for no swearing, and therefore no possibility of forswearing.

Now I say, let us consider of these two unlawful things, Forswearing and
Swearing in Common Communication: And let us see how they are forbidden, and
then I hope there will appear some light in the case, that by the Assistance of
the Lords Light, thou Henry Den, and thy Brother Jeremiah, may see Light.

We usually say in our common Proverb, It is good killing two birds with one
stone: And the Lord Christ does the same thing in effect in this place: for he
forbids both these unlawful things (though different) in one breath, when he
says, Swear not at all: as if he should have said to both of them distinctly
thus, Swear not at all, as to common communication, because never lawful; And,
Swear not at all in other things, lest possibly you may in Swearing, forswear
your selves: But because the difference in the Translation is the main thing
upon which thou would turn the sense of the letter of this Scripture upon, I
shall once more, for a more perfect clearing up of the case, take thine own
terms in thine own translation, and read the sentence according to them; and
therein I hope there will appear so much contradiction of truth, as that thou will change thy ^^nd, and be ready to say, it is in vain to kick against the
pricks; it is an evil thing and a bitter to be found fighting against God, by
endeavoring to pervert the way of truth, to the turning the blind and ignorant
out of the way, to the bringing Gods Curse upon thine own head, Deuteronomy. 27.18.
Therefore in the fear of the Lord, and with mature deliberation and due
consideration, let us read the sentence in thine own words: Let your
Communication be wholly and altogether without Swearing; Either by the true
God, lest ye take the Name of God in vain; or by any other Oath, lest ye become
Idolaters in setting up something else to swear by, instead of the true God:
Therefore, swear not at all, neither by this, that, or any other Oath; but let
your Yea be Yea, and your Nay, Nay; for whatsoever is more than this, comes of
Evil, or from that Evil one.

And to the other thus, according to thy Greek rendering: Forbear Swearing
wholly, and altogether, lest possibly in Swearing, ye Forswear your selves: but
let your Yea, be Yea, and your Nay, Nay; for what is more than this comes of
Evil, or of, or from that Evil one.

Now let the Rational judge both of thy Translation and thy Application, and my
Answer.

In the next place I shall lay before thee thine own words, and shall desire
thee to be thine own Judge, in what thou have gone contrary to Truth in; And
seeing they are the things of God that we are upon, be persuaded to lay aside
thy Humane Learning, and thy great Scholarship: The which far be it from me to
condemn, either as unlawful, or unprofitable in their places; yet in this case
I would have them take no place at all, because it is the work of another: yea,
so says our Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.10, 11. For what man knows the things of a
man, but the spirit of a man that is in him. Even so (or just in the same
manner) the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God. And if it be
the Spirit of God only, then it is not Humane Learning: And if it be the Spirit
only that searches all things, yea, the deep things of God, then it is not
great Scholarship, nor strength of parts that does it.

And if thou find not such a fullness of the Spirit, as to search out the
depth of the deep things of God; then consider with thy self, what has been
hitherto omitted by thy self, and what by thy Brother Jeremiah Ives, and has
been publicly Disputed against, as to be of, and from the Devil, and that
which has been slighted; undervalued, and Disputed against, and by some of
those that are now the chiefest and the greatest sticklers, persuading persons
to Swear, both in Print, and by Verbal persuasions; I say, Consider of things
seriously, in the Fear of the Lord, and the Lord make both Thee and Them wise.

In page the sixth, Thou crave^^ our Patience, whilst thou examinest the
Grounds that we who cannot Swear at all, do bottom upon; till thou weighest
them in the Balance of the Sanctuary; And all the Balance that we find thee
weighing them in, is the Translation, the which I have hitherto found, as to
thy purpose, too light; yet true as to the sense of the Letter of the
Scripture, as is aforesaid showed, saying, Swear not at all, or let your
Communication be wholly or altogether without Oaths.

And now I shall proceed farther by the assistance of that Spirit, which
through mercy I received, by the Laying on of the Hands of the Presbitery; Yea,
I say again, not by Humane Learning, for I have it not, nor by mine own Wisdom,
which is but foolishness, but by the assistance of that Spirit, which through
Mercy I received by the Laying on of the Hands of the Presbitery; I shall take
a farther view of thy account that thou give us of thy work, after thy
weighing, and how thou do apply it, and how much it does amount to, that so
thou may have a due reward; for the Labourer is worthy of his hire.

Thou have told us, that the Greek renders, not at all, to be wholly, or
altogether (as aforesaid) And now the Application thou make of thy
Translation, is this;

That in the proper sense it should be read, Swear not wholly or altogether,
let not your Communication be interwoven with Oaths.

So that thy Speech implies no less than this (to wit) That Gospel Disciples in
their Communication, by the allowance of Christ, may Swear, nay, must Swear,
for that thou bring it to prove, as will be evident anon, though that
Communication must not be overballanced with Oaths, so as that the greatest
part of our Communication be Oaths; for thy terms wholly and altogether, does
admit of some Swearing, and that thou do no less then say thy self; for
these terms, wholly and altogether thou bring in opposition to Christ words,
Swear not at all, to prove the lawfulness of some Swearing; so that thou
say, our Communication should not be interwoven with Oaths, as much as if
thou should say, every other word, or every other sentence, should not be an
Oath; yet thy speech is as good as if in so many words, thou should say,
that the verity of every three or four sentences, must be confirmed with an
Oath; or at the least, some Oaths must be used by the appointment of Christ,
for the Confirmation of our Communication; by which Translation of thine, thou
would persuade Gospel Disciples, to be of another conversation than Christ
requires they should; for Christ says, Swear not all, or let your
Communication be wholly and altogether without Oaths; thou say, talk what
you will, but Swear not over much, yet be sure you Swear in your Communication,
yet let not your Communication be wholly nor altogether interwoven with Oaths.

And now must I say to thee Comparatively, as once the Lord spoke to Adam in
the Garden, Genesis 3.9. and say, Henry Den, where art thou? art thou in and
amongst the Briery Bushes of Humane Learning, whilst thou should be in the
Garden of God, disclosing the things of God, by the assistance of the Spirit of
God? Art thou covering thy self with the Fig Leaves of thine own Wit, when thou
should have been clothed upon, with that clothing that is from Above? Art
thou thus Goliah-like, fighting in thine own strength, when the Lord Christ
says, That without Him thou can do nothing, John 15.9. therefore know, that
it is hard to be found fighting against God, Acts 5.39. What is the cause thou
art found asserting things thou know not how to prove, for in page the
third, thou tellest us, that to prevent the impendent evil consequences
necessarily following, of those that cannot Swear at all, thou shall labor to
prove the lawfulness of an Oath, in a Serious and Weighty Matter, which cannot
otherwise be determined; and yet in conclusion, this Mountainous pretense of a
Serious and Weighty Matter, that cannot otherwise be determined, is nothing
else but a mere nothing of frivolous Communication.

Thy pretense was, to prove that Swearing that was Lawful under the Law, to be
Lawful under the Gospel, in opposition to those sayings of CHRIST, Mat. 5.34.
Swear not at all; And this thou have endeavored to do, by bringing in an
Exception to the Translation, and that under a pretense, that thou had the
Balance of the Sanctuary to try it by; but thou and thy Balance being all
weighed in the true Balance, thou (as to what thou would prove) art found
too light; but thy translation, to wit, wholly and altogether, is found full
weight, and such as in reason agrees with the Lip of Truth, which says, Swear
not at all: In opposition to whose words, in p. 6. and in p. 7. thou bring
several Scriptures to prove the truth of the Translation, as 1 Cor. 5.1. and 1
Cor. 6.7. and 1 Cor. 15.29. the which is a good evidence for what I say, seeing
the Translation speaks so much Truth, and does so well agree with the Word of
Truth.

So that instead of proving that SWEARING to be Lawful under the GOSPEL, that
was allowed under the Law, thou in so many words endeavourest to prove that
that Swearing is Lawful, under the Gospel, that was never Lawful under the LAW;
for it was never lawful to Swear in Communication, yet when thou have proved
what thou can prove, it is nothing else but Swearing in Communication; so
that that Scripture, Job 28.2. may be fitly applied to Thee, for who art thou
that darknest Counsel by words without knowledge? yea the counsel of that HOLY
CHILD JESUS, upon whose shoulders the Government of the Gospel Church is, who
is that same that is Born unto us, Isa 9.6. and is called Wonderful
Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; who
as a Son over his own House, Heb. 3.6. has given this Word of Counsel, Mat.
5.34. Swear not at all, but let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay; I say,
notwithstanding this word of Counsel, what he would not have us to do, and what
he would have us to do; that is, that we should be of a singular Conversation,
walking in the Integrity of our Souls, as in the presence of the all-seeing
God, the Searcher of all Hearts; So as that we show forth his Praise, and shine
as Lights in the World, adorning the Gospel of Christ, by an Honest, Peaceable,
Innocent, Quiet, Harmless, True and Spotless Conversation, both in Words and
Actions; for our Conversation as to men, is nothing else but our Conversings
with the Sons and Daughters of men, and that is by Words and Actions; and as he
requires our Actions should be Innocent and Harmless, True and without Fraud;
So also our Tongues that they speak Truth, without either Swearing or
Forswearing, truly and without guile: A part of which Counsel thou endeavourest
to darken, by thy deep Learning.

The which, that thou may the better effect, thou tellest us, that thou have
one thing more to add to help thee, which is, That it is concluded by the
Ancients, that the Gospel of Matthew, was written in the Hebrew Tongue, as
Hierom, more then Ten Times, and Eusebius says the same, that he wrote his
Gospel in his own Country Language, and he cites the same out of Papia, Saint
John's Auditor, and out of Irenias, who was the Scholar of Policarpus, who was
the Scholar of Saint John, and the rest of the Apostles; also telling to us,
that thou have many other Witnesses; saying, that thou have consulted the
Hebrew Copy, which thou have received from the hands of Sebastian Munster,
which he rescued out of the Hands of the JEWS: I could wish thou would stick
to something, that so I might know where to find thee: first, thou tellest us
that the Greek is the true Translation, and anon the Hebrew; one time this is
an Oath, and anon that which was an Oath, is now something equivolent to an
Oath; now thou will show us this, then that is the way, now thou art up, then
thou art down; and thus when thou have pleaded for the Greek, then thou tellest
us, that the Hebrew renders it, Swear not in every way, and that is the Truth.

I Answer, If it were found in the Greek, then not in the Hebrew, if in the
Hebrew, then not in the Greek; and upon this account thou tellest us, that our
first Pillar stands upon a doubtful, nay, upon an unwarrantable Interpretation.

But Henry Den, I shall follow Thee and Thy Confusion, and question not but in
conclusion, by the assistance of that Spirit, that produced a Glorious Fabric,
out of that first confused Lump, Genesis 1. to make Truth so appear in the behalf
of him, who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, as that God shall have his
Glory, and misled Souls the benefit, even to thy smiting upon the Thigh, and
saying, What have I done?

Thou say, the Hebrew renders the saying of the Lord Christ, Mat. 5.34.
Swear not in every way; though our Translation says, Swear not at all; as if
there were much contradiction in the terms, and that the sense were something
else then what the Letter of the Scripture holds forth; the Letter of the
Scripture, says, Swear not at all, and thy Translation says, Swear not in
every way, as if he had said, in every way avoid Swearing, and what difference
that is, that is material, between Swear not at all, and in every way avoid
Swearing; for mine own part, I must leave to the consideration of wiser Heads
than mine to distinguish; And if the Lord Christ had said, It has been said to
them of old time, Thou shall not Forswear thy self; but I say unto you, In
every way avoid Swearing; whether it had not been as good a Warrant for us to
avoid Oaths, as when he said, Swear not at all? I shall leave the Rational to
judge; And what Reason H. Den had to make so much ado about the Greek and
Hebrew Translation, I know not, unless it were to let the World know, that he
is a Greek and an Hebrew Scholar: And therefore, according to the common course
of the World, you must believe it, because a deep Learned Scholar, one that is
well read in the Original Tongues, said it; If this be thy end Henry Den, why
thou have manifested thy Schollar-ship, and to so little purpose, I must tell
thee, that I find that in this case, that Prophecy of Isaiah repeated by our
Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.19. is made good, where the Lord says, I will destroy the
Wisdom of the Wise, and bring to naught the understanding of the Prudent; and
as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses; so thou resisting the Truth, shall
proceed no farther, but shall be manifested,

And whereas in page 7. and 8. as to our second ground drawn from, Jam. 5.12.
thou tellest us, that thou will appeal to the Judgment of any Rational man,
skilful or unskilful in the Languages, whether this has the sound of the true
interpretation or not, Above all things my Brethren, Swear not; for say thou
in page 8. Is it worse to Swear, the^ to commit Adultery, to kill the King, our
Political Father, or our Father or Mother?

From whence some do Infer, that those that are now Imprisoned (being
scandalously Printed to Public view as Traitors) who cannot Swear at all, are
such as are Guilty of the late Kings Blood, and most abominable in other
actings also; and this seemingly Charged upon them by thy self, as if thou
did know some of them guilty of such things: But I hope, the all-seeing God,
the searcher of all Hearts, in his own due time will clear our Innocence, as to
what is gathered from thy Expressions, and otherwise also in Print Published;
And in the mean time, I must let thee know, that it had been good for thee to
have washed thine own hands in innocence, and that thou had taken a review of
thy Burford Actings, in order thereunto, before thou hadest so charged others;
yet if thou or any one else can justly charge us for those, or any other
Misdemeanors; I shall for mine own part crave no other favor at Thine or
Their Hands, but that They or Thou, see Condign Punishments be speedily
executed.

In the mean time, I shall by Divine Assistance, consider of an Answer to what
thou have to say to Jam. 5 12. as to the Translation, for thou tellest us, that
thou have something against this Translation also; and thus thou art running in
Romes Road, for it is and has been the practice of her Jesuitical Priests, and
of the Priesthood of her Daughter, to tell the L^^ity, as they call us, that we
are Ignorant of the Original, and yet Rome her self in this, is honester than
thy self; for as to Mat. 5.34. the Rhemist Testament renders it, But I say unto
you, not to Swear at all; upon which Text in their Annotations, they say thus;

The Anabaptists here, not following the Churches Judgment, but the bare Letter
(as other Heretics in other Cases) hold that there is a^ Oath lawful, no not
before a Judge, whereas Christ speaks against, ra^h and usual Swearing in
common talk, when there is no cause.

Whence I would briefly note these four things, First, That the Rhem^st
Translation, as to Mat. 5.34. is the same with ours, and that they quarrel not
with the Translation, to make us believe that something else is meant by the
Original.

And secondly, That it is evident, that in the Primitive times, it was the
Principle and Judgment of the Anabaptists, as they call us, from this Text, to
judge and hold all Oaths utterly unlawful in all Cases: So that it is evident,
by their showing, whose Translation (as they say) was never adulterated: I say
it is evident by their showing, that as to Oaths, we follow the Flock of God
gone before; and not only in this, but also from Matt. 5.39. That it was the
Principle of this sort of People, not to resist the Turk, because the Text
said, But I say unto you, Resist not evil.

And thirdly, That they in their Marginal Annotations, can plead no good
Warrant from Scripture, to disprove or confute our Opinion herein; but only the
Judgment of the Church; and how corrupt she is in her Judgment, being the
Mother of Harlots and all Abominations, I shall leave those that sprang from
her to judge: And if she were not corrupt, why should we be Imprisoned for
refusing to Swear against her, when it was never our Judgments to Swear at all.

And Fourthly, I would here have all to take notice, That the Judgment of the
Baptists, or Anabaptists as they are abusively called, are not of such a late
beginning and rise, as the Church of England would persuade men they are; for
this that I cite out of the Margent of the Rhemist Testament, was in being a
long time before the Church of England knew her self, even whilst she was in
the Arms, and sucking the Breasts of her Adulterous Mother, that SCARLET WHORE.

Thus we see thou find fault with us, and condemnest our Translation, when
ROMES Priesthood will not do it; yet this is Common with Book-learned men,
generally in all Ages, that when persons are either desirous to Regulate
according to the Scriptures, as to there Principles, in Doctrine or Discipline;
then they are branded with ignorance of the Original; and although the Original
differ not in the sense in the least, as in thy Exceptions to James 5.12. Thou
say the Greek Renders it, Before all things; where our Translation renders
it, Above all things Swear not: And here thou make much ado, as if there were
such a vast difference between the two Words, ABOVE, and BEFORE, as that it
were a thing impossible to think, that they could be reconciled, so as to speak
to one and the same sense. And to this purpose thou tellest us who are thy
Authors, as the Vulgar, Erasmus, and Beza, in the Latin Translations, who do
all agree to translate it, ANTE OMNIA; together with comparing of other
Scriptures, where the same Phrase is used, as Romans 16.7. Who were in Christ
before me.

To the sense of which Scripture, I shall say something hereafter, and let thee
know, that herein thou dealest unfaithfully with us; And were it so, that we
were not assisted from above, to discover thy nakedness herein, thy nakedness
might become our Blindness; and so we might go multitudes of us halting out of
Gods way into the bypath of Error. But to answer thee in plainness of speech,
I must let thee know, that as to all that thou bring in thy former
Exceptions, so likewise to this, that it is to very little purpose, and is
insufficient to make our Translation any other Sense than what it is: So that
if I make thy Translation speak the Language of our Scripture, without wronging
it; then it is all one with the Scripure; and then thou have nothing against
our Scripture, to weaken our Pillar, or to make void that Law, neither of the
Lord Christ, nor his faithful Servant James, who said, Swear not, and Swear not
at all.

Thou tellest us, that the Greek renders it as does the Latin, Before all
things: And that I may make such a Distinction, that may be satisfactory to the
meanest Capacity, I shall let thee know, that both these Words, have each of
them several Acceptations in Scripture, and both of them to one and the same
Senses, and both one in the Text; as, First, the Word BEFORE, it is used in a
threefold Sense: And to bring all these Senses for one and the same end,
because they are spoken in one and the same words, will prove Senseless, as
thou do Romans 16.7. to prove thy Translation, as I shall show: Therefore know;
that, 1. Before, is used with respect to Time. 2. Before, is used with respect
to Place. 3. Before, is used with respect to Estimation or Superiority.


As, 1. Before is used with respect to Time.
Romans 16.7. Salute Andronicus and Junia, my Kinsmen, and my fellow Prisoners,
who are of note among the Apostles, who were in Christ first, or before me.

1 Timothy 1.13. Who was before a Blasphemer, and a Persecutor, and Injurious,
etc. Gal. 5.21.

Jude 4. For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of old
Ordained to this Condemnation.

2. Before is used with respect to Place.
Revel. 14.3. And they sang as it were a new song before the Throne, and before
the Lamb.

Revel. 7.15. Therefore are they before the Throne of God.

Acts 5.27. And when they had brought them, they set them before the Council.

3. With respect to Estimation or Superiority; which is the sense spoken of in
the Text, James 5.12. Above, or Before all things my Brethren, Swear not, etc.
John 1.15. He that comes after me, is preferred before me.

John 1.17. He it is who coming after me, is preferred before me, whose shoe
latchets I am not worthy to unloose.

Exodus 20.3. Thou shall have none other Gods before me.

And Secondly, the word ABOVE, has a fourfold Acceptance; As, 1. Above, with
respect to Time. 2. Above, with respect to Quantity. 3. Above, with respect to
Place. 4. Above, with respect to Estimation or Superiority.


1. Above, with respect to Time.
2 Cor. 12.2. I knew a man above fourteen years ago, whether in the Body I
cannot tell, etc.

Acts 4.22. And the man was above forty years old, on whom the Miracle of
Healing was showed.

Romans 15.6. Afterward he was seen of above 500. Brethren at once.

2. Above with respect to Quantity.
2 Cor. 12.7. Lest I should be exalted above, ( or beyond) measure.

2 Cor. 11.23. -- In stripes above ( or beyond) measure.

2 Cor. 1.8. -- Pressed out of measure above strength.

3. Above, with respect to Place.
James 1.17. Every good and perfect gift is from above, and comes down from
the Father of Lights.

James 3.15. This Wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly devilish,
sensual.

Col. 3.1. If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things that are above, where
Christ sits at the right hand of the Father.

4. Above, with respect to Estimation or Superiority.
And this is the sense that is spoken of in our Text of James 5.12. And
therefore I shall desire that it be well minded, because it is that which will
clear the Text from all doubts, and answer thy Objection, and make thy
Translation speak our Scripture Language: for Above and Before being taken in
the same sense, with respect to Estimation, is one and the same: And where it
is read above, it may as well be read before; and where it is read before, it
may as well be read above. As for Example,

John 1.15. He that comes after me is preferred before me, or, he shall be
esteemed above me.

Exodus 20.3. Thou shall have none other gods before me, o^ ^^at thou shall
esteem above me, or set over me as my superior, to have him in estimation
above me: Therefore I shall read these two Scriptures in both terms, the which
will produce but one sense; and then the Exception to the Translation will
prove as light, as those that were brought to Matthew. 5.34. Swear not wholly,
altogether, or not at all.

1 Pet. 4.8. Above (or before) all things, have fervent Charity.

2 Thessalonians. 2.4. Who opposes himself above (or before) all that is called of God.

3 John 2. I wish above (or before) all things.

Phil. 2.9. God has highly exalted him, and has given him a Name above (or
before) every name.

Prove. 31.10. Her praise is far above (or before) Rubies. And in our Text the
sense stands good.

James 5.12. Above (or before) all thing, my Brethren, swear not. So that the
sense that thou bring to find fault with our Text, is that which speaks
the very language of our Text, nothing differing from it in the least. And
whereas thou tellest us, that thou do the rather believe this Translation
before all, to be true, is, because thou have compared it with other Texts,
where the same phrase is used, as Romans 16.7. Which were in Christ before me.
And Col. 1.17. He is before all things: The which can neither of them be fitly
applied to our Text, James 5. for these Texts do both refer to Time, and not to
Estimation.

But a little to show thee thy folly herein. Suppose Henry Den, Jer. Ives, and
Henry Adis, take a Journey from London to York; and Henry Den and Jeremiah Ives
come into York before Henry Adis; sure I am Henry Den will come behind (as to
his end) if he shall think to make any rational man believe, that if Henry Adis
does prefer Jesus Christ above or before John the Baptist, that these two
befores can be brought to one and the same; for then we must read the former
supposal thus: Henry Den and Jeremiah Ives came into York above Henry Adis; the
which to say is mere nonsense: And yet this is nothing less then what Henry Den
in effect does assert; for Henry Den brings a Before which respects Time,
to disprove our Above, which respects not Time but Estimation; but Henry Den
may plainly see, that if he had brought a Before, which respects Estimation,
he would then have read our Text, Jam. 5.12. as does the Rhemist TESTAMENT,
which reads thus, Before all things my Brethren, Swear not; which is Henry
Den's own Language, without any contradiction in the least: And what need then
all this ado about the Translation, as if the Translation did so much alter the
sense of the Text, as if it should or did alter the thing in ended, which the
Spirit of God lays down as a Prohibition, Swear not, so as to be a possitive
command, ye shall Swear, for that is the thing Henry Den intended to beget us
to a belief of; for he quarrelleth with the Translation, for no other end, but
to prove some Swearing in Communication Lawful, but not so much as to have our
Communication interwoven with Oaths, as in page 6. line 26. is evident, which
is to prove that Lawful under the Gospel, which was never lawful under the Law.

So that Henry Den, I see any thing will serve turn to patch up thy Opinion,
bare Terms, or words without distinctions, the which when men use to darken the
Counsel of God, they run into Confusion as thou do, who by thy Scholarship
would make us believe that some Swearing is lawful under the Gospel; but I
plainly see the good Word of the Lord made good, which says, he takes the
Wise in his own Craftiness; and thus the Counsel of the Froward is carried
headlong, they walk in darkness in the day time, and grope at none-day, as in
the night, Job 5.13.14. The Wisdom of the (Humane Learned) Wise, is brought to
nothing, and the understanding of the Prudent men, is become folly; for God
has chosen the Foolish, the Weak base things, and things that are not, to
bring to naught the things that are: and his end in all this, is, that no
Fleshly, Carnal, Humane Learned Persons, should Glory in his Presence, that so
his Son, and his Spirit alone may be exalted, being manifest in the weakness of
his People.

And whereas thou tellest us in thy last page, That all these things
considered, the Ground appears not so sure, as it was Fancied.

To which I Answer, That the Ground yet, through Mercy, stands firm, and
those Objections, the Pillars thou speak of, in page. 3. the which in page
6. thou namest to be Mat. 5.34. and James 5.12. are yet as firm as ever, and
are as so many STANDING MONVMENTS in the house ^f God, which is the Church of
the Living God, that Ground and Pillar of Truth; notwithstanding thy Artificial
Workman-ship, with thy Greek and Hebrew Translations, togegether with the help
of thy Brother Jeremiah Ives, who followed thee, and much mended thy work too,
yet all in vain, for he was but a Learner at the work; and although he formerly
had bidden Defiance to the Faces of GENERALS, COLONELS and COMMANDERS in open
Field, in the behalf of his late Masters, probably to the gaining of that,
which now to keep, he durst not withstand the assaults of a single MAJOR, and
his small company; and thus betraying his trust in that work, in which he was a
Master Builder, he very then began this Trade of Undermining, when he followed
Thee, the which although he was so forward to undertake, yet he had needed,
both He and Thy self too, to have gone to the University again, to have studied
to distinguish between things that differ; for taking a Vow, a Testimony, an
Asseveration, and an Adjuration for an Oath, you run Babel-Builders-like, into
a Confusion, and so may pull an old house on your heads in conclusion,
Samson-like, Judge. 16. probably to the wounding and slaying thousands.

As for Sophistical, Syllogistical Science, that your forerunner, the Captain
of your Work, John Tombs, as blind as your selves in distinguishing, has been
hewing these Pillars withal, yet the Foundation is not moved, for it was
Emanuel that God-mans work, to raise them, and he must be more then a man that
can pull them down.

And whereas thou tellest us, that the ground is not so sure as it was fancied.

I Answer, That in pretending to sh^ke the Foundations, thou have had many
Fancies, for that thou have done, is mere Fancy, and that which never grew in
Truths Garden, the Holy Scrip^ures, but was fetched out of the muddy Channels
of Humane Learning; and whereas thou tellest us, that if the Quaker says, the
Light within forbideth him to Swear, the consent of Nations, thou say,
confuteth him: Having already to thy Consent of Nations, said so much as I
have, I shall leave that QUAKER, that I heard is answering thy Letter, to
answer for himself, and his Light within, and shall only answer for my self,
and in the behalf of those that plead Scripture for their Warrant, which thou
say is so weak; and shall let thee know, that ordinary Grammar Schoolboys
can tell us, that as there is weak and weaker, so there is also weakest of all;
even so there are three that have born Testimony against this Truth, John
Tombs, Jeremiah Ives, and HENRY DEN, and therefore I must continue my Speech to
thee, and in thine own following words shall say, Beware you that have so done,
lest ye hear, who has required these things at your hands? they are thine own
words, make the best use of them thou can; it is a good caution, Physician,
cure thy self.

And I shall farther say, as thou say, That Christ forbideth all those
Exorbitant and Ex^ravagant Oaths, whereof now the Streets and Houses are full;
a sad presage of some Judgment at hand; it was hoped by some that the Kings
Proclamation, would h^ve restrained such Debauchery; but alas it is not so! but
had the Fiery Zealous Mayor of London, and his Officers, with the Justices of
Pe^ce, of the City and Liberty of Westmnister, and the Out-Parishes, with them
of the several Shires and Counties, been but half as careful to have put the
Penalty of that Proclamation into Execution, and have followed it to the
height, as they have done the Observation of that Proclamation, for shutting up
the Peaceable, Innocent, Harmless Meetings of us, the Despised Abused
Baptists; and in their so Eager and Inhumane Committing us to Prison, even to
the Ruin of our Families, unless we who are in the Gate House Prison, be
willing to pay Traitors Fees; I say, If the Mayor and Justices as aforesaid,
had been but as Zealous for Gods Glory, the Goo^ of the King and Kingdom, the
Peace and Tranquillity of his People, the Benefit of Sinking Souls, the
Restraining of Rude, Ranting Revilers, to the Conversion of them, and the many
Lewd and Lascivious Lazy Persons, Harbored and Fostered up in that Multitude
of Dammy and Debauched Bawdy houses, in and about the Cities of London and
Westminster, and else where, they would then have filled the Prisons fuller
^hen they be, and upon a far better account than now they are; in which they
would have proved themselves far better Friends to their King and Country, to
the lasting fame of themselves and their Posterity, to the nourishment of that
and those, that are an Honor, a Blessing, and a Safety to a Nation, People or
Kingdom, to the Discountenancing of that which is, has been, and will be the
downfall of the greatest in Nations; and the consequence of this thing, I do
bewail as well as thou; and thus far I can go hand in hand with thee, and can
further upon this account cry out with thee, and say, What times do we behold!
nothing but extremes are presented to our Eyes and Ears, some do little else
but Swear, whilst thou (with the rest of thy Compliers with the Times) look
upon Persons truly Conscientious of an Oath, to be Vicious; and whilst they in
their obedience to Christ, dare not Swear at all, thou think them evil
Doers, because they do not Swear enough, ranking them with, and esteeming them
equal to such as are Adulterers, Killers of their King and their own Parents,
as in thy 8th page, and 4. first lines; and would persuade them to Swear in
their Communication, as is proved by thine own words.

And although thou complainest in the last four or five lines of thy last page,
That some fill their Mouths with Direful Execrations, upon every triffle,
whilst others will not yield to Swear, when weighty matters vehemently urge
them; And so thou endest as thou begannest; for as here, so in page 3. line 5.
Thou tellest us, That thou will Labor to prove to us the Lawfulness of an
Oath, in a Serious and Weighty Matter, which cannot otherwise be determined;
when thou in all thy Book have not laid us down one President, by which we can
in the least come to any knowledge, in what Serious or Weighty Matters Oaths
may or may not be lawful or unlawful: But all that thou have done with thy
Scholarship, is but to puzzle Persons with thy Translations, finding fault with
ours, that so, as other Humane Learned men of our Age, thou, if possible,
might persuade men to hang their Ears at your Lips, or else no real Truth is
to be attained; and although thou in some part of thy Book, find much fault
with Common Debauched Swearing in Communication; yet in the Conclusion, thou
have proved nothing else to be Lawful, but such Swearing; for all that thou
have done in all this thy Discourse, is chiefly and alone to persuade us to a
Belief, that when Christ said, Swear not at all, he commanded us to Swear in
our Communication, for all that flourish, that thou make with those
Scriptures, 1 Cor. 5.1. in page 6. and 1 Cor. 6.7. and 1 Cor. 15.29. in page 7.

To which I have said nothing particularly, because they are brought only and
alone to prove the Truth of thy Translation, and thy Translation was brought to
prove the Lawfulness of some Swearing, and that some Swearing thou restrainest
in thy Discourse, only and alone to a Lawfulness of Swearing in
Communication, as in page 6. line 20. of thy Letter, is evident; and thus in
pretending to prove some Swearing to be Lawful under the Gospel, that was
Lawful under the Law, as much as in thee lies, thou have proved that that
Swearing is Lawful under the Gospel, that never was Lawful under the Law. And
yet thou in page 7. line 35. tellest us in so many words, that our Savior did
only endeavor to put a stop to common and frequent, light and trivial
Swearing; And therefore I shall bring thine own words to evidence against thy
self, which are these, page 6. line 33. And say thou, It appears to be the
aim of our Savior, not to forbid Solemn Oaths before the Magistrate, between
man and man, upon Grave, Mature Deliberation, etc.

And yet thou bring us not one President for that appearance, though thou
say it does appear, for it appears not in the least, but by thy so saying
it does appear; and till it does appear by thy better stability, that thou have
an Infallible Spirit, and such an Establishing Spirit, as shall make thee
appear to be an Assertor of Yea and Amen; and not of such Yeas and Nays as thou
have done; and instead of believing thy pretended Appearances, I shall desire
thee to consider with thy self seriously, that if thou had appeared with
these thy Yeas and Nays before Festus, as Paul did, whether he might not upon a
far better account have said to thee, than he did to Paul, Acts 26.24. Thou art
besides thy self Henry Den, too much Learning has made thee mad?

And now, Henry Den, seeing thou with thy Greek and Hebrew Translations, have
proved as good as nothing; nay, I do affirm thou had better have said nothing
at all, unless thou had proved more than what thou have proved; Therefore now
be persuaded to call to thy assistance, thy Brother Jeremiah Ives, John Tombs,
and Theophilus Brabourn; and for thy better Illumination herein, implore the
help of those two Seed-plots of Learning and True Religion, the two Eyes of this
Land (as some call them) OXFORD and CAMBRIDG, with the Pupils and Tutors,
Fellows and Masters, with all that are in them, and all that proceed from them,
whether they be Lawyers, Musicians, Physicians, or Divines, so called, whether
Batchelors or Masters of Arts, Doctors, Deans, or Chapters, Deacons,
Archdeacons, or Prebands, Bishops, or Archbishops, and lay before them thy
Greek Translation, Swear not wholly or altogether, and thy Hebrew Translation,
Swear not in every way; and Cooperate or work together, and see what work you
will all make of it, when you shall bring, Swear not wholly or altogether, or
Swear not in every way, to a Serious and Weighty Matter. As suppose Henry Den
lend Theophilus Brabourn a 100. pound, for which he gives him a Bond, and John
Do and Jeremiah Ives, Richard Roe and Henry Adis, be Witnesses to that Bond,
the which we will suppose is put in Suit, and the Case being before the JUDGE,
and the Declaration and the Plea being both read, and the Jurors Sworn,
according to Henry Dens Translations, to give in their Verdict, neither wholly,
altogether, nor in every way, according to the Evidence; And though John Do
and Jeremiah Ives can and will Swear, and suppose their hands be upon the Book,
neither John Do nor Jeremiah Ives, can Swear an Oath, according to what they
pretend; for they must not Swear by the Lord, as it was under the Law (neither
do I believe did Jeremiah Ives so Swear) when before that double Officious
Mayor, by virtue of whose Jehu- like Zeal, to make the King amends for his
Abingtons hasty Mornings Work, and that Tender Respect he showed to the late
KING his FATHER at Holmby House.

I say, That when Jeremiah Ives was frightened into a persuasion to Swear
neither John Do nor Jeremiah Ives must Swear before the supposed Judge, no
otherwise but as Jeremiah Ives Swear before that Officious and double-diligent
Officer, as aforesaid, not by the Lord, but by the Contents of that Book, yea;
even by what was Contained in that Book; For this is the Form of the Oath, You
shall Swear by the Contents of this Book, to speak the Truth, the whole Truth,
and nothing but the Truth, so help you God.

Now I querie (although I think I need not) because he that persuaded him to go
out of Gods way to Swear, could as easily persuade him to go out of Gods Way to
Swear by that which is no God; yet I shall querie whether Jeremiah Ives did so
much as open the Book, to see whether it was a Divine Service Book (as they
call it) or a Bible, as it is usually bound with the Old and New Testament, and
the Apocrypha, with or without the Service Book as aforesaid, or the Singing
Psalms, Compiled by Thomas Sternhold, John Hopkins, William Wade, and others,
who were said to be Musical Servants to Queen Elizabeth; I say, whether all,
some part, or which part of all these Jeremiah Ives Swore by? and whether
Jeremiah Ives did consider what a strong Oath he took, and by how many Gods he
Swore? And for brevity sake, we will omit the Common Prayer, and begin at
Genesis, and consider that there is a Serpent and his Words, several false
Heathenish Gods, as Dagon, Molech, Baal, Ashtrosh, Chemoth, Rimmon, Diana of
the Ephesians, with several Great and Mighty Men, as the Children of Anack,
Goliath, Jepthah, Sampson; with many Giants, and several Kings, Good and Bad, as
Sihon, Og, Agag, Saul, Agrippa, Herod, Pharaoh, etc. the Multitude of whose
Armies and Fighting-men are innumerable, with the several sorts of Birds,
Beasts, Fish and Fowl, with many more things of several kinds; with Herbs,
Flowers, Plants and Trees, both Men and Women, good and bad, with several
Stones, both Precious and Common, which are contained in the Old and New
Testament, as they are occasionally Discussed of, by the Great Jehovah, his
Holy Prophets, the Lord Christ and his Apostles, for the Holy Scriptures are
laid down to us, Prophetically, Prometically, Typically, Allegorically,
Historically, Parrabolically, as well as by Precept or Command; in all which
Cases, all things aforesaid must be named, and yet all Lawful, Godly, and of
Christian use, and such as are well pleasing to God, and many of them uttered
by the Lord Christ himself; as for Example, one had bought a piece of Land, and
another a Yoke of Oxen, and another had Married a Wife, and therefore they
could not come to the Supper spoken of; to what end these are spoken, the
Rational may Judge, that they were of Singular and Holy use; But to Swear by
that Land, that Yoke of Oxen, or that Wife, or that Supper, is as Profane, and
as much forbidden, as to Swear by Heaven, or Earth, or Jerusalem, because it is
of some other thing; And he that Swears by the Contents of the Bible, Swears by
what ever is contained in that Book, and must Swear by all things therein, bad
as well as good, as well by the meanest things, as by the holy Commands.

But to our Supposal as aforesaid, the Bond being before the Judge, the Jurors
are Sworn according to Henry Den his Translations, neither Wholly, Altogether,
nor in every way; and John Do, and Jer. Ives, their hands upon the Book, are
Sworn, neither Wholly, Altogether, nor (to speak the truth) in every way; by
what means does Henry Den suppose by his Translation to have his 100 l. when
neither Judge (for him we must suppose also to be thus lamely Sworn) I say, by
what means can Henry Den suppose to have his 100 l. by such a Judge, Jurors,
and Witnesses, who are thus Sworn to Halves, neither Wholly, Altogether, nor
every way? But if Richard Roe and Henry Adis, whose yea is yea, and their nay
nay, shall in the presence of the great Jehovah, according to Henry Den his
Translation, and according to the Sense of our Text, Mat. 5.34. without
Swearing at all, wholly and altogether, and in every way, speak the Truth, the
whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth in every Circumstance, both of time,
place, and person, when, where, who, and what; So that by such a Judge, Jurors,
and Evidence, Henry Den may expect his 100 l. from Theoplilus Brabourn.

And here it would be well minded by the People of God, that they consider what
they that have Sworn, have Sworn By in so Swearing; and that they lay all
carnal reasonings aside, and not withstanding the Kings Proclamation, that they
speedily Repair to their Respective Meetings, with all the Members that they
possibly can get together, that so they may make a great Outcry to the Lord, in
the behalf of the King and his People, that so God may pass by and wink at
these OATHS of Ignorance, and for the time ^o come, that it may be so much
taken notice of, as that it be never acted in by any, as a Sin of Wilfulness,
neither by him that shall Administer it, nor by them to whom it shall be
Adminstred: And if any men shall oppose you in your so doing, let them know,
that you are going to pray to the great King of Heaven and Earth, by the help
of the Holy Spirit, in the name of King JESUS, for King Charles the Second,
that so in the name of King Jesus, God may shower down his Blessings upon King
CHARLES the second, under whom you yet hope to lead a peaceable, quie^, and
godly life, in all godliness and honesty; and that God may enlighten the Eyes
of their Understanding in these things, so as that the Judgments of God come
not speedily down upon the Nation for such Oaths as these.

Thus the Lord having given this in by the Incomings of his Spirit, I could not
choose but lay it down, that so there may be a Conviction upon the Consciences
of all that are herein guilty, that so they may go to God and beg his pardon
for this Sin of Ignorance, Wilfulness, o^ what it may be called: And I
earnestly beg you who ever you are, into whose hands this shall come, that you
Improve the best of your Interest, to see that this be brought to the Kings
view, that so at present there be some speedy Consideration therein had, that
so Englands Subjects be no longer forced to Swear hand over head, by that which
is not GOD, to the ensnaring of the Simple of the Land, to the pulling down the
heavy Judgments of God upon them, for their Ignorance in their pretended
acceptable serving of him, in this pretended Swearing by his Name; by which
means they are plunged into a Gulf of abominable Idolatry, for he that sets
up a false God to Swear by, is an Idolater, for he prefers that Thing or
Person he so sets up, before his God, by whose strength only he can and must
expect power to perform his Oaths and Engagements: And hence it is that the
Lord Christ says, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor by
Jerusalem, because they by their power or strength, are not able to give
strength nor ability to perform; the which I judge might be convincing to any
rational man, in reason to conclude, that to call God to Witness a thing, is
not to implore his help to perform that thing; and to assert the certainty of a
thing, by the certainty of the Lords living, is not to crave his assistance in
the least to make good that thing that is already certain, and therefore not a
Swearing by God to make good the certainty of what is already certain.

And therefore I would have Henry Den, Jer. Ives, John Tombs, and Theophilus
Brabourn, know, That their asserting, that Calling God to Witness, is Swearing,
in the Apostles saying, God is my Witness, or I take God to Record; or in
saying, as the Lord lives, or as the Lord is true: The which I resolve, God
assisting, to handle more fully in my further Answer to Theophilus Brabourn his
Book; which will more fully treat the nature of an Oath; and in which will be
contracted that which in this Book lies more confused and scattered; in which
something shall be more fully, yet very briefly Answered, to John Tombs, and
also Jer. Ives, although as to the main Argument of Gospel-Disciples Swearing,
I have to him said sufficient in my Answer to Col. 2.24. the which had it been
here inserted, would have swelled to something too large a Bulk.

Thus having, by divine Assistance, scanned over thy Work fully in every
Particular, and therein in plainness of Speech, according to the Ability
received, in a measure cleared up every thing that may seem Cloudy or dark,
that so thou with others may have a clear sight of Truth from Error herein;
and that thou with others may say with me, and some others, as says the Lord
Christ, Mat. 5.34. with another of his faithful Servants, James 5.12. Swear
not, and Swear not at all: And if in what I have said, I have grated something
too hard upon thee and the rest, as to Humane Learning, I must tell thee, I did
it not that I undervalue Humane Learning, for I own it in its place to be of
singular use; neither do I so beat it down, because I have it not, for had I it
my self, I should with the Apostle Paul in this place, as to the Things of God,
undervalue it, and come only in the demonstration of the Spirit; And therefore
know, that what I have said as to that, I said it on purpose, and in the
faithfulness of my soul for thine, and their good, if possible to beat thee out
of a Dependancy upon it, has so thou might come out of thy self, and as I
may so say, to Plow with Gods Heifer in the things of God; and use that only in
and about thy Drugs, Distillations, and Chemical Extractions, and other secular
Affairs; and let that Doctrine that thou do manage on in that Society thou
belongest to, be only Compounded by the Spirits finger, whose only and alone
work will best become it.

And if upon trial thou find not such a measure of it, as may discover to thee
the deep things of God, to the stopping the mouths of the Gainsayers, that
thou go to God in his own Way, for the attaining of it, the which for a long
time thou have rejected; that so thou may speak and write the things that
appertain to sound Doctrine, to the glory of God, the good of Souls, and thine
own Eternal well-being:

Which is the desire of him, who is willing, according to the Ability received,
to spend and be spent for the propagating the TRUTH, for the benefit of Souls.
HENRY ADIS.

A WORD to Theophilus Brabourn.
FRIEND,
HAving Read thy Sheet, concerning the Lawfulness of the Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy, and having a Resolution to make some Answer thereunto, I caused
the Printer to insert thy name with the rest, in the Title Page of this my
Book, intending to have said so much to it, as should have Answered the
Substantial part of it; but it coming not to my hands, till this Answer was
going to the Press, and finding I had Answered much of it, the which being out
of my hands, I could not insert thy name in those parts, wherein I had Answered
to others in the same Cases; I shall therefore desire thee to busy thy self
but a little, in order to thy Satisfaction, in what I have said to others of
thine own judgment, till I procure the Press to go for thy further
Satisfaction: And shall rest thy Friend, so far as thou art a Friend to thy
self, in Owning and Standing for Truth, in this Crooked and Adulterous
Generation; And shall,

Subscribe my Self therein, Thy FRIEND, HENRY ADIS.
From my Contended Castle, the Gate House Dungeon, till Traitors and Offenders
Fees be mittigated and taken off; my Discharge running, Being found Guiltless,
paying due Fees; which is --
THE END.

