An Admonitory LETTER WRITTEN By an Old Minister of the New Combinational
Church, and sent to diverse Ejected Ministers of those Parts in which he lives.

IN Which is not boldly and barely affirmed, but also offered fairly to be
confirmed by unanswerable Arguments, I. The right constitution of a
Combinational Church. II. The corruptions that crept in upon it from the
Parochial, Cathedral, Provincial, National, and Ecumenical Roman Church. III.
Who were the Heads of these several Churches, and what were the qualities of
them.


PUBLISHED I. For to inform the Ignorant. II. For to reduce the Errant.


LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Richard Lowns, at the White Lion in Paul's
Churchyard, 1658.

An Admonitory LETTER WRITTEN By an Old Minister of the New Combinational
Church, and sent to diverse Ejected Ministers of those Parts in which he lives.
Reverend Sir,
THat that glorious God who is the giver of all Grace (as well as of every good
and perfect gift) would never be weary of conferring on you, or of continuing
in you, or yet of increasing by you, those real and rich gifts and graces which
he (out of his good will and mere goodness) was pleased to endue and adorn your
precious soul withal; for the daily use and exercise whereof, his main aim, and
uttermost end was his own service, and your own solace, to heave you up higher
in holiness and happiness (as I am hopefully persuaded in my very heart) then
most of your Companions or Acquaintance, Kindred or Country (and that at the
least) by the head and shoulders; is one of those many motions which I have
frequently and unfeignedly found my self moved (and that as I trust from the
highest Heavens) for to make unto the Hearer of prayers, and the granter of
requests: 1. An humble motion for you.
this motion is my humble motion for you.

That you would call to your remembrance, and also seriously consider, and lay
to heart, what (I in the judgment of rational charity am bound to conceive)
you cannot choose but know, by what Christ did reveal to you, and by what you
did likewise receive from Christ; namely, how our God in Covenant has thought
meet to constitute three several sorts of visible Churches (and no more to be
owned and acknowledged as his) to be founded, and found successively on earth
from the beginning of the world to the end of the same: Whereof the first was
the Oeconomical, or Domestical; the second was the National, or Judaical; and
the third was the Presbyterial or Combinational Church. You your self are not
at all any thing ignorant I suppose, that the foremost of these sorts did exist
in, and was confined unto those Ages alone, which were before the Mosaical Law,
or that the next had its being (and that precisely) during those very days
which were under the force of that Law; either of which spaces of time
consisted of two thousand years, or near about: and that the hindermost sort
did not begin to be until after the utter abolishment of the said Oeconomical
Law. In which third and last kind of Church Government, every child of man that
is an ingenious child of God, and a conformable member of Christ, either really
has for the present, or else earnestly longs and desires to have for the
future, both a name and a nail, according to what is promised to the believing
Gentiles, and was performed to the believing Jews, Isa. 56.2. and Ezra 9.8.
That you would be pleased to spend sometimes a few of your second and morning
thoughts in the mature perusing, pondering, and applying of what is thus humbly
put before your eyes, and proposed to your judicious consideration, is a second
Motion which I make bold to acquaint you with. 2. An hearty motion to you.
This Motion is my hearty Motion to you.

That some others, especially such of yours whom it may most nearly concern, to
be well seen and skilled therein, may have it made known unto their souls by
your self (how and where you shall see cause, and think fit) that the first
visible Church which was constituted by the wise builder thereof was a
domestical Church, being outwardly guided and governed by the first born of the
family, who were the types and shadows of Christ Jesus in the several houses of
professing Saints; and did continue from Abel and Adams days, to the time of
Moses and Aarons pilgrimage in the Wilderness of Sin: as does plainly appear to
all that deliberately do weigh both what is expressed, aad what is necessarily
employed in Genesis 4.4 compared with Exodus 12.17. That the Church of the second
sort was a National Church, consisting merely of Jewish persons, and their
Proselytes for its Members, who were instrumentally enlightened and led by the
Priests and Levites, as their only ordinary Ministers: the which kind of
Church Government lasted among them from the life of Moses to the death of the
Messia^, and no longer, as it is exceeding plain and clear to any one that can
find in his heart advisedly to compare the several testimonies of the old and
new Testament together, which will contribute pregnant light to this particular
point; such as are Exodus 19.6. Numb. 8.10. Deuteronomy. 7.7. with Gal. 4.9, 10. Col.
2.14.17. and Heb. 7.12. And that the Church of the last and longest
constitution was a Presbyterial, or Combinational Church; whose commendable
opinion and practice (and that without any ground of contradiction in the best
judgment of unbyassed believers) it is, quietly and cordially to subject the
earthly, erring, and unruly will of every creature therein, unto the heavenly,
infallible, and uncontrolable will of Christ; who peremptorily wills and
enjoins all his professed subjects, and professing Church Members to be
indoctrinated and disciplined by the prescribed ministry of those Presbyters
(or Teaching and Ruling Elders) that are of their own voluntary Election and
regular Ordination, whose office-extent reaches from Christ's Ascension, to the
Creations Dissolution: as it is witnessed by what is written Acts 6.5. and
14.23. Romans 12.7, 8. 1 Cor. 12.8, 28. Ephesians. 4.7, 14. Rev. 2.6. and 5.6. and
19.4. That you would resolve (in his strength whose you are, and in whose hand
your life and whole time also is) to reveal and manifest unto some of yours,
somewhat (at least) of that much, which the loving and liberal Lord and lender
of pounds and Talents, did see good to commit to the care of your conscience,
3. An harmless motion by you.
is a third Motion which I was stirred up for to spread before you. This Motion
is my harmless Motion by you.

In case that the frequent pondering of this profitable point (which is of so
much concernment to be thoroughly versed in) should puzzle any one that begins
for to question how, where, or when did the Christian Church (which at the
first was Presbyterial and Pure) become so corrupt and polluted, as that scarce
is the Skeleton, fashion, or face thereof as much as to be perceived; the more
is the pity in most places, or (as yet) amongst most professors of godliness. I
was really persuaded that a little pains might prove not only acceptable, but
advantageous to a person that was so puzzled about that particular, for to hear
and to have it (not alone boldly and barely affirmed, but also) fairly and
firmly confirmed by unanswerable arguments, that it fell to that foul and
fearful degeneration (under which it now does, or should) groan and for which
it has good cause to grieve by no fewer then by five distinct degrees; whereof
the first was into a Parochial, the second into a Cathedral, the third into a
Provincial, the fourth into a National, and the fifth was into an Ecumenical,
or a Roman Catholic Church.

The first rise of the rottening of the Church, was its falling from a pure
(though poor) Presbyterial Church (which in respect of its Primitive
constitution was composed and made up of living stones: namely lively Members,
and laborious Ministers, being fastened and firmly knit unto the Lord Jesus as
their only head by faith, and one to the other by a Fraternal covenant of
servent love; according to the pattern which was proposed and prescribed in
both Testaments. Isa. 44.5. Jer. 50.5. Ezekiel. 20.37. Zach. 11.7, 10, 14. 2 Cor.
8.5. Ephesians. 2.13, 19, 22. Coll. 2.2, 19. and 1 Pet. 2.5) Into an impure and
unpolished Parochial Church at that time, when (ceasing to elect and ordain
either a Teather, a Pastor, a Ruler, or Deacon and Deaconess, or Widow) in
conformity to the heavenly Canon, Romans 12.7. and 15.4. and 16.1. compared with
1 Timothy 3.1. and Tit. 1.5, 6.) it was well content to admit and accept of a
Parson, a Vicar, a Warden, an Overseer of the poor, and a Midwife; by which
wisdom of the flesh, being no better then enmity against God, within a short
time after the days of the Apostles, Christ's spiritual house, and growing (as
well as living) Temple, was turned and transformed into a carnal and dead Town,
or apostatizing Parish, the very beginning and breeding of which Parochial
Church is seen to have been in the time of Polycarpus and Ireneus, one of them
being an Elder of the Church at Smyrna, and a Disciple of John the Evangelist;
and the other a Pastor at Lions, and a Disciple of that Polycarpus, as any man
may easily perceive, that will peruse what is to be observed in Eusetius his
Ecclesiastical History, the fourteenth and fifteenth chapters of the fourth
Book, with the three and twentieth and four and twentieth of the fifth Book.

Act. 15.24. which is laid down, and left as well for the imitation as
information of after-Ages; whose work it was by Scripture-proofs to confute
souls-subverting positions, and to confirm Christian Doctrines, without using
any manner of authority to censure any man's person, being that that is the
express privilege of the Presbyterial Church, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. and 2 Thessalonians.
3.15. The Babe-age of which usurpation is made mention of (as newly appearing
in the world) by what was exercised by Alexander of Alexandria against Eusebius
of Nicomedia, as well as against Arrius in the reign of Constantius and
Constance the sons of Constantine the Emperor; as it is to be seen in Socrates
Scholasticus, the second book, the third chapter, compared with the two and
thirtieth chapter of the second Book, or Evag. the sixth chapter of the first
Book.

Austin (who was sent from Gregory the last of good Bishops, and the first of
the evil Popes of Rome) is reputed and recorded to have been the Father and
Founder in this land, even then, when he was both st^fly and stoutly opposed by
the Monks of Bangor in the year of our Lord 596. and in the reign of King
Ethelbert; witness Fox his Martyrology page 119. together with the rest of the
English Historians, and Evagrius lib. 2.8.



is the very best, though in the judgment of Christ Jesus in the Scriptures it
is the very basest, because the beast^est, and the most blasphemous of all the
Bastard-Church constitutions, that ever were till now; witness what is written,
Rev. 13.1, 3, 5, 6. Whose Pastors and other Presbyters, yea (sin-pardoning
Pope, Cardinals, Abbots, with others were owned and acknowledged for to be, and
thereby not a few (if not of the summoned Councels; yet) in several Synods in
sundry countries, insomuch that Churches abominable iniquities were so
increased over their heads, and their traiterous trespasses were so egregiously
grown up to heaven, as that the long-forbearing Lord could no longer forbear,
but was put upon it, and as it were necessitated for to take vengeance on their
inventions, as on Aarons golden calfe, and Samuels grievous connivency at the
evils of his sons spoken of Psalm. 99.6.8.

Much respected Sir,
MAy not any one to whose Inwards the knowledge of these particulars is come,
ingeniously confess that his very soul is clearly convinced of the mighty and
manifold corruptions which have crept into, are cherisht within, and contested
about by many (yea, by too too many) Christians of too too many Churches? And
may not I (though a stranger to my nearest friends, because an exile newly
arrived to the land of my nativity) safely appeal to any person that has
either conscience, or common sense, whether Christ Jesus our supreme Lord
Protector, upon whose shoulders the government of the Churches is laid, has
not of late years borne a loud witness against every one of those five before
mentioned kinds of deformed Churches, and that in those very countries which
are counted and commonly called Christendom? If so, God forbid, that there
should be any Christian man (and more especially any Clergy man) so carnal, and
so careless in all these coasts, as not to be both able and willing to conceive
and conclude himself to be called upon for to consider of, and to lay to heart,
the great and grievous desolations which his hand has made amongst the most
and mightiest of the sons of men.

and in Ireland, to pull down lowest, that loose, that lofty and lawless
Church, which the corrupt Clergy had lifted up highest? namely, the
Ecumenical, or Roman Catholic Church, whereof the sin-pardoning, or rather
soul-poysoning Pope was the vile and virulent head, who was therefore, and upon
that account, publicly declared, and generally (though not universally)
believed to be a very horrible Monster, as well as a very abominable beast,
because of its ten horns; witness what is written, Rev. 17.3, 5.

Secondly, Has not Christ hid his face from, and bent his brow against the
National Church, as being the very next in naughtiness? whereof the British
King was (although not an invincible) yet a violent head, which was therefore
the less victorious, and more vincible; partly because the head (not only of a
very uncanonical, but also) of a very unspiritual corporation: and partly,
because of the said National corporations inconsistency with the Scripture
precepts, Mat. 18.17. and 1 Cor. 14.23.) which do require its ordinary
congregating in one place, seconded and aggravated by its notorio us
inconformity to the Scripture patterns. ( Ephesians. 2.16, 22. Phil. 2.15. Rev.
9.5) where the Christian Combinational Church is called (not a whole Nation,
but) a holy City, a growing Temple, a spiritual House, or a finenlightning, and
a soul-enlivening Church, gathered, built, framed, cul'd and called out, of and
from a carnal and crooked Nation, which was both dark and darkness it self;
witness what is written, Ephesians. 5.3.

Pet. 5.4. When the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive an
incorruptible crown of Glory. Who was that Church-Minister? what was his name,
or where did he dwell? who came once into a capacity to be accounted such a
superlative Counselor, or comforter, as was endued either with ability, or
authority to confer a spiritual crown on any one of the sincere Elders of a
Church of Saints? which is such a matter as a dying son of man should not dare
to hear (much less to make) any mention of, without some measure of amazement
in his very soul.

Mat. 20.26. Ye know that the Lords of the Gentiles exercise domination over
them, but it shall not be so among you. And 1 Pet. 5.3. feed the flock of God
which depends upon you, not as though you were Lords ever Gods heritage. Which
royal Laws do testify all such lofty Lords, and Lordless out-lawes to be such
illegal and irregular livers, as that their unhallowed dwellings appear to be
long since destined and appointed for Hedge-Hogs to house and harbor at; yea,
for Jim and Ohim with the wild Satyrs to dance in, and for Owls and Vultures
to dung on, being afraid of none to drive them away. Thus verifying that
terrible threat to be performed and fulfilled at length, which was prophesied
of old; witness what is written in Isa. 13.19.

hurt of all the other heads, yet the Almighty Lord has (as yet) lift up his
hand against him: yet at this time it is his turn to lie down under the lash,
and like the lukewarm Angel of Laodicea (by taking shame and confusion of face
unto himself) to receive whatsoever sharp correction shall (as a cordial of
love) be administered unto him, for the preventing of the spewing of his name
out of Christ's mouth, as is manifest from what is foretold, Rev. 3.19.
therefore the whole (half blind Political body of the Parish Church) does
openly appear to be, though not utterly uncurable, yet in respect of its
present posture in its numerous abominations, altogether unapproveable, because
of its rejecting the commandments of God, that it may observe the traditions of
men. Against which hateful offense Jesus Christ does sadly complain, Ma^k 7.7,
9. and concerning which offensive hatred, Christ's sincere servant does
seriously caution, Col. 2.8, 18. Beware left there be any man that spoil you
through Philosophy and vain deceit, through the traditions of men, according to
the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. Let no man at his pleasure
bear rule over you by humbleness of mind, etc. Which holy watch-words and
wholesome warnings (had they been heedfully hearkened unto by all such as were
Church Officers) would without question have restrained the multitude of
Church-hearers from many such observations and alterations as must of necessity
be either amended timely, or mourned for eternally; witness what is written,
Rev. 14.9, etc.

If there were nothing amiss (or out of order) to be observed in the parish
meeting houses, if there were never so full freedom from Communion,
Book-praying, and from Homily Book preaching, as well as from
Common-book-swearing; if all bare Heads were barred out from their places, and
utterly rejected from ever being any spiritual Overseers again before they were
inwardly qualified by Christ's sin-crucifying, and soul quickening spirit in a
cleansed conscience, and also outwardly, and orderly called by Christ's
covenant-servants in a cleansed Combinational Church, if there were an
unanimous rooting down of all double reading (I mean that babbling reading of
two chapters, which is not seconded with the opening and expounding of the
same, because it cannot but be confessed that 'twas such a course as was quite
contrary to what is commanded and commended in the Scriptures of truth, as all
do well know that are acquainted with what is written, Ezekiel. 33.2. N^h. 8.8
Luke 4.16. Acts 13.15. and 1 Cor. 14.23, 24. If there were no news amongst them
of one Relic of all the Romish Rites, or other humane Inventions, as
Matrimonial Bonds, Marriage Ring, Sign of the Cross, White Surplice, Choristers
singing. Funeral Sermons, Idol Sureties, of Godfathers and Godmothers or
groundless application of public or private Baptism unto the Infants of
profane Parents; and if none but Christ's own faithful friends and followers
were admitted to be fed, or physicked at his Supper-feast; yet the mere sight
of a Monarchical Pew to stand in the stead of a Ministerial Pulpit, is a strong
plea of a strange Apostasy from the commendable practice of the primitive
Christians; seeing that such a coop is not of a sufficient capacity to contain
(at once) any more persons then one. Whereas it is of moral equity, (and
consequently of perpetual observation) that a rightly reformed Presbyterial
Church should have all her Elders (who are engaged by virtue of their office to
begin and end all the public Ordinances, and to transact all the open
concernments of the City of God) for to stand and sit together in the face and
full view of the whole Assembly, and by so much the more, seeing they are so
plainly warranted, and so punctually prescribed as they be, both to wait, and
to walk according to the patterns showed in the mount; witness, Exodus 25.42.
Acts 7.44. Heb. 8.5. and as in all other points, so in this particular
concerning the Elders Pulpit, they are tied and limited by their commission, to
hold conformity with what is upon sacred Record, as this is (and that not only
necessarily employed, but) eminently expressed in several Scripture-expressions,
as Neh. 8.4. Eccles. 12.11. 1 Timothy 4.14. Rev. 4.6. and 5.6. and 19.4.

To sum up in short the whole sum and substance of what I would show until
such times as the Parochial Churches of the Nations do again become truly
Presbyterial, and so reformed in their essential parts, consisting of visible
converts, and an explicit covenant, which are the matter and form of a Church;
witness, Jer. 50.5. Ezekiel. 20.37. Isa. 44.5. Acts 2.47. Romans 14.1. 2 Cor. 8.5.
and 9.13.

And until they be also refined in their Integral parts, which are the Organs
or Officers thereof, that as Eyes, Mouth, Hands, are to see, speak, and act in
their behalf, until they both desire and endeavor to be endowed, first with a
Teacher to dispense the word of knowledge and information to the judgment.
Secondly, with a Pastor to dispense the word of wisdom and exhortation to the
will and affections. Thirdly, with a Ruler to dispense the word of rebuke and
admonition to the irregular in life and conversation. And fourthly, with
Deacons and Widows to receive and dispense the weekly contribution, that is
belonging, and also brought to the King of Saints from his subjects in
covenant, toward the maintenance of the table of the Lord, the table of the
Church Elders, and the tables of such of the fellow members as be in lack; and
all this in obedience to what is enjoined in his revealed will; namely, in Romans
12.2, 7, 8. and 16.1. 1 Cor. 12.8.28. and 16.1, 2. 1 Timothy 3.2. and 5.10, 20.
Until that I say the Parochial Churches be thus qualified: can you upon good
ground expect (as to them) either the manifestation of sure mercy, or the
enjoyment of solid peace? knowing that comminations are properly appertaining
to vile and violent sin-loving sinners; as it is showed by the Oracles of God,
Psalm. 5.5. and 11.5, 6. and Rev. 14.10. and 22.15. And that Church-promises and
Church Priviledges, as well as Christ's consolations, are peculiarly applicable
to such covenant-makers with God and Men (as through the strength of their
surety) are covenant keepers with both; which covenant-making, and covenant
breaking is expressed and perceived by a regular walking toward them that are
without, as well as toward them that are within; according to what is written,
Isa. 55.3. Gal. 6.16. and 1 Timothy 4.8. If you can tell any such tidings as a
heavenly promise to unheavenly persons, or a holy privilege to the souls, or
the seed of unholy Parents, that you would find in your heart to give me some
notice thereof, and to acquaint me with any one of those good grounds of any
lively hope that they will be everlastingly happy, is the last of those Motions
which I make bold for to leave with you to consider of, and meditate upon. This
Motion is my heavenly Motion for my self, the granting of which, will engage
me (yet farther) to be, to remain, and also to acknowledge my self,

Your thankful Remembrancer in his nearest approaches to the Throne of Grace.

FINIS.

