Avaritia coram Tribunali: OR, The Miser arraigned AT The Bar of Scripture and
Reason; For his sinful neglect of Charity, in this present lamentable and
dreadful Visitation Of the PLAGUE.

By a Gentleman that loves Men more than Money.

Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven,

S. Mat. 5.16. He that sows little, shall reap little; and he that sows
plenteously, shall reap plenteously. Let every man do according as he is
disposed in his heart, not grudgingly, or of necessity; for God loves a
cheerful giver,

2 Cor. 9.6,7. Sen. Hoc habent Homines cum Diis commune, ut aliis Benefecerint.
London, Printed for Elizabeth Calvert, and are to be sold at the
Black-spread-Eagle, at the West End of S. Paul's. 1666.

Avaritia coram Tribunali: OR, The MISER arraigned at the BAR OF SCRIPTURE and
REASON.
IT is no news to persons who have delighted themselves with the pleasant and
profitable conversation of a Library, That the World is so imperious a Critic,
that the first thing an Epistle commonly presents the Reader, is, A
complemental Excuse for troubling him. Importunity of Friends; surreptitious
Copies; to spend my idle time, or gratify my good friend the Stationer; and
other suchlike Sconces (commonly built to defend Castles in the Air) are the
hackney Defenses against the Rustic Battery of Ignorance, and her Daughter
Impudence; of Detraction, and her Mother Envy. But the best friend to such
pretensions, is a Socratical Ingenuousness; Erubuit salva res est; The young
Blade blushes, and all is well: Let not the morose melancholy of a Study put in
Interrogatories, Shall friends seduce a man a degree or two on this side a
Frenzy, to run the Gauntlet? How many have you known tam curtae
supellectilis, so ill furnished as to want Trunks susticient to contain their
own Papers? O Tempora! O Mores! Is not Idleness the Fools Largess? and do
Grocers and Cooks want waste-Paper? Sed non tibi notus Ulysses; there is a fetch
for applause beyond all this, A pretense of Public Good, which avoyds many
strict examinations, with that ordinary Certificate, Bonum quo communius, eo
melius; and indeed this Apology (when the Chaff of Hypocrisy is fanned away)
is the Christian Author's complete Armor, whereby his devout Thoughts are left
invulnerable, not only against pragmatical Censure, but Principalities and
Powers, and all the sinful works of Darkness: and how can popular breath,
though never so sharp and impetuous, force him to an ignoble flight, who
(through Gods discriminating grace and favor) has resolutely fixed the Eye of
his Discourse upon his Creators glory, and the benefit of his Neighbor; which
word under the interpretation of an unbiased Conscience and sincere Heart, is
as comprehensive and universal as Humanity it self? Fecisti Domine Cor propter
te, and irrequietum est donec perveniat ad te, said the holy Bishop of Hippo.
Give me Aquinas, take you Scotus; give me Aristotle, take you Des Carts: Does
a Pen trace Galen, or ruffling Paracelsus? yet the Laconian Ti may serve to
answer King Philip, and scoff all tuggers at the Quill. If your endeavors
prove fortunate, then Digito monstrarier, and dicier hic est:
This, this is he, stretch'd-out fore-fingers tell,
Writ that brave Piece which sold so wondrous well.


But not a few learned Men could I summon in to testify how skittish our Age
is, how apt to start, how apt to stumble; so that Irrequieta est Penna tuo,
donec perveniat ad Deum. All sublunary Transactions have no other
Insurance-Office then the Providence of the Almighty: when his Honor and
Service are the Marks levelled at, then we quickly discern it to be true
Philosophy, that the whole Earth is but as an indivisible point, compared to
the Heavens. What matter who derides? what matter who reviles? can clap thy
Breast, and talk in Apelles strain, Pingo Eternitati; then (in the
Scripture Language) gird up thy Loins, and be strong; the Fountain of Goodness
can never turn Bankrupt; and that by S. Paul insures thy Barque, at least to
the Port of everlasting Happiness, 1 Cor. 15.58. Therefore, my beloved
Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord;
for so much as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

When the destroying Angel brandishes his Sword over our Jerusalem, and the
Pestilence has already shot in many terrible and barbed Arrows of Divine
Vengeance; certainly he must have very little sense of his own Offenses, and
the whole Nations both Crime and Punishment, that cannot afford a sigh, a tear,
and God be merciful unto us, for we have sinned. When many thousands have died
since April, 7496 is found at the foot of the last Weekly Bill; and many, very
many of their lives might have been preserved (as a great Blessing to their
Relations) if rich men were but Men; if they would but live till they died; not
deserve Hic situs est, an Epitaph a long while before the Mourners go about the
streets. It cannot undoubtedly be accounted unprofitable spending my hours on
this instant Fast Day (the sixth of September) if I plead in Forma Pauperis,
and voluntarily undertake Timothy's hard task, 1 Epist. 6.17,18. Charge them
that are rich in this world, that they be not high-minded, nor trust in
uncertain riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all things to
enjoy; that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate.

I shall not be so magisterial, as to affirm this and that particular sin was
the root of our Thorns and Briers, for I am none of the Sons of Aaron; nor if I
were, should I presume to snatch my faint and glimmering Candle out of the dark
Lanthorn of silence and obscurity, when our holy Mother the Church has advanced
her Torch in a necessary, pious, seasonable Exhortation: Yet since People count
it as it were customary for their respective Ministers to persuade
Contributions; and Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver, may want their due
reverence with the many, by reason of unwelcom reiteration; it will be no
disservice to the Pulpit, if they find an Echo in a Country Recess: and
possibly some or other may mind it, introduced with these circumstantial
considerations, That it is good will to all in poverty and woeful perplexity, and
not either selfish design, or homebred casualties, that form the rebound.

We will begin our Memoyrs, by taking notice that Children (who cannot be
suspected for Machiavilians) are accounted of good disposition by all, when
they are willing to part with this or that trifle they may be called Owners of.
By this we may easily conjecture what humane Nature is, before it be estray'd
too far from Innocence, and has drunk too deep of the Marah of bad Education
and evil Customs. At mature years, Noble Housekeeping is the characteristical
Letter of Generosity. What more apt or usual expression, than to call a
coverous Person, A narrow Soul; and, as one tartly expresses it, fit to live
nowhere but in an Ally?

Can a serious and deliberate Head give Commission to his Tongue to call
Vespasian, The Darling of Mankind, and yet forget the usual Sentence that
dubbed him so? Diem perdidi: My unlimited Sovereignty, my transcendent Glory has
not distilled upon my Subjects any reviving showers of Grace and Munificence; I
have lost this day. The men of Nineveh (says our ever-blessed Savior) shall
rise in Judgment against this generation, and condemn it: And do sober
Christians imagine that the High and Mighty Monarch of the discovered World
should bewayl the loss of twenty four hours, for fear of displeasing burnished
Brass, and carved Wood; and he not called to a severe account by the Ancient of
Days, for bringing forth nothing in it, may be more then four and twenty years,
but drouzy Poppy, instead of the staff of Bread; sour Grapes and wild Olives?
But admit that even according to the Psalmists Arithmetic, your foot be not
yet in the Grave, and decripped Age is by most designed for the stall of
Repentance; yet you cannot convict your security by the Verdict of a wiser than
Solomon, Eccl. 11.9. Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let thy Heart cheer
thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the
sight of thine eyes; but know thou that for all these things God will bring
thee into Judgment. The Angelical Doctor observes, That Death is a more
treacherous Enemy in surprising youth by stratagem, stealing upon them
unawares, when their Backs are toward it; than to the grey-heads, whom it
charges on the front; and the dimmer their eyes be, the better they may discern
a Coffin: the more cause they have to cry out, O curva senectus, O shrinking
shoulders, O feeble knees, the more is the Grave obvious, and consequently
might be rendered more familiar. May a spring of warm blood full of spirits, by
three or four fits of an Ague, be sadly metamorphos'd into shivering December,
a pale Cheek, a dull Eye, a soft pace, a restless Bed? Can a Fever (even
without the help of an universally-destroying putrefaction of humors) shake
off golden Locks (those beautiful leaves of the Arbor Inversa) scorch up the
radical moisture, banish the poor Creature into the land of forgetfulness, and
make an humble Turf the dishonorable Coverlet of an Airy Gallant, of a
rare-accomplish'd Monsieur? And can Summer, Autumn, Winter, expect fairer
usage? Can they that have enjoyed a large Estate many inches of the longest
span of Life, conceive it not yet high time to make friends of unrighteous
Mammon?

We need not desire a Legate Kekerman, to repair to his beloved Dichotomie,
about division of Estates; they may logically enough to our purpose be said to
come by divine Providence: but nevertheless it will not be amiss to keep the
road, and take for our fellow-travellers Descent and Purchase.

He that has dug himself thirty or forty years together in the golden Peru
of Profit, should do very well to consider whether his hands be not dirty;
whether the Widow and the Orphan, this weak Brain, and that credulous Tenant,
Clyent, Customer, have no just cause to complain of his gripes; though
perchance nor well versed how to remedy themselves: If so, how fence you this
blow of the Casuists, Without Restitution no Salvation? Delay not, unless thou
art content to endure the gnawings of the Worm of Conscience at thy
dissolution, when Horror and Amazement cry out, Have thou found me, O mine
Enemy? Nor could that suffice the converted Publican Zacheus; he restored
fourfold to heal the wound of Extortion, and gave half that he had to the
poor, to prevent a scarre. If the pampered flesh turns a deaf ear, and the
deceitful World searches Hell for distinctions, carry them both to Tho. a
Kempis Cell; Durum est verbum (says he) toll crucem and sequere me; sed multo
durius, Ite maledicti in ignem sempiternum: It Is an hard Chapter, Take up your
cross and follow me; but it is a far more intolerable, Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire. Are you beholden to a rich Ancestor for those Rivolets of
Milk and Honey that bedew your condition? then God has given you Press-money in
hand; and a superabundant gratitude engages to manage your Stewardship with
fidelity, and to employ your Talents with an industrious Zeal. Rising early,
going to Bed late, in conjunction with the Bread of carefulness, are strangers
to your Birthright: Would you stand idle in the Market all day long, and that
after you have received your penny? God gave you not Honor and Wealth to
furnish a magazine for rebellious vices, blacker in the eyes of Heaven, then
any Ink can render their names. Deceitful, disorderly, and excessive Gaming,
put the present Parliament (in the sixteenth of our most gracious Sovereign) to
the trouble of an Act to restrain it; from which it is evident that one hundred
pound was before looked upon as nothing to lose and run upon the Tick at a
time; Discinctis nepotibus, with my extravagant young Masters: one time might
be one minute; but should one of those A-la-mode Quakers, or Shakers, give so
much in seven years to the relief of the poor and afflicted, he would not to be
sure change Soul take thine ease, but instead of Thou have goods laid up for
many years (for that were a Sarcasm of his own inventing) would laugh in his
sleeve, and hug the fancy, that he had done good deeds enough for many years,
yes even for Methuselah's 969. But all Estates are Dominica Coronae Reg is
Coelestis, belong to the King of Kings; His is directum Dominium, an absolute
and uncontrollable Regality: the Posterity of Adam have only Utile Dominium;
so that we may truly say, not only, Lord, thou have made us, and not we our
selves; but, Lord, our Inheritances are thine, and not our own. The Earth is
the Lords, and all the fullness thereof: this Lump of Clay he has made a Vessel
of Honor, that of Dishonor; some fit objects of Charity, and others his
Almoners. Aska fellow as absuedly prodigal as a certain rich Citizens Heir,
(whom some alive remember a petty Prince in the morning of his Age, and a
despicable Beggar before noon) who for fear of a surfeit of Wealth made Ducks
and Drakes (in the Childrens Babble) with Six-pences, Shillings and
Half-crowns, in the Thames; or a fellow as ridiculously covetous as he in the
Comedy, that stopped the top of his Chimney for fear of losing the smoke, few of
either Herd will deny that Solomon said true, The lot is cast into the lap, but
the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord; or that of Job, The Lord gives, and
the Lord takes away: but depraved Nature musters up Quirks to avoid the Statute
de Donis conditionalibus, in the Bible; and will by no means allow, that
voluntas omnipotentis Donatoris, secundum formam in charta Doni sui manifest
expressam observaretur: That the intent and good pleasure of the omnipotent
Donor, plainly expressed in those sacred leaves of his revealed Will, should be
punctually observed: a most clear and significant Precept take from Deuteronomy.
15.7,8. If there be among you a poor man, of one of thy Brethren, within any of
thy gates, in thy Land which the Lord thy God gives thee; thou shall not
harden thine heart, nor shut thy hand from thy poor Brother; but thou shall
open thine hand wide unto him, and shall surely lend him sufficient for his
need, in that which he wants. Deuteronomy. 26.12,13. about the third years tything:
will you have a comment? read Dr. Hamond's Sermon: I shall quote little from
him, and what I do, leave it like Esops provident Fathers Treasure in the
Vineyard; who told his Sons it was hid there, but said no more, on purpose that
they might dig and ransack every foot. After that eminent Doctor has proved
Charity to be like a Picture, looking upon every one that comes into the great
Room of the World; he kills the Bugbear of old Age, and the Patron of
Covetousness against the most laudable disbursments, namely, the fear of want;
by asserting David's Doctrine in several pious inferences: They that give unto
the poor, lend unto the Lord; and he will repay it. To whom first? To the
Household of Faith: Where chiefly? To our Neighborhood, before places more
remote: When? Whenever we meet with an opportunity; or by a prudent
separation of this and the other Sheaf of our Revenue, are enabled to seek one.
But let his own words administer advice against the spirit of Slumber, that
Chyragra of the Worldling, as to Eleemosynary Landmarks: The proportion to be
observed by the Christian Almes-giver, to speak at the least, must be more in
any reason then the thirtieth part of his Revenue or Increase. Non magna
loquimur, sed vivimus; He preached no more than he lived; nor so much neither:
for he gave the tenth part to the Poor constantly, besides the spring-tides of
his extraordinary tender-heartedness and compassion. I wish we could all as
easily imitate his Life, as procure a Treatise so called (a Piece of strong
lines, and good complexion) But if ever ye desire to converse with the Saint,
as well as visit the Shrine; trace him by his own Counsel, Offer unto God the
Sacrifice of a contrite Heart, and the sweet incense of universal Obedience.

The necessities of Men, trivial Follies, and that great one, Perverseness, have
produced a multitude of cases in Law, of unlike features; so that it is not to
be expected a Maxim should knock down every particular occurrence with a Thomas
Aquinas fist, Conclusum est contra Manichaeos; that the Rule should ascertain
positively either the Affirmative or Negative: But from general Gounds and
Eruditions, a learned Inference, a smart Deduction, must state the matter in
agitation. We have in the Gospel Line upon Line, and Precept upon Precept, to
command us to put on Brotherly Kindness, and the Bowels of Compassion; but
should we disband our Vantguard of direct and demonstrative Texts, the
proceedings of the day of Judgment afford Instructions clearer than the Sun in
his Mid-Summer-Glory, and printed in such Elephantine-Characters, that whosoever
runs may read them, S Mat. 25.35. Giving Meat to the Hungry, Drink to the
Thirsty, Lodging to the Stranger, Clothes to the Naked, Visits to the Sick,
Redemption to Captives, are assigned as the reason of that triumphant
Invitation, verse. 24. Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world. Leaveing Pharaoh and his 600 chosen Chariots at the
bottom of the Red Sea, Ahab and Jezebel to the Dogs, Judas to his Halter; great
and notorious Sinners to exemplary punishments here; (although Thunderbolts
kill not often) or at least unless the generation of Vipers repent, and fly
from the wrath to come, to the horrid and racking expectation of the second
death: come hither harmless well-meaning Christian, gather the bitter fruit of
Omission, and dissect the barren womb of Holiness with this Instrument, verse.
41. Then shall he say also unto them on his left hand, Depart from me ye
cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Watch and
pray, for ye know not at what hour your Lord will come: but it is evident what
our Lord will say when he does come to judge every man according to what he has
done in the Body, whether good or evil. Wife Virgins know the Bridegroom loves
the Oil of Mercy; they will upon no terms show such want of civility and vulgar
manners, as to have their Lamps to light, when he passes by; especially since
the fire of Charity devours not the unctious humor, no more than the Prophet
Elijah's Hunger emptied the Widow of Zarephath's Cruse. Fear of a consumption
of the Purse, through that excellent and successful Phlebotomy, is routed by
the heavenly Host of Promises: Questionless that inexorable Gluttons partner,
Luke 16.19. who treated the Bru^e his Carcass sumptuously every day, has only
Animam pro sale, a Soul to keep his Body from stinking, till Death locks up the
Purple in the Wardrobe, allowing only the fine Linen of a Winding Sheet, and
then serves him up to the Worms; must at last change the frolic Scene to
weeping and gnashing of teeth. The sooty fumes ascending from an impure
stomach, causes the brain to want sweeping, the whole unprofitable mass to want
evacuation; from whence naturally arises stupidity and unactiveness, and then
strutting about, and yawning: Pleno laudat Jejunia ventre:
The Churl is crammed; his Parasite cannot carve
One tempting bit: Steal Poor, be hanged, beg, starve.


But there will come a time, or rather an eternity, when Lazarus, who by reason
of age, sickness, a charge of small Children, losses by Sea or Fire, etc. was
compelled to imitate the disconsolate murmurs of the Turtle, and (being far
beneath the ownership of a Couch) watered his straw every night with tears;
though he might not divide the spoil with the Dogs, in sharing part of the
crumbs that fell from the Rich Man's Table, shall be mounted up into Abraham's
Bosom upon the Wings of glorious Spirits; when sottish, flint-hearted- Dives,
shall not obtain with his earnest and vehement begging, the tip of a wet finger
to cool his Tongue that was tormented in the flame, and perpetually frying in
the bottomless Pit, that inexhaustible lake of Fire and Brimstone.

Charity is a comprehensive word, and like the Mediterranean Sea, acquires
several names from the adjacent shores: Mercy, Alms, Liberality, Beneficence,
all fall under that title, and may not unfitly be looked upon as only several
degrees of heat, and alterations of the same inestimable Elixar. Let the
Understanding say, There stands a deplorable Object; Mercy, from a cold Still,
presently melts into a drop or two of Silver: If exquisite Education, and a
perception that the virtue of money lies only in its subserviency to commerce,
and the mutual necessities of the Inhabitants of this terrestrial Globe; put a
merciful disposition into a Limbeck, then this and the other Bag will be
thought well spent in generous Hospitality; and Sundays, Tuesdayes and
Thursdayes, (provided the Cook-Maid be in a good mood) half a dozen of the poor
of the Parish, may fill their Bellies after a fashion. But still here is the
head of the Crow, a black sediment at the bottom; an Ox or two at Christmas, a
feast now and then for Tenants, a dish extraordinary at command, to prevent the
surprise of Acquaintance; and then call me Niggard who dare. But when from
being good in an humor, and doing good by fits; Virtue proceeds from single
Acts to an Habit; from an Habit, to an Heroical Exaltation; a beam of the Sun
of Righteousness that arises with healing in his Wings infused, will produce
the pure and unvaluable crimson Tincture; and make the Artist cry out, I desire
to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified. All the Income (though
never so vast) will bear the Image and Superscription of the heavenly Caesar;
and every day yields precious opportunities of exchanging his Jacobusses and
Gynnyes to the New Jerusalem; whose Street is pure Gold, and whose Gates are
Pearls; where Rust cannot corrupt, nor Thieves break through, and steal.

But for my part, I shall neither usurp the Divines Chair, nor domineer in the
Peripatetick School; this Meditation is ambitious of no higher preferment, then
to be Usher to the Basket, and call aloud, For Gods sake remember the Poor. A
Duty at all times seasonable; in this Huge Mortality, Clamerously urgent. The
Poor you have always with you; but never had a more amazing Argument to
frequent the Offertory, to give the Overseers measure pressed down, and running
over. Augusta est Charitas ad Leges vincta; A Parochial Tax, A Monthly
Collection, add the Free Will Offerings of here and there a Star of the first,
second, and third Magnitude, (whose Names let History convey to the Temple of
Honor, and there Engrave in a Marble Column;) all conjoined, are too narrow,
and too weak Emplaisters to be applied to all the Plague-Sores (that deserve
Commiseration, and want the ordinary means of Cure) in the 130 Parishes of
London, and many Country-Towns, and Villages; unless the Physician wanted no
more chargeable Drugs, than the Royal Prophet Isaiahs lump of Figs.

Skin for skin, and all a man has will he give for his Life; was the sharpest
Tooth, and strongest Paw, wherewith the Roaring Lion Satan, assaulted the
Integrity of Job. Ventum erat ad Triarios; the Devil was driven to his last
charge, when he fell on so furiously. But though so many hundreds have drunk
the dregs of the Lords Wrath, (as to the temporal Vial) and that City which was
lately the Joy and Delight of the whole Nation, is turned into a kind of
Golgotha, and like dejected Rachel, sits with disheveled Hair, weeping, and
mourning, and will not be comforted because her Children are not; Yet, Ille
meos oculos comprimat, Ille tuos; It were a Cordial to the gasping Patient, if
a discreet Friend might draw his Will; this dear Son, or Daughter, or the other
Affectionate Kinsman might close his Eyes, and pulling the Curtains close,
Modestly hide the deformities of a ruined Cottage, from impertinent Curiosity.
But, Hinc ille Lachrymae! Infected persons cannot expect Visiters; and the spur
of Fear hurries away Neighbors (of any Quality) so fast, that before they come
to their rural Sanctuaries, they have scarce leisure to afford the kindness of
Lots Wife to Sodom, a pitiful Retrospection.

The greatest cruelty the Poet could brand a Tyrant with, was, Mortua --
jungebat Corpora vivis.
Quick tied to Dead, were hurled to seek their Graves,
To Neptunes Executioners, the Waves.


Not the Tyranny, but merciful Wisdom of Authority, concludes it necessary to
shut up the whole Family; not only the Sick, but the Well; for, Latet anguis
in Herba, all flesh is grass, and be it never so green, the Constitution
strong, and florid, yet in a few days the sting of Contagion may wound under
the fifth Rib; the Throat may rattle, the Pulse cease, and Dust return to Dust.
Nor may they which seem in Health be permitted to straggle, lest the raging
Disease should Rob in the open Street, and Kings Highway; justles be Fatal,
salutations Deadly. It is remarqued concerning Holland, that it is a kind of a
Courtesy for the Poor to be put in Prison, because the rich Creditors are
bound to provide for them. But in many cases there is no Justice in that, for
Laziness, and Brandy might contract, and a restless Importunity extort the
Debt. But, Actus Dei nemini facit Injuria; without dispute they ought to be
carefully provided for, that lose Liberty; (the darling of Sublunary
enjoyments, and Favorite of the Law;) and are made Prisoners by the angry
dispensation of God; and not by their own Idleness, and Debauchery.

Sir Walter Rawley. Judge Jenkins.
We are beholden to the Fleet, for Fleta. To the Tower, for an Incomparable
History. And Newgate it self, in our unhappy Civil War, could cry out, (...):
Neither the Laws written by the Finger of God in Tables of Stone, nor those of
England, (which may challenge a modest Eternity ex part ante, as having their
Original hid like the Head of Nilus, in the folds of Antiquity;) will allow
Subjects to take up Arms against their King.

The Soul may Aethereas volitare per Auras, take the fresh Air, and like the
Be suck Honey out of variety of Classick Authors; when the Body is confined,
and like a Tennis-Ball tossed from Hazard to Hazard, in a Solitary Walk, from
this, to the opposite Wall, of a Dark, Pitiful Chamber: But how can they who
have the Pestilence for their Jailer, alleviate the pressures of an unhappy
Condition by a sweet Thought, or brisker Meditation? They sit like Niobe turned
to Stones; or if great Grief can speak, it is in Jeremiahs Dialect; Is it
nothing to you, all ye that pass by, (To your Country-houses, and are no more
heard of till the Tempest be over?) behold and see if there be any sorrow, like
unto my sorrow; which is done unto Me; wherewith the Lord has afflicted Me in
the day of his fierce Anger? Lam. 1.12.

Burning is the Punishment of great and heinous Malefactors; and yet that is the
Epithet of a common Fever. If the dismal Ingredient of prevailing Venom be
added to the Trophy of a less observable Choleric Putrefaction, the Meazles,
and Smallpox (borrowing the Future tence from Elishas curse,) make a Gehazi; a
Leper, from the Crown of the Head, to the Sole of the Foot; and it is well if at
last he escapes alive from the Pot-sheards, and the Dunghill.

A more Rampant Malignity generates the Spotted-Feaver. But if the Pale Horse
of Death rushes more outragiously into the Battle, and tramples upon his
Thousands, and ten Thonsands, then the Plague, (that Attila of Diseases)
harases City, and Country; and Michael the Angel of Vengeance (in spite of the
Rabbis Proverb) has two Wings, as well as Gabriel; and strikes whole Legions,
cum Flagello Domini, with the Scorpions of incensed Justice; Imprinting Botches
under the Ears, and about the Neck; Blains of a Straw-colour, and Bronish Blew;
fiery and corroding Carbuncles; Party-colored spots on the Breast, Back, etc.
All which may be termed not only Ingravescentis Morbi, sed Peccatorum Indices;
not only the symptoms of a Spreading and Depopulating Plague, but the Tokens
of Indignation upon a stiff-necked, and stubborn Generation; whom odious and
unnatural Broyls could not terrify from the superfluity of Naughtiness; nor
the Olive Branch of Peace, and a return from Captivity allure to a Spiritual
(well if to a Vocal) Te Deum Laudamus.

But let us Rentour Hearts, and not our Garments; acknowledge our
Transgressions, and set our Iniquities before us; doubtless we that have
cumbred the Ground long, (though Glory be to God on High, we are not yet cut
down) are as great sinners as those buried under the Rubbish of this Tower of
Shilo. Let Phinehas execute Judgment, that the Plague may be staid. Let the
Priest cry mightily betwixt the Temple, and the Altar; and the peoples
amendment say Amen. Let the Rich Scribe and Pharisee bring their Talents; the
middle sort their Shekels, the poor Widow her two Mites, to provide Bread and
Triacle; Meat and Medicine; Pest-houses, and Keepers; and all other Materials
which may serve Religiously to Exorcise the Spirit of Desperation out of those
whom the deplorable Mortality have enforced to want Doctor, Apothecary,
Surgeon, etc. or another Lues Epidemica, an Universal deadness of Trading,
has put into the Furnace of Affliction; and made like Narcissus in Tacitus,
Certa sibi pernicies, seu Britannicus rerum, seu Nero potiretur; Foreseeing
approaching destruction to them, and their Families, if not by the Plague, yet
by Famine; Surgunt indocti and coelum rapiunt, cum nos cum Doctrina nostra
mergimur in Gehennam. The unlearned practical Christian rakes Heaven by
violence, whilst the speculative Master in Israel, with all his Quidlibets, and
Quodlibets of a dead Faith, is plunged into Hell.

Those Heathen, that were deservedly Renowned in their several Ages, for
Improving the Light of Nature to a severe virtuous Life, shall find the Day of
Judgment an easier-to-be entreated and propitious Audit, then the Profane,
Dissolute, or Scraping, penurious Professors of the Doctrine of the Holy Jesus;
who will not be persuaded to work out their Salvation with Fear, and Trembling;
Although they may have a Light to their Feet, and a Lanthorn to their Paths,
the glad Tidings of the Gospel; which shines clearly, and beautifies every
corner of our Horizon. This made Cyrus the Persians Deathbed soft, and stufft
his pillow with Down; I have been Merciful, and Munificent, cast continually a
good Aspect, and made it my business to benefit, and contrive the felicity of
all Regions under my Influence; and now I expect to find favor, and receive
my Dividend of his Loving Kindness; who is a great God, from whom Men challenge
their Original, and Mercy flows in a deep Channel, and perpetually refreshing
Streams. O si hoc esset pugnare! O how happy might we count our selves if this
were to fight! hum'd out the sleepy Soldier, enamored of his Nest; stretching
his hands over his head, and opening his eyes by halves. Balaam, an Inchanter,
wished that he might die the death of the Righteous, and that his last end
might be like his. (He durst not curse Israel, and in those days 'twas not the
fashion to curse themselves) But not a syllable fell from him expressing an
inclination (not so much as a whimsical Velleity) to live the Life of the
Righteous. But notwithstanding the Ass was smitten three times, yet she
deserved better of her Master, then either that son of Beor, or any of the sons
of Belial do of their God; For though she turned aside out of the way, crushed
his foot against a Wall, and at last fell under him; yet she has a far better
Apology for her self, then the presumptuous sinner; Numb. 22.30. Am not I
thine Ass? A dutiful acknowledgment of property; Upon which thou have ridden
ever since I was thine unto this day; A frequent service, and probably for a
considerable part of the Life of that short-lived Animal; Was I ever wont to do
so unto thee? 'Twas a rare contingent, a single instance, no incorrigible
fault, no inveterate Jadishness; And he said, Nay. A great truth sure, that
anger had not the face to deny. If God be God, then serve him; set resolutely
upon the whole duty of Man. Open your hands wide unto the poor and needy. Thou
shall do no murder. No, why then does Abels blood sum up into the third
Heaven, and sue an Appeal against malicious execrable Cain? Homo Homini Deus,
is no repealed Statute, though vanity and sordidness wave the Reading upon it.
Am I my Brothers keeper? This froward and contumacious Answer was given; But
trace the Dialogue a little further, God had no sooner examined the cause, and
pronounced, Cursed art thou from the Earth; But the Murderer makes this rueful
Reflection, My punishment is greater then I can bear.

Forum nactus sylvam suam, Testem mortuum, Apparitorem Umbram, Carnificem
Culpam, Judicem Deum: London is the Shire-house, those who die for default of
seasonable Administrations Witnesses, Conscience the Accuser, God the Judge,
the Devil the Executioner.

Semper ego Auditor tantum, nunquamne reponam? Shall I hear Sermon after
Sermon, and not make my life the practice of Piety?

Turn over Volumes of Devotion, and not be converted? Walk through Hospitals,
and never merit the truly Honorable style of a Benefactor? Make thy Chest
sweat, whilst the Poor quake for cold? My sin, and luxury Hydropick, while the
indigent starve? Wallow in the complacency of Honor and Riches, when my
Saviors side is pierced through with a spear? His forgotten and despised
Members cry out, O my head, my head! My heart, my heart! And pine, and
languish, and die. God is not mocked: and God forbid but that we should be able
immediately to digest the sincere Milk of the Word, S. Jam. 1.27. Pure Religion
and undefiled before God, even the Father, is this; To visit the Fatherless,
and Widows in their Afflictions, and to keep himself unspotted from the World.
And then, Procul hinc, procul ite Prophani! I am none of your Tribe, ye
Nimrods, ye mighty Hunters, and Unsatiable Birds of prey! And Nabal, I
magnanimously defy you, in the words of the same Apostle, Chap. 2. v. 18. Yea,
a man may say, Thou have Faith, and I have Works; Show me thy Faith without thy
Works, and I will show thee my Faith by my Works.

FINIS.

