AN Awakening Word TO THE CHURCHES, SAINTS, AND PROFESSORS; In this Slumbring
and Sleepy Day.

Printed at London, in the year 1664

A Brother in Tribulation, and in the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus Christ, To
the Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, called to
sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the Blood of
Jesus; Together with those yet uncalled, or however distinguished, or
scattered, greeting.
My Brethren and dearly loved in Jesus the Christ,
I Say the Truth in Christ, I lie not, my Conscience also bearing me witness in
the holy Ghost, that I have great heaviness and continual sorrow for you in my
heart, out of an earnest and true Christian-affection to you, and an uncessant
desire that you may prosper in soul and body, and may be made fit, and
accounted worthy to stand with the Lamb at his appearing upon the Mount Sion:
But though I have very strong persuasions upon my heart, that this Day of the
Lord is very very very near, even at the door; yet I have a holy jealousy upon
many, and fear that multitudes, whose Names are written in the Lambs Book of
Life, are wonderfully unfit and unprepared to meet their Lord.

I am hereupon greatly pressed in my spirit to write in love to such, as a
Brother, and beseech you in the bowels of Jesus Christ to accept it. I have
cause out of deep sense and sad experience in my self, greatly to mourn over
the sin and punishment of old Adam, as it is manifest in me to this very day,
which exceedingly darkens the Glory of the New Creation in me; So that by that
Old-man's abiding still with me, I am greatly hindered from being so
serviceable to Jesus Christ as I would be, and much detained from those
Comforts in Divine Enjoyments through the Spirit, which I desire. I cannot
indeed terminate the evil of the flesh in a person regenerate, nor am I able to
discover the wills of the natural heart, or the advantages Satan has by this
Old man in the Saints: But this I can say of my self, through Grace, That
though I delight in the Law of God, after the inward man, yet I see another Law
in my Members warring against the Law of my Mind, (and worse also) [bringing me
into captivity] to the Law of sin which is in my Members; So that here, here I
am driven out of self, my best self, and only by faith in the Promise and
Covenant, flee to the Mercy-Seat, as sprinkled with the Blood of the Lamb slain
from the foundation of the world, and so I can say with Paul, -- I thank God
through Jesus Christ [our Lord;] I say Our Lord; -- and not only my Lord, for
he is, Jesus, -- to save all his People from their sins. If this were only my
particular state and case thus to be burdened with Corruption, hindering me
from good, and inclining me to evil, this humble Acknowledgement lays a bond
upon you, as Brethren, jointly to pray for me, -- that I might be delivered
from this body of death; But alas I may, I may say of you all what Paul writ to
the Churches of Galatia; -- The Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the
Spirit against the Flesh; and these are contrary the one to the other; [so that
ye cannot do the things that ye would,] but in many [in many things,] we offend
all.

I have (the Lord knows) tender bowels to all, yet am I humbly bold to say; --
That such Persons (if any such be) as dream of a Perfection in the flesh in
this world, are under dreadful delusions, and give little testimony of the
in-being of the Spirit in them, though they pretend so much for it. I judge if
such an estate in this life in the estate of the flesh were attainable, surely
God would have magnified that degree of grace to some persons, more or less, at
one time or other: But I find it only recorded of Jesus Christ, the only
begotten of the Father, who had no sin, and in whose mouth was found no guile;
for he was God-man, in whom the divine and humane Natures were united in one
Person, to make him a fit Mediator. Jesus Christ must have the true Nature of
sinful man, to pay the price of sin; and yet he must not have the sin of that
Nature, for then he had justly suffered for his own sin, and had not been a
competent Surety for sinners, who must be himself harmless and holy. Bear with
me though I mention these first Principles of Religion in this day: for, though
according to that Light of the Gospel, which has shined amongst us, we might
all have been Preachers, yet by our corruptions, together with Satan's
delusions, we have sadly overslipped the day of the Gospel-Liberty, and have
gained little true spiritual Light, God knows, that most Saints (I fear) are
babes, and but babes in Christ at this day. It will not now recall the day of
Gospel-Liberty abused, to recount Saints failings; but I hope the smart of
misspent time will help the Lord's People better to improve the day of mercy,
when mercy again restores them. But the Lord knows, well might Saints be
overcome with heat of an unwonted (if not unknown) prosperity, while they
cannot keep close to God under the Rod. I intend not to stay upon this subject,
but if I mistake not greatly, I discover some Professors (and well it were, if
there were but some) to be in danger by letting out their hearts too much in
lawful things (so called at least) I mean in the cares and pleasures of this
life. O Friends, I cannot but mourn deeply to see (at this day) so many
(formerly persons full of life and zeal for Christ) now marry themselves to,
and indeed are buried in the world; so that the day of Christ is like to come
upon them unawares, and I fear they will be found foolish virgins at last. I do
but hint this by the way, but who knows to what ears and hearts the Lord may
direct this holy jealousy by his Spirit, and give some poor souls that
awakening, with sight and sorrow for this sin never more to be sorrowed for?

My Brethren; if in the Apostles times, those were looked upon and called the
last times, what then may we judge of these times [we are cast into] who live
1600 years after most of the Apostles and first Saints after Christ? Surely, if
those were the last times, then our times must be the last part of the last
times, and the very dregs of evil and sinful days. O! at what a high rate do
men sin now (one or other) who slight, or oppose the glorious Gospel of
Free Grace, and the remission of sin in the Blood of the Lamb, Jesus Christ,
after this Gospel has been so eminently preached and witnessed to, by the
Father, the Son, the Spirit, and the Saints, for above 1600 years? The whole
time of the Gentiles Tyranny was at first limited to 42 Months, and the
Witnesses sackcloth-state to 1260 days: and if that time prophetically shall
signify 1260 years, that time must now be very near its period, when Christ
will again assume his Supreme Power in the World and over the World, according
to the Promises and Covenant of the Father. My Brethren, do but at this day
cast an eye back, and O what a very very little of all the Promises,
Prophecies, and Visions too, of the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles are yet
to be fulfilled, if we thoroughly consider it? This very meditation has been a
wonderful help to my faith, when I have looked backward, and found, that from
the time (especially) that God called forth Abraham, and engaged himself to him
by Promise and Covenant (in Christ,) no one thing failed of all that ever God
promised to Abraham or his Seed, though the most of the Promises were of great
things, and after long time to have accomplishment: very little of all which is
yet to be fulfilled at this day. To help you in your meditations, consider the
Prophecies of the state of Abraham's Seed in Egypt, and how God fulfilled those;
Consider the Prophecies of Christ's Incarnation and coming in the flesh, and
how punctually all those have had their fulfillings; Look back to the
Prophecies of all the monstrous beastly tyrannical Powers of the World, how
they have had their actual fulfilling hitherto; Weigh seriously how Prophecies
and Scriptures have had fulfilling in and at Christ's death, and how God
brought about his own Counsels, and neither men nor Devils could hinder it. Let
it be much upon your thoughts thoroughly to consider, how in all the reign and
rage of the last Antichristian Powers in this Western World, who have far
exceeded in Policy, Cruelty and Murder, all the four heathen beastly States
before them, and in less than 1200 years has shed more of the Blood of Saints
by Persecution in this Western Empire, than all the Heathen Pagan Powers have
done, take in Turk, Persian, and all the rest: and that yet God Almighty should
in the days of these Antichristian Kings, and in their Kingdoms spread the
Gospel, preserve Saints, and raise the Kingdom of his Son, notwithstanding all
their power and rage (according to Promise and Prophecy) even where the Whore
sits, and in the Kingdoms of those earthly Kings, over whom the Woman reigns:
this is mavelous in my eyes, I say, that in all these Times and States Jesus
Christ should yet preserve a competent number of Witnesses, even when and where
they were tortured and martyred for their Testimony for Jesus Christ, and those
beastly savage Powers yet could neither stop their mouths, nor wear and root
them out, as they have attempted, but that they are still increased in their
number, and in their witness for Christ against the Beast; this, this is the
manifestation of the Power and Faithfulness of God to make good his Promises,
and Covenant, and Oath to Abraham and his Seed.

Now my Brethren, if you seriously take a view of all these Promises and
Prophecies, what, what a little, a very very very little remains to be
fulfilled, but the fall of these Beasts, and the exaltation of Jesus the
Christ, the Lamb upon the Mount Sion; Blessed be God, we, we see so much of the
Night is past, and therefore the day must be at hand: My dearly Beloved, the
fields look white to the harvest, and the crop is ready to cut, yea, the
harvest-man is prepared, he has his sharp Sickle in his hand ready to thrust
it in, and the loud Cry of the Angel of the Temple will prevail. I say the
fields begin to look white to the harvest; But alas, how few comparatively,
even amongst the Lord's People, are there, who show they either see it or
believe it? The Lord knows it is a very sleepy time with the Virgins; their
long and sore afflictions make them heavy, and the night is dark, and there is
none to say, How Long? This stay of the Bridegroom (I fear) deadens the Hopes,
and sinks the Faith of many, which should indeed quicken them; Come it will,
and that suddenly, all believe: And why not now? for certain this great Day of
the Lord is very near, our Lord is coming; for his immediate Harbingers have
been seen up and down above this three years, Signs in Heaven and Earth, and
stay long he cannot; therefore why do ye not believe and make ready? Who knows
but this very Epistle may be the last Alarm to awaken slumbering sleeping
Saints? therefore slight it not. Or who can say but this may be the last Call
from Jesus Christ to his Elect in these parts, -- to come out of Babylon?

Precious Souls! I have very strong impulses upon my heart, that I am moved by
the Lord in tenderness to differing Saints, to write these lines, and deal
plainly with you, as becomes a Brother: I have no other design in it (God
knows) but the Glory of Christ, the Honor of the Gospel, and the present and
eternal Comfort of Saints. I have by Providence been rolled up and down, and
cast into several Families of Professors under various Forms, and have been a
diligent Observer of such persons as I have been conversant with; so that
(possibly) I may have better ground to write this General Epistle, then some
others of the Lords Servants, who could perform it better then my self. But
whatever imperfection any do discover in the Penman, cover but with Love, and
then I know you may discern a Voice of the Spirit.

Brethren, suffer, I beseech you, from me that by exhortation, which is the
command of Jesus the Christ, -- Come out of her my People, (that is, Babylon)
that ye be not Partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues:
-- of her plagues: This Call is by a Voice from Heaven, or out of the heavenly
state; which Call, with the ground moving the Lord Jesus to give one Call more
at last to his deceived People, is more fully expressed by Jeremiah, -- Flee out
of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man [his soul,] be not cut off in
her iniquity: for this is the time of the Lords vengeance, he shall render unto
her a recompense: I beseech you mistake me not, I press not this seasonable
Exhortation upon you as if I intended to urge a new thing upon you, never heard
of before; no, no, I know the Exhortation is old and common, and yet (I fear)
the voice of Christ is not understood in it: I judge the words are frequently
used and pressed in all Forms, yea even in Babylon, and by her Priests. Now the
Light of the Gospel is so gloriously broken forth, and grosser Abominations are
so discovered, -- that the Devil and his Ministers are fain to transform
themselves into Angels of Light, and learn the Language of heavenly Saints; and
here he plays his last Game. Where is that Form of People at this day
pretending to worship God, but they cry out of Babylon, and call -- Come out of
Babylon, yea, even in Babylon? O then what a deep undiscovered Mystery is
Babylon! I profess, I know no Form of People pretending Religious Worship, but
they look upon themselves as the only true Worshippers of God, and their Way
the only true Way of Worship, and esteem all other Ways false and
Antichristian, and therefore call upon People in other Forms to separate, --
Come out of Babylon, and come to them. Did I not speak this knowingly, from the
mouths of Leaders and Teachers, (and I believe is known to you all) I should
not have dared to to have laid such a charge upon Saints: and what is all this
but Babel and Babylon, Darkness and Confusion? This is the very spring and rise
of Persecution, where the stronger Party carries it against the weaker or
lesser, like Heathens, or mere men; and is not this Babylon? Look well into old
Babylon, or new Babylon, and what were the one, or what are the other, but
Models and Forms of Civil and Ecclesiastical Governments, framed and compiled
by such as they took to be the wisest and most able men in their times, in
great Councils, neither seeing nor seeking further than humane Reason, and the
greater Vote; and Laws or Canons thus constituted, by the Sword and Power of
Flesh to force and compel Obedience thereunto? And certainly this is Babylon.

My Brethren, I confess I have a very narrow path to walk in, to deal
faithfully between God and his People, and not offend one Party: but I can say,
(if it were the will of God) I would neither provoke the One, nor offend the
Other; yet if I become an Enemy to any, because I tell them the Truth, which
they do not know, neither are willing to know, I shall beg that the Lord would
both discover and pardon that sin also, that nothing may keep them from seeing
the Lord in the Beauties of Holiness, in the approaching day of Refreshment.

Object. But possibly a quick Retort is made, That I say my Charge too deep,
when I charge Saints to be still in Babylon, whom they defy: for although the
Saints are divided and distinguished into many Forms, yet those Forms or Models
of Discipline and Government they are under, are not formed by the Wit and
Wills of men, but from the Word of God, and most of these Separate-People are
so far from Persecution, that they would have none compelled against
Conscience; but we ought to separate from evil Persons and Things.

Answ. Here, here is the great point indeed, which would require a volumn to
treat fully on; yet if the Lord would but give in the light of his Spirit in
these things, Babylon was fallen, was fallen indeed, Breaches among Saints were
made up, and the Glory of new Jerusalem would shine forth presently; for
nothing hinders it (instrumentally) but Babylonish darkness and confusion
amongst Saints, though yet they see it not. This therefore being the main work
of our day, to seek and beg -- That Spirit of Christ's mouth (the Spirit that
gave and reveals the Mysteries of the Gospel) by which the Lord discovers
Babylon, and will also destroy her with the brightness of his coming, as he is
more manifested to the Saints: I shall humbly crave leave to commend some
present brief thoughts to you, and the examination of them to you to improve,
through the blessing of God, by the Spirit in Jesus.

First, If I assert, [That most Models and Forms for Worship, or in which God
is worshipped at this day] are Babylonish, and formed by the Wits and Wills of
Men, even among Saints; I can retract my Words, but yet grieve and mourn that
it is so, and that I should have cause in the Name of Jesus Christ to lay so
deep and dreadful a Charge upon Saints and Professors after so long a time of
Gospel light amongst Us. That the Charge is true, is too manifest: For if the
various Forms of professing People were directed by the Spirit of Truth, and
not by the Wits and Spirits of men, whence then comes all this Babylonish
Confusion and Divisions among Saints both in Doctrine and Order? To charge this
evil upon the Spirit of God, is blasphe my in a high Degree; and therefore the
sin must lie upon Saints, for so yet I would account them. I shall not enlarge
upon the subject, but must take the boldness to say, -- That by want of the
Light and Guidance of the Spirit of Truth, poor dark bewildered Saints mistake
their Way and Work: -- One taking the Scripture in one sense, another in
another sense, and so does a third, a fourth, and a fifth, etc. and so such
persons under such a persuasion, (and Light, as they term it, which is Darkness
often times) fall into Parties and Forms; and is not this Babylon? Yet every
Party cries out of Babylon, and calls -- Come out of Babylon: O what has sin
brought that excellent Creature Man, to! that his Understanding should be so
darkened, and the Man so deceived, that he verily thinks that he serves God,
when indeed he serves the Devil! O what has sin brought Man to! To take
Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness! To take Error for Truth, and Truth
for Error! And yet this is the state of most, if not all Saints, in one degree
or other. That I may (through Grace) speak home to differing Saints, and
clearly discover the bottom of Divisions, and set upon the hearts of the Elect
a deep conviction of these common and dreadful Mistakes about several Forms and
Models of Divine Worship, I shall fully demonstrate to them that while they are
in this state, they are in Babylon, and that the Lord Jesus Christ has a
special respect to these Divisions, in this last call to his People, -- To come
out of Babylon. That I may do this Work with the more clearness to conviction,
I shall observe this Order:

First, Prove that People in this state, are in Babylon, or that this state is
Babylon, where men's own Spirits are their Guides.

Secondly, Demonstrate that people in these Forms, are not led into them by the
Spirit of God.

This is the Assertion I am to prove, -- That those particular Forms and Models
of Worship and Government, into which People of several Persuasions are formed
and united, accounting severally, that only they in such a Form have the
Spirit of Truth with them, and that all other Persons and Forms are erroneous,
false, and to be separated from, as in Babylon; and yet this is very Babylon. I
hope it needs not be put upon me to prove that amongst us there are many Forms
of Separate-people under these persuasions, and in this practice, while both
are so common; but I judge it not convenient to give them by Name, but proceed
to make good my Charge against the Thing. Therefore consider these few things
seriously:

First, That this practice is Babylonish and from Babylon, is evident: for thus
mystical Babylon was founded, and raised her building -- from the Scriptures,
as her Leaders and Rulers judged the Scriptures spoke, or at least as they made
them to speak, by corrupting and perverting the Scriptures: Who are so ignorant
that they do not know that at this very day, Babylon would father all their
Power and Jurisdiction they exercise, even to Idolatry and Murder, upon the
Scriptures and Divine Authority from God? and yet are Babylon for all that,
yea, and because of that: Now where do men raise their different persuasions,
but from different taking (or mistaking) the true and right sense of the
Scriptures? all is fathered there, and so they make the Scripture speak what
their Reason or Understandings judge to be the mind of the Spirit, and so they
close: and does not Babylon the same, and has as good Warrant as these?

Secondly, That these several Sects and Divisions in and about the Worship of
God and Government, do arise and grow out of the Wits and Wills of Men (as Men)
is clear and undeniable upon this ground, -- That however persons in their
present persuasions seem high and fixed in their way, pretending the light and
leading of the Spirit strongly, and therefore separate from all other forms,
and deeply judge and censure all differing from them; yet after this,
(supposing they have received better light) these very persons fall into some
other Form, and sometimes into the same Form they a little before separated
from, as Antichristian and Babylonish; and the utmost they can say for their
change, is, They were then persuaded in their Judgments that was the Truth
then, and this is the Truth now; and does not Babylon say the same? Good Lord!
what a deep Mystery is Babylon yet to most Saints! and what dreadful sins are
the sins of Babylon! -- that makes the holy God, the holy Spirit, and the holy
Scriptures to be their Authority and Warrant to sin at this rate! and yet all
this while cry, -- Come out of Babylon?

Thirdly, That these People and Sects are only formed and founded in the
Wits, Wills, and humane Reason of Men, also is very manifest from the Fruits
and Effects following them: -- What carnal and sinful prejudice, divisions and
censuring is there, in these Parties, of their Brethren, who cannot come up to
their present thoughts and persuasions? However poor souls deceive themselves,
and are hurried by blind zeal, yet for certain the fruits most appearing in
them, are fruits of the Flesh, and not of the Spirit: for Saints to be divided
in heart, and into Parties about Teachers and Forms, so as to envy, revile and
separate, so as to break the Bond of Christian Love and Order, this discovers
such to be very Babes in the School of Christ, and to be more carnal than
spiritual: This is not mine, but Paul's reasoning, (1 Cor. 3.3, 4.) and the
Argument is not the weaker because it is old, -- Ye are yet carnal: for whereas
there is among you envyings, and strife, and divisions or factions, are ye not
carnal and walk as men, or according to man? While one says, I am of Paul, and
another, I am of Apollos, are ye not carnal? I hope a word to the wise is
enough, therefore I would only leave this to consideration, -- That hatred,
variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, and envyings (Gal.
5.19, 20, 21.) among Saints, in and about the Ways and Worship of God, are
really the fruits of the flesh, as well as Adultery, Idolatry and Murder: And
is it not then high time that the Lord should awaken dreaming deluded Saints,
and indeed call them out of Babylon, that they lose not the Light of the Lamb
in his Appearing and Glory with his holy Host, and they (outwardly) fall and
perish with Babylon, while they think they are in Mount Sion?

Secondly, I shall in the next place demonstrate the foresaid Position
negatively, that these Forms and Factions are not from the Spirit of God, but
arise in Peoples own deceived spirits, and as hurried by Satan, in such
ignorant zeal; the very same which stirred up Saul (after, Paul) to persecute
the true Christians, and the true Church of Christ, ( Act. 22.3, 4, etc. Act.
26.1, 2, 3, etc. Act. 21.20, 21.) and thought he did well, and his duty; yea,
it is the same spirit which stirred up the Christian Jews to persecute Paul,
from mistaken zeal for the Law: My Brethren, I beseech you hear me patiently,
examine and then judge; I assure you, my Bowels yern toward you, and Christian
Compassion moves me only in the Lord to use this plainness for the good and
comfort of your Souls, and that you may no longer deceive your selves; and that
when our Lord shall come (whom I hope ye look for) he may not find you in
Babylon, smiting your fellow servants, with heart, tongue, or hand, but that
you may be ready to enter into your Lords Joy. Therefore consider,

First, These sinful Sects and Divisions among Saints, are carnal, fleshly, and
from men's own spirits, and not from the Spirit of God: for the Spirit of God is
but one; there is but one God, one Christ, one Spirit, and one Way of true
spiritual Worship of God, and not many: This the Apostle lays down ( Ephesians.
4.4, 5, 6.) as a general Principle, -- There is one Body (of Christ) and one
Spirit, one Lord (Jesus) one Faith, one Baptism (or Form of true Worship) one
God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all. Mark
it, there is but one true Mystical Body of Christ, but one Spirit of Truth, but
one Faith to Salvation, but one true Form of Gospel Worship, but one Lord
Jesus, and but one God and Father of all the Elect by Jesus Christ: Therefore
all ways and forms of Worship [but one, revealed by the Spirit of Truth in the
Scripture of Truth] are false, erroneous, Babylonish, and by the wits and wills
of carnal deceived men, and not from the Spirit of God.

Secondly, These sad and sinful Factions and Forms among Saints, are not from
the Spirit of Truth, but from their own deceived spirits, is thus manifested;
-- The Spirit of Truth teaches other things, and better things than these:
Paul says, The fruits of the flesh are manifest -- Adultery, Idolatry, Murder
-- Hatred Variance, Emulation, Wrath, Strife; -- But the fruit of the Spirit,
is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, --
Gal. 5.22, 23. I may not enlarge here upon the particular Graces of the Spirit
as they put forth themselves in Saints, but I may say this in general, -- That
the Spirit in Saints can distinguish between Saint and Saint, strong and weak,
enlightened or dark, Saints at liberty and Saints under temptations; and so
only the breach is made up, and the wound healed. O Brethren, if we were all
acted more by the Spirit of Grace, and less by our own carnal selfish spirits,
we should be more like Jesus Christ, more full of bowels and compassion to the
ignorant, and such as are out of the way. I shall end this in that healing
Exhortation of the Apostle, Gal. 6.1. -- Brethren, if a man be over-taken in a
fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such a one in the Spirit of Meekness,
considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted.

Thirdly, These sinful Factions amongst Saints, are from men's own spirits, and
not from the Spirit of God and Grace; for they have neither precept nor
practice of Saints in the Gospel to warrant it, but the contrary altogether.
The Old Testament is the declaration of one Covenant, of one God, one Church,
and one Worship; The New Testament also declares of one New Covenant, one of
Jesus the Christ, one Faith, one Baptism, one Mystical Body: yet in that one
Body many Members, or that Body divided into many Societies, Companies or
Congregations by habitation or near co-habitation; but the whole Body of
Christian Saints living together in one City, or a part in several Cities or
Countries were all of one Faith, in one order of the Gospel, and all in mutual
Love and Fellowship as one Body or Church. This was the state of the Primitive
Churches of the Gospel founded by Christ and his Apostles, amongst which Jesus
Christ walked, and amongst whom the Apostles labored and conversed, and none
other: therefore such Societies only are Churches of Christ. It is now (the
Lord knows) a hard matter to number up the several Factions of People formed
and united in several Opinions which Christ and the Gospel knows not; and yet
every party professing to worship God above others, each several Company
accounting their way the only true way of Worship, and that only, and so they
divide and separate from all other Persons and Forms as false, Antichristian,
and in Babylon, while (I fear) their Doctrine and Practices are merely
Babylonish, and were never known in the Churches of Saints till Antichrist
arose. O what a wonderful cheat is Antichrist! and what dreadful Darkness and
Delusion yet possesses Saints, that they take themselves to be in Sion, when
indeed they are in Babylon! and Christ knows it is so and therefore calls, --
Come out of Her my People. Poor hearts, I speak my experience (and by light
received) my soul mourns for you, and mourns after you, and to my Exhortation I
join my prayers, -- That yet the Lord would give forth the Spirit more fully to
discover your present state and standing, for little do you think what spirits
you are led by. Certainly persons under such singular Opinions discover woeful
pride and ignorance (whoever they be;) and these two are the very Basis upon
which Babylon is built, and the Pillars upon which she stands: remove these,
and Babylon is in the dust. The better to manifest this to you, consider,

First, Persons under these singular Opinions of their own Light and ways, so
as to condemn all others, and separate from them as Antichristian, and account
themselves only to have the Spirit and be the only People of God, and none but
they; this discovers wonderful pride, arrogance and rashness; and ordinarily
these singular high thoughts prove but thoughts and mistakes at last. This is a
sad dividing Spirit and Principle of Antichrist, and discovered to creep in
early, in Paul's time. It was this Spirit which was got into the Church at
Crinth, which caused them to despise the Apostles themselves, as men of little
light, and of small gifts to them: What else can we make of those humble
Rebukes Paul writes to that Church, 1 Cor. 4.8, 10. -- Now ye are full, now ye
are rich, ye have reigned as Kings without us; and I would to God that ye did
reign, that we also might reign with you: -- For we are fools for Christ's
sake, but ye are wife in Christ; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are
honorable, but we are despised. Such a spirit also was among the Romans, which
the Apostle reproves, Romans 2. Who make their boasts of God, and knowing his
will, and are able to approve of the most excellent things and (are confident)
that they are lights to the blind, instructors of the foolish; -- who have the
form of the knowledge of the Truth: and yet even these pers^^^ caused the Name
of God to be blasphemed among the Gentiles. It is, it is a shame to mention the
pride of deceived Professors, who professing themselves wise (above all others)
become fools, or discover their weakness, being giddy and high-minded, directly
opposite to the Spirit of Saints, the Spirit of Christ, his Apostles, and the
Gospel, which teaches more humility, and to look upon the things of others as
better than our own. It is wonderful strange that persons professing the
Gospel, should yet be such strangers to the Spirit of the Gospel, to say no
more.

Secondly, These singular Opinions and Practices, discover wonder^^l ignorance
and weakness, to accuse their Brethren, and separate from them as in Babylon,
and this is their own state; nay, possibly those they condemn, are nearer to
the rule of the Gospel than themselves. Surely if this charge which some
Professors lay upon others, shall not bear weight in the Balance of the
Sanctuary, the accusers will be found to speak evil of the things they know
not, but by a deceived carnal judgment; and that is sad. When that sad Division
in the Church of Corinth was declared to Paul, that they said, -- I am of Paul,
and I am of Apollos, I am of Cephas, and I am of Christ. -- The Apostle
charge this as a sin of ignorance, and to convince them, he uses this as his
main argument; -- Is Christ divided? has Christ so many bodies? and leaves
them that to consider. This was so contrary to the received Principles of the
Gospel, that he judged the pondering upon that, was enough to discover their
own carnal thoughts to be the spring of such divisions; for the Spirit of
Christ and the Gospel teaches the quite contrary; -- Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, etc. bearing one another, burdens, and [so
fulfilling the Law of Christ;] and therefore Paul presses this general
exhortation from the Prison, -- I beseech you, that ye w^^k worthy of the
vocation wherewith ye are called, [with all lowliness and meekness,] with
long-suffering, forbear one another in love, [endeavoring] to keep the [unity
of the Spirit] in the Bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4.1, 33. And the ground of this
Exhortation the Apostle draws from the Oneness of the Mystical Body of Christ,
and of Gospel Worship, verse. 4, 5, 6. Alas, alas, the Divisions among Saints
sufficiently discover their infant-state, and their new breaking forth of
Babylon, that they are so spotted and tinctured with Babylon; and no question,
but as the Spirit of Light and Truth is more given forth, the Spirit of
Antichrist will be more manifest in Satan's closest delusions, that he cannot
deceive long. If I might not too much offend the weak, I could ascribe a great
part of Saints divisions to arise from abused Liberty, and prejudice against
the able Preachers of the Gospel; I do not, I dare not acquit them of sad
failings, which have caused the way of Truth to be evil spoken of, and are an
instrumental cause to move tender and weak Saints to draw into corners, and
follow weak and unsound Teachers; (which was their weakness also) by which
means the Ministers of Antichrist and Babylon have done their work, and brought
the Saints into bondage, etc. But amongst, or above the rest, I would earnestly
commend to you three Characters of Babylon to be heeded.

First, Blasphemy, in denying or invalidating the holy Scriptures.

Secondly, In corrupting the pure Doctrine of Justification in the Blood of
Christ, by bringing in the Doctrine of Universal Redemption, or Christ's dying
equally for all alike.

Thirdly, By instituting or founding the Church, or Churches, in an Opinion, or
submitting to an Opinion, this or that, and not in union with Christ. All these
are in Babylon, and from (...), and will perish with Babylon.

Fourthly, These Factions are (...) not from the Spirit of Grace; and it is too
(...) ^^^^ons and forms are great strangers (...) a holy and inward close
walking with (...) of Saints closet-communion with God; but (...) that is a
very lean Religion which stays in the (...) is worse which comes not to the
Form of Godliness.

My Paper and Prudence calls me to conclude, and therefore I beg of Saints to
look more to their Souls, and to the Duties of Relation natural, civil and
spiritual.

It yet remains that I make some reply to the latter part of the Objection; --
That these persons are against force and persecution for Conscience, but where
persons walk disorderly, to withdraw and separate.

For my part, I cannot say that all Corrections or restraint in abuses and
corruptions in and about the Worship of God under the Gospel, is Persecution;
yet I do confess, that withdrawing or separating from false Ways and false
Worship, is a blessed Ordinance of God when rightly used; but for Saints to
separate from Saints, and withdraw from Churches, and so un-saint the one, and
un-church the other upon men's own bare opinions or self-conjectures, and not in
the Ligh, Spirit and Power of Christ, becomes a sin of a high nature. Alas,
many people know not what spirit they are led by, and it is much to be feared a
change of state may change their minds in some things as well as in others.

My Brethren, in tender Christian Bowels I have written these lines to you, and
shall follow them with earnest and constant prayer, that the Lord would direct
them seasonably to gracious souls by the Spirit of Grace and ^^^^th, that they
may be made effectual to those great ends I have designed them to, Love, Unity
and Peace amongst all Saints, and so shut up this Epistle in the words of Paul,
1 Cor. 1.10. -- Now I beseech you, Brethren, by the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak the same things, and that there be no Divisions or
Schisms among you; but that ye (...) perfectly joined together in the same
mind, and in the same judgment in all the things of God, Christ, Spirit, Gospel
and Saints, and things accompanying your peace and joy here, and glory
hereafter. Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus, and thus rule and reign.

From my Clift in the Rock, the 10th day of the ^th month, 1664. I hope in the
year of Redemption (begun) from (...).
THE END.

