THE AGREEMENT OF THE ASSOCIATED MINISTERS OF THE County of Essex: Proposed to
their particular Congregations, and to all such of the County that love the
Churches Peace; with a word of Exhortation to Brotherly Union.

Romans 14.19. Let us therefore follow after the things which make for peace, and
things wherewith one may edify another.

1 Cor. 1.10, 11, 12. Now I beseech you Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among
you, but that you be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the
same judgment: For it has been declared unto me of you my Brethren, by them
which are of the house of Cloe, that there are contentions among you. Now this
I say, that every one of you says, I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, I am of
Cephas, I am of Christ.

Romans 16.17. Mark them that cause divisions and offenses contrary to the
Doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them.

The second Edition Corrected and much Amended.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Brewster, at the Crane in Pauls-Church Yard. 1658.

THE PREFACE.
THe richest Crown, and highest glory of a people, is to be Gods Peculiar,
related in Covenant-nearness to him, dedicated to his Praise, trusted with his
Word, the only perfect Rule, guided in the alone way of Salvation, the true
Religion; Religion shining in those greater Beauties of Purity, Power, and
Unity (still that Purity being preserved most tenderly, the Power held up
eminently, the Unity maintained entirely) and to have all due provision made
for this Crown, and Glory to descend, and settle upon Posterity for ever.

To consider how much of the forementioned Glory has dwelt in our Land,
together with its gradual declining, great decay, almost departing; the hopes
of Reformation given, and heightened, but soon disappointed, sadly turned into
fears, confusions, and such vast evils, which once let in, have been so
lengthened out: Above all, to seriously view our present condition; of sin,
after soarest smartings, more abounding it spreads farther, roots deeper, rises
higher, but comes daily nearer to a filling up; Of miseries, in complicate
distempers, imminent dangers, and so extreme difficulty of healing, settlement
and security, our hearts cannot but break and bleed within us; To see Souls
more precious than Worlds (whose price can never fall lower) to run unwonted
higher hazards of utter undoing. The numbers among us either more settled in
ignorance, or improved in profaneness, fixed in mere civility and formality,
without any Power of Godliness, or arrived at very Neutrality; and not a few
(which we tremble to mention) under fearful Apostasy of damnable Heresies, and
vilest practices, often also attended with hellish blasphemies. These Souls,
all retaining their invaluable worth, and for ought can be known, possibility
of saving, should they not have all endeavor of pulling them out of the fire;
and if by Covenant-Obligation, and Sacramental-Dedication, they are Christ's
Propriety and Right; should not his Officers and Stewards strive to the utmost
to recover them to the King of Glories use and service? yet these poor
perishing ones, as to any effectual order for Instruction or Reformation,
remain helpless.

Ah! that we could not go higher to the injuries and dissecurities of Religion
it self, in those checks given to the progress, damps to the Power, wide
breaches made in the Unity, and most daring attempts against the very Being and
Reality; almost no Doctrine or practice escaping vain doubting, yea impious
vilifying and decrying. Add that further danger of Opportunity and Temptation,
either of shifting ways and Religions, till the substance and foundation is
overturned, or for to shake off profession of Godliness, shut out the
Knowledge, and sit at home at doing nothing.

Besides (which still more endangers) many of the elder sort, (who should
derive Religion to succeeding Times) by sinful indifferency, are ready to let
go their hold of the Truth; and most of the younger, either distracted at
diversities of Ways and Opinions, or disacquainted with the very principles of
Christianity, are never like to take sure hold of it.

Oh that we had not to bewail the dissatisfactions, divisions, distances, and
oppositions, among Brethren of the same household of Faith; and these arising
chiefly from less and lower points and punctillioes, when in fundamentals, and
the main, there is so great an accord. And to all we annex, the offense given
the weak, discouragements to comers in to godliness, just scandal to many at
home, and in Foreign Nations, opening wide the mouths, and strengthening the
hands of Adversaries against us; and the most (if not all these evils) arising
chiefly from our unestablishment, as to Scripture and Gospel Order.

Therefore when Souls are thus perishing, Truth lies bleeding, divisions
continuing, enemies insulting, dangers and difficulties not abating, and (which
far transcends all that can be said) the most precious and glorious Name of
Christ so infinitely suffering: All this likewise, when our calamitous
condition is not utterly hopeless, but like the patient languishing, not from
utter defect of remedy, but want of the Physicians willingness to join
together, study the case, and apply the cure, For these things our hearts melt,
and eyes mourn, till the Lord look down from heaven and help: But when all
looking, bewailing, pities and prayers can little avail, without endeavors of
redress in a right way first resolved, and then unanimously carried on, for
which the conceived expedient, is a Brotherly Association, long since in our
thoughts, and already begun by others, godly learned, in diverse Counties;
others of different judgment, in point of Church Government, showing the
hitherto hindered Union, to arise, not so much from difference of principles,
inconsistent with Union, as from defect of will and inclination, and this from
a grand failing in Brotherly Love.

Therefore laying aside all private respects, and carnal interests, and
resigning our selves wholly up to the Lord, we resolve in his strength,
according to what we have attained, to unite together for carrying on the work
of Reformation, and discharge of our duties, in our respective places: and not
only an Associating in this particular County, but correspondency with our
Brethren in other parts of the Nation, yet hereby, not binding up, and limiting
our selves from further improvement of Union, which we hope the Lord will teach
and stablish in his time Universally.

And for an Introductive to the work in hand, and freeing our selves from
imputed Innovation in the Doctrine of Religion, we declare, that as all way
formerly we have owned; so we do, (and by Christ's assistance) will ever own,
and maintain the form of wholesome words, contained in the Scriptures, of the
Old and New Testament, in the constantly received sense of the Orthodox
Churches of Christ, expressed more especially (as to the Fundamentals of Faith)
in that most Ancient and Universally received Creed, called the Apostles, in
the therewith agreeing famous Nicene Creed, and that notable Creed of
Athanasius; to which (we might add those excellent Creeds of the Great Councils
of Constantinople, Ephesus, Calcedon, and others,) likewise we declare our
owning, and resolution to own and maintain, the whole Body of Protestant
Reformed Doctrine, so far as it is jointly held forth in their Confessions of
Faith, and in our English Articles, the Articles of Ireland, 1615. And in the
late Confession of Faith, by the Assembly of Divines, so fully and excellently
set forth; and having it, (as to the matter it self) long since impressed on our
thoughts, which some pious and prudent Brethren have published for the Basis
and ground of their Associating work, we think it no diminution, but honor (if
not duty) to tread in their exemplary Christian, and peaceable steps, showing
our ready concurrence with them in building on the same Foundations, which are
these ensuing Rules.

1. THat in the exercise of discipline, it is not only the most safe Course,
but also most conducing to brotherly Union, and satisfaction, that particular
Churches carry on as much of their work with joint, and mutual assistance, as
they can with convenience, and edification: and as little as may be in their
actings, to stand distinctly by themselves, and apart from each other.

2. That where different principles lead to the same practice, we may join
together in the same practice, reserving to each of us our own principles.

3. That where we can neither agree together in principles, nor practice, we
agree to bear with one another differences, that are of a less and
disputable nature, without making them a ground of division among us.

Yet notwithstanding we do not thereby bind up our selves from endeavoring to
inform one another in those things, wherein we differ; so that it be done with
a spirit of Love and Meekness, and with resolution to continue brotherly Amity
and Association, though in those particulars our differences should remain
uncomposed.

Upon these grounds we agree as follows.
1. BEing each of us in our hearts persuaded of our own particular Call by
Christ unto the Gospel Ministry, and that we are entrusted, and employed as
Ambassadors, Stewards, Overseers, Guides, Watchmen and Laborers in his Church,
and Vineyard: We resolve through his help sincerely and constantly, both to
endeavor the fulfilling of this our Ministry; and to labor in all things,
that the Ministry be not justly blamed, that so we may promote the glory of God
in saving the precious souls committed to us.

2. We resolve (through the grace of Christ) to contend daily to the
comprehension of that Ministerial Knowledge and Wisdom, whereby we may
understand our way, and to study more, and strive after that excellent Wisdom,
and Art of winning souls; and likewise the putting on, growing in, and
exercising of that Love, Faithfulness, Compassion, Humbleness, Meekness,
Long-suffering, and such other graces, Christ especially enjoins for the due
discharge of our great trust.

3. We resolve to endeavor the attaining those high ends the Ministry is
appointed unto, by all such ways the Scripture requires, and allows: As by
Preaching, Catechizing, private Instructing of, and conferring with our people,
visiting the sick, and exemplary walking: Together with dispencing the
Sacraments, Church Government, and Brotherly Union for mutual Assistance, and
better carrying on the Work of Christ.

1. In preaching, we agree to hold forth to our hearers, the Word of Life, and
the whole Council of God therein contained, clearly and plainly to their
apprehensions, close and home to their Consciences, and Hearts; by Doctrine,
Instruction, Confutation, Exhortation, Reproof and Comfort, in such manner as
the Scripture prescribes, and according to that wisdom and opportunity the
Lord affords.

2. In Catechizing, we agree to make use of the shorter Catechism made by the
Assembly, which we will endeavor to go through at least once in the year.

3. In private Instruction, and Conference, we agree, as our strength, and
labors will permit: and our people shall offer us occasion (which we earnestly
desire they should) we will instruct them privately, and confer with them of
the things of God, and their souls, in that way each of us shall judge most
expedient for Edification.

4. In visiting the sick, it being our peoples duty in case of sickness,
according to that Rule of the Apostle James 5.14. To send for Elders, We agree,
to go to those, who shall send for us, (unless the case be such, as will not
stand with our public work) and then we will deal with them, sincerely,
plainly, and effectually, as God shall enable us concerning their souls
condition, and eternal salvation.

5. Because every Minister of Christ is to be an example in conversation to his
Flock. To seal his Doctrine by his Exemplarie doing.

Therefore we resolve through Christ to have an especial care that our lives be
not destructive to our Doctrine, but a Confirmation of it, and thereby an
Instigation to our people to follow us in that we follow Christ.

2. Being we are in Scripture enjoined to love all men; and so much as in us
lies, to follow peace; but especially to evidence both peculiar love to all
the godly, and such as walk as becomes the Gospel, and likewise to delight in
their Society. Therefore we shall endeavor in our converse, to demean our
selves accordingly: Yet not any way denying, or withdrawing that charity,
civility, helpfulnesse, and duty, in any sort due to the scandalous, and such
as walk inordinately.

Seeing profaneness, such as Swearing, breaking the Lords Sabbath, together
with Uncleanness, Riot, Drunkenness, and the like enormities, are so
abominable to God, and his Saints, pernicious to the practisers, and often so
mischievous to others that behold them, we resolve besides the public
reproving them, to endeavor their suppressing among our people, so far as
will stand with our calling and convenience.

Reforming Congregations.
1. BEcause Reforming Congregations, and preserving them being Reformed,
depends so much upon settling that Order and Government, which Christ requires
in his Word; therefore we shall use our best endeavors to inform our people of
the nature, necessity, and excellency of this Scripture-Order, and persuade
them to a willing agreement with us; namely, in such things which are clearly
held forth in Scripture, and to which we our selves do all agree, which (though
not to every circumstance) yet for the substance, we shall set down in due
place hereafter.

2. We agree, that every one who professes Faith in Christ, and hopes for
Salvation by him, ought to join himself as a Member to some one or other
Visible Church, where the Word of God is truly preached, and the Sacraments are
duly administered; and that it is most agreeable to order and edification for
those that dwell together in one place, to join together as Members of the same
particular Church; and that a peoples meeting together ordinarily, to attend
upon the public worship in one place, and subjecting themselves to the
Ordinances of Christ therein dispensed, is a real expression of their consent
and agreement, to join as Members to that Church: Yet because we conceive the
more express this Agreement and Consent is, the more fully it puts us in mind
of our mutual relation, and stirs us up the more to the performance of our
respective duties to each other; therefore we have hereunto annexed a
profession of Assent to the Fundamentals of Faith, by way of Explication of the
Creed, called the Apostles (which we all own, and will maintain.) Likewise a
profession of Consent to the terms of the Covenant of Grace, (which also we
all freely agree unto) and both these, we conceive, may not unfitly be used (if
not in the express words,) yet at least as to the substance of them) either at
the Sacrament of Baptism, and the Lords Supper, or on other occasions, as
prudence shall direct.

And we also engage for our selves, to endeavor the settlement and practice of
that Church Order and Government, the Scriptures warrant for admonition,
reproof, and other Church Censures, hoping that our people also will agree with
us in the things fore-expressed, as being not only lawful in themselves, but so
conducing to the Churches Union and Reformation, Ministers encouragement, and
mutual edification.

Baptism.
1. WE agree, that not only those who do actually profess Faith in Christ, and
obedience to him, but also the Infants of one or both Believing Parents, or
Parents that are Church Members, are to be Baptized: But we shall not Baptize
the Children of such as are strangers to us, until we have had personal
conference with them; and the like conference we will endeavor with such
Parents, who offering to us their Children to be Baptized, are either ignorant
of the grounds of Religion, or scandalous in Conversation.

2. Because some Brethren of the Association judge it meet, when a Parent
ignorant of the grounds of Religion, or scandalous in Conversation, offers his
Child to be Baptized, that the Ordinance may be forborne, till that ignorant
Parent get competent Knowledge, or the scandalous do testify serious
Repentance: Therefore for preserving Unity amongst us, we agree, that none of
us of different judgments, from such Ministers, will over-hastily Baptize the
Child of such a Parent, till first we understand the case from any such
Ministers that so defer Baptizing; and if then we think fit to Baptize, yet
first we will render our Reasons to them for so doing, which also we shall not
be unwilling to submit to the censure of the Association.

3. We also agree, to administer Baptism publicly, and in the most solemn
manner, and therefore to perform it ordinarily on the Lords Day, or upon some
other day of Preaching the Word; or at least when the Word by some Exposition,
or Exhortation, may accompany the Ordinance: and likewise (so far as may be) to
avoid private Baptism.

The Lords Supper.
1. WE agree, according to Scripture Warrant, the general Judgment and
Practice, both of the ancient, succeeding, and present Churches of Christ;
(with which the Rubric before the Communion, in diverse passages of it; and the
Confession of Faith, the larger Catechism, and form of Church Government, made
by the Assembly concur) that the Church-Guides should still put a difference in
their Admissions to the Lords Supper, between the evidently worthy, and
unworthy, encouraging, and furthering the one to, and in a frequent partaking
thereof; but warning, and not suffering the other to profane the Ordinance,
endanger their own Souls, and give scandal to other Christians. And seeing
Church-Rulers are apt to fail in their duty, either from too great severity,
rigidly excluding the competently fit, or by inadvertency, over-facility, or
fear, promiscuously admitting such, who on prudent and moderate Trial, would
appear unworthy: Therefore we resolve, as to encourage good Christians to an
often coming to the Lords Supper, so not to admit such to it, who appear unfit:
Namely, 1. Those that have not a competent Knowledge in the principles of
Religion. 2. That are not of an unblameable Conversation.


And if some of us require more positive signs of Grace in persons that come to
the Ordinance, it shall be no breach of Union among our selves.

Competent Knowledge.
BEcause a total, or gross ignorance in the principles of Christianity, cannot
consist with saving Faith, sound Repentance, coming up to the terms of the
Covenant of Grace, of which this Sacrament is a Seal; neither with that
discerning the Lords Body, and such self-examination, as is necessary to worthy
partaking. But that persons thus ignorant, must needs miss of benefit by this
Ordinance, and meet with a Curse, instead of a Blessing.

Therefore we shall not admit any, that on Trial are found such, till Competent
Knowledge be attained.

That we may therefore proceed more clearly, and with less inconveniency to
any, we will not give the Rule our selves for this Trial, but express our
concurrent sense and approbation of that direction, being very full and plain,
which the Assembly in their form of Church Government offers, yet not limiting
any strictly, or solely to it.

Their words are these:

The Rubric at the end of the Confirmation formerly mentioning the Curats
Duty, of taking account what Children could say the forementioned Catechism;
Add these words, -- And there shall none be admitted to the Holy Communion,
until such time as he can say the Catechism, and be confirmed; where the
Catechism is made the Rule of Trial of Knowledge, in first admission to the
Lords Supper; and that saying the Catechism, when Children but six or seven
years old may rehearse it, yet cannot understand it, nor examine themselves,
must therefore be a saying of it, with understanding the meaning and sense, of
which the Curate must take notice, before he admits to that Ordinance.
All such persons, who shall be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
ought to know that there is a God, that there is but one Everlasting and true
God, Maker of Heaven and Earth, and Governor of all things; that this only
true God, is the God whom we worship, that this God is but one God, yet three
distinct Persons, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, all equally God. That God
created Man after his own Image, in Knowledge, Righteousness, and true
Holiness; that by one man Sin entered into the world, and Death by Sin, and so
Death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned, that thereby they are all
dead in trespasses and sins, and are by Nature the Children of Wrath, and so
liable to Eternal Death, the wages of every sin.

That there is but one Mediator betwixt God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, who
is also over all, God blessed for ever, neither is there Salvation in any other.

That he was Conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary, that he
died upon the Cross to save his people from their sins, that he rose again the
third day from the Dead, ascended into Heaven, sits at the right hand of
God, and makes Intercession for us, of whose Fullness we receive all Grace,
necessary to Salvation.

That Christ and his Benefits are applied only by Faith; that Faith is the gift
of God, and that we have it not of our selves, but it is wrought in us by the
Word, and the Spirit of God.

That Faith is that Grace whereby we believe and trust in Christ for remission
of sins, and Life Everlasting, according to the Promises of the Gospel; that
whosoever believes not in the Son of God, shall not see Life, but shall perish
eternally.

That they, who truly repent of their sins, do see them, sorrow for them, and
turn from them, to the Lord; and that except men repent, they shall surely
perish.

That a godly life is conscionably ordered according to the Word of God, in
Holiness and Righteousness, without which no man shall see God.

That the Sacraments are Seals of the Covenant of Grace in the Blood of Christ;
that the Sacraments of the New Testament, are Baptism, and the Supper of the
Lord; that the outward Elements in the Lords Supper, are Bread, and Wine, and
do signify the Body and Blood of Christ crucified, which the worthy Receiver
by Faith does partake of in the Sacrament, which Christ has likewise ordained
for the remembrance of his Death, that whosoever eats and drinks
unworthily, is guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord; therefore that every
one is to examine himself, lest he eat and drink Judgment to himself, not
discerning the Lords Body.

That the Souls of the Faithful after death, do immediately live with Christ in
Blessedness, and that the Souls of the Wicked, do immediately go into hell
torment; that there shall be a Resurrection of the Bodies, both of the Just and
Unjust, at the last day, at which time all shall appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, to receive what they have done in the Body, whether
it be Good, or Evil; and that the Righteous shall go into Life Eternal, and the
Wicked into Everlasting Punishment.

3. Because some persons, through want of Education; weakness of apprehension,
bashfulness, and other impediments, are unable to express their minds in fit
and composed words, and yet others by roat, can easily speak more than they
understand; we will therefore use the most familiar means, by easy questions
and discourse, to discern the meaning of such, not taking any for ignorant, for
want of apt expressions, nor accepting every one for competently knowing, who
verbally can recite the forementioned particulars, but so far as we can
discover, we will make their ignorance, or knowledge it self, the ground of our
proceeding.

Unblameable Conversation, and Scandal.
1. SCandalous sinners, we agree, cannot be admitted to the Lords Supper,
without great sin, and judgment to themselves, danger by their example, of
leavening the whole lump, defiling the Ordinance, and very great dishonor to
Christ; therefore we resolve not to receive any of what degree or quality
soever, that is proved such, before satisfaction be given the Church, by
evidence of serious Repentance.

2. We will not reject any from our own private apprehensions, and suspicious,
or others bare report, but where the matter of fact shall have some evident
proof.

3. Because all sins are not alike evil, nor of a scandalous nature, therefore
we shall distinguish of such sins, and accordingly proceed.

4. We agree, that no person ought to be judged scandalous for sins of such
mere infirmity, and daily incursion, that all the Saints daily are subject to
mourn for, and strive against.

5. But such we agree are scandalous persons, who continue in any course or way
of open wickedness whatsoever, and particularly are evidently guilty of any of
those ways of sin, mentioned in Scripture as marks and characters of wicked
persons, being utterly inconsistent with Holiness, saving Faith, true
Repentance, new Obedience, and coming up to the terms of the Covenant of Grace,
sealed by this Sacrament, and thereby appearing in open rebellion against
Christ the Ordainer of it, such as Idolaters, Sorcerers, Fornicators,
Drunkards, Liars, and any such kind of evil livers.

6. We agree, that a person is scandalous, by not only a way, or course of open
wickedness, but likewise by any one single act, or work of manifest wickedness,
whereby the people of Christ have that evil example set before them, and may be
drawn into the like Rebellion and disobedience against Christ; such as a single
act of Fornication, Drunkenness, Blasphemy, Idolatry, or any the like immorral
and flagitious act.

To this we add (for further evidence) that innumeration of scandals by the
Assembly in their Church Government. The words are as follows.

All scandalous Persons hereafter mentioned, are to be suspended from the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper; that is to say; all persons that shall
blasphemously speak, or write any thing of God, his holy Word, or Sacraments;
all Renouncers of the true Protestant Religion, professed in the Church of
England; and all persons, who shall by preaching, or writing, maintain any such
Errors, as do subvert any of those Articles, the ignorance whereof does render
any person excluded from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; an Incestuous
person, an Adulterer, a Fornicator, a Drunkard, a profane Swearer, or Curser,
one that has taken away the life of any person maliciously; all Worshippers of
Images, Crosses, Crucifixes, or Relics; all that shall make Images, or
Pictures of the Trinity, or of any person thereof; all Religious Worshippers of
Saints, Angels, or any mere creatures; any person that shall profess himself
not to be in charity with his Neighbor; all persons in whom malice appears,
and they refuse to be reconciled; any person that shall challenge any other
person by word, message, or writing to fight, or that shall accept such
challenge, and agree thereto; any person that shall knowingly carry any
Challenge, by word, message, or writing; any person that shall upon the Lords
day use any Dancing, playing at Dice, or Cards, or any other Game, Masking,
Wakes, Shooting, Bowling, Playing, playing at Football, Stool-ball, Wrestling,
or that shall make resort to any Plays, Interludes, Fencing, Bullbaiting,
Bear-baiting, or that shall use Hawking, Hunting, or Coursing, Fishing or
Fowling; or that shall publicly expose any wares to sale, otherwise then is
provided by an Ordinance of Parliament of the sixth of April, 1649. Any person
that shall travel on the Lords Day without reasonable cause; any person that
keeps a known Stew, or Brothel-house, or that shall solicit the chastity of
any person, for himself, or any other: any person, Father or Mother, that shall
consent to the Marriage of their Children to a Papist; or any person that shall
marry a Papist; any person that shall repair for any advice to any Witch,
Wizard, or Fortuneteller; any person that shall menace, or assault his Parents,
or any Magistrate, Minister, or Elder in the execution of his office any person
that shall be legally attained of Barrotry, Forgery, Extortion, or Bribery.

Thus the Rubric before the Communion; in these words; If any be an open and
evil liver, so that the Congregation by him is offended, or have done wrong to
his Neighbor by deed, or word, the Curate having knowledge thereof, shall
advertise him, in any wise, not to presume to the Lords Table, until he have
openly declared himself to have truly repented, and reformed his former life,
that the Congregation may thereby be satisfied, which before were offended, and
that he have recompensed the parties whom he has done wrong unto, or at the
least declare himself to be in full purpose so to do, so soon as conveniently
he may. The same Order shall the Curate use with those, betwixt whom he
perceives malice and hatred to reign, not suffering them to partake of the
Lords Table, until he knows them to be reconciled. And if one of the parties at
variance be content to forgive from the bottom of his heart, all that the other
has trespassed against him, and to make amends for that himself has
offended, and that the other party will not be persuaded to godly Unity, but
remain still in his frowardness, the Minister, in that case, ought to admit the
penitent, and not him that is obstinate.

Thus the Primate of Armagh, Doctor Usher in his Reduction of Episcopacy,
lately set out by Doctor Barnard. Prop. 1. in every Parish, the Rector or
Incumbent Pastor, with the Churchwardens and Sides-men, may every week take
notice of such as live scandalously in the Congregation, and if by such
admonitions, and reproofs, as their offense deserves, they cannot be reclaimed,
they may be presented to the monthly Synod, and in the mean time debarred by
the Pastor from access to the Lords Table.


6. We likewise agree, that there are scandalous Omissions, as well as
Commissions, for which such as are guilty of them, till their Repentance
testified, and satisfaction given to the Church, they ought to be debarred from
the Sacrament.

1. Of this sort we judge all voluntary and customary Omissions, open, and
manifest to the Church of that worship enjoined Christians, as their homage to
their Lord Christ for honoring him in the eyes of others, and conducing to
their Union and Communion with God in Christ, in effectual Calling, Conversion,
and Edification to perfection.

2. Such we judge also scandalous Omissions, which are ordinary and open
neglects of such duties, whereof we have particular patterns, and practices of
the Saints, recorded in the Word, grounded on general precepts, and having a
moral and general equity in them, and so carrying a force and virtue of a
Command, though not expressly enjoined in Scripture.

3. We agree also there are scandals of Omission, respecting duties of the
second Table, such as manifest, and voluntary neglects of performing those
duties to our Neighbors, touching the saving of life, estate, liberty, and
such high concernments in present danger and hazard, yet are wilfully
neglected, when there is ability and opportunity of their being performed.

7. But for the more full enumeration of scandals, we agree to refer it to
determination in our Meetings of Association.

8. We agree, not to admit to the Ordinance any such, who are not only guilty
of the forementioned scandals, but of any other evil of like nature and
quality, until they have given sufficient evidence of their repentance, which
must not be slight, and merely verbal, but serious, so far as may be judged by
us.

9. We resolve to use great caution, concerning sins that make men liable to
the Law, as to their lives, liberties, estates, or any other case not provided
for in this Agreement.

10. We resolve not to admit any to the Sacrament, but such a one that has
been first declared to those with whom he is to communicate, that if any of
them can object, and prove duly any thing against him, whereby he appears unfit
to receive, that party may be kept from the Ordinance, till the Church or
Congregation receive satisfaction.

11. We agree to require of all Governors of Families, that come to this
Ordinance, to bring and keep their families under Catechizing, and to see they
learn and understand the Principles of Christianity; and if they cannot
instruct them themselves, to bring them to us to be instructed.

12. If any person that has been admitted to the Lords Supper, shall at any
time hereafter prove scandalous in Concersation, we will not receive such a one
to the Sacrament, till he testify Repentance, and satisfy the Church.

13. We resolve to take notice of such, who formerly have been admitted to the
Lords Supper, and absent themselves from it, and to enquire into the reasons of
their absence, and accord. ingly we will deal with them as we find just cause,
that neither Christ's Ordinances may seem to be despised, nor opportunity of
doing good to their own souls neglected.

14. We agree, to be very cautious of admitting such of other Congregations,
that occasionally offer themselves to receive the Lords Supper with any of us,
that so no just offense may be given thereby, either to godly Ministers, or
Congregations from which they come, neither to our own people that join with us
in that Ordinance.

15. We agree, not to admit any to this Sacrament, that are members of other
Congregations, without either a Testimonial from their Minister of their
orderly walking, or that we can be assured both of their fitness for the
Ordinance, and their not rejecting the fellowship of that Congregation, whereof
they be Members.

16. We agree, when in any of our Congregations, such as are rightly qualified
for receiving the Lords Supper, shall be so few, as not to make up any
competent number to join together in that Ordinance; we will then advise with
the Association concerning the best expediency, as to uniting with some other
Congregation, for that present necessity, yet only until that impediment shall
be removed.

Government in particular.
1. WHereas we all agree, that every Minister of Christ is made by him a Ruler
in that Congregation, or Church to which he is called: And many of us think
according to Scripture, and the way of diverse Reformed Churches, there should
be some adjoined to assist him in Government, called, Ruling Elders: Yet diverse
of us also are dissatisfied, as touching such Elders, but all of us also
conceive it meet, and a Ministers Wisdom, to see with more eyes than his own,
and have the best help he can, both to acquaint him with the Conversation of
his people, and to assist him in matters of concernment, that cannot so safely
or conveniently be done by himself alone: Therefore we agree (as we shall see
it feisable and fit, in respect of our people,) to desire the assistance of
some godly and discreet persons of our respective Congregations, both for the
acquainting us with the Conversations of our people, and to be present
sometimes at least with us as witnesses of our due, and equal proceeding, both
in dealing with such as offer themselves to the Lords Supper: And likewise in
case of some admonitions to be given to offensive walkers; yet it shall be no
hindrance to the work of Union, for any of us to do, as he is best persuaded in
his own judgment, and may more conduce to peace and Edification.

2. We agree, that for the Exercise of Government in our particular
Congregations, it is to be managed by those that rule over them in the Lord,
and that therefore the Examination and Determination of things, in point of
admissions to Ordinances, and refusals, together, with other Church acts, shall
be performed and managed by them; yet not without notice given to the people,
of what in matters of general concernment and consequence, is determined by
them; that if any can upon grounds out of the Word object any thing, their
satisfaction may be endeavored, or the matter forborne.

3. In these, and all such cases, wherewith the people are made acquainted, we
agree, according to Scripture Rules, practice of the Churches, and all
Societies rightly ordered, there must be one to govern the matter of speech,
and silence, of which the Pastor or Minister is to take care that order be
maintained.

4. We agree, that to heal offenses, and remove scandals out of the Church,
Christ has provided the remedy of admonition of offenders, and other Church
censures, to which there ought to be no proceeding, but in case of known
offense, and such as cannot be healed without censure; and offenses, being some
of them private, others public, they require a proceeding according to their
nature and quality.

5. In private offenses, or scandals of one Brother against another, known if
to more than the brother, yet but to few, we agree, that as Christian
Inspection, and watchfulness over each other, must not degenerate into
imprudent, rash, and uncharitable prying into others failings, so Brotherly
Admonition may not at any time become unadvised, and unwarrantable meddling;
therefore we are in proceedings of this sort to follow, as other Scripture
Rules, so espcially that Rule, Mat. 18.15. If thy Brother, etc. which offense
or trespass we understand, not to be meant by our Lord, of such humane
infirmities, that all men, even the best Saints on earth, in this state of
imperfection, continually fall into; nor of such smaller faults or injuries,
which Christian prudence, love, and peaceableness, require an over-looking and
passing by, but the offense there grounding the admonition is a greater evil,
endangering the soul of the doer, scandalizing the Brother seeing it, and lying
as a stumbling stone in his Christian course, and such a sin, that for the
nature of it, is fit, in case of insuccessefulness of admonition to be brought
before the Church.

6. Besides this Ecclesiastical Admonition, we yield there may be other
Charitative Admonitions, which must not proceed to Ecclesiastical censure.

7. Therefore for our own particulars, we shall be very tender and cautious,
what either we our selves do, or encourage others unto in this case, but on
such grounds as the Word will sufficiently warrant.

8. The offense or scandal against a Brother, being more than a mere humane
infirmity; the offending Brother, by the Rule of Christ, ought to go to his
Brother offended, and declare his Repentance to him, who thereupon is to
forgive him; but if the Offender neglect that duty, the Brother offended, is to
go personally to him, and tell him his fault between themselves alone; and if
by that admonition the offense be healed, and the Brother gained, it is to be
concealed for the future.

If he hear not this first admonition, the party offended is to take to him two
or three witnesses, and if he then hear at the second admonition before
witnesses, the matter ought to be kept secret by both the Admonisher, and the
Witnesses; but if he again hear not before Witnesses, then the matter is to be
told to the Church, which though some understand of Church Rulers, others of
the Church of a particular Congregation, yet all do agree, that for order and
decency, the accusation must not first be brought to the whole Congregation,
but to the Rulers, or Overseers; and therefore we resolve not to countenance
the bringing of any such matter before the Congregation, till those that are
set over them in the Lord, have first been acquainted with it, to whom belongs
also the giving of all public admonitions; if afterward the aforesaid party
upon proof of sin be admonished by the Church, and he hear not the Church, but
is obstinate in the sin, then he ought to be accounted as an Heathen man, and a
Publican; and excluded the Church.

Public Scandal.
1. WE agree, that a private Scandal, by obstinacy added to it against private
admonition, and thereupon told, and proved to the Church, especially by that
further obstinacy against the Churches following admonition, becomes a public
scandal; but properly a public scandal, is that which in its own nature at the
very first is public and notorious, known to many, if not to the whole Church,
in which case the former proceeding by a private gradual admonition, is not
requisite nor proper; but the Church, when an offense is thus public, ought
immediately to deal with it according to the nature of the offense, either by
the less censure of admonition, when the Scandal is less, which admonition may
be once, or oftener, as need shall require, or by the greater Censure of
Excommunication, when the scandal is greater and heinous, wherein we resolve
faithfully to endeavor the discharge of that duty shall be incumbent on us.

2. If the party offending after due proceeding, shall manifest Repentance, and
satisfy the Church, he is to be received into fellowship again.

3. To the satisfaction of the Church is required more evidence of Repentance
after some greater sin is committed, or in case of relapsing readily into the
same sin, for which he has declared Repentance before the Church, or falling
into some new scandalous evil, after a former censure, and readmission into
Communion, then in other cases. Therefore we agree to be very cautious and
circumspect herein, that there be not an overhasty re-admitting of any such,
till due trial of Reformation be made in some competent measure of time.

4. When an offender is under Church-Censure, though the former
Christian-Fellowship be denied to him, yet ought there to be all due ways used
to reduce him to Repentance toward God, and former Fellowship with the Church,
as being a Member or person under cure. Therefore we resolve so long as
opportunity and hope remain, to do our best endeavors (when any Member of our
Congregations shall come under Censure) for the Recovery of such out of Satan's
Snare, and reducing them to the obedience of Christ, and his Churches
Fellowship.

5. Whereas such Members of the Church born and Baptized in it, (by virtue of
the Covenant of their Parents, and so received into it) have many privileges,
which others not Church Members have not, as their being in Covenant with God,
having the Seal of the Covenant of Baptism upon them, and so if they are not
Regenerate, yet are in a more hopeful way of attaining Regenerating Graces, and
all the spiritual blessings, both of the Covenant and Seal; and are also under
Church-watch and oversight, and consequently subject to such Gospel Order, as
may conduce to their spiritual good: Therefore we agree to endeavor to perform
what we judge our duty toward them accordingly, as God shall afford us power
and opportunity.

Brotherly Union, and Assistance.
1. BEcause we judge it lawful and necessary for Members of diverse Churches, in
sundry cases of common concernment, and greater weight, to hold correspondence
and communion together, we agree to associate our selves, and keep frequent
meetings together, as occasion shall require.

2. We agree, that whereas Synods and Councils (wherein diverse of several
Churches meet for matters of common concernment, and greater importance) may
Ministerially determine and order such things according to the Word of God, so
their determinations and orders being consonant to it, are to be received with
reverence and submission, not only for the agreement with the Word, but for the
power whereby they are made, as being an Ordinance of God, appointed thereunto
in his Word, so we judge our selves and our Congregations bound to follow
whatsoever Advice, Direction, or Admonition (being consonant to the Word) any
of us shall receive from the Brethren in their meetings of Association with us.

3. If in our Associate Meetings any thing proposed, shall seem less convenient
to any of us in particular concerned, yet if it be not evidently contrary to
the Word of God, we resolve to yield to it, rather than to break peace, and to
give an evil example of disorder by our dissenting.

4. If any Minister, or particular Church, shall obstinately, after many
endeavors, much waiting and patience, reject the counsel or admonition of the
Association, in things manifestly agreeable with the Word of God, then we
resolve to withdraw from that Minster, or Church, the Right Hand of Fellowship.

5. There being severab matters of concernment, wherein we may need the advice
and help, not of one Association only, but the general Association of the
whole County: Therefore we agree to have diverse Associations, some particular,
others more general also of the whole County, where matters most weighty, and
that cannot be determined in the less, may be debated, and receive advice and
direction in the greater.

6. We agree to dispose of our selves into diverse divisions, each division
consisting of such a number, as may conveniently meet together at fit times,
and places, for consulting and ordering such matters of consequence, which
shall be propounded according to such Rules as are hereafter expressed.

7. We agree for furtherance of desired general Union, and to show our
readiness, to give all due satisfaction, concerning the proceedings in our
Associations, that we purpose not to exclude all those which are Members of our
Congregations from being present at our Meetings, and therefore do desire the
Members that are Communicants of our respective Congregations, to choose and
send (if they think meet) one or two fit persons among them, to be present at
our Meetings, held either in their own divisions, or for the County in general.

8. It being agreeable to order, and conducing to Edification (as is expressed
in the second General Proposition) for those that dwell together in one place
to join together as Members of the same particular Church or Congregation; and
it having been an occasion of difference among Brethren to receive Members out
of other Churches or Congregations than their own. Therefore for the future, we
agree, not to receive into our Churches or Congregations, those that live in
other Congregations, except first they have no Minister of their own; or
secondly, one that is scandalous; or thirdly, one that has not competent
ability for the Ministry: Fourthly, except any Minister himself shall be
willing, that some of his Congregation shall join to another Congregation or
Church, tendering his Reasons to be approved first by us in our Association, who
upon the referring the matter to us, will not be rigid against any expediency,
that may be without a manifest doing of injury, and breaking peace and unity.

9. We resolve (so far as any of us shall be interessed) to advise with the
Association, concerning the justness or unjustness of exception made against
Ministers, in point of scandal, inability, or any other matter that may be
alleged by any that desire to be admitted Members into other Congregations,
than where they live, conceiving, that neither people desiring to depart from
their Ministers, nor yet Ministers themselves, with whom they desire to join,
are competent Judges in such cases; yet we agree (if the exceptions be approved
by the Association) that it is fittest for the duties of mutual inspection, and
edification, together with the avoiding disorder and offense, for people to
join themselves to some near Congregation, that may be for the best
convenience, and where a godly able Minister is placed.

10. In case hereafter for peoples want of a godly able Minister, These three
last Propositions, although for some special reasons thus passed; yet because
they may seem to bear upon the parties in this agreement conceined, they will
be reduced to a due moderation in our after Assemblies.
we shall admit any of them to be Members of our Churches, or Congregations:
Yet when once a godly able Minister is placed in that Congregation, then will
we seriously advise such a person, whom in that case any of us have admitted,
to join himself to that Minister, neither will any of us retain such a person
any longer.

11. In case complaint be made of any Minister in Association with us, we the
rest of the Ministers complained to engage to, hear it freely, and impartially;
and if any such complaint be brought to the Association against any of us in
particular, we do all engage freely to submit our selves to the admonition,
reproof, censure, or advice of our Brethren of that Association, particular, or
general, yet not as encouraging frivolous quarrellers between Minister and
people, neither being hasty to receive an accusation against an Elder.

Excommunication.
THe Censure of Excommunication being in it self so weighty, and concerning,
and that wherein none can be too over cautious, and circumspect, nor receive
too great advice. Therefore we judge it very expedient, that consultation be
had with the Association in cases of this nature, before the Sentence of
Excommunication be declared in any particular Church, or Congregation, and
accordingly we will not any of us either declare the Sentence of
Excommunication, or give consent for any other to declare it in our
Congregations, or Churches, before advice first had from the Association,
either the next particular Association, or when the weightinesse of the matter
requires the assistance of the general Association, unless the case be so
easy, and evident, that there needs no consultation.

Yet we agree that whosoever shall be duly cast out of any one particular
Church, we will look on that person, as cast out of all Churches, and
accordingly will decline fellowship with him, till he testify serious
repentance, and be received into the Churches communion again.

Ordination.
THe different persuasions among Ministers, and People, about the Call, and
Ordination of Ministers having been such an occasion of difference among
Ministers themselves, distraction among people, disadvantage to the free course
of the Gospel, offense to the weak, and opportunity to adversaries, to advance
their destructive designs against the reformed Religion, and agreement therein
being so necessary, both for uniting our selves, and people together, joint
carrying on the work of Christ, and disappointing the adversaries of Religion,
and Reformation: Therefore we hold forth this following accord for the present,
and shall endeavor in our Meetings of Association all further, lawful and due
agreement, as God herein shall guide us.

1. Seeing that Ordination of Men to the Ministry is an institution of Christ
so necessary, that in an ordinary way, none can preach as a Pastor, or
administer the Sacraments without it, and because Admission, and Ordination of
a Minister, is a work that cannot have too great care, and caution about:
Therefore when a Minister is to be ordained among us, we agree, that such as
are of the Ministry faithful, and able, be entrusted, and employed in the
trial, and approbation of him, and in the work of Ordination, which Ordination
(the most of us judge) to be that act of Ministers, whereby a fit person, first
duly tried, and approved by them, or some of them, is solemnly set apart, and
appointed to the Ministry, and sent into the Lords work by such acts, and in
such manner, as is peculiar, and proper for that setting apart, appointing, and
sending. Namely, by such suitable prayer, with fasting, and laying their hands
on him, as is according to the Gospel; which laying on of hands, being the
universal practice of the Church of Christ from the Apostles time to this
present age, grounded on Scripture Rule, and Pattern, we earnestly desire,
that all of us might unanimously, and constantly practice, when occasions are
offered we likewise for due, and more orderly proceeding agree, that when any
person desires to be ordained a Minister among us, that he do apply himself to
that particular Association, wherein he is to exercise his Ministry; and
therefore the Moderator of that Association, assisted with some of the
Brethren, appointed by the Association to join with him, shall take care that a
due trial be made of the persons fitness, according to the direction given by
the Assembly in that case (or at least to the substance of it) and such
Brethren as shall be chosen by that Association after the aforesaid trial, and
also approbation of him, shall ordain him in manner as is fore-expressed; and
likewise in that place, and before that Congregation, where the party is to
exercise his public Ministry, unless for better convenience some other place
adjoining (and to which the people he is to take charge of, may come, and be
there present) shall be chosen, that so both Minister and people may together
be instructed in, and exhorted to their mutual duties.

We agree, though the most of us judge the way of Ordination should be
performed, as is formerly expressed; yet if some Brethren among us are not at
present thoroughly satisfied therein, we are willing to keep union with them, if
that Ordination among them be performed by ordained Ministers, solemnly setting
a part a person tried, according to the substance of the directions of Trial
expressed, and appointing him to the Ministry with suitable prayer, and
fasting, and there shall be endeavor, (as is formerly provided,) of further
Unity in practice in this particular in our Associate meetings.

We will also seriously labor a Closure in affection, as well as in judgment
and practice, and to that end we resolve to lay aside all names, and terms of
difference, forbearing so much as may be, all such things which may occasion
mistakes, jealousies, or dissatisfaction, and practicing whatsoever may
increase and confirm Brotherly Union.

Lastly, in respect of the Civil State, we will avoid in our Associate
meetings, and otherwise, all such things which may disturb or prejudice the
quiet thereof, endeavoring, by what lies in our sphere and power, to promote
the public peace and welfare.

Consentimus omnes nos infra scripti.

I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, And in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord, which was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of
the Virgin Mary, suffefered under Pontius Pilare, was crucified, dead and
buried, he desconded into holl, the third day he rose again from the dead: He
ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty,
from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the
Holy Ghost. The holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the forgiveness
of sins, The Resurrection of the Body, and life everlasting. Amen.

I do heartily take this one God, for my only God, and chief good, and I take
this Jesus Christ for my only Savior and Redeemer, and this Holy Ghost for my
Sanctifier, by his grace giving up my self wholly to this one God, to love and
obey him sincerely, and faithfully, according to all his Laws contained in the
holy Scriptures, and all this unto the Death.

And also I consent, and resolve in the strength of Christ, to hold constant
Communion with the Church of Christ in the public Worship of God, and to
submit to the Discipline and Government which Christ has ordained for his own
glory, and his peoples good.

And that I may have the opportunity of enjoying of these privileges for the
advancement of mine obedience, I resolve, and promise to submit to the
Ministerial Guidance and oversight exercised, according to the Rules of the
Word in this Congregation, and to the Brotherly advice and admonition of Fellow
Christians here.

1. I Believe that there is one only true God, the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, which are three distinct persons, and each of them God, and all of
them that one and the same God, Infinite, Eternal, Unchangeable in being, and
all perfection.

2. I believe, that this God is the Fore-ordainer, Maker, Preserver, and
Governor of all things, according to the Counsel of his own Will.

3. I believe, that God made man upright after his own Image, in Knowledge
Righteousness, and Holiness, who by transgressing the Law of his Creator, fell
from that holy and happy estate, and brought himself, with his whole posterity,
into an estate of sin and death.

4. I believe, that man thus fallen, not being able to deliver himself from
this estate of misery; God so loved the world, that he sent forth his only
begotten Son, Jesus Christ, who took to himself our nature, and became man,
being conceived by the Holy Ghost in the Womb of the Virgin Mary, of her
substance, and born of her, who being perfect God, and perfect man in one
person, free from sin, even in his humane nature and life, having fulfilled all
Righteousness, gave himself a Sacrifice for our sins, and a Ransom for us, by
suffering the wrath of God, and the death of the Cross, to reconcile us to God,
and being buried, yet so triumphed over death, that he rose again the third
day, and afterward ascended into heaven, where he now remains, ruling in
equal power and Glory with the Father, and making Intercession for us, whence
he shall come again at the appointed day to judge the World in Righteousness.

5. I believe, that God the Holy Ghost, who proceeds from the Father and the
Son, has fully revealed the truth, and will of God, contained in the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, for a perfect, perpetual, and only
Rule of Faith and obedience, and does effectually apply to his Elect, by
working Faith in them the saving benefits of that Redemption, purchased by the
Blood of Christ, which precious benefits are dispensed by the same Spirit in
the use of those holy Ordinances, which Christ has instituted in his written
Word, for the begetting and perfecting grace to be carefully observed till his
second coming.

6. I believe, that this Holy Spirit dwells and works in all that are drawn
to believe in Christ, who being united to him, the Head, makes up one holy
Catholic Church, which is his body, the members whereof, having fellowship
with the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost, by Faith, and with one another in
love, do receive here on earth forgiveness of sin, with the life of Grace in
Christ, and at the last Resurrection of the bodies of all men, then dead, shall
for ever enjoy the life of glory with God in Heaven, when the wicked shall go
into everlasting punishment in hell.



I believe, Mark 9.24. And straight way the Father of the child cried out, and
said with tears, Lord, I believe, etc.

That there is one only true God, Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God
is one Lord; Isa. 44.6. 1 Cor. 8.4. Isa. 44.6. 1 Timothy 2.5.
There is none other God but one; and ver. 6. to us there is but one God, 1 Timothy 2.5.

The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Heb. 1.3. John 14.26. compared with
15.26.
which are three distinct persons, Matthew. 28.19. Go ye therefore and teach all
Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 13.14. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of
God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you all.

Each of them God, 1 Cor. 8.4. To us there is but one God the Father, etc. Romans
9.5. Christ is over all, 1 Cor. 8.6. 2 Cor. 3.17.
God blessed for ever. Acts 5.3, 4. But Peter said; Ananias, why has Satan
filled thy heart to lie to the Holy Ghost, etc. Thou have not lied unto men,
but unto God.

And all of them that one and the same God; 1 John 5.7. For there are three
that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these
three are one.

Infinite, 2 Chronicles. 6.18. Job 11.7. etc. Psalm. 45.3. with Psa. 139.7, 8, 9.
But will God in very deed dwell with men upon the earth? Behold heaven, and
the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee.

Eternal, Deuteronomy. 33.27. The Eternal God is thy refuge, Psalm 90.2. From
everlasting to everlasting thou art God.

Unchangeable, Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not, Exodus 3.14.
James 1. v. 17. With him there is no variableness, neither shadow of change.

In being and all perfection, Exodus 34.5, 6, 7 1 Chronicles. 16.27. with 29.11. Mat.
5.48. with 6.13. Job 37.23. Acts 7.2. Isa. 46.10. Ephesians. 1.11.
Genesis 17.1. I am the Almighty God, Romans 9.5. Who is over all, God blessed for
ever.

I believe that God is the Fore-ordainer, Maker, Preserver, and Governor of
all things, according to the counsel of his own will.

I believe that God is the Fore-ordainer, Prove. 19.21. There are many devices
in a man's heart; nevertheless, the Counsel of the Lord, that shall stand, Acts
17.26. And has made of one blood all Nations of men for to dwell on all the
face of the earth, and has determined the times before appointed, and the
bounds of their habitation.

Maker, Genesis 1.1. In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth, Acts
17.24. God that made the world, and all things therein, etc.

Preserver, Neh. 9.6. Thou, even thou art Lord alone; thou have made heaven,
Heb. 1.3.
the heaven of heavens, with all their Host, the earth, and all things that are
therein, -- and thou preservest them all, Col. 1.17. By him all things consist.

And Governor of all things, Psalm. 103.19. His Kingdom rules over all. Dan.
4.34, 35. Mat. 10.29, 30. Acts 17.28. John 5.17.


According to the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11.

In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestined according to
the purpose of him who works all things after the counsel of his own will.



I believe that God made man upright, Eccles. 7.29. God has made man upright:
But they have sought out many inventions.

After his own Image, Genesis 1.27. In knowledge, Coloss. 3.10. and have put on
the new man, Genesis 3.6, 7, 16, 17, 18. Romans 5.18, 19. with Romans 3.9, 10, 11, 12,
23.
which is renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that created him;
Righteousness and holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. Put on the new man, which after God is
created in righteousness and true holiness.

Who by transgressing the Law of his Creator, fell from that holy, and happy
estate, Eccles. 7.29. God has made man upright: But they have sought out many
inventions.

And brought himself with his whole posterity into a state of sin and death,
Romans 5.12. sin entered into the world, Psalm. 51.5. John 3.3, 5, 6. Ephesians. 2.1, 2,
3.
and death by sin: and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.

Romans 5.6. for when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for
the ungodly, Ephesians. 2.1.
Romans 8.3. for what the Law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh,
God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned
sin in the flesh.

God so loved the world that he sent forth his only begotten Son Jesus Christ,]
Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, Gal. 4.4, 5. 1 John 4.9.
should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Who took to himself our nature, Heb. 2.14. for as much then as the children
are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the
same, that through death he might destroy, etc.

And became man, 1 Timothy 2.5. there is one God, and one Mediator between God
and men, the man Christ Jesus.

Being conceived by the Holy Ghost in the womb of the Virgin Mary, Matthew.
1.18.20, 21. Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise. Luke 1.27, 31, 35,
42.
When as his Mother Mary was espoused to Joseph (before they came together) she
was found with child of the Holy Ghost -- for that which is conceived in her,
is of the Holy Ghost, and she shall bring forth a Son, and thou shall call his
name Jesus, etc.

Made of her substance, Romans 1.3. Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord,
who was made of the seed of David according to the flesh, Gal. 4.4. In the
fullness of time God sent his Son made of a woman, and borne of her, Matthew.
1.25. -- she brought forth her firstborn Son, and he called his name Jesus.
Luke 2.7.


Who being perfect God and perfect man in one person, Matthew. 1.23. Behold, a
Virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a Son, and they shall call
his name Emmanuel, John 1.14. Romans 9.5. 1 Timothy 3.16.
which being interpreted, is God with us.

Free from sin even in his humane nature and life, Heb. 7.26. 1 Pet. 2.22. 1
John 3.5.
2 Cor. 5.21. for he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we,
etc. Heb. 4.15. he was without sin.

Having fulfilled all righteousness, Matthew. 3.15. with 5.17. Jesus said unto
him suffer it to be so now: for thus it becomes us to fulfill all
righteousness.

Gave himself a sacrifice for our sins, and a ransom for us, Ephesians. 5.2. And
walk in love as Christ also has loved us, Heb. 9.14.26.28. Mat. 20.28. 1 Timothy
2.6. 1 Pet. 3.18. Mat. 26.38. and 27.46. Gal. 3.13. Phil. 2.8. Romans 3.24, 25,
26. with 5.9. Heb. 2.17. 1 Pet. 3.18.
and has given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet
smelling savor.

By suffering the wrath of God, and the death of the Cross, 1 Pet. 2.21, 24.
Christ has suffered for us, etc. -- who his own self bare our sins in his own
body on the tree, etc.

To reconcile us to God, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 21. All things are of God, who has
reconciled us unto himself by Jesus Christ, and has given unto us the ministry
of reconciliation, to wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, etc.

And being buried, Acts 2.23, 24, 27. Col. 2.15. Heb. 2.14.
yet so triumphed over death, that he rose again the third day.

And that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the
Scriptures; And afterward ascended up into heaven, Luke 24.51. Acts 1.9, 11.
Mark 16.19. after the Lord had spoken unto them he was received up into
heaven, etc.

Where he remains, Romans 8.34.
Act. 3.21. whom the heavens must receive until the time of the restitution of
all things.

Ruling in equal power and glory with the Father, Col. 3.1.
Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22. which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the
dead, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places, far above all
principalities, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is
named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come; and has put
all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all things to the
Church;

And making intercession for us, Heb. 7.25.
Romans 8.34. who is even at the right hand of God, who makes intercession for
us.

Whence he shall come again, 1 These. 4.14, 15, 16.
Act. 1.11. this same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so
come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.

At the appointed day to judge the world in righteousness, 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9,
10. Acts 10.42. with 17.31.
John 5.22, 27. for the Father judges no man: but has committed all judgment
unto the Son -- And has given him authority to execute judgment, etc.

Gal. 4.6.
John 15.26. But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the
Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceeds from the Father, he shall,
etc. Luke 24.27.44 Romans 3.22 with 15.4. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. 2 Pet. 1.19, 20,
21. Ephesians. 2.20. Deuteronomy. 9.2. Rev. 22.18, 19 Ephesians. 2.8. Acts 13.48. Joh. 6.37,
39, 44, 45. 2 These. 2.13. Tit. 3.4, 5, 6, 7 Eze. 36 26, 27 Nehem. 8.1, 2, 3
Isa. 59.21. Acts 15.21. with 17.11. Mat. 15.10. Mark 7.14. Rev. 1.7, 11. Mat.
28.19, 20 1 Cor. 12.28, 29.


Has fully revealed the truth and will of God contained in the Scriptures of
the Old and New Testament, Luke 1.70. as he spoke by the mouth of his holy
Prophets, which have been since the world began:

To be a perfect, perpetual, and only rule of Faith and obedience, Psalm. 19.7.
The Law of the Lord is perfect, Isa. 8.20. to the Law and to the Testimony,
Luke 16.29. They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them.

And does effectually apply to his elect, by working Faith in the saving
benefits of that redemption purchased by the blood of Christ, Ephesians. 1.5, 7, 9.

Which precious benefits are dispensed by the same Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.11. But ye
are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of our Lord
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.

In the Use of those holy Ordinances, John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in
them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me.

Which Christ has instituted in his written Word, Ephesians. 4.11.12. And he gave
some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and
Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the body of Christ. 2 Timothy 4.2. John 6.44, 45. Acts 12.37. with
10.44. and 26.18. 1 Pet. 1.23, 25.


For the begetting, Romans 10.14, 15, 17. how then shall they call on him in whom
they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not
heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? And how shall they preach
except they be sent? as it is written, how beautiful are the feet of them that
preach the Gospel of Peace, and bring glad tidings of good things? So then,
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God.

And increasing Grace, James 1.18. 1 These. 5.19, 20. Acts 2.42, 46. 1 Cor. 10
16, 17 with 11.20, 23.
2 Pet. 2.2. As new-born-babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that you
may grow thereby.

Carefully to be observed, Isa. 2.3. Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain
of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, Luke 4.16. Acts 13.14, 15, 16,
42, 43, 44, 1 These. 5.20. 1 John 4.6.
and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths.

Heb. 10.24, 25. And let us consider one another to provoke unto love, and to
good works: Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together as the manner
of some is: but exhorting one another, and so much the more as ye see the day
approaching.

Till his second coming, 1 Cor. 11.26. for as often as ye eat this bread, and
drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come. Matthew. 28 20. Ephesians.
4.12, 13. Heb. 2.25. Romans 8.9, 11. 1 Cor. 3.16. 2 Timothy 1.14.


I believe that the holy Spirit dwells, John 14.17. even the Spirit of truth,
whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him:
But ye know him, for he dwells with you, and shall be in you, and works,
Joh. 16.13. he will guide you into all truth.

In all that are drawn to believe in Christ; Rom 8.14. Phil. 2.13. Heb. 13, 21.
1 John 3.23, 24. with 4.15.16.
Ephesians. 3.16.17. That he would grant you according to the riches of his glory,
to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner-man, that Christ may
dwell in your hearts by Faith, etc. Who being united to him their Head, Ephesians.
5.23.30.
Joh. 17.21.22.23. that they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in
thee, that they also may be one in us, Ephesians. 1.10.22, 23. with chap. 2.19.20.
and 3.15. and 4.12, 13, 14, 15. and 5.23. with Heb. 12.23.
etc. -- that they may be one, even as we are one, I in them, and them in me,
that they may be made perfect in one, etc.

Make up one Catholic Church, which is his body, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13, 14, 27. For
as the body is one and has many members, and all the members of that one body
being many are one body: so also is Christ.

For by one Spirit we are all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or
Gentiles, whether we be bond or free; and have been all made to drink into one
Spirit; for the body is not one member, but many. Now ye are the body of
Christ, and members in particular. 1 Cor. 1.9. 2 Cor. 13.14. Phil. 2.2. 1 Cor.
2.12. 2 Cor. 4.13. John 17.20, 21 Ephesians. 3.17. with 4.4, 5, Acts 2.42, 44, 46.
Romans 12.5, 6. 1 Cor. 12.25 26, 27. Gal. 6.2. Ephesians. 4.2, 3, 4, 15, 16. Phil. 2.1,
2, 3, 4 Acts 10.4. and 26.18. Col, 1.14. Romans 8.1, 2. John 15.4, 5. Gal. 5.25.
1 John 5.12. 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. 1 These. 4.16, 17. Luke 12.32. Col. 5.4 Romans 6.8.
1 Timothy 2.11, 1 These. 4.17. John 1.3, 2. Matthew. 25.46. 2 These. 1.8 9. Rev. 22.8.
Mark 9.24. 1 Pet. 3.15.
The members whereof having fellowship with the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Spirit by Faith, 1 John 1.3. Our fellowship is with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ.

And with one another in love, 1 John 1.7. But if we walk in the light, as he
is in the light, we have fellowship one with another.

Do receive here on earth forgiveness of sins, Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have
redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins, according to the
riches of his grace.

With the life of grace in Christ, Ezekiel. 26.27. A new heart will I give you,
and a new Spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the stony heart
out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh, and I will put my
spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my
Judgments, and do them.

Gal. 2.19, 20. For I through the Law am dead to the Law, that I might live
unto God; I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the
Faith of the Son of God who loved me, and gave himself for me.

And at the last Resurrection of the bodies of all men then dead, Acts 24.15.
there shall be a Resurrection of the dead, both of the just, and of the unjust.

Shall ever enjoy the life of glory with God in heaven, Mat. 5.8. Blessed are
the pure in heart, for they shall see God, Mat. 25.46. -- But the righteous
into Life Eternal.

When the wicked shall go into everlasting punishment in hell, Psalm. 9.17. The
wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the people that forget God.

I do heartily take, Is. 44.5. One shall say I am the Lords, and another shall
call himself by the name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his hand
unto the Lord, and surname himself by the name of Israel. John 1.12. But as
many as know him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God.

This one God for my only God, Exodus 20 2, 3. Josh. 24.21, 22 24. Psa. 48.14.
with 63.1. Psa. 4.6, 7.
Deuteronomy. 26.17. Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk
in his ways, and to keep his Statutes, etc.

And chief good, Psalm. 73.25.26. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is
none upon earth that I desire besides thee.

And this Jesus Christ for my only Savior and Redeemer, Job 19.25, 26, 27.
Luke 1.47. John 20.28. Romans 8.2. Gal. 2.20. 1 Pet. 1.2.
Act. 4.12. Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is none other
name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved.

And this Holy Ghost for my Sanctifier, 1 Pet. 1.22. Seeing ye have purified
your selves, in obeying the truth through the Spirit, etc. Psalm. 51.11. Take
not thy holy Spirit from me.

By his grace giving up my self wholly to this one God, 2 Cor. 8.5. Deuteronomy.
26.17. Isa. 44.5.
First, Luke 10.27. Deuteronomy. 6.5. Acts 11.23. Joh 24.15, 16, 18, 21, 22, 23, 24.1
Sam 12.24. Luke 1.6. Deuteronomy. 4.2. with 5.32 and 12.32. Rev. 22.18. Job 14.14.
Psalm. 48.14. Luke 1.74, 75. Revel. 2.10. Psalm. 119.106, 115. Esa. 2.3. Mich
4.2. Acts 2.42, 44, 46. Heb. 10.23, 25 Romans 12.3, 4, 5 to the 10.17.2 These.
3.6, 11, 12, 14. Col 2.5.1 Cor. 11, 12, 13. with chapter 14.32, 33, 34, 37, 40.
they gave their own selves to the Lord.

To love and obey him sincerely and faithfully, Mat. 22.37. Thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.

According to all his Laws contained in the holy Scripture, Psa. 119.6. Then
shall I not be confounded, when I have respect unto all thy Commandments.

And all this unto the death, Psalm. 119.112.117. I have inclined my heart to
perform thy Statutes always, even unto the end. -- I will have respect unto thy
Statutes continually.

Also I consent and resolve in the strength of Christ, Josh. 24.15. I and my
household will serve the Lord.

To hold constant Communion with the Church of Christ in the public Worship of
God, Jer. 50.5. They shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward;
saying, Come, and let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant
that shall not be forgotten.

And to submit to the Government and discipline which Ghrist has ordained: If
thy Brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between
thee and him alone, if he shall hear thee thou have gained thy Brother; but if
he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more, that, etc. and if
he shall neglect to hearken, then tell it unto the Church; but if he shall
neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as a Heathen man, and a
Publican.

For his own glory and his peoples good) 2 Cor. 10.8. For though I should boast
more of our Authority which the Lord has given us for edification, and not for
destruction; and Chap. 13.10. The power which the Lord has given me to
edification, and not to destruction.

And that I may have the opportunity of the enjoyment of these privileges for
the advancement of mine obedience, I resolve and promise, Isai. 44.5. One shall
say I am the Lords, and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and
another shall subscribe with his hands unto the Lord, etc. 2 Cor. 8.5. And this
they did; first gave themselves to the Lord, and unto us by the will of God, 2
Cor. 9.13. They glorify God, for your professed subjection to the Gospel of
Christ.

To submit to the Ministerial Guidance and oversight, exercised according to
the rule of the Word in this Congregation, Acts 14.22. And when they had
ordained them Elders in every Church, Acts 20.28. Take heed therefore unto your
selves, and to all the Flock over the which the Holy Ghost has made you
overseers, to feed the Church of God, Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule
over you, and submit your selves to such, for they watch for your souls, as
they that must give an account that they may do it with joy, and not with
grief, for that is unprofitable for you,

And to the Brotherly advice and admonition of Fellow Christians here, Romans
15.14. I am persuaded that you are filled with all knowledge, able also to
admonish one another, Col. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, in
all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another, Jude 20. Ye beloved,
building up your selves in your most holy Faith, -- keep your selves in the
love of God, and of some have compassion, making a difference; others save with
fear pulling them out of the fire, 1 Thessalonians. 5.11. Comfort your selves together,
and edify one another, Heb. 3.16. Exhort one another daily, Heb. 10.24. Let us
consider one another, to provoke to love and to good works.

The Exhortation to Union.
IT will readily be yielded, that the great work of Christians here, is to
advance to their utmost, the Superlative interest of Christ his Kingdom and
Glory. That the way conducing hereunto lies; First, (for a sure foundation) to
begin with a Total and free subjecting themselves to Christ: Then for suller
furtherance, to endeavor after the largest Heart, and most public Spirit, for
doing very much for Christ.

And (as a yet more full and proportionate means,) to put themselves into the
best posture of the fullest and firmest Union and Conjunction, for exalting
together of the Name and Cause of Christ; without which General Union, neither
the Churches Edification, Reformation, or Preservation, can be sufficiently
provided for, as necessarily requiring a conjunction of hearts, knit together
in Love, of heads united in counsels and contrivances, and of hands affording
their best assistance and help.

Among others, there are these three things in the reformed Churches, which are
the great Dolenda, the greatly to be bewailed.

1. That great defect and want of Union and good correspondencies for mutual
help. 2. That height and depth of hazard and danger, they daily run by that
want of good Union. 3. That so great, so great neglect of applying any just and
proportionate remedy to heal divisions and prevent the danger.
Certainly it is no small one, but one of the great scarrs seen this day in the
Face of the Protestant Churches, that sinful division and want of Union, which
interrupts those good correspondencies and joint actings thereupon, to the
securing and propagating the Protestant interest, that would upon conjunction
follow.

Our Lord indeed tells us, Luke 16. The Children of this world are wiser in
their generation, then the Children of Light: and besides former, our own
present age and experience, do abundantly prove and seal unto it.

Diverse adverse parties, though smaller, they can hit it, they can be closely
united among themselves, and strongly combined against the reformed; But
Papists, (the greatest enemies, and the greatest party) are the most eminently
and observedly prudent and wise (as to matter of Union, and combination against
the reformed.)

They (though so scattered over the earth, as to places of habitation;) yet are
all one in heart, for to unite still strongly against the Protestants. And for
a spring and feeder of all their affairs and dangerous actings, they have one
chief (the deepest and most impenetrable) counsel; They have the choicest
instruments, exactest correspondencies, surest intelligences, and the most
equal and unwearied prosecutions of their grand design, the propagating of
their own, and extirpating of the reformed party and way.

But the Protestants (though for numbers no whit despicable, and by good
conjunction would be sussiciently formidable) are so defective toward
themselves, as they neither do, nor will piece together in any entire and
general Union, for Counsels, correspondencies, and joint prosecution of their
own interest and preservation. And as this (...) and inconsistency, becomes a
daily derision and reproach among their adversaries, and makes them look upon
the Protestants, as a very simple party, and wanting that wisdom of
self-preservation by union; So it is the great ground given them, to place
their destructive Engines, carry on their mines, and lay their trains.

But for any just and speedy remedy as yet undertaken effectually, This is
rather the Object of our Desires, Prayers, and Tears, then of our Hopes: and
not to be expected until God rebuke that spirit of division (gone out among
the Churches) breathe a Spirit of Love and Unity, and bow the clashing
interests of States and Kingdoms, into a due subserviency to that Supreme
interest of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

When therefore disunion and division is so great a scarr in the face of the
Churches in general, It can be no small blemish in any particular Nations and
Churches: but is more especially so, in this Nation of ours.

That so many Nations divided in situation, and of such different Languages and
interests, more especially, do not so perfectly unite, is not altogether so
strange: But for those of our Nation, (and which formerly were so united,) to
be so rent and torn in pieces, and so remain without a healing up into unity;
to behold the great and growing divisions among us, to hear the continual
scorns and derisions of the adversaries: to foresee that danger that heightens,
and the ruin that hastens toward us, by our enemies close conjunctions, deep
contrivances, and daily attempts of so many Parties, especially the Popish, who
are both greatly increased and encouraged, to act and strive with all their
artifices and industries to make our divisions subservient to their own
destructive purposes against us: And, which adds no little weight to all the
former, for our selves to find it, and our adversaries thereby to observe,
their great advantages by that great defect of any adequate means yet used;
yea, and withal, so general a heartlesness unto any such way, which may
timely secure and relieve us,

-- Pudet haec opprobria nobis,
Et dici potuisse and non potuisse refelli.
This is and must be for a Lamentation.

When therefore our distempers and dangers are from division: The remedy must
needs be by a just and general Union, especially of the conscientious and
godly of different persuasions.

There are three ways may be thought of for effecting Union.

The first is that, which though it may greatly be feared, yet cannot justly be
desired, and that is the Storm and Flame of Persecution, to drive and warm us
into a willingness to unite. This, although persecution sometimes has brought
about; yet now if persecution should arise, it must in most probability be from
the Popish party, which is no way likely to occasion it. For now the way of the
Papists, is not that of Queen Mary's time, by a juridical Trial, condemnation
and execution, by burnings, and such like: But by sudden Massacres and
exposing to cold, nakedness, hunger, and all extremities.

This is the new way of the Papists, a proof of which we have in those three
successive Instances, First, in that of Ireland, and then diverse years after,
in that of Poland, and that of Piedmont. These tell us plainly, what course
they will run, if once opportunity be given them. Then when the sword and
violence has taken away those that come to their hand; The inquisition will
come to find out others that have escaped and are undiscovered

Therefore if the Popish party so increase and are so busy daily (as on very
good grounds it is apprehended) there is great need of a present, firm,
general Union, to counterwork them: and the Lord set this home on the heedless
and listless Spirits in this Nation.

2. A second way for procuring Union, is by the Civil Magistrates
Interposition, by settling such order and government as may gather and glue
together, the broken and divided parties among us. But this way though it is
not desired at all by diverse, who like no imposition, but a liberty to do as
they please, yet if the civil power would please to give their assistance and
encouragement unto it; how soon might a happy Union be effected, and the
building of Gods House would bring a blessing, and greatly conduce to settle
their own affairs. But when a disease is mortal and high, the remedy must not
be remote and delayed: if at present this will not be done, we had need do that
we can do.

3. There is a third way, (The way at present to effect a good and necessary
Union) which is by our own free choice or voluntary conjunction and
association, in some just and moderate way, respectively to the godly and
peaceable of different persuasions.

Continuance of disunion and every ones going his own way, as the best way of
peace and preservation, cannot nor will not in the conclusion, be a relief and
remedy to out distempers and dangers. Whatsoever may be said for a necessity of
indulgence, the good party in the Nation must come in to some fit Union and
accord. For such as conceive disunion and division best, we may as soon credit
them, as we would agree to him, who should affirm, that burnt tow is best to
make Cord-age, or Roes of sand are fittest to make Cables for Ships that toss
at Sea.

Or to say we need do no more then either lie still, or only act in our own
private capacities, in our own particular places, this will avail us little.

For if the Ship be sinking, and so all engaged to endeavor the saving of it,
it is no time for any particular person to lie sleeping like Jonas in the sides
of the Ship; or to be busy in his private Cabin to order his own affairs.

If a Country be invaded with an Army, it is not fit for the Inhabitants to run
into holes and hide themselves, as the Israelites did, when the Philistines
were up against them. Neither is that enough in this case, for every man to
take up Arms, and then stand in his own door only; that may help against the
approach of the thief, but not against an enemy in a Body. But as the enemies
strength and the Countries danger is by that of many single persons joined in
one Army; so the single persons of the endangered Country must unite (as Saul
and Jonathan did in that invasion by the Philistines) there must be Army
against Army for the present security. The way left us at present is Union, by
a free and voluntary associating, both to heal Divisions, and defend our selves
against them that are all united, and jointly acting against the Reformed
Religion.

But this must be a good and a just, an entire and extensive full union; so as
the Remedy be not below, or short any way of the Malady.

A good union by the Good, Good men sincerely and cordially closing for
carrying on the work.

A due and entire union made by persons of a suitable due Gospel temper, of
Sobriety, Moderation and Discretion, that may thereby evenly join and glue
together.

Rigidness and Harshness of spirit will not suit this work; as churlish Iron,
and soft pliant Gold, will not agree in a curious frame, for an exquisite and
continuing motion: Nor harsher matter, with softer silk in the same piece;
which will not wear or hold well, but soon fret out: Gospel calmness and
gentleness, Humility and Yieldingness must make a due union.

But yet there is need also of Resolution, firmness of purpose, Confidence and
Courage, to make the strong soder of a firm and lasting union.

Men must not be of a dubious Hesitancy, of a suspicious timorous temper, full
of Doubts, Jealousies, endless Dissatisfactions, and continual Unevennesses:
but Fortes and Tenaces propositi:] that know first what they do, and then fix
and hold up in evenness and equalities. For when the Remedy is proper, it must
also be constantly used, so long as Necessity calls.

The persons concerned, that should contribute to, and concur in this union,
are both Ministers and people.

Ministers leading, and people willingly following, both together coming in to
help close up the breach, which the high-seas and spring tides of Distempers
have made upon us. First, Ministers of the Gospel, the Gospel of peace and
union; Ministers that are public persons, and more peculiatly concerned.

These should specially be healers of Breaches in Churches, and among the
people of Jesus Christ.

They are by Office Guides and Leaders. First, To lead, by preaching Christians
into union, showing the Gospel-duty, the Necessity, Excellency, and Utility; To
set home all Gospel Directions, and Inducements upon the Consciences and Hearts
of Christians, and do all they can to light, warm and win them to it.

And they are likewise to guide and lead by example, Give the fairest Copy,
Set the most excellent president of endeavors, Industry, and Zeal for godly
unity. If Ministers lead not, will their people begin alone? If they are
listless, will people be lively and active? If they are of a low narrow cold
cowardly spirit, will people in probability be of an high heroical zealous
temper? No, the Ministers Light must help to direct, their Heat to warm, their
Resolution and Zeal to help others to be resolute and zealous.

And people also should design and endeavor union, to cooperate and go along
with their godly Ministers in good and necessary ways, Not neglect their
Ministers herein to let them go and act alone: but honor them with yieldings
to, and followings of them in what they follow Chirst.

Formerly what a spirit of willingness was there to hear, learn, believe, and
do as their godly Ministers guided and persuaded? What a Gospel yieldingness
and great sequaciousness was seen among people, that turned greatly to their
own Edification, and the great Comfort, and high encouragement of their godly
Ministers.

Christ's Ministers they have ever been Satan's great eye-soar and special envy,
and Satan has ever endeavored to make their credit run as low as he could,
that the Gospel might run the lower, and be glorified the less in peoples
hearts. A man is so far passable with others, as he has esteem and credit in
their hearts, and will accordingly prevail with them. It is Satan's grand
design, to make the Reputation of the Ministers of Christ run low, that thereby
the Doctrine they bring, might be little regarded.

Gods design in Scripture, and Christ's great drift in the Gospel, is to set up
the Ministers very high in peoples hearts; (that they should have them in
singular Honor for their work sake) knowing this would exalt both his Word,
and himself also. But this has been Satan's design, and effected more of late
then ever, since the Reformation; yea other Ages: scarce any have exceeded
ours. But the loss is least to Ministers, and most to the Hearts, that suffer
themselves to be prejudiced against them. The Word loses its efficacy, but the
people the profit, and their souls into the bargain also, if they look not to
it. But as Ministers of Christ must lead, and let their Light shine before
their people; so people must let in their light, and suffer themselves to be
guided and persuaded, as for their own Edification, so Ministers great
encouragement and comfort. Thus in this great work of Union, both should help
and encourage each other, and then the Adversaries may be disappointed, and in
time our Divisions healed up.

Some looking into the obstacles, likely to hinder Union, among those of
different judgments gave (some years since) among others) a matter of ten
Reasons; which though not in the same method, nor in all the words at length,
yet is thought not amiss to mention here.

As 1. Some place too much of their Religion in standing off from others, as if
the height of a Christian lay in rigid Separation from those that are of a
lower size; and will be hardly drawn to remit any thing of their supposed
necessary strictness; rather desiring to please themselves, than bear with the
weak, suspecting even necessary provisions for admission of the weak, as
savouring too much of loosnesse, and that which may bring on their partaking in
other men's sins.

2. Some have drunk in such prejudice against their Brethren, that fancying the
difference greater then it is, and supposing a Closure unlawful or scarce
possible, are the more backward to any thing tending to a composure.

3. Ignorance may prove a great hinderance, many understand only the practick
part of their own way, not fully knowing the extent necessity, indifferency of
their several principles, these out of a zeal to truth will stand off, as not
knowing how far they may yield.

4. Some delight in contentions.

5. Some once embittered their blood is not easily cooled.

6. Some are pleased with nothing that themselves propound not

7. Many are engaged and will find it a hard task to deny themselves in point
of honor and credit, which they think will be lost if they alter their course.

8. Many are so overdriven by their friends, and members of their
Congregations, that they dare do little for fear of displeassing them.

9. Some want public principles having but one thing in their eye as suppose
purity or peace, prosecute that to ruin or neglect of other necessary things.

10. Some want public Spirits, not caring what become of other Christian, so
long as they have the Ball at their own foot, or things go with them as they
would have it.

Now as the proper cure and relief of Divisions, and dangers thence arising,
must necessarily be from Union, a suitable and speedy Union, answerable to the
nature and extent of the Malady: so that must first be removed that is the
impediment to it, that (though many things else concur) is chiefly a great
defect of publicknesse of Spirit, a Spirit carried out to the public good of
the Church of Christ and his Cause, together with a grand failing in Brotherly
Love.

1. That defect and great want of a public spirit (a spirit that has made so
many Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Ministers, and Saints in all ages to shine so
gloriously.)

All Christians whatsoever should endeavor great publicknesse of Spirit,
should put on and wear this rare Jewel, with the rich Pendants of it of purest
and greatest aims, best contrivances, warmest affections, strongest highest
resolutions for the Churches good, against all things whatsoever that interpose.

But public Persons, Ministers, principally they should be of a very eminent
and exemplary publicknesse of Spirit, as they are lights, and leaders, so in
this, in a more observeable manner.

But now there is none should be of a mere private and impublick, but of the
most public Spirit.

We should not be like the Snail that houses her self in her shell, commonly
cleaves to a block or stone, and seldom moves, and then but for a little food.

But like the Springs of Water, that rise up, run over, and make a river for
general use.

Not like a Light in a dark Lanthorn, which shines only inward; but like the
Heavenly bodies that mounted up, are still running round the Heaven, to carry
and convey their light and influence to all. It is too evident that great want
of publicknesse of Spirit, that like an Epidemical common disease, has spread
it self about. This this is the reason of that want of endeavors for general
Union.

The School Maxim is, Omne negativum fundatur in affirmative, all disintending
and neglect of a duty, arises from over intending and following something else,
that should not be done. The neglect of the public, must have some ill
unworthy ground and occasion.

There Is some evil that infects the Heart of Men, that breeds this animi
deliquium, this heartlessness unto the public.

It was holy Paul's complaint in his time, All seek their own, and none the
things of Christ.

The defect of publicknesse of Spirit, seeking the things of Christ, breeds
from a private Spirit, and sinful seeking our own things.

There is a very private narrow Spirit gone out into the Nation, that like
Pharaoh's lean and ill favored Kine, eats up the fat and good.

Many Christians, many public persons, many Ministers for their own safety,
ease, self-enjoyments, and attendance on their own private affairs, design
retiredness, and please themselves in unprofitable Privacies, lying hid, and
lying still, withdrawing themselves from the public in a great measure: when
the public calls so loud to all for help.

There is a very sinful unworthy Spirit, in diverse this way, suffering
themselves to be of little use, in comparison of what they might, and hiding
much of their Talent in the Napkin of an unprofitable privacy.

This is as if the Springs and Rivers should seal up themselves, or hide
themselves under ground, and bid us go seek our water. As if the Sun should
stand still, draw a Curtain before it and then bid the Moon and Stars to warm
the world, and make day.

Ah how sinful is it to be all self, Center-self, and Circumference self,
aims and actings all self; Or to prefer a man's own petty privacies and
particularities, before the public, to have all the heart on the one, no heart
on the other, or in an exceeding great disproportion?

Never any Christian yet had his license made him, or his quietus est given
him, to retreat from the public, and lie still in mere unactivenesse.

It is the alone prerogative of him that is immutably self-sufficient (and from
whom all things only are) to be solely for himself.

Weigh it seriously; there are but two sorts of Creatures in the world, that
have made themselves a license to be merely and only for themselves, and they
are Devils, and wicked men, left to themselves. There is nothing in the whole
Creation, but as it is stamped with a principle of self-preservation, so
likewise it has a strong inclination, and will accordingly on occasion to
bestir it self into a zealous activity to preserve the universe.

Many heathens though moved only by principles of Morality, yet were often
Persons of a most Public and Heroical Spirit, eminently carried forth and
acted, to undertake and adventure for the public good.

Holy persons in Scripture are purposely put upon the file of a glorious
Record, for their excellent public Spirit, their being so studious and zealous
for promoting the public, and not regarding their own private, as to estates,
liberties, lives, or whatsoever might be dear and precious to them; As Moses,
David, Nehemiah, Paul, and many others.

The Saints in Heaven, though so secure and happy, yet are all of a most
public, transcendently public Spirit, engaging for the Church Militant in
their requests continually.

The glorious Angels are of this public Spirit, being daily most freely
ministering Spirits for the good of the Heirs of Salvation.

The most Blessed God, although he needs nothing, and is under no obligation
to any, but as himself pleases; yet has the largest heart, and most liberal
hand, doing good to all, especially his Churches: and guides continually every
thing, as to his own glory, so the good of his.

That private Spirit, that designing of, and pleasing it self in unprofitable
recesses, latencies, and lying still: That Spirit which is under a Spiritual
Listlesness, and Cowardice for doing and adventuring any thing to promote or
preserve the public, is the most improper and irregular thing in the world.

The most excellent Christians have the most public, lively Spirits, the
greatest thoughts, highest aims, largest affections, most abundant Zeal,
activity, and equality of endeavors for the public.

These when private, narrow, listless Spirited men, that overminded their own,
will have but a bad account to give in to Christ; These will render up their
account with greatest joy and confidence.

This the first great Obstruction to our healing and relieving Union, want of a
public Spirit, and this from being so much of an unprofitable private Spirit,
set upon, and seeking our own, and not the things of Christ.

The second (and which also greatly grounds the former) is that very great want
of Love. First, To Jesus Christ his cause and Gospel-Brotherly Love.

Love, which is exclusive of a merely private and narrow, of a listless cold
and dull distemper, introduces a free and enlarged, active, adventurous, and
zealous disposition, and way; and is one of the great Fountains and Feeders of
publickness of Spirit. One of the great Legacies the Lord Jesus bequeathed to
his Disciples, when he was leaving the world, was peace.

And one of the great Commandments given in charge by him was Brotherly Love,
the ground of peace and unity; let that be well considered.

Brotherly Love (which besides that great weight of the golden Scepter of
Christ, lying on it all the Scriptures over, and the clear stamps of his
authority in those frequencies of strictest Scripture Precepts,) to make it
more passable and current, it received from Christ himself, a peculiar Stamp
and new Signature, and is that alone in all the Scripture, which is styled the
new Commandment, required to be the proper Gospel-badge of Christ's Disciples.
Herby shall all men, etc. And Brotherly unity is the genuine and rare fruit of
Brotherly Love, by every Christian to be endeavored to the utmost extent of
Gospel possibility. Nothing in our own Spirits of corrupt distemper, carnal
ends or undue prejudice should hinder it; nothing in our Brethren sound in the
Faith, and of Godly Conversation, though not absolutely agreeing with us in
way, disposition, or opinion in all things: Christians cannot be all alike
here. All have not the same intellectual complexion. It is a great defect of
meekness of wisdom to refuse all agreement with others because they agree not
with us in all things. Neither may any other Christian precepts hinder us.

Ah that we could duly consider of this new, this one new Commandment, our
Lords peculiar charge given upon ground of great necessity in Gospel times,
foreseen perfectly by the Lord the all-knowing Lawgiver, and King of his
Church!

Certainly when Christ will heal and stablish a people, he fills their Spirits
with over-powering Brotherly Love, to smooth off heart-unevennesses of
disinclinations, distrusts, and misunderstandings, and makes them firmly piece
together in Godly unity. Love as the Apostle has it, is the bond of
perfectness. Yea, Love is the fulfilling of the Law, (...), That will incline
and enable wise for, and make willing with it, and constrain us into it, into
all the latitude of duties we owe to Fellow Christians, and preserve us
therein. Get we but that sincere and ardent Love, the Gospel calls for; and
unity will be both easily brought about and kept a firm and full unity, that
may answer the Churches present necessity. If there be any defect in Union it is
from a deficience in this Bond, this affection of Love. Were there among other
Gospel requisites this public Spirit, were this Gospel Brotherly Love put on,
this would recover and reduce us to happy unity, without which the breaches and
distempers are not likely to be healed.

For to provoke us (those especially that are the backward and unactive!) oh
that we could consider things together! and once more in Christ's name be
entreated to endeavor it. For is Brotherly Union merely arbitrary, and left to
our liberty, and not of a Scripture and Gospel necessity? Are not divisions
among Christians carnal? Are not sowers of discord among Brethren abominable
to the Lord? 1 Cor. 3.3. Prove. 6.12. Romans 16.17.
Must not those that make divisions, be marked, and also avoided?

Has not God in Scripture straightly Commanded Unity, Christ most signally, and
peculiarly enjoined it? Do not his Apostles very frequently in the New
Testament, ( Ephesians. 4.3. (...), etc.) both require and persuade to it? yea, must
we not look to keep it studiously, solicitously, and zealously endeavor it?
And that, as in other Scriptures, is there urged upon very General and
equitable reasons, that extend to all Christians. There are seven ones, and all
respecting all the People of God, as those Ephesians. It is not to be
endeavored only with some single persons, whom we shall please to pick out to
our selves. Or with those particular Congregations we are fixed in, but with
all Christians in General, as their condition requires, and opportunity is
afforded to us? And accordingly, have not good Christians in all Ages, both
assented to the Doctrine, and earnestly endeavored the practice of it? Does
not all experience of the Churches, Evidence the Necessity of it? Did not those
Churches so excellently constituted by the Apostles themselves, soon discover
the use and Necessity of it, as we see in the case of the Church of Antioch,
Acts 15. which occasioned that Application to the Church of Jerusalem; and
thereupon the first and exemplary Christian Synod, Whereby that, and likewise
other Churches were established in the Faith?

Let matters be never so well Constituted in Churches, yet there ever will be
New Emergencies, and after cases, which will call for, and still Necessitate
union and correspondencie, and that cannot be relieved otherwise.

At this day, those Divisions among the Reformed, are not they acknowledged,
and bewailed as sinful, and greatly desired by the Godly, of any moderate
spirits, of all parties, to be healed? Yea, among our selves is it not so
acknowledged and bewailed, and accordingly are not our desires and Prayers,
still a going after it? Do we not Evidently see the evils, and mischief, that
will unavoidably every day increase, and Grow upon us, without Union?

Ah! What will become of Truth, of all Gospel Truths, and the purity of
Doctrine, which is preserved by Union? When the house is burnt, and the Gold
and Treasure in it melted, is it not hard finding it among the Rubbish? Pearls
if they should be buried in great heaps of sand, will they not hardly be
recovered? How hard will it be for people to find the Treasure, the Pearls of
Gospel Truth, in the Rubbish and sands of multiplicities of errors?

And what will become of the life and power of Godliness, when men's zeal and
fervor still evaporate, and breathe forth in contentions; and Christians
become engaged to maintain Parties, rather then Godliness it self?

Yea, how must Ignorance, and Profaneness increase, And how will Popery gain
upon us? Yea, and how will that be kept out at last; look seriously to the
close. What can Magistrates and Ministers do, if unity be not recovered? At the
best must not the Doctrine be highly hazzarded, and hardly be saved.

Must not the Power of Godliness needs sink, and be swallowed up in these
Quicksands of Division; yea, and withal the civil state? When hearts are
divided, and men's ways and Conscience so continually clash, and run cross;
must not that needs be but in a crazie condition, in comparison of that, which
General union would produce, which also would in time, work out a happy
settlement in the Civil State?

What though some are of the opinion that disunion is best, that makes it not
so in it self?

But why should union (the entirest, fullest, and largest) union in States, and
Kingdoms be best; and not in the Church of Christ, and among Christians?

If single persons or small Towns, and particular places, cannot carry on the
Civil Interest, without Civil Union, nor never sufficiently provide for the
security of the Civil State; then why must it, or how can it be, that single
Christians, or particular Congregations, without Consociation can carry on, and
preserve Religion in a Nation?

As all former, so late Experience proves, and after Experience will ever prove
the contrary.

Thus New England it self also, acknowledges and practices the contrary, and
that upon Experience. And they accordingly (even the strictest of them) do not
only wish, but encourage, and provoke the Godly of different Judgments in this
Nation, to endeavor Unity. And certainly this must be very considerable, that
they of New England, who left this Country for liberty of Conscience, and went
into a desolate wilderness: They that had such excellent Christians, and
Eminent Ministers, to form and make up their Congregations; They that had so
full a Liberty, to choose their own way of Church Government, and withal had
so great countenance and assistance from the Civil Magistrate, as ever Churches
in the world had: yet these, these so accommodated and assisted, after almost
thirty years experience, find a Necessity of union of Churches; and of godly
Christians, of different Judgment, are in expectation daily of it here; blame
those that are opposite to it, or slothful in it. And certainly this fresh
experiment brings a cogent and conclusive Argument, that out-weighs all colors
and pretenses made by any, for refusal or neglect of unity. But to add no
more, we our selves Generally see a Necessity of unity, we wish it, pray for
it, and expect it also; but this lays great blame and sin to our charge, that
we do so little for it: That our Judgments and Prayers concur in it, but our
hands stir not, and we do not (to any purpose) endeavor after it.

What then is and must be, the Obstacle to this so Necessary Unity? Is it
private advantage? like men that having a private Trade, are enemies to joint
Stocks and Trading in Companies. Is it listlesness, and a spirit of
slothfulness? like the sluggard, that will not pull his hands out of his bosom.
A lothness to be unhinged and taken off our old wonts of unactiveness, and
doing nothing, but for our own particulars; and so being habited and accustomed
to move, or go no further, we will not disease our selves, and be further
engaged. They say, as speech, discovers, wisdom, or weakness; so Actions, or
not actings, often discovers custom and habit. If we have contracted an ill
custom, of doing nothing or little, except for our selves, we had need do the
more for after time. It Is too true, that mere sloth and love of ease, and
lothness to do more then that is ordinary, especially that which seems New
(though never so Necessary) is one great cause of the backwardness, and
unactiveness of many: or is it cowardice, and a timourous temper, an
over-cautiousness, and aptitude to suspect every thing, and every man; like the
Beggar that is still shrugging the shoulder, or like a shy Horse that eats hay
in the stable, and will startle at a little of it lying in the road. Shall we
always cry a Lion's in the way, when we should be doing? and set up our own
apprehensions, and then startle at them? If these be the hindrances, carry we
our eye to Primitive Christians, go warm our selves into resolution and
activeness, at that fire and flame of Heavenly Zeal. How did they adventure to
hold tog^ether in Christian unity, and continuing correspondency for the first
three hundred years, when the Magistrate was not for, but against them, yet
held Christian union with the hazard, and often to the loss of liberties,
Estates, and lives, so warm was their Love, that it cast out fear, and kept up
constantly desire of some good unity? And what had become of Religion, and
Christianity, if they had been no warmer, and more resolute and active then
many that go for good, are in our times.

What did the Waldenses and Albigences for diverse hundred years, in matter of
correspondency and union, notwithstanding the fury and rage of Persecution?
What was it under Christ that kept up Religion in those so extremely corrupt
times, but their Conjunctions and Constancy?

What did the Blessed Reformers against the Pope, Emperor and others, the
great difficulties and dangers that presently arose: did they not endeavor
Unity and Agreement, notwithstanding the hazzards, and extremities of those
times?

If the Spirit, and way of Christians in Primitive and succeeding ages, was to
labor and adventure for unity, when Laws and the Civil Authority were against
them; and it was so exceeding dangerous? Shall we not adventure and endeavor
it, when the Laws and Civil Power do not hinder us, yea and when of the chief
Magistrate (to whom this Agreement being presented) it was not only well
accepted, but with such expressions also of Great Readiness to countenance, and
farther us, in these our endeavors after a just and moderate union.

Ah then will any of the forenamed private respects, any lothness and
listlessness, fears and jealousies; will these in the Balance of the Sanctuary
weigh any thing? O will they weigh against Scripture Commands, Christ's peculiar
New Command, the Judgment and endeavors of the Church, old and new
experience, our own as well as others Approbations of Endeavored for unity,
and Prayers for it? Shall we approve it, and pray for it, and then confute our
own Consciences, and ravel out our Prayers, by a sitting still and looking for
an opportunity, as a ripe fruit to fall into our mouths, and be made to our
hands, and not take it when there is such need of it, and likewise the way so
free for it? It is a good saying, Iter ad pietatem est intra ipsam pietatem, It
is true of Godly and brotherly unity, the cure of Division and the way of Union
is not so much without it, not wishing and desiring of it; but resolving,
trying, acting vigorously, and carrying it on with constancy. Practice will
bring that experience, that will ease and sweeten the way and work, and
Evidence that very feisable, that was looked on as improbable, if not
impossible. And that union is practicable and feisable, this we see by what
others, in other parts of the Nation have happily begun and held on. Therefore
shall we busy our selves in drawing circles in the dust, as he did when the
City was storming, whereby he lost his life by a common Soldier? Shall we sit
still when Necessity calls aloud for it, the way is so open to it, and others
have so fairly led the way before us? If we should do nothing, Union and the
work of Christ may arise and go on another way: But if we be doing, we among
others shall be called the Repairers of the breach, and our labor shall not be
in vain in the Lord; For the Lord will be with them that are with him.

FINIS.
Books printed for and sold by Edward Brewster at the Crane in Paul's
Churchyard.
MOtives to a good Life in ten Sermons, by Barten Holliday. 4o

A Treatise of Faith, wherein is handled the nature of true saving Justifying
Faith, in opposition unto counterfeit: also helps thereunto prescribed;
hindrances thereunto removed; and several other Gospeltruths clearly
discussed, by W. N.

Mr. Birckbecks Protestants Evidence taken out of good record; showing that for
1500 years, worthy Guides of Gods Church, have in sundry weighty points taught
as the Church of England now does: a very Learned and Judicions Work, in soll.

-- His Treatise of the four last things, Death, Judgment, Hell, and Heaven,
in 8o.

Mr. Cawdry's Inconsistency of the Independent way with Scripture and it self,
in 4o.

Mr. Calamy's Sermons preached upon several select occasions, gathered into
one Volume, in 4o.

An excellent Treatise of Mortification, called, The crucifying of the world by
the Cross of Christ; with a Preface to all Rich men and Noblemen, directing
them how they may be richer: by Richard Baxter, in 4o.

Mr. Palmers Gospel New Creature, wherein the work of the Spirit is opened, in
awakning the soul to the getting of pardon of sin, and an interest in Christ,
Conviction of sin, Gospel Justification, and creating into Christ, discovering
the false Refuges, and hopes of heaven, of ignorant formal and carnal
professors. (Whereunto is added by way of comfort) the tempestuous soul calmed
by Jesus Christ, in 8o.

Mr. Angiers Helps to better hearts for better times, in 12o.

Mr. Belkes Scripture enquiry, or helps for memory in duties of piety, in 8o.

Mr. Paul Baines Christian Letters replenished with diverse Consolations,
Exhortations and Directions, tending to promote the honor of Godliness, in
12o.

-- his directions to a godly Life: wherein every Christian is furnished with
most necessary helps for the furthering of him in a godly course here upon
earth, that so he may attain eternal happiness in heaven, in 12o.

Mr. Benthams Christians Conflict, a Treatise showing the Difficulties and
Duties of this Conflict, with the Armor and special Graces to be exercised by
Christian Soldiers, particularly applied to Magistrates, Ministers, Husbands,
Wives, Parents, Children, Masters and Servants.

Mr Elton his Excellent Commentary on the 7, 8, 9 Romans, in foll.

There is also in the Press, A practical Commentary with observations on the
whole 17 of John in foll. by Mr. George Newton of Taunton.

Christ's Commission Officer, or the Preachers Pattent cleared, and the peoples
plea considered in a Sermon preached before the associated Ministers of Christ
in the County of Sommerset, at a Late solemn Ordination of 13 Ministers at
Somerton in the said County, by John Norman Minister of Bridge water.

Also a Sermon preached at the funeral of the Right Honorable, Robert Earl
of Warwick, by Edmund Calamy, in 4o.


