AFter Our hearty Commendations; Whereas by the Act of Parliament now lately
Passed, for Granting a Supply to His MAJESTY of 206462 l 17 s 3 d for Paying
off, and Disbanding the Forces Raised since the 29th of September 1677, We are
Authorized to Issue the Money thereby Granted without any Privy Seal or other
Warrant from the KING, to the end the same may be Paid with most Expedition:
And whereas ^^ Thomas ^ Knt, and Cole Roger Whitley Commissioners named in the
said Act for Disbanding the said Forces, by a Debenture, or Certificate Signed
and Sealed by them, bearing Date the 31st of May last and Directed to Us
pursuant to the said Act, have Certified Us, That upon Examination they find
that there is due to Eliza Howard of Egham from ^e^ral of Caplaure Clifford
^oloress in (...) Rupert Rog^men^ the Sum of four pounds sixteen shillings for
their Quarters for seberall days; which said Sum they have Deducted out of
their Pay, according to the Rules of the said Act; and desire that an Order may
be drawn and Signed for the said Sum, with Interest as by the said Act is
directed: These are therefore to pray and require you by virtue of the said
Act, forthwith to draw an Order for Payment of the said Sum of four pounds
sixteen shillings to the said Eliza Howard or his Assigns, in full of the said
Quarters, together with Interest every Three Months after the Rate of Eight
pound per Cent. per Annum. And let the said Order be Registered and Paid in
course out of such Money as shall come into the Receipt of His Majesty's
Exchequer, of the said Sum of 206462 l 17 s 3 d according to the Direction of
the said Act of Parliament: For which this shall be your Warrant. Whitehall
Treasury Chambers the 30th day of June 1679.

To Our very loving Friend, Sir Robert Howard Knight. Auditor of the Receipt of His
Majesty's Exchequer.

Eliza Howard 4th, 168 for Quarten.


