To His Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Right Honorable Estates of
Parliament. Alison Aitkin, and Mr. Duncan Robertson her Husband, for his
interest.
Humbly shows,
THAT whereas the Bishop of Galloway having Three Daughters, and the Eldest and
Second having had sufficient portions from their Father, by their Contracts of
Marriage; But his Youngest Daughter Alison (who deserved best, having stayed
longest with him, and waited on him in his old Age) getting no Portion, had
therefore the only proper interest to be his Executrix, And Mr: Duncan in his
Wifes name obtained her decerned Executrix by the Commissars of Edinburgh gave
up Inventars, found Caution to make the Executrie goods, furthcomeing to all
parties having Interest, and expedes the Confirmation upon, an Edict; To which
the other two Sisters and their Husbands, and the Relict were personally cited;
And whereupon Mr: Duncans Wife is sele Executrix Dative. qua nearest of Kind,
discerned and conformed: The most of the effects of which Executrie lying in
Galloway, And extending to a considerable sum (besides the ann half Cropped
1688, the Bishop surviving Martinmass 1687,) Mr. Duncan pursues the Debitors,
and by Process made a considerable progress in executing of this Testament, and
obtained Decreets and Acts against a great many of them; And he being obliged
to do diligence, and discussed the Inventar, And that a considerable sum was
in the hands of the Viscount of Stair; And als that the Bishop in his own life
time had commenced an Action against him for 1257 pounds Seots money, or
thereby yearly, as Feu and Teind duties payable to him for several years;
Wherein Mr. Hugh Dalrymple Advocat, then Factor to, or Assigney constitute be
the Viscount, was ordained to depone anent the possession and Quantity of the
Rent, That a fifth part of the free rent might be decerned as the Teind, And
their Chartors was ordained to be produced, that the Feu duty might be
instructed by the Redendo; There was a Summonds of Transferring of the said
Action raised at the Executrix instance and execute and after some communing,
in order to a Transaction which took no effect: And particularly with Mr. Hugh
who was so far from questioning Mr. Duncans Right to the Executrie, That he
offered him 6000 merks, or thereby for what was due be the Lord Staire to the
Bishop before his deceass; But he would have it to be a part of the
Transaction, That Mr. Duncan should accept of some bonds granted be Mr. Patrick
Smith for certain sums paid to him, which Mr. Duncan refusing, in respect he
did not think Mr. Patrick Smith Responsal, and that it would be so much lossed
money to him, and that what was offered, was not, looked, be Mr. Duncan, as the
half of what was truly due, the communing broke up, at which time the said Mr.
Hugh Dalrymple said to Mr. Duncan Robertson, these or the like words, Come,
come, If you do not this, we will find a way to lay you aside. And thereafter
the Viscount of Stairs had raised a suspension of multiply ponding against the
Executers and nearest of Kinn, and others; The other two sisters, and their
husbands (by advice of some of these Interessed) Raises, and insists in a
Reduction of the Testament and Confirmation: And for us to denude in their
favors of the right of the office of Exrecutrie, and to deliver to them all
goods in our hands that was extant, and to Count and Reckon for our
Intromissions; And albeit the Reduction was first raised in both the two eldest
Daughters names, Yet the Summonds was thereafter cutted, and the second sisters
name left out, in consideration, that she was in the same Case with Alison the
youngest daughter, as to a provision by a Bond made by the Father, and found
amongst his Papers, which the Eldest daughter made use of to exclude us from
any share of the Executrie, the Eledest sister having first agreed with the
second sister, for all her pretentions: So that the Action, at last was carried
on in name of the Eldest sister; And after some debate upon the Reasons of
Reduction in February 1692, Their was an Interloquitor Reduceing the
Confirmation, and yet ordaining us to assign the same, and finding that the
uplifting of the su^ms, in the said Bond of provision was no alteration of the
Defuncts will, in the Destinantion of the sums: Albeit done conform to an
faculty therein, which the Defunct Exerced; And besides I the said Alison had
many other good reasons to refuse the provision; And likewise my Father was so
little careful of my acceptance, as that he uplifted the sum in his own time,
But thereafter upon a Petition given in be us. And Answers thereto be the said
Eldest sister, The Lords declared they would hear the parties Debate the points
in jure, represented in our Petition in their own presence, which were in short
these. 1mo. By the Laws of this Realm, and the Lords constant and daily
practique, This interest of Children and as nearest of Kinn is never taken away
where there is neither an nomination of an Executor or any General or
particular Disp^sition of the subject matter falling under Executrie, Unless
the Children had renounce and discharged not only the Bairns part or person
natural, which is the Legitime: But all that they succeed to by their Fathers
Deceass. 2do. What the import of this pretended Bond is as to its Narrative and
Inductive Cause; And whether the uplifting of the sum therein do evacuat, make
void or annull the same, as do the payment and uplifting of sums contained in
Bonds. Securities make such Writes of no force nor effect. 3tio. Whether Mr.
Duncan was obliged in hoc statu processus, to debate anent the division of the
Executrie, since there is a second Sister, who is neither compearing, nor
called: It being the Geueral Interest, and good of all Parties concerned, that
the Inven^ar be first discussed, and the Testament and Execute, seeing Mr.
Duncan has found Caution, beyond Exception; And albeit we relied upon the Faith
of the Lords deliverance, And expected a Hearing upon these three points, yet
upon the very last day of the Summer Session 1692, without hearing us upon the
foresaid three points. there is minurs and Interloquitor made up Reduceing the
Confirmation, and ordaining us to denude of the Executrie upon which there was
a decree of Reduction Extracted, and which last minutes and Interloquitor was
must unwarrantable made up, in sua far as, first, The minutes were drawn, and
Interloquitor made up out of the Parliament House by Mr. Patrick Smith and hit
Procurators as Mr. John M^kinize the Clerk cannot Refuse: and is known to
others Members of Court. 2do. It was the Last day and the last hour of the
Summer Session 1692 Presented to the Clerk be the party, or some other in
their name by calling of him from the Inner house, to the side Bar, and urging
him to Carry in, and present it to the President to get it signed, and when the
Clerk scrupled they with enforceing arguements laid home to the Clerk, how he
was no further concerned then to carry these minutes with the subjoined
Interloquitor, so framed and prepared be them, and present the same to the
President, which accordingly was signed. 3tio. The said Mr. Duncan Robertson
knowing nothing of that Interloquitor, nor yet his Procurators for many days
in the vaccancie, and challanging the Clerk as being out of his duty, he
answered, there was nothing extracted, and that he would not suffer to give any
extract thereof without express order from the Lord President, who having some
days thereafter ordered the Decree, be virtue of that Interloquitor to be
given out, we and our Procurators addressed to the Lord President having the
Clerk along with these made up Minutes and Interloquitor: Put in place of
redressing as, my Lord President caused the Clerk transcrive the same ^med
Interloquitor, with the pretended Minutes at his own sight, in his own Chamber,
and so privately signed the said Interloquitor in time of vaccancie, as the
Clerk cannot deny, and appears by the process, and the Clerk accordingly did
give out an extract of the said Decree, reducing and overturning the
Testament, whereupon there followed a transaction betwixt my Lord President,
and Mr. Patrick Smith and his Spouse, whereby my Lord President as he
acknowledged himself, is dischar^ed not only of these years preceding the
Bishops Death, but also of the Ann: Cropped 1688 from which it was not in Bishops
power to seclude his Daughter Alison extending in all as the Bishop claimed
8799 lib: which with the Ann: makes now in hail 9427 lib: or thereby; And we
have given in a Bill of Suspention upon the foresaid ground, the Clerk of the
Bills, James Nicolson, refused to write any sist upon the same, in respect as
be affirmed he was discharged to present any such Bill of Suspension, albeit in
that suspention we offered Consignation, upon which we were necessitate to
apply to the Lord Aberuchil then ordinar upon the Bills, that he might cause
the Clerk write upon the said Bill, who having called the said James Niccolson,
ordered him to write upon the same, and not prevailing, The said Lord Aberuchil
was necessitat to write the several fi^ts of Execution himself upon the Bill,
and in the mean time ordained the Charger to see and answer the same, and
because the said James Nicolson would not take in the papers offered to be
consigned by the said Bill of Suspension, the Lord Aberuchil ordered us to
bring the Bonds and other Writes concerning the Executrie to him, together with
an Assignation subscrived by us, in order to be consigned in obedience to the
Decree, (I the said Mr. Duncan being under Caption) And his Lordship ordered
the Papers together with the Assignation to be put in the hands of James
Nismith Under Clerk, in the said Mr. John M'kenzies Chamber, and marked the
Assignation with his own hand, and according to my Lord Aberuchils Order, the
Bonds with the other papers and Assignation, were delivered to the said James
Nesmith as consigned papers in his hands, there to ly until the Bill of
Suspension should be discust before the Lords; And albeit the said Bands,
other Writes and Assignation to the Executrie were only consigned papers, and
that the said Mr. Patrick and Archibald Smith Writer, his Son, having borrowed
up the same from the Clerk upon trust, yet they immediately within very few
days thereafter, Registrat the Assignation in Mr. James Dalrymple Clerk hss
Chamber, and that same day it was registrat, Hugh Ross the Lord Presidents
Servant took out an Extract thereof, besides several other Extracts that were
taken out, as appears by a Declaration under the Clerks servant the Extracters
hand, to be given to sever I other persons with whom the saidt Mr Patrick Smith
and his Son had transacted, as having Right to the Executrie be virtue of the
said Assignation, albeit both Bands, the other Writes and Assignation were only
consigned as said is; And upon those Grounds we having raised Reduction of the
said Mr. Patrick his Spouse their decreets. We the last Session obtained the
same to be reduced most justly, and we were declared to have the only Right to
the Executrie, By which Decreets the Lords likewayes fand, that the said
Assignation, Bands and other Writes being only but consigned papers, they were
unwarrantably taken up be the said Mr. Patrick and Archibald Smiths, and were
as unwarrantably Registrat, and Extracts were ordained to be given back, and
the principal Assignation again transmitted, and put in Mr. John M kenzies
hands, and the Lords granted warrant to apprehend the said Mr. Patrick Smith
till the same was done; And also he was ordained to and Caution for our
damages in eventu, But be having withdrawn and absconded himself, he could not
be gotten that the Caption might be put in Execution against him, and albeit
that order of the Lords was publictly intimat to all the Clerks, it having
followed upon a Long Inner house debate: Yet notwithstanding and since that
time, and of late, and before the principal Assignation was got transmitted,
there was a new Extract of the said Assignation given out, which was a manifest
contempt of the Lords of Sessions Authority, and by this means they have not
only endeavored to defraud us of the sum due be the Lord President, which as
a foresaid amounts to 9427 pound, But also have uplifred and imbazled almost
the whole Executrie, which was due be, and in the hands of the other Debitors,
amounting to very considerable sums, so that albeit we are now declared by the
decree of Reduction to have Right to the said Executrie, yet by the Methods
that has been taken, it seems these Decreets will be of little Effect to us;
And seeing the Lord President asserts he has a Discharge, and that he made
payment after the foresaid Decree, so unwartantably made up, as said is; And
that the Lords of Session, upon that account cannot meddle with the Reducing
such a Discharge, so that its only propet for the Parliament to give Remedy in
such a case.

It is therefore humbly craved, That your Grace, and Honorable Estates of
Parliament may be pleased to take the Premises to your Consideration, and to
grant Warrant to eite the Viscount of Stair, Lord President, the said Mr.
Patrick Smith, and his Wife, and such other persons as we shall condescend
upon, to exhibit and produce the foresaid Discharge, alleged to have been
granted be the said Mr. Patrick Smith and his Wife, to the said Viscount of
Stair, Lord President, upon such a competent time as the Parliament shall think
fit to hear and see the foresaid above Discharge reduced, and our Damages
repared, And that the Kings Advocat who was formerly employed in the Case above
written, may be ordained to plead and Consult in this Cause; Especially seeing
that probably we cannot get payment from the said Mr. Patrick Smith and his
Wife, The Gift of his Escheat being already Gifted, and both be and his Wife
being fled, and that they have imb^zled and conveyed away the Effects of the
Executrie; And your Petitioner shall ever pray etc.


