AN ADVERTISEMENT, Concerning the Right Way and Manner of practicing the new
Art of Improving of BEES in the Form of BEE-HOUSE, BOX, and COLONY, etc.
WHereas Mr. John Gedde has invented a new way of ordering and Improving of
Bees by a Form of Bee-house and Boxes digested into Colonies, (described in a
book entitled A New discovery of an excellent Method of Bee-houses and
Colonies, etc. lately printed) which does infallibly prevent both the Swarming
of Bees (or their separating and flying away in Companies from their native
Hives) and likewise their destruction by stifling and drowning or violent
driving at the time of taking their honey, or by Cold, Cattle, Vermin and
other Casualties; as also the Charge and trouble of attendance, loss of time,
and the other Inconveniences of the old Forms; which Method is Approved by the
Kings Majesty, practiced by several persons of Quality and many others of all
ranks, and diverse years experiene'd by himself to be far more Commodious and
profitable than any former way whatsoever.

And whereas His Majesty being willing that all his good Subjects should have
the benefit thereof, has granted his Letters Patent to the said Mr. John
Gedde, in order to the discovering and diffusing the said Art throughout his
Dominions, strictly forbidding all persons under the Penalties appointed by
Law, the use of the said Invention during the space of Fourteen years, without
the special License of him the said Mr. John Gedde under Hand and Seal first
had and obtained.

These therefore are to inform all such as are desirous to enjoy the benefit of
the aforesaid Art for Improvement of Bees, in the right way and manner of
practicing the same.

YOur Bee-house being built of Timber, Brick or Stone, and situate in a
convenient place, is next to be furnished with Colonies of Boxes made of proper
materials, and those Boxes with Bees, according as is directed in the aforesaid
Book.

In Addition whereunto take these Following Instructions.

First, It Is necessary that such as are not furnished with Bees already do
provide themselves stocks of good old Hives of strong Bees, always betwixt
Michaelmas and Candlemas, that being the most proper season for transporting of
Bees.

Secondly, Your Bees being once settled in the place where you intend them, must
be transplanted from the old form of Straw. Skeps into their new Colonies of
Boxes at or before the beginning of March as the season shall favor, that so
they may both begin their labor with the early Spring, and their Owners may at
the end of six or seven months of the same year both reap the profit and make
proof of the Contrivance. Therefore whereas in the printed book (page 16) the
beginning of Summer is recommended as the fittest season for transplanting
Bees, you are to take notice that that relates only to the time of Swarming:
Where you are desired farther to observe, that Swarms of Bees may be hived in
your Boxes after the same manner that you use to hive them in your Straw Skeps,
they being fitted and clapp't upon them; yea Shaking them off from the bough of
a Tree into your Boxes, may prove a very successful way of planting them,
provided they be good early Swarms.

The manner of transplaming your Bees out of the Straw Skeps into the Boxes, is
as follows, viz. Take one of your Boxes dressed after the same manner as you
use to dress your old Skeps when a Swarm is to be put into them: Then having
opened the square-hole in the top of your Box, and your Colonies placed at an
equal distance from each other in the house; take your strongest and best
furnished Straw hive and place it upon the top of the aforesaid Box with its
front to the front of the Box, and Plaster it round, so as to stop all passages
from the Bees Coming out any other way than through the little-holes in the
lower part of the front of the Box. Let all windows of the Boxes and all doors
of the House be shut and kept close, except at such times as you have occasion
to look through them to observe what progress the Bees make in their work, or
for pleasure and delight; only the small ledge at the bottom must always be
kept open save in Winter.

When you perceive your first Box to be full of Work and Bees, take another Box
prepared as the former, and listing up the first Box with the Straw Skep still
on the top of it, place the second under it, which when you observe to be
filled as the former, you must in like manner supply a third, except it be very
late in the year; which continual supply of Boxes as often as occasion
requires, and constant Cricle and succession of work therein, is an infallible
Expedient (which many have attempted but none ever heretofore attained) for
preventing the Swarming of Bees, which are known never to Swarm save for want
of room and fitting accommodation for themselves and their work. But if any be
so desirous that their Bees swarm out of the Boxes in order to the planting of
new Colonies, this you may easily effect by forbearing to supply them with an
additional Box when needful; so you may be at once furnished both with a stock
for a new plantation, and with a convincing proof that want of room is the only
reason why Bees swarm. Where it is not once to be questioned but that the Bees
will descend and continue their work out of the Straw Skep, down into the Box
upon which it is placed, and out of that into the next under it, and so on in
pursuit of their labor; it being natural for Bees ever to begin their work at
the top and upper end of the place where they dwell, and from thence to work
downward.

The manner of taking your Honey according to this new way is briefly thus --
viz. Regard must be had to the season, and to the richness of the store, and
strength of the Bees, that is, If there be two Boxes full of Wax and Honey
before August, you may remove the Straw Skep when you please, wherein will be
no Bees but Wax and Honey, and there will be no more use for any Straw Skeps,
etc. And at Michaelmas, which is the usual time for taking of Honey, if the
third Box be placed before and the Bees in it, and any work with them, you may
take off the upper Box which will be also full of Wax and Honey, and after a
right Judgment made of the state of your Bees, you may take half or whole of
the Honey and Wax therein according to discretion; this for the first year, and
so yearly as the seasons prove good or bad.

The way of removing the Boxes when full of Honey, is this -- viz. To open the
little door in the side of that Box which is still uppermost and with the
shutter at once to cut the work, (perfectly dividing betwixt the Bees and
upperwork,) and close the square hole of the same, thereby securing the Bees
and their Work in the lower Boxes; so that by this dextrous and Commodious way
of removing the Honey the destruction of the Bees by stifting, drowning,
violent driving or otherwise (the usual but unkind requital of their Industry)
and one great reason of the scarcity of Honey and Wax and the adulteration of
both) is prevented; and sufficient Winter store reserved for the Bees according
to the same, Judgment being made thereof by inspection through the Glass
Windows.

All which Considered, it may be very easily Computed what great Gain, Profit
and Advantage may redound to the public, from this new Form and Method of
Apifactory, beyond any other whatsoever, through excelency of the Honey and
Wax, being freed from smoke and water, its great increase and quantity, and
expedition in point of time, two entire Months at least and that in the Chief
season of the year, being gained by this new way which was wholly lost by the
other through the great confusion and unsetlement of Bees before in and after
Swarming.

All that are desirous to reap the benefit of this new way of Improvement of
Bees; Are to take notice, That these Eight Counties of England, Cheshire,
Herefordshire, Glostershire, Wiltshire, Somersetshire, Dorsetshire Devonshire
and Cornwall, withal the Cities and Towns Corporate within the said Counties,
and together with the whole Dominion of Wales; Are let in Lease unto Richard
March, Perriwig-maker of Exeter, and that the said Richard March and those
Impovered by him, has the only liberty to grant and disperse the said Licenses
within those Counties above mentioned, under the said Richard March's Hand and
Seal as if the said John Gedde did grant the same himself.

March. 1675.

