AN ADDRESS TO THE Magistrates, Clergy, and Learned Gentlemen Of the CITY of
DUBLIN. OR, A Rational and Expeditious Method Of TEACHING the ENGLISH, LATIN
AND GREEK TONGUES, Discovered.

DUBLIN: Printed by Joseph Ray, and are to be Sold at his Shop in Skinner Row,
over against the Tholsel. School.

An ADDRESS to the Magistrates, Clergy, and Learned Gentlemen of the City of
DUBLIN, etc.
GENTLEMEN,
I Published lately an Advertisement of an English, Latin and Greek School; and
therein I undertake, upon very Reasonable Terms, to teach the English, Latin
and Greek Tongues, after a more Easy, Expeditious and Rational Method, than
has been hitherto practiced; but finding that it does not succeed according to
my Expectation, I thought fit to discover to the World, that I am Able to
Perform, what I have therein Undertaken: And since I cannot be so happy as to
reap some Benefit by what I have with many years Toil and Travel found out, let
me at least have the Satisfaction of Discovering it to my Native Country; some
more Ingenious Person may perhaps Improve it to greater Advantage for the
Public Good.

My Method of Teaching the Tongues, is this. 1. I Teach my Scholars the English
Tongue Grammatically, according to the English Grammar which I Printed at
London in 1692. and do instill all Grammatical Rules, Terms and Notions into
Boys in their Mother Tongue, which they comprehend the better, because they are
delivered in a Known Tongue. When Boys understand the English Parts of Speech,
their Numbers, Cases, Articles, Genders and Declensions; the Conjugations,
their Moods, Tenses and Persons; the Concords and Regimens in Syntax; the
Accents, Names of Verses, and Measures in Prosody; the most Tedious and
Difficult part of Grammar is over, before ever they enter into Latin. Then I
teach them to make English Theams and Vers^^, and put some English Authors of
the Purest Style, into their hands. A Boy thus qualified, is fit for learning
any Foreign Tongue, and not till then. The forming of Boys at the
Grammar School, either makes or marrs them for ever. The first Impressions
stick fastest, and therefore ought to be made with the greatest Skill.

2. When I enter a Boy into Latin or Greek, I do not Teach him the General
Rules of Grammar over again, but make those Rules that are Peculiar to each
Tongue, as Exceptions to the English Grammatical Rules. The Constitution of all
Tongues, as to the General Rules of Grammar, are the same, and do only differ
in a few things, viz. the English and Latin Tongues have Two Numbers; the
Greek, Three; the English and Latin have Six Cases, the Greek but Five; the
English Tongue has but One Declension, the Latin Five, and the Greek Ten; the
English has but Two Conjugations, the Latin Four, and the Greek Thirteen, etc.
Now to make Three complete Grammars, when One may suffice, is labor in vain.
To repeat the same thing over and over, is to burden the Memory and
Understanding. What Assinity the Latin and Greek Tongues. have with the
English, may appear by my English Grammar, a competent Number whereof are daily
expected from London. When an English Scholar is sent to a Latin School,
generally he is to be taught to Read and Spell better, which is a great and
improper Task for a Latin Schoolmaster, as Schooling is now: But my Method does
not only save him this Labor, but the most laborious part of the Scholar's
Education, viz. The frequent inculcation of Grammatical Rules, Terms, and
Notions. As the learning of Latin has been hitherto a help to Boys for
attaining the English. Tongue, this Method will be a great help to them for
attaining the Latin and Greek Tongues; so that by this means, Boys may attain
these Tongues in half the time that is usually spent in them. Besides, No Boy
can turn English into Latin, or Latin into true and proper English, unless he
has learned the English Tongue Grammatically: There are many Idioms in every
Tongue, that cannot be rightly translated without this Knowledge. In this I
have the concurring Opinions of the greatest Orators and Poets of the Age. The
most Translations extant are convincing Instances of this Defect: The
Translators for the most part following the Idiom of the Tongue from whence
they translated them. Thus I think I have sufficiently evinced the Advantages
and Necessity of Teaching the English Tongue Grammatically: The defect of
which, may be reckoned the first Great Error in the Vulgar Method of Educating
Youth. The English Tongue may be improved to all the Advantages that have made
the Latin and Greek Tongues so famous, were Terms proper for all Arts and
Sciences invented; which a too fond Admiration of Foreign Tongues, does hinder.
For my part, I cannot perceive wherein our English Oratory and Poetry are
Inferior to the Greek and Latin: The English Tongue is Copious enough, and may
be Improved.

Gentlemen, I must likewise beg leave to offer my Opinion as touching the
Vulgar Methods of Teaching the Latin and Greek Tongues; and the first Error I
find, is the Teaching of several Grammars: This variety of Grammars breeds not
only a great Confusion in Schooling, but is a great loss to those Boys who
leave a School before they be perfect in the Grammar Taught there: This makes
Teaching and Learning an Herculean Labor; whilst the New Master is forced to
re-teach, and the New Scholar to re-learn another Grammar. There ought
therefore to be One Grammar Established as the Standard of Education, or None
at all. The Use of Grammar was first occasioned by the Ignorance of
Schoolmasters, and is still continued by their Laziness: There are no Grammars
extant absolutely perfect; nay, some have great Errors in them. I have known
that different Grammars have been taught in the same School; one Parent is for
Lilly, another for Despauter, a third for Alvarez, etc. He that is not able to
compose a Grammar, is not fit to Teach a School? Such Fellows are Pick-Pockets
and Quacks, and the Ruin of Children. Every Schoolmaster ought to compose a
Compend of all necessary Grammatical Rules.

2. The Second Error I find in the common way of Teaching, is, The Teaching of
Latin in Latin Rules: This is as great Nonsense as the Teaching of Hebrew in
Hebrew Rules: How much Labor and Time are lost in this, is evident to you all:
Both which are saved by my Method. All Grammatical Rules ought to be in
English; at least till Boys are Masters of Oratory. The bare mentioning of this
Error, is sufficient to expose it.

3. To put Boys into Authors before they can make Congruous Latin or Greek, is
the greatest Error of all. When a Boy begins Syntax, he should have Sentences
given him to turn into Latin, according to the Syntactical Rules that he
learns, and ought not to leave that Rule, till he can make Latin perfectly
according to it. To make Boys go through the whole Rules of Syntax, before they
begin to make Latin, is a great Consumption of Time, for one Rule drives the
other out of their heads. Besides, Boys ought to make congruous and ornate
Latin, before ever they begin any Author: Janua Linguarum and Commenii Orbis
Pictus, will do better than any Author; and yet I don't think them fit to be
put into a Boys hands, till he can make congruous Latin. The omission of this
Daily Exercise, is chiefly to be imputed to the Laziness of Schoolmasters: Were
Boys daily kept to this Exercise, it would save them the Necessity of Reading
such foolish stuff as is contained in most of the usual Authors.

4. To teach Boys Poetical Authors, before they be Masters of Oratory, is a
great Error: For the Genius of Oratory and Poetry, are vastly disterent;
witness the Prince of Orators hobling Verse: O Fortunatam natam me consule
Romam! I have known Cato, Qui mihi, Ovid's Epistles, and his Tristia, taught
before ever they had learned Syntax: So that the Vulgar way of Teaching the
Tongues, seems rather to be calculated to retard, than to further the Boys
attaining of the Tongues.

5. To teach Boys so many Classick Authors of different Styles, is a great
Disadvantage to them, because it hinders them from Imitating or Acquiring a
Good Style. Terence and Erasmus, Seneca and Cicero, are opposite Styles: Now to
teach so many Authors of different Styles, must either be to furnish them with
a sufficient store of words, which may be more easily done by Nomenclatures,
where the Noun may be found in his Nominative Case, and the Verb in his Present
Tense, without putting Boys to the trouble of turning over to the Declensions
and Conjugations every foot; or else, to supply them with the several Forms of
expressing the same things: But this may be more easily done by Winchester
Phrases, and other Books composed on purpose: Or lastly, The end of teaching so
many Authors, must be to instill the Author's Wit and Learning into Boys; but
Wit and Learning are not to be picked out of the Classick Authors by
Schoolboys: We find in most of the School-Authors a great deal of Atheism,
Profaneness, and downright Lies, False Principles of Philosophy and Morality.
The Reading of such Poetical Fictions is the Ruin of many a Youth. Are Ovid's
obscene Lines to be introduced into a Christian School, for which he was
Banished a Heathen Empire? Wit, Philosophy, and Morality, are not to be learned
at the Grammar School. Besides, the Principles of Philosophy are different from
what they were, when the Classick Authors flourished; nay, Morality it self is
Refined since. If Boys must be taught Wit, Philosophy, and Morality, at the
Grammar School, let them be given to them in their Versions; for upon my word
they are not to be found in most Classick Authors. It is not good to prepossess
Boys with False Principles; Prejudice of Education is a great hinderance to the
Discovery of Truth. It were better to leave them to the Instruction of a
Learned Tutor, where every Truth may be taught under a Proper and Methodical
Head, and in its due place. These very Practices are the Bane of Youth, and a
means to make them Eternal Blockheads. Some few Men indeed retrieve those
Disadvantages and Prejudices of Education. Besides, what signify those Bits
and Scraps of Wit that are picked out of Satyr? Is it fit that Boys should be
kept Eight or Nine years in perusing such? Si Populus vult decipi, decipiatur:
If People will be led by the Nose, who can help it? The due perusal of one
Orator's, and of one Poet's Works, will be of more Use, than a hotch-potch of
all the Classick Authors. To judge of a Boy's Proficiency in the Tongues, by
his Skill in Classick Authors, is idle; if he can speak good Latin, and write
elegant Latin and Greek, it is not a Farthing matter whether he has read them
all, or not. It is the Misfortune of Mankind, that all Learning has been so
long wrapped up in Foreign Languages. For my part, I admire some of the Classick
Authors as much as any Man, but they must be read cum grano Salis. When a Youth
is Master of Oratory and Poetry, then indeed he may be permitted to read all
the Classick Authors. But to spend the prime of Youth in them, when it is
evident we get nothing by them but the knowledge of the Tongues, is a great
loss of Time, which might be better employed in the study of more profitable
Learning.

Now, Gentlemen, I have gone through the Vulgar Errors in Educating of Youth in
the Knowledge of the Tongues: I shall only mention two or three Advantages more
of my Method of Teaching. 1. It will save Masters a great deal of Pains in
Teaching, and Boys a great deal of Pains and Time in Learning the Tongues. 2.
It will be of great Advantage for those who are not designed for the
University, or are designed for Trades; for hereby the mere English Scholar is
qualified for the study of Philosophy, Divinity, and the Mathematics, and of
all other Arts and Sciences, which are now extant in the English Tongue. 3. It
will be of great Advantage to the Native Irish, and all Foreigners, who may
hereby learn to pronounce and speak English like Native Englishmen; which they
could not attain to before, by the defect of an English Grammar. Every
Schoolmaster will complain of the defect of good Methods, but none venture to
remedy the Evil: I have freely thrown my Mite into the Corban, and if I have
not hit the Mark, yet I have led the way for a more Ingenious Pen to complete
it.

Gentlemen, I have not Published this Paper to undermine any other
Schoolmaster: I only desire that a competent Number of Gentlemen's Sons may be
committed to my Tuition, that have not been fixed at a Latin School for any
time; for if they have, they are not fit for my Method. I taught many Noblemen
and Persons of Quality's Children at London, and at length taught None but
Such; the Truth whereof is known to some Persons of Eminent Quality in Dublin:
And now to sit idle in an Empty School, and in my Native Country too, seems
very uncouth. However, I hope this small Essay cannot be taken amiss, being
writ for the Public Good: And so I am in all humility,

May 15. School. From my School at Mr. Fox's on New Key, near the Indian Queen,
Adjoining to Essex- Bridge Dublin. Your most Devoted and Humble Servant, JOSEPH
AICKIN.


