AN ADVERTISEMENT FROM THE COMPANY OF Tinn-Plate-Workers OF LONDON; Concerning
the Erecting of Lamp Lights.
WHEREAS One Edward Windus in the Thirty Sixth Year of King Charles the Second,
(upon Suggestion that he had obtained a Discovery of a New Experiment, for the
great and durab e Increase of Light by extraordinary Glasses and Lamps,)
whereupon his then Majesty did grant unto him the said Edward Windus, a Pattent
for the better improvement of Ship Lanthorns, Light-houses, and dispersing of
Light in Mines, and such like places. But upon condition, that if it should
prove grievous to any his Loving Subjects, the Pattent to be void, as by the
Pattent appears.

That since the granting of this Pattent, several Gentlemen and others have
obtained a Share or Right in the same of the Original Pattentee, and under
Color and Pretense of that, do now presume to set up and erect those
Lamp-Lights within this City and Suburbs, and the Streets, and Lanes thereof;
notwithstanding there is no grant in the Pattent for so doing; And under the
Umbrage of it, do take all the indirect means that Malice can invent, to
prevent those from erecting those Lights, who indeed have the only Right to do
it, (namely, the Company of Tinn-plate-workers of London.)

That accordingly several Falsities and Threats are spread abroad, on purpose
to amuse and frighten the Inhabitants: The Company of Tinn-plate-workers of
London, therefore thought it advisable to make public to the World the
indirect ways that is taken by these Pattentees, to interrupt the said Company
in the free Exercise of their Trade; And if such Pretensions as these should
meet with encouragement, the trading Part of the Nation must of necessity be
undone; Farewell all Communities, and Bodies Corporate. We that are the Company
do believe, and hope, that the thinking Part of Mankind will consider it; and
especially in this Case of the Tinn-plate-workers: For by the same Rule, all
handicraft Trades may fall under the same Predictment, and consequently they
and their Families brought to Ruin.

But to state nothing but Fact; in short, take the Cause in the late Act of
Parliament: Entitled, An Act for paving and cleansing the Streets in the City
of London and Westminster, and Suburbs and Liberties thereof passed in, etc.
1690. (Verbatim) And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid; That
every Householder within any of the Parishes, Places or Precincts in the
Counties of Middlesex and Surrey, and City and Liberties of Westminster,
comprised within the weekly Bills of Mortality, whose House adjoins unto, or is
near the Street, from Michaelmas unto our Ladyday yearly; shall every Night set
or hang out Candles, or Light in Lanthorns, on the outside of the House next
the Street, to enlighten the same for the Convenience of Passengers, from time
to time a^ it shall grow dark, until Twelve of the Clock at Night, upon pain to
forfeit the Sum of two Shillings for exery Default; exceptin^ such Person or
Persons, as shall agree to make use of Lamps of any sort, to be placed at such
Distances in the Street, as shall be approved of by two or more Justices of the
Peace.

By the Clause in the Act you may perceive, that every Inhabitant is injoined
to hang out Candles or Lights in Lanthorns; the Direction in the Act is
according to the Ancient way of Lighting the Streets; so it is plain, the
Tinn-plate-workers do not only loose a considerable Branch of their Trade,
which is making and vending Tin-Lanthorns: But if the aforesaid Pattentees
might Rule: Must the Company be hindered from Erecting these Lamp-Lights, which
the said Company have made above Twenty Years ago, and is as much a Part of
their Trade, as making of Tinn-Lanthorns; and 'twould be very hard for the
Company to loose the Advantage of making of Lamps, since they loose such a
Branch of their Trade, as aforesaid?

Now by this Act of Parliament, it is indifferently left to every Man's liberty,
to make use of what Lamps he thinks fit, or to use none at all: So far it is
from Compulsion in any kind: And it is plain, the Parliament at the time of
making this Act, had a regard to the Company, and what was done by them was
intended in favor and ease of the Subject, and never intended t^ encourage
Monopolies of any kind.

A great deal more might be said, but we the Company aforesaid, do th^^ only to
satisfy the World of the Justice of our Case, and to show that (...)
Proceedings of those that call themselves Pattentees to be unjust. A^^ thus,
their going from place to place, and forewarning the Inhabitants fr^^
contracting with the said Company, for the said Lamp-Lights; threatni^^ them if
they do, they will make them pay over again; and where the Company have already
contracted, do go and Actually erect Posts, and other C^^veniencies for setting
up their Lights, amongst those very Inhabitants, w^ whom the said Company have
already contracted, and did light the (...) Year.

This being some Part of the Case;

And all Persons that desire to be furnished with our Lamps, or to (...)
further satisfied in this Affair, if they please to come to our Office in
Critc^^^ Friars, within Algate, in the New Buildings; where we meet every
Tues^^^ and Friday at Six a Clock in the Evening, may be furnished with the
s^^^ Lights, and fully satisfied about the whole matter, we being resolved to
st^^^ the Test with all Pretenders: And not so easily loose so considerable a
Bran^ of our Trade.

FINIS.

