A TESTIMONY Against the False TEACHERS OF THIS GENERATION By one who is come
from under them, unto the true Teacher and shepherd of the soul.
THirty years (or more) I was a hearer of the Priests, while I did see that
they had an end more then to the glory of God; they turned their coats when
they saw that tithes should be taken from them; then did I leave them when I
saw that, then did I see that they were not the Ministers of God, but they were
hirelings and false teachers, and remains so to this day, and leads the people
into captivity, and preaches peace to them so long as they will put into their
mouths, and tells them they can never be free from sin in this life; but when I
came to be lighted with the light of Jesus Christ, I saw another thing, (though
before I had run from it as others do, but) then it brought thought, word, and
deed to judgment, and all that had been done to that day, and it let me see
that Priests and people were professing the Saints words, and out of the life
and power of the Saints; it let me see all sects and judgments of men, all out
of the life and power of God, Anabaptists, and others, a teaching people, and
need to be taught themselves, so as I came to be obedient, and the old bottle
to be broke, the new Wine came to be poured in: Now the Scripture was given to
the Scribes and Pharisees in parables; now to come to read your selves with the
light of Christ Jesus, you will witness the Scripture true, it will be no more a
parable to you, as you come to let the Witness of Jesus Christ arise in you,
you shall be made a new by the power of the pure spirit of the Son of God, it
will teach you to deny all ungodliness, you shall need go to no man to be
taught, it will bring you out of all the ways of the World, fashions, customs,
and traditions, and the Worldly-Worships, and out of all their ways, into the
one way, to be led by the spirit of the Son of God; none comes at the Father,
but whom is lead by the spirit of his Son; whoever believes in him, he gives
them power to be sons and daughters of God, no more bondmen, but made
freemen, and free-women, living obedient unto his command, to that measure
made manifest to us, all outward things done away and by his power are made
new, and born again: Now by this Power our blind eyes comes to be opened, and
our deaf ears to hear, and our hearts comes to understand the things belonging
unto our peace; and as we are faithful and obedient, we come to see our selves,
and to see what acts for God, and what acts against him; and as this Work goes
forward, we cannot submit to the will of man, but to the will of God; Christ
was counted a deceiver when he was upon the earth, so was Paul and Silas, so
are the Lords Prophets now: Christ was called Beelzebub, the Prince of the
Devils, and Christ is our example, to the measure of him I direct you: You say,
you believe in Christ, and remains in darkness, and so you are liars; for them
that believes in Christ, and comes into obedience to him, they receive power
from him to overcome uncleanness, and therefore you are seen to profess Christ
with your lips, and your hearts far from him; you are seen in your fallen
estate, alienated from the Lord, for the Lord speaks no peace to the wicked:
Who comes to be Witnesses for the Lord, witness his Word as sharp as a
two-edged Sword, and as a flame of fire that burns up all that stands against
him. This is the truth of the Lord God to you all where ever this comes; you
can read this Work is to be done in the Scriptures without you; Christ says,
Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they are
them that testifies of me, but ye will not come unto me that ye may have life;
but profess what you will of the Scriptures without you, until you come to be
obedient to the light of Christ Jesus within you, the Scripture cannot you
know; and as you become obedient to the light of Christ, you will come into the
life and power which gave them forth, and to witness the Scripture true, and it
will be no more a parable to you, for this is the day of the Lords power, it is
he that searches the heart, and tries the reins, (I witness it) he leaves no
corner unsearch't; he is come to look for fruit, that tree that does not bring
fruit unto God, is to be hewed down; he is gathering his people together, and
building them up upon his holy Mountain, Christ Jesus the Son of God: To you
which are of the World, I write this, that the Lord would gather you, but you
refuse to be gathered by him no further then your own will; Therefore I warn
you in the fear of the Lord, as you prize your everlasting peace with him, to
become obedient to the Witness of the Lord within you; but this you cannot know
in your fallen Wisdom; therefore I warn you to let the time past that you have
spent in your pride, in your vain glory, and vain sporting your selves be
sufficient, and be obedient to the Light of Christ Jesus within you, that you
may no more be disobedient, but obedient, that you may no longer be professors,
but to possess with them that are come to be servants of God, and lives in
obedience to him every day, and is able, and knows the great incomes of the
love of God, and knows their daily bread from him who sits upon the Throne at
the right hand of his Father. This am I eternally moved to write to you all,
therefoee search and try your hearts with the light of Christ Jesus, and prize
your everlasting peace with him: In Adam all men fell; but God so loved the world
he gave his only begotten Son for a ransom for our sins, that whoever believed
in him, (in the second Adam) comes to witness the old Adams state before he
fell, if you would but let that light of Christ arise which shines in your dark
hearts, and read your selves with it, it would open the hidden treasure of the
everlasting Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has been hid from many
generations by the dark power of Satan. Truth shall stand though Gog and Magog
do resist it.

Hear the Word of the Lord ye Priests of England, ye that call your selves
Ministers of Christ, (yet falsely) thus says the Lord, Woe unto the shepherds
that destroy and scatter my flock, says the Lord; ye scatter and thrust out my
flock, and look not upon them; therefore now will I visit the wickedness of
your imaginations, says the Lord, and I will gather together the remnant of my
flock from all lands, and will bring them again to their folds, that they may
grow and increase; I will set shepherds also over them, which shall feed them,
and there shall none of them be lost, says the Lord.

Now mark and consider ye Priests of England, is not this your own condition?
Are not you scattering the people abroad, as it were, sowing pillows under
their elbows, in telling them that there is no perfection in this life, and
though they continue in sin, yet when they dye they shall be saved by the death
of Christ? When as in the least measure you have not brought them to that which
is the first step to know Christ by, which is the light of Christ manifest
within them; so you (as it were) thrust them away from the knowledge of Christ,
deceiving them, telling them that that which is a true Witness of Christ within
them, is but the light of nature, or something of a little value, which I bear
a testimony for, will lead them into the way of truth, and so to the true
knowledge of Christ Jesus. I have seen (says the Lord) also among the
Prophets, foul adultery, and presumptuous yes, they take the most shameful men
by the hand, flattering them, so that they cannot return from their wickedness.

Now mark and consider, is not this your condition? If any of the servants of
the Lord be sent with a Message from the Lord to the people, and any wicked man
lay violent hands upon them, you do as it were take them by the hand, and join
with them in imprisoning them, and whipping them, stocking them, stoning them,
and despiteful using them, declaring to the people that they are seducers,
deceivers, Jesuits, deluders, vomiting out most falsely all manner of lies
against them, so that you keep the people that they cannot return from their
wickedness. Therefore dear friends and people, turn your minds to that of
Christ within you, which makes known unto you all the evil of your doings,
whereof I am a Witness to this day; and as you come to mind it, it will show
you the intents and secrets of your hearts, and bring to light the works which
are not wrought in God; and turn away from these dumb shepherds, which no
longer then you are putting into their mouths, will speak to you; and consider
what you have profited by them, how many of you have been under their Ministry,
some thirty, some forty years, some more, some less, but what can you witness
(as in the presence of God) you have profited by them? Therefore thus says the
Lord, I have not sent these prophets, and yet they run; I have not spoken to
them, and yet they preached; but if they had continued in my counsel, they had
opened to my people my words, and they had turned my people from their evil
ways, and wicked imaginations. Therefore, dear friends, consider how many
thousands have been followers of them these many years, and still continues in
their evil ways, and wicked imaginations; therefore thus says the Lord, Hear
not the word of the prophets that preach unto you, and deceive you, truly they
teach you vanity, for they speak the meaning of their own hearts, and not out
of the mouth of the Lord.

Consider I pray you, do not the Priests of England at this day speak
divinations of their own brain, taking other men's lines, and speaking from them
their own thoughts, not witnessing (in the least) the life and power of those
that spoke those words? Therefore in love to your souls do I warn you to turn
to the Witness of Christ within you, which will guide you into the way of
truth, which will bring you to the Father; for says Christ, I am the way, the
truth, and the life, no man comes to the Father but by me: So now here is set
before you the way to God; here (I say) is set before you life and death. Thus
says the Lord God which gathered together the scattered people, I will bring
yet another Congregation to him; Come all ye Beasts of the field, that ye may
devour, all the beasts of the wood; for his watchmen are all blind, they have
altogether no understanding, they are all dumb dogs, not being able to bark;
they are sleepy, sluggish are they, and lie snorting, the shepherds have no
understanding, but every man turns his own way, every one after his own
covetousness with all his power. Therefore friends and people, consider in the
fear of the Lord, (I speak in love to your souls) Is not this the condition of
the Priests of England at this day? Are they not covetous? Do they not preach
for hire? Do they not seek for large preferments? Do they not leave their
flock, and go from one place to another for larger revenues? Do they not seek
for gain from their quarters, and if you do not give them, do they not prepare
prisons for you? Therefore thus says the Lord, The righteous perishes, and no
man regards it in his heart; godly people are taken away, and no man
considers it: Therefore thus says the Lord, Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye
dye? As I live, I do not desire the death of a sinner; hearken diligently unto
me, for lo (says the Lord) I will teach you wisely.

And now I have a Word to you of the baptized Churches, you that say you are
the Churches of Christ, and none but you, take heed, and do not go forth in
imitations of the Apostles, into washings and dippings, and breaking of bread,
and laying on of hands, not having the same call which the Apostles had; but
come down to the Witness of God within you, and there see with the light of
Christ within you, whether you be baptized your selves with Christ's Baptism,
which is with the Holy Ghost and with fire; see within you if you have
passed through the fire which John speaks of; Verily (says John) I baptize
with water, but there comes one after me which will baptize with the holy
Ghost, and with fire, (which is Christ's baptism.) So I say, Come to see your
selves first baptized with Christ's baptism, before you go forth to baptize
others; For verily (says Christ) I will not be worshipped in Temples made with
hands, neither with any outward observations, but he that worships me, shall
worship in spirit and in truth, for my dwelling is amongst the sons of men.

I desire every one that reads this, to read with the light of Christ within
them; for many false things are cast upon the children of light for beating
their testimony for the Lord Jesus Christ, having nothing justly to lay to
their charge; let all sober people which comes to read this, judge of it,
whether these who falsely accuse the upright and innocent, be not shut out from
the kingdom of God, yea or nay, when Christ says, He will judge every one
according to the deeds done in the body, whether good or evil; I warn you in
the fea^ and dread of the Lord, That you let the time satisfy which you have
spent in your pride, and wicked words and actions against the pure spirit of
the Lord Jesus Christ for it will not satisfy him, that you say, you know
him, and with your lips profess him, and denies him in his works, and in his
ways; ye are found in false accusing, lying, and slandering, and with all
manner of unclean Words, Works, and Actions; for them that bears their
testimony for him and against unclean spirits, are made by his power to declare
against them where ever they come; they reckon us as Heretics, but it is
little to us, for reproaches are our riches; but it is none but them who are
of that generation which called the Master of the house Beelzebub, the Prince
of Devils, which are found in the evil practices now; but this is the day of
the Lords power wherein light is come into the World, but men loves darkness
rather then light, because their deeds are evil; They will not come to me that
they may have life, that their deeds (which are evil) may be judged, and such
as are acted in the light, justified, and they reconciled unto me, says
Christ. And we that are the children of the Lord, do bear our testimony that
this is the day which the Lord will pour out his spirit upon all flesh, his
sons and daughters shall prophecy; and this is the day wherein he is
manifesting his power amongst the sons of men, and makes known his mind to
his sons, and to his daughters. Therefore fear and tremble before the Lord all
ye that live in the World without a God, What will ye do in the day of your
calamity, when the Lord God shall come to call you to judgment, to give
account for what you have done in the flesh, whether it be good or evil?
Therefore hear the Word of the Lord all you that make a mock of the Lord, and
of his appearance; thus says the Lord, Thus long have I ever holden out mine
hands to an unfaithful people that go not the right way, but after their own
imaginations, to a people that is ever defying me to my face; if thou come
nigh them, they say, Touch me not, for I am holyer then thou; all these men,
when I am angry, shall be turned into smoke and fire that shall burn them for
ever; behold it is written before my face, says the Lord, and shall not be
forgotten, but recompensed; I will reward it to them into their bosoms, I mean
your misdeeds, and the misdeeds of your fathers together, says the Lord; but I
will take a seed out of Jacob, and out of Judah, one to take possession of my
hill, my chosen shall possess it, and my servants shall dwell there, therefore
will I number you to the sword, that ye shall be destr^ed all together, for
that when I called, ye gave me no answer; when I spoke, ye hearkened not to me,
but did wickedness before me, and those ^^ing that leased me not; therefore
thus says the Lord God, Behold, my servants shall eat, but ye shall have
hunger; Behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall have thirst; behold, my
servants shall be merry, but ye shall be confounded; behold, my servants shall
rejoice for very quietuess of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and
complain for vexation of mind; your name shall ye leave accursed among my
chosen; for God shall slay you, and call his servants by another Name; whosoever
rejoiceth upon earth, shall rejoice in the Lord, the true God; for the old
afflictions shall be forgotten, and taken away out of my sight; for lo, I shall
make a new heaven, and a new earth, and as for the old, they shall never more
be thought upon, nor kept in mind; but the Lord says, Be glad, and evermore
rejoice for the things that I shall do; for why, behold I will make a joyful
Jerusalem, and his people joyful; yea I my self will rejoice with Jerusalem,
and be glad with my people, and the voice of weeping and wailing shall not be
heard in her from thenceforth; they shall build houses, and dwell in them; they
shall not build, and another possess; they shall plant Vinyards, and eat of the
fruit of them; they shall not plant, and another eat; but the life of my people
shall be like a tree, and mine elect shall still enjoy the work of their hands,
they shall not labor in vain, nor beget with trouble, for they are the high
blessed seed of the Lord, and their fruits are with them; and it shall be, ere
ever they call, I will answer them; while they are but yet thinking how to
speak, I will hear them; the Wolf and the Lamb shall feed together, and the
Lion shall eat hay like the Bullock, but Earth shall be they ^^pents meat; the^
shall no manstay nor hurt one another in all my holy ill, says the Lord.

Therefore in the (...) of the Lord, come down to his witness within you, all
you who are abroad wandering up and down, seeking rest from the mo^thes of men,
and climbing up to heaven to your own wills; and (...) the spirit of truth,
which is the spirit of the living God; bu^ I say, Woe unto all those who stands
in opposition against th^^spirit of truth; I say, eternally woe, and plagues,
and misery a from the Lord God will come upon all those that opposes the Son
of God in his appearance; therefore I say, repent repent, repent, while the
door of mercy is open unto you lest ye ^^^^ut out; for without stands dogs;
whoremongers; adulterers, (...) all that tells lies; therefore, I say, let this
be a warning to you (...) from the Lord; least you have your portion amongst
the hyp^^^^tes, where is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth for ever.

This is from one who is a witness to the everlasting Truth, Margaret Abb^tt.

THE END

