The Agreement Of diverse Ministers of Christ In the County of WORCESTER, and
some adjacent parts, For Catechizing or Personal Instructing All in their
several Parishes, that will consent thereunto. Containing I. The Articles of
our Agreement. II. An Exhortation to the People to submit to this necessary
Work. III. The Profession of Faith, and Catechism, which we desire them first
to Learn.


London, Printed by R.W. for Nevil Simmons Bookseller at Kidderminster, and are
to be sold there by him, and at London by William Roybould, at the Unicorn in
Paul's Churchyard, 1656.

Our warrant from God.
ACT. 20.20.28. And have taught you publicly, and from house to house. Take
heed therefore to your selves, and to all the flock, over the which the Holy
Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood.

Luke 12.42. Who then is that faithful and wise Steward, whom his Lord shall
make Ruler over his household, to give them their portion of meat in due season?

Col. 1.28. Whom we preach; warning every man, and teaching every man in all
wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.

Mal. 2.7. For the Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the
Law at his mouth; for he is the Messenger of the Lord of hosts.

Mark 4.34. And when they were alone, he expounded all things to his Disciples.

Heb. 5.12. Ye have need that one teach you again which be the first principles
of the Oracles of God, and are become such as have need of milk, and not of
strong meat. See 1 Cor. 15.1, 2, 3. to 8.

1 Cor. 4.1. Let a man so account of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of the mysteries of God.

Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves; for
they watch for your souls, as they that must give account; that they may do it
with joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you.

1 These. 5.12, 13. We beseech you brethren, to know them which labor among
you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; and to esteem them very
highly in love for their works sake, and be at peac^ among your selves.

In the sixth general Council at Trull: in Constantinople, it is thus decreed,
Can. 78. [That they that are baptized, ought to learn the Belief, and on the
fifth day of the week to say it over to the Bishop or the Presbyters.]

WE Ministers of Christ, whose names are underwritten, having sought Gods
direction, and enquired of his holy Word concerning our duty, and finding our
selves under many obligations to seek diligently the edification and salvation
of souls; and withal considering the greatness of our Work, and the shortness
of our own and our neighbors lives, and the strict account that we and they
must shortly yield to God our Judge; Do humbly bewail our too great neglect,
that we have not more frequently, earnestly and unweariedly employed our care
and time, and labor on so great a Work, according to the strict and holy
precepts and patterns in Gods Word; especially that we have done no more in
Catechizing, and familiar personal instructing, to acquaint men with the most
necessary points of our Religion, and to work them on their hearts, for the
awakening of them from security, and drawing them from sin to God, by the faith
of Christ, and for the directing them in the right way to their everlasting
peace. And as we earnestly beg of God to pardon this our great neglect, through
the blood and intercession of Jesus Christ; so do we by his grace resolve to be
hereafter more faithful and diligent, and therefore do unanimously agree and
resolve on the particulars following.

I. That we will in the several united Churches of this County, and the
adjacent parts, where we are Teachers, set apart (...) the (...) day of (...)
publicly to humble our souls before God in Fasting and Prayer for our former
negligence, and to beg pardon thereof, and of all our miscarriages, that the
everlasting misery of men's souls may not be charged on our heads; and to seek
his direction and assistance for the time to come, and to acquaint our Hearers
with their duties, in reference to the following Work to be undertaken.

II. That we will hereafter, by Gods assistance, lay out more of our time, and
labor, in the foresaid work of Catechizing, and familiar instructing people in
the Doctrine of Salvation: And, that ordinarily we will set apart a convenient
stated time for this work, at least on one day every week, and in greater
Parishes, either two or three; or else more hours on that one day, as our
strength, and other necessary employments shall permit. And whereas we have
only hitherto Catechized the younger people in public; we shall now desire
either the whole Families to come together by their turns, to a certain place,
on a certain stated day, and hour, or so many of them that are not Catechized
publicly. And the Clerk or some other fit person shall be sent to them some
days before, to remember them of their turns, and to know whether they will
come, or not.

III. We conceive the fitttest place for the aged, will be the Ministers house,
unless where some special accident may make another place more Fit. Or if any
rather choose to do it in the Church, or that their children and servants be
chatechized in public, and themselves in private, We shall grant their
desire: and though it be the duty of the people to come to the Ministers for
instruction, in any convenient place which they shall appoint, which all humble
and obedient Chr^stians will readily yield to, yet if any will not come to us we
shall go to them, if they consent to hear us, and to be instructed: The like we
shall do to those who by reason of Age or other weakness, or distance, cannot
well come to us, or at least we shall procure some that are sit for such a
work, to go to them, and instruct them, if by weakness or greater works we are
hindered our selves.

IV. If any be unwilling to be chatechized, or instructed before the rest of
the family, we shall do it as privately as they please: only we shall catechize
the women, especially the younger sort in the presence of some of the rest,
lest malicious wicked persons should make it an occasion of scandal and
reproach: but we shall as carefully as we can avoid the opening of the
weaknesses of parents, or masters, in the hearing of their children, or
servants, in any way that may tend to the diminishing of their authority and
due respect.

V. We shall desire all our parishioners, old and young, that are able, to
learn the ancient Creed, with out Expository profession, or Catechism
containing it, the ten Commandments and the Lords prayer, and the Assemblies
shorter Catechism; and those that cannot (at least without longer time) learn
the Catechism, we desire them first to learn all the rest; and those that
cannot so soon learn our profession, we shall expect at least that they learn
the Creed, the Commandments, and the Lords prayer, and endeavor to learn the
rest in further time, as they are able; or if any pretend scruples against our
Profession, or the allowed Catechism, they shall use any Orthodox Catechism
which themselves will choose.

VI. When we receive an account from them of what they have learned of these
heads of Chatechism, we shall also faithfully endeavor to help them in the
right understanding of them, and to get the truths which they learn into their
hearts and lives; in all which we shall endeavor as prudently as we can, to
suit our Instructions and Q^estions to the capacity of the persons to whom we
speak. Not seeking to disgrace them, or puzzle them by hard unnecessary
questions or words, but express the plainest necessary truths in the plainest
words; and if they understand not one phrase, we shall try whether they
understand the same truth in other phrases: nor shall we stand so much on their
words as their meanings; and if they be not able to deliver a fundamental truth
in any tolerable words of their own, we shall try by their affirmations or
negations whether indeed they understand it or believe it, when they hear it
expressed by us: we shall endeavor also to use such love and meekness as may
win, and avoid such harsh imperious speeches as may offend, and to use such
seriousness as may tend to awaken the stupid and secure, lest all our labor
with them be lost, and yet such tenderness as that the weak may not be
discouraged. And, because it is a work that requires such great prudence and
holy skill, together with zeal, and patience, we shall the more reverently and
cautelously attempt and manage it, avoiding all rashness, observing and
lamenting, and striving against our imprudency, unskilfulness, and other
unfitnesses; and earnestly beg of God more fitness for his work.

VII. Those that have not learned the words of any of the aforesaid Principles,
or Catechisms, we shall yet desire to come to us with the rest of their
families, that we may have opportunity familiarly to discourse with them, and
instruct them.

VIII. We shall desire that the most learned, or judicious and Godly people
among us would submit to this course, as well as others, though they have not
the like need, lest their forbearance be a pretense to others to keep off;
especially seeing the wisest and Godliest men are bound by God to obey their
teachers, and guides, as well as others; and all Christians have need to keep
the great fundamental truths still in memory, for their daily use, that they
may live upon them; and the best may yet get some advantage by such
conferences, which Ministers will fit to their riper state.

IX. Having procured this our Agreement to be printed, together with an
exhortation to our people to submit to this work, we shall first read both to
them in the public assembly upon some Lords day, and afterward give and cause
to be delivered one Copy thereof to each family in our several parishes that
will accept them, desiring them that they may be read to all the family.

X. As for those that after sufficient admonition shall contemptuously and
obstinately refuse to be either Catechized or Instructed, thus personally, by
us, giving us no valuable reason of their refusal, if they are such that have
professed themselves members of our Charge, in the particular Churches whereof
we are Pastors, we shall proceed as in other cases of scandal, or impenitency,
til we have either prevailed for their reformation, or else rejected and
avoided them. And if they are such that are only members of the Parish, and
have withdrawn themselves from our charges and the particular Church, by
refusing to own and profess their membership, we shall yet so far difference
them from the rest of the parish, who are Tractable and Teachable (though
refusing to be of our particular Church, and charge) as that we shall, in
regard of Communion, and the application of sealing and confirming ordinances,
deal with them as the obstinate despisers of instruction should be dealt with.

THE reasons which move us to this Agreement and Resolution, are these
following.

1. As it is undeniable that the everlasting perdition of multitudes is caused
by their Ignorance, and people perish for lack of knowledge; so is it most
evident that catechizing and familiar personal instruction, is a great means to
overcome that killing ignorance; and that much of the darkness of this Land is
chargeable on the neglect of this necessary work.

2. The aged among us are too commonly more Ignorant then the younger sort; and
though their souls should be as much regarded by them, yet have we no hope of
prevailing with these to come publikly on the Lords day, in the face of the
congregation, to be catechized; but yet we are in hope that fewer of them will
refuse to come to us in private; and seeing we are thus necessitated to deal in
private with one part of the family, if it be their desire, we shall take all
together in the same way; Perhaps one will encourage another. We observe also
that the younger when they are once married, will come no more to be catechized
publicly, and so too many forget that which before they had learned, which
this course may prevent.

3. It is the principles and fundamental truths that life or death does most
depend upon, and in which the essentials of Christianity do consist; which
therefore no man may be utterly ignorant of, that hops for salvation; and
which the ripest Christians have the greatest daily use for, and most
continually live upon as their bread and drink: and those that are well
grounded in these fundamentals, are likest to stand in a time of trial, and to
resist temptations, and to hold fast, and grow up in the knowledge of the
superstructure; and it is the want of being well grounded in these
fundamentals, that is the cause of much of the heresy and apostasy of this
Age. It is the improvement of these principles that is the true Christians
daily work, for the managing of his duties, the quickening and ordering of his
affections, and the guidance of his life; and it is the want of sound digesting
and improving of these that is the cause of much of the hypocrisy, and
self-deceiving opinionative and factious kind of Religiousness, that has so
prevailed: In a word, the benefit of right Catechizing, and the mischiefs that
follow the neglect of it, are more indeed then we can express or conceive.

4. We find by sad experience, that the people understand not our public
teaching, though we study to speak as plain as we can, and that after many
years preaching, even of these same Fundamentals, too many can scarce tell any
thing that we have said, when yet we find that they better understand and lay
to heart a familiar Conference.

5. The Lords day is short enough for the public worship of God, and preaching
of the word, with those private duties which are necessary in our Families,
though we reserve Catechizing, at least of the aged, to another day, especially
in the Winter, when the days are short.

6. By this means we shall better know the state of our hearers, and better
know how to speak publicly to their necessities, and how to pray for them; and
how far either to be moan them, or rejoice over them, and we shall better
understand their capacity and fitness for Communion and Sacraments.

7. If we appoint not a stated time and place for this work, we cannot tell how
to have any fit opportunity for it: because we know not when to find people at
leisure together, and prepared thereto: nor can every weak Minister endure the
attendance and inconvenience of some of their houses, for so long time, without
apparent injury to their health or lives.

8. The diligence of Papists and Sectaries will condemn us, if we will not do
half so much in a right way, to save men's souls, as they will do in a wrong
way, to pervert them. The Papists will bring all the people to confess their
most secret sins in secret to their Priests; and we have heard of some that
have approved of their Church rather then ours, because it is more strict in
such practices. The Sectaries of other Sects creep into houses, and lead
captive the silly people by their smooth deceiving words and industry: If we
then that have a better work to do, shall betray men's souls by lazy
negligences, all these might rise up against us and condemn us.

9. The work that we agree upon is of unquestionable necessity; it is not of
the controverted matters, where some godly men are of one mind, and some of
another: we know of no party reputed sober and pious among us, but are all
agreed of the usefulness and excellency, which is more then the lawfulness of
this Catechizing, and familiar instruction; and we observe them all as with one
mind and mouth, complaining of the neglect of it, and commending the
performance; we think it therefore a sad and unexcus^ble thing, that while we
contend about controversies, most should neglect that necessary work, which all
approve of, even while they thus neglect it.

10. It is a work wherein we have the countenance of authority. Former Rulers
commanded Catechizing, and the present do not discountenance it, but encourage
us to such works. It has been the constan^ pract^ce of the Primitive Church,
who had often their Catechists to teach these principles; and all Ages have
allowed it without any considerable contradiction; And the Catechism which we
agree to use was approved by the Church Assemblies of England and Scotland, as
a part of the Uniformity.

11. We receive the public maintenance to this end, that we may be enabled to
lay out our endeavor for the good of the whole Parishes from which we do
receive it; and therefore we are further obliged in Justice to do our best for
the salvation of them all.

Upon these plain and pressing Reasons (among others) we find our selves
called to lament our former negligence, and more diligently to perform this
needful work, and to exhort our Parishioners to encourage us by their
submission, and willingness; and we do resolve upon a more faithful discharge
of this duty to those that shall thus submit.

Subscribed by RIchard Baxter, Teacher of the Church at Kidderminster. John
Boraston Pastor of Rib^ford, and Bewdly. Richard Eades Pastor of Beckford
Glocestershire. Charles Not Minister of Shelsly. James Warwick Minister at
Hanley Castle. Thomas Eavans Minister at Welland. Thomas Wright Teacher at
Hartlebury. John Not Teacher at Sheriff Hales Staffordshire. Henry Oasland
Teacher of the Church at Bewdly. John Hill Minister at Clifton upon Teame.
Thomas Baldwin Minister at Wolverley. Richard Wolley Minister at Salwarp. John
Freeston Minister at Hampton Lovet. Richard Sergeant Preacher at Kidderminster.
Andrew Tristram Pastor of the Church at Clent. Thomas Bromwich Minister at
Kemsey. Thomas Franck Teacher at Nanton Beachamp. John Tailor Minister at
Dudley. William Spicer Minister of Stone. Humphry Waldern Minister of Broom.
Samuel Bowater Rector of Astley Benjamin Baxter Minister at Vpton upon Severn.
William Lole Minister at Pyrton. Thomas Francis Minister at Doderhil. Thomas
Jackman Minister at Borough. William Durham Pastor of Tredington. Thomas
Easton Pastor of Batesford Glocestershire. Giles Collier Pastor of the Church
at Blockly. George Hopkins Ministers of the Gospel at Evesham. Thomas Matthew
Ministers of the Gospel at Evesham. John Dolphin Pastor of the Church at
Honniborn. Joseph Trebel Pastor at Church Lench. William Wills Preacher at
Littleton. Richard Beeston Preacher of the Gospel at Breedon. William Kimberly
Minister at Ridmarley. Joseph Baker Preachers of the Gospel in the City of
Worcester. Richard Fincher Preachers at the Gospel in the City of Worcester.
John Willnot Preacher a^ Parshore. Francis Hyat Minister at Eckington. Robert
Brown Minister at White-Lady Aston. Jarvis Bryan Pastor of the Church at Old
Swinford and Sturbridge. John Dedicol Preach^r at Abbotsley. Richard Dowly
Minister of Stoke Pryor.


An Exhortation to all our Parishioners, to submit to this Necessary work of
Catechizing and personal Instruction, which we have Agreed on, for the
furthering of their own Salvation.
To all the Inhabitants of our several Parishes, Grace and Peace from God our
Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.
DEarly beloved Brethren, whose souls are precious both to Christ and us, and
whose Peace and Salvation we do earnestly desire. It has pleased the God of
all the Earth to call out this poor unworthy Isl^nd in the utmost parts of the
world, to make it his garden, while others remain a wilderness; and a Land of
ligh^, while others live in horrid darkness; Here has he Proclaimed the Gospel
of his dear Son, and made plain to us the way to everlasting felicity: He has
not dealt so with every N^tion, nor have they heard and seen what we have done.
Most of the world do lie in the darkness of Heathenish Idolatry, Infidelity and
Mahometanism: and too much of Christendom in the darkness of Popery and
Heresy. It ha^h pleased the Lord of the Harvest, to send forth Laborers into
this part of his Harvest; though, we confess, too weak and imperfect, yet more
numerous, and faithful, and diligent, then most of his Churches elsewhere
Proportionably can show. He has wonderfully dispelled the mists of Popery, and
many of his servants have laid down their lives in the flames in witness
against it; and with a mighty hand has he hitherto hindered its return. We have
the holy Scriptures faithfully translated into our own Language, and Bibles so
common, that every family may have one or more at a small price, and may make
them the matter of their daily exercise. We have this Scripture weekly at least
read and preached to us publicly. we have the living examples of many that
fear God, in whose hearts his Law is written, though imperfectly, and in whose
lives it is expressed. We have very great Numbers of excellent Books, expounding
this Scripture, and plainly directing us in the way to Salvation; so that we
know no Nation that in their own tongue has the like. And among the rest we
have the sum of Christian Religion in Catechisms, in so small a room, that the
weak may learn, understand, and remember it.

Yet after these wonderful mercies and means, we must needs confess it, to the
grief of our souls, that many thousands in this Land of light, do wilfully live
in darkness: And whereas they might all, for the time and means, have been able
to teach others, they have need to be taught again the very principles of Gods
Oracles, and to be fed as babes with milk, and not with strong meat, as being
unskilful in the word of Righteousness, Heb. 5.12, 13, 14. It astonisheth us
many times when we have occasion to talk with some of our hearers, to perceive
that they know very little of the Doctrine which we have been preaching to them
so many years, as plainly as we could speak: If we could speak plainer to them
we would; for we know it is a matter that they must understand or perish. It is
sad to us to hear many men, that can talk understandingly about matters of the
world, that can scarce speak a word of sense about the matters of their
Salvation, or scarce give us any reasonable answer, if we Q^estion them about
the very Fundamentals of Christianity, without the knowledge of which they
cannot be saved.

Upon this sad experience of men's Ignorance, we have been brought to a deep
Consideration of our own Neglects; and the Lord has partly set it home upon
our hearts, and in the apprehension thereof our souls have been brought low, to
think how we have wronged Christ and you, and lest God should require your
blood at our hands. For though we have frequently and faithfully taught you in
public, which is enough to leave you without excuse, yet perceiving that it
must be a more familiar course that must help the extremely ignorant to
understand, we lament that we have done no more in it then we have done. And
though some of u^ have hitherto excused our selves, by our bodily weakness, or
other pressing business of our calling, and from your neglect of coming to us
according to your duty; yet da^e we no longer be guilty of these excuses, while
we discern any further means to be used for your good. Having therefore sought
Gods direction, and Consulted together with his word before our eyes, we do all
with one mind Agree and Resolve to set upon the practice of Constant
Catechizing, and personal familiar Instruction of All that shall not
obstinately refuse our help: and this we shall do, by Gods assistance,
according to the Rules which we have hereunto adjoined. And because we cannot
expect that the Aged and Rich should be persuaded to be Catechiz^d in the open
Congregation, and because it is many ways inconvenient that we should go from
house to house, if we can avoid i^, and it is your unquestionable duty to seek
to your Teachers, and obey them in as great a thing as this; we do earnestly
entreat you, that you will submit to this order, and willingly come to the
place which the Minister shall appoint, even your whole families in their turns
when they are called, both old and young; and that Parents and Masters will
lead their Children and Servants, and give them a good example, and not Condemn
themselves by refusing that duty which they confess their children should
perform; especially seeing ^gno^ance in the Aged is a double sin and shame. We
entreat you also that you will bestow some time and labor to learn by memory,
the Common Creed, with our Expository Profession, and the ten Commandments, and
the Lords Prayer, and this small Catechism, and the shorter Catechism of the
Assembly of Divines. And if you cannot read, get some to read them to you that
can. We entreat you also to take some pains to see that your families do all
learn the same: and especially bestow all that time on the Lords day in this
exercise, which can be spared from the greater parts of Gods service: As also
that you would bring all your family with you (except the children who are
catechized in the Congregation) at the time, and to the place that shall be
appointed, there to render some account of what you learn, and to entertain
some familiar conference about it, that you may be further Instructed in the
way to life. If you know never so much already, we suppose you will not lose
your labor: and the most Judicious should be the most humble, Obedient and
exemplary to the weak. If you have learned never so little, and find it hard to
remember the words, yet we entreat you to come with the rest, for some familiar
Conference and Instruction: For the less you know and remember, the more help
you need.

Now the Lord has awakened us his unworthy Messengers to the sense of our
duty, O do not you discourage us, and please the Devil, and frustrate all our
work and hopes, by your wilful refusal; especially when we call you to no
Controverted work, but that which all the sober Christians in the world will
confess to be your duty: In some other matters, some are of one mi^d, and some
of another: but, through the great merc^ of God, it is not so here. You can
have no such excuse to cover your refusal: but if you will not Learn and Obey,
you must even speak out, and say you will not, and tell God plainly so to his
face, and so let your nakedness appear to all. Now God has put it into our
hearts to do you good, and caused us to thirst after the welfare of your souls,
we beseech you take heed of Refusing your mercies. If you come to us to enquire
the way to salvation, we dare not for all the world refuse to teach you: for
then how should we meet the Lord in Judgment, and look him in the face that
made us watchmen for men's safeties! How then Dare you refuse to be Taught, or
to bestow your time and Labor for to Learn?

Dear Brethren, the Lord who is our Judge and yours, knows, that it is not a
desire to domineer over your Consciences; nor any pleasure that we take in
needless troubling you; much less any ill will to you, that caused us to take
up this Resolution, and to call you to this work: But it is the sense of our
former sin and present duty, and of the great Necessity hereof to your
Salvation. Alas, flesh and blood has kept us from this duty too long already:
and if we would hearken to it, we should not so much trou^le our selves or you,
but let you alone in your sinful Ignorance: you may q^ickly understand that it
is far easier to us to please you, and let you alone! Indeed, we cannot but
expect that this work which we have now undertaken, should bring upon us much
more labor or trouble to the flesh, then all our Public preaching does. We
are frail sinners, and have flesh and blood as well as you, that would fain
draw us back from such troublesome duties, and persuade us to take our ease,
and not to lose the love of our Neighbors by molesting them: But woe to us and
you if this should prevail you should therefore rather encourage us, and warn
us to be Diligent, and to take heed to our Ministry which we have received in
and of the Lord, and to fulfill it, Col. 4.17. If we were Stewards for the
supply of your bodily wants, you would call to us for help, and not stay till
we seek to you; much less would you refuse it. We have all need to join heart
and hand, to help one another safe to Heaven; and all little enough, when we
have such enemies within us, and without us; and so many difficulties before us
to overcome. We know that you will have many Temptations from Satan, to keep
you back from this profitable work; He that is unwilling of your Salvation,
will be unwilling that you should learn the way to it. He will persuade the
Rich and worldly-wise, that it is a business unbeseeming them to be Catechized
or Instructed; As if they were too good to obey Christ and hi^ Officers, or to
be saved! He will persuade the Aged that they are too old to learn, and that it
is only for Children or the younger sort; As if they were too old to be saved!
or as if it were not yet time to learn how to Live, when they have almost done
Living; or how to Dye, when Death is so near! Alas, that any reasonable soul
should be so brutish, when most of their lives is already spent in Ignorance
and worldliness, and living to the flesh, and they should speedily lament their
former folly, and Redeem the little time that does remain; when one would think
they should day and night be afraid, left Death should snatch them away in
their sin and Ignorance; that yet they should not only delay and loyter, but
wilfully refuse, and say, they are too old to learn! When you know Certainly
that you must be shortly in another world, in endless Joy or Torment, is it not
time to know wh^^ world it must be? Or at least to use your utmost diligence
that you miscarry not in a ma^ter of such unspe^k^ble Consequence? Should not
^he old that are nearest their Journeyes end, be most Careful to know whither
they are going, and where that end will be, and to see lest they have hitherto
mist ^he wa^? While there is lise and ^ime, there is ^lop^ of mercy, if you
have but willing minds to use Gods m^ans; But if you remain unwilli^g till time
be g^^e, ^here will never be the least hop^ of R^m^dy more. Truly Brethren, if
Christianity were a fa^^e, and there were no such things as Heaven or Hell when
this short life is ended, but men dyed as D^^^ do, we should never then trouble
your minds wi^h these matters, but let you live in ease and pleasure w^ile you
may. But we know that the Living God is True; and Heaven and Earth shall sooner
fail, then one tittle of his sacred Word. We know that we and you are hasting
to the Judgment seat of Christ, where we must be accountable for our Teaching,
and you of your learning, and both of our Obeying and Love to the Truth, and of
all the time and means that we did possess. We know that it is but a little
while till we and you must be all gone hence, and the places where we live must
know us no more. We know that then we shall wish we had been more diligent in
Teaching, and you will wish you had been more diligent in Learning; and all of
us in Obeying! O Sirs, what should you so much think on, as the God whom you
say you love and honor, and the heaven that you say you hope for ever to
enjoy, and the Necessary way that leads thereto? If you are Christians, what
should you more mind then Christ and his Benefits? Col. 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Math.
16.19, 20, 21, 23. John 6.27. Will you drop out of the world, before you have
well Considered what you had to do in it? will you lose the last hour or part
of your Lives as you have done the rest? yea and make that a reason for it? As
if you would not Learn in your Age, because you learned no sooner? will you
live all your youth with purposes to repent and turn to God in your Age? and
then when Age comes, will you refuse to Return because you did it not sooner?
What is this but to abuse Christ all your youth, and then abuse him more in
your Age, because you abused him in your youth! How will you think of this
foolish wickedness when you look back upon it in Hell, if your found Repentance
and Returning to God by Christ prevent it not? Believe it, true Repentance is a
through turning from the flesh and the world to God; and not only a wish that
you had been wiser; which is merely forced by the sight of death! woe to that
man for ever, that dies before he has done the business of his l^fe: and that
must go to Christ's Judgment, before Christ have had his heart! We beseech you
therefore rather lay by any thing then these needful works: you have nothing
else to mind, that in Comparison of this is worth the minding: it is for this
that all things else must be Used. In themselves they are but as childrens
toys; will you play with them till they and you do fall together into the dust?
and that while greater things stand by? It is Christ, and Grace, and the
promised Glory, that will never deceive you, if you will but seek him, and set
your heart upon him, and esteem him above these transitory things, and make it
the chief business of your life to Please and Enjoy him; which cannot be
without the knowledge of him. Is it not pity that God should have any
Reasonable Creature that Knows not his Maker or his Laws, or his own
happiness? it not pity after all that Christ has done and suffered for the
world, that any that call themselves his Disciples, should so little know him,
and the salvation which he has purchased, and should set so light by him, as
to reject his invitations? and so neglect this great salvation! Math. 22.5, 6.
Heb. 2.3. O that you had but felt what it is to be under the bond of Gods
Commands I especially the great Command of the Gospel; then you would see that
you refuse not him that speaks; For if they escaped not that refused Moses
that spoke on Earth; much more shall not we escape if we turn away from him
that speaks from heaven, Heb. 12.25. O that you did feel but what it is to be
under the power of constraining Love! 2 Cor. 5.14. And to have the Love of
Christ shed abroad in your hearts by the Holy Ghost! Romans 5.5. And the Spirit
to write Christ's Law within you! Heb. 10.16. Then would you long for more of
Christ, and run after him in his Ordinances with thirsting souls, and delight
in his Law, and meditate in it day and night, and love his Teaching, and
delight to do his will, Romans 7.22. Psalm. 1.2, 3. Psalm. 10.8. and 119.24.77.35.
and 40.1.2. These things would not only be your business, but your Pleasure;
even your meat and drink, Job 23.12. O that you did know in this your day the
things that belong unto your Peace, before they are hid from your eyes! Luke
19.41, 42. And that you would once soberly Consider what it is to be in
Everlasting Joy or Torments! and that you would live as men that believe these
things indeed!

We do yet again beseech you in the name of him that Made you, and Redeemed
you, and for the sake of your own immortal souls, that you will not be so
stout, or self-conceited, or so careless, or so contemptuous of the Grace of
the God, as to refuse to come to your Teachers to be Catechized and Instructed,
or to bestow your labor in learning these Principles. You can lose but little
by it, and only that which however you shall shortly lose. You may get that
which shall never be lost. O what a Glory would it be to our Parishes, and to
the Land, if you would all join as with one mind to learn and study the things
of Christ! what a Joy would this be to the hearts of your Teachers, to see you
readily with one accord to come to them for Instruction, and obey the word. All
the wealth of the world would not so glad them, or do them so much good as this
would do! But what a Grief is it to our hearts at present to think, that so
many of you do live in wilful Darkness, and will not use the means to get out!
and to think what is like to b^come of you for ever, if death shall find you in
this sad Condition! Now we are near you, and fain would see your hearty change.
But then, betwixt us and you what a gulf would there be set? Luke 16.26. The
word of God will certainly be made good: And, he has expressly said, that if
the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost: in whom the God of this
world has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them. 2
Cor. 4.3, 4. And people perish where vision fails, and for lack of Knowledge,
Prove. 1.22.29. and 29.18. Hos. 4.6. And when a people have no understanding, he
that made them will not-save them, and he that formed them, will show them no
Favor, Isai. 27.11. that the heart be without knowledge, it is not good. Prove.
19.2. To know God and his son Christ, is Eternal life. John 17.3. How sadly
does God call even to the Heaven and Earth to hear his Complaint against his
people! Isa. 1.3, 4. because he had brought up a people and they rebelled
against him: the Ox knew his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib, but Israel
knew not God; his people would not Consider. Give not God cause to complain
thus of you, lest you prove your selves the complainers in the end.

It grieveth us also to see so many untaught children and families among you!
to see the Lords day so idly spent when you have so much of this necessary work
to do! To see so many of you either live without the Lords Supper, and the holy
Communion of the Church, or else expect it when you know not what you do. And
it much grieveth us when we come to visit the sick, and would fain speak
Comfort to their departing souls, and find them in so Ignorant and Carnal a
state that we dare not do it. O what a trouble must this needs be to our minds!
You look that we should speak Peace to you at the hour of Death, that will nor
learn the way of Peace in your life, but rather abhor it and wilfully reject
it. But that is a thing that we may not do; and if we should do it, we should
but deceive you.

Brethren, take time and mercy, while the God of mercy does offer it you! Think
not a little labor too much, to learn that which must be Learned upon pain of
Damnation; and which may make you Happy for ever. It is the highest, the
noblest and sweetest work that you can mind, or be employed in! Other things
are drudgery to this, and must give place to it. Harden not therefore your
hearts against the Instruction and help that is offered you. It is none of our
purpose to question you in matters of Scholarship, but of mere Christianity;
nor to shame the Ignorant, but to teach them; nor to puzzle you with hard
unnecessary Questions, but to speak to you according to your several
Capacities. You can learn a trade to live by! And could you not lea^n the way
to Heaven if you were as willing and diligent? you pray that the will of God
may be done: and will you not learn to do it? you pray, that his Kingdom may
come, and his Name be Hallowed: and will you not learn to Know the nature and
dignity of his Kingdom, and how to hallow his blessed Name? God is willing to
Teach you, and therefore has sent his Son to be your Teacher: All Christians
are his Disciples or Scholars: and its an ill Scholar that Refuses to Learn,
or be taught. Christ's way of Teaching is, jointly by his Ministers, Word, and
Spirit: If you Refuse these, you refuse Christ: And though you may think it is
but a man that you despise, yet God himself says, He that despises, despises
not man but God, 1 These. 4.8. And he that despises you, despises me, Luke
10.16. And he that despises him, shall be lightly esteemed, and despised by
him in the day of his Necessity 1 Samuel 2.30. Prove. 1.24. to the end. And he
that de^piseth Knowledge, shall be destroyed, Prove. 13.13. O how much better
would it seem to us, if you would go along with us Cheerfully in the way of
Salvation, then to force us to be witness against you to your Condemnation! For
Christ has said, that if people receive not his M^ssengers, and hear them not,
they must depart, and shake off the dust of their feet as a testimony against
them; And he ha^h assured us that it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and
Gomorrah in the day of Judgment, then for that City, Mark 6.11. Math. 10. 14
15.

Finally Brethren, we conclude with the repetition of our former request, that
if God have so much interest in you, if Christ and the holy Ghost have so much
Interest in you, if your own Salvation be any of your Interest, or if we your
Teachers and friends have any Interest in you, we earnestly beseech you, that
not one family, nor one person, old or young, would deny us this request, which
we make, to our own Labor, but for your Good: First that you would take some
pains, to Learn over the Creed with out Expository Profession, the Ten
Commandments, and the Lords Prayer, our small Catechism, and the Assemblies
shorter Catechism. Secondly that you would see that all your Children and
Servants (that are capable) learn them: especially on the Lords day. Thirdly,
that you would not refuse to come when you are called, to give your Teachers an
account of your Knowledge, and (how little soever you have learned, yet) to
receive Instruction by them. And think it not too much that we desire you to
come to us; for as you know it is a more regular and certain way for all to
come to one place, then for us to go seek after every person, not knowing where
and when to find them; so is it no more then you owe to your Teachers (in order
to your own good;) when God has made them Stewards of his household, to give
them their meat in due season, Luke 12.42. Tit. 1.7. 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. and has
Commanded you to obey them that have the Rule over you, for they watch for your
souls, as those that must give account, that they may do it with Joy and not
with Grief, for that is unprofitable for you. And Mal. 2.7. For the Priests
lips should keep Knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth: for he
is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts.

If the Lord bow your hearts sincerely to yield to this our advice, it will be
the Joy of your Families, the honor of your Towns, Parish^s and Country, a
good example for the whole Nation to imitate, and it will be the Comfort of
your Teachers, and a good preparative to your own everlasting Peace; so great
Benefits will follow a Small, a Certain, a Reasonable duty. But if after all
that we can say or do, you unthankfully and obstinately refuse the help that is
freely offered you, your Blood will be upon your own heads; and your
Consciences shall bear us witness that we made you this offer; and this our
Exhortation shall rise up in Judgment for a witness against you; And then
Christ will have the glory of his Justice on all that set so light by the
Riches of his Grace.

May 4th. 1655. These are the Testimonies, Warnings and Requests of us the
servants of Christ for the saving of your souls, whole names are before written.



The Ancient Western CREED.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and earth. And in Jesus
Christ his only Son our Lord, which was Conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of
the Virgin Mary; suffered under Pontius Pilate; was Crucified, dead and buried;
he descended into Hell; The third day he rose again from the dead: he ascended
into Heaven, and sits on the Right hand of God the Father Almighty, from
thence he shall come to Judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the Holy
Ghost: the holy Catholic Church: the Communion of Saints: the forgiveness of
sins: the Resurrection of the Body, and the Life everlasting.

The Lords Prayer, Math. 6.
OUR Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name: Thy Kingdom come, thy
will be done, in earth, as it is in Heaven: Give us this day our daily bread:
And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors: And lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from Evil: For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power,
and the Glory, for ever, Amen.

The ten Commandments, Exodus 20.
GOD spoke all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy God which have brought
thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bond^ge.

Thou shall have no other Gods before me.

Tho^ shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or any likeness of any thing
that is in Heaven above, or that is in the ea^^h beneath, or that is in the
water under ^he ear^h: ^hou sh^lt not how down thy self to them, nor ^erve him:
F^^ ^ ^he Lord ^hy God am a jealous God, visit^ng ^he iniquiries of the Fa^hers
upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me:
and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my Commandments.

Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: For the Lord will
not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain.

Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy: six days shall thou labor, and do
all thy work: but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it
thou shall not do any work, thou nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy
manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor the stranger that is
within thy gates: For in six days the Lord made heaven, and earth, the sea,
and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord blessed
the Sabbath day and hallowed it.

Honor thy Father and thy Mother: that thy days may be long upon the land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

Thou shall not kill.

Thou shall not commit adultery.

Thou shall not steal.

Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy neighbors
wife, nor his manservant, nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor
any thing that is thy neighbors.

The fuller profession of our Faith, taken out of Scripture; for the better
understanding of the Creed.
I Believe that there is One only God or [in three. Persons the Father, The
Son, and the Holy Ghost.]
[The Father,] Infinite in Being, the Father, The Son, Wisdom, Goodness and
Power: the Maker, Preserver, and Disposer of all things; and the most Just and
Merciful Lord of all.

I Believe that Mankind being fallen by sin from God and Happiness, under the
wrath of God, the curse of his Law, and the Power of the Devil, God so loved
the world, that he gave his only son to be their Redeemer, who being God, and
one with the Father, did take to him our nature, and became man, being
conceived of the Holy Ghost in the Virgin Mary, and born of her, and named
Jesus Christ: and having lived on earth without sin, and wrought many Miracles
for a witness of his truth, he gave up himself a sacrifice for our sins, and a
Ransom for us, in suffering death on the Cross: and being Buried, he rose
again the third day, and afterward Ascended into Heaven, where he is Lord of
All, in Glory with the Father: And having Ordained that all that truly Repent,
and Believe in him, and love him above all things, and sincerely Obey him, and
that to the death, shall be saved; and they that will not shall be damned; and
commanded his ministers to preach the Gospel to the world; He will come again,
and raise the bodies of all men from Death, and will Judge all men according to
what they have done in the body: and the Righteous shall go into life eternal,
and the rest into everlasting Punishment.

I Believe that God the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of the Father and the Son, was
sent from the Father or and
by the Son to inspire and guide the Prophets, and Apostles, that they might
fully reveal the doctrine of Christ, and by multitudes of evident miracles and
wonderful gifts, to be the great witness of Christ and of the truth of his holy
word, and also to dwell and work in all that are drawn to believe, that being
first joined to Christ their head, and into one Church, which is his body, and
so pardoned and made the sons of God, they may be a peculiar people sanctified
to Christ, and may mortify the flesh, and overcome the world and the Devil,
and being zealous of good works, may serve God in Holiness and Righteousness,
and may live in the special Love and Communion of the Saints, and in Hope of
Christ's Coming, and of Everlasting life.

I do heartily take this one God In the Trinity of Persons.
for my only God, and my chief good; and this Jesus Christ for my only
Lord-Redeemer and Savior, and this Holy Ghost for my Sanctifier; and the
Doctrine by him revealed, and witnessed by his Miracles, and now contained in
the holy Scriptures, I do take for the Law of God, and the Rule of my Faith,
and Life. And Repenting unfeignedly of my sins, I do Resolve through the grace
of God, sincerely to obey him, both in Holiness to God, and Righteousness to
men, and in special love to the Saints, and Communion with them, against all
the temptations of tht Devil, the World, and my own Flesh, and this to the
death.

Note that the first eight Articles of the following Ca^echism, do contain ^he
foregoing Profession: and the four last do express the particulars ^ontained in
the two words, Holiness and Righteousness, and in the ten Commandments.

The CATECHISM.
Qu. 1. What do you believe concerning God?

1. There is one only God in three persons, the Father, 1 Cor. 8.4, 6. Mat.
2^.13. 1 John 5.7. 1 Timothy 1.17. Psalm. 1.^9.7, 8, 9. Isa. 40.17. Rev. 4.8. Psalm.
147.5. Neh. 9.6. Psalm. 135 6. Rev. 15.3. Exo. 34 6.
the Son, and the Holy Ghost: Who is infinite in Being, Power, Wisdom, and
Goodness: the maker, preserver, and di^poser of all things: and the most Just
and Merciful Lord of all.

Qu. 2. How did God make man, and what Law did he give him?

2. Pro. 16.4. Genesis 1.26, 27. and 2.16, 17. Romans 6.23.
God made man for himself, in his own image, and gave him a righteous Law,
requiring perfect obedience upon pain of Death.

Qu. 3. Did man keep or break this Law?

3. Man being tempted by Satan, Genesis 3. Rom 5.1^.28. and 3.23. and 6.23. Ephesians.
2.12. Hos. 14.1. Ephesians. 2.^.3, 5. Gal. 3.10.^^. Act. 26.18 Genesis 6.5. 2 Timothy 3 15.
Hos. 11.7. and 13.2. Psalm. ^8.17.
did w^^fully sin; and so fall from God and Happiness, under the wrath of God,
the Curse of the Law, and the Power of the Devil: so that a e are b^ nature
dead in sin, and prone to do more evil continually, and to grow worse, and ^o
depart yet further from God.

Qu. 4. How was man Redeemed?

4 God so loved the world, Joh. 3.16, ^7. 1 John 2.2. Ioh. 4.22. Rom 9.5. and
10.12 Joh. 10.30. and 17.11. Heb. ^.14, 16. 1 Timothy ^.5. Lu^. 1.2^, ^1, 35. Mat.
1.22, 25.20. Heb. 4.15. and 7 26. Heb. 2, 3.4. Act 2.22. and 7.36. Tit 2.14.
Heb. 9.26. 1 Timothy 2.6. Mat. 27.31, 35. ^0 1 Cor. 15 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 12. Act. 1.9.
Ephesians. 4 8, 9, 10, 11. Act. 10.56, and 2.36. R^m 14.9. Mat. 28.18. Ephesians. 1.20, 21,
22
that he gave his onl^ son to be their Redeemer: who, being God, and one with
the Father, did take to him our nature, and became man, being conceived by the
Holy Ghost in the V^r^ in Mary, and born of her, and called Jesus Christ, and
having lived on earth without sin, and wrought many Miracles for a witness of
his truth, he gave up himself a sacrifice for our si^s, and a ransom for us, in
suffering death on the Cross, an^ being buried, he rose again the third day and
afterward ascended in^o ^eaven, where he i^ Lord of all ^n glory with the
Father.

Qu. 5. How and on what ^e ^^s is ^al^ation offered in the Gospel?

5 Our Lord Jesus Christ has ordained in his Testament that all they that
receive him by a tine effectual faith, 1 Cor. 9.14 Heb 9.15. Col. 2 6. Joh.
1.12. Mar. 16.15, 16. Gal. 5.4 Jam. 2 24. Act. 26.18. ^n. 24 47. Act. 5.31. and
11.18. and 20.21. and 3.19. and 2.38 and 8.2^. and 26.10. (...) 13.3. Mar.
4.12. Isa. 55.7. and 2.16 Eze^. ^8.21.^0.^2. and 33 11. to 20. Mat. 19.2^, 29.
and ^0 3^. L^k ^4.26, 27 3^. T^t 3 ^.7. Heb. 3 14. C^l. ^.23. Joh. 15 ^. to 12.
and 8 31. Ro^. 1.22 Heb 10.26 38. Rev. 2.1^.^^. Mar. 16.15, 16. Mat. 28.19, 20,
21.
and that by true Repentance do forsake the Devil, the world, and the Flesh,
and heartily turn from them unto God, shall freely receive the Pardon of their
sins, and become the sons of God, and Heirs of everlasting life, The
conditionality of the promise deny^th not the certainty of faith and
perseverance.
and that if they sincerely love and obey him to the death, they shall be
glorified: and that they that will not do all this, shall be damned. And this
he has commanded his Ministers to preach to all the world.

Joh. 14.26. and 15.26. 1 Pet. 1.10, 11, 12. and 2 Pet. 1.21. 2 Timothy 3.16. Joh.
16.13. Ep. 3.3, 5. and 2.20. and 4.11, 12, 13. Mat. 28.20 ^ Tim. 6.14 Isa. 8
20. Rev. ^2.18, 19. Heb. 3.2,^. and 2.3.4. Acts 2.22. and 19.11.10 19. Gal.
3.1.2 3, 5. Joh. 14.12. and 3.2 and 10. 25, 37, 28, 1 Cor. 14.
Qu. 6. How did Christ reveal and prove his doctrine?

6. The Holy Ghost was sent by the Father and the son to inspire and guide the
Prophets, Apostles and Evangelists, that they might truly and fully reveal the
Doctrine of Christ, and deliver it in Scripture to the Church as the Rule of
our Faith and Lise: And by multitudes of evident uncontroled miracles, to be
the great witness of Christ, and of the truth of his holy word.

Act. 26.18. Joh. 6.44. Romans 8.^, 10, 11 Act. 16.14. Eze^. 36.16. Act. 15.9. 1
Cor. 6.11, 19. Col. 1.18. and 2.19. Ephesians. 5.30. 31.32. and 3.17. 1 Cor. 12.
13.27. Romans 3.24. Gal. 4 6. Joh. 1.12. Gal. 6.26. Tit. ^.14. 1 Pet. 2.9. 1 Cor.
6.11. Romans 8.1.10 14. Gal. 5.17, 24. 1 John 2.15. Gal. 6.14. 1 John 3.8. Luke
1.74, 75. 1 Pet. 1.22. Joh. 12.34, 35. Ephesians. 2.^9. Heb. 10 25. ^ Cor. ^.9. ^
Pet. 3 11, 12. Tit. 1.2. and 3.7.
Qu. 7. How are men brought to partake of Christ and life?

7. The same Holy Spirit does by the word enlighten men's understandings, and
soften and open their hearts, and turn them from the power of Satan unto God,
by faith in Christ: that b^ing joined to Christ the Head, and into one Church
which is his body, and freely justified, and made the sons o^ God, they may be
a sanctified peculiar people unto him, and may overcome the flesh, the world,
and the devil; and being zealous of good works, may serve God in Holiness and
Righteousness, and may live in the special love and Communion of the Saints,
and in hope of Christ's coming, and Everlasting Life.

Acts 1.11. 1 Cor. 15. 1 These. 4.16, 17, 18. Joh. 5.22, 27.2 Cor. 5.10. Romans
2.6, 7. Mat. 25.2 These. 1.8, 9, 10. and 2.12. 2 Timothy 4.8, 18. Luke 10.11. Joh.
17.24. and 19.27. Mat. 13.40.
Qu. 8. What shall be the end of the Righteous and of the wicked?

8. The Lord Jesus Christ will come again at the end of this world, and will
raise the bodies of all men from the dead, and judge all men according to their
works: And the Righteous shall go into Everlasting Life, and the rest into
everlasting punishment.

Qu. 9. What a^e the Public means which Christ has appointed to salvation?

9. Mat. 28.19, 20. Mat. 16 15. Romans 10.7, 8.14.15. 2 Timothy 2.^. Act. 14.1^.
Act. 2.42. and 20.7, 28. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 14. Ezekiel. 3.17, 18, 21. Mal. 2.7. 1
Cor. 12.17, 28, 29. Col. 1.28. Act. 18.26. Jam. 5.14. N^h. 11 17. and 9.5. and
8.4, 5, 6, 8. 1 Cor. 10.16. and 9.13. and 11.24. Nam. 6.23, 24. Deuteronomy. 10.8.1.
Chr. 23.13. Heb 7.7. 1 Cor. 4 1. 1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15. Jo^. 1.10. Acts 20.7. 1
Cor. 16.2. Mar. 16.2 9. Joh. 20.1, 1^. Tit. 2.15. and 1.9, 11. 1 Timothy 5.1, 19,
20. and 3.5 Tit 3.10. 1 Cor. 5.4, 5, 11, 13. Acts 2.42. Heb. 13.7, 17, 24. 1
These. 5.^2, 1^. 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Cor. 16.16. Luke 12.42. and 10.16. 1 Cor. 1.10.
and 3.3. R^m. 16, 17. Ephesians. 4.2, 15, 16. Col. 2.2. 2 Cor 13.11.
Christ has appointed that fit men shall be ordained his ministers to disciple
the uncalled, and baptize all that are Disciples in the name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, and to Congregate his Disciples, and to Ouersee and Guide
the several Congregations, and each member thereof. Particularly to Teach them
the wo^d of God, to Pray and Praise God wi^h them and for them; to administer
the Lords supper in remembrance of him; and to Bless them in the name of the
Lord: Especially on the Lords day, which he has appointed for holy Communion
in such works: Also to reb^ke with Authority the scandalous and unruly, and to
reject those that are obstinately impenitent and unreformed.

It is therefore the Peoples duty to ioyn with such Churches in the foresaid
worship of God; and to know, hear, submi^ to, and obey these their Guides that
are over them in the Lord, and to avoid discord and division, and to live in
Unity, Love and Peace.

Qu. 10. What are the secret holy Duties which every one must use?

10. Psalm. 104.34. and 119.97, 99. and 1 2. and 63.6. and 77.^2. and 143.5. and
119.59. Hag. 1.5. Deuteronomy. 32.29. Psalm. 50.22. 2 Cor. 1^.5. Psalm. 4.4 Pro. 4.13.
Man. 5.^^. and 12.34. and 15.18, 19. Psalm. 119.113. and 39.1. Mar. 13.33. Luke
21.8, 34. 1 Cor. 10.12. Col. 3.5 Heb. 3.12, 13, 14. Mat. 2^.4. Luke 1^.15. Romans
13 13, 14. 1 Cor 3.18. Jer. 17.9. 1 Pet. 2.1. 2 Timothy 1 6. and 4.7. Acts 24.16.
Mat. 26. 4^. 1 Cor. 16.13. Ephesians. 6.11. to 19. 1 These. 5.17. Act. 10.9. Luke 6.12.
The secret Duties of Holiness, are frequent and serious meditation of God and
his works and word, especially of our own sin and danger, of our Redemption, of
our d^ty, of Death, Judgment, and the endless Joy and Torment after it: The
diligent examination of our own hearts, and watching over our Thoughts,
Affections, Words and Actions: The mortifying of our sin^, especially V^belief,
Error, hardness of heart, Pride, worldliness, flesh-pleasing and Hyp^crisie:
The exercise of all graces: watching against Temptations, and resolute
resisting them: And secret prayer to God.

Qu. 11. What Private Duties of Holiness must be performed with others?

11. Ephesians 6.4, 9. Deuteronomy. 6.11, 12 Jos. 24.15. Psalm. 101.2, 3. Act^ 10 ^0. Genesis
18.19. Pro. 22.6, 15. and 25.13. 1 Samuel 2.23.29. Col. 3.20.12. Ephesians. 6.1, 5, 6,
7, 8. Deuteronomy. 21.18, 20. Mal. 2.7. Jer. 6.16. and 50.5. 1 Cor. 14 35. Acts 2.37.
and 16.30. Romans 15.14. Col. ^ 16 (...) ^.1^. Ephesians. 4.29. 1 Pet. 3.1, 2. Jam
3.23. Jam. ^.16. Act. 12. 5 12. Col. 1.3 and 4 3. 1 These. ^.10. Joh. 20.19.
Act. 20.9. Act. 12 12. and 10.30. Phil. 4.6. ^ Cor. 9.12. Psalm. 50.^4. 1 Cor.
7.5. Romans 1^.15.
The Private Duties of Holiness to be performed with others, are these; parents
and Masters must teach their children and servants the word, and fear of God,
and pray with them, and for them, and hinder them from sin: children and
servants must willingly Learn and Obey: we must seek advice in the matters of
our salvation: Especially of one Teachers: we must daily admonish and exhort
one another: using gracious and Edyfying Conference, and a winning
conversation; Confessing our faults one to another, and praying with and for
one another: Especially on the Lords Day, and on extraordinary occasions of
Humiliation or Thanksgiving.

Deuteronomy. 1 17. 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7. Deuteronomy. 17.18. Jos. 1 8. sa. 56.1. Zach. 7.9. Romans
13.1, 2, 3. 1 pet 2.13. Ephesians. 6. 1, 5. Col. 3.20, 22, 23, 24. Mat 19 19. and
^2.^9. and 7.12. Ephesians. 4.2. Phil. ^.3, ^5. Mat 10.16. Ephesians. 4.25. Tit. 2.12. Col.
3.25. 1 Cor. 6.7, 8. Mat. 5.21, 22, 27, 28, 39, 44, 45. Ephesians. 4.28. Exo. ^3.1.
and 2^.16. Psalm. 15.3. Ex. ^0.17. Col 3.13. Ephesians. 4.2. Mat. 5.44. Gal. 6.10.
Heb. 13.^6. Mat. 25. Phil. 2.4.20, 21. 2 Cor. 8.11.12.
Qu. 12. What are the necessary Duties of Righteousness and mercy toward men?

12. The necessary Duties of Righteousness and Mercy to men, are these;
Superiors must Rule for God, and the Common-good, with Justice and mercy:
Inferiors must willingly Obey them in the Lord. We must love our neighbors as
our selves; and do as we would be done by; behaving our selves to all men in
lowliness and meekness, harmlesness, sobriety and truth: not wronging any in
their Bodies, Chastity, Estates or Names, no not in Desire, but forbearing and
forgiving one another, loving our very Enemies; and doing good to all,
according to our Power.

FINIS.

