THE ADVANCE OF Sir Arthur Hasilrigg, FROM The Garrison of Portsmouth, toward
the City of LONDON: And His Letter to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Commoun
Council.

Also, the Number both of Horse and Foot; the Names of the Regiments revolted
from the Army; together with the Isle of Wight, and most of the Castles
thereabouts.

Likewise, the Answer agreed upon by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common
Council at Guild Hall yesterday, and the Names of the Commissioners, sent to
Sir Arthur Hasilrigg, and Vice Admiral Lawson, to communicate the Sense of the
CITY.

London, Printed for GEORGE HORTON

THE great Hand of Providence having in a most high and wonderful manner
appeared in the Issue of these late Changes, Overturnings, and Confusions; and
in the midst of our great Fears, Dangers, and Calamities, miraculously to work
and point out a signal Deliverance for these distracted languishing, and, woeful
afflicted Nations; by raising up some noble and faithful Patriots, true
spirited English men, and renowned Assertors of the peoples Rights, Liberties,
and Freedoms, standing up in this great Day of Englands Trial and Trouble, even
in the very Gap and Gulf of Desolation threatening the inevitable Ruin of many
Thousands, who desired nothing more then a true settlement of the public
peace, upon a firm Basis, and irremovable Foundation, of Truth and
Righteousness, and to preserve a good Conscience, in casting off those
ignominious Reproaches, of breach of Faith to their Representatives.

And thereupon diverse Honorable Members of Parliament, being spirited to stand
firm for the Interest of this Commonwealth, (being warranted in their present
actings, by especial Commission and Authority from the Council of State)
unanimously declared their Resolutions and Concurrence, to hazard All, even
Lives and Fortunes, for restoring of the Parliament and People to their ancient
Rights, and undoubted Freedoms: In pursuance whereof, it pleased God to raise
up Deliverers, both by Sea and Land, having by admirable providence put an
opportunity into the hands of General Monck, a most able and experienced
Commander of the Parliaments Army; Vice Admiral Lawson, Commander in chief of
the Fleet under his immediate Conduct; and Colonel Whetham, Governor of
Portsmouth; whose Actions and Undertakings have been so Honest and Honorable,
as that they have given an absolute Check to the Exorbitances of diverse
perfidious Apostates, who have walked contrary to the Light of Knowledge, in
these late and glorious Dispensations, and so to become Instruments of some
men's ambitions, by making the good people of England their Enemies and exposing
the Nation again to the hazard of a new War and intestine Troubles.

But blessed be God, these Clouds are extinguishing, and the black Vizards of
these dark and obscure Tyrannical Streams, begin to run and center in their
proper Current: For, not only Colonel Riches Regiment of Horse have deserted
the Army, and returned to their former duty of obedience to the Parliament, but
also some of Colonel Berry's Regiment of Horse, in all Nine Troops; and several
Companies of Companies of Colonel Lago's Regiment of Foot are gone into
Portsmouth, marching with Drums beating, and Golours flying, where they
declared for the Parliament and their Resolu^ions (by the help of GOD) to stand
by and assist them with their Lives and Fortunes, and to hazard all that is
near and dear unto them, in dedefence of the Parliamen^, and the security,
service, and peace of this Commonwealth.

Upon the coming in of the said Nine Troops, and five Companies of Foot, Sir
Arthur Hasilrigg, Colonel Morley, Col. Walt^n, and Colonel Whetham (the
Governor) sent out a party of Horse and Foot to make a discovery of the
remainder part of the Army; and having good intelligence amongst them, and of
their motion, upon their approach near, it pleased God the whole party came in,
some few Officers only excepted; so that the Siege was raised, and the Town at
liberty, without a drop of blood.

The Town is very strong, and the Soldiery unanimous, Sir Arthur, and Col.
Morley having behaved themselves very gallantly.

This Western Brigade being so providentially reduced to the Obedience of
Parliament, it is said, that several Regiments of Horse and Foot are upon their
march from Portsmouth toward London under the Conduct of Sir Arthur Hasilrigg,
and other faithful Commanders; and that there are four Troops of Horse, and
four Companies of Foot raised in the Isle of Wight, for the service of the
Parliament: besides, it is ascertained, that two Troops of Horse, and two
Companies of Foot in the said Island, have also revolted from the Army; and
likewise Carisbrook Castle, Hurst Castle and all the rest of the Castles
thereabouts, except Cowes Castle, which is blocked up, and a speedy reducement
thereof is suddenly expect^d.

For the carrying on of this great Work so happily begun, and for a timely
delive^ance of these almost destroyed Nations, it is the Duty of every English
man to assist, that Posterity may be happy under a Succession of Parliamentary
Authority, derived from a Civil, rather than a Military Foundation, from whence
flows nothing but unlimited and a^bitrary streams. In order whereunto, a
Letter has been sent from Sir Arthur Hasilrigg, and the rest of the
Parliaments Commissioners at Portsmouth to the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen and Common Council of the City of London desiring them to contribute
their aid and assistance, for restoring of the Parliament, and settling the
ancient Rights, Charters, Liberties, and Fundamental privileges of these
Nations.

In pursuance whereof, Vice Admiral Lawson has also represented to his
Lordship, the state of affairs with the Fleet, importing. That they were
resolved (through the Lords assistance) to stand to their Declaration, and with
the hazard of their Lives and Fortunes, to endeavor the Re-establishment of
the Parliament, interrupted the 13th of October, 1659. to the Exercise of their
Trust: Not doubting, but to find the assistance and concurrence both of them
and others, in this Undertaking and Resolution: And in confidence of their
Complyan^e herein, he assures them of all assistance for the advancement of the
Trade, Freedom and Safety of the City in particular, and the Nation in general.

Hereupon the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, assembled at Guild
Hall, London, on Thursday the Two and Twentieth of this instant December;
where, after reading of the said Letters, a Committee of Safety was chose, who
are forthwith to consider thereof, and to return an an^w^r unto Vice Admiral
admiral Lawson: as also unto that which came from the Commissioners at
Portsmouth.

The said Committee is also appointed to consider of settling the Militia of the
City, to the end, that the peace and safety thereof may be inviolably preserved,
and the Exorbitancies of all persons whatsoever (for the future) prevented.
Which will be the only means (under God) to prevent Confusions and
Desolations, the sad Companions of Civil Discords, and to establish Peace and
Truth throughout Her Confines; by putting a Check to such ambitious and
insolent Spirits, who thirsted after the Treasure of her Pavilions, and fain
would have made her habitable places even as so many Thrones.

Guild Hall, London, December. 23.
This day the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, resumed the debate of
settling the Militia of the City, and resolved upon several Officers of
approved Trust and Fidelity, there being a singular choice, by free Election,
of such Gentlemen, and persons of quality, as do, and with God's assistance
will always adhere to their former principles and Declarations, in the use of
all lawful means for the maintenance of the true Reformed Protestant Religion,
the support of a settled lawful Magistracy, the preservation of a learned pious
Ministry, the restoring of the ancient Fundamental Laws of the Nation, and the
just Rights, Properties, and Liberties of the people.

December. 23. Afternoon.
The Revolt of diverse of the Army Forces in the Western parts, is not one
ratified by sundry Testimonies from very good hands; but also a Confirmation of
the advance of Sir Arthur Hasitrigg from Portsmouth, on Wednesday last, with
about five thousand Horse and Foot, leaving only four hundred in the Garrison.

They began their march about Ten of the Clock in the Forenoon, and quartered
that Night at Petersfield. The next morning they began their march again,
intending to quarter at Gilford on Friday Night: but whether the inclemency of
the Season, or the shorrness of time impedes them, a few hours will prove the
only Resolve. In the mean time, no small expectations, but as high
Conjectures, what Event these strange Mutations will produce: Since that the
Spirits of men are extremely dissatisfied and elevated, and possibly cannot be
allayed, without a restoration of their long-lost Trade, Liberties, and
Freedoms; With which God of his infinite mercy crown these Nations.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
THrough many delatory Expressions and Speeches, by some few persons, the
Honourab^^ Court of Aldermen and Common Counsel of the City of London could not
proceed to the Nomination of Officers for the Militia that Night; but resolved
to meet this present Saturday, and proceed to the Election of Colonels, and
other Officers. A Report being made also of the sense and substance of the
Letters sent from Sir Arthur Hasilrigg, and Vice Admiral Lawson; The said
Court resolved upon an Answer to be returned, Declaring, Their cordial
Affections, to preserve the peace and Safety of these Nations, and to acquiesce
in such things, as may be consistent with the Glory of God, and the Rights,
Privileges, and Proprieties of the People. In pursuance whereof, Commissioners
were chosen, to represent the Sense of the City; the Names whereof are as
follows: To Sir Arthur Hasilrigg, Alderman Tompson, Colonel Bromfield, Mr.
Beard.
To Vice Admiral Lawson Alderman Fowk; Mr. William Bateman, Mr. Jokey, Merchant.
For White Hall, Alderman Bateman, Mr. Vincent, Mr. Richard Foord, Merchant.



FINIS.

