A FREE GIFT, FREELY Given of God TO HENRY ABBUT, And by him freely Given to
The Reader, Without MONEY or PRICE.

It was the Complaint of God by the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer. 6, 13, 14. and chapter
8. 10, 11. That the Prophets and Priests had dealt falsely, In that they had
healed the hurt of the daughters of his people slightly, saying, Peace, peace,
where there is no peace.

Printed in the Year 1684.

THE EPISTLE TO The Reader.
READER,
I Was never learned, in the Schools of men, any other Language but the
English; nor do I well understand many words that is spoken in that Language,
that come from other Tongues: and therefore it cannot be expected that I should
place my words in what I write, in such an outward Scholar like-way, as perhaps
I might have done, had I been brought up in the outward Schools of Learning. To
show outward Wisdom, is not the thing I aim at in what I write, (nor ought it
to be my aim, if I had it) because the things of God, that is in the way that
God makes use of to restore fallen man again unto himself, he will destroy the
wisdom of the wise, and bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent, 1
Cor. 1. 19. And therefore if I had been learned in that Wisdom, I could not, in
and by that Wisdom, experimentally and knowingly, have set forth to others, the
way that God makes use of to restore lost man again unto himself, because God
has hid it from the wise and prudent, and has revealed it unto babes: for so
it seems good in the Fathers sight, Luke 10. 21.

The thing that I aim at in what I write, is, that the Tallent given to me
might not be hid, but improved for him that gave it me; in my discovering what
I by experience know of Man's being made in the Image of God: And how Man made a
wrong use of that Understanding and Knowledge that God gave to Man in his
Creation, as made in his Image: And how the Serpent self in man, at first was,
and now is tempting Man in that Understanding and Knowledge that God has given
to Man, to persuade man to please, satisfy, and content himself more in what
he understands and knows of God, than to yield obedience to God, according to
what he knew of God, that he should obey God in.

God commanded man that he should not eat of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and
Evil; that is, he should not please, satisfy and content himself in that he
knew God, and knew what was God's declared Will, that he should do which was
good; and knew what was God's declared Will, that he should not do that was
evil, he was not to do evil; of this Tree man was commanded not to eat of, nor
to touch the Fruit of it: And God commanded man to eat of the Tree of Life
which was in the midst of the Garden, which was Jesus, that in man that saved
man from sin, that brought forth the Fruit of Obedience unto God, according to
that understanding and knowledge that God had given to man to obey him in; this
man was to eat freely of. And to declare what I know of Gods love to all fallen
men, and how he will bring lost man again to himself, by choosing them to take
up the Cross and follow Jesus.

When I at first began to write some part hereof, I began upon half a sheet of
Paper, and had no thoughts to write more than what might have been writ upon
half a sheet of Paper; and that only concerning what Adam, the Woman, the
Garden, the Serpetn, the forbidden Fruit, the eating of the forbidden Tree, and
the death that Man died in the day that he eat thereof; what these were in the
mystery: as knowing that no Scripture is of any private interpretation, nor had
I at first any thoughts of printing.

But God, of whom I earnestly begged to assist me in what I then was moved to
write, resigning my will wholly up into his will, in what I did, he has caused
me to exceed that bounds (which then I thought to have left only in writing;)
and what I have writ, is according as he was pleased to put into me, and move
in me to write, without observing any outward forms, rules, or methods in
writing, (as is used by men so to do.) Are not the Scriptures so written,
without the observing of outward rules and methods?

God having herein, in what measure he pleased, lighted his Candle in me, he
made known to me, that it was not to be put under a Bushel, but on a
Candlestick; that so as an Instrument it may be a light to others. And in
obedience to God, I knowing no other way to do it in, to avoid offense, but by
being at the charge of putting it in print; and so thereby to communicate it to
my Children, Friends, and Acquaintance; and thereby it may remain as an
Instrument in Gods hand, to be as an help to show to others how subtle the
Serpents self is in man, to draw man into disobedience to God, and that under a
pretense of profit or gain that man shall get by his disobedience, in that
thereby he shall become the more like unto God, to be as Gods: Which subtilty
of the Serpent man cannot see, but as he comes into the obedience of Jesus, the
true Light in him; and so come to know how God saves man again out of his
disobedience, and bring man again into himself: Which being outwardly printed,
may outwardly remain, when outwardly shall not be

Henry Abbut.

A FREE GIFT, Freely given of GOD TO Henry Abbut, etc.
I Do believe there was an Adam, a man made by God, and out of that man God
took a woman, and gave her to that man that he had made (of whom came all
mankind) and they lived together as Gods Creatures, and for a time obeyed God
in all things that he required of them to obey him in; but they did not
continue in their Obedience, but sinned against God, (and so do all men and
women: If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is
not in us, 1 John 1. 8.) But for their sin they did not die a natural death of
the body, in that natural day of the week that they first sinned in: And had
they not sinned, I believe they had never died the natural death of the body.
And I do believe the outward Adam, and woman, and the outward death, are
Figures, and in a mystery they represent an inward Adam, woman, and death.

Adam, in the mystery, is Jesus; the woman, in the mystery, is man's being drawn
by the Spirit, or the leadings or goings forth of man by the Spirit of Jesus in
man. As the woman was taken out of man, and given to man to be an Help-meet for
him; so is man by the drawings of the Spirit, or the goings or leadings forth
of man by the Spirit of Jesus in man; they are taken out of Jesus and given as
Help-meets for the life of Jesus in man.

When I speak of the Life of Jesus in man, I do not mean that eternal Life and
Being that gave life and being to all things; for that Life and Being, the
works or actions of man cannot reach unto to do it either good or harm: but I
mean the Life of Jesus as a Savior in man; as he is sent of the Father, and is
come into fallen man, (and is of that eternal Life and being that gave being to
all); that life of his that was slain in man by sin, and is come again into man
to be raised up to life; and thereby to save man from sin, and to bring man to
God, and into God again, from whence man fell by his sin. And so as man keeps
in obedience to his being drawn or led forth by the Spirit of Jesus in him, so
he in his obedience being thereunto led or drawn forth by the Spirit of Jesus
Christ in him, is as an Help-meet for that life of Jesus in him, to save him
from sin, (which the woman given to Adam as an Help-meet, I believe was a
figure of.) And man's going out of his obedience in the time of the drawings or
strivings of the Spirit of Jesus in him, is a hurt or hindrance to that Life of
Jesus in him; that is, to that Life that is a saving him from sin: And so that
which was as an Help-meet, is deceived by the subtilty of the Serpents self;
that in man that yielded obedience to God, is deceived in and by its
disobedience.

God's Spirit striving in man to keep him from sin, that is, God's drawing of
man; and as man keeps in obedience to those strivings and drawings of the
Spirit of God in him, so he becomes an Help-meet to the Life of Jesus in him;
that is, to that Life that saves from sin. The end of Paul's preaching, was to
bring men to repent and turn to God, and do works meet for repentance, Acts 26.
20. And it was Gods Command by the Apostle, to work out our own salvation with
fear and trembling. For it is God that works in us both to will and to do, of
his own good pleasure, Philip. 2. 12, 13. Every one is to work out their own
salvation with fear and trembling: But how are they to work out their own
salvation? It must be according to the strivings or drawings of the Spirit of
God in them to do it: For it is God that works in us to will and to do, of
his good pleasure. The work is God's; but he does not do it, without man
working with him; and as God chose man to work with him, so he makes man as an
Help-meet for the Life of Jesus in man, to save man from sin, as man yields an
obedience to the working of God in him: but when man goes out of his obedience,
and yields not obedience to the working of God's Spirit in him, then the woman
is deceived and found in the transgression.

While the woman stood in obedience to the strivings or drawings of the Spirit
of God in her, which strove in her to keep her from yielding to the temptations
of the Serpent, and caused her to resist the temptations of the Serpent,
telling him, that they might eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden: But
of the fruit of the tree in the midst of the garden, God had said, they should
not eat of it, nor touch it, lest ye die. While the woman stood thus in
obedience to the working of the Spirit of God in her, that strove in her to
keep her from sinning, she was, as God wrought it in her, an Help-meet for the
preserving of the Life of Jesus in her that kept her from sin: But while the
Spirit of God thus wrought and strove in her, she hearkened to the Serpents
temptation, and went out of her obedience into disobedience; then she was
deceived, and found in the transgression, as all men in the state of
disobedience are.

How does experience teach the truth of this! at this very day the subtle
Serpent presents to man his temptation. The Light, the Spirit, which is Jesus,
although in several names, yet but one Being, God makes known to man that what
the Serpent tempts to, is a breaking of his Commands; and the penalty that
follows the breaking of the Command, is death. This is the striving or drawing
of God by his Spirit in man, to keep man from sin (this was in the woman.)
While man stands in obedience to these strivings or drawings of God in him, he
is kept from sin, (and so was the woman:) And as man is thus an Instrument in
Gods hand, for God does not save man from sin, without man's joining,
condescending, or being willing thereunto; and although the work be wholly
Gods, who works both to will and to do, yet God does not do this his great
work, without his Instrument man. And as man is an Instrument in Gods hand, so
God makes him a fit Instrument to do his work withal. And so man may be said to
be an Help-meet for the work of God in man; as a man that has a work to do,
makes an Instrument fit to do his work with, and so his Instrument is an
Help-meet or fit for him to do his work withal.

God strives or draws in man by his Light, his Spirit, his Son Jesus, to keep
man from yielding to the temptation of the Serpent. The Serpent also then
strives in man, and draws in man to yield to his temptation; (this was the
cause of the woman.) The Serpent in his temptation causes man to behold a good
and pleasantness to be had in the sin, in the forbidden Fruit, (the woman saw
that the Tree was good for food, and pleasant to the eye.) When the
understanding part in man, the knowing part in man, beheld a good for food, and
pleasantness to the eye, in what was contrary to the Command of God, and that
there was so much good and pleasantness in it, that he shall thereby have
content and full satisfaction, as being wise as Gods. Then there is a desire in
the mind stirred up after the enjoying of it: (this was the case of the woman,
when she saw the Tree to be good for food, and pleasant to the eye; then there
was a desire stirred up in her to take thereof to be made wise thereby.) So
when the understanding and knowing part in man looks out and sees that there
is a good, a pleasantness, a satisfaction, and full content in what God has
forbidden man to do, and that thereby he shall be made as Gods; then a desire
gets up in the mind to get the enjoyment thereof, that he may be wise as Gods,
that is, that he may know what good, what pleasure, what satisfaction, what
content there is to be had in the doing the thing that God has forbidden to be
done. And so man's desire is to be wise in that God has forbidden him to do,
and to know what God would not have him to know. And when man, in the
understanding and knowing part, thus beheld what God had forbidden, and the
desire of the mind is let out after it; then the will joins with the desire of
the mind, and as a hand, takes of the forbidden fruit and eats thereof, that
is, does what God has forbidden him to do; (this was the case of the woman)
and this is the state and condition of man at this day.

The understanding and knowing part in man, is that which knew this is good,
and this man ought to do; and that is evil, and that man ought not to do. This
was in the woman; she knew that it was good to eat of the Trees of the Garden,
and that she ought to do it; and that it was an evil to eat of the Tree in the
midst of the Garden, and that she ought not to do. (Man's knowing of what was
good, and what was evil, was the Tree; and it was in man, and was not forbidden
to be in man; and so it was no sin, but to eat of it was forbidden: The doing
of what God has forbidden man to do, was and is the sin; but the knowing of
what God has forbidden man to do, was no sin, nor is no sin.) And although the
woman thus understood and knew, and the knowledge did not depart from her, for
when she had sinned, her eyes were open, and she saw her self naked; that is,
that she saw that she had done what she ought not to do: Jesus was the Light in
her that gave her this understanding and knowledge, as he is the Light in all
men, and gives them the understanding and knowledge to know this is good, and
this they ought to do; and that is evil, and that they ought not to do: And
this, as a Tree, remains still in all men.

But this understanding and knowledge cannot properly be said to be Jesus, the
Light; but it is a gift of God in this Jesus the Light given to man, as he is
the true Light which lights every man that comes into the world. As a Candle
that lights the house, and may be said to light all the house, or all in the
house; so Jesus the true Light is in man, and lights man. And yet the Light,
the understanding and knowledge that man has from this Light, is as the light
in the house is from the Candle being in the house; so is that Light that man
has, whereby he knows this is good, and this he ought to do; and that is evil,
and that he ought not to do. This Light came from Jesus, the true Light in man;
and this Light does not depart from man, but after man has departed from his
obeying of it; this Light remains in man, showing him his disobedience. And
although this Light continued in the woman (as a measure of it is in all men)
and the woman knew that to obey God was good, and to disobey God was evil; yet
although she thus understood and knew, she in the wrong use of this
understanding and knowledge saw a good for food in the Tree that God had
forbidden to be eaten of; and that good for food, was that she apprehended that
in the enjoyment of what God had forbidden her to enjoy, she should have full
content and satisfaction, (as being wise as Gods) like as the natural body is
fully contented and satisfied with natural food: And this was pleasing to that
eye that so beheld it.

God did not give the gift of his Son Jesus to be a Light in man, to that end
that Gods gift to man of his Son Jesus, the true Light, which did and does
enlighten every man that comes into the world, was, that man should improve
this gift in obedience to him. This was the end of Gods giving this gift as a
Portion to man; but man, as a prodigal son, misspent his Portion, and made use
of it in disobedience to God: As a man that gives his son a Portion to the end
that he should improve it, and in the use of it live to the honor of the
Father that gave him it; but the son mis-spends the Portion in evil courses, as
did the prodigal, to the dishonor of the Father that gave it him. So was Gods
gift to man of his Son Jesus, the Light given to man, to that end that man in
the light that he received from the true Light, Jesus in him, and thereby come
to that understanding and knowledge of what was good, that man ought to do; and
in the understanding and knowing what was evil, that man ought not to do; that
so man in this understanding and knowledge should have honored God as a Father
in his obedience, in doing those things that God has made known to him and in
him to be his will that he should obey him in. But man like a prodigal son,
dishonored God his Father in and with that portion of understanding and
knowledge that God had given to him in and by his disobedience.

That understanding and knowing part in man that saw and beheld a good for
food, and thereby to be made wise as Gods, and a pleasantness to the eye, in
the Tree that God had forbidden to be eaten of, that caused the desire of the
mind after it; and the desire of the mind puts forward the will to take and eat
thereof. And these three are all but one, and make up that body or being it
self; they are not to be separated, but only as they are known by their
several workings and actions, and make up but that one body self in man.

He that will be true to himself, and to the Light of God in him, he may by
experience find the truth of it in himself, how they are one and agree in one:
for no sooner does the eye of the understanding and knowing part in man behold
what God has forbidden, to be good for food, to make them wise as Gods, and
pleasant to the eye, but the desire of the mind is let out after it, and the
will joins therewith, and as an hand, takes it, and so it is eaten; that is,
the sin is committed in the heart or inward part of man, although perhaps there
may never be an outward appearance thereof, as to the view or knowledge of
others; and if it be outwardly known, the outward manifestation thereof may be
done at several distances of time, as opportunity serves: But within in the
heart or inward part of man, it is all done at once, and God looks on it as the
eating of the forbidden Fruit, when that the eye of the understanding and
knowing part in man beheld it as good for food, and thereby to be made wise as
Gods, and pleasing to it, and the desire of the mind is let out after it, and
the will joins with the desire, and so it becomes a sin in Gods sight, although
there never be the least appearance of it without. And this is according to
what Christ said, Mat. 5. 27, 28. Ye have heard it has been said by them of
old time, Thou shall not commit adultery. But I say unto you, That whosoever
looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with her already
in his heart. Mark here the eye first looks upon her, which must imply, that it
so looks upon her as to be good to satisfy and please him, and then lust the
desire is stirred up after her, and the will that condescends, and then the
adultery is already committed in the heart, although no outward action ever be
manifested tending thereunto. And what Christ spoke of an outward woman, may be
said of all outward Creatures: When the eye of the understanding and knowing
part in man, does look upon any Creature, otherwise than it is Gods will that
man should look upon them, and the desire of the mind be let out after them,
contrary to the ^^clared will of God which was given to man before his fall;
and the will joins therewith, that it will have its desire satisfied in the
enjoyment of them, although contrary to Gods command to man. Here the inward
adultery is committed with the Creatures, although there come none of it forth
into outward action. And this is a kind of inward and spiritual whoredom
committed in the heart or inward part in man.

And this understanding and knowing part in man which looks upon what God has
forbidden, to be good food for it, to be thereby made wise as Gods, and so
pleasing to it, and the desire of the mind to be let out after it, and the will
condescending and takes it in and eats of it; that is, does the things that God
has forbidden to be done. These three thus joined together in one, as they are
but one, this is that which is the Antichrist in man; it is that which opposes
God in his workings by his Son Jesus in man, for the bringing man again to God.
And it is that man of sin in man, the Son of Perdition, that is to be revealed,
who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped, sits in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God, and
is the mystery of iniquity. And this is he that lets and will let, until he
be taken away; and when he is taken away, then his wickedness is revealed, then
is he made manifest what he was; that is, when Jesus is a consuming of him with
the Spirit of his mouth, and the brightness of his coming in the heart of man.
And then, whereas before the coming of Jesus in man, and is in man thus a
consuming of this man of sin, he that is the man of sin, until Jesus is a
consuming of him, lies hid in the heart or inward part of man, and is not
known to man what he is, but sits in Gods Temple in man as God, and man
boweth down to him and worshippeth him as his God, whom the Lord Jesus shall
(yea he does, as experience teaches us) consume him with the Spirit of his
mouth, and destroy him with the brightness of his coming.

Men have a long time been looking without them, and enquiring without them,
who that man of sin should be, and what he is that is to be revealed, and so to
be revealed, whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power, and
signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceiveableness and unrighteousness in
them that perish, because they receive not the love of the Truth that they
might be ^aved: And for this cause God shall send them strong delusions that
they should believe a lie, that they all may be damned who believe not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrightness.

I say, their so-much-looked-out for the man of sin to be revealed without
them, that is it that has hindered that they have not seen the revelation of
him within them: For what is there spoken of the man of sin, but the same may
be found in that understanding and knowing part in man, that saw and beheld a
good for food, and thereby to be made wise as Gods, and a pleasantness to the
eye in the Tree that God had forbidden to be eaten thereof, and the desire of
the mind after it, and the will to take and eat of it? Join these three
together in one, as indeed they are but one, and make but one man sin, for they
all were joined and united together in the sin, and eating of the forbidden
Fruit, and so may properly be called the man of sin, because they begot the
first sin in man. And see if you do not find in these, as they are joined and
united together, all that is spoken of the man of sin, in 2 Thessalonians. 2. No
prophecy of scripture is of any private interpretation, 2 Pet. 1. 20.

The Garden, in the mystery, is the heart of man, or the inward part of man,
that was Gods garden. While Adam stood in his obedience to God, the heart or
inward part of Adam was pleasant and delightful to God, and Adam's hearts
delight was in God, and his obedience to God was pleasant unto him; and so the
heart or inward part of man does very fitly resemble a Garden which is a
pleasant and delightful place. In this Garden, in the heart or inward part of
man, Adam, after he had fallen, in the cool of the day heard God's voice
walking in the heart or inward part (as man in the fallen state does at this
day) and calling to Adam, saying, Where art thou? And his eyes being opened, he
knew that he was naked; (which cannot be meant the outward eyes of his body,
for they were open before, and he saw his outward body before;) but the eyes of
his understanding were opened, and he saw himself naked for want of that
righteous Garment of obedience that God had clothed him with in the Creation;
which Garment remained upon him, and he was clothed with it, until he eat of
the forbidden Fruit; and when he had eaten of the forbidden Fruit, then he saw
himself naked, stripped out of that righteous Garment of obedience that God had
created him in. And then when he heard God's voice walking in his heart or
inward part (which before he eat of the forbidden Fruit, was pleasing to him)
but after he had eaten of the forbidden Fruit, he was afraid of God's voice,
and hid himself from God, fearing Gods justice that he saw he justly deserved
for his sin (as experience teaches us in the fallen state and condition of
man, at this very day, as man remains in that fallen state.) And thus when man
had sinned, the heart or inward part of man, that which was before life, a
garden for delight and pleasantness, is become like a Hell, a place of fear,
dread, and torment: And indeed that fear that was then in man's heart or inward
part, when he heard God's voice walking in the garden, was the beginning of
Hell in man. And here God may be said to send man or drive man out of the
garden; that is, as man in his own apprehensions looked upon God to be like
himself, that is, as he had changed himself in his obedience to God, so man in
that false sight that he then had of God, looked upon God that he had changed
his love to him, and so man beheld himself as sent or drove from the presence
of God, and turned out of the garden, out of Gods love and delight that he had
in man. And the reason why man so looked upon God to have no love nor delight
in him, in his fallen state, was because man in his disobedience he found no
love nor delight that he had in himself toward God; and so he judged God to be
changed toward him, as he had changed himself toward God: when in truth, the
change was only in man. And so man may be said to send, drive, or turn himself
out of the Garden, where man in the fallen state is, and so do continue out of
the Garden until there is a change wrought in the heart of man, by being
brought to a knowledge of God's unchangeableness, that although man by his
disobedience turned enemy to God, yet love continued in God toward man. God so
loved the world, God's love was so great to man, too great for the tongue of
man to express, or the heart of man to conceive of, that he gave his only
begotten son, that whosoever believed in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life, Joh. 3. 16. And* God commended his love toward us, that
while we were sinners, Christ died for us. When we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his son, Romans 5. 8. 10. These Scriptures show
the unchangeableness of God's love to man; which until man comes in some
measure or degree to be made sensible of the unchangeableness of God's love,
the fear of God's justice for sin, continues in the heart of man, and man
continues out of the Garden, and a true love to God is wanting in the heart of
man.

But when that Change is wrought in the heart, that we love God because he
first loved us, then man comes again into the Garden, and man obeys God,
because God has made known his love to him: and therefore he loves God again,
and then the heart or inward part in man, is pleasing and delightful to God;
man's delight is to obey God. 1 John 4. 18, 19. There is no fear in love, but
perfect love casts out fear; because fear has torment: he that fears, is
not made perfect in love. We love him, because he first loved us. Here is the
true state of man in the Fall, and of his being restored again: When man by his
transgression had lost his love to God, then the fear of God entered into his
heart, and that caused or brought forth torment; and as long as fear continued
in man's heart, man's love is not made perfect to God, and man's love is made
perfect to God by our loving of him, because he first loved us; and then man's
heart or the inward part in man, comes again to be as a pleasant and
delightful Garden.

The Tree of knowledge of good and evil, as in the mystery, God made man, and
as a gift, God gave to man the knowledge of himself that he was his God: And
God also gave to man the knowledge of his revealed will, that what God had
commanded man to do, was God's will that he should do; and what God had made
known of himself in man, and what was God's revealed will in man, that he
should do in obedience to him, was good: and so God gave to man the knowledge
of what was good. And God gave also to man the knowledge of his revealed will
of what God had commanded him not to do; and what was Gods revealed will in
man, that God had commanded man not to do, that was evil; and so God gave to
man the knowledge of what was evil: And this was in man's heart or the inward
part of man, which in the mystery was God's Garden. And this knowledge of good
and evil, in the mystery, is a Tree remaining in the Garden, in the heart or
inward part of man; and in this knowledge of what was good, and what was evil,
man for a time stood in his obedience to God, obeying God in the doing all that
he had commanded him to do; and obeying God in the leaving undone all that he
had forbidden him to do. And while man in this his knowledge stood thus in
obedience to God, in doing all that God had commanded him to do, and in leaving
undone all that God had commanded him not to do; man knew no will in him of his
own, but man's will was wholly resigned up into Gods will; man willed nothing
but what God willed in him; and what God willed in man, that man willed in God;
and man knew no other will but the will of God: and so God was all, and in all
man.

And man was the Paradise, the delight of God; and God was the Paradise, the
delight of man: And out of the ground that the Lord God had made man of, the
Lord God made to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for
food: the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, Genesis 2. 7. 9. The Tree of Life is Jesus, the Light
of God in man; and this Tree was also in the midst of the garden: the garden is
the heart or inward part of man, which the Lord God planted Eastward, which is
the place of the rising of the Sun; which is as much as to say, God so placed
the heart or inward part in man his garden, that it should be in the place
wherein the rising of his Son Jesus, the true Light in man, did rise; and as a
Tree there to grow and be in the midst of his garden, and the Tree of knowledge
of good and evil. I pray observe the words of the Scripture: The tree of life
also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.
See how near the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, is placed to the Tree of
life; there is but ( and) between them, and that ( and) makes them two Trees;
and so indeed they are: The Tree of Life is one, which is Jesus the true Light
of God in man; and the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, is another; and they
are so near joined together, that there is but an ( and) that parts them: Jesus
the Word of God, the true Light in man, gave man the knowledge of what was Gods
will that he should do, and that was good, man was to do good; and the same
Jesus the Word of God in man, gave man the knowledge of what he should not do,
and that was evil, man was not to do evil. And these two Trees were very nearly
joined together in Gods garden, in the heart of man; and so a measure of them
do continue so nearly joined together at this day, that would man be true to
himself, and the Light of God in him, he might see them to be both in him, and
how nearly they are joined together in him.

While man was thus in Gods garden, and these two Trees in him, and he kept by
Jesus the Light of God in him, in obeying of God according to that knowledge
that God had given him of his revealed will, in doing what God had commanded
him to do, and in leaving undone what God had forbidden him to do: In his thus
obeying God, man eat of the Tree of life, and lived; he lived in God, in
obedience to God, knowing nothing but the will of God, and doing nothing but
the will of God. Man's knowledge of evil, as it became a sin in man, was man's
not continuing in obeying God, in doing the things that he knew God had
commanded him to do: This was the actual knowing of evil, the knowing of evil
by the doing of evil, and that was sin. The Tree was knowledge, and while
obedience was joined to knowledge, it was a good Tree as God had placed it in
the heart or inward part of man; but when disobedience was joined to knowledge,
then it became an evil Tree; then man eat of the Tree whereof God had commanded
him that he should not eat of. And man's disobedience came from self ends, a
will and desire that was in them to be wiser than God had made them, and to
have another likeness of God than that Image that God had created them in;
their desire was not to be in Gods Image as he had made them, but to be as Gods
in knowledge.

The Serpent, in the mystery, is man's self, or man's will, as separated from
God, and this is that which was more subtle than any Beast of the Field that
God had made. God made all the Beasts of the Field, and they were good; From
whence then came this more subtle Beast? (it may bare the name of Beast, that
man's will as it is revealed from Gods will, because of the foul, unclean, and
evil beastly nature that was in it;) it was not of Gods creating, because it
was not good; if it had been good, it could not have tempted to the knowledge
of evil in the doing of evil, that is, it could not have tempted man to disobey
God; self in man, or a man's own will separated from God, is more subtle to
tempt man than all the Beasts of the Field that God has made; that is, self in
man or a man's own will, is more subtle to prevail with man to disobey God,
than all without him can prevail with him to disobey God. James 1. 13, 14, 15.
13 verse, Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God: for God
cannot be tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man; (that is, God tempts
no man to evil, and as God is good, so are all the Creatures that he has made;
and as they are good, and the creation of God, so the Creatures they cannot
tempt man to evil.) 14 verse, But every man is tempted when he is drawn away of
his own lust, and enticed. (Mark, that which tempts man to sin, and entice him
to sin, it is something of his own: the Apostle calls it lust, that is, the
height of desire: in Genesis it is called desire, a Tree to be desired to make
wise: And does not lust, the height of desire to be made wise in what God has
forbidden, come from self in man.) 15 verse, Then when lust has conceived, it
brings forth sin, and sin, when it is finished, it brings forth death. The
comparison is taken from natural conceptions and bringings forth: That which
conceives, is of its own; it is something within that conceives, it is an
inward act, and not an act without them; and conception is before bringing
forth; and what is brought forth, is of the same kind with that which
conceived: what then can be more plainer than that, that the Serpent that
tempts to sin, is self, or a man's own will in separation from God, or something
of man's self that draws him forth into disobedience to what he knew to be the
mind and will of God for him to do; and the gain that he expects by his
disobedience (is to be wise) to please himself?

There is nothing Gods opposite or enemy, but what God has forbidden; all that
God created, he made very good, Genesis 1. 31. God did not make the Devil a Devil,
if the Devil be a fallen Angel, as many believe him to be; and so before he
fell he was an Angel as other Angels are, ministering Spirits; so was man's will,
and all that was in man in the creation was an Angel a ministering Spirit, and
ministered, that is, waited or attended upon Gods will, as the Angels do; but
when the temptation entered into man, and then when man by the temptation was
overcome, and desired to be as Gods. Then the ministration of the will of man
fell from the ministration that it had before in the creation, to wait or
attend upon the will of God: and so the will of man it became a fallen Angel, a
fallen Ministration, a fallen Spirit. The Angels they are ministering Spirits,
attending upon the will of God; so was the will of man, and all that was in man
in his creation, was a ministering Spirit attending upon the will of God: But
when that which was more subtle than any Beast of the Field that God had made,
entered into Gods garden, (that is, into man's heart or the inward part of man)
and man yielding to the temptation, desiring to be as Gods, that is, to do his
own will, and not to do Gods will; then entered into man's heart the Devil. See
the truth of it, John 8. 44. Ye are of your father the devil, and the lust of
your father ye will do: he was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in
the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie, he
speaks of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it. Christ here tells
the Jews, they were of their Father the Devil, and the lust of your Father ye
will do; lust is the great desire of the heart after the forbidden Fruit which
is of the Devil, he is the Father of it, he is the begetter of it; the Devil,
called the Serpent, was the Father that begot the desire after the forbidden
Fruit. And Christ also told the Jews, that he was a murderer from the
beginning, and abode not in the truth. If the Devil were not once in the truth,
then how can it be said, he did not abide in it? Man's self or will, all that
was in man, was once in the truth, as God is the truth, in God, in Gods will,
as God created man and made him good; but man's will, it abode not in the truth
that is in God, for God is the truth; it abode not in the doing Gods will, but
went into the doing its own will, and so murdered the Life of God in man, that
is, murdered Jesus the innocent Lamb of God, which was in man to preserve and
keep him from sin; and so Jesus was the innocent Life in man, as he kept man
from sin; as appears by Jesus telling the woman what was Gods will that they
should do, they might eat of the fruit of the Trees of the garden: and what was
Gods will that they should not do; but of the fruit of the tree in the midst of
the garden, God has said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it:
And the penalty that would fall upon them if they did not Gods will therein, it
was, that they should die. This was Jesus the true Light in man, that gave the
Serpent this answer. And Jesus did for a time preserve man from yielding to the
temptation: for the woman did not eat of the forbidden Fruit presently, as soon
as the Serpent tempted her to eat of it, but as soon as she had eaten thereof,
Jesus the Lamb of God, the innocent Life that was before in them, was slain in
them; Jesus that had preserved them from sin, was slain in them; that is, as to
their obedience to God, so was he slain in them; but not slain in them as the
Light to make known their sin to them, nor as he was a Judge to condemn them
for their sin: so Jesus continued alive in them, as appears in that their eyes
were opened, and they saw themselves naked, and were afraid of God. And Jesus
told the Jews the reason why the Devil did not abide in the truth; the Devil
abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaks a
lie, he speaks his own: for he is a liar and the father of it. That which is
a lie, is of the Devil, and it is the Devil, and so the Devil entered into man
in the lie that was in the temptation; and there can be no truth in a lie, and
therefore a lie cannot abide in the truth, it cannot have a being in God; all
deceit or deceiving is a lie, and is of the Devil, and indeed it is the Devil,
because it is truths opposite, and truth is God, and God is truth; and God
which is truth, was first, and was before there was deceit or lie: for there
was in the beginning (mark that) when there was, and was nothing but God,
nothing but truth; where then was the Devil? But the Devil abode not in the
truth, he was a murderer from the beginning; which cannot be meant from the
beginning of time, for then the Devil was not a Devil, God made all things
good; but the beginning of the Devil, was the murdering or slaying in man,
Jesus that preserved man from sin; that is, it slew Jesus as to man's obedience
or obeying that in him which kept and preserved man in the doing the will of
God, and so kept man from sin. And man was brought into disobedience to God, by
lying, by deceiving was the innocent life in man (that did God's will in man)
slain. And this was the beginning of the Devil in man, which abode not in the
truth, he went out of the truth, and there is no truth in that which goes out
of the truth; all that is out of the truth, out of God, is a lie, is deceit, is
the Devil. And thus by these two Scriptures it does plainly appear, that man
was tempted by something within him; and man's temptation was the entering of the
Devil into man's heart, and that the Serpent was not an outward Creature, as
many do think or suppose it to be.

Now the serpent being more subtle than any beast of the field that the Lord
God had made, he gets into the Lords Gods garden; or else how could he speak in
man, when man was in the garden of the Lord God? Before the temptation entered
into the garden of God, into the heart or inward part in man, man knew no will
that he had of his own; man was in his Virgins state, he knew nothing of man,
he knew nothing of himself, nor of any will that he had of his own; he only
knew God, and knew Gods will, and that will he had, was wholly resigned up into
Gods will, and did nothing but Gods will: but after he had yielded to the
temptation, then his eyes were opened, and he then saw himself to be naked; man
with his outward eyes saw his outward body before he was tempted; but after he
had yielded to the temptation, then his eyes were opened, and he saw himself in
that outward body which before he did not see, (before he yielded to the
temptation, he saw nor knew nothing of himself;) but after he had yielded to
the temptation, his eyes being opened, he knew himself naked, that is, he knew
himself naked, stripped of the righteous garment God in the Creation made him
in; he then beheld self in him, and self that set him presently at work to make
himself Aprons to cover their nakedness with, of the leaves of the Figtree, the
Tree Jesus cursed, because he found no fruit on it.

It is no sin to be tempted; Jesus, as man, was tempted, and yet did not sin:
And when he taught his Disciples to pray, he did not teach them to pray that
they might not be tempted, but he taught them to pray that they might not be
led into the temptation; to be led into the temptation, that is a sin, to yield
to the temptation, that is a sin. Jesus, as man, had a will in him that caused
him to pray, that if it were possible that Cup might be taken from him. And he
had a will in him that caused him to pray to the Father, that that will of his
that would have had the Cup taken from him, should not be done; but that that
will of the Father should be done, that would have him to drink of the Cup. And
in all this Jesus sinned not, because his will was resigned up into the will of
the Father, and not his will, but the will of the Father was to be done. I make
mention of these two wills in Jesus, to the end to help the understanding of
that, that when the temptation entered into man, there might be two wills in
man, and yet man, by the power of God in him, was kept from sinning, kept from
entering into the temptation, kept from yielding to the temptation, kept from
eating of the forbidden Tree.

When the temptation entered into the garden of God, into the heart or inward
part in man, there was then something in man that would have drawn man out of
his obedience to God, into disobedience to God. And this was that which the
Tempter at first desired, and that which at first would have drawn man out of
his obedience to God, into disobedience to God. This in time did do what at
first it desired to do, and so it did its own will: And that which at first
would have brought man out of his obedience to God, into disobedience to God,
was the same subtle Serpent, the same will that in time did its will, in
bringing man out of obedience to God, into the disobedience to God.

Now this serpent was more subtle than any beast of the field that the Lord
God had made. Man in the enjoyment of all the Creatures, the Fish in the Sea,
the Fowl of the Air, and the Cattle of all the Earth, and the creeping things
that creep upon the Earth, all these did not tempt nor prevail with man to draw
or take his will out of Gods will, in doing the things that God had commanded
to do, and in leaving undone the things that God had commanded him not to do:
But man in the enjoying and having dominion over all these, his will was kept
in the doing of Gods will; and in the enjoying of all these, his will was
wholly resigned up into Gods will, and to do what God would have him to do with
them, he knew no will of his own in the enjoyment and having dominion over them
all: for when God in his will brought to Adam every Beast of the Field, and
every Fowl of the Air, to see what Adam would call them: whatsoever man called
every living creature, that was the name thereof. Thus was man kept in the
enjoyment and having dominion over all Creatures, by Jesus the Light of God in
him, that none of them tempted him to draw his obedience from God, into
disobedience to God; but his will continued firm in the being resigned up into
Gods will, and kept in the doing of what God would have him to do; and he knew
no other will but that will that did Gods will in him. But the Serpent that was
more subtle than any Beast of the Field, he gets into Gods garden, into the
heart or inward part in man; and then there was something in man that would
have that done in man, that God had forbidden man to do; and this at length
proved a will in man: for that which began the temptation in man, continued the
temptation in him, till there was a willingness in man to yield to the
temptation.

Now the Serpent began his temptation very subtly, and said, Yea, has God
said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden? He puts it by way of
question, Whether it were so or no, that God had said, they should not eat of
every Tree in the garden? To eat, is to take in content and satisfaction, as
the natural body is contented and satisfied with eating outward food; so that
was the Command of God, that man should not eat, should not content and
satisfy himself with the Tree of knowledge of good and evil; that is, man
should not be contented and satisfied in that he knew what was Gods declared
will that he should do, and what was Gods declared will that he should not do.
This man was not to eat of, this man was not to content and satisfy himself
in; but he was to eat freely of the other trees of the garden. Man was
commanded to eat freely of the Tree of Life, of Jesus, by which he was by his
Spirit in him, led into obedience to the Commands of God, of this man was to
feed freely of; that is, man might freely content and satisfy himself, in that
he was drawn by the Spirit of God, the Light of Jesus in him, into the
obedience of Gods Commands; and in the doing thereof, he knew nothing of any
will of his own, but was led and drawn thereunto by the will of God in him. And
on this Tree he was freely to eat, freely to content and satisfy himself in.

But if man, as to the outward doing of things, does those things that God has
commanded him to do, and does them from the leadings or drawings of his own
will in him, and feed upon this, content and satisfy himself with what he does
in obedience to God, and done in his own will; this is the eating of the Tree
of knowledge of good and evil: for although one part of it be good, as it is
the doing of what God has commanded, yet the other part of it is evil, as it
is a doing of what God has forbidden: for God is a jealous God, and will not
give his glory to another; God will not have man's will to be the leading or
moving case. In the leading or drawing of man out to do God's will, in the
doing what God has commanded to be done, this God has forbidden in man to be
done; that is, God has forbidden man to take his work out of his hands: for it
is Gods work only to work in man an obedience to himself; he must work both to
will and to do.

The subtilty of the Serpent said in man, Yea, has God said, Ye shall not eat
of every tree in the garden? Which is as much as to say, Is there any Tree in
the garden that God has said, Ye shall not eat of? Is there any thing in the
heart or inward part of man, that God has said, Man shall not eat of, man
shall not content and satisfy himself in? Oh how willing is man to eat of, to
content and satisfy himself with what he finds to be in his own heart, or in
the inward part of man; and especially if he find any thing there that would be
willing to be in the doing of any thing, as to the outward things, that he knew
that God has commanded him to do? How little then does man question whether he
may not eat of this Fruit, content and satisfy himself in his doing of those
things that he knew that God has commanded to be done? And so man, in the
doing the things that God has commanded to be done in his own will, to please,
content, and satisfy himself in the doing of them; and man not waiting for the
strivings of the Spirit of God in him, to draw him forth in Gods will in the
doing of those things that God has required of him to do, but man's doing of
them in his own will, this is the eating of the forbidden Fruit; which the
Serpent subtly tempts to do in his doubtful Question, Whether or no God had
said, Ye shall not eat of every tree in the garden?

But man, in the woman, did not presently yield to this temptation of the
subtle Serpent, will in the woman had not gotten so much power over the man;
but when the subtle Serpent presented his doubtful Question in the woman, Yea,
has God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree in the garden? Jesus, the Word,
the true Light of God in man, was then striving in man to draw and preserve him
from being led into the temptation: And so it was no sin in man to be tempted;
the sin was in being led into the temptation, that is, in yielding to the
temptation; which for a time man was kept from by the strivings of the Spirit
of God in man, the drawings of the Spirit of Jesus, the true Light in man, who
in the woman gave this answer to the subtle Serpent: We may eat of the fruit
of the trees of the garden: But of the fruit of the tree that is in the midst
of the garden, God has said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch
it, lest ye die. Here man, by the woman, in the help and assistance of the
Spirit of Jesus, the Light in man that caused him to relate to the Serpent the
Command of God in what was Gods revealed will to him, and in him, wherein he
was to obey God, in doing what God had commanded him to do; and wherein he was
to obey God, in what God had commanded him not to do: And hereby having his
will kept and preserved in the will of God, he resisted the temptation, and
stood in his obedience to God, feeding upon the Tree of Life in him.

But the Serpent continuing his temptation, said unto the woman, Ye shall not
surely die. For God does know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes
shall be opened: and ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil. The Serpent
had before asked the Question in man, Yea, has God said, Ye shall not eat of
every tree in the garden? What could he willed or desired in the asking of this
Question, but the drawing of man out of his obedience to God, into
disobedience? But the will at that time was not gotten to be so strong in the
man, as to prevail over man; but it was resisted by the power of God in man.
(May I not say by the same power of God in man, that prayed, Father, not my
will, but thy will be done?) Here began the strife between the two wills in
man; which Paul was sensible of, when he said, The good that I would, I do not;
but the evil which I would not, that I do, Romans 7. God by his Spirit strove in
the will of man, that is, in that will of man which had yielded obedience to
God in his Commands, and knew the doing of nothing else but of the Commands of
God, and thereby drawing man to keep man still in obedience to his Commands.
But another will appeared in man, that strove to bring man out of his obedience
to God in the keeping his Commands, into the disobedience in not doing his
Commands: for what can it be else but a will that strove so much in man to
bring man from his obedience into disobedience? In the asking that Question,
Yea, has God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree in the garden? that which
asked that Question, it was that in man that after it had made a beginning,
would not nor did not leave tempting of man, until it had brought man into
disobedience. An outward Serpent it could not be, because he was one of the
Creatures that God had given man dominion over; and God brought him to man to
name, God made him subject to man; and man, in obedience to God, having rule
and dominion over him, did name him. But besides, that which makes it
undeniable, that it was not an outward Serpent, is this, the seed of the woman,
which on all hands is owned to be Jesus that saves from sin, was to bruise the
head of this Serpent that tempted man to eat of the forbidden Tree; and this
Serpent that tempted man to eat of the Tree that God had forbidden, was to
bruise the heel of the seed of the woman; bruise the heel of Jesus, bruise the
heel of that which saves from sin. And where can ye find in the Scriptures, or
any where else, that ever Jesus that saves from sin, bruised the head of this
outward Serpent? or that ever this outward Serpent bruised the heel of Jesus,
bruised the heel of that in man that saves man from sin? But to this purpose ye
may read in Scripture, that Jesus in man that saves man from sin, bruise the
head of that will in man that tempt man to eat of the forbidden Fruit, that
tempt man to do the things that God has forbidden; as that you may read in the
seventh of the Romans, where Paul cries out, O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from the body of death? whereas before he made a great
complaint of doing what he would not; he found a will in him drawing him to do
that God had commanded him not to do; but he finds a remedy against that will,
that bruised the head of that will, and that is Jesus Christ. And this will in
man is known to bruise the heel of Jesus, that is, as Jesus is in man a saving
of man from sin, and so bringing man into God again, this will in man is
striving in man to hinder and hurt this work of Jesus, as appears in the
aforesaid seventh of the Romans.

To speak something to the words in the latter part of the temptation of the
Serpent, whereby he prevailed with the woman, Ye shall not surely die; although
the temptation did not at first prevail with the woman to question the truth of
what she knew, whether or no God had said, Ye shall not eat of every tree in
the garden, yet in the continuing of the temptation, I believe he did at length
prevail with the woman to question the truth of it, whether God had said, Ye
shall not eat of every tree in the garden: or else how could he have prevailed
with her to a belief that they should not surely die if they did eat of it? For
God had as surely said, that they should die in the day that they eat thereof,
as he had said, Ye shall not eat of it; but the Serpent having caused in her a
doubt or question, whether or no God had said, Ye shall not eat of it, he
causes her to believe, Ye shall not surely die, if they did eat of it. How can
it be thought that the woman could believe the temptation; that they should not
surely die if they did eat of the forbidden Tree, being God had certainly said,
that they should surely die in the day they eat of it, if she had not first
yielded to the temptation to doubt or question the truth, whether God had said,
Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden, and if they did, they should
surely die? Does not experience teach the truth of this, that when the Tempter
tempts to do what God has forbidden, that there is first a question or a
doubt got up in man, whether God has forbidden it or no? And if he cannot
prevail so far, then to question if it be forbidden, yet not so forbidden with
such strictness and severity as the Light of God in man does at first discover
it to be forbidden, that if they eat of it, in the day they eat of it they
shall surely die, they shall surely receive a punishment from God for it. And
then although there may not be altogether a yielding so fully to the
temptation, as to question or doubt wholly of the truth of the Command of God;
yet there is a yielding so far to the temptation, as to question whether or no
that God is so strict or severe in his Command, as the Light of God at first
makes known in man that he is. And then there is a belief got up in man, that
he shall not surely die; that is, as God was not so strict or severe in his
Commands, so God will not be so strict or severe in his punishments. And thus
the Tempter persuades man out of his obedience that he had to God, which was in
the believing the truth of what God had said, into disobedience to God in the
believing the lie the Tempter said.

And when the Tempter had prevailed thus far with man, as to question the truth
of what God had said, and brought man to believe that God had not said true in
saying they should surely die, but persuaded man that Ye shall not surely die:
Then he proceeds further in his temptation, and persuades man to a belief that
God does know, that in the day ye eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened: and
ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil. The Tempter persuades man not only
to believe that God had said a lie, when he said, in the day he eat thereof he
should surely die, (to die, is to cease to be, as man is said to die when he
cease to be alive,) but the temptation persuades man to believe that God knew
that he lied when he said, man shall surely die in the day he eat of the
forbidden Tree. And this the Tempter did, in persuading man to believe that God
does know, that in the day ye eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened; and ye
shall be as Gods: that is as much as to say, that God did know that man should
be so far from dying, that is, from ceasing to be, that he should have a more
higher or greater Being than the Being he had before the Tempter entered into
him: for the Being man had before the temptation entered into him, was but the
Being of a Creature; but by yielding to the temptation, the Tempter persuades
him to believe that he should have a Being as God, ye shall be as Gods: and so
he persuades man to a belief that God did not only lie when he spoke the
truth, in saying man shall surely die in the day he eat of the forbidden Tree;
but that God did know he lied, when indeed the truth of it was, that all that
God spoke was that which was surely true as God is the truth. But the Tempter
by his lying, persuades man to believe that God was such a one as the Tempter
was, that he was a liar, and knew himself to be a liar; when God had said
nothing but the truth, and the Tempter had said nothing that was true, and that
it was all lies that he had said, that is, that in and by his deceit he
intended to deceive man in all that he said to man. John 8. 44. He was a
murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no
truth in him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own: for he is a liar,
and the father of it. The Devil the Tempter, is the Father, the begetter of
lies, and is he that abode not in the truth, where once he was.

And when the Tempter had prevailed thus far with man, to cause him to believe
that God had not spoken true, and that God knew that he had not spoken true;
then he persuades man into a belief of the great profit, gain, and benefit that
man should have in the believing the Tempter the Serpent in his lies, and in
yielding to his temptation in his eating of the forbidden Tree, in his
disobedience to God; and that God did know that in the day ye eat thereof, he
persuaded man that God knew that all was to be as the Tempter the Serpent said
to man it should be; that their eyes should be opened, that the understanding
and knowing part in man should see and know that they should be as Gods,
knowing good and evil.

How did God know good and evil, that man should be as Gods, knowing good and
evil, and that he should be so by eating of the Tree God had forbidden to be
eaten of, by doing that which God had forbidden man to do? Does any one believe
or think that God knew evil in doing contrary to his own declared will? If they
do so believe or think, I believe they will not so speak, but be like the fool,
that says in his heart there is no God; in his heart he speaks it, and in his
heart he believes that God is not in his heart. But God did know good and evil,
God did know his declared will to man to be good; and God willed this declared
will of himself, and of himself he willed this declared will of his to be done;
there was no mover, no stirer, no drawer, to move, stir, or draw God to his
will, or to the knowledge of his will to be good, nor to will his will to be
done; there was no mover, no stirer, no drawer, to move, stir, or draw God, to
do his declared will in man, and so to bring up man's will into his will, and to
cause man's will to be resigned up into the doing of Gods will. And in all this
God knew good; and in Gods knowing of good, he was absolute in himself, there
was nothing that could help him or move, stir, or draw him thereunto; and thus
God was in knowing of good. God knew what was evil, God knew that the doing of
what he had forbidden to be done, was evil; God new that it was evil, because
he had forbidden it: and thus God knew evil, as it was evil; but God did not
know evil in the action, in the doing of what he had forbidden to be done.

The Serpent by his temptation persuaded man to believe that he should be as
God, to know good and evil; as God knew good and evil, so man should know good
and evil; God knew his declared will to man to be good of himself, God had none
to give him the knowledge thereof: And so the Tempter persuaded man that he
should know the will of God, as God knew it as God, of himself, and not as a
Creature, to have his knowledge thereof from another. And God willed his
declared will of himself, and so the Tempter persuaded man that he should be as
God, to will Gods declared will of himself, and not as a Creature, to have his
will brought to will Gods will by the motion, stirring, drawings, or the work
of another in him. And God of himself, he willed his declared will of his to be
done; and so the Tempter he persuaded man that he should be as God, and not as
a Creature; and that of himself he should will Gods declared will to be done.
God had none that moved, stirred, and drew in God to his will, or to the
knowledge of his will to be good, or to will his will to be done; and so the
Tempter persuaded man that he should be as God, and not as a Creature, to have
none to move, stir, or draw in him to the will of God, or the knowledge of Gods
will, to be good, or to will Gods will to be done. God moved and stirred up
himself to strive, move, or draw man to do his declared will, and to bring man's
will into his will, and to cause man's will to be resigned up into Gods will;
and so the Tempter persuaded man that he should be as God, and not as a
Creature, but of himself, as a God, to stir, move, and draw his will to do Gods
declared will, and to bring his will into Gods will, and to cause it to be
resigned up into Gods will. And thus man was, by the perswadings of the
Tempter, drawn into a belief to know good absolute in himself, as God knew good
in himself.

And man by the temptation was persuaded that he should know evil, as God knew
evil. God knew that the doing of what he had forbidden, was evil; and so man
knew evil: God had made it known to man to be evil, the doing of what he had
forbidden him to do; but in man's doing of what God had forbidden man to do, man
came to a greater measure of this knowledge; for he came to know evil in the
act, in the not doing Gods will, but in doing of his own will: And so the
Tempter persuaded man he should be as God, and not as a creature, to do the
will of another; but as God, to do his own will as God did his will. And God
knew that it was evil, because he had forbidden it, and so man knew it to be
evil. God had made known to man, that what he had forbidden him to do, was an
evil, and the evil was, in that it was forbidden of God: And God had that
knowledge of himself, that what he had forbidden was evil, and that which made
it evil was, because God had forbidden it. And so the Tempter persuaded man
that he should have that knowledge of himself as God had of himself, to know
that what God had forbidden, was evil, and the evil was, because God had
forbidden it.

And if man could be true to himself, and to the Light of God in him, he might
by experience see the Tempter now to be in man in the fallen state, acting all
this in him; and thereby he might come to see how the Tempter acted it in man,
to draw him at first into the fallen state, where all men now in that fallen
state are in some measure, degree, or other so tempted. God had none to make
known his declared will to him, but he knew it of himself. How does the Tempter
now tempt man in that understanding and knowledge that he has of God, to have
such high thoughts of himself, that he need not depend upon another to be
taught to know what is Gods will, but he has so much knowledge of himself, as
that he may know that of himself? And as God willed his will of himself, so the
Tempter now persuades man that he may will Gods will of himself: And as God of
himself willed his will to be done, so the Tempter now persuades man that he
may of himself will Gods will to be done: And as God had none but himself that
moved him to his will, or to the knowledge of his will to be good, or to have
his will done; so the Tempter now persuades man that he need none but himself
to move him to do Gods will, and that of himself he can resign up his will
into Gods will: And so as to the knowledge of evil which God by his Light in
man makes known to him to be his doing of what God has forbidden him to do,
and the evil is because God has forbidden it to be done; and the Tempter now
persuades man that he may have this knowledge of himself, that of himself he
may know the evil that God has forbidden to be done, and that of himself he
knows it to be evil, because God has forbidden it.

How is the truth of this manifested, that many by the subtilty of the
temptations of the Serpent, have such high thoughts, that of himself, in that
understanding and knowledge that he has of God, he knows Gods will, and can
will as God will, and can do Gods will? And this appears by the outward
actions of many that take no notice of it, how it is acted within them. How do
many, when they have been a drinking until they are near drunk, or a swearing
and cursing very highly, or in a great passion of anger threatening revenge upon
those they are offended with, or in deceiving, wronging of their Neighbors, or
in uncleanness, or in the doing of some other sins whatsoever; and
yet-presently laying by or leaving off but the outward action of sin, and that
while the delight and love to the sin is in their hearts and minds, and they
acting of the sin within them; and yet in this condition they step out of the
outward acting of sin, and while it is still in the action within them, and
they go presently into what they call their Prayers to God and their Worship
and Service of God? I pray consider and see what it is that strive, move, or
draw them thus to their Prayers, Worship, and Service of God, as they call it;
is it not the subtle Serpent tempting in them, and persuading them that the
eyes of their understanding and knowledge being opened, they are as Gods to
themselves in the knowing good and evil? Evil they know, they know the sins
they commit to be evil, and that they are evil, because God has forbidden the
doing of them. And good they know, they know that there is a God, and that this
God is good, and that this God is to be prayed unto, and to be worshipped and
served; and to pray to this God, to worship and serve God, they know to be
good. And their wills in this knowledge, that sets them upon what they call
Prayers, Worship, and Service to God.

And how do they pray? They do not pray as the Apostle said of himself and the
Saints, We know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the spirit it self
makes intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered, Romans 8. 26.
And Jesus said, God is a spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in
spirit, and in truth, John. 4. 24. But they do not wait in the silence of all
the earthy part in them, to find in them the strivings, movings, or drawings of
the Spirit of God in them, to lead them forth to Prayer, to the Worship and
Service of God: No, they do not wait for Gods Spirit to stir, move, or draw in
them, to pray to God, or to worship and serve God in spirit and in truth. But
they put themselves forth into the doing thereof, they having eaten of the
forbidden Tree, they having done that which they knew God had commanded them
not to do. And the eyes of their understanding and knowledge being opened, they
see themselves naked, that is, that they have sinned against God, and that
there is judgment due to them from this God that they have offended, and that
makes them afraid, and to passifie the apprehensions that they have in them of
the anger of this God, which by that understanding and knowledge that they have
of him, they know to be due to them for their sins. And by that understanding
and knowledge that they have of God, they know that he is good, and that it is
good to pray to him, and to worship and serve him. And the subtle Serpent that
by his temptations drew them in to eat of the forbidden Tree, the doing of what
God had forbidden them to do; he persuades them that their eyes being opened by
that understanding and knowledge that they have of God, they of themselves know
what is Gods declared will that they should do, in praying to him, in
worshipping and serving of him; and that they of themselves can will Gods will
to be done; and they of themselves can bring up their wills to do Gods will, in
performing of their Prayers, Worship, and Service to God. And thus the subtle
Serpent persuades them that their eyes being opened, they are as Gods, to know,
will, and to do all of themselves; and so of themselves they pray, worship, and
serve God, as they call it: and are not contented to be as Creatures, to know
nothing, but as they wait upon God to reveal it in them by his Spirit; and to
will nothing, but what God in his will wills in them; and to do nothing, but
what God by his Spirit led or draw them forth in the doing thereof. Although
few are so bold or ignorant of God, as to confess with their tongues that they
of themselves do know Gods declared will that it is good, and that they of
themselves can will Gods will to be done in them, and that they of themselves
can bring up their wills to do Gods will in praying to him, and in worshipping
and serving of him; yet by their actions they manifest the truth of what with
their tongues they will not confess: for by their actions it does appear, that
they do all, as Gods, of themselves, in that they do not wait upon God for him
to do it in them by the leadings or drawings of his Spirit in them; but they
yield to the stirrings, movings, or drawings of their own wills: and as their
wills lead them out for to do, so they go forth in their Prayer, Worship, and
Service to God, as they call it.

It were well, if all those that are in the use of Set Forms of Prayers, and
those that pray in their Families at set times, would consider what is the
leading, stirring, moving, or drawing Cause of their so praying; and to see
whether or no they do pray as the Apostle said of himself and the Saints, That
they knew not what they should pray for as they ought; but as the Spirit it
self made intercession for them, with groanings that cannot be uttered: and
that their Prayers be performed in Gods Spirit and in truth, or else they are
not acceptable to God who is a Spirit. I so well love all of them whose Lives
and Conversations, as to the outward, are blameless, and use those Prayers as a
Sacrifice or Offerings to God, as to beg of them to have a care that in the use
of them the Serpent do not deceive them, as he has deceived me in praying,
worshipping, and serving of God: For by experience I do know, that what is done
in praying, worshipping, and serving of God, that is not done wholly and alone
by the Spirit of God in man; and man in the doing thereof, to be but an
Instrument in Gods hand to do his work by. And so indeed and in truth, it is no
other but God the Son in us, praying, worshipping, and serving God the Father,
that has begotten us in himself again unto a lively hope, by the Resurrection
of Jesus Christ from the dead: And what Prayer, Worship, and Service is not
thus done in God unto God, is not acceptable to God; and all other Prayers,
Worship, and Service that has been done in me, and called by me Prayer,
Worship, and Service done to God, I do now know and have experienced it to be
true, that it has only been done by the subtilty of the Serpent in me, in
that understanding and knowledge that I had of God, that caused me to have high
thoughts of my self; and that of my self, in that understanding and knowledge I
had of God, I could pray, worship, and serve God, and was as God to my self,
that is, to will what I knew was Gods will, and to do what I knew to be Gods
will that I should do, that is, as to an outward obedience to God. And now I do
know, that all that then I did in obedience to God, was done in my own will,
and for my own self ends. And knowing the danger that I was then in, being in
the woman's deceived state, and so in the transgression, and so in danger of
perishing, I cannot but out of love and pity to those that are in that state,
give them warning for them to have a care that they do not fall into that
Quick-sand that lies so hid in man; and as an honest Traveller in the outward
Land, having fallen into a Quick-sand, sets a mark there, that so others may
have a care of falling into the same place: This being the end of all my making
known of what I know of the subtle Serpents self-will in me.

And further, to make it more clearer that it is the work of the Tempter in
man, as man is in the fallen state, to persuade man to have high thoughts, that
of himself, in that understanding and knowledge that he has of God; he can
know Gods will, and can will Gods will, and can do what God would have him to
do. And if this be not the true state of man in the fall, to have the subtle
Serpent to be thus in him tempting of him, I desire then to know from whence it
comes, that many now see it to be so hard for man to become a very nothing in
the Work of his Salvation, that so God may be all in it, and man nothing but
only as God makes him an Instrument in his hand. But they who are not in some
measure come to the knowledge of that in them, as to know how hard a thing it
is to become a nothing in the working out of their salvation, that so God may
be all in them in that great work of saving of them; to them it is as hard to
believe the truth of what I have said (concerning the experience that some have
seen of the Tempter, how he now tempts in man, and therefore they cannot
believe how the Tempter first tempted in man, and cause him to fall) it is as
hard for such to believe it, as it is for a Camel to go through the eye of a
Needle: They are of the number of those rich men that have not sold all, that
has not parted with all, and are become so poor as to have nothing, to be
nothing, to will nothing, that so they may enter into the Kingdom of Heaven;
but they are of the number that do still see themselves to be as Gods, that is,
to have of their own, to be of their own, to do of their own, to will of their
own: and are not yet come into that state of being become new Creatures, they
are not come into that state that God at first made all things, of nothing;
nothing was before the Creation, and nothing man must be of himself, before God
does his great work of creating man his new Creature.

And when the woman saw the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to
the eye, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit
thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her, and he did eat.
I pray observe the words of the Scripture: And when the woman saw that the tree
was good for food, at that very instant of time that she saw the Tree was good
for food, at that very instant of time it was pleasant to the eye; and at that
very time it was a tree to be desired to make one wise; at that very instant of
time she took of the fruit thereof and did eat, and gave also unto her husband
with her, and he did eat. Here was not a seeing of the Tree to be good for
food, at one time; and then at a time after, that it was pleasant to the eye;
and then at a time after, that it was a Tree to be desired to make one wise;
and then at a time after, that she took of the Fruit thereof and did eat, and
gave also to her Husband with her, and he did eat. No, the Scripture does not
speak after that manner; but the Scripture says, And when the woman saw the
tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eye, and a tree to be
desired to make one wise. All these are joined and linked together, as to the
matter of time, to be at once in the woman; when was the one, then was the
other of them, they are not separated; and as they are not separated the one
from the other, as to the matter of time wherein they were done, but all joined
and linked together; so is not her taking of the Fruit thereof and eating of
it, and giving of it to her Husband with her, and he did eat. These are all
joined and linked together, as to the matter of time wherein they were done:
when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and pleasant to the eye,
and to be desired to make one wise, at the very same instant of time she took
of the fruit thereof and did eat, and gave also to her husband with her, and he
did eat. The time when joins them altogether to be done when the one was done,
then at that instant of time the other was done, so joined and linked together,
as to the matter of time when they were done, as not separated the one from the
other.

When the woman in the understanding and knowledge that she had, saw a good in
the Tree, and such a good as that it was good for food; for to that the Serpent
in his temptation in time had brought her unto: whereas in the beginning of the
temptation, in the understanding and knowledge that she had, she saw the Tree
not to be good for food, nor yet the Fruit of it to be eaten; but instead of
being good for food, she saw the eating of the Fruit thereof, if I may so call
it, of a poisonous nature, bringing death, because God had said, that in the
day they eat thereof, they should surely die. But the Serpents temptation
continuing in her, at length it prevailed so far in her, to bring her to make a
wrong use of that understanding and knowledge that God had given to her: For
the end of Gods giving man that portion of understanding and knowledge, it was;
that man should improve this his portion of knowledge in doing Gods will, in
yielding obedience to God. But man misspent his portion, and made use of it in
disobeying God, and goes out of the doing Gods will, into the doing his own
will; the temptation having first prevailed in man to question the truth of
what God had said, that they should surely die in the day they eat of the
forbidden fruit. And then when the temptation had prevailed in man so far as to
give credit to the lie, that the subtle Serpent said, Ye shall not surely die.
For God does know, that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be
opened: and ye shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil. The temptation having
thus prevailed in the woman, this caused her, in that understanding and
knowledge that she then had (after the temptation had so far prevailed in her
and over her) to look upon the Tree to be good, and not only to be good, but
to be good for food; that which before, when the temptation first entered into
her by the understanding and knowledge that she then had, she saw to be evil
for food, and of (if I may so say) a dangerous and poisonous nature, bringing
Death along with the eating of it, and so she did not then yield to the
Temptation; but when the Temptation had prevailed in her and over her, then it
was that in that understanding and knowledge that she then had, she saw the
tree (that once she saw to be evil to eat of) to be good, and not only good,
but good for food; the good she then saw in it, was in doing what God had
forbidden: God had not forbidden the being of the Tree. The tree of Life was in
the midst of the garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil, so that
the tree in it self was not evil; the evil was in the eating of it, the eating
of it was that which God had forbidden, and the temptation having prevailed in
the woman to question the truth of what God had said, and to give credit to the
lie that the Serpent had said; and when the Serpent by his temptation had
prevailed thus far in the woman, then he caused her in that understanding and
knowledge that she then had, to see a good in what God had forbidden, which in
it self was evil; and the good that she saw, was a good for food, and therefore
to be eaten. Good food eaten by the outward body, as instrumental, it has this
in it, that is, it contents and satisfies the hunger or desire of the body, it
refreshes, comforts, and strengthens the body, and it preserves the life of the
body; and thus did the woman in that understanding and knowledge that then she
had, look upon the tree to be good for food, and so it was pleasant to the eye,
and a tree to be desired to make one wise; she so saw it to be good for food,
that in the eating of the fruit thereof, she should be contented and satisfied
in the enjoying of it, that is, in the eating of it her desire, her hunger
after it, would be satisfied; and to speak after the manner of outward eating,
she in the eating thereof should be so refreshed, comforted, and strengthened,
as to be no more wise as a Creature, (for so she was before the temptation
entered into her, she was wise as God had made her wise) but to be thereby made
wise, which was another being made wise, than that being wise as God had made
her; it was to be made wise as gods, and to live in the being as gods in
knowledge, knowing good and evil, as God knew good and evil: this was that
which caused the tree to be desired and hungered after, it was to make one wise;
which making wise, must be that being wise that the Tempter tempted to; that
was, in the day they eat thereof, then their eyes should be opened, and they
should be as gods, knowing good and evil; this was that in the tree that was
desired and hungered after; and the expectation of content and satisfaction in
the eating thereof, was in that to be as gods, to be wise as gods, knowing good
and evil, and thereby to be refreshed, comforted, and strengthened, as to live
as gods knowing of good and evil.

And thus man misspent and made a bad use of that portion of understanding and
knowledge that God had given to him, in which he as he knew Gods will, so he
was to obey God in the doing of Gods will. But instead of keeping in his
obedience in doing what he knew to be Gods will, there was something in him
that caused him first to question, whether what he once knew and believed to be
Gods will, whether it was Gods will or no? and having prevailed therein with
man, then the Tempter caused man to see a good, in what man once saw to be an
evil; that was, to eat of the forbidden Fruit: and in that man once saw such an
evil to be in it, as to be the cause of death, if he took and eat thereof. Now
the Tempter caused man to see such a good to be in it, that if he took and eat
of it, he shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil; and when man saw this, at
that very instant of time the desire of the mind was to the enjoying of it, and
at the same instant of time he took and eat of it; and then man made his full
manifestation and appearance of his going out of obedience in doing Gods will,
into his disobedience of doing his own will: And although then when man took
and eat there was the full discovery of man's will in the Temptation, yet there
was something of man's will that was in the beginning of the Temptation,
although then it lay hid. The substance of man's eating of the fruit of the
forbidden Tree, consists in this, That man went out of his obedience to God,
which he was once in, and so was in the doing of Gods will, and went into the
disobedience in the doing of his own will, which man knew nothing of any will
of his own, before the temptation entered into him; that is, he knew nothing of
any will in him contrary to the will of God in him.

Some question there may be, which was first in man to draw man into
disobedience, Pride, or Will? they are so nearly joined and united together, as
it is hard to discern which of them was first: But I believe Will was first in
man, although Pride made his first appearance to be there. Man in that great
understanding and knowledge that he had of God, was therewith lifted up with
Pride, which caused a desire in him to be as Gods: But what was that which so
lifted man up? was it not his Will, in that he would be as Gods? And this Will
wrought in the earthy part in man, as the Mole does in the ground hidden and
not discerned; the earth that the Mole raises up, is first seen, before the
Mole that is the cause of raising it up, so it was in the Temptation; Pride did
first appear, before the Will that raised up the Pride: for was it not Pride in
man to be so bold to ask a question, thereby to question the truth of what God
had said? Thus Pride first appeared in the Temptation, that which would seem to
have an equality with God, in that it would undertake to question God in the
truth of his Word; and this was Pride that which was so lifted up with that
great understanding and knowledge that it had of God, was Pride; and it was by
the understanding and knowing part in man that that question was asked, it was
by that which knew that God had spoken to man, and knew that man was to eat of
the trees of the garden, and by this knowledge it was that Pride asked the
question, yea, has God said, ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden? And
what was that, that thus lifted up man? was it not his Will, wherein he desired
to be as Gods? but this Will was not so strong at first, as to prevail with man
to go out of Gods will; there was a greater appearance at first of Pride, in
questioning the truth of what God had said, than there was an appearance of
Will to be as gods: And in this the Serpent the Tempter, was more subtle than
any beast of the field which the Lord God had made, for man having the
enjoyment and dominion over all them, they never lifted up the heart of man
into pride, nor did they cause in man a will or desire to be as gods.

When God had made man, the tree of Life was in the midst of the garden (in the
midst of man's heart, or the inward part of man) which was Jesus in man keeping
man in obedience to God. As long as man obeyed God, he lived in God, and God
lived in him, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil both trees were in the
midst of the garden, and were not forbidden to be there; that which was
forbidden, was the eating of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. The eating
of the fruit of it was forbidden, and not only to be eaten, but not to be
touched; and that is the great mystery of the Creation of man, which God in his
time will make known in man and to man his Creature, that both trees were in
man, as made in his Image. To be tempted is no sin, nor forbidden; that which
is forbidden, is to yield to the temptation, that is, sin. To eat of the tree
of knowledge of good and evil, or the fruit of it, or to touch the fruit of it,
this was what was forbidden. Jesus was tempted, but he did not yield to the
temptation, and so did not sin; Jesus was led up of the spirit into the
wilderness to be tempted of the devil, Mat. 4. 1. mark that led of the spirit
into the wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil, read it within who can in the
mystery, there is so much in it, and so much do I see in it, that if I should
declare it, few at this day could bear it; Jesus told his Disciples, I have
many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now, John 16. 12.

I hope I may, without offense to any, write what is in the Scripture: And
first as to the time when Jesus was led up of the spirit into the wilderness,
to be tempted of the Devil, Matthew. 4. 1. which is not by every one that reads
it minded, or any notice taken of it, although there is very much in it. The
time it was then, when at that very time that Jesus had by his Forerunner
John, fulfilled all Righteousness, and had the Spirit of God descending like a
dove, and lighted upon him, and lo, a voice from Heaven, saying, This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, Matthew. 3. 15, 16, 17. then was the
time, Mark 1. 12. immediately it was that then was Jesus led up of the spirit
into the wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil. Secondly, it was Jesus, it was
the beloved Son of God, in whom he was well pleased, that had fulfilled all
Righteousness, it was he that came to save his people from their sins, that was
led up of the spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil; the
Scripture does not say that he went of himself into the wilderness to be
tempted of the Devil; Mark says of it, Mark 1. 12. the spirit drives him into
the wilderness. Thirdly, it was the spirit that led up the beloved Son of God,
in whom he was well pleased, that had fulfilled all Righteousness, that came to
save his people from their sins, into the wilderness to be tempted of the
Devil; it was no man nor any outward earthy Creature, that led up Jesus into
the wilderness to be tempted of the Devil, but Jesus was led up of the spirit
into the wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil; there is much in that, I pray
mark the words of the Scripture, it is not said, that Jesus was led down of the
spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the Devil, but Jesus was led up of
the spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil. Fourthly, this
beloved Son of God, in whom God was well pleased, that had fulfilled all
Righteousness, that came to save his people from their sins, whither was he led
up of the spirit to be tempted of the Devil? it was into the wilderness; not
only led up to a wilderness, which might be to the outside of a wilderness,
but led up into the wilderness; he was led up into the wilderness, he was in
the wilderness: what wilderdess? the wilderness is all the name that is given
to it in the Scriptures; outward wilderness have outward names. There is a
wilderness that is not without, nor has an outward name, and yet it is a
wilderness, and may truly be said to be the wilderness. Fifthly, and this
beloved Son of God, in whom he was well pleased, that had fulfilled all
Righteousness, that came to save his people from their sins, was l^d up of the
spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the Devil, as first being there in
the wilderness, and in want he was then tempted by the Devil, to do that which
God had not commanded him to do to supply his want, being an hungered, he was
tempted to command those stones to be made bread. Secondly, he being taken up
(mark that taken up) of the Devil into the holy City, and set upon a pinnacle of
the Temple, he was tempted of the Devil, to presume upon God: the Fathers love
and care, because God had given his Angels charge concerning him, to preserve
him from harm, therefore he was tempted to cast himself down from a pinnacle of
the Temple. Thirdly, he was taken up (mark that taken up) by the Devil into an
exceeding high mountain, and showed all the Kingdoms of the World, and the
glory of them, and tempted by the Devil, to do that which was altogether
unlawful, to have given to him the things of the World, the Kingdoms of the
World, and the glory of them, and that was, to fall down and worship the Devil:
And in these temptations in the wilderness that he was of the spirit led up
into, he did make it appear, that he was the Son of God, by his obedience to
God, as is plain by his not yielding in the least to any of the Temptations.
Sixthly, this beloved Son of God, in whom God was well pleased, that had
fulfilled all Righteousness, that came to save his people from their sins, he
was led up of the spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the Devil, to be
tempted of him that was a murderer from the beginning, to be tempted of him
that abode not in the truth, to be tempted of him that there is no truth in
him, to be tempted of him that is a liar and the father of lies, John 8. 44. I
pray take notice of this, that the Scripture does not say, that Jesus was led
up of the spirit to be tempted of the Devil, any where, but only in the
wilderness; and when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was
afterward an hungered (mark that an hungered, he wanted bread, there is much in
that of Jesus being an hungered) and when the Tempter came to him, he said the
Tempter said, that which tempted him, it was that which said, which being taken
notice of; it may as an instrument in Gods hand, be as an help to understand
what the wilderness was, and what the Devil was, and what Jesus temptations
were that he was tempted in; the holy City, and the Temple, they were not in an
outward wilderness; and where is there an outward mountain in the outward world
so exceedingly high, that upon it may be seen all the outward Kingdoms of the
outward World, and the outward glory of them? and Jesus in the temptation was
taken up into an exceeding high mountain, and showed all the Kingdoms of the
World, and the glory of them, if the Reader who understands little or nothing
of the mystery of Jesus being led up of the spirit into the wilderness to be
tempted of the Devil, did but in true silence of all the earthy part in him, of
all that is of the flesh in him, wait upon God, and be like the poor Widow to
the unjust Judge, who would not give over going to him, until he had done her
justice; so, not to give over waiting upon God, in true self-denial, in being
as a nothing in thy self, until God send his spirit, that quiet into all truth,
to guide, to search, to let thee understand something of the great mystery that
is in these few words, Then was Jesus led up of the spirit into the wilderness,
to be tempted of the Devil, thou would then find that those few words have
been much read without, and very little understood by the outward Readers
within, they have read little of them within themselves.

The forbidden fruit, as it was presented in the temptation, it was pleasant to
the eye, and to be desired to make wise; the knowing of Gods will, and not to
do Gods will, is the forbidden fruit: What God requires of man to obey him in,
and what man knows to be Gods will that he should obey him in, is good; but to
know Gods will, and not to do it is evil, that is the knowing of good and evil
in the action, which is sin. To know, is very pleasant to the eye, because it
makes wise; and how much is there a desire in man going forth after knowledge,
that they may be wise, because Wisdom is one part of the Essence or Being of
God, and it is to be like God; and so man in the temptation had a desire to be
like God, as being wise. And thus man desired to know more of God, than he
desired in that knowledge to yield obedience to God in what he knew of God. And
this is the forbidden fruit, to have a desire to be wise like God, to know God,
or the mind and will of God, and not to obey God according to what he knew to
be Gods will; this was Adams fall, this was the forbidden fruit which man was
not to eat of, nor yet to touch it. And now man is fallen, who can say upon a
true examination of himself in the inward parts, that he is now judged or
condemned for the doing of any thing, but for the doing of those things that
God has made known to him that he ought not to do, or else he is judged and
condemned for the not doing of those things that God has made known to him to
be his will that he ought to do, and should do; the condemnation is either for
doing what we know we ought not to do, or for leaving undone what we know that
we should do.

The woman mystically being the figure of man's being drawn by the spirit, or
the goings or leadings forth of man by the spirit of Jesus in man; for as the
Lord God took the woman out of Adam, so is man's being drawn by the spirit, or
the goings or leadings forth of man by the spirit of Jesus in man, is the work
of the Lord God; and they are given as Help-meets for the life of Jesus in man;
that is, as Help-meets for that life of Jesus in man that is in him, saving of
him from sin. And as the woman, as she was taken out of Adam, although she was
bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, yet she had a distinct and separated
body from Adam; so in the mystery is to be understood man's being drawn by the
spirit of Jesus, or the goings or leadings forth of the spirit of Jesus in man,
although taken out of Jesus in man (as the woman was taken out of man) to be
distinct and separated from Jesus in man, and serve for the end the woman was
created for, to be as an Help-meet for man, so man by these drawings of the
spirit, or the goings or leadings forth of man by the spirit of Jesus in man,
are as Help-meets for the life of Jesus in man.

How is the life of Jesus in man refreshed and comforted, when there is in man
a drawing, going, or leading forth of the spirit to meditate of Gods goodness,
or to meditate of some mystery that God is making known to the Soul, either
what God is, or what he has made man to be, or what man was before the fall,
or what man made himself by the fall, or what God has made man by his
redeeming of him, or what man shall be in the resurrection; or sometimes in
praying or speaking, or some sudden Vision, or breakings out of the
manifestations of Gods love in these or other of the drawings, leadings, or
goings forth of man by the Spirit of Jesus in man! How is the Life of Jesus in
man helped and refreshed? that is, that Life of Jesus in man that is in him
saving of him from sin. So as the woman was created to be an Help-meet for
Adam; so has God made man by these drawings, leadings, or goings forth of man
by the Spirit of Jesus in man, as Help-meets for the Life of Jesus in man, as
he is in man a saving him from sin. Now, as I said before, as the woman,
although taken out of Adam, and was bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh,
yet she had a distinct and separate body of her self. So in the mystery,
although man by these drawings of the Spirit, or goings or leadings forth of
man by the Spirit, they come from Jesus, and are taken out of Jesus in man; yet
in the mystery they are to be looked upon as a distinct and separate body from
Jesus in man, as the woman was a distinct and separate body from man.

Now the Serpents self, or a man's own will, as separated from God, as it is in
the fall, and so is become a fallen Angel or Spirit, and being in the garden of
God, that is, in the heart or inward part of man, this presents to the woman
(that is, to man, as being drawn of the Spirit, or his goings, or being led
forth by the Spirit of Jesus in man) a desire more to know the things of God,
than to come into the obedience of what God has by those drawings, leadings,
or goings forth of the Spirit, made known to them to obey him in, (and this is
the forbidden Fruit) for man to desire to know more of God in those
manifestations or enjoyments that he has received from God by the drawings,
leadings, or goings forth of his Spirit in them, than to obey God in what he
knew of God, or that God does make known to him of himself in those
manifestations or enjoyments that he gives of himself unto man. And this desire
after knowledge, this Serpents self or a man's own will in the fall, presents to
be very pleasant to the eye of the woman, and to be desired to be made wise,
and by it to be as Gods.

But these presentations to the woman, is to be taken as if man in these
drawings, goings, or leadings forth of the Spirit, were distinct and separate
from Jesus, as the woman was from the man. And that is only to be taken as to
that sense or knowledge that the Soul (wherein these drawings or goings forth
of the Spirit are acted) has of them, that is, as the Soul or inward part of
man does look upon the drawings, goings, or leadings forth of the Spirit of
Jesus in them, and take them in as their own drawings, goings, or leadings
forth after God; and do not look upon them as they are the work of God or Jesus
in them. And thus, as at a distance or separate from Jesus, that is, the Soul
first losing the being sensible of its being drawn, going, or being led forth
by the Spirit of Jesus in them, to be the work of Jesus in them, and so not
keeping in the low and meek Spirit, but being lifted up with what they enjoy of
God in those drawings, goings, or leadings forth of the Spirit in them, self or
man's will in the fall, prevails through the pleasing part that it has of those
drawings, goings, or leadings forth of the Spirit, as to look upon them as
their own, and they do not look upon them as the work of Jesus in them: And
from this a desire gets up in man to be wise. And so that in man (which is the
woman) that was drawn, led, or went forth by the Spirit, takes and eats of
them; that is, to take it down into them, and satisfy themselves therewith as
their own drawings, leadings, or goings forth after God; which they were drawn,
led, or went forth to, by the Spirit of Jesus in them: Not that the drawings,
goings, or leadings forth of the Spirit of Jesus in man, can eat of the
forbidden Fruit, they cannot eat of the forbidden Fruit; but man in those
drawings, goings, or leadings forth of the Spirit, eats of the forbidden Fruit,
that is, he takes down into himself, as man does the food he eats, a desire
more to know of God than to obey God in what he knows: And so as man's body is
satisfied with taking in and eating of his food, so man satisfies himself with
taking and eating of knowledge, and contents himself with knowledge, as with
food, to live upon, and his life is in it.

And the reason why man takes in, eats, and feeds himself upon knowledge in the
drawings, leadings, or goings forth of Jesus's Spirit in him, is, because of
man's not minding or having regard to the root from whence those drawings,
goings, or leadings forth of the Spirit in him, sprung; which is from Jesus in
them; but they looking upon them as their own, and as springing or coming from
something of their own: And here the subtle Serpents self, or man's own will,
as it is separated from Gods will, gets in his head; and having got in his
head, he by degrees rigles in his whole body. He at first began so with the
woman; he first said to her, Yea, has God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree
of the garden? He puts it by way of question (and causes her to question)
whether it were true or no, that God had said, that they should not eat of
every tree of the garden. And when Jesus the Light (that lightneth every man
that comes into the world) tells the woman what was Gods Command, and the Will
of God that they should do; and the punishment, if they transgressed Gods
Command, that is they should die: it was Jesus in the woman that gave the
Serpent this answer; it was that in the woman, that if she would have believed
and obeyed, would have kept her from sinning, from eating the forbidden fruit.
But the Serpent, he having got in his head into her, in causing her to question
the truth of Gods Command, whether or no God had said, they should not eat of
every tree of the garden. Now he rigleth in his whole body, and by his lying
would make God a liar, saying, Ye shall not surely die. For God does know, that
in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened: and ye shall be as
Gods, knowing good and evil. Here the Serpent gets in his body rigling it in a
little at once. First, he removes the penalty out of the woman's thoughts,
persuading her she shall not die, as God had said; and so gives God the lie, or
makes God a liar: And when the Serpent had persuaded the woman that God had not
said true, then he easily wrought in her a good opinion of himself, that he
spoke true when he told her (the lie) that God knew that in the day she eat of
the forbidden Fruit, their eyes should be opened, and they should be as Gods,
knowing good and evil: they should not only be as Gods, but their eyes should
be opened so as that they should see themselves as Gods.

How does experience at this day teach the truth of this? That before the Devil
does prevail with them to yield to his temptations, he first begets a doubt or
question in the heart, whether indeed God has forbidden the doing of what the
Devil tempts to do; that is, as the Devil presents his false gloss upon it,
that there is a good to be gained by yielding to his temptations; as he did the
forbidden fruit to the woman, that it was good for food, and to be desired to
make wise. And if the Devil once prevail so far as to get the Creature to
reason the case with him, whether the doing of what he tempts, to be lawful
or not lawful, and so makes the person doubtful and questioning in what before
he knew and believed to be the will of God, and obeyed God in, (as was the case
of the woman, she knew and believed she was not to eat of the forbidden fruit,
and for a time obeyed God in it) then he soon prevails with them (as he did
with the woman) to hopes of escaping the penalty that Jesus, the Light in them,
has told them would follow upon their breaking Gods Command; and then how
easily is the Creature carried away to a belief of what the Devil said to be
true (as did the woman) that by yielding to his temptations, they shall be
great gainers! (the woman was promised to have her eyes opened, and to be as
Gods, knowing good and evil.) What greater gain can any have by yielding to the
Devils temptations, than to have their eyes opened, and to be as Gods? And who
is it that can say, if ever they did take any notice or regard how the Devil
tempts them, and how they have been carried away with his temptations, if they
have not in some degree or measure found it to be so, That first there is a
question or doubt in them, whether what they are tempted to, be a breaking of
the Command of God; or if it be a breaking of the Command of God, yet not so
great a breaking of the Command of God, as that they shall surely die for it,
that is, be surely damned for it; but they may eat of the forbidden fruit, and
yet be as Gods, that is, break Gods Command, and please themselves therein, and
have their own minds, wills, and desires satisfied in what they do? And what
can be greater gain than this, to have their minds and wills? This to them is a
Kingdom; and herein they think themselves like Gods, they are as Gods to
themselves: for as God made all things for himself to be glorified in them, so
as much as in them lies, they make all things their own to satisfy and please
themselves in them; and yet please themselves with a hope that God will forgive
them all their sins, and that they shall be like God at last.

And thus when the Serpent had prevailed in his temptations with the woman,
that they should not surely die, but that their eyes should be opened, and they
should be as Gods, knowing good and evil, and that the woman saw the Tree was
good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eye, and a Tree to be desired to
make one wise, then she took of the fruit thereof, and did eat. The fruit of
the Tree was wilful disobedience; she eat, she satisfied her self with a desire
after the knowledge of good, and willingly neglected her obedience to God; she
knew Gods mind and will what she should do, but did not obey God in that she
knew to be Gods will that she ought to obey him in; but instead of yielding
obedience to God in what she knew of God, the Serpent telling her that their
eyes should be opened, that was, to see more or better than they did see, as
much in difference as is between seeing with the eyes as if they were shut, and
the seeing with them wide open. And this must be understood as to the
understanding and knowing part in man: for none can be so ignorant as to think
that the eyes of their bodies were not open before the temptation, but it is
the eye of the understanding and knowledge that was to be opened by yielding to
the temptation, to know more of God than they did know of him. And by this the
woman was carried out to a desire of another knowledge of God, and likewise to
God, than that knowledge of God that God had given to them in the Creation; and
another likeness of God, than that Image of God that he had made them in: And
by this running out after a desire of a greater measure of the knowledge of God
and likeness to God, and not to obey God in what they knew to be his will to
obey him in. Here disobedience, that got in (the forbidden fruit that was eaten
they eat, that is, they filled and satisfied themselves with a desire of
knowledge, as a man eats and satisfies himself with meat, and did not yield
obedience to God according to what they knew of God,) and so that knowledge of
God and likeness to God that they were made in. And as they were created, so
they for a time had obeyed God in that knowledge, and in that likeness that
they were created in, until the time of their disobedience; and then by their
eating of the forbidden fruit, their obedience died in them: And so man died in
the day he eat of the forbidden fruit, he died in his obedience to God, his
obedience to God died in him; he died as to that knowledge that he had of God,
as being in Gods Image, the Image of God that he was made in, was dead in him;
man's body did not die in the day he eat the forbidden fruit, nor was man's body
that Image of God that he made man in.

Before man's fall, all that he did was done by his being drawn, lead, or going
forth by the Spirit of Jesus in him; he knew nothing but God, and the doing
Gods will; and to that state man is again to be restored. 1 Cor. 15. 45, 47,
49. The first Adam was made a living soul, (this was not the body of Adam that
God made of the dust of the ground, but it was that which after he had made
that body, then God breathed into that body the breath of life, and man became
a living soul which was this first Adam) the last Adam was made a quickening
spirit. The first man is of the earth, earthy: the second man is the Lord from
heaven. As we have born the Image of the earthy, we shall also have the Image
of the heavenly. Here the Apostle gives the description of the two Adams, and
what they were made; the first a living soul, the second a quickening spirit:
And then what they were; the first man is of the earth, the second man is the
Lord from heaven: And then he describes how he and the Saints were in likeness
to the first Adam, and shall be in likeness to the last Adam; and to the first
and second man: And as we have born the Image of the earthy, we shall also bear
the Image of the heavenly. Not that we do now bear the Image of the heavenly,
but we shall in time to come also bear the Image of the heavenly; that is, as
certainly as we have born the Image of the earthy, so certainly shall we also,
when the time shall come, bear the Image of the heavenly; that is, as the
Apostle and Saints did then experimentally know what it was to bear the Image
of the earthy, so by faith they did as certainly believe that they should also
bear the Image of the heavenly. And to that Image that the Apostle spoke of,
that he and the Saints then were in, of the first Adam that was made a living
soul, which was not man's body that was made of the Earth, but that of man which
was made in the Image and likeness of God. I pray take notice! man in the
creation was not made God, he was but made in the Image and likeness of God.
God is unchangeable, and cannot fall. God in man did not change, it was that in
man that was made like God, that changed, his Image was changeable; which is
well worth our taking notice of, which if we did, our experience would tell us
the truth of it, how Gods Image changes in us. And man in the creation was not
so made in the Image and likeness of God, but that he might change (as he did)
in eating of the forbidden fruit; not by the Command of God, but contrary to
Gods Command.

To that state of the Saints in this life, which was made in the Image of God,
and so made as it may be changeable by eating of the forbidden fruit, does what
I have here already writ, for the most part, tend unto; that as they have born
the Image of the earthy, and so was the woman that was deceived and in the
transgression: for the same Apostle says, 1 Timothy 2. 13, 14. Adam was first
formed, then Eve: And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived, was
in the transgression. Adam here cannot be taken for the first man Adam made of
the Earth; for so he eat of the forbidden fruit, as did the woman, and was
deceived, and in the transgression with the woman; and for his offense judgment
came upon all men to condemnation, Romans 5. 12 verse to the 20 verse. But Adam
here must be Jesus, who was made a quickening Spirit, and is Lord from Heaven:
And he was first formed, (the Apostle does not here say, made as a Creature,
but formed) he was in the form and likeness of God before the World was, and
the World was made by him. This Adam in man, that is, Jesus in man was not
deceived, neither does this Jesus in man enter into the transgression: But Eve,
so called because she was the Mother of all living, she that had her beginning
after Adam, and was taken out of Adam, (mark that) she was the woman that was
deceived and found in the transgression; that which was taken out of Adam, and
was bone of Adam's bone, and flesh of Adam's flesh, and given to Adam of God to
be an Help-meet for Adam, this was deceived, and was in the transgression. Read
it within, who can, in the mystery.

Christ is compared to the man, and the Church to the woman, Ephesians the
fifth Chapter; and the Saints are compared to a woman bringing forth a man
child, Revelations the 12th Chapter. All they that can read it in the mystery,
in some measure, degree or other, who knows what it is to have the woman in
them saved in Childbearing, that is, to know that in man which was deceived
and found in the transgression, to be again saved in bearing the Child Jesus,
in bearing and bringing forth in them that which saves from sin; and that which
saves from sin, is that Adam in them that was not deceived; that of God in man
that never changed, but was, and is, and ever shall be the same, and is the
quickening Spirit the Lord from Heaven, and the heavenly Image that we shall in
time bear, if we continue in Faith, and Charity, and Holiness with Sobriety.

It was Gods promise, that the seed of the woman should bruise the Serpents
head; it was not the woman that was to bruise the Serpents head, (mark that)
but the seed of the woman: Not man's being drawn forth by the Spirit, or the
goings, or the leadings forth of man by the Spirit of Jesus in man; that was in
man before the fall, that was not to bruise the Serpents head, but the seed of
the woman was to bruise the Serpents head. A Virgin shall conceive and bear a
son, his name is Emmanuel, God in us, Mat. 1. 23. The Virgin that knew no man,
brought forth Jesus the Son of God, Luke 1. 34, 35. That is the seed that
bruises the Serpents head; that is that in man that knows nothing of man;
that wherein there is nothing of man joined to it, as is in man's being drawn,
lead, or going out to act by the Spirit of Jesus in him; there the Serpents
self, or a man's own will, is ready to bruise the heel of it. The feet is the
walking or going part of man, or upon that which man walks; and the heel is the
hindermost part of the foot, and so it represents the walkings, goings, or
drawings forth of man by the Spirit of Jesus in him; which self or a man's own
will, is ready to bruise the heel of it, that is, to hurt or hinder the pure
operations of the work of the Spirit of Jesus in man; but the seed of the
woman, God in us, the Son of God, Jesus that saves from sin, this bruises the
head of the Serpent. The head is that part of the body wherein the life and
understanding is placed, it is the seat of that which makes wise, and it is the
uppermost part of the Creature. And this seed of the woman, God in us, the Son
of God, Jesus that saves from sin, is that seed which bruises the head of the
Serpent in us, bruises the head of self or a man's own will in us, bruises the
life of self or a man's will, bruises its wisdom or understanding, bruises
whatever is uppermost in man. God did not promise that the seed of the woman
should slay or kill the Serpent, so as that there should be no life or motion
in the Serpent; (mark that) no, there was to be an enmity between them, between
the woman and the Serpent, and between the woman's seed and the Serpents seed:
And although the Serpent had his head bruised by the seed of the woman, yet the
Serpent should bruise the heel of the woman's seed: (mark that) The Serpent was
not to bruise the heel of the woman, although God put enmity between the
Serpent and the woman, and between the woman's seed and the Serpents seed; and
so great an enmity, that the Serpent was to bruise the heel of the woman's seed;
and the seed of that woman, not the woman, but the woman's seed was to bruise
the head of the Serpent. Man in his goings forth by the leadings or drawings of
the spirit of Jesus in him, is not to bruise the Serpents head, but it is Jesus
in him, by whom man is drawn forth to do what he does in obedience to God; it
is he, it is that seed of the woman that is to bruise the Serpents head, so
that man must be nothing in bruising the Serpents head, but God must be all in
the doing thereof.

And does not experience teach us the truth thereof? do we not find that
although God in us, Jesus that saves from sin does bruise the head of the
Serpent in us (self or man's will) wherein the life of the Serpent and its
wisdom is placed, and what is uppermost in Man, is bruised by the seed of the
Woman in us; yet there remains a life or motion in this Serpents self or man's
will, that does bruise the heel of the Woman's seed in us; that is, it hurts or
hinders the hindermost part of the pure operations or workings of the seed of
the woman in us, that is, of Jesus in us; and it must be this Jesus in us, and
he alone in us that can bruise the head of the Serpent in us, and man must be
but an instrument in his hand, and not to move therein, but as moved by Jesus
in him, that so God may be all in all, to work both to will and to do of his
own good pleasure.

And yet this woman that was deceived, and in the transgression, shall be saved
in Childbearing, in bearing the Child whose name is God in us, the Son of God,
Jesus that saves from sin, which is conceived in the pure Virgins seed in man,
in that in man that knew no man (that is, that knew nothing of self or, the
will of man) but knew only the will of God, it is that in man that knew
nothing of man, (that is, of man's self or will) by joining with it, or
condescending to it; that is the Virgins seed in man, which conceived God in
us, the Son of God, Jesus that saves from sin; and this Conception of the
Virgins seed in us, is wrought and brought to pass, by the Holy Ghost, the
power of the highest coming upon us, and over-shadowing of us, it is the great
power of God by the holy Spirit, joining with that seed of God in man, that
never condescended or yielded to self in man, or to man's will in the
temptation, but did oppose it, and discovered the temptation in man to be
contrary to Gods will; that is, that they should not eat of the fruit of the
tree in the midst of the garden, and told man the danger if he yielded to the
temptation, that he should die; and after man had yielded to the temptation,
showed him his nakedness, his being stripped or made naked as to that holiness
and righteousness that God had made them in, and made them serviceable of the
justice of God toward them for their transgression, which made them afraid of
God. To this Virgins seed in man, that was thus in man before the fall, and
continued in man after the fall, the great power of God by the Holy Ghost joins
with; and by this conjunction or joining together of these two seeds, (if they
may be so called) that is, the seed of God in us, and the seed of God without
us; that is, the power of God within us, and the power of God without us (which
is all of one kind and nature, as is the seed of the man, and the seed of the
woman) here comes the conception of the Son of God in us, Jesus that saves
from sin, which being born and brought forth in the life, cannot sin: 1 John 3.
9. Whosoever is horn of God, cannot sin because he is born of God; it is the
birth and bringing forth of the seed of God in us, it is that in us cannot sin,
because it is born of God. 1 John 3. 8. He that commits sin is of the Devil,
for the devil sins from the beginning: he that sins, or that which is sin,
is of the Devil, for the Devil sins from the beginning; this beginning is
not to be understood from the beginning of time in which God created all
things, for then all things were very good, Genesis 1. 31. They were like God as
God is good; but from the beginning of the Devil, the Devil sinned, sin was the
first beginning of the Devil, and so he, or that which commits sin, is of the
Devil, and when sin began to have a being, the Devil began to have a being.
There is but two seeds in man, the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the
Serpent; and what is not of the seed of the woman in man, which brings forth
that which is born of God and cannot sin, is of the seed of the Serpent in man,
the Devil, that which brings forth sin in his own likeness: The spirit of
Jesus that draws man forth into obedience to God that cannot sin, nor does it
sin, but it is that in man that was in the obedience to God that sins, as once
man's will was in obedience to God, but man's will going out of the obedience to
God, was that which brought forth sin in man.

The Apostle said, 1 Timothy 2. 14, 15. that the woman being deceived, was in the
transgression; Notwithstanding (that is, there is nothing to hinder it, but)
she shall be saved in childbearing, if she continue in faith, and charity, and
holiness with sobriety: If she continued in faith, etc. which is as much as to
say, that she was in faith wherein the child Jesus was born; John 1. 12. as
many as received him, to them he gave power to be the sons of God, even to them
that believed in his Name. Ephesians. 2. 8. By grace we are saved through faith,
and that not of our selves, it is the gift of God. By these Scriptures it is
plain, that Faith is that in man that God (as I may so say) makes use of for
the bringing forth this child Jesus to save us from sin: In the bearing of this
Child the woman that was deceived, and in the transgression is saved, if she
continue in faith; that is, in that faith that God purifies the heart with; the
woman in the transgression she went out of faith, out of the believing God,
into the believing of the Serpent, and so her heart was defiled; and to save
her, she must be brought into that faith that purifies her heart; and there
must not only be faith, which God makes use of, for the bringing forth this
child Jesus that saves from sin, but there must be a continuing in it, it must
continue to the end.

And Charity, which is the height of Love, that must continue in Faith, which
the Apostle in the first of the Corinthians 13. says, that although they had
all Faith, and thereby did great things, as to remove mountains, and other
great works as he there mentions, yet all was nothing without Charity, and
Charity he says is greater than Faith.

And Holiness must continue with Faith and Charity: to be holy, that is to be
like God; 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. As he that has called you is holy, so be ye holy
in all manner of conversation, because it is written, Be ye holy, for I am
holy; and to all these, Sobriety is to be joined. To be sober, Romans 12. 3. that
is, to have a low and mean essence of our selves. Tit. 2. 11, 12. For the grace
of God that brings salvation, teaches them that are saved to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to lively soberly, righteously, and godlily
in this present world. These all must and do attend to and with the
Childbearing of the Woman that saves her out of the transgression; and where
these are wanting, or any of them, what true marks, signs, manifestations, or
knowledge is there that any one can say they have, that the child Jesus is born
in them, and that the woman in them is saved out of the transgression.

But if it be objected, if the woman in the figure or mystery that was
deceived, and in the transgression be man's being drawn by the spirit, or the
goings or leadings forth of man by the spirit of Jesus in man; then how is God
in us, or the Son of God, or Jesus that saves from sin, the seed of this woman
that was deceived, and in the transgression?

To that I answer, That the Woman was deceived, and in the transgression knew
man, she knew the will of man, and condescended and joined to and with the will
of man, in the transgression; and in so doing, the Serpents seed was brought
forth, disobedience was brought forth, which is the seed of the Serpent. When
God in the Creation made the Creatures on the Earth, the seed of what he made
was in them; and so it may be said of the Serpent, when he took his first being
in man, his seed was in him, disobedience was in him, and between that seed of
disobedience, and the seed of the Woman, that is that seed of God in man, that
never condescended to the will of man in his disobedience, but stood in
obedience to God: There is by God put an everlasting enmity between those two
seeds; and the seed of the Woman, that is God in us, or the Son of God, or
Jesus that saves from sin; that is another seed of the Woman, and not that seed
which knew the will of Man, and condescended and joined with Man's will in the
transgression; but it is a seed in man that never knew man, that is, the will
of man by joining with it, or condescending to man's will in his disobedience,
but it ever did and does oppose the will of man in his disobedience, it is a
Virgins seed that knew no man.

And this is as great a mystery to the Wisdom of this World, as it was that an
outward Virgin that never knew an outward man, should bring forth a Son: The
woman that this Virgins seed shall save, is that in man that was lost by the
transgression. Take notice of this; before man transgressed, he was drawn and
went forth in the doing what he did by the spirit of God in him, I hope none
will deny that. God breathed into him the breath of life, and he became a
living Soul; man being thus made alive, he was by the drawings of the spirit,
or the goings or leadings of the spirit of Jesus in him, carried out by a
principle of love to yield an obedience to God, and in and by his transgression
he died; that is, man as to his being drawn, going, or being led forth by the
spirit of Jesus in him, in obedience to God in that love that he had to God. In
the transgression, that obedience that he had to God died, which he was in
before the transgression, and drawn, led, or went forth in that obedience by
the spirit of Jesus in him: that obedience died, that is, it died as to man's
part, as to man's obeying of God; and so man was lost as to his love and
obedience to God; and the woman being saved, is the restoring of this love and
obedience again in man to God, which is done in the Virgins seed, in the woman's
bearing the Child Jesus, the Son of God, God in us, who came to seek and to
save that which was lost.

What is now required of the woman to continue in to be saved in childbearing,
that is, she is to continue in faith, charity, holiness, and sobriety; these
all were in Adam before the fall, and so man may be said to die in the day that
he eat of the forbidden fruit.

There was faith in Adam before he fell: Adam before he fell he believed all
that God had said to him to be true, and he obeyed God in all that he had
commanded him to do, and he confessed the truth of what God had spoken to him,
and of his obedience to God in and by the woman: It was the woman that said, We
may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden, but of the fruit of the tree
in the midst of the garden, God has said ye shall not eat of it, neither shall
ye touch it lest ye die, (and this was spoken by the man in the woman, as being
led or guided by the spirit of Jesus in him, to give this answer to the
Serpent) I pray mark, God did make known his Commandment to the man, before the
woman had a being, that is, before she had a body separated from man's body: man
makes no acknowledgement of what God had commanded him to do, or of his faith
in believing the truth of what God had commanded, or of his obedience to God,
but as he did it in and by the woman; it was the woman that acknowledged the
Command, and their believing of it, and their obedience to the Command, the
acknowledgement of their faith and obedience, it was in this that she declared
what God had commanded them to do, and what he had commanded them not to do,
and the penalty, if they transgressed, and then they had not broken Gods
Command.

The Serpent never set upon man to tempt him, before he had a woman given to
him as an Help-meet; but after he had a woman given to him, to be an Help-meet
for him, then he set upon him to tempt him in and by the woman (read it in the
mystery who can) I hope none will own themselves to be so ignorant as to say,
they believe the Serpent did not tempt the man, because the Scripture speaks
of the Woman and the Serpent to have all the discourse in the temptations; but
yet the Scripture says, that she took of the fruit thereof and did eat, and
gave also to her husband with her, and he did eat, and gave also to her husband
with her, and he did eat, that is, at the very same time and instant that the
woman eat, the husband eat also with her, they eat together; by which it is
clear that the temptation was the same in the husband that it was in the woman;
but God is pleased to set it forth to be the woman that was tempted, the more
to make known the mystery of the creating of man, and of man's fall, and given
it the name that the woman was deceived, and in the transgression,
notwithstanding she shall be saved in Childbearing.

And as Faith was in Adam before the fall, so Charity was in Adam before the
fall; the height of love was in Adam before he fell, there was no love in the
heart of man to any creature before the fall, man's heart was filled, as I may
so say, with love to God, the love of the Creation, nor of any Creature was not
entered into man's heart before the fall, no not to Eve, but only as God had
made her an Help-meet for man, but he knew her not till after the fall; and
Holiness was in Adam before the fall, as he was made in the Image of God, and
Sobriety was in man, before the fall man had no high thoughts or esteem of
himself.

While man stood steadfast in his faith, believing the truth of what God had
spoken, and his love remained unchangeable, and his holiness unblemished, and
his sobriety unmoved, man's heart was like a pleasant and delightful Garden; and
while man's heart was thus as a garden, and all that man did was done by man's
being drawn or led, or going forth thereunto by the spirit of Jesus in him; for
who dare say that man before his being tempted, did any thing that was not the
work of God in him; and man in the garden, and in his being led, drawn, or
going forth by the spirit of Jesus in him, subtly gets into him, and
persuades him in the time of his being drawn, led, or going forth by the spirit
of God (or Jesus) first to question the truth of what God had said, and then to
a desire to be as Gods. Man was in the Image of God before the temptation, as
God made him, and so in that Image he was led or drawn, or went forth to do
whatsoever he did by the spirit of God in him: But subtly the temptation
caused a desire in him to be as Gods, and not to be contented to be led, drawn,
or guided by another, as he was in that state that God had made him in, but to
be as gods, to be of himself and to do of himself; that is, to be as gods, to
have no dependency upon another, but of himself; and thus man in the garden,
and in the time of his being drawn, led, or carried forth by the spirit of God
(or Jesus) was tempted by the Serpent, the subtilty of self in him, and by the
temptation deceived, the temptation prevailed in him to a desire to be as gods.

Man as he was made in the Image of God, so he had in him neither desire nor
will to eat of the forbidden fruit; but yet he was not so made in the Image of
God, but that Desire and Will got up in him to eat of the forbidden fruit (as
he did.) In the midst of the garden was the tree of life, Jesus that saves from
sin is the tree of life, this was in the midst of man, as he was made in the
Image of God, and the fruit that this tree brings forth, is obedience to God,
and of this fruit of the garden man was commanded by God freely to eat of, he
eat no other meats, that is, as the natural body takes into it outward meat and
eats it, and so is filled and satisfied with it, so man as made in the Image of
God, he took in of the fruit of the tree of life (Jesus) which brought forth
the fruit of obedience in him, and man eat thereof, that is, he filled and
satisbed himself with obedience to God, as he was in the Image of God: As the
outward body takes in and eats and fills and satisfies it self with outward
meat, so man, as made in the Image of God, eat, took in, filled and satisfied
himself with obedience to God.

And the tree of knowledge of good and evil was in the midst of the garden,
that is, man knew Gods will what he should do, and that was good; and what he
should not do, and that was evil; and for a time man stood in his obedience to
God, eat of the fruit of the tree of life, and lived in obedience to God for a
time, although the tree of knowledge of good and evil was in the midst of the
garden, God had made known in man what was good and what was evil, which was
not forbidden to be in man, what God did forbid was evil, man was not to do
evil, but man's knowing of what God had forbidden was not an evil, so the tree
of knowing what was good that God had commanded to do, and knowing what was
evil that God had forbidden to do, was not an evil tree in it self, and
therefore not forbidden to be in man, God does continue it still in man; it was
the eating of it, or the fruit of it, and touching of the fruit of it that was
forbidden; and man did not eat of the fruit thereof as soon as he was in the
woman tempted by the Serpent, but at or in the beginning of the temptation he
stood in his obedience to God, in eating of the fruit of the tree of life, as
appears by his acknowledging in the woman, Thou may eat of the fruit of the
trees of the garden, but of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the
garden, God has said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it lest
ye die; here man continued in his obedience, eating of the fruit of the tree of
life (although tempted) and in the acknowledging Gods Command to the full
height or largeness of it, in answer to that doubtful question of the Serpent,
Ye, has God said, ye shall not eat of every tree in the garden? take notice
how the Serpent leaves out Gods Command and the Name of the tree that God had
commanded not to eat of, that so his temptation might the easier take place,
and by it got into the man by the woman, and only puts it in as a question,
Yea, has God said, ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden? when it was
Gods Command, saying, Of every tree of the garden thou may freely eat, but of
the tree of knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat of it, for in the day
thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die, Genesis 2. 16, 17. mark, here is a
Command forbidden to eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, but there
is nothing said of not touching the fruit thereof; and when man by Jesus in him
gave an answer to the Serpent by the woman, and that while he stood in his
obedience eating of the fruit of the Tree of life, he tells the Serpent, that
they were not only forbidden to eat of the fruit of the Tree of knowledge of
good and evil that was in the midst of the garden, but they were not to touch
the fruit of it. By which it plainly appears, that at the first beginning of
the temptation man did not yield thereunto, but stood fast in his obedience, in
feeding upon the fruit of the Tree of life in him (Jesus) the Tree that brought
forth the fruit of obedience in him, and so kept him from sin.

But the Serpent, for so may the temptation be fitly compared to a Serpent, who
can twist and turn himself round and round, he continued in his body turning it
about the Tree of Knowledge. As I have seen the likeness of a Serpent by man
pictured upon the likeness of a Tree without me, so have I experimentally seen
the Serpent within me upon the Tree of Knowledge. And although the Scripture
does not plainly speak it in plain words, yet experience teaches me, and the
Scripture speaks to that purpose, that although the Serpent had so full an
answer given to him, that not only the fruit of the Tree of knowledge of good
and evil was forbidden to be eaten, but it was also forbidden to be touched;
yet the Serpent would not leave his temptation in his doubtful question,
whether God had said they should not eat of every Tree in the garden; but the
Serpent did continue in his temptation, therein tempting man, till he had
caused man in the woman to doubt or question the truth of what God had
commanded: for if man in the woman had not doubted or questioned the truth of
what God had commanded, he could never have believed the Serpent, when he made
God a liar: God had said to the man, In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall
surely die. And the Serpent said to man in the woman, Ye shall not surely die.
For God does know, that in the day; mark that, God had said, That in the day
man eat thereof, man should surely die. The Serpent said to man in the woman,
Ye shall not surely die. And that God knows that in the day ye eat thereof,
your eyes shall be open: and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil. In
that day that God had said, they should die; in that day the Serpent said, they
should be as gods. Can any one believe that the Serpent could have persuaded
man by the woman, to have believed this notorious lie of his, if he had not
continued in his temptation twisting, winding, and turning himself about the
Tree of knowledge in man; and in that causing him, in the woman, first to
question the truth of what God had said, that he should not eat of every Tree
of the garden? Before the Serpent could persuade him into a belief, by the
woman, that they should not surely die, if they did eat of the fruit that God
had forbidden them to eat of; and not only so, but persuaded him to a belief
that God knew, that in the day they eat thereof, their eyes should be opened,
and they should be as gods, knowing good and evil: I say, can any one believe
that the Serpent could persuade man that he should not surely die in the day
that he eat of the fruit of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, if he had
not first prevailed with man in the first part of the temptation, to question
or doubt whether or no it were true, that God had said, that they should not
eat of every Tree of the garden.

And thus when the Serpent had prevailed with man to bring him to doubt or
question the truth of what God had said, and to believe the lie that the
Serpent had said when the temptation had prevailed to this; then man in the
woman saw that the Tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eye,
and to be desired to make wise, then by the woman man took of the fruit thereof
and did eat.

And thus the desire of the will got to be uppermost in man, after the
forbidden fruit. Man then did not obey God according to that knowledge that he
had of God, but had a greater desire after the fruit of the Tree of knowledge,
than he had after the fruit of the Tree of life; which fruit was obedience,
which for a time he had eaten and lived in; but when the desire was carried out
after knowledge to eat of that fruit, and live of that, then man died in his
life of obedience, then man died in that very day of the week that he eat of
the forbidden fruit, he then died so as he ceased to obey God in what he knew
of God. And then he eat, he filled and satisfied himself with knowledge, and
desired knowledge more than obedience to God in what he knew of God. And
although knowledge, while obedience was joined with it, was a good Tree, yet
when man did not continue yielding obedience to God in what he knew of God,
then knowledge it became an evil Tree, and brought forth the evil fruit of
disobedience which was forbidden, which man was not to eat of, nor to touch it:
for in the day he eat of it, he was surely to die; and did die in the day of
the week that he eat of the fruit of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil,
but not a death of the body that lived hundreds of years after his eating of
the forbidden fruit.

Jesus was the true Light which lights every man that comes into the world,
John 1. 8. and so he was in man as made in the Image of God, he was the true
Light that gave him the true knowledge of God, what was Gods will that he
should do, and what was Gods will that he should not do. And so knowledge, as a
Tree, was in man when man was in the Image of God, and while man yielded
obedience to God, according to the knowledge that he had of God, it was a Tree
of knowledge of good; but when man had the knowledge of what was the will of
God, and did not obey God in that knowledge, then that knowledge that was good
in man, became evil: And so the Tree of knowledge of good, became a Tree of the
knowledge of actual evil, and brought forth the fruit of disobedience, which
was sin, which man was not to eat of, nor touch; man then knew evil by doing of
evil, which before he only knew evil as it was what God had forbidden to be
done; and in that knowledge of evil was no sin committed, no Command of God
broken in the knowledge of that to be evil that God had forbidden to be eaten
of.

And if any should think it not to be true that the Serpent should set upon man
to tempt him when he was in that glorious state of his heart, being filled with
Gods love, and his love to God and upon God only, and he in that state of
love, to do all that he did by the Spirit of God, drawing, leading, or carrying
him forth to do what he did; and then in that time when he was eating of the
fruit of the Tree of life in him, for the Serpent to set upon him as he did, to
tempt him not to be contented with that state that God had made him in his
Image, but have a desire to be as gods.

I desire them that question the truth of it, to consider Christ's temptations,
and when the Devil set upon him to tempt him, and read it in Matthew, Mark, and
Luke, and you shall find it to be at that time when he had fulfilled all
righteousness, and was full of the Holy Ghost, and had that manifestation by a
voice from Heaven, that he was Gods beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased:
And then immediately the Devil set upon him to tempt him; and what was he
tempted to? He was tempted not to be contented with that condition that he was
then in; as being an hungry, he was tempted not to be contented with it, but to
make use of a means that God had not appointed to satisfy his hunger. And the
like may be observed in the other temptations. And although there was a
declaration from Heaven, that he was Gods beloved son, and that God was well
pleased with him, yet the Devil tempts him twice with a doubt or question
whether he were the son of God, in these words: If thou be the son of God,
command these stones to be made bread. And if thou be the son of God, cast thy
self down. And the Devil brings Scripture, if I may so say, to prove that he
might yield to him in his temptation in casting himself down: For it is
written, he shall give his angels charge concerning thee, and in their hands
they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone.
Both these temptations were, that by his yielding to them he might have or
manifest a further or another manifestation or making known of himself to be
the son of God, than that manifestation or making known of him to be the son of
God, that the Father had given of him from Heaven. But Christ did not yield to
any of the temptations (man at first resisted the temptation of the Serpent,
and did not yield to it, yet man did not as Christ did, continue resisting the
temptation, and so he was prevailed with and overcome, and eat of the forbidden
fruit;) but Christ was so far from yielding to the temptation, that he called
the Devil Satan, and bad him get him hence: for it is written, Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, Mat. 3. 19. Mark,
that which tempted Jesus, ought to have done him worship, and served him only,
as being his Lord and God. And if the Devil thus set upon him that was God in
man, is it to be questioned that the Serpent would not nor did not set upon man
that was but the Image of God, and that in the time when he did what he did by
the leadings, drawings, or going forth of the spirit of God (or Jesus) in him?

Jesus the Son of God was tempted in all points like as we are, yet without
sin, Heb. 4. 15.

If it be objected thou call'st the Serpent subtle, self, or man's will, was
there any such thing in Christ to tempt him? I desire the Objecter to read and
well consider Christ's Prayer the night in which he was betrayed, and the place
where he prayed in, it was in a garden, John 18. 1. (Adam was in a garden when
the Serpent tempted him) His Prayer was, O my Father, if it be possible let
this cup pass from me, nevertheless not as I will, but as thou will, Matthew. 26.
39. And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was as it
were great drops of blood falling down to the ground, Luke 22. 44. Is it not
plain by these Scriptures, that there was in Christ a will and desire that the
Cup might pass from him? but he yielded not to that will and desire, but
resigned and gave up all to the will of the Father, and so he did not sin: Is
it not plain by these Scriptures, that although Christ as man had never sinned,
never did any thing contrary to the will of the Father, and all the fullness of
the Godhead dwelt in that body, Col. 2. 9. yet what a conflict or striving was
their between the will and desire as man, and the will and desire as God, as he
was the son of God, the only begotten son of God? What was it else, but the
strife or conflict between the desire, if it were possible to have that Cup
pass from him, and a will that it might pass from him, and a desire and will
that was in him, that that desire and will that would have the Cup to pass from
him, should not be satisfied, but that the will of the Father should be done,
whose will it was that he should drink of that Cup? Was not this the case of
the agony that caused such a sweat that the drops thereof were as great drops
of blood?

If Christ, as man, who always had done the will of the Father, found it so
hard to bring the will to be resigned and given up to the will of the Father,
Can it be believed by any of those who have known the resurrection of Jesus in
them, (and have known a time when their will and desire have been after what
God has forbidden) that it is an easy work in them to have their wills
resigned and given up to the will of God in all things? They know that it is
God that must work in them both to will and to do of his own good pleasure,
Phil. 2. 13.

Jesus, as he was the only begotten son of God, so he could not be prevailed
with, or overcome by the temptation. It was the only begotten son of God in
that body born of the Virgin Mary, that kept that body from yielding to the
temptation; (mark that) and it is the begotten son of God in us, and that
only, that must and does keep us from yielding to the temptation. Whosoever is
born of God, does not commit sin: for his seed remains in him, and he cannot
sin, because he is born of God, 1 John 3. 9. God may be said to have two sons,
one a created son, as was Adam, Luke 3. 38. and that son, although made in Gods
Image, yet he yielded to the temptation, and so sinned. The other was a
begotten son, which is Jesus, which is the same with the Divine Nature, and was
and is God, by whom the created son was made: and this begotten son cannot sin,
because the seed of God remains in him.

And the want of a true understanding of these two sons, makes that great
difference that is amongst those that call themselves the sons of God; the one
believing they cannot live in this body without sinning, the other believes a
state of perfection, and that such a life is attainable while the outward body
has an outward life: That there may be a life or living without sin, which is
true indeed; and it were well if all those that make profession, understood
what it is to live and not sin, and what it is in them that live and do not
sin; if they did, the Controversy between them that believe they shall sin,
and that they cannot live while the life of this body continues without sin,
would not be so great as it is.

Adam the created son of God, made in Gods Image, and had Faith, Charity,
Holiness, and Sobriety, he yielded to the temptation and sinned. And does not
men and women do so now, although restored to Adam's created Estate? Do they
not find the Serpent bruising the heel of the seed of the woman? If they do
not, then how do they find what God said to be true? God said, that the Serpent
should bruise the heel of the seed of the woman; but the begotten son of God in
man that cannot sin, the seed of God in man that cannot sin, neither did it
condescend to sin in Adam; nor does it now condescend to sin in any that are
restored to that state that Adam was in before the fall. And this is that that
lives without sin, that lives and cannot sin, it is Jesus in us, the only
begotten son of God: And this is that life that Paul speaks of, Gal. 2. 20. I
am crucified with Christ: (that is, dead with Christ) Nevertheless, I live, yet
not I, but Christ lives in me; and the life which I now live in the flesh, I
live by the faith of the son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.

Does not most of them that profess themselves the sons of God, and know any
thing of the work of God in their hearts, but will own Jesus Christ to be
raised from death to life in them, and to be alive in them? And ask them if
they believe that this Jesus Christ that lives in them, sins? they will answer,
No, he lives in them without sin. Then ask them that believe a state of
Perfection and living without sin while this body lives, what is it in them
that does not sin? whether it be the first Adam that was deceived and in the
transgression, that lives without sin in them, or whether it be Jesus the
second Adam that lives without sin in them? They will answer, The second Adam,
it is Jesus in them that sins not in them; and without that Jesus in them,
they cannot live without sin. So then where is the difference between those
that believe they cannot live in this body and not sin, and yet they believe
that Jesus lives in that body, and he cannot sin; and those that believe that
there is a life attainable while this body lives, that does not sin; but this
life that does not sin, is the life of Jesus in them.

But Adam did not continue in that state that God had made him in; the Serpent
gets into the garden into man's heart, and the first work the Serpents subtle
self does, he sets upon man in his faith, and brings man first to question the
truth of what God had commanded, Yea, has God said, Ye shall not eat of every
tree in the garden? and then to a not believing of what God had said, that they
should surely die; but man believed the Serpent that said, they should not
surely die, although they eat of the fruit that God had forbidden them to eat
of. Here man by yielding to the temptation, lost his faith, his faith did not
continue in him; and then he lost his love that he had to God, he was afraid of
God; and there is no fear in love, perfect love casts out fear; and then he
lost his holiness, the Image of God, and also lost his sobriety; pride got up
in him a desire to be as gods.

And thus man, although he had before his fall Faith, Charity, Holiness, and
Sobriety, yet he not continuing in them, was the cause of the fall; and the
woman that is saved in Childbearing, must not only have Faith, Charity,
Holiness, and Sobriety, as Adam had before his fall, but must continue in them:
so that the saving of the woman is not only a restoring of that again in man
that was lost, but a preserving man in that state that he was in before the
fall; which only can be done by the power of that Jesus in her that the Devil
could not prevail with in his temptations. It is the bringing forth of that
Child Jesus in man now, that is the only begotten son of God that must keep
and preserve man, that he is not prevailed with and overcome by the subtle
Serpents temptations, as Adam was.

I know there may be much wrought in man; and yet the Child Jesus not born, nor
the woman saved out of the transgression.

But first, to speak something of Jesus as he is the Light to all, and a
Savior to some that never heard of Jesus born of the Virgin Mary, and
crucified by the Jews. Christ Jesus, as he is the Light, John 1. 9, 10, 11, 12,
13. so he is the true Light that lightneth every man that comes into the world.
And so Jesus that saves from sin, is in all that comes into the world, that
was made by him, but they knew him not. And when he came to his own, his own
they received him not. But as many as received him, to them he gave power to
become the sons of God, even to them that believed on his Name: Which were born
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.
John 3. 16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that
whosoever believed in him, should not perish, but have eternal life. Jesus the
only begotten son of God, as he is the Light, so he is given of God to all the
world to save them, to keep them from perishing, and to give them eternal
light, if they will receive him, and believe in him. He is a Light in all and
to all that have not heard of him by that name of Jesus, as born of the Virgin
Mary, and crucified at Jerusalem; and yet have heard of him, and knew him, that
is, as there is Serpent bruising the heel of the seed of the woman? If they do
not, then how do they find what God said to be true? God said, that the Serpent
should bruise the heel of the seed of the woman; but the begotten son of God in
man that cannot sin, the seed of God in man that cannot sin, neither did it
condescend to sin in Adam, nor does it now condescend to sin in any that are
restored to that state that Adam was in before the fall. And this is that that
lives without sin, that lives and cannot sin, it is Jesus in us, the only
begotten son of God: And this is that life that Paul speaks of, Gal. 2. 20. I
am crucified with Christ: (that is, dead with Christ) Nevertheless, I live, yet
not I, but Christ lives in me; and the life which I now live in the flesh, I
live by the faith of the son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.

Does not most of them that profess themselves the sons of God, and know any
thing of the work of God in their hearts, but will own Jesus Christ to be
raised from death to life in them, and to be alive in them? And ask them if
they believe that this Jesus Christ that lives in them, sins? they will answer,
No, he lives in them without sin. Then ask them that believe a state of
Perfection and living without sin while this body lives, what is it in them
that does not sin? whether it be the first Adam that was deceived and in the
transgression, that lives without sin in them, or whether it be Jesus the
second Adam that lives without sin in them? They will answer, The second Adam,
it is Jesus in them that sins not in them; and without that Jesus in them,
they cannot live without sin. So then where is the difference between those
that believe they cannot live in this body and not sin, and yet they believe
that Jesus lives in that body, and he cannot sin; and those that believe that
there is a life attainable while this body lives, that does not sin; but this
life that does not sin, is the life of Jesus in them.

But Adam did not continue in that state that God had made him in; the Serpent
gets into the garden into man's heart, and the first work the Serpents subtle
self does, he sets upon man in his faith, and brings man first to question the
truth of what God had commanded, Yea, has God said, Ye shall not eat of every
tree in the garden? and then to a not believing of what God had said, that they
should surely die; but man believed the Serpent that said, they should not
surely die, although they eat of the fruit that God had forbidden them to eat
of. Here man by yielding to the temptation, lost his faith, his faith did not
continue in him; and then he lost his love that he had to God, he was afraid of
God; and there is no fear in love, perfect love casts out fear; and then he
lost his holiness, the Image of God, and also lost his sobriety; pride got up
in him a desire to be as gods.

And thus man, although he had before his fall Faith, Charity, Holiness, and
Sobriety, yet he not continuing in them, was the cause of the fall; and the
woman that is saved in Childbearing, must not only have Faith, Charity,
Holiness, and Sobriety, as Adam had before his fall, but must continue in them:
so that the saving of the woman is not only a restoring of that again in man
that was lost, but a preserving man in that state that he was in before the
fall; which only can be done by the power of that Jesus in her that the Devil
could not prevail with in his temptations. It is the bringing forth of that
Child Jesus in man now, that is the only begotten son of God that must keep
and preserve man, that he is not prevailed with and overcome by the subtle
Serpents temptations, as Adam was.

I know there may be much wrought in man; and yet the Child Jesus not born, nor
the woman saved out of the transgression.

But first, to speak something of Jesus as he is the Light to all, and a
Savior to some that never heard of Jesus born of the Virgin Mary, and
crucified by the Jews. Christ Jesus, as he is the Light, John 1. 9, 10, 11, 12,
13. so he is the true Light that lightneth every man that comes into the world.
And so Jesus that saves from sin, is in all that comes into the world, that
was made by him, but they knew him not. And when he came to his own, his own
they received him not. But as many as received him, to them he gave power to
become the sons of God, even to them that believed on his Name: Which were born
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.
John 3. 16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that
whosoever believed in him, should not perish, but have eternal life. Jesus the
only begotten son of God, as he is the Light, so he is given of God to all the
world to save them, to keep them from perishing, and to give them eternal
light, if they will receive him, and believe in him. He is a Light in all and
to all that have not heard of him by that name of Jesus, as born of the Virgin
Mary, and crucified at Jerusalem; and yet have heard of him, and knew him, that
is, as there is something that is in them that tells them that there is a God,
or a power above them; and this God or power above them, ought to be pleased,
served, or obeyed; and that as they please, serve, or obey this God or power
that is above them, so it will be well or ill with them when this life is
ended: And so as they yield an obedience to what they thus know of God, that
God has made known to them and in them, (for it is Christ, the true Light,
that lights every man that comes into the world, that makes this known in
them) so they are accepted of God, or else condemned in themselves for not
yielding obedience to what they know of God, their Consciences bearing them
witness, accusing or excusing them. See the truth of this in Romans the first
Chapter the 14th verse to the end of the Chapter. And the second Chapter, the
11th verse to the end. And the third Chapter, the ninth verse, to the end. And
the ninth Chapter, the 25th verse, to the end. And the 10th Chapter, the fifth
verse, to the end of the Chapter.

I read in Revel. 7. that John heard the number of them that were sealed for
the servants of God, a hundred forty and four thousand of all the Tribes of the
children of Israel, of each Tribe twelve thousand. Dan who Jacob told should be
as a Serpent by the way when he told his sons what should befall them in the
last days, Genesis 49. 17. There was none sealed of his Tribe, but instead of him,
Manasses is put in a son of Joseph, (mark that) there is none of the Serpents
Tribe to be sealed, although Dan's Tribe were in the outward Worship of God, as
were the other Tribes: And of the other Tribes but twelve thousand of a Tribe
sealed. In all but an hundred forty and four thousand, which is the number
sealed to be the servants of God, of those who had the Commandments written in
Tables of stones without them, and the Law and the Prophets written in Books
without them. These are they that worship God in outward forms of Worship; the
number of them that were sealed that were the servants of God, is easily to be
numbered, being one hundred forty and four thousand, which is but a very small
number to what a man can number.

And these were all that John heard the number of, that were in the outward
form of worshipping of God, that were sealed to be the servants of God unto
whom were committed the Oracles of God, Romans 3. 2. And to whom pertains the
adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the
service of God, and the promises, whose are the Fathers, and of whom concerning
the flesh Christ came? Romans 9. 4, 5. What can all these in the several forms of
the worshipping of God say that they have more, and yet of all these there is
but twelve thousand of a Tribe sealed (may I say of an outward form of worship)
in all but an hundred forty and four thousand that were the servants of God, a
very small number in comparison of what a man can number; and these John did
but hear of to be sealed for the Servants of God (mark that.)

After this John beheld, and lo, a great multitude which no man could number,
of all Nations, Kinreds, and People, and Tongues, stood before the Throne, and
before the Lamb, clothed with white Robes, and Palms in their hands, and cried
with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God, which sits upon the Throne,
and unto the Lamb. And John was asked what these were, which were arrayed in
white Robes, and whence they came? (he was not asked what they were that were
sealed, they were told him before that they were of all the Tribes of the
Children of Israel) and it was told John, These are they which come out of
great tribulations, and have washed their Robes and made them white in the
blood of the Lamb; therefore they are before the Throne of God, and serve him
day and night in his Temple; and he that sits on the Throne shall dwell
among them.

John did but hear of the hundred and forty four thousand sealed to be the
Servants of God of all the Children of Israel; but he beheld, and lo, (that is,
with a kind of admiration) this great multitude that no man could number, (now
amongst men that is looked upon as a more certain knowledge which they behold
with their eyes, than what they hear with their ears) although John might not
question the truth that there was of all the Tribes of the Children of Israel a
hundred forty and four thousand sealed of them to be the Servants of God,
because he heard it that there was so many sealed, and why he might not
question the truth of it, it was because they were looked upon to be the people
of God, and had the Oracles of God, and to them pertained the Adoption, and the
Glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God,
and the Promises, and the Fathers were there, and they were them of whom Christ
came in the flesh, and therefore there was no cause for him to question the
truth of that, although he did but hear of it.

But as to the great multitude which no man could number, and they not of the
Tribes of Israel, but of all Nations, and Kin^eds, and People, and Tongues, if
John should only have heard of this great multitude of all sorts and Kinreds,
of the Gentiles that the Israelites called and counted Heathen, such as knew
not God, such as the Apostles themselves after they had known the Resurrection
of Jesus, questioned whether they might preach Jesus to them, to hear of such a
great multitude of them that no man could number, to stand before the Throne
and before the Lamb, clothed with white Robes, and Palms in their hands and
crying with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sits upon the
Throne, and unto the Lamb, coming out of great tribulations, and having washed
their Robes and made them white with the Blood of the Lamb, (and heard of but
so few of all the Tribes of Israel to be sealed as the servants of God.) If
John had only heard of this great multitude, might he not have had cause to
question the truth of it? or would he not (being one of the number of the
Tribes of Israel) have questioned the truth of it? (as the Tribes of the
several outward forms of worshipping God do at this day) but that John might
certainly know the truth of it, God was pleased to let him behold with his eyes.

John being in the spirit, he saw and beheld this great multitude (although
with a kind of admiration) that no man could number, of all Nations, Kinreds,
People, and Tongues, which were arrayed in white Robes, and made them white with
the Blood of the Lamb: This cannot be meant outward Robes washed in outward
Lambs blood, for that will rather make them red than white; but the Lamb is
Jesus, his Innocence is that which is compared to the Lamb, and the Blood is
the Life; so that the washing in the Blood, is the washing in the innocent Life
of Jesus; and in this they had made their Robes white: White is that which
betokens Innocence, white is the sign or badge of Innocence, and this was
that they were clothen withal, as with a Robe or Garment; that is, those great
multitudes of all Nations, and Kinreds, and People, and Tongues, which stood
before the Throne, and before the Lamb in their white Robes of Innocence,
washed in the Blood (the Life) of the Lambs Innocence, with Palms in their
hands, holding forth Praises to God, crying with a loud voice, Salvation to our
God: They cried aloud setting forth Gods praise, That it was he, and he only
that saved them, and caused them to wash their Robes in the Blood of the Lamb,
that clothed them with Innocence as with a Robe, and that was by the innocent
life of the Lamb in them, the life of Jesus in them, which had John only heard
of, and not seen it, may it not be questioned whether or no he would have
believed it? as those do now who only hear of it as they hear it read in the
Scriptures, but they are not in the spirit as John was to see it.

Let them know that Jesus is the true light that lights every man that comes
into the world; and he is the tree of Life, and in some measure, degree, or
other, as he is the true light, and lights them, so he gives unto them some
knowledge of Gods will what they should do, and what they should not do: God
does not reap where he did not sow, nor gather where he has not strewed, as
the slothful servant who had not improved his Talent, but hid it in the Earth,
charge God falsely therein. The sower sowes the word, the word is the seed,
Mark 4. all men are comprehended to be in one or the other of the four parts of
ground: the seed which is the word is God, John 1. In him was life, and the
life was the light of men, that was the true light that lights every man that
comes into the world, God as his Word is in every man that comes into the
world, they were all made by him, made by his word, and without him there was
not any thing made; in him was life, and the life was the light of men; the
tree of life that was in Adam, was the life of God in him, that was Jesus that
was the light in him, that told him what was Gods will that he should do, and
what was Gods will that he should not do; and this remains as a tree in all
Adams Posterity, although the appearance thereof is more in some than it is in
other some, yet there is something of the light in every man, that convinces
him of an evil, and makes known a good to him; and this did remain in Adam
after he had eaten of the forbidden fruit, opening his eyes, showing him his
nakedness, that by his disobedience he had shipped himself out of that white
Robe of Innocence that God had clothed him with, as he had made him in his
Image, man seeing himself naked and without that clothing that God had made him
in, it made known to him the good that he had lost by his disobedience; and it
shows also to man the justice of God for his disobedience, which made him
afraid of God, and by his being afraid of Gods justice, it made known to him
the evil that he had committed by eating of the forbidden fruit.

And this tree of life, as the true light that lights every man that comes
into the world, does still continue in Adams Posterity, see Romans 2. 14, 15. For
when the Gentiles which have not the Law, do by nature the things contained in
the Law, these having not the Law, are a Law to themselves; which show the
works of the Law written in their hearts, their consciences also bearing them
witness, and their thoughts in the mean while accusing, or else excusing one
another. Mark, when the Gentiles which have not the Law, that is, they have not
the written Law of God written without them, do by nature the things contained
in the Law, by what nature do they do the things contained in the Law? it
cannot be by the fallen Nature, that is, the Serpents Nature; the Serpents
Nature is that which breaks the Law of God; and therefore that Nature cannot
do the things contained in the Law of God: And there is in man but two Natures,
the Nature of the Serpent and his seed, and the Nature of the Woman's seed; and
therefore if those Gentiles that had not Gods Law written without them, did by
Nature the things contained in Gods Law within them, it must be by the nature
of the seed of the Woman, which is the Divine Nature, Jesus, the seed that is
sown, which is the Word, the true light which as a seed is sown upon all the
four sorts of grounds, and lights every man that comes into the World, but
it brings forth fruit in its own likeness in none of the grounds, but the
good ground, which these Gentiles were of the number of, for they having not
the Law, (that is, the written Law without them) are a Law to themselves.

The seed sown in the good ground, and in them bringing forth its own likeness,
made them in the Image of God, made them a Law to themselves, Jesus as a light
that gave them the knowledge of Gods Law, which in substance is this, To do
that God has commanded, and to leave undone what God has forbidden; he
wrought obedience in them to Gods Law; and this was the nature by which the
Gentiles did the things contained in Gods Law, and so they are a Law to
themselves, and so they show the works of the Law written in their hearts;
these Gentiles by their obedience they show not only that the Law of God was
written in their hearts, but they show the work of the Law of God that was
written in their hearts, they made the tree known to be good by the fruits,
which few of these of the Tribes of the Jews that were in the outward form of
worship did do, which had the written Law and Prophets read amongst them every
Sabbath day, their Consciences bearing them witness: These Gentiles had a
witness in them that they did the things contained in the Law of God, that was
the witness of God in their Consciences, which is a most certain witness, it
witnesses to nothing but what is true; so that if any should have questioned
them whether or no they did yield obedience to the Law of God in them, and they
had answered they did, if they had not been believed, they could have proved
the truth of it by a very good witness, the witness of God in their Consciences.

And their thoughts the mean while accusing, or else excusing one another:
There was in the Gentiles not only a taking notice of the actions done by
them, and the words spoken by them, whether they were agreeable to the Law of
God writ in their hearts; but so much were they brought to an obedience to the
Law of God in them, and they thereby became such a Law to themselves, as that
they took notice in themselves of their very thoughts, and according as they
were, if bad and evil, then their Conscience (the witness of God in them that)
accused them for their bad and evil thoughts: There was that in them that did
not only judge and condemn them for evil works done by them, or evil words
spoken by them, but they were accused for evil thoughts; and there was that in
them that justified them for doing the things that were good contained in Gods
Law, and for speaking what was good, and it excused them in their thoughts that
were good.

And these Gentiles were all Nations, and Kinreds, and People, and Tongues,
excepting the Jews; and Paul did plainly say, that the Gentiles that did the
things contained in the Law of God, were the true Jews, and had the true
Circumcision: And those Jews that had the written Law of God without them, and
did not keep the Law, although circumcised without in the flesh: their
Circumcision by breaking the Law was made Uncircumcision to them, and they were
not the true Jews; see from the 15. verse. to the end of the Chapter: And this
Paul does not speak of such Gentiles as should believe in Jesus after the
preaching of an outward Jesus to them, that was Crucified at Jerusalem, but of
those Gentiles that had never heard of that Jesus; for in the 24th verse he
tells the Jews, that the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through
you, as it is written, He made use of the Scripture to prove what he had spoken
to be true*

God put no difference between the Jew and the Gentiles, having purified their
hearts by Faith, Acts 15. 9. The Centurion that came to Jesus to have his
servant healed, Matthew. 8. he was a Gentile, and was not of the outward form of
worshipping God that the Jews were of; and Jesus says of him to the Jews that
followed him, that he had not found so great faith, no not in Israel, as he he
had found in that Gentile; and farther tells them, that many shall come from
the East and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the
Kingdom of Heaven, but the Children of the Kingdom shall be cast into utter
darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: Mark, many shall come
from the East and from the West, those many they must be Gentiles, and such as
were not counted the Children of the Kingdom of Heaven; that is, they were not
counted the Children of the Kingdom of Heaven by the Jews, which were in the
outward form of worshipping God, nor are they counted the Children of the
Kingdom of Heaven, by those that count themselves the Children of the Kingdom,
because they themselves are in the outward forms of worshipping of God, and
therefore they count themselves the Children of the Kingdom of Heaven, as did
the Jews; because they were in the outward form of worshipping God, they looked
upon themselves as the only Children of the Kingdom of Heaven, and so Jesus
calls them, when he says the Children of the Kingdom shall be cast out into
utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: None can think
Jesus's meaning to be, that the Children of the Kingdom that are the right
heirs to it, that they shall be cast out into utter darkness, where shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth: No, that cannot be; for as they are Children of
God, so they are Heirs, Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ, Romans 3. 17.
and it is the Fathers pleasure to give them the Kingdom, Matthew. 12. 32. These
are not those that shall be cast out of the Kingdom, but they that shall be
cast out of the Kingdom are those that call themselves Children of God, and so
look upon themselves as the Children of the Kingdom, because they are in an
outward form of worshipping God, in a way that God has required to be
worshipped in, as to the outward form of worship, as were the Jews; but they
did not do the things contained in the Law of God written in them; they do not
show the works of the Law written in their hearts, but boast and bear
themselves up in an outward worshipping of God, in these things that God has
outwardly required to be done in his worship, and so call themselves the
Children of God, and of the Seed of Abraham: These are they that shall be cast
out of the Kingdom into utter darkness. When those that make not the outward
show of worshipping of God, but do the things contained in the Law of God
written in their hearts, and show the works thereof written there, they shall
be taken into the Kingdom of Heaven, and sit down there with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, when those that think themselves Children of the Kingdom, because of
their outward form of worshipping, shall be cast out, although they say God is
their Father, and that they* are of the seed of Abraham, as did the Jews.

Jesus tells the Jews that believed on him, John 3. who told Jesus that they
were of Abraham's seed, and that God was their Father, and Jesus tells them that
he knew that they were of Abraham's seed, but they seek to kill him because his
word had no place in them, And when they told him Abraham was their Father,
Jesus says to them, That if they were Abraham's Children, they would do the
works of Abraham; but now ye seek to kill me, a man that has told you the
truth which he heard of God, this did not Abraham (that is, Abraham did not
seek to kill him.) But notwithstanding they were such as believed on Jesus, and
told him they were Abraham's seed, and that God was their Father, and he tells
them that he knew they were Abraham's seed; yet because they went about to kill
him for telling them the truth, Jesus he tells them they were of their Father
the Devil, and the lust of your Father ye will do: He was a murderer from the
beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. These
were they that looked upon themselves to be the Children of the Kingdom, and to
have a right to sit down in it with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, because they
were in an outward form of worship, worshipping God in the outward worship that
God had commanded, and they called Abraham Father, and that they were Abraham's
seed. And mark further, the Scripture says of them, that they believed on
Jesus, and owned that they had one Father even God; and yet these were cast out
of the Kingdom of God into utter darkness, Jesus telling them they were of
their Father the Devil, and where their Father was, must they not be there also
with him? and if any can believe that the Devil is in the Kingdom of Heaven,
sitting there with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, then they may believe that his
Children are there also; and his Children are those that are in the outward
form of worshipping God, although in an outward form that God has required to
be used in his worship; and say that Abraham is their Father, and that they are
of the seed of Abraham, and that they have but one Father even God, and that
they believe on Jesus, as did those Jews, and yet Jesus's Word had no place in
them, but they seek to kill Jesus, as did those Jews, for telling them the
truth: Mark, they did not kill Jesus, they did but seek to kill Jesus, as do
all those wherein Jesus is a light in them, and does tell them the truth, what
it is that they should do in obedience to God, but they will not do it, and
therefore Jesus word has no place in them, and so as much as in them lies
they seek to kill Jesus for telling them the truth, that is, they seek to kill
him in themselves, in that they do not do the things contained in the Law of
God written within them, nor show the works of the Law of God writ in their
hearts, as did the Gentiles that had not the Law of God written without them,
and yet they did the things contained in Gods Law, and showed the work thereof
written in their hearts. I say, if any man can believe the Devil is in the
Kingdom of Heaven, sitting with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, then they may
believe that his Children are in the Kingdom of Heaven with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob.

It is not the high thoughts and esteem that they have of themselves, or that
others have of them, as if they were the Children of the Kingdom, that can give
then an entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven, because they are in an outward
form of worship; and as to the outward in the doing of such things in it as God
has commanded, and looking upon Abraham to be their Father, and that they were
of Abraham's seed, and calling God Father, and believing in his Son Jesus, this
cannot give them an entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven, there being that in
them that will not let Jesus words have any place in them; and therefore they
seek to kill Jesus for telling them the truth; that is, they seek to kill Jesus
in them, in that they do not yield obedience to God, in what Jesus the light in
them makes known to be Gods will for them to obey him in; this makes them of
their Father the Devil, because they will do his lusts; and if the Father be
cast out, sure the Children must be cast out with him. The Gentile Centurion
who was great as to the outward, in that he could say to this man, Go, and he
goes; and to another, Come, and he comes; and to his Servant, Do this, and he
does it; yet he did not boast and bear up himself to come of the Line of
Abraham, nor to be of his seed, nor did he call God his Father; but was low and
little, mean and unworthy, in his own esteem, and did not think himself worthy
that Jesus should come under his Roof: And yet there was a greater Faith in
this Gentile that was not in the outward form of worshipping God, than Jesus
had found in Israel, that were in the outward form of worshipping God. And he,
although not of the Line of Abraham, nor in the outward worship of Israel, yet
he was one of them that should sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the
Kingdom of Heaven, when the Children of the Kingdom should be cast out into
utter darkness with the Devil their Father, whose lust they will do.

This is the state of man, while in an outward form of worshipping of God, and
are not doing the things contained in Gods Law written in their hearts; that
is, they yield not obedience to God in what Jesus, as a Light in them, makes
known to be Gods will that they should obey God in; but they will, as much as
in them lies, seek to put out that Light by their disobedience, and so seek ^o
kill Jesus in them, for telling them the truth which Abraham the Father of the
Faithful did not: and so by their disobedience they make it appear they are not
the Children of Abraham, because they do not Abraham's works; Abraham he obeyed
God in what Jesus the Light made known to him to be Gods will to obey him in:
And Jesus tells the Jews, that if they were Abraham's Children, they would do
the works of Abraham; that is, yield obedience to God in what Jesus, as a Light
in them, tells them the Truth is Gods will that they should obey him in. And
while men are out of this obedience, let them be of what outward form of
worshipping of God that they will, and have never so high esteem of themselves,
and be as highly esteemed of by others as these Jews had, yet they are Children
of Wrath as well as others; and so in that state, as Children of Wrath, they
are cast out of the Kingdom of Heaven, and are where their Father the Devil is.

Oh! but infinite, infinite are the mercies of that unchangeable God, as I have
experienced, who can say in some measure with Paul, Ephesians. 2. who wherein in
times past walked according to the course of this world, according to the
prince of the power of the air, the spirit that works in the children of
disobedience. Among whom also we had our conversation in time past, in the lust
of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the mind, and were by
nature the children of wrath, even as others. Mark, Among whom, that is,
amongst those that had walked according to the course of this world, according
to the power of the Prince of the Air, (which is the Devil) that works in the
Children of disobedience; among these we had our conversation in times past,
fulfilling the desires of our flesh, and of the mind, and were by nature
Children of wrath, even as others. Although the Ephesians, as they were
Gentiles, might not be in an outward form of worshipping God in those outward
things that God had required to be worshipped in, yet Paul was, and of the
highest sort or form of them, as elsewhere he speaks of himself: And yet see
how Paul put himself to be equal with them that had been in no outward form of
Worship, although he himself had been high in that outward form of worshipping
of God in those outward things that God had required to be worshipped in, yet
when he was in that height of outward Worship, he owned himself to be one that
walked according to the course of the world, and according to the power of the
Prince of the Air (which is the Devil) the Spirit which works in the Children
of disobedience: Among whom we had also our conversation, Paul with the
Ephesians had their conversations in time past, in the lust of their flesh,
fulfilling the desires of their flesh, and mind, and were by nature Children of
Wrath, even as others. Mark, they were not only Children of Wrath by nature
(that is, by the nature of the Serpent, who is the Prince of the Air, who is
the Devil, who is the Spirit that works in the Children of disobedience) but
they were the Children of Wrath, even as others; that is, just even alike;
there was no difference between their being Children of Wrath by nature, and
others being Children of Wrath by nature. There is the same nature of being
Children of Wrath, in those that are high in an outward form of worshipping
God, as was Paul, who as to his outward life as to men, lived blameless; and
those that were in no outward form of worshipping God, as were the Gentiles,
while they both have their conversations in the lust of the flesh, fulfilling
the desires of the mind, pleasing themselves in what they do: if they be in an
outward form of Worship, they please, content, and satisfy themselves in that
outward form of Worship; and therein they are fulfilling the lust of the flesh,
and the desires of their minds, in eating of the forbidden Fruit; as do those
that were in no outward form of worshipping God, as were the Gentiles who
fulfilled the lust of the flesh, and the desires of their minds in outward
pleasures. And so both those that fulfill the lust of the flesh, and desire of
the mind in outward forms of Worship, or in outward pleasure, they are those
that are not suffering Jesus's Word to have any place in them; and so they are
seeking to kill Jesus in themselves, for telling them the truth that he had of
God.

But God, who is rich in mercy, for the great love wherewith he loved us; even
when we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ (by grace we
are saved) and have raised us up together, and have made us sit together in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus. Mark, they which having their Conversations in
the lust of the flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and mind, and
thereby were by nature Children of Disobedience, and so Children of Wrath,
Children of the Devil; both those that were not in an outward form of
worshipping of God, as were these Gentiles the Ephesians; and those that were
in the highest of outward forms of worshipping of God, as was Paul: yet God who
is rich in mercy, can and does for his great love sake, wherewith he loved
them, yea even when they are dead in sins, quicken them together with Christ,
and so raise them up together as to make them sit together in heavenly places
in Christ Jesus; as you may see more to that purpose in the second Chapter of
the Ephesians.

Jesus tells the woman of Samaria, John 4. that the hour comes, when ye shall
neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father. But the hour
comes, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in
spirit and in truth: for the Father seeks such to worship him. God is a
spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth.
Jerusalem was the place that God had chosen to be worshipped in; and so it
represents the true outward form of worshipping God, wherein God was worshipped
according to his Command. The Mountain of Samaria represents the false
worshipping of God: for although there might be something done there, that God
had required in his outward Worship to be done, yet they mixing other things
with it that God had not required to be done in his Worship; and so it
represents all false outward forms of Worship. And Jesus tells the woman, and
would have her believe him, (mark that) Jesus would have the woman belleve him,
that the hour comes, when neither in this mountain, (that is, in the false
outward forms of Worship) nor at Jerusalem, (that is, the true outward forms of
Worship) they should worship the Father. But the hour comes, and now is, (mark
that, now is, then at that time it was) that the true worshippers shall worship
the Father in spirit and in truth: and that because the Father seeks such to
worship him. God being a spirit, they that worship him, must worship him in
spirit and in truth; or else it is no worshipping of him, where the Spirit and
the Truth is wanting, because whom God seeks to worship him, they and they
only are the acceptable Worshippers of God: and God seeks for those and
only those to worship him, that worship him in spirit and truth. It is not the
outward places, nor the outward form* (no not at Jerusalem, nor the outward
Worship commanded to be used there) that God seeks for; it is the spiritual
Worship done in the truth and in the sincerity of the heart, that God seeks
for; it is that and that only that is well-pleasing to him, which the outward
forms of worshipping is not, although never so exactly performed according to
the Command of God, yet if the Spirit of God, which leads and guides into all
truth, be wanting, the outward form is not acceptable to God, nor sought for of
God, nor desired of God. And where the Spirit of God is, and is the Guide and
Leader of them in his Worship, although the outward form be wanting, yet these
are the true Worshippers of God; and these are those that God seeks for to
worship him, that is, those that worship him in his Spirit and in his Truth,
that is, in Jesus; and all those that so worship him in the use of outward
forms, or without the use of outward forms. Of all Nations, and Kinreds, and
People, and Tongues, that worship him in his Spirit and in his Truth, in Jesus
which saves from sin, by which Spirit they are guided and led thereunto to do
it in the truth and sincerity of their hearts, these are such as God seeks
for to worship him, and are acceptable to God.

And of these John beheld the great multitude that no man could number,
standing before the Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white Robes, and
Palms in their hands, crying with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God:
which came out of great tribulations, having washed their robes, and made them
white in the blood of the Lamb. And John did but hear of a hundred forty and
four thousand of all the Tribes of Israel, to be sealed for the servants of
God. And those were they that were in the outward form of Worship, which had
the Commandments writ in Tables of stone, and had the Law and the Prophets
written in Books without them, and read among them, without them, every
Sabbath Day. And had the Oracles of God committed to them? and to whom pertain
the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the law, and
the service of God, and the promises: Whose are the Fathers, and of whom
concerning the flesh Christ came. And yet of all the Tribes of the outward
Israel, there was but a hundred forty four thousand sealed for the servants of
God.

I take notice, and so I desire the Reader to take notice, that the Tribe of
Dan was left out; there was none sealed of that Tribe (that was a Serpent by
the way) to be the servants of God; none of the subtle Serpents Tribe are
sealed to be the servants of God: And that was the reason why there was no more
sealed of all the outward Tribes of outward Israel, the Serpents Tribe was not
sealed; and the Serpents Tribe is those wherein the Serpent and his seed rule
in the heart. These being left out, and not sealed for the servants of God of
the Tribes of Israel, was the reason there was no more sealed; and it is the
reason that there is no more sealed of all the Tribes that are in the several
outward forms of outward Worship: and that is that which makes their number so
small that a man may easily number a hundred forty and four thousand.

And of the Gentiles, all Nations, and Kinreds, and People, and Tongues, that
have not known the subtilty of the Serpent tempting man in the outward forms of
worshipping of God; and also of those that have known the subtilty of the
Serpent tempting them in outward forms of worshipping of God; and have known a
saving and being delivered out of those temptations of the Serpent by the life
of Jesus in them, (and so are none of the Serpents by the life of Jesus in
them, (and so are none of the Serpents Tribe) nor are sufficing themselves, nor
can suffice themselves in that they are worshipping God in outward forms, but
are worshipping him in his Spirit and in his Truth, that is, in Jesus that
saves them from sin. Of all these, that is, of those that have not known the
subtilty of the Serpent tempting them in outward forms; and those that have
known the subtilty of the Serpent tempting them in outward forms, and have
known a being saved and delivered out of his temptations. There are a great
multitude, that no man can number, standing before the Throne, and before the
Lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their hands, crying with a loud
voice, saying, Salvation to our God, having come out of great tribulations, and
washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Thus Jesus is
a Light and a Savior to those that never hear of that Jesus born of the Virgin
Mary.

And now to return again to those that have heard of that Jesus born of the
Virgin Mary, and profess themselves Christians, and have known something of the
working of Gods Spirit in them, and have known something what it has been to
be drawn or led forth by the Spirit of Jesus in them: how far they may go, and
yet not know the birth of the Child Jesus in them, that saves from sin, nor the
woman that was deceived and in the transgression, to be saved out of the
transgression by bearing the Child Jesus.

Man may by Jesus, the Light in him, be convinced of sin, that it is the
breaking of Gods Command, and of the Judgment of God that is due to man for
sin, and he may be so far convinced in himself of sin, and of Gods judgment for
sin, as that he may be brought to a repentance and sorrow for his sins, and a
desire to be kept from sinning, and he may pray earnestly that he may be kept
from sin, and may set upon a reformation, and do many things in obedience to
God, that he knew to be the will of God: And this may be done from some
stirrings or movings of the Spirit of Jesus in him, and yet the Serpent self
his own will deceive him in all this, as I have experienced.

And that thus man may from the knowledge that he has of this or that thing,
that he does know that in the doing thereof he does that which is a breaking of
the Command of God; and for his so breaking of the Command of God, Jesus, the
Light in him that makes known to him the breaking of Gods Command, does
likewise make known to him what is due to him for his transgressions, that is,
Death, Hell, or Damnation; which man being afraid of, and willing to escape,
and to escape the punishment that he apprehends to be due to him for his sins,
this makes him to repent of his sins, and not only to say lightly and
carelessly, as many do, I would I had not sinned, and broken Gods Commands, and
God forgive me for it; but there is in them an inward repentance, an inward
sorrow and grief which goes so far as that there is a desire in them that they
may not commit sin again, and an earnest praying to God that they may not
commit sin again; and a doing of many things to prevent or to be kept from the
doing or the committing the sin again, which they have before committed. And
yet in all this the subtle Serpents self, or man's will, prevails much, as I
have experienced.

That man may repent that he has sinned in doing what he knew to be a breaking
of Gods Command, and may be sorrowful for it, and mourn for it, and earnestly
pray that he may do so no more, and use much means to be kept from sinning, and
yet all this time has a love to the sin; but for fear that he has of the
punishment, and the willingness that he has to escape the punishment, causes
the repentance, and sorrow, and mourning that he has for sinning: and to
escape the punishment, that sets him upon doings, as praying, fasting* and
other religious Duties, that he thinks may be a means to keep him from being
overcome by the Devils temptations, and to do such things as he thinks God will
be pleased with; and for this his so doing of these things, he thinks to find
acceptance with God. And all this may be done for a self-end, and in their own
will, and is only to escape the punishment; which if they could escape the
punishment, the doing the things that God has forbidden, would be no trouble
to them, but very pleasing, and to be desired. And in this state many are
deceived, and think themselves in a good condition, because they cannot now sin
as once they could, when they had little trouble in their Consciences for their
sins; but now if they sin, trouble, sorrow, and grief does attend them for
their sins, and there is praying to God for forgiveness, and it may be private
days of fasting to be kept, that they may be kept from sinning, and it may be
for private sins, such sins as none but God and their Conscience can accuse
them of; and the best that they know of outward forms of Religion, is set up
and strictly practiced by them; and an outward blameless life is got up in
them, to what they once lived in: and they are counted of others to be one of
those that are the Children of God, and Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven; and
they look upon themselves to be one of that number: And yet all this time the
root of sin, that is, the love of sin remains in them as live as ever it was;
and so long as the love of any sin remains alive in them, what they do in
obedience to God, is done because they are afraid of Gods Justice for their
sin; and while there remains in them a fear of Gods Justice for sin, they have
no true love to God, while they are afraid of God. There is no fear in love,
perfect love casts out fear, 1 John 4. 18. Their repentings, sorrows, griefs,
mournings, prayings, fastings, and all other their religious performances,
while done for the escaping, or for the preventing Gods Justice to fall upon
them, because of their sins that they have committed. That which carries them
forth to the doing and performing of those repentings, sorrows, griefs,
mournings, prayings, fastings, and all other their religious performances, it
is self, it is for a self-end to escape or prevent Gods Justice falling on them
for their sins; and therefore it is that they will do them: And so they are
deceived in all their doings, by the subtilty of self in them, doing their own
wills in them, and are of the Serp^nts Tribe, of whom none are sealed for the
servants of God.

These they have known the beginning of John, preaching in the Wilderness in
them, that is, when their hearts were as a Wilderness, wherein every unclean
Beast fed and found an abidingplace, every unclean Lust found wherewithal to
feed upon, and to abide in. Before man disobeyed God in eating of the Tree that
God had forbidden him to eat of, man's heart was like a garden, a place of Gods
delight, and brought forth pleasing Fruit unto God; the Plants therein were of
Gods planting, no Thorns nor Thistles were therein, nor no wild nor unclean
Beast was found there; but after man had disobeyed God in eating of the Tree
that God had forbidden him to eat of, then man's heart, instead of being like a
garden wherein God was pleased, it became like a Wilderness, a place
displeasing to God, a place wherein God was offended, a place bringing forth
Thorns and Thistles; such Plants of disobedience sprung up in the heart of man
as was not of Gods planting, nor pleasing to God: And then man's heart became
like a Wilderness, a place of every unclean and beastly Lust to harbor, feed,
and abide in. And here in this wilderness of the heart many have heard the
voice of John, the Forerunner of Jesus, preaching Repentance; and they having
heard his voice, and have repented, and have come to John's Baptism, that is,
an outward washing of water, a making clean of the outside, and so they have
been John's Disciples, they have known a cutting of the Branches of sin, that
is, a repenting and forsaking such sins and evils as are generally accounted as
sin and evil. Yea, they may have gone further, and have cut down the body of
sin, that is, they have not only repented and forsaken such sins and evils as
are done outwardly that man can accuse them of, but have repented and forsaken
such sins done within them, that none can accuse them of but God and their
Consciences; and yet they have not come so far as to hear and obey the end of
John's preaching in them, that is, that the Ax is laid to the root of the Tree
of sin; and the root from whence sin sprung is love, that is, the love that is
in man's heart to sin, the love to the sin that is first in man's heart, before
it comes forth into action. There was first in the woman a seeing of the Tree
to be good for food, and pleasing to the eye, and a desire to it; this was
first in her, before she took of the fruit thereof and eat of it: There is
first in the heart of man a love to sin, before there is a going forth to the
committing of it; and this love is the root from whence sin in the action
sprung. And the end of John's preaching was to lay the Ax to the root of the
Tree sin, which brings not forth good fruit, to hew it down and cast it into
the fire to be consumed, that is, to cast the love and desire to sin that is in
the heart of man, to cast that into the fire to be consumed that gave the first
being to sin in man, which was love in the will and in the desire of man.

And although we read of many that heard John preach Repentance, and came to
his Baptism, as did Jerusalem, and Judea, and the Regions round about Jordan,
many Pharisees and Scribes were baptized of him, confessing their sins, Mat. 3.
yet few of them came to the end of his preaching, to know the Ax laid to the
root of the Tree, to know the love and desire to sin in the heart, to be hewn
down and cast into the fire to be consumed. And this John told them, must be in
the Baptism of Jesus (which his Baptism was a forerunner of) which was to
baptize with the Holy Ghost, and with fire. In Jesus's Baptism, in the Baptism
that saves from sin, they were to know the fire of the Holy Ghost to burn and
consume the love and desire to sin in them. That whereas there was a time in
which they had in them a love and a desire to commit sin, but dare not commit
sin for fear of the punishment that they knew was justly due to them for their
sins; but if they could have escaped the punishment, they would willingly have
pleased themselves in the sins. And here the Serpent self deceived them; they
thought there was an enmity in them against sin, because they were afraid to
commit sin, when the enmity was not against sin, but against the punishment for
sin. And so indeed and in truth, the enmity that they thought was in them
against sin, it was in them against God, that is against the justice of God,
and sin in the root, sin in the love and the desire to it was alive, and sin
and they in union; and thus the subtle Serpents self and their own wills
deceive them under a form of godliness.

But when they are come to the end of John's Preaching and Baptism, and know
what it is to have the axe laid to the root of the tree of sin, to the love of
sin, and to know the hewing down and burning up of the love and desire to sin
in them, so as if there were no punishment for sin, yet would they not sin: And
why would they not sin? it is because of the manifestations or making known of
the love of God that is shed abroad in the heart, God having made known the
freeness of his love to them, without any desert from them, that while they
were sinners, and so enemies to God, there was love in God to them, and he sent
his Son to die to reconcile them to himself: This begets a love in them to God,
we love him because he first loved us; and now the enmity is not against the
punishment (as it was when what we did in obedience to God, was because we were
afraid of Hell if we disobeyed him) but the enmity is now against the sin, as
it offends that God that has bestowed the riches of his Love upon them: And
now the Creature if it be drawn aside by the temptations of his own hearts
lusts (if the Serpent bruise the heel of the seed of the Woman in it, as God
has said it should) how does it mourn for its offense! not because it knows
that God as a loving Father will chastize it for its offense; it does well know
that God will not let offenses pass in his Children unchastized, but their
grief and sorrow is, because it has offended God his loving Father: And as to
the chastisements of God, although in themselves they are tedious, but as they
come from a loving Father, and are for their good, so they are pleasing to
them, as God makes use of them to the bringing forth of the peaceable fruit of
Righteousness in them: This was David's case, Psalm. 119. 67. Before he was
afflicted he went astray, but now he had kept his word; and hence is a change
wrought in the heart: now the sorrow and grief that is in it because sin is
committed, is not because it is afraid of the punishment, as once it was, but
the sorrow and grief is because a loving God, a loving Father is offended by
its breaking of his Commands.

And this change in the heart is wrought by the joining together the two seeds
(if I may so call them) the seed of God the power of God in man, and the seed
of God the power of God without man; and from hence comes the Child Jesus that
saves from sin, in the bearing of which the woman was saved: That in man that
was deceived and in the transgression, is again saved; here comes the
restoration of man, man being restored again into the Image of love to God
that he lost in the fall, and into that Image of holiness in obeying God that
he lost in the fall; and now there is a change wrought in the will, man being
brought to will what God will, and that because it is Gods will; and now he
does not do Gods will, because he knows that if he does it not he shall be
punished for his transgressions, as once he did when that which put him upon
his obedience to God, in what he knew to be Gods will that he should do; it was
that by the doing thereof he might escape that punishment that he knew would be
due to him if he did not do Gods will: but now there is such a change, that if
there were no punishment for the transgression, yet there is a willingness in
him to do Gods will, and that because of the love that God has manifested and
made known to him, that God loved him when there was an enmity in his heart
against God, yet God loved him, and sent his Son to die to reconcile him to
God, Romans 5. 8, 9, 10. And this begot such a love in the heart to God, as that
it so changes the will, that its desire is not to do its own will, but Gods
will only; and it is afraid lest its own will, that he is so much sensible of
that has so much deceived him, should get into the doing of what he is so
carried forth to do in obedience to God, and so deceive him and bring him again
into the transgression, that he is afraid of his own will as of a deadly
Serpent: this is known in some measure, degree, or other where the Child Jesus
is born, and the Woman saved out of the transgression, they do know the work of
the only begotten Son of God in them, and not only to restore that in them
that Adam lost in the fall, but to preserve and keep them from falling by the
temptation as Adam did; they knew that in them that the Serpent cannot tempt so
as to cause it to sin, nor never did, nor never will yield to the temptation;
and that they are not only the created Sons of God, but the begotten Sons of
God, 1 Pet. 1. 3, 23. and that it is that begotten Son of God in them that
keeps them from falling by the temptation.

Herod heard John Baptist and feared him, knowing that he was a just and holy
man, and he heard him gladly, and did many things, yet because John reproved
him for his beloved sin, he put him into prison, and afterward cut off his
head, Mark 6. This is to be read within in the mystery.

Simon, who by his Sorcery had bewitched the People, being looked upon as the
great power of God, he believed Philip preaching, and was baptized, and
continued with Philip, wondering and beholding the miracles and signs that were
done, and offered to part with his money, if for it he might have had the power
of disposing the Holy Ghost, yet his heart was not right in the sight of God,
but he was in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, Acts 8. This
also may be read within in the mystery. These both were under John's
dispensations, the one of Preaching, and the other of Water Baptism, and both
in an outward yielding obedience to God.

Hymenia and Alexander they went further, they put away Faith and a good
Conscience, which they could not have done, if they had not first had Faith and
a good Conscience, and were gone so far as to make shipwreck of Faith, and yet
there was a hope of recovery of these, 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20.

But it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of
the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted
of the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come; if they shall
fall away to renew them again unto repentance: seeing they crucify to
themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.

Here is a going a great way in the ways of God, and a being in a high state,
and yet a possibility of falling when they are gone so far, and are in that
high state; but if then they do fall, it is impossible for them to be renewed
again by Repentance: and therefore what great need has all to have a care and
not to desire the forbidden Fruit; that is, to desire to know more of God, than
a desire to yield obedience to God in what they know of him, and also to keep
low and to have a low esteem of themselves, in and under all the enjoyments of
God, and his manifestations or making known of himself in them and unto them,
and not to look upon any part of what they enjoy of Gods making known himself
in them, or unto them as their own, but to look upon all their enjoyments as
the Free Gift of God, and given to them to be as an Help-meet for the life of
the Son of God in them, for the bringing them into the Image or likeness of the
heavenly Adam.

I know no subtle Serpent, no Satan, no Tempter, no Devil without me, and
therefore I can say nothing of a substile Serpent, a Satan, a Tempter, or a
Devil without me. Those who do know a subtle Serpent, a Satan, a Tempter, or a
Devil without them, they may declare their knowledge of that subtle Serpent,
of that Satan, of that Tempter, or of that Devil that they know without them,
and what works or actions they have known done by that subtle Serpent, that
Satan, that Tempter o^ Devil without them. As I have declared my knowledge of
the subtle Serpent, the Satan, the Tempter or the Devil within me, their works
or actions, I would not be mistaken, I do not say there is no more to be known
of the Devil, than what I have known of his works and actions within me; that
is, as he is a subtle Serpent, a Satan, a Tempter or a Devil, that is as much
as to say, he is all whatsoever it is in man that opposes God and the work of
God in man, that is, the Devil. I know no more of him, that is, I have no
experimental knowledge of him, but only as he opposes God and the work of God
in man: But I read of other works, actions, or manifestations of the Devil in
Scripture, as that of Witches, Wizzards, familiar Spirits, Divinations,
Enchantments, which I know nothing of but only as I read of them in the
Scripture, and of those possessed with Devils in the time that Jesus Christ
lived in the Humane Nature upon the Earth; as, the man that came to him to have
the Devil cast out of his child, which did sometimes cast him into the fire and
into the water, and rent and tore him at the time of his casting out, that he
left him as if he had been dead: And the man possessed with Devils, that chains
and fetters could not hold him, cutting himself with stones, and kept in tombs,
and had many Devils entered into him; but of these I know nothing of
experimentally, but as something of the inward work of the Devil in man may be
compared to these outward works or actions of the Devil; but as to the outward
works themselves, I am altogether ignorant of them, I only know them as I read
of them in the Scripture, but having no experimental knowledge of them, causes
me to say I know no other subtle Serpent, Satan, Tempter, or Devil, but what I
have found of his works and actions within me; and I leave it to others that
know the other works and actions of the Devil (as without doubt some there be
that now do know some of them) to declare if they please what they know of them.

I know and do believe that evil men have evil Spirits or evil Angels that do
attend upon them, their works or actions; I have seen of those evil Spirits or
evil Angels within me, but I never saw any of those evil Spirits or Angels
without me; and I also know and believe that good men, as God has again made
them good by bringing forth his begotten Son Jesus in them, they have good
Spirits or good Angels attending upon them, their works or actions I have seen
of those good Spirits or Angels within me, but I never saw any of those good
Spirits or Angels without me.

I think that to be my duty that John said was his and others their practice in
his time, 1* John 1. 1, 2, 3. That which was from the beginning, which we have
heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our
hands have handled of the word of life; (for the life was manifest, and we have
seen it, and bear witness, and show unto you that eternal life which was with
the Father, and was manifested unto us) that which we have seen and heard,
declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us; and truly our
fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.

I have read what the subtle Serpent said to the woman, and what answer she
gave the Serpent, and how she yielded to the Temptation; and I have read how
the Sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, and Satan came also
among them, and what the Lord said to Satan of Job, and wha Satan said to the
Lord concerning Job, and the leave that the Lord gave Satan to try Jobs
Integrity, and how Satan tried Job: I have also read that the Lord said to
Simon, Simon, behold Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you as
wheat, but I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not; and when thou art
converted, strengthen thy brethren: And of Peter's Confidence not to deny Jesus,
and how he was prevailed with to deny Jesus, and of his repenting: And I have
likewise read of Jesus being led up of the spirit into the wilderness to be
tempted of the Devil; and when the Tempter came to him, what he said to Jesus,
and what answers Jesus gave the Tempter and Devil; and by my reading of them,
and remembering what I had read, I could speak and discourse of them, but I knew
little of them in comparison of what I did then speak of them, nor do I now
know any thing of them, but what by experience I hear of them spoken within me,
and have seen with the inward eye, and have looked upon within me, as a measure
of them have been, acted, done, or wrought within me; and I do believe it to be
unlawful for me now to speak or declare more of them than what by experience I
have seen and heard of them within me, and so much I may speak and declare, and
no more.

And if it be objected to me, If thou may speak or declare no more than what
by experience thou have within thee heard and seen; then how have thou heard
and seen within thee, That Jesus is a light to all (and a Savior to some) that
have not heard of an outward Jesus born of the Virgin Mary, and crucified at
Jerusalem.

To that I answer, I was once without the true knowledge of that Jesus born of
the Virgin Mary, and Crucified at Jerusalem, although from my being a Child I
was brought up to read the Scriptures that make mention of such a Jesus; and I
was taught by my Parents to say, that I believed there was such a Jesus; and
yet I do now know, that I did not then when I read of such a Jesus in the
Scriptures, and said I believed in such a Jesus, I did not then know that there
was such a Jesus, I was only learned to say so, but I knew it not; and what
was I then better than those that never heard of the name of such a Jesus, when
I only heard of the name, but knew not what he was, that is, I knew not what
he was, as he was sent of God to save from sin: And all that profess themselves
Christians, and know any thing of the work of God in their hearts, will own,
that the knowing by reading or here-say of such a Jesus born of the Virgin
Mary, and so growing up to be a man, and Crucified at Jerusalem, and know no
more of him, that this knowledge of him does them no good as to their
Salvation; and what are they then the better for their hearing or reading of
the Name of such a Jesus? are they any thing better than those that never heard
of that Name? But that knowledge of Jesus that does them good to their
Salvation is the knowing of him to be a Jesus, that is, a Savior that saves
from sin; that knowing of him is that which is only good and profitable to
their Salvation, and not the hearing or knowing of an outward name of Jesus.

I knowing and having experience of this within me to be true, that it is not
the hearing and knowing of the outward Name Jesus that does man any good to his
Salvation, but it is the knowing him to be Jesus, a Savior from sin, that does
man good to Salvation, and thereby I know and have experienced, that God may
save some that have not heard of an outward Jesus born of the Virgin Mary, and
Crucified at Jerusalem; and the way how he saves them, is by saving them from
their sins: before I know a saving from sin, I know nothing of Jesus, but only
as I had heard or read of the Name Jesus, but of the nature of Jesus, as he is
a Savior sent of God, I was as ignorant as those that never heard of the name
Jesus, I only knew the Name as it was written in these letters, JESUS; but the
nature of Jesus as he is a Savior I knew not; I did not know him as he is the
great power of God to Salvation, the only begotten son of Gods Love, the true
Light which makes known to man the unchangeable being of Gods Love to the
World, MAN, that whosoever believed in him the only begotten Son of God, the
true Light; that is, whosoever so believed the true Light that lights every
man that comes into the World (so that none are without this Light) they that
so believe in this true Light that tells them this is good, and what they ought
to do, and this is evil which they ought not to do, and yield obedience to God
according to what this true Light the only begotten Son of God in them, makes
known to them to be Gods will that they should do, or that they should leave
undone. These that so yield an obedience to the light in them, in doing the
good that this Light makes known in them they ought to do, and in leaving
undone the evil that this Light makes known to them that they should not do;
these are they that Gods love is so to in his begotten Son, as that they shall
not perish, but have everlasting life: and this believing the true Light Jesus,
the only begotten Son of God, and yielding obedience thereunto, is not wrought
in them by the reading or hearing of a Name Jesus that a man had that was born
of the Virgin Mary, and Crucified at Jerusalem; and that knowledge that we have
by reading the Scriptures and hearing the name Jesus preached, that is all the
knowledge that we now can have more than those that never heard of that Name,
and of that Man.

But that which give us the true knowledge of that Name, and what that Man was,
before that Body had a being upon the Earth, and what it was when it had a
being upon the Earth, and what it is now it has no being upon the Earth; I
say, that which gives us the true knowledge of what that man Jesus was before
he had a body upon the Earth, and what he was in that body upon the Earth, and
what he is now that body is taken from the Earth. That which gives us the true
knowledge of what he was, and now is, it is the true Light that lights every
man that comes into the World, and so he is a light, and the true light in
those that never heard of that Name and of that Man, as he is the same true
light in us that has heard of that Name, and of that Man.

And as he is the true light that lights every man that comes into the
World, so he made known to me what was Gods will that I should do, and what was
Gods will that I should not do; and also made known in me the unchangeableness
of Gods love toward me, and so he begot a love in me again to God, and so he
wrought a willingness in me to do what God has made known to me to be his will
that I should do, and has wrought a willingness in me to leave undone what God
would not have me to do; and I have known him as he is the true light to be the
Word of God, which is the seed sown upon all the four grounds (which is all
men) as he is the true light that lights every man that comes into the
World, and I have known the nature of all the four grounds in me, and how the
light, the word, the seed, has been sown in me, in the nature of all the four
grounds; and so have I known and experienced how the seed has been sown in
those that never heard of that outward name Jesus, born of the Virgin Mary, and
Crucified at Jerusalem, and how they have been saved from sin, which is done by
the light of the Divine Nature, the Word, the Seed sown in them, causing them
to be the good ground: It is the word of God, which is the power of God, that
changes* the heart, and makes it the good ground (the same word by which all
things were made) and thereby causes them to do the things contained in Gods
Law writ in their hearts, and are become a Law to themselves, and have the
witness of God in their Consciences, accusing them or else excusing them, as we
have that have heard of that Jesus born of the Virgin Mary, and Crucified at
Jerusalem: And by the doing the things contained in Gods Law, and thereby show
the works of Gods Law written in our hearts; it is by that, that they and we
wash our Robes in the Blood of the Lamb (that is, in the life of Jesus) and
make them white in his Blood, in the innocent life that he lives in us, not
that we live, but he lives in us, and works in us both to will and to do of
his good pleasure, and when the will of man is so given up into the will of
God, for God to be all, to will and do all, in man as it pleases him; then
man's will is restored to be what it was when God made man in his own Image. And
God saw every thing that he had made, and beheld it was very good, Genesis 1. 31.
All things that God made was very good, and God saw them to be very good, and
God set his mark of behold upon them to be very good, that man might see and
behold them to be very good, as they were what he had made and gave the being
to; that is, all that God had made was very good, as a measure of his being,
was and is in them, whereby they are preserved and upheld; and so were and are
very good, as God that made them is good and is in them.

Before time was, God was, and was All in All, (before subtle Serpent, Satan,
Tempter, or Devil was) and so God is to be All in All again. See 1 Cor. 15. 21
verse. to 29 verse. For since by man came death, by man came also the
resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so (mark that, even so)
in Christ shall all be made alive. But every man in his own order; Christ the
first fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at his coming. Then comes the
end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the father, when
he shall have put down all rule, and all authority, and power. For he must
reign, till he has put all his enemies under his feet. The last enemy that
shall be destroyed is death. For he has put all things under his feet: but
when he says all things are put under him, it is manifested, he is excepted
which did put all things under him. And when all things shall be subdued unto
him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things
under him, that God may be all in all. When this shall come to pass, where then
will be the subtle Serpent, Satan, Tempter, or Devil? Do they not rule? Have
they not authority and power? Are they not his enemies? Where will be subtle
Serpent, Satan, Tempter, or Devil, when Jesus shall have put down all rule, all
authority and power? for he must reign till he has put all his enemies under
his feet, and the last enemy that shall be destroyed is death (which is that
the subtle Serpent, Satan, Tempter, Devil, sin, was the cause of death, and
gave death its being) where will they all be then, when all Jesus's enemies
shall be thus subdued unto him, and he as a Son shall be subject to the Father
that has put all things under him, that that God who before time* was may be
all in all?

That which may be known of God, is manifested in men, for God has showed it
unto them: for the invisible things of him, from the Creation of the World, are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made even his eternal
power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse, Romans 1. 19, 20. By this
Scripture it plainly appears, that God by his true Light in man (that lights
every man that comes into the World) does make known in men that which may be
known of him. Those things that were invisible of him, and not known before the
Creation, he has made known from the Creation of the World; and they are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal
power and Godhead: Gods eternal power and Godhead which was before the
Creation, God by his true Light Jesus, has in men made so much of it known
unto them, as may be known of God, being clearly seen and understood by the
things that are made, God has showed it unto them, so that all men are without
excuse. They cannot plead ignorance that God has not made known himself unto
them, or that they have not known so much of God, as that they might be saved:
for that which may be known of God, is manifested, is made known in them, for
God has showed it unto them, even his eternal power and Godhead. And what is
there more to be known of God, than is in his eternal power and Godhead?

In that he has made known his eternal power and Godhead to all men. God has
thereby shown his love to all men. John 3. 16. verse. to the 21 verse. That God
so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believed in him should not perish, but have everlasting life: (whosoever, God
makes no exception.) For God sent his Son not to condemn the world, but that
the world through him* might be saved. (Gods end in sending his Son was not to
condemn any one, but to save all.) He that believes on him, is not condemned;
(all those are saved that believe on him) but he that believes not, is
condemned already, (all those that do not believe on the begotten Son of God,
the true Light, they are already condemned, that is, presently, while they are
in that state of unbelief. All men as they have sinned, are as they are in the
state of sin, under the sentance of condemnation; but Gods love is such to man
in general, that he has sent his only begotten Son to take off that sentance
of condemnation, that whosoever did believe in him should not be condemned. God
grants to them that believe in his Son, to speak after the manner of men, a
Pardon; and so the sentence of condemnation is taken off from them, and they
are as if they had never been condemned: but all those that do not believe in
his Son, they remain under that sentence of condemnation, and so are condemned
already;) because he has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of
God. (The cause why all men are condemned, is because they do not believe in
the Name of the only begotten Son of God. As the name of a King signifies the
power of the King, so the Name of the only begotten Son of God signifies the
power of the only begotten Son of God. They do not believe in his power who is
the true Light in them, that makes known in them, and shows unto them what may
be known of God: They do not believe that this Light has power to save them,
or that there is a sufficient power in this Light, that if they should yield
obedience to it, to save them.) And this is the condemnation, that light is
come into the world, (Light is come into the world, into that world Man that
God so loved, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever of that world
Man believed in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. God has by
his true Light made known his love in them; and their condemnation is not
because they did not know God, or for want of Gods making known his love to
them, or for want of Gods making known so much of God to them, as may be known
of God; but it is because Light is come into the world Man, come into them;)
and men love darkness rather than light, is because their deeds are evil. For
every one that does evil, hates the light, (evil doers hate the Light, hate
Jesus, the only begotten Son of God, whom God in his love has sent to save
them) neither comes to the light, (they will not come to Jesus, the only
begotten Son of God, the true Light that lights them, that makes known in
them, and show unto them what may be known of God, to the end that they may be
saved by believing in his Name, by believing in his power; but they will not
come to him, the true Light, the power of God, to salvation, to be saved by
him) lest their evil deeds should be reproved, or discovered. They so love
their evil deeds, that rather than they will have them reproved or discovered,
so as to be brought to a leaving or forsaking of them: They will not come to
the Light to be saved by the Light, that is, to be saved by the only begotten
Son of God.

But he that does truth, comes to the light, that his deeds may be made
manifest, that they are wrought in God. This is that which makes the
difference in men: God makes known himself in all that which is to be known of
God, even his eternal power and Godhead, Gods makes known in all, he has
showed it unto them, and so they are without excuse. His love is to all, he
gave his Son, that whosoever (none excepted) that did believe in him, should
not perish. He did not send his Son to condemn the world Man, but to save the
world Man; and those that believe in him, are not condemned, but are saved from
the condemnation; and those that believe not, are already condemned, they are
now in the state of condemnation. And it is because they have not believed on
him* the condemnation is because Light is come into the World, come into them,
and they believe not in it, but they love darkness, the works of darkness, evil
deeds, better than they love the Light. And instead of loving the Light that
makes known evil deeds in them, they hate the Light, because it discovers, lays
open, and makes their evil deeds known, and reproves them for evil deeds; and
therefore they will not come to the Light, but hate it. The Light in them calls
them to come and believe in it, but they will not come and believe in it: And
why will they not come and believe in it? It is because they love their evil
deeds, and that causes them to hate the Light; but he that does truth, that is,
he that in sincerity and integrity of his heart, does the things that God has
made known in him to be his will that he should obey him in, he comes to the
Light: And why does he that does truth, come to the Light? It is, that his
deeds, his works may be made known, made manifest that they are wrought in God.
He that does truth, he that truly yields obedience to God, according to what he
knows of God, his hearts desire is to bring all his actions and deeds to Jesus
the true Light of God in him, that thereby they may be made known, made
manifest, made truly known in him, and to him, that they are the works of God
wrought in him, that is the great thing desired by him that does the truth, to
know that all that is done in him, is done by Jesus the truth in him.

So that the difference that is made in men, is of their own making. Gods love
is general to all; he sent his Son to save all that would believe in him; he
has made known his love in all. That which may be known of God, is manifest in
them; God he has showed it unto them, they are clearly seen, being understood
by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead, so that they
are without excuse. But some love darkness rather than light, because their
deeds are evil: and therefore they will not come to the light, but are haters
of the light: Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God,
nor were they thankful to God for what God had made known of himself to them,
but became vain in their imaginations. Even as they did not like to retain God
in their knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things
that are not convenient, Romans 1. 21, 28. I pray mark the words of the
Scripture: Even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, (which
knowledge they once had that God had given to them of himself) God gave them
over to a reprobate mind, to do those things that are not convenient. Even,
that is just equal alike; then things are said to be even, when they are just
equal alike. Here is the reason why God gives men over to a reprobate mind, to
do those things that are evil. It is, because they do not like to retain, to
keep that knowledge that God has given to them of himself, and to keep it so
as to glorify him in that knowledge; and so to glorify him in that knowledge,
as thereby to manifest their thankfulness to him, and to manifest their
thankfulness by their obedience, in obeying God according to what they know of
him. And the want of this their obeying God according to what God has made
known of himself unto them, is the cause why even, just alike God gives men
over to a reprobate mind, to do those things that are not convenient; and as
they are Reprobates, so they are condemned.

Others that do the truth, they obey God in Jesus the truth, and their hearts
desire is, that Jesus the true Light may make known the truth in them and to
them, that their deeds are wrought in God; and they are lovers of the Light,
and from that love that they have to the Light, and to the doing the truth,
that is, the doing of the will of God in sincerity and integrity of their
hearts, according as Jesus the true Light in them, has made known in them what
is Gods will that they should do, and what is Gods will that they should not
do. These they bring their deeds to the Light, that they may be made manifest,
that is, made known in them, and to them that they are wrought by God in them.

Gods love is such to man, in general to all men, as that he is willing to keep
man from perishing, and is willing to save them, and give them eternal life.
But some men are not willing to come to Jesus the true Light in them, although
God so loved the world Man, as to send him to that end, that whosoever believed
on him, should not perish, but have eternal life; yet Jesus the true Light,
said to some that thought to have eternal life in the Scriptures, and it was to
those that were in the highest outward form of worshipping. God, and said God
was their Father, to these Jesus said, Ye will not come to me, that ye might
have life, John 5. 39, 40. Man's will is that which hinders man from coming to
Jesus the true Light, that they may have life, that they may be saved by him.
God does his part in sending his Son into the World to save them; and so the
Father draws them by the Son, and he is the true Light that lights every man
that comes into the World, he makes known Gods love in them and to them; and
so the Father draws them by making known his love in them. Can any one say,
that they have known the Father to draw them to come to the Son to believe on
him, any other way but as Jesus the Son, the true Light in them has made known
the Fathers love to them? And this God has done to all, because that which may
be known of God, is manifest in them, God has showed it unto them. The
invisible things of him from the Creation of the World, are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead.
(Mark that!) Even his eternal power and Godhead. And what is there more to be
known of God, than his eternal power and Godhead? Dare any one say, that they
know any thing more of God than what is contained in his eternal power and
Godhead? And although God has so manifested himself in them, and showed
himself to them, yet they will not come to his beloved Son Jesus, the true
Light, that they may have life. Jesus did not say to them, the subtle Serpent,
Satan, the Tempter, or the Devil, that they would not have them come to him
that they might have life; but it was their will that hindered or kept them
back from coming to Jesus that they might have life. Ye will not come to me,
that ye might have life. Oh, Will! Will! that which brought man into sin, and
so brought death; that keeps man from coming to Jesus the true Light, that they
may again have life.

To speak something of what I know of taking up the Cross, and to follow JESUS.
TO have the will brought to be resigned up into Gods will, to be given up into
the will of God, to be what God will; this is the taking up of the Cross, and
following of Jesus; this is to be a Disciple of Jesus: this is to learn of
Jesus, and without this, whatsoever outward profession any may be of, how
zealous soever they may be in that outward profession, how outwardly blameless
soever they may live, how much soever they may be esteemed of by others, how
high esteem soever they may have of themselves, as to be the Disciples, the
Scholars, or Learners of Jesus; yet if they have not learned some part of this
Lesson, to deny themselves, to deny all that is of self in them, which the will
is a great part of, and take up his Cross and follow Jesus. The Cross that
Jesus took up, was the Cross to that will in him, that as he was man would have
had the Cup taken from him, but he took up the Cross to that will in praying,
Father, not my will, but thy will be done; and this Cross must all take up that
will be his Disciples, that will learn of him, and follow him in the spirit,
and not be knowers of him in the flesh, and followers of him only in the flesh.

Jesus said to his Disciples, that if any man will come after him, and
whosoever will come after him must deny himself, and take up his Cross daily
and follow him, Matthew. 16. 24. Mark 8. 24. Luke 9. 23. I pray mark the words of
the Scripture, if any man will, or whosoever will, which is as much as to say,
there is none whosoever that can come after Jesus, there is none whosoever that
can follow Jesus, there is none whosoever that can learn of Jesus, but they
must first deny themselves, deny all that is of self in them, which will is a
great part of. All that is of self is first to be denied before man can take up
his Cross and follow Jesus: before man can take up a Cross to his own will, his
own will must first be denied, be said Nay to, be resisted as being of the
Devil; Resist the Devil and he will flee from you, Jam. 4. 7. Resist the
Temptations of the will, and stand in obedience to Jesus the true Light, and
that will which opposes Gods will, that will flee from you, it will not abide
the battle with you, but it will flee from you, it will vanquish, will be
overcome and cease to be in you, as it ceased to be in Jesus when he prayed,
saying, O my Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me; nevertheless,
not as I will, but as thou will: And that will in Jesus that as man would have
had the cup to be taken from him, that will abode not the battle in him, but
flee'd and was vanquished, was overcome and the Fathers will was done.

And so it will be with us and in us, if we will with the Light of Jesus in us,
that light that is in us, and it is so in us that it would save us from sin,
save us from the doing of our own wills, if we would by the help and assistance
of the power of that Jesus, the Light in us, resist the temptations of the
will, and abide in the power of that Light, Jesus, believe in his Name, believe
in that power which is the love of God to us; it is the Gospel of God, the good
tidings of God, the power of God to Salvation, which is made known in us. If we
will believe in the name of this Jesus, the true Light, believe in the power of
the Light in us, that that Light, that power of God, that Gospel, that making
known of Gods love to us, and in us, that it is that and that only that is
able to save us, is able to keep us to salvation; and so by it to be saved from
the temptations of our own wills. This will save us from the temptations of our
own wills, and so save us from the condemnation that is due to us for our sins
which we commit in yielding to our own wills: The believing in the name of the
only begotten Son of God, in the power of the true Light in us, which is the
only begotten Son of God, which all those that do not believe in the name of
this true Light in them, in the power of that Light in them, which is the only
begotten Son of God, they are already condemned; they are (while they are out
of that believing in the name of the only begotten Son of God) in the present
state of condemnation for their sins, John 3. 18. and are in the doing of their
own wills, and so are not in the taking up of the Cross, which is not only to
be taken up, that is to say, once and no more, or now and then, as for a man
once to say he took up his Cross, he crossed, he said Nay, to his own will, he
once vanquished, he once overcame his own will, he once followed Jesus; or to
say sometimes, he took up his Cross, he sometimes crossed his own will, he
sometimes vanquished and overcame his own will; this is not enough to be a
Disciple, a Follower of Jesus, a Scholar, a Learner of Jesus; but he that will
be a Disciple, a Follower, a Scholar, a Learner of Jesus, he must daily, that
is, constantly deny himself, take up his Cross and follow Jesus. As Jesus
taught his Disciples to pray day by day for their daily bread, so they are to
pray day by day, Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven: They are day by
day to pray that Gods will be done, in their earthy bodies, day by day to take
up their Cross and follow Jesus; day by day, every day daily Jesus took up the
Cross to his will as man, he said Nay to that will that was in him as man, he
vanquished and overcame that will he had as man, and day by day daily he did
the will of the Father, as he was the only begotten Son of the Father; and if
any man, and whosoever will come after him, will follow him, he must take up
his Cross to his will, he must cross his will, he must say Nay to his will, he
must vanquish and overcome his will, and this must not be done only once, or
at some times, but daily, constantly, day by day, every day, and that is to
take up the Cross and follow Jesus, follow that which saves from sin* that it
is to be a Scholar, a Learner of that Light Jesus in us, that is in us, and it
is a gift of God given unto us, and that to that very end, to save us from sin,
to save us from the doing of our own wills, and to restore us to the doing of
Gods will, and to keep us in the doing of the Fathers will, as the begotten Son
of God, and not as the created son of God who fell from the doing of Gods will,
although made in Gods Image, which the begotten Son of God cannot fall from the
doing of Gods will; he sins not, nor can he sin, because the seed of God
remains in him, abides in him; and he cannot sin, because he is born of God.
That which is born of God cannot sin, and whosoever does not bear his Cross and
come to Jesus, follow Jesus, cannot be his Disciple, Luke 14. 27. There is no
being a Disciple, a Scholar, a Learner of Jesus, without bearing of his Cross,
without coming to Jesus; without following of Jesus none can be his Disciple:
but they may be the Disciples and Followers of Jesus, and yet not follow those
that look upon themselves to be the Disciples and Followers of Jesus.

The Twelve forbade one casting out Devils in Jesus Name, because he did not
follow them, but Jesus rebuked them for it, saying, Forbid him not; for he that
is not against us, is for us; and none could do miracles in his name, and
lightly speak evil of him, Mark 9. 38. 39, 40. He that casts out Devils in
himself, he that takes up the Cross to his own will, he is a Follower of Jesus,
a Disciple, a Scholar, a Learner of Jesus within him, that saves him from sin,
as was he that the Twelve met with that cast out Devils in Jesus name, in the
power of Jesus in him; and yet the Twelve forbade him to cast out Devils in
Jesus Name, in the power of Jesus, because he followed not them, he gave not
honor to them, to follow them, to come after them, and therefore it was that
they did not regard that he was a follower of Jesus, and that he was for Jesus,
and did miracles in his Name; they regarded more their own honor to be
followed by him, than they minded the honor of Jesus, who he honored and
followed, and was for Jesus, and yet they forbade him to cast out Devils in
Jesus Name who was on Jesus part, and could not lightly, easily, readily speak
evil of Jesus; and yet in their own wills for a self-end of their own, because
he followed not them, gave not them the honor, they forbade him to cast out
Devils in Jesus Name; and such a one I have known forbidden to declare to
others what God has made known to him, that so as an instrument in Gods hand
he might be as a means to cast out the Devils that entered into man by the
subtilty of the Serpents self in man, in and by declaring to others Gods
goodness to him, how God has made known the subtle Serpent to him, and how he
has known God to cast out the subtle Serpent that ruled in him in an outward
form and show of godliness, and such a one I have known forbidden to declare to
others Gods goodness to him, and forbidden by those that have professed that
they have been sent of Jesus to cast out Devils as was the Twelve; and why?
because he followed not them, he gave not them the honor they desired and
expected.

But he or they, let them be who they will, that does not take up his Cross and
follow Jesus, is not worthy of him, Matthew. 10. 38. Where the Cross to man's own
will is not taken up, where all that is of man is not denied, where man's will
is not become a nothing, and no will known but what is resigned and given up
into the will of God; where there is a love to any thing more than to Jesus, a
love to any thing more than to that which saves from sin, let them have never
so near, never so much familiar acquaintance with an outward Jesus, as the
Twelve had with the outward man Jesus, who met with one casting out Devils in
Jesus Name, in Jesus power, or the power of Jesus in him, and they forbade him,
because he did not follow them, what are they the better for their familiar
acquaintance with the outward man Jesus? Did that make them worthy of the
inward man Jesus? and was he any thing at all the less a follower of Jesus, the
less a follower of that which saves from sin, the less worthy of the inward
man Jesus, because they forbade him to cast out Devils in Jesus Name, in Jesus
power? and were not they the less the followers of Jesus, for forbidding of him
to cast out Devils in Jesus Name and that because he did not follow them? When
they forbade* him to cast out Devils in Jesus Name, and that because he did not
follow them, had they then taken up the Cross to their own wills, and in the
bearing thereof followed Jesus, and learned that lesson of Jesus, to be meek
and lowly in themselves? And if they had learned that lesson of Jesus, to be
meek and lowly in themselves, could self their own wills have gotten to be so
high in them, as to forbid one to cast out Devili in Jesus Name, and one that
was for Jesus, and could not lightly have spoken evil of Jesus, and forbid him
to cast out Devils in Jesus Name, and that because he followed not them, he
gave not them the honor that they expected? And if they had known the Death
and Resurrection of Jesus within them, could they in that knowledge have
forbidden one to cast out Devils in Jesus Name, because he gave not them the
honor of following of them?

They the Twelve then had a knowledge of Jesus, and had the most nearest and
most familiar acquaintance with Jesus, but was it any more than a knowing of
Jesus after the flesh? They did not know, they did not believe in his Death and
Resurrection, as the Scriptures do plainly in many places testify when Jesus
spoke of his going to Jerusalem, and to suffer, Peter rebuked him, Mat. 16. 21,
22. And when Mary Magdalene, out of whom Jesus had cast seven Devils, told them
that he was risen, and she had seen him, they did not believe her; and after
that he appeared to two more, and they told the rest that he was risen, and
they believed them not; and then he appeared to the Eleven, and upbraided them
for their unbelief, Mark 16. And several other places of Scripture there is to
the same purpose, that although in the time of Jesus being with them in the
flesh, and of that familiar acquaintance they had with him, and that power that
he had given them of casting out of Devils, yet they were then knowers of him
in the flesh, and followers of him in the flesh, and they did not know him in
his Death and Resurrection in themselves, and so they had not, denied
themselves, denied their own wills, and taken up their Cross to all that was of
self, their own wills in them; and from thence it came that they seeing one
casting out Devils in Jesus Name: and because he followed not them, that was
the very ground and reason why they forbade him, it was because he followed not
them; and they in forbidding of him did not follow Jesus, because they had not
taken up the Cross to their own wills.

Solomon said true in what he said, that there is nothing new, what it was, and
what it was, is; so that now it is from the same knowledge and familiar
acquaintance that some now have of Jesus after the flesh, and in the knowledge
and acquaintance with him he has sent them forth, and given the power to cast
out Devils; and they, as the Twelve did, meeting one casting out Devils in
Jesus Name, they forbid him, and that because he followed not them; and those
that do so, they are in the state the Twelve were in, they knew not the Death
and Resurrection of Jesus: But where the Death and Resurrection of Jesus is
known, and the Cross is taken up to their own wills, to all that is of self in
them, they will be of Paul's mind, Some indeed preach Christ even of envy and
strife, and some also of good will; the one preaches Christ of contention, not
sincerely, supposing to add afflictions to my bonds, but the other of love,
knowing that I am set for the defense of the Gospel: What then? notwithstanding
every way, whether in pretense, or in truth, Christ is preached, and I therein
do rejoice yea, and I mill rejoice, Phil. 1. 15, etc. By this Scripure it is
plain, that Paul had learned that lesson of self-denial, had taken up the Cross
to his own will, and did follow Jesus, knowing the power of his Death and
Resurrection in him, and that made him rejoice, yea, and he would rejoice in
that Christ was preached every way, whether in pretense, or in truth, although
the pretenders of preaching Christ, preaching him out of envy and strife, and
not sincerely thinking thereby to add affliction to his bonds, yet he rejoiced
and would rejoice in that Christ was preached: This was a great way distant and
differing from the Twelve, forbidding one to cast out Devils in Jesus Name, and
that because he did not follow them.

When Jesus comes to be less known and followed in the flesh, and more known
and followed in the spirit, then there will be a time, that as every man has
received the gift, even so to minister the same one to another as good stewards
of the manifold grace of God, if any man speak let him speak as the Oracle of
God; if any man minister let him do it as the ability which God gives, that
God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise and
dominion for ever Amen, 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. Such a time as this I believe will
come, although through my outward age I may not live in the body to see it, yet
now I do see it by the eye of faith; and if I depart this life before that day
come, I shall die in the belief of it, That there shall be a time when Jesus
shall be less known, and less followed in the flesh than he is now, and more
known and followed in the Spirit than now he is. And that there shall not be so
much Lordship and power used over one another as now there is amongst those
that are the disciples of Christ, and know him and follow him after the flesh,
which had its being when the Twelve met one casting out Devils in Jesus Name,
and forbade him because he followed not them; but there shall be a true
following of Jesus and obeying his command in those that are great among them,
in that they will not do as the Kings of the Gentiles did exercise Lordship one
over another, but he that is great among them shall be as the younger, and he
that is chief as he that does serve, and that is to be like Jesus, who was
amongst his Disciples as he that serves, Luke 22. 25, 26, 27. When this day
comes the high places will be taken down within and also without, what high
places were there either within or without for men to get up in when the
Apostles and others first preached the Death and Resurrection of Jesus? and the
power of God went forth then wonderfully in reaching the witness of God in them
that heard them, although their words were not many. And what high places were
there either within or without for men to get up in, when those called Quakers
came first forth like poor silly men, and here and there spoke a few words as
they met with people. And how then went the power of God forth with them
reaching the witness of God in many that went to see what manner of men they
were? as my self was one.

I believe there will come a time when the Disciples, the followers of Jesus
shall know what it was that Jesus did when he washed his Disciples feet, which
Peter when he did it did not know what he did, and yet Peter saw him wash and
wipe the outward feet of some before he came to him to wash his feet. And Peter
looking upon it but only as an outward act, and saw not then the spiritual
meaning of it, but looking upon it as an outward act, he thought it was not a
sitting thing for Jesus, his Lord and Master, to wash his feet; but Jesus tells
them, that although he was their Lord and Master, he had washed their feet, and
he did it to that very end, to give them an Example that they should do to
others as he had done to them, and that it was a duty that they ought to wash
one another feet, John 13. When and where this duty is practiced, there all
Lordly and Masterly power is cast down, there is no exercising of authority
over others, there is a knowing what it is to take up the Cross to their own
Wills, and to follow the Example of Jesus. Which washing of feet was another
thing than the washing of the outward feet: for although Peter then had so much
outward familiar acquaintance with Jesus in the flesh, yet he knew not the
meaning of it, although he had been sent forth by Jesus to preach and cast out
Devils, (as others now may be) but Peter should know afterward the meaning of
it. And Peter did afterward know the meaning of it, when he knew the Death and
Resurrection of Jesus, which then he did not know nor believe the Death and
Resurrection of Jesus, when Jesus washed the outward feet of his Disciples. But
when Peter came to that knowledge that Paul speaks of, 2 Cor. 5. 16. Henceforth
know we no man after the flesh: yea, though we have known Christ after the
flesh, yet henceforth know we him no more.

When and where this knowledge is of knowing no man after the flesh, not the
knowing of Christ after the flesh, there is the knowing what it is to wash one
another feet; which Peter did not know, while he knew Christ after the flesh;
which knowledge cannot be meant the outward feet being washed, for then Peter
would have known what Jesus had done when he washed the Disciples outward feet;
but it was the washing of those feet, which if Jesus did not do for them, they
had no part in him: And then Peter who had before denied Jesus to wash his
feet, now rather than he would lose his part in him, would have not only his
feet washed, but his hands and his head; but Jesus told him, he that is washed
needs not save to wash his feet, but is clear every whit; that is, the feet
that is the duty of the Disciples, the Followers of Jesus, that they are to be
as Instruments in Gods hand to wash one for another; it is that or those feet
that makes them clean every whit. That part of the body that God had said the
Serpent should bruise, that part Jesus washed, and left it as an Example and
Command for his Disciples to follow; read it in the Mystery who can.

The feet is that upon which the whole body is born up, they are those upon
which the body walks, they are next the Earth; these being washed and made
clean, the whole body is clean, and so they represent or figure man's walking in
obedience to God; which as an Instrument in Gods hand, the new Creature in us
moves and walks upon the feet of obedience in us; which if our obedience be not
washed and made clean by Jesus, we can have no part in Jesus; that is, if what
we do in obedience to the outward Command of God, be not the work of Jesus in
us, we have no part in Jesus. And man being washed and made clean in that part
of him, that is, in his walking in obedience to God, by Jesus who is the life
of the new Creature in man, he need not have any more washed or made clean, but
is clean every whit. Man in this his walking in obedience to God, he treads
upon the earthy part in him, which is very ready to cleave to the feet of his
walking in obedience to God; and so to defile them, the Serpent God has said,
shall bruise the heel of the seed of the woman, hurt or hinder Jesus in the
pure operation or working of the Spirit of Jesus in man: And so thereby the
feet of man's walking in obedience to God, that which the new Creature in man,
may be said, as in a figure, to walk and move upon in obedience to God, as
Jesus the Life moves in the new Creature; and so as our obedience is from the
movings and stirrings of the new Creature in us, which moves and walks upon the
earthy part in us; and so as the earthy part in us cleaves to the feet of
obedience in us, so comes the feet to be defiled and made unclean. Now as Jesus
has washed and made clean the feet of obedience in any, and keeps them clean
in the walking in obedience to God; it is their duty, and they are to follow
the Example of Jesus: That if they see in any that the Serpent has bruised the
heel of the seed of the woman in them, that is, in their walking upon the
earthy part in them, any part of the Earth has cleaved to their feet, whereby
they are polluted or defiled; then it is their duty, as Instruments in Gods
hand, to wash and make clean the feet of those that they see so polluted or
defiled.

And this is what God by the Apostle commanded: If any man be overtaken in a
fault, yea which are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit of meekness,
considering thy self lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another burdens,
and so fulfill the Law of Christ, Gal. 6. 1, 2. Which is as much as to say, If
any man by the temptation of the Serpent, has defiled his feet of obedience in
being overtaken in a fault, the earthy part on which he walked upon in his
obedience, has cleaved to his feet of obedience and has defiled them, yea
that are spiritual, yea that stand in your obedience by the power of Jesus in
you, who has washed your feet; wash ye the feet of those that are polluted,
restore such a one again to the pure and clean walking in obedience to Jesus,
but do it in the spirit of meekness, in a low and meek spirit, not lording it
over them, but in meekness and lowliness of mind, as if thou were indeed a
servant to them, attending upon them to that very end; considering thy self,
lest thou also be tempted, lest thou also fall by the temptation of the Serpent
self in thee, lest thou pollute or defile thy feet of obedience in walking upon
the earthy part in thee. And so then thou may stand as much in need of
another to be an Instrument in Gods hand to wash thy feet to make thee clean in
thy obedience to God, and so restore thee again by the spirit of meekness to
God, as thy Brother has need of thee. And in thus your seeking to restore one
another in the spirit of meekness, ye bear one another burdens, and so fulfill
the law of Christ, the Command of Christ, to wash one another feet as he
washed your feet.

And when and where this shall be put in practice, that Lordly power which some
in their wills, because they have known Jesus in the flesh, and he has sent
them to preach and cast out Devils, they have taken upon them to judge and
condemn others wherein the Witness of God in their Consciences, the Light of
God, has acquitted and cleared them: And when that Lordly power shall be
thrown down, and a Cross taken up to that Will, and also when and where this
duty of washing one another feet, is known and practiced, then when there is
indeed such a thing done whereby the feet of obedience is polluted or defiled,
and it be seen by those in whom the Lordly and Masterly spirit is cast down,
and a Cross taken up to that Lordly and Masterly Will in them, that was ready
to run out in judging and passing sentence upon others, because their feet of
obedience have been polluted, and by the subtilty of the Serpents temptations
they have been overtaken in a fault: Instead of running upon them, and passing
sentence upon them, there will be a Spirit of meekness, gentleness,
forbearance, love, long suffering, pity and compassion used to them; and
thereby to be as Instruments in Gods hand to wash the feet of such a one, to
recover, to restore, and bring such a one again into obedience to God, as not
knowing how soon you that now stand, may fall by the like temptations. And this
I believe men will come more into the practice of, as they come to know what it
is to take up the Cross to their own Wills and to follow Jesus, and not be like
the Disciples of Christ, that would have had fire to come down from Heaven upon
those that would not retain them, who knew not what spirits they themselves
were of; and yet had known Christ, and had followed Jesus in the flesh, and had
preached and cast out Devils; and yet knew not what it was for Jesus to wash
their feet, nor what it was to wash the feet of others: and therefore had no
patience to bear with them that would not retain them, that would not take in
and believe what they said, although spoken in their wills, as in their own
Wills it was, that they would have fire come from Heaven to consume them.

Some there has been in this knowing Age that we live in, that has taken upon
them to judge those true words spoken by one whose life they have had nothing
to object against; and yet for declaring what he has known of the deceit that
is wrought in the heart of man, by the subtilty of the Serpents self in man,
and that under a form of Religion, and thereby the Devil persuades man that he
shall thereby come to be like God; and declaring how he has in Jesus's Name,
by the power of Jesus the true Light in him, resisted and cast out the Devil in
his temptations; and desiring them to have a care that they be not deceived by
the temptations of the subtilty of the Serpents self in them, under an outward
form of Religion, and of being like God, as Adam was, and himself had
experienced. They have judged these words (or words spoken to that purpose, or
tending to the same effect, in discovering the subtilty of the Serpents self in
man in an outward form of Worship, and how the Serpent in those temptations
might be resisted and overcome) to be spoken from a wrong Spirit, and so would
make the Devil to be a dividing of his Kingdom; and so if Christ's words be
true, they would make the Devil to be a throwing down his Kingdom: for he said
to those zealous Professors that thought themselves better than others, when
they so judged of him, that he cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of
Devils, that a Kingdom divided cannot stand: And if Satan cast out Devils, he
is divided against himself; and how then can his Kingdom stand? Mat. 12. 24,
25, 26. Jesus himself meets with the like dealing from the like sort of zealous
Professors. And he told his Disciples, that the disciple is not to be above the
master, nor the servant above the lord. It is enough for the disciple that he
be as his master, and the servant as his lord: if they have called the master
of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of the household?
Mat. 10. 24, 25.

But that which made them judge that the words were not spoken by a true
Spirit, was this (as has been several times expressed by them) that is because
the words spoken they did not feel them to reach to the witness of God in them,
or theseed of God in them, and therefore they judged them not to be spoken by
the true spirit of Jesus in him that spoke them, and that because they found
some thing burdened or troubled in them when those words were spoken; and yet
they could not deny but that he might speak what he knew to be the work of God
in him, and that his words were true, and that his life was answerable to his
words, but because they did not feel his words to reach to the witness of God
in them, or the Seed of God in them, but there was something troubled and
burdened in them when they heard those words spoken, therefore it was that they
judged him to speak these words by a wrong Spirit.

I pray mark the Argument, because the Seed of God in them, or the witness of
God in them was not reached to by the words spoken therefore they must be
spoken by a wrong Spirit; and why must they be spoken by a wrong Spirit, is
because some thing was troubled or burdened within them by those words spoken:
and therefore that which was troubled or burdened in them by those words being
spoken, must be the seed of God in them, or the witness of God in them, that
must be the thing troubled or burdened in them by those words.

Oh the mystery of deceit that lies secretly hid in the heart of man by the
subtilty of the Serpent self-will in man! who will not bring their deeds to the
light to be made manifest? who will not bring their deeds to the truth that the
true Light has made known in the Scriptures, to be thereby judged whether they
be true or false? but do talk of a Light in them, and to walk by the Light, and
yet do things and judge of things contrary to what the Scripture makes known to
be true, which was given forth by the true Light: For by the Scriptures there
is nothing more plainer than that it is the duty of all to make known to others
what God has made known of himself to them in his great work of saving of man
from the subtilty of the Serpent, by whose temptation man was brought to sin,
brought to disobey God. But this making known what God* has made known of
himself in saving from sin, this, say they, was spoken by a wrong Spirit; and
the reason why it must be so, that it was spoken by a wrong Spirit, is because
they did not feel the words spoken to reach the seed of God, or the witness of
God in them; and because there was something in them that was troubled or
burdened by hearing those words spoken, and that they say is the seed of God in
them. And if they had said it had been the seed of the Serpent in them that had
been troubled, they had spoken more truer, and agreeable to the testimony of
the Scripture.

Mat. 16. 21, 22, 23. Jesus tells his Disciples, that he must go to Jerusalem,
and suffer many things, and be killed, and be raised again the third day. What
is this, but a making known to them what God the Father had made known to him
that he was to do for the saving of man from the subtilty of the Serpent, who
by his temptations had caused man to sin? Dare any one be so wicked as to say,
that Christ did not speak this by the true Spirit, but it was a wrong Spirit in
Christ that spoke it? I say, dare any be so wicked as to say so? And yet these
true words of his did not reach to the seed of God in Peter; and yet Peter was
troubled, there was something in Peter that was oppressed and burdened with the
hearing of Jesus speaking of these words. And none can reasonably believe, but
that Peter thought and believed that that which was troubled and burdened by
these words spoken by Jesus, was something in him that was good, something in
him that loved Jesus; which Peter might, as some others have done, think that
it was the seed of God in him that was troubled and burdened at what Jesus
spoke: And that made him take the boldness upon him, as to take Jesus to him,
and began to rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thee, Lord: this shall not be
unto thee. And I pray what was this in Peter that was so troubled and burdened
in Peter at what Christ had said? Was it not Peter's Will in him, which was
contrary to Gods Will? This Will of Peter's that was thus troubled and
burdened, that lay uppermost in Peter, and that was that which hindered in
Peter Christ's words, that they did not reach the seed of God in Peter: the
subtilty of the Serpents self in Peter, deceived him. He having been a
Disciple, a follower of Jesus, and having preached the Kingdom of Heaven is at
hand, and had power to heal all manner of Diseases, and to cast out Devils, and
had given that testimony of Jesus that he had the words of eternal life; might
not Peter, who had done all this, think that Jesus spoke by a wrong Spirit,
because he found his words to be a trouble and burden to him? Peter he did so
think that he spoke by a wrong Spirit, and that is plain by the Scripture: for
he began to rebuke Jesus for what he had said, and told him in his rebuking of
him, that that should not be done to Jesus, that Jesus had said should be done
to him. And so he makes Jesus to speak a lie; And what is that less, than to
tell Jesus that he did not speak those words by the true Spirit? For if Peter
had believed that they had been spoken by a true Spirit, Peter would have
believed the words would prove true; and he would not have gone about to
reprove him for speaking true words by the true Spirit: but Peter did not
believe the words to be true; and going about to reprove him for speaking of
them, it is plain that Peter believed they were spoken by a wrong Spirit; when
it was the lying Spirit in Peter that reproved Jesus for speaking the truth.
And Peter's rebuke was made up of nothing but lies, and that made Jesus call
him Satan, and told him he was an offense to him: for he favored not of the
things that be of God, but those things that be of men; that was, he savoured
not the things of God, the doing Gods will which was to be done by Jesus going
to Jerusalem, and to suffer many things of the Elders, Chief Priests, and
Scribes, and to be killed, and be raised again the third day. (See who they
were that Jesus suffered under; it was under those that were high in an outward
form of worshipping God.) And as Peter savoured not the things of God, the
having of Gods will done, so he did savor the things of men, he favored the
having of his own will done: for it was a will of Peter's own which he had not
taken up the Cross to, that would not that Jesus should do what was Gods will
in him that he should do: And it was this will of Peter's that was contrary to
the will of God, that was troubled and and burdened at Jesus's words, when
Jesus spoke the truth; and it was in that will of his own that did believe that
Jesus spoke those words by a wrong Spirit: for he made Jesus a liar, saying,
that it should not be as Jesus had said. And in this will, in this wrong
Spirit, in this Satan, in this Devil, Peter undertook to rebuke Jesus for
speaking the truth that he had received of the Father; as to my knowledge
others have done the like.

And further, to make it more manifest that it is a lying and deceitful Spirit
which works in the Will, that persuades to believe that those things that are
true which be spoken, are spoken by a wrong Spirit; and all the reason that is
given why it must be so, that it is spoken by a wrong Spirit, is because it
does not reach the seed of God in them, but they find a burden, a load
oppressing them, and it is a great trouble to them to hear those words spoken.
And if this were true, then Jesus, in the time that he had lived upon the
Earth, spoke many times by a wrong Spirit, in that it did not reach the seed of
God in his Disciples. Mark 14. 27 verse. to 31 verse. Jesus says to his
Disciples, All ye shall be offended because of me this night: for it is
written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered. But Peter
said, Although all shall be offended, yet will not I. Jesus says unto him,
This night, before the cock crow twice, thou shall deny me thrice. But he spoke
the more vehemently, If I should die with thee, I will not deny thee in any
wise. Likewise also said they all. I pray observe the words of the Scripture,
Jesus had told them, that that night they should be all offended because of
him; and he proves the truth of it by Scripture: for it was written, I will
smite the shepherd, and the she^p shall be scattered. What Jesus spoke, was the
truth he had received from the Father. And did he not spoke these words by the
true Spirit? And yet this did not reach the seed of God in them, so as to
believe he spoke true: And therefore how could they believe that Jesus spoke
these words by the true Spirit? yea, by their own answers it did appear, that
they all believed that he spoke them by a wrong Spirit, because they all said,
that should not be true that Jesus had spoken; Jesus had said, that they should
be all offended because of him that night, and the truth of that Scripture
should be fulfilled that night, that the Shepherd should be smitten, and the
Sheep scattered. Peter who had at another time, some distance of time between
before that time, began to rebuke him for speaking something to that purpose,
he does not now reprove Jesus for speaking the truth; but he again contradicts
him for speaking the truth, and tells him, that what he had spoken, should not
be done: for although all should be offended because of him, yet would not he.
And when Jesus told him that that night, before the Cock crew twice, he should
deny him thrice; he spoke the more vehemently, If I die with thee, I will not
in any wise deny thee. Likewise also said they all. That is, all of them said,
as Peter had said, that they would not be offended because of him that night;
and before they would deny him, they would die with him. As Peter in his own
Will had resolved to do, so had they resolved in their Wills to do. I pray what
hindered the true words spoken by Jesus, that it did not reach the seed of God
in them? Was it because they were spoken by a wrong Spirit? Or was it not
because their own Wills lay uppermost in them, above the seed of God in them,
and so made such a separation as that the words spoken by Jesus could not reach
the seed of God in them? Was it not their own Wills in them, that would not
have them to be offended because of him that night, being it was Gods will that
it should be so, and God had caused the Prophets to foretell the same? But there
was in them all a Will opposing the Will of God; and that Will of theirs, was
that which hindered that Jesus's true words spoken by the true Spirit, that they
did not reach the seed of God in them; and this Will of theirs was troubled and
burdened by the words spoken by Jesus.

What might not this Will say in them? or they say in this Will? What shall I,
that have been a Disciple, a Follower of Jesus, that have been sent by him to
preach the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, have had power to heal all manner of
Diseases, and to cast out Devils, and have had my outward feet lately washed by
him, and that night received of him that which is commonly called the Sacrament
of his Body and Blood; and what shall I now be offended because of this Jesus
that has done so much for me? No, I will not be offended: no, rather than I
will be offended because of him, I will first die with him. This Will of theirs
that was not willing that Gods Will should be done in them, this Will of theirs
was burdened and troubled in hearing Jesus speak those true words, That that
night they should be all offended because of him. And from this strong fleshly
love and affection that they had to the fleshly Body of Jesus, might they not
think, as others have done, that it was something in them that was good,
something in them that was of God, that was troubled and burdened at Jesus
speaking of the true words by the true Spirit? When indeed, and in truth, that
which was burdened and troubled at Jesus's true words spoken by the true
Spirit, it was nothing but the fleshly will of theirs, in which will they
opposed the will of God (as others have done in this knowing Age.) How were
these deceived by the subtle Serpents self their own wills in them, who hod
been so much with Jesus, and had received so much from Jesus, and yet had not
taken up the Cross to their own wills, but were in the knowing of Jesus after
the flesh, and followers of Jesus after the flesh, and were ignorant of his
Death and Resurrection in them!

Luke 18. 31, 32, 33, 34. Then took he unto him the Twelve, and said unto them,
Behold me, go unto Jerusalem, and all things that are written by the Prophets
concerning the Son of man shall be accomplished; for he shall be delivered unto
the Gentiles, and shall be mocked and spitefully entreated, and spit on; and
they shall scourge him and put him to death, and the third day he shall rise
again: and they understood none of these things, and the saying was hid from
them, neither understood they the things that were spoken. Does any one believe
that Jesus spoke these true words, and that he did not speak them by a true
spirit, but that it was a wrong spirit in Jesus that spoke these words? I say,
that if any one does believe that these true words (spoken by Jesus) were not
spoken by the true spirit, and if not spoken by the true spirit, then they must
be spoken by the false spirit: They that do so believe, I believe they will be
ashamed to say, that they believe that Jesus did not speak these true words by
the true spirit, and that he spoke them by the wrong spirit. And if Jesus did
speak these words by the true spirit, as that Jesus did speak them by the true
spirit, then see the falsity and deceit that is in the Argument that I have
heard often, and that by many used, that because by the true words spoken, they
did not feel them to reach the witness of God, the seed of God in them, when
they heard them spoken; therefore it was that they believed the true words
spoken, were not spoken by the true spirit, but by a wrong spirit: By the same
rule the Twelve might have judged, that Jesus did not speak those true words;
and why? because they understood none of these things, and the saying of his
was hid from them, neither knew they the things that were spoken. If they had
felt these words of Jesus to have reached the witness of God, the seed of God
in them, how then could it have been that they understood none of those things,
and his saying was hid from them, neither knew they the things that were
spoken? if they had felt those true words spoken by Jesus, by the true light,
and by him proved by Scriptures, not only by one Scripture, but by many
Scriptures, by all things that are written by the Prophets concerning him, if
they had felt these words to have reached the seed of God, the witness of God
in them, they would have understood something of those sayings, they would not
all have been hid from them, they would have known something of what had been
spoken; but by this Scripture it is plainly proved, that true words may be
spoken by the true spirit, and proved by many Scriptures, and that too
concerning Christ's being put to death, and by whom, and the place where, and of
his rising again, and when he rise: And all these may be spoken of the inward
work of God in the heart of men (as the like I have known) and yet the Witness
of God, the seed of God in the hearers, have not been by them felt to be
reached unto, by the words so spoken (none of the Twelve understood any of the
things Jesus spoke of; I pray observe, none of his hearers understood any of
the saying he spoke.) And so although they have understood the outward sound of
the Words spoken, as the Twelve did the outward Words spoken by Jesus, yet the
inward meaning of them, the spiritual meaning of them, as they are wrought,
asked, and done in man, may be hid from them, and they may know nothing of
those things spoken as to the Work of God in the heart; and yet they may be
spoken to such as the Twelve were, or at least would be counted such as the
Twelve were; that is, those that had the most familiar acquaintance with
Christ, who Jesus had sent forth to preach, that the Kingdom of Heaven was at
hand, and had cast out Devils in his Name: And yet these did not know what
Christ's Death and Resurrection was, neither understood they any thing of it
when he spoke of it to them: And may there not be such in this knowing Age we
live in, that may for some years have been Disciples and followers of Christ in
the flesh, and have had a familiar acquaintance with him, and have been sent to
preach the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, and have cast out Devils in his Name,
and yet have not known Christ's Death and Resurrection, nor have understood any
thing of it, when it has been spoken of to them by those that have known the
inward work of it wrought within them.

Luke 9. 44, 45, 46. Jesus said to his Disciples, Let these sayings sink down
into your ears, for the son of man shall be delivered into the hands of men:
But they understood not the saying, and it was hid from them, and they
perceived it not, and they feared to ask him of that saying: Then there arose a
^easoning among them which should be the greatest. Mark the Scripture, were not
these true words spoken by Jesus? and were they not spoken by the true spirit
in him? and were they not spoken to his Disciples his followers? And yet these
true words were spoken by Jesus, and spoken by the true spirit in that person
that never had sinned; and they by the true spirit were called upon, that those
sayings should sink down into their ears; and yet true words thus spoken by the
true spirit in him, that they had no just cause to speak evil of (although some
when they could not deny the truth of what he had said, were so bold as to say
to him, Say we not well that thou art a Samaritane, and have a devil, John 8.
There is that have met with words to the like purpose, when they could not deny
the truth of what has been spoken) and yet these true words, spoken by one
whom there has not been the like man upon Earth: And yet they that heard him
speak them, and to whom they were directly spoken unto, and called upon, that
(...) words should sink down into their ears; and yet they did not feel in them
that these true words spoken by a man in whom the fullness of the true spirit
dwelt bodily; these words they did not feel that they reached the witness of
God, the seed of God in them, because they understood not tha^ saying, it was
hid from them, they perceived it not: How fully, how plainly does the Scripture
make out the deceivableness of that Argument! That because when they hear true
words spoken, and they do not feel the witness of God, the seed of God in them,
to be reached by these words; therefore they that speak them, must speak them
by a wrong spirit.

Oh! the subtilty that the subtle Serpents self uses to deceive people in a
form of Godliness, persuading them that in the disobeying God in the looking
upon the tree of Knowledge they shall be as Gods, and so have a liberty to
judge according to the putting forward of their own wills in them. These true
words were spoken by Jesus, a man in whom the fullness of the true spirit dwelt
bodily, and by him called upon that those sayings should sink down into their
ears, which is more than only to give them the hearing of them; and yet for
all this, they did not feel these words thus spoken to reach the witness of
God, the seed of God in them: And it appears that it did not reach the
witness of God, the seed of God in them, by that they understood not the
saying, and it was hid from them, and they perceived it not; which if they (by
these words spoken by Jesus) had felt that, it had reached the witness of God
in them, the seed of God in them, they would have understood, seen, and
perceived something of the meaning of what Christ had said. What think ye? who
dare say that they think or believe that the Disciples the followers of Jesus,
to whom these words were spoken, had done well if they had gone to Jesus and
told him, although they could not deny but that those words that he had spoken
were true, yet they questioned whether or no he spoke them by the true and
right spirit; and the reason why they questioned and did not believe he spoke
them by the right and true spirit, is this, Because when they heard him speak
those words, they did not feel that those words spoken by him did reach the
witness of God, the seed of God in them: Who dare so say, that they think or
believe the Disciples had done well, if they should have gone to Jesus, and
used such an Argument to have persuaded Jesus, that the words he spoke were not
spoken by the true spirit, because they (...) they heard them did not fell the
witness of God, the seed of God reached in them by Jesus true words when he
spoke them.

If such a light Argument as this had been sufficient to have proved, that
Jesus true words had not been spoken by a true and right spirit, because his
words when spoken, did not reach to the witness of God, the seed of God in
those that heard him; how much then of his words would then have been proved to
have been spoken by the wrong spirit? How little, and how seldom do we read in
the Scripture, that those that heard Christ speak true words, and that by the
true spirit, that the hearers of Jesus did feel the witness of God, the seed of
God reached in them, by Jesus true words when he spoke them? And yet you many
times have I heard that used as an Argument, and the only Argument, to prove
that the true words spoken, have not been spoken by the true spirit, but spoken
by the wrong spirit! And why? because those when they heard them they did not
feel the witness of God, the seed of God in them, reached by those true words
spoken; but they have found something in them troubled and burdened when they
heard those words spoken: Jesus Disciples they did not understand the words
spoken by him, they being hid from them, and they perceived them not, and they
feared to ask him of that saying, that is, they feared to ask him the meaning
of that saying: I shall not say they were afraid to ask the meaning of those
true words, that they judged to be spoken by a wrong spirit; but this I can
say, they did not ask the meaning of them: And the Disciples when they feared
to ask him of that saying, then there arose a reasoning among them which of
them should be greatest; they were more minding to be great, and which of them
should be greatest amongst them, than to ask and enquire into the meaning of
what Christ had said when he spoke something of his Death; and yet these were
the Disciples and followers of Jesus: Would it not be well it were not so now
in this knowing Age that we live in? That there were not more reasoning and a
greater care taken to know which shall be greatest, than there is a care taken,
and an enquiry made to understand the words of Jesus spoken concerning his
Death?

Balaam who used Enchantments, and loved the wages of Unrighteousness, I do not
find in all the Scripture that ever he was reproved for the true words that he
spoke, that God put into him to speak: Nor do I find that they were a burden or
a trouble to any that heard him speak them, unless it were to Balak, and those
with him, that would have had Israel cursed; and to them indeed Balaam's words
were a burden and a trouble unto.

The hearing of the prosperity of the outward Israel, the outward seed of God,
which was a Type of the inward seed of God; this was a trouble and a burden to
Balak, and those with him, that would have had the seed of God cursed. And for
persons in this knowing Age to be troubled and burdened with the hearing words
spoken by one that did declare his knowledge of the inward seed of God to
prosper in him, and how he had known it set at liberty from the bondage of the
subtle Serpent, who had deceived him in an outward form of Godliness,
persuading him that in his eating of the forbidden tree, he should be as Gods
in knowledge: that this his declaring of his experience of the prosperity of
the inward seed of God in him, and persuading others to have a care that they
were not deceived by the subtilty of the Serpent, as he had been; that these
words, or words spoken to this purpose or effect, should be a trouble or a
burden to any.

Must not that which was burdened and troubled in them, be the same spirit that
was burdened and troubled in Balak and those with him, when he and they instead
of hearing Balaam to curse the outward seed of God, that he blessed them
altogether? As God the true spirit changes not, but his Works, Actions and
Doings do agree, and do not contradict one another in all Ages and Generations;
so the Serpent, the lying and deceitful spirit, changes not, but his works,
actions, and doings do agree, and do not contradict one another in all Ages and
Generations; and therefore it was the same spirit in those that were offended
at the hearing of the true words spoken, in making known the prosperity of the
inward seed, being set at liberty from the bondage of the subtle Serpent, and
warning of others to have a care of being deceived by the subtle Serpent; I
say, it was the same spirit that was offended in them, that was offended in
Balak, and those with him, that he heard the Words spoken by Balaam, when he
declared the prosperity of the outward seed of God.

But I know an Objection or Argument may be made or raised, although I never
heard it made or raised, yet I know it may be made or raised, and that to this
purpose, That true words may be spoken by a wrong or evil spirit, and such true
words as the Scripture speak, yea the very words of the Scripture, and brought
in for Scripture, and brought in as a proof for what this wrong or evil spirit
have been spoken to before. And ought this wrong spirit or evil spirit be
suffered in going on to speak these true words, although words of Scripture? or
ought he not rather to be rebuked or put to silence, than suffered to go on in
his speaking of such true words? And this Objection thus made, or Argument thus
raised, they may seem to ground or lay the foundation of it upon the Devils
tempting of Jesus ( Matthew. 4.) in these words: The Devil takes him up into the
holy City, and sets him on a pinnacle of the Temple, and says unto him, If
thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down: for it is written, He shall give
his Angels charge concerning thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee up,
lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone. Jesus says to him, It is
written again, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Upon this Scripture, some
may seem to raise such an Objection or Argument as this, or to this purpose:
That the wrong or evil spirit, or the spirit of the Devil in man, may speak
true words, the words of the Scripture, and bring it for proof of what he had
before said; but that spirit is not to be suffered to speak such true words,
but to be rebuked and put to silence, and that from this example of Jesus.

In answer thereunto, I do believe Jesus example is to be followed: And if
there be any that from this Scripture do raise any suchlike Objection or
Argument as I have here mentioned (as I suppose there may and will be some
such) I say, it were well if they would follow Jesus example, and read the
whole temptation as it is written in the Scripture, Then Jesus was led up of
the spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the Devil (read it in the
mystery who can) And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was
afterward an hungered; and when the Tempter came to him, he said, If thou be
the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread; but he answered and
said, It is written, That man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word
that proceeds out of the mouth of God: I pray what rebuke was hear to the
Devil, or putting him to silence, and causing him to keep silence, as Jesus had
power so to do, and could have done it, if it had pleased him.

But Jesus leaves this his answer to the Devil, as an example for us to follow,
that if the Devil tempts us to the doing of any thing that is contrary to Gods
declared will for us to obey him in, thing that was for Jesus to make bread of
stones to satisfy his hunger, and thereby to answer the Devil in his
temptations, to give another manifestation of his being Gods Son, than that the
Father had before given of him, by a voice from Heaven, saying, This is my
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. Jesus he resisted the Devil in his
Temptation, and brings Scripture to prove that it was not lawful for him to
yield to his temptation, to command those stones to be made bread to satisfy
his hunger, and thereby to yield to his temptation by it to manifest himself to
be the Son of God; and therefore he proved it by Scripture, that man's life did
not consist by bread alone, but by every word that proceeded out of the mouth
of God; and this he has left as an example for us to follow: Does the Devil
tempt thee to the doing of any thing that is contrary to Gods declared will for
thee to do, to supply thee in any want that thou art in, if it be either an
inward want of the bread from Heaven, or an outward want of any outward thing
(as Jesus being hungry wanted bread) and thereby have thee to yield to his
Temptation, and give another manifestation or making known that thou art the
Son of God. Then that making known to thee that thou art his Son by the voice
that thou have heard from the Kingdom of Heaven that is in thee; and in that
Kingdom, in that Rule, in that Government, that thou know that God has in
thee, which is his Kingdom in thee, wherein and whereby he has made known in
thee and to thee, that thou art, as thou art, in his Son Jesus in thee, that
saves thee from thy sins, and so in his Son Jesus thou art his beloved Son in
whom he is well pleased. And do thou not so much seek to stop or put to silence
the Devil in thee in his temptations, if it were in thy power so to do (as it
was in Jesus power) as to resist him in his Temptations, and to bring Scripture
to prove that we ought not to yield to his Temptations. Jesus did not stop or
put to silence the Devil, although it was in his power so to do, when he thus
tempted him; and therefore that is an answer to that part of the Objection,
whether by the example of Jesus the wrong or evil spirit is not to be stopped
or put to silence, and not suffered to speak; for Jesus he did not stop and put
to silence the Devil, but suffered him still to speak.

Then the Devil takes him up into the holy City, and sets him on a pinnacle
of the Temple, and says unto him, If thou be the son of God, cast thy self
down; for it is written, He shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, and
in their hands they shall bare thee up, lest at any time thou dash-thy foot
against a stone. Jesus says unto him, It is written again, Thou shall not
tempt the Lord thy God. I pray what rebuke or putting the Devil to silence, or
stopping of his mouth was here by Jesus answer to this Temptation, more than
was in his answer to the former Temptation, although the Devil brings Scripture
as an argument to press Jesus to yield to him in this his Temptation; and that
because Jesus had resisted the Devil in the former temptation, and proved it by
Scripture that he ought not to yield to his Temptation. Now the Devil brings
Scripture as an argument to have him yield to his Temptation, telling him there
was no danger to befall him if he yielded to him in his Temptation, in casting
himself down from that pinnacle, if he were the Son of God he might safely do
it, because it is written, He shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, and
in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot
against a stone. I say, what rebuke did Jesus give the Devil for speaking of
Scripture-words? I find no more rebuke that he gave him when he made use of the
Scripture as an Argument to persuade him to yield to his Temptation, nor no
more stopping of his mouth and putting him to silence, than he did when he made
an answer to the former Temptation when the Devil made use of no Scripture, as
he made use of no Scripture when he tempted him to make bread of stones. And
this is a full answer to the Objection, for Jesus did not rebuke the Devil, nor
stop his mouth, nor put him more to silence when he made use of the Scripture
as an Argument (...) persuade him to yield to his Temptation, than he did
rebuke him, stop his mouth, and put him to silence, when he spoke no Scripture
in tempting of him; no, nor so much neither: for you will find in the next
Temptation, when the Devil makes no use of Scripture, he rebukes him more
sharply, and stops his mouth, and puts him to silence. And therefore there is
no ground from this Scripture to build such an Objection or Argument upon, that
an evil or wrong spirit, or the spirit of the Devil in man, may speak true
words, the words of the Scripture, and bring it in for a proof of what he had
before said; but such a spirit is not to be suffered to speak such words, but
to be rebuked and put to silence, according to Jesus's Example, when Jesus did
no such thing, nor gave no such Example.

But before I pass from this Temptation, I desire the Objecter to follow
Jesus's Example, which is our duty so to do. Does the Devil get thee into the
holy City (the holy City of God in man) and set thee upon a Pinnacle of the
Temple there within thee, read it within, and would have thee cast thy self
down from thence, where he has exalted thee in the holy City upon a Pinnacle of
the Temple of God in thee, thereby to manifest thy self to be the son of God,
thereby to make it known that thou art Gods son, in another way than the way
that God has declared thee to be his son in? read it within. And does he bring
Scripture to thee to prove that thou may safely* do it, thou may tempt God
in making known thy self to be his son in a way he has not commanded, and it
will be no danger to thee to do it? read it within. I could tell my experience
herein, but I know it will be with many in this knowing Age, as it was with the
Eleven, when Jesus had many things to say to them, but they could not bear them
then, John 16. 12. but the time is coming, and at hand, when men shall read
them within, and then it will be born; when true words may by all be spoken,
and will be born without being a burden o^ trouble to any of the Hearers that
obey the Light in them, and make it their Guide to guide them into all Truth:
Then it will be known to be a duty to follow Jesus's Example, to resist the
Temptation, how highly soever he has exalted thee and lifted thee up in his
Temptation; as he did Jesus in bringing him into the holy City, and setting him
upon a Pinnacle of the Temple, and then and there would have him to manifest
himself to be the son of God, and brings Scripture to prove the lawfulness
thereof. Which I know are all Figures, and are to be read and known within.

And if thou find the Devil thus to tempt thee, as some have done, follow
Jesus's Example; do not so much seek to stop the mouth of the temptation, as to
stand fast in thy obedience in keeping with Jesus in the low and meek Spirit,
and bring Scripture to contradict the Temptation, as Jesus did: He tells the
Devil, It is written again, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. The Devil
brought Scripture to prove, that if he were the son of God, that God had given
his Angels charge to keep him from harm. Jesus answered the Devil, It is
written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Which as no Scripture is of
private interpretation, so is not this. And in these few words Jesus, according
to our Proverb, Kill two Birds with one stone, he tells the Devil, that it is
not his duty to tempt him as he is his Lord and God; nor was it his duty, as he
was man, and the son of God, to tempt the Father in casting himself down from
thence, because the Father had so great a love for him, as to give his Angels
charge concerning him to keep him from harm. And when this Example of Jesus is
followed in resisting of the Devil in his Temptations, the Cross will be taken
up to that Will that would run out to judge, to rebuke, to stop the mouth, and
to make them keep silence that are speaking of true words: for Jesus did not so
rebuke the Devil for speaking true words, as to stop his mouth, or make him
keep silence.

Because that again, after this, the devil takes him up into an exceeding high
mountain, and shows him all the kingdoms of the world* and the glory of them:
And says, All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me. Then said Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, Satan: for it is written,
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Then the
devil leaves him. I pray hear, the Devil brings no Scripture, nor speaks
nothing to him whereby he would have him manifest himself to be the son of God
in yielding to him in his Temptations. In this Temptation he only got him up
into an exceeding high Mountain, and showed him all the Kingdoms of the World,
and the glory of them; and promises to give him all them, if he would fall down
and worship him. And for this setting of him upon an high Mountain, which I
know is to be read within; and then showing of him all the Kingdoms of the
World, which is to be read within; and then telling him, All these will I give
thee, if thou will fall down and worship me, which also may be read within. All
of them I know to be Figures.

And for this Temptation Jesus rebukes him more sharper, than for the other
two; and if I may use such an expression, he did more stop his mouth and put
him to silence, than he did in the other two Temptations: First, he bids him
get him hence Satan; he did not before command the Devil to depart from him,
nor did he call him Satan; when in the other two Temptations he would have had
him answered his Temptations by making himself known to be the son of God, in
ways that God had not required of him to manifest himself to be his son in; and
for the last of the two, he brings Scripture to prove that he might do it with
his own safety: and yet in neither of those two Temptations he did not command
him to depart from him, nor call him Satan. But now when he had taken him up
into an exceeding high Mountain, and showed him all the Kingdoms of the World,
and the glory of them; now to tempt him to have such a love to the World, to
the enjoyments thereof, and the glory of it, as for the sake thereof to fall
down and worship him. This caused Jesus to command the Devil to depart from
him, and to call him Satan, Tempter, and bring Scripture for his denying to
yield to the Temptation: It is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God,
and him only shall thou serve. Then the devil leaves him. And if in any of
the Devils Temptations Jesus may be said to stop the mouth of the Devil, and
cause him to keep silence, it was in this, when he tempts him to have a love to
the World, and such a love to the World and the glory of it, as for the
enjoyment of it, he should fall down and worship him. And Jesus did not only
resist the Devil in his Temptation, and rebuke him, commanding him to depart
from him, and kept him for that time for speaking any more to him; but he
brings Scripture to prove the unlawfulness of the yielding to the Temptation:
It is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve. This Scripture may also have two interpretations: first, that it was the
duty of the Devil to worship Jesus as his Lord and God, and not Jesus to
worship the Devil; and then, as Jesus was man, and the son of God, so it was
not his duty to fall down to the Devil and worship him, but to worship the
Father as his Lord and God.

And it were well if all the Objecters, and all others, would follow this
Example of Jesus, that when the Devil gets them up unto the exceeding high
Mountain of the earthy part in them, of that which has a love to the world
within them, and there show them all the Kingdoms of the World, and the glory
of them, and promise to give them all, to fall down and worship him; that thus
they resist the Devil, and command him from them, and as much as in them lies,
not suffer him to speak of such a thing to them, as to persuade them to have
such a love to the World, and the glory thereof, (wherein all things of the
world within man, which is man's self, man's Will, and all things without man,
that is, all outward Creatures, is contained and comprehended) as for it to
fall down and worship the Devil; and for the love of the World, and the glory
thereof, to serve and obey the Devil: No, no, answer with Jesus, Get thee
hence, Satan; get thee hence, Tempter: It is written, Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. And if I yield to thy Temptations
to love the World, and the glory of it, and so in that my love to the World, or
to any part of it, either within me or without me, I fall down and worship
thee; then I cannot worship my Lord and my God only, but I shall be a
Worshipper and a Server of thee: No, no, this must not be.

In and under these three Temptations, I believe that all the Temptations that
man meets withal, may be contained or comprehended; as all Prayers are
contained or comprehended in that Prayer Jesus taught his Disciples to pray.
And see Jesus in all these Temptations makes use of the Scriptures in his
resisting of the Devil in his Temptations; and thereby, as man, to show the
lawfulness and the usefulness that was in his making use of the Scriptures to
resist the Devil in his Temptations. And I believe it is our duty to follow
Jesus's Example therein. That it is our duty by the Scriptures to prove and try
our works, actions, and doings, whether they be done by the Spirit of Jesus in
us, that resisted the Devil in that outward body of Jesus, Yea or Nay: And if
our works, actions, and doings cannot be proved by the Scripture to be
according to the declared Will of God that he has made known to man, that is,
his Will that man should obey him in; as Jesus in that outward body, did by the
Scriptures prove, that his works, actions, and doings were according to Gods
declared Will in the Scriptures that he should do: and so he made use of the
Scriptures not only in that which is mentioned of his resisting of the Devil
in his Temptations, but in his other works, actions, and doings he makes use of
the Scriptures to prove that what he did in that body, was according to Gods
declared Will that he should do in that body, as it was written of him in the
Scriptures. And when the Apostle speaks of him to be the Body prepared by God
to do Gods will, which pleased God better than outward Sacrifice and Offerings,
he says of him, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God, as it is written of me in
the volume of the book. There is a lo, a behold put to it, that is, it is to be
taken notice of that Jesus came to do in that body the will of God the Father,
as it was Gods declared will written in the Scriptures that he should do, Heb.
10. 5, 6, 7.

I do believe, and dare be bold to say it, that they are not the works,
actions, and doings of the same Spirit of Jesus in man, that was in that
outward man Jesus, which man does and refuses to bring to the Scriptures to
prove that they are done according to Gods declared will written in the
Scriptures, that man is to do in obedience to him* for Jesus did not only make
use of the Scriptures to resist the Devil in his Temptations, but thereby to
show that what he did in resisting of the Devil, was according to Gods declared
will written in the Scriptures; as he did in many other of his particular works
and actions, he made use of the Scripture to prove by the Scripture, that it
was according to Gods declared will written in the Scriptures that he should
do: And therefore I believe that I may safely conclude, that those works,
actions, and doings that are done by any that cannot be proved by the
Scriptures to be Gods declared will for man to do in obedience to him, that
they are not wrought, acted, and done by the same Spirit of Jesus in them, that
wrought, acted, and did those things that God in the Scripture had declared to
be his will to be done in that body. And I think I do them no wrong, to judge
that those works, actions, and doings that is not done according to what they
can prove by Scripture to be done according to Gods declared will therein
written; that such works, actions, and doings, they are not the works, actions,
or doings of Jesus in them, as he is in them to save them from sin; but they
are the works, actions, and doings of a wrong spirit or will in them, which
would not have that done in those bodies of theirs, that was and is Gods
declared will written in the Scriptures that they should do and obey God in.

But perhaps some may object and speak to this purpose: We have the Light in
us, and that is the true Light that is in us, and it is the same true Light
that is the Word of God it self, and it is that which gave forth the
Scriptures; and what would thou have us bring this Light in us to the
Scriptures to be judged by them? Or would thou have us bring our works and
actions done in us by this Light, to the Scriptures to be judged? Or will thou
have us bring our obedience done by this Light in us, to be proved by the
Scriptures, whether or no they be such things as God requires of us to be done?
What would thou have us to bring the Light to be tried by the Scriptures,
that gave forth the Scriptures? What, to try the Creator by the Creature, the
Maker by the thing made? What, would thou have the Spirit tried by the dead
Letter?

To this I answer, The Light, the true Light is one and the same, it never
alters nor changes, and it is one and the same in all men, as it is the true
Light that lights every man that comes into the World; and it is the same in
those that have no Scriptures, in those that have nothing outwardly written
that was given forth by the holy men that spoke as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost: It is the same true Light in those that have no Scriptures, as it is in
those that have the Scriptures. And if that be the Argument, that because we
have the Light in us that gave forth the Scriptures, therefore we need not make
use of the Scriptures, or not so much use of them as to bring our works,
actions, and doings to them to be tried by them, to see if they be agreeable to
the works, actions, or doings done by the holy men of old, by that spirit in
them that gave forth the Scriptures; or agreeable to what the holy men of old
gave forth in the Scriptures to be Gods will for man to do. I ask them that
make this for an Objection, this Question, Whether or no Jesus had not, as man,
as much of this Light in him as thou have? And yet he made use of the
Scriptures to prove that what he did, was agreeable to Gods declared will
written in the Scriptures, that he as a son ought to do in obedience to the
Father. It is true, that those that have not the Scriptures, they cannot bring
their works to the Scriptures to try them whether or no their works are
agreeable to those works done by the holy men of old, or agreeable to that
which the holy men of old gave forth in the Scriptures to be Gods will that man
should obey him in. These not having the Law written without them, they cannot
bring their works to a written Law without them, to be tried by that; but they
having only the Law written within them, in their hearts they bring their
works to that Law to be tried by that written Law in their hearts, Romans 2. 14,
15.

But for others that have the Law and the Prophets, and the Writings of
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, and of the Apostles, without them; for them that
have the Scriptures to talk of, bringing the Light to be tried by the
Scriptures, that is, to bring the spirit the Life that gave forth the
Scriptures, to be tried by the dead Letter: Is not this a piece of the Serpents
subtle deceit, to talk after this manner? But for those that have the
Scriptures for them to bring their works, actions, and doings of those that own
that they have the true Light in them, and walk in obedience to that Light in
them; for them to bring this obedience of theirs that they say is done by the
true Light, (and not to bring the true Light it self) to prove that by
Scripture, (that is, to prove their obedience to the Light by the Scripture,
and not to prove the true Light by the Scripture) whether or no their obedience
be according to the obedience wrought in the holy men of old, by the same
spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, by the true Light, that spirit of God in
them that gave forth the Scriptures; wherein God has made known to man what is
his will that man should do, and what is his will that man should not do. This
is that which we that have the Scriptures, should bring to the Scriptures to
prove the truth of; not to prove the truth of the Light, whether that be true
or no, but to prove the truth of our obedience to the Light in our works,
actions, and doings, to prove whether they be wrought in us by the true Light
the spirit of God in us, or whether they be wrought in us by the subtilty of
the Serpent in us: for there is in man but two Natures whereby and from whence
all our works, actions, and doings come and proceed, that is, the seed of the
woman, and the Serpent and his seed; and whatsoever is not done in us by the
seed of the woman in us, by Jesus the true Light in us, is done in us by the
Serpent and his seed in us. And this is that we are to bring to the Scriptures
to be proved and tried by, whether or no our works, doings, or actions that be
done in us, be done in us by the seed of the woman, or by the Serpent and his
seed; and for that they are true Rules for us to know by, that is, true Rules
for us to know by which Nature in us our works, actions, or doings are wrought
in us. And is not that but a piece of the subtle Serpents deceit, to talk of
such a thing as of bringing the Light in them to the Scriptures, to be tried by
them whether it is the true Light or no? That is no other but to bring the
spirit to be tried by the Letter, which cannot be. And by their so talking of
bringing the Light, the spirit to be tried by the letter of the Scriptures, do
they not thereby put a slight or undervaluing of the true Light or spirit that
gave forth the Scriptures? Or are they not such who do so talk, that seek by
their so talking to make the Scriptures of little or no use, but only as to
what things they please, and when they please, and where they please?

As if the Light, the true Light and spirit of God that gave forth the
Scriptures by the holy men of God, was one thing then in them, and did one
thing then in them, in making known what was Gods declared will for man to do
in obedience to him, and that it is another thing now in man, in making known
another thing now to be the will of God that man should do, and that is
contrary to what was Gods will declared in the Scriptures. I know that as to an
outward form of Worship, God did make known one thing to be his mind and will
to the Prophets, and another thing to the Apostles; but however, here was no
contradiction; that outward form of Worship in the time of the Law and the
Prophets, did not contradict that outward form of Worship that was in the
Apostles time; nor did that outward form in the Apostles time, contradict that
outward form of Worship that was in the time of the Law and the Prophets. The
one was but a Type and Figure of the other, and what was in the one was in the
other, as God was in them both worshipped as a spirit; and the Worship that
then was and now is performed, as God then did and now does look for and accept
of, is to worship him in spirit and in truth: and so in that there was no
contradiction. There was not one thing that was Gods will for man to obey him
in the days of the Prophets, and another thing in the days of the Apostles that
was to be done in man, and that in obedience to God; which was contrary to that
which was Gods revealed will to be done in the days of the Prophets, that they
were to obey God in: No, there was no such contradiction. And that now there is
another thing wherein God is to be obeyed in, (in these days of Gods making the
Light to shine more in the inward part of man than formerly) and this other
thing that God is now to be obeyed in, as some would have it, that are not
willing to bring their works; deeds, or actions to the Scriptures to be tried
by them, whether or no they be agreeable to the works, deeds or actions of the
holy men of old, by whom God by the spirit by the true light gave forth the
Scriptures, and in them gave forth what was his will that man should do in
obedience to him. This other thing that some pretends by the light in them,
that they are now to obey God in, is contrary and not agreeable to Gods
declared will in the Scriptures; and so they make the unchangeable God, to be
like changeable men, to have one thing to be his will for man to obey him in at
one time, and another thing quite contrary to that to be his will for man to
obey him in at another time.

Jesus the true light, the Word of God, by whose spirit the holy men of old
spoke, as they were moved in giving forth the Scriptures, both Prophets and
Apostles; it was the command of this Jesus, this true light, this spirit that
gave forth the Scriptures, in that outward body that he took in the nature of
man, to search the Scriptures, John 5. 39. And he gives the reason why it is
that he commands them to search the Scriptures, it was because they are they
that testify of him, they are they that bear witness, they are they that
testify, that bear witness what he is; they are they that testify, which
witness what was the Fathers will that as man he was to do; they are they that
testify, that bear witness that as he was man, he came not to do his own will,
but the will of the Father that sent him. They are they that testify, that
bear witness what Jesus the true light, the Word of God in man is: And they are
they that testify, that bear witness what this true light is in every man, and
what this true light Jesus does in every man. They are they, that is, the
Scriptures are they that testify, that bear witness how this true light Jesus
by his spirit it teaches, it guides, it leads man into the doing of all
that is of the Truth, by that spirit, that is, of his sending forth according
to his promise, that he would send the spirit of truth, and when he is come he
shall guide them into all truth; for he shall not speak of himself, but
whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak, for he shall receive of mine,
and show it to you, John 16: 13, 14. How do they disobey Jesus Command, that
refuse to bring their works, actions, and doings to the Scriptures to be tried
by them, whether or no they are the works, actions, and doings of Jesus the
true light in them, and that under a pretense because Jesus the true light is
in them, and therefore it is that they need not or ought not to do it! And how
willingly are they to be deceived, in thinking what is done in them, and by
them, is done in and by Jesus the true light in them! And yet will not bring it
to that which Jesus says, testifies, which bear witness to what is the works
of Jesus in them!

And therefore there is great reason why the Scriptures are to be searched, to
be sought after, searched and sought into, to find out what it is that they
testify, what it is that they bear witness of Jesus to be, as he is the true
Light, the Word of God, the Savior of man. As he sends his spirit of Truth
into man to make known to man what that spirit receives from him, and thereby
to guide man into all Truth; and whatever it is in man that pretends to be the
work, actions, or doings of the Light of Jesus in them, and is not agreeable to
the testimony, the witness that the Scripture bears of Jesus the true Light,
and of his works, actions, or doings in man. And if that be true that Jesus
said (as I believe none dare deny the truth of it) that the Scriptures testify
of him, then those works, actions, or doings that they do not testify to be
the works of Jesus in man, as he is the true Light, and sends his spirit to
guide them into all Truth, may very well be looked upon and judged to be the
work of Satan, the subtle Serpent in man, transforming himself into the
likeness of an Angel of Light; which Satan did in the Apostles time upon the
like occasion, read 2 Corinthians. 11. 13, 14, 15. For such are false Apostles,
deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ. And no
marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light. Therefore it
is no great thing, if his ministers also be transformed as the ministers of
righteousness, but let them be so, yet their end shall be according to their
works.

The Apostle speaking of Christ, and how it is our duty to follow Christ's
Example, he brings Scripture to prove the truth of what he said, Romans 15. 1, 2,
3, 4. We therefore that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak,
and not to please our selves. Let every one of us please his neighbor for his
good to his edification. For even Christ pleased not himself, but as it is
written, The reproaches of them that reproached thee, fell on me. For
whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope. The Apostle
here sets down the duty of those that are strong (and may I not say, of those
that would be thought or do think themselves stronger than others?) and that is
not to please themselves, to satisfy and content themselves in that they are
stronger than others, and so exalt themselves over and above those that are
weak; but their duty is to bear the infirmities of the weak, and thereby to
please his neighbor for that is good to edification. And it this their so
doing that was to follow the example of Christ who pleased not himself, and
that he proves by Scripture, that it was the duty of the strong to follow
Christ's example, and that Christ did not please himself, because it is written,
The reproaches of them that reproached thee fell upon me. And then he tells
them, That what was written in the Scripture aforetime, was written for them to
learn. I pray, what is it that we should learn by the Scripture, if we are not
to learn thereby to follow Christ's example, in proving our works; actions, or
doings by the Scriptures? Was it not Christ's practice to make use of the
Scriptures to prove, that what he did was according to Gods declared will made
known by the Prophets? and was it not the practice of the Apostle? see for one
place the aforementioned Scripture, where the Apostle does not only bring
Scripture to prove what was his and the Saints duty for them to do, but he also
brings Scripture to prove that Christ did the same things that was written of
him in the Scriptures that he should do; and also that it was and is the duty
of those that are Christ's Disciples to follow him in what he therein did, which
was according to Gods declared will in the Scriptures that he should do: And
many other places of Scripture there be that Christ and his Apostles made use
of the Scriptures to prove, that what they did was agreeable to the will of
God, before declared by the holy men of God.

And I hope none will deny it in words, and therefore I shall bring no more
Scripture to prove that it was the practice of Christ, and followed by the
Apostles; and yet these were such as had the same true light in ehem that gave
forth the Scriptures: And do any men think themselves better than Christ and
the Apostles, and that because the same true light that is in them that was in
Christ and the Apostles, and that therefore they ought not to bring their
works, actions, and doings to the Scriptures to be tried by them, to see
whether they be agreeable to the works, actions, or doings of the holy men of
old, done in them by that spirit that gave forth the Scriptures; or whether
they be agreeable to the will of God declared in the Scriptures by those holy
men of old, that was and is Gods will for us to obey him in. The Apostle said,
Whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, (What?
were they written only for the learning of the Apostles, and those in that
day? And what, were they not written for our learning now in this day of the
shining forth of the light amongst us? And to the same end that we through
patience and the comfort of the Scriptures might have hope: And have we not
comfort and hope by bringing our works* actions, and doings to the Scriptures,
to try them by the Scriptures? I say, to try our works, actions, or doings by
the Scriptures?

I do not say to try the true light that is in us by the Scriptures, that is a
falsity and deceit to speak after that manner; but to try our works, actions,
and doings by the Scriptures, to see how agreeing they are to the works,
actions, and doings of the holy men of God in those things that the Scripture
make mention of, that they were carried forth by the spirit of God, the true
light in them to do; and also to try our works, actions, and doings by those
things written in the Scripture, that the holy men gave forth by the spirit of
God in them, the true light, that is, the duty for man to do, according to the
declared will of God. Now as we bring our works, actions, or doings to this
Touchstone to be tried by it, and find that our works, actions, or doings, are
agreeable to what the holy men of old did in obedience to God; and as they in
obedience to God declared what was Gods will that man should obey him in: I
say, as men thus bring their works, actions, or doings to the holy Scripture to
be tried by it, whether they are agreeable to the works, actions or doings that
God by his spirit, the true light, wrought in the holy men of old that gave
forth the Scriptures; or agreeable to what God by the spirit of the true light
gave in command to the holy men of old, that man ought to do in obedience to
God.

And when they have brought their works, actions, or doings to the Scriptures
thus to be tried, and find them answerable and agreeing to the works, actions,
or doings wrought by Gods spirit, the true light in the holy men of old, or
answerable and agreeing to the works, actions, or doings given forth from God
by the holy men of old for man to obey God in. As they thus find their works,
actions or doings to be answerable and agreeing to and with the Scriptures, so
are the Scriptures a comfort and hope to them; that as the holy men of God in
old time did enjoy the love and favor of God in this life, and more in the
life to come, as is made known in the Scriptures, so if we with patience
continue in our obedience (by the help and assistance of the true light in us)
to God, according to Gods declared will in the Scriptures, God may and will do
the like by us and for us, as he did for the holy men of old: And this Comfort
and Hope I have and do now find in the Scriptures, for some years before I
heard of the name of a Quaker, I by experience had found that the Letter of the
Scripture killed, and from that death* that I was made serviceable of that I
got by trusting in that knowledge that I had by the Letter of the Scriptures,
thinking by that knowledge to have eternal life, it made me afraid to read the
Scriptures for above a year, fearing thereby I should be a means to hinder my
self of that life that was to be had in and by the spirit that gave forth the
Scriptures; and I did declare that the Scriptures were not the Word of God, but
that was the Word of God by which all things were made; but the Scriptures as
they were given forth by the spirit of God, as he moved the holy men to speak*
them, so they were the words spoken by God.

And now I do give that honor to the Scriptures that Paul writ of, 2 Timothy 3.
15, 16, 17. And from a child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are
able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith, which is in Christ Jesus.
All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for reproof,
for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works; here is the right use that is
to be made of the Scriptures; they are able to make wise unto salvation; but it
must be through that faith that is in Christ Jesus, it must be by believing
that there is a power in Christ Jesus the true light to save us; and in that
belief to yield an obedience to God, in what God has made known to us to be
his will to obey him in. In this faith, manifested by obedience, the Scriptures
are able to make wise unto salvation: and then as they are given by inspiration
of God, they are profitable for Doctrine, whatever is taught ought to be
agreeable to the Scripture, and the Scriptures are profitable for reproof, all
reproof ought to be agreeable to ^^e Scriptures; and they are profitable for
correction, all correction ought to be agreeable to the Scriptures; and they
are profitable for instruction in righteousness, all instruction in
righteousness is agreeable to the Scripture, that by this means the man of God
may be perfect thoroughly furnished unto good works. How is the man of God to be
made perfect thoroughly furnished unto good works? that is, how is the man of
God to know perfectly and thoroughly what are those good works that God requires
of him to do? Is it not by the knowing of them, as God has been pleased to
make known what is his revealed will for man to obey him in, as they are
written in the Scriptures? I speak this as Paul did of those that have the
Scriptures, as Timothy had, and not of those that have not the Scriptures, who
by the true Light, the power of them Divine Nature in them, do those things
that God has written in his Law within them; by which Law* written in them, as
they yield an obedience to it, God perfectly and thoroughly furnishes the unto
good works, according to his revealed will written within them.

This is to make the right use of the Scriptures, and not to Idolize them on
the one hand, as if eternal life was to be had in them, as did the Jews, and as
once I did; nor to undervalue them on the other hand, as some do, who because
the true Light is in them (and the same true light is in all men) and therefore
they undervalue the Scriptures, because that is in them that gave forth the
Scriptures. And they are all undervaluers of the Scriptures, who refuse to
bring their works, actions, or doings to the Scriptures, to try them by the
Scriptures whether those works, actions, or doings of them, be the works,
actions, or doings of Jesus the true Light in them. Jesus and the Apostles
proved their works, actions, or doings by the Scriptures, that they were done
by the true Light in them; that is, that they were done as God had declared to
be his will that they should do, as it is written in the Scriptures, which the
holy men spoke as they were moved by the true light in them: And if any ones
works, actions, or doings be the work of the true Light Jesus in them, then
they are agreeable and like the works, actions of the holy men who gave forth
the Scripture, as those holy men wrought, acted, or did by the working, acting,
or doing by the same spirit in them that gave forth the Scripture, or agreeable
and like the works, actions, or doings that the holy men by the spirit, the
true Light in them, declared to be Gods mind and will for man to do. And those
works, actions, or doings, let them be done by whom they will* although by such
as think themselves equal with the Apostles* whose works, actions, and doings
are not answerable and agreeing to what the holy men of old was moved to write
to be Gods will that man should obey him in, written in the Scriptures; I say,
that if their works, actions, and doings be not answerable and agreeing to what
is written in the Scriptures, that is Gods declared mind and will for them to
do, they may talk of what light they please; that light in them (if they will
have it so called) that leads them forth in the doing of any thing that is
contrary, and not answerable and agreeing to Gods declared will written in the
Scriptures, it is not the true light; but if it may be called a light, it is
that knowing light, or the light of knowledge, that Satan himself is
transformed into; and it is no great thing if his Ministers or servants work,
act or do by that light, as I my self have done, and have therein been deceived
by the subtle Serpents self in me; I have known much of the subtle Serpents
selfs Temptations, how he has tempted me in the doing of what God has
forbidden me to do, that thereby I should be in knowledge as Gods, knowing good
and evil.

It was Gods Command to Isaiah (chap. 8.) to bind up the Testimony and seal the
Law among his Disciples, and that people should seek to their God, to the Law
and to the Testimony: If they speak not according to this Word, it is because
there is no light in them. In Isaiah's days, when the Scriptures were less than
they are now, yet they were then to be bound up and sealed amongst Gods
Disciples, and people were then to seek to their God, to the Law and to the
Testimony; and if they did not then speak according to this Word of the Law and
Testimony then written in the Scriptures, it was because there was no light in
them; that is to say, they did not speak according to the movings of the true
light in them, for man cannot shut or keep out the true light from being in
him: The true light Jesus is and will be in man, teaching him what is Gods will
for him to do, and so enabling of him to do Gods will, if he will believe in
the Name, in the Power of this Jesus the true Light, that there is a power in
this light to save from sin, if he will yield an obedience to it, in leaving
and forsaking the doing of that which this light in him tells him God has
forbidden him to do; and if man will not yield obedience to this true light the
spirit of God in him, and thereby come to be saved from sin, then this true
light the Spirit of God will remain and abide in him, judging and condemning of
him for his disobedience to the Command of God; and they cannot keep it out of
them, but it will be in them judging and condemning of them for their
disobedience: And so the true light may be said to be in those that speak not
according to the Law and the Testimony of the Scriptures.

But the true light is not in them, so as that they are brought into the
obedience of the light, and so it may be said not to be in them. The light of
the body is the eye, if therefore thine eye be single, the whole body is full
of light; but if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness.
If therefore the light that is in thee, be darkness, how great is that
darkness? Mat. 6. 22, 23. While the eye of the understanding and knowing part
in man is single, that is, alone and only for God, and desire nothing in that
understanding and knowledge, but Gods will to be done in his obeying God
according to that understanding and knowledge that they have of God, then the
whole body is full of light, full of obedience; but if the eye be evil, if in
the understanding and knowledge we have of God, we desire more to please,
satisfy, and content our selves in that we know what is Gods declared will
that we should do, then to yield an obedience to God in what we know, this
makes the eye of the understanding and knowing part in man evil, and then the
whole body shall be full of darkness, full of disobedience. If therefore the
light that is in us be darkness, if therefore we have an understanding and
knowledge of what is Gods will that we should do, and we obey not God according
to what we know of God, how great is that darkness? how great is that
disobedience? And therefore what great need is there for man to know that he
has denied himself, denied all that is of self, and taken up his Cross to his
own will: Without the doing thereof, there is no following of Jesus, no being a
Disciple of Jesus, no follower, no learner of obedience to that Jesus, to that
true Light in us, that is there in us to save us from sin, without the denying
of our selves, and taking up the Cross to selfwill.

And if it be objected, Can man deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow
Jesus?

I answer, What man may do of himself, in seeking, in laboring to deny
himself, and take up his Cross and to follow Jesus, that is only self, and is
no denial of self, nor taking up of any Cross to self: I know by experience,
that the subtle Serpent self in man is putting man upon that, to think that of
himself he can deny himself, and follow Jesus. I read in the Scripture, that
the kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, that a woman took and hid in three
measures of meal, until the whole was leavened, Mat. 13. 33. I pray mark the
words of the Scripture; it is not, that the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto
Leaven that a man took and hid in three measures of meal, although baking was
an Employment used by men many years before Christ spoke this Parable, we read
of it to be used by men in the time that Joseph the son of Jacob was in Egypt;
but it is like unto Leaven which a woman took and hid in three measures of
meal. When I began to write, and did write that the woman in the mystery is
man's being drawn by the spirit, or the leadings or goings forth of man by the
spirit of Jesus in man, I then had not the least thoughts of this Parable; but
this is the woman that takes the Leaven, and not man. Man of himself he cannot
take the Leaven that works the change in him; no, man cannot do it: it is the
work of Jesus in man drawing him forth by his spirit to take the Leaven. The
Leaven, it is the love of God, the manifestations, the making known of Gods
love to man; and there in man to hide it, as the outward woman hid the outward
Leaven in the three measures of meal, until the whole be changed, until the
whole be leavened, until the whole be made like the Leaven. So the woman in
man, that is, man's being drawn, led, or carried out by the working of the
spirit of Jesus in him, she took, that is, the woman, the goings forth of the
spirit of Jesus in man, it is that which takes in the love of God to man, and
hides it in man, in the three measures of meal, until the whole be leavened,
until the whole be changed and made like the Leaven, like the love of God. As
the Apostle said, We love him, because he first loved us; and so the love of
God being taken in and hid in man, it works that change in man as to make man
love God again.

Self in man, according to what I know and understand of it in me, and so, and
not otherwise, I am to speak and declare of it. Self is made up of these three
parts or properties: The understanding or knowing part in man, as it is in
union with the subtle Serpent: The desire, love, and affectionated part in
man, as it is let out after the Creation: And the Will in man, as separated
from the Will of God. These three joined and united together, as the one is not
without the other, they are unseparable. They make what to my understanding is
self in man, I having first found that my falling upon the stone of the
apprehensions of Gods Justice and Judgments for sin, it had broken me to
pieces, had troubled, had disquietted me, had caused me to mourn for my sins,
and to repent of them, and to pray against them; I now have found the stone of
Gods Justice and Judgment to fall upon all these three parts or properties of
self in me, and grinding them to pieces. I have known so much of Gods Justice
and Judgments to fall upon me for that understanding and knowledge, that by the
Serpents subtilty I had gained in reading the Scriptures and other books, and
by-words that I had heard spoken by men and in discourse with men, that I was
so much broken a pieces under the manifestations and makings known to me of
Gods Justice, for my knowing more of the Will of God than I yielded obedience
to what I knew, that it made me afraid to read, afraid to speak. And then was
it made known to me that the letter of the Scripture killed, because in that
knowledge that I had, I thought to have eternal life: And then it was made
known to me that my trusting in that knowledge, hindered me of eternal life:
And then was it made known to me that the letter of the Scriptures were not the
Word of God, nor the power of God to salvation: And then was it made known to
me the desire, love, and affection that I had after the Creation, the
Creatures, and especially the love to my self, in that what I did in obedience
to God, was done for a selfend that the Justice and Judgments of God might not
fall upon me for my sins, more than it was for any love I had to God: And then
was it made known to me that it was my own will that put me upon the doing of
all that I did in obedience to God, and in the going from one outward form of
Worship to another, as I apprehended which was best, and that God might be best
pleased in. And all this was done for a self-end to escape that punishment that
I apprehended was due to me for my sins.

And so much was the manifestations and making known of Gods Wrath and Justice
to me for my sins; and not so much for my outward sins, that men in the world
take notice of to be sin and evil, for so all my life I had lived as blameless
as most had done: for now I do know that it was the true Light Christ Jesus,
that was in me judging and condemning me for such outward sins, from my being a
very Child; and I was kept from such sins, as being afraid of Gods Justice*
that was made known to me to be due for such sins; and yet not so kept, but
that the subtle Serpent sometimes prevailed over me. And then when I had
sinned, how did I repent, and mourn, and humble my self, and pray to God for
forgiveness, and set upon religious duties, as I was then taught, to gain the
love and favor of God! until at last these Prayers, these Mournings, these
Repentings, these Fastings, these Religious Perf^^mances, became the greatest
sins in me; and I apprehended Gods Justice and Judgments to be most due to me
for these religious sins, as I may so call them, more than I did for any
outward profane sins: for God had made it known to me, that it was the Serpent
self in me that put me upon the gaining of understanding and knowledge, to know
what was Gods will that man should do, thereby to be able to discourse of it
amongst men, and to be counted some body; and also by that knowledge I thought
to have eternal life: And God made it known to me that my love was more to my
self in those things that I did in obedience to him, than it was from any true
love that I had to God; for if I could have escaped Gods Justice for sin, I
should have loved and delighted more in sinning than in obeying God: And God
made it known to me, that it was my own will, and that for ends that I had of
my own, that I did all that I did in gaining and desiring to gain knowledge of
him and of his will. And so much was I then grownd in pieces by the stone of
the manifestations, and making known of Gods Justice and Judgment d^e to me for
my religious sins, as I may so call them, as that I was afraid to read, and I
dare not pray to God, but sometimes would fall down upon my knees and sigh and
grown, but dare not speak a word, nor dare not speak and discourse of things
concerning God, as formerly I had done, nor keep no company with those that
were thought to be godly persons, as before I had done, nor went to no outward
form of Worship, but sighed and mourned to my self, but made no outward show of
it, for fear I should play the Hypocrite.

And while I was in this state and condition, what was it that I would not have
given for one glympse or little beam of the making known of Gods love to me!
which when I was worshipping and serving God, as I thought I was, when in the
Serpents subtilty, in the understanding and knowledge that he had put me upon
to gain, and in the obedience that he had put me upon to do, after my Prayers,
Mournings, and Repentings, and humbling of my self for my sins, and my Promises
and Vows made to God to do so no more; then could I easily apprehend God to be
a merciful God, forgiving sins and trespasses, and that God had a love to me:
But now when I saw that in all these religious duties, as I then called them, I
found that to be true which often in words I had spoken, That all our
Righteousness was but as filthy rag^; and as a monstrous Garment; and that we
sinned in the best of our duties and performances. When I found this to be true
indeed, which I had so often in formality spoken, then there remained in me
nothing but a fear of Gods Justice and Judgments to follow me for my sin, and
especially for my religious sins, for my mocking God in a seeming outward
obedience to him, in doing the outward things that I knew was his will for me
to do; but my heart was not upright to God, my love was to my sin; but for fear
of his Justice, I dare not commit the sin: and so it was self-will, self-love
in me that carried me out in the doing all that I did in obedience to God. And
for these self-actions in me, I most feared Gods Justice to fall upon me, and
that made me afraid to do or perform any of those religious duties and
performances, as I then called them. And thus by the grinding-stone of Gods
Justice, was self in me, in its three parts or properties, that is, in the
understanding and knowing part, in the desire, love and affection, and in the
will; which I in the Parable compare to the three measures of Meal, being thus
grownd and made fit for the Leaven of Gods love, to be taken in by the woman in
me. The drawings or goings forth of the spirit of Jesus in me to save me from
sin, which now I know was all of his working and preparing, although I did not
then understand it to be the work of Jesus in me; but now I know that it was
the work of Jesus in me, to cause me to deny my self, to deny my self in that
understanding and wisdom that the Serpent put me upon to learn, to deny my self
in my love and desire to the Creation, and especially to that of self in me,
and to deny my self in my own will, and especially in the doing of what then I
called religious works or Worship done to God.

And while I lay thus grownd apieces, I saw nothing in my self to recommend me
to God, nor saw nothing in my self why God should bestow any love upon me; nor
could I apprehend that there was any love in me to God, as once I could and did
apprehend that there was love in me to God, when I was worshipping him in the
Serpents wisdom, in my own will: Then I thought there was a love in me to God,
and would say so too; and would have taken it very ill, if any one should have
told me that I did not love God. And while I was in this sad and deplorable
estate, without apprehending any love in me to God, or any love in God to me.
Now I do know that this was the work of Jesus the true Light in me, working in
me by his spirit, to save me from sin; and that not only from the outward
actions of sin, but to save me from the love of sin. And when he had thus
prepared in me, if I may so call them, his three measures of Meal, the
Understanding and Knowing part in me, the Desire and Love in me, and the Will
in me, and made them fit for the woman, the drawings, the leadings and goings
forth of the spirit of Jesus in me, to take the Leaven, to take the makings
known of the Fathers love to me, then he caused it to be so to me, then he made
known the Fathers love to me.

And the manner of it was thus: It pleased him to bring into my mind the words
of Manoah, Sampson's Father and his Mother, when they saw the Angel of the Lord
to ascend up in the flame of the Altar; Manoah said to his wife, We shall
surely die, because we have seen God. But his wife said unto him, If the Lord
were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a burnt-offering, and a
meat offering at our hands, neither would he have showed us all these things,
nor would at this time have told us such things as these, Judge. 13. Upon the
thinking of these words, God was pleased to put this into me, That if God had
been pleased to kill me, to send me to Hell, to damn me, he would never have
showed me all these things: He would never have showed me the deceit of the
subtle Serpent self in me, in putting me upon it to get to understand and know
Gods declared will made known in the Scriptures, (which, as to the letter of
them, I knew in that day much more than now I do:) He would never have
discovered to me the deceit of the Serpent, in putting me upon an outward form
of Religion, and from one form to another, which was in best esteem; and that
out of a self-love, and not out of any true love that was in me to God: And he
would never have discovered to me that all this was done in my own will, for
self ends of my own, if God had a mind to kill me, to send me to Hell, to damn
me: He would never have made known these things to me, but have let me go on in
the understanding and knowledge that the Serpent had put me upon to get, and to
let me have contented my self in that understanding and knowledge, and in that
worship and service of God that the subtle Serpent had put me upon to do in my
own will, and so have let me gone to Hell in deceiving my self, thinking I had
been going to Heaven, and should never have known that I had been going to
Hell, until I had been in what is called the flames thereof.

The consideration of this, as God would have it, caused me to have some
thoughts that God had some love to me, or else he would never have made known
these things to me. And this was but a little Leaven, and a very little too:
for I considering the greatness of my sins, and especially of my religious sins
(as I now call them) how much I had therein mocked God; and the Serpent when he
saw he could no more deceive me in a form of godliness, then he had almost got
me to despair of Gods love, until God dropped in a little hopes of it upon the
aforementioned considerations; but so little was this Leav^ ^f the
manifestations, or making known of Gods love to me, that I was a long time
between hope and fear, until at length I thought there was something stirring
in me that I could love God, or a willingness in me to love God; and then I
began to have some hope that God might love me, but not for any desert of mine,
as while I was in the deceivable estate deceived by the Serpent, I thought then
that God might love me for what I did for God in my obedience to God; but now I
knew a death to all those thoughts that God should love me for the obedience
that I had done to him, all that was grownd to pieces in me; and now if God
loved me, he must love me freely. And thus as I apprehended the freeness of
Gods love to me, so I found a love to grow in me to God. And that understanding
and knowledge that the Serpent had persuaded me to, and that love and desire to
self that he had wrought in me, and that will of my own which before I acted by
and did all in, I sound to be so broken and grownd apieces, as not to oppose or
hinder the working of the Leaven of Gods love in me; but the Leaven of Gods
love did so work in me, as to work up my heart again unto a love to God.

And then if at any time any thing of the parts or properties of self did rise
in me, the Light of Jesus in me discovered it, and made it known to me; and by
my obedience yielding to the Light in those discoverings of self in me, self it
was kept under and subdued. And so as it is the property of the Meal, not to
oppose or hinder the working of the Leaven that it is hid in, but it is
passive, it suffers the Leaven to do its own work; so as I kept in obedience to
the Light in me, which although then I did not know it by that name, but only
by the name of the spirit of God in me. I say, as I was kept by that power, by
the power of the Light or spirit of God in me, in obedience to the Light or
spirit of God in me, which made a discovery of the attempts or endeavors of
self to rise again in me; and as I was kept in obedience to that which
discovered self in me, so self was kept down in me in all its three parts or
properties; and so as self was kept down in me, so self opposed not the working
of the Leaven, the making known of Gods love to me, that wrought in me a love
to God again; and so as my love increased to God, so it decreased to self in
all the three parts or properties of it. And so I came to know how to deny my
self, and take up the Cross to that will in me, that is not willing that Gods
will should be done in me, and to follow Jesus, to follow that in me that was
in me a saving me from sin. As the Leaven being hid in the Meal, does not
presently do its work in leavening the whole, but does it by degrees a little
and a little, and in length of time it is that it brings the whole to be like
it self; so did I then find, as now I do, the Leaven of the love of God made
known and hid in (...) It did not then at the first making known of the love of
G^^ (...) me, presently work such a love of God in me, as to work out the love
of all self in me; but by little and little, as I now find my love increase to
God, so I find love to die and decrease to self in me, in all its three parts
or properties; and thereby a greater strength to increase in me, to take up the
Cross in me to that will in me that is not willing that the will of God should
be done in me.

Man in himself of his own will, went out of his obedience to God, and so in
and by his disobedience he lost his love to God, and so came under the
manifestations or makings known of Gods Justice and Judgment for his sin. So
man must by Gods making known his love which is in God, as God changed not to
man, by this unchangeable love, man must be brought to love God again; and in
and by that unchangeable love, man is restored to love God again; and in and by
the obedience done in man to God by that love of God which works the love in
man, by the making known of Gods love to man, which begets a love in man to
God; by which love to God it is that man denies himself, all self, all that is
of self, in all the parts or properties of it. And so in that denial of self,
he takes up the Cross to his own will: And so as he is in the denying of
himself, and taking up of the Cross to his will, to that will in him that is
contrary to Gods will, and would not that Gods will should be done in him: And
so as this Cross is taken up, so are the manifestations or makings known of
Gods Justice or Judgments in man, and to man, for his sins, they are taken away
from man. There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit, Romans 8. 1. Mark, there is no
condemnation, there is no manifestation or making known of Gods Justice or
Judgments for sin, to those that are in Christ Jesus, to those who walk not
after the flesh, to those who walk not after the self-will that is in man, but
walk after the spirit of Jesus in man, walk after that which saves man from
sin, from all sin; and that not only from the outward actions of sin, but also
the inward love and desire to sin.

I am, by the assistance of the Light, the spirit of Jesus in me, endeavoring
to be of Paul's mind, Philip. 3. But what things were gain to me, those things
I count loss for Christ. Yea and doubtless, I count all things but loss, for
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have
suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win
Christ, And be found in him, not having my own righteousness, (...) is of the
Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ: Th^^ I may know him, and
the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made
conformable to his death, If by any means I might attain unto the resurrection
of the dead. Not as though I had already attained, either were already perfect:
but I follow after, if I may apprehend that for which I am also apprehended of
Christ Jesus. Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended: but this one
thing I do; forgetting those things that are behind, and reaching forth unto
those things that are before: I press forward toward the mark, for the price
of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. Let us therefore, as many as be
perfect, be thus minded: and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall
reveal it even this unto you. And thus have I, as briefly, as well as I could,
let you know my experience how man may deny himself, and take up a Cross to
self-will or man's own will, and follow Jesus. And I hope the reading of it will
not burden the Witness or Seed of God in any, although some have pretended that
the hearing of me speak to this purpose, has burdened the Witness or Seed of
God in them. I shall speak something of the benefit that I know by experience
that comes to man by yielding to Gods Will, by having of our Wills resigned and
given up into Gods Will, as the Will of man was when God made him in his own
Image, by our having our Wills resigned and given up into Gods Will, we do
thereby make it appear, that we be like Jesus which was conceived in the Womb
of the Virgin Mary, and so took the outward nature of man, as God created man
without sin, in that nature of man or outward body of man, the man Jesus, the
Divine Nature dwelt; that is, it took up its abode or being there, it stayed,
it remained there; and the dwelling or abiding of the Divine Nature in that
outward body of the man Jesus, was that which caused that outward body to do
nothing but what was the Will of God for that body, that it should do, as in
that body of Jesus he did declare and make known, saying, I do nothing of my
self, but as the Father has taught me I speak these things, Joh. 8. 28. He
spoke not of himself, but the Father that sent him, he gave him a Commandment
what he should say, and what he should speak, and he knew his Commandment is
life everlasting; therefore whatsoever he spoke, it was even as the Father had
said to him, so he spoke, John 12. 49, 50. And that the world may know that he
loved the Father, and as the Father gave him commandment, even so he did, John
14. 31. And when there was something that did rise or get up in that outward
body of Jesus, as the nature of man was in it, that would not have had Gods
will to have been done to that body, which that body came to do, which he
called his Will: Yet how did he pray to the Father, that that will of his that
was not willing to have that done to that body, which that body came to do,
that that Will that he called his Will should not be done, but that the Will
that he called the Fathers Will should be done, as you may read in Matthew,
Mark, and Luke.

Now as we come to have our wills resigned and given up into Gods will, so we
make it appear that we be like Jesus, that as he in that body that was of the
nature of man, had the Divine Nature to dwell in that body, so we in the
outward body, that is, in the Nature of man have the Divine Nature to dwell in
us; I do not say in that measure and fullness that the Divine Nature dwelt in
that body, for the fullness of the Divine Nature dwelt in that body; and to say
that the seem fullness dwells in our bodies, I think to be Blasphemy: But this I
do say, that as our wills come to be resigned and given up to the will of God,
so we make it appear that we be like Jesus; that is, as he was in that outward
body in the nature of man, and so had the Divine Nature to dwell in him; so in
these bodies of ours the Divine Nature dwells in us, that is, a measure of the
Divine Nature to dwell in us, as Christ is the Head, and we the Members of that
Body; and so as every member of the outward body partakes in its measure of the
same life that is in the head, so it is in the spiritual or mistical Body of
Jesus. As we come to have our wills resigned and given up into the will of God,
so we make it appear that we are members of that Body, and that there is a
measure of the same Divine Nature to dwell in us, in these bodies of ours, that
dwelt in that outward Body of that outward Jesus; and that according to the
measure of the same Divine Nature dwelling in these bodies of ours, so we act
and do the same things that were acted and done by that Body of Jesus. As the
same Divine Nature dwells in us, as it takes up its abode and stays in us, and
remains in us, so in these bodies of ours are the same things acted and done,
as was by the same Divine Nature acted and done in that Body of Jesus, wherein
the fullness of the Divine Nature dwelt: For in him dwells all the fullness of
the Godhead bodily, Col. 2. 9.

I do not say that the same things are acted and done in these bodies of ours,
wherein this Divine Nature may appear to be in, and their making known that
this is the will of God that man should do, and that is the will of God that
man should not do; for so a measure of this Divine Nature is in all men, as he
is the true light that lights every man that comes into the world, John 1.
And the World was made by him, and the World knew him not; the World knew him
not; and yet they were made by him, and were his own as he was their Creator;
and he came to them, as he is the true light in them, but they did not receive
him, they would not give him entertainment, they would not let him dwell in
them; and therefore it is that the same things are not acted and done in them,
that was acted and done in the outward Body of Jesus, and yet he was in them as
a light; but to as many as received him, as many as was willing that he should
dwell in them, to them he gave power to be the Sons of God, even to them that
believed in his Name, even to as many as believed in the power of him, the true
light in them, which was the Word, and the Word was made flesh, and dwelt
amongst us, and we beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the only begotten of the
Father, full of Grace and Truth, where a measure of the same Divine Nature
dwells in these bodies of ours, that the fullness thereof dwelt in that outward
body of Jesus: There is a beholding of it, a seeing of it as the Glory of the
only begotten of the Father in them, which according to his abundant mercy
has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the dead, 1 Pet. 1. 3. I say, that where the will is resigned and given up
into the will of God, there it does make it appear that we are like Jesus; that
as the Divine Nature was in that outward body of Jesus, and dwelt there, and in
that outward body it did the will of God the Father, so a measure of the same
Divine Nature is in these bodies of ours, and dwells there, and in these bodies
of ours do the will of God the Father, as it did in that body of Jesus.

And as Jesus did nothing of himself, but as the Father taught him; and as the
Father taught him, so he spoke those things that he spoke. So as our wills come
to be resigned and given up into the will of God, we will do nothing of our
selves; there will be a denying of all self, and a doing only of such things
as the Father teaches us, and then there will be a denying of our selves in
all we speak, and a speaking of nothing but what the Father teaches us to
speak; and therefore men may know by their actions and by their words, whether
in their actions and words their wills be resigned and given up to God, and so
thereby they may know whether a measure of the same Divine Nature dwells in
that body of theirs, that dwelt in that body of Jesus. When men do nothing but
what God the Father teaches them to do, and say nothing but what God the
Father teaches them to say, then they make it appear, that their wills are
resigned and given up into Gods will, and what is done, and what is spoken in
them, is done and spoken by a measure of the same Divine Nature dwelling in
them, that dwelt in that body of Jesus; and so they make it appear, that they
in these bodies be like to what Jesus was in that body. But when men do such
things as God the Father does not teach them to do, and speak such words as God
the Father does not teach them to speak, they then make it appear, that in the
doing of those things, and speaking of those words, that their wills are not
resigned and given up to Gods will; nor are those things done, nor those words
spoken by a measure of the same Divine Nature dwelling in them, that dwelt in
that outward body of Jesus, but those things that were done in them, were such
as that God did not teach them to do, and those words spoken by them, were such
as that God did not teach them to speak: Those works were done by them in their
own Wills, and those words spoken by them, were spoken in their own Wills.

Jesus he spoke nothing of himself, but as the Father that sent him, gave him a
Command what he should say, and what he should speak, and he knew that his
Command was life everlasting, and therefore what he spoke was even as the
Father had said to him. So as our wills come to be resigned and given up to the
Will of God, we will speak nothing of our selves, but as God our Father gives
us a Command what we shall say, and what we shall speak; and we know that his
Command is life everlasting; and therefore what the Father gives in Command to
speak, even so as the Father has said, so to speak. And where there is a
knowing of what God has given in Command to speak, and that in this Command
there is life everlasting; and then where there has not been a speaking of
what God has given in Command, there the Will has not been resigned, nor
given up into the Will of God; nor has it there been made appear, that the
same Divine Nature dwelt in that body, that dwelt in the body of Jesus; but in
their own Wills, in the Earthy part in them, they have hid the Command of God
in them, that he has given them to speak: And therefore as man ought not to
speak any thing in his own Will, so man in his will ought not to hide or keep
in silence any thing that God has given him in Command to speak, let it be
never so little, or never so much: And as it is man's duty to obey Gods Command
in speaking, so man ought also to have a care in going beyond Gods Command in
speaking, for that is not to be like Jesus, who spoke even as the Father had
said to him, to speak just so much, neither more nor less.

And as Jesus did manifest and make known to the World the love he had to the
Father, in that whatsoever the Father gave him in Command, even so he did: so
where the Will is resigned and given up to the Will of God, there is a making
of it appear, that we in these bodies be like as Jesus was in that body; in
that we make known and make manifest to the World that we love God the Father,
and that we make it appear to them that we love God as our Father, in that we
keep his Commands, and that we keep his Commands from a principle of love, as
Jesus did, we do not only make it appear to the world, that we do those things
that God requires of us to do, but we do them because we love God, and we love
him as our Father. There be those that as to the outward in an outward
obedience, they do the things that God Commands; but they do not do them
because they love God as a Father, but because they are afraid of Gods Justice
or Judgments that they have a knowledge of that will fall upon them, if they do
not do the things that God Commands them to do; and therefore it is that they
do the things that God Commands them, out of a fear, and not from a principle
of Love to God: And by this we may know how far our wills are resigned and
given up into the Will of God, by what it is that works in us the doings of the
Commands of God. If that which puts us upon the doing of the things that God
has required of us to do, is because we are afraid of God, afraid of Gods
Justice or Judgments to fall upon us, which the light in us tells us is justly
due to us for the breaking Gods Command, then it is our own Will in us that
puts us upon the doing of those things that God Commands us to do, because we
would escape the punishment; and this our obedience is not done because we love
God, but because we love our selves: But when the Will comes to be resigned and
given up into Gods Will, then there is a doing of Gods Commands, not because we
are afraid of Gods Justice or Judgments to fall upon us if we do not do them,
but because we love God as a Father, and that was that from whence the Divine
Nature in that body of Jesus did the Commands of God, it was because there was
a love in that Divine Nature which did the Commands of God in that body, as God
was its Father, as God was he that begat that Divine Nature in that body.

When I speak of God as a Father, begetting the Divine Nature in that body, I
do not believe that there is a separation in the Divine Nature it self, or that
there is degrees of Age in the Divine Nature it self, as that which begets is
before that which is begotten, but I believe it is all one God, all one Divine
Nature, all one Being, which gives Being to all; but this I believe, that
there is a distance or degrees of time, wherein this Divine Nature manifests or
makes known it self to man his Creature, as in the Creation he made known
himself to be in man, as his Creator and Maker of him in his own Image; and not
only so, but the words of the Scripture are in our Image, in the Image that
the Divine Nature would make known it self to man in, as Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost: And man by his disobedience lost this Image of God, and then God was
pleased to make known himself to be in man, as a begetter of his likeness in
man; and that which is the begotten likeness of God in man, that is called the
begotten Son of God.

And in that body of Jesus, God (the Divine Nature) begot so much of the Divine
Likeness, as to keep that body from being overcome by the Devils Temptations
(as Adam was overcame in that created body wherein God had made his Image; and
this is a mystery, to know the difference between the created Image and
likeness of God, and the begotten Image and likeness of God. Man in the created
Image and likeness of God, by the subrilty of the Serpents Temptations, fell
and sinned, and the begotten Image of God in man that cannot sin.) God caused
the fullness of the Godhead to dwell bodily in that body of Jesus: That body was
so filled with God, with the Divine Nature, that there was no part of the body
which was not filled, which was not filled full of the Divine Nature, and so
the fullness of the Godhead may be said to dwell in that body bodily; and so God
is pleased to make known himself in such ways, and by such means, as he has
been pleased to make man capable to understand that of the Divine Nature, and
so much of it as is his good pleasure that man should understand of the Divine
Nature; and by Gods making known of the Divine Nature, to beget that of the
Divine Nature in that body of Jesus, that did the Will of the Divine Nature in
that body, and in that body it did nothing else but the Will of the Divine
Nature; so God is pleased thereby to make known in us his begetting in these
bodies of ours that of the Divine Nature, his likeness in us in these bodies of
ours, that do the Will of God, and that it do nothing else in us but the Will
of God, that is the Divine Nature by which God begets his likeness in us, which
Divine Nature is that which does the Will of God in us, and it does nothing
else in us but the Will of God, as it did in Jesus the only begotten Son of
God: And as we are begotten by the Divine Nature, so are we members of that
only begotten Son of God; and so we do nothing but what is Gods Will. And so
as our Wills come to be resigned and given up into the Will of God, then there
will be a doing of the Commands of God, as we love him as he is a Father, that
in these bodies of ours, it is he that begot this divine nature in us, by which
we come to do his Commands. And herein we manifest and make known to the world,
that we in these bodies of ours, are according to the measure of the working of
that divine nature in us working in us, to resign and give up our wills to the
will of God, like as Jesus was in that body.

And when there was something that did rise and get up in that outward body of
Jesus, as the nature of man was in that body that would not have had Gods will
to have been done in that body, which that body came to do, which he called his
will; yet so filled full of the divine nature was that body, as that there was
no room in it to give it entertainment, as appears by that earnestness that
he prayed to the Father, that that will of his, as he was man, that was not
willing to have that done to that body, which that body came to do, that that
which he called his will, that was his will as he was man, should not be done;
but that will that he called the Fathers will, should not be done. And as we
come to have our wills resigned and given up into the will of God, as Father,
according to that measure that our wills are resigned and given up to the will
of God, so do we make it appear, that we in these bodies are like to what Jesus
was in that body. And then as any thing does rise and get up in us, as we are
men that would not that that should come to these bodies of ours, or to any
outward thing that we call ours, let it be what it will; and if it be any thing
that we look upon as ours, or that we have any interest in, and would not that
Gods will should be done in it or to it; and that not only Gods declared will
given in command for man to do, but that which may be called Gods will of
sufferance, as God suffers things to come to pass, which are contrary to Gods
declared will; as God suffered false witnesses to be brought against Jesus, and
he suffered the Jews to be envious against him, and out of envy to bring him
before Pilate, and desired him to crucify him, although he found no fault in
him, and he accordingly passed sentence upon him, and they executed the
sentence upon him. All this was done to Jesus, contrary to Gods declared will
for man to do in obedience to God. Man was not to bear false witness, nor do
any thing out of envy, or to pass sentence of death upon the innocent, nor to
take away the life of the innocent.

And yet the Apostle tells the Jews, Acts 2. 23. Him, being delivered by the
determinate counsel, and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked
hands have crucified and slain. So that there is nothing that does befall these
bodies of ours, or to any outward thing that we call ours, but that may be said
to be as God will have it so to be, either as it is his will given in command
to be done, or as it is his will of sufferance, as that was his will of
sufferance in suffering of the Jews to put Jesus to death. And there was a will
that did rise and get up in that body Jesus, as he was man, that desired if it
were possible, that hour might pass from him; but there was another will in
him, as the divine nature dwelt in him, that would not that that will of his
that would have had the hour to pass from him, and the Cup taken from him, that
would not have that will be done, but the Fathers will be done, whose will it
was that he should drink of the Cup; and that hour should come upon him: By
which it does appear, that there is nothing that does befall our bodies, or to
what we call ours, that is, as to the outward things, but there is a will of
the Father in it.

Now as our wills in all things, whatsoever it is that does befall us, be
resigned and given up into the Will of God, as our Father; so do we make it
appear, that the divine nature dwells in us, and that in these bodies we are
like Jesus, as he was in that body. And wherein our Wills are not resigned and
given up into the Will of God, in whatsoever it is that does befall these bodies
of ours, or any thing that we call ours, there we make it appear that we are
not in these bodies of ours, like to Jesus in that body; and therein we make it
appear that we have not taken up our Cross to our Wills; and therein we make it
appear, that we are no Disciple, no Follower, no Learner of Jesus in us; but we
are therein a Disciple, a Follower, a Learner of our own Wills in us. And this
is the daily work that the Disciples, the Followers, the Learners of Jesus
should do, that is, to take up his Cross to his own Will, and follow Jesus, in
resigning and giving up his Will into the Will of God his Father. And no more
than we can make it appear, that we are thus daily taking up our Cross, in
resigning and giving up our Wills into the Will of God, as a Father; no more
can man make it appear, that he is a Disciple, a Follower, a Learner of Jesus
within him. Let man profess what Religion he will, know what he will, live
never so blameless, as to the outward appearance of men, esteem of himself as
he will, and let him be never so great in the esteem of others; yet no more
than he can make it appear, that he has taken up his Cross to his Will, and
resigned and given up his Will into the Will of God, as his Father, no more can
he make it appear that he is a Disciple, a Follower, a Learner of Jesus within
him, that is in him* to save him from sin. Nor can he any more make it appear,
that he in that outward body of his is like what Jesus was in that outward body
in which the divine nature dwelt in; nor can he make it appear, that the divine
nature dwells in him, as it dwelt in that outward body of Jesus, but only as
his Will is, as Jesus's Will was resigned and given up into the Will of God, as
his Father.

The resigning and giving up of the will into the will of God, as a Father,
this is to eat Jesus's flesh, and drink his blood, without the doing thereof,
we have no life in us; and this is that Bread that came down from Heaven: and
did not come down from Heaven to do his own will, but the will of him that sent
him, John. 6. This is that Meat that Jesus had to eat, that his Disciples knew
not of; which Meat was to do the will of him that sent him, and to finish his
work, John 4. 32, 34. This is that, which when it comes into the world, says,
Sacrifices and offerings thou would not, but a body have thou prepared me.
Then said I, Lo, I come (in the volume of the book it is written of me) to do
thy will, O God, Heb. 10. This is that which comes into the world, Man, that
pleases God better than outward Sacrifices or Offerings; it is that which does
the will of God in man, that pleases God better than outward Sacrifices and
Offerings. This is the body that God the Father prepares. This is his begotten
Son Jesus in man, that saves from sin, that which does Gods will in man, and
thereby causes man to resign and give up his will into the will of God as his
Father, and so take up his Cross and become a Disciple, a Follower, a Learner
of Jesus, in him that saves him from sin.

The resigning and giving up of the will into Gods will, as a Father, This is
that which works contentedness in all states and conditions. This is that
which makes Christ's burden light, and his yoke easy. This is that by which we
come to know that all things works together for good, to them that love God.
This is that which makes chastisements, although at present they seem
grievous, yet afterward they yield the peaceable fruit of righteousness to
them that are exercised therein. This is the Feast of fat things, and of Wine
well refined from the lees, that God has made, is making, and will make upon
his holy Mount, for all Nations to come unto. This is that which put more
gladness into the heart, than can the increase of Corn or Wine, and all outward
things. This is that which causes a lying down in peace.

The resigning and giving up of the will into the will of God, was that in
which the Faith of those mentioned in the 11th of the Hebrews, was exercised
in. And who is it that can say, upon a true examination, that he has any true
peace, any true quietness, any true comfort, any true quietness, any true
comfort, any true content, any true satisfaction in any thing that they desire
to enjoy, but as their wills be resigned and given up into the will of God in
that enjoyment? And who is it that can say, upon a true examination, that they
have any true peace, any true content, any true satisfaction in any thing that
does befall them, or come to them, or upon them, that is contrary to the desire
or will of man in them, if they do not find that their wills, as it is the will
of man (as it was in the man Christ Jesus) are resigned and given up into the
will of God in what is fallen upon them, or come to them, or upon them? And in
the having of the will resigned and given up into the will of God, this gives
true peace, true quietness, true comfort, true content, and true satisfaction
in the enjoyment of what, as man, we desire to enjoy: And in the having of the
will resigned and given up into the will of God, this gives true peace, true
quiet, true comfort, true content and satisfaction in the bearing and suffering
under those things that do befall us, and come to us, or upon us, that are
contrary to the desire and will of man in us.

And would man, as God has made him more reasonable, and has placed more of
Reason in him, than in all the Creatures upon Earth; would he but consult with
this Reason in him, and be true to the Light of God in him, he would see how
reasonable a thing it is for him to resign and give up his Will into the Will
of God. And if man did first consider the great care and love that God took, I
speak after the manner of men, as God in the Scripture compares himself, and
his actions to man, and to the actions of men, and so after that manner, I call
it the great care and love that God did take in the creating and making of Man,
more than in all other things that he made: In all other things that he made,
he did but say, Let there be, and there was; as he said, Let there be light,
and there was light: And so on in the whole Creation it is, And God said; and
as God said, so it was, until he came to make Man; and then God said, Let us
make man: Although the word us signifies more than one, yet do I not believe
that there is more than one God, but God speaking after the manner of men,
calls in the advice or assistance of the whole Divine Nature that he would make
himself known to man in, as Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which he did not in
all or any part of the Creation before, and further he did not in all or any of
the Creation before (man being the last of the Creation) He did not say, Let us
make it after our likeness; but in the Creation of man, he said, Let us make
man in our likeness: And so God created man in his own Image. And God did not
say that he created any thing but man in his likeness and Image. And moreover;
God did not give to any Creature that he had made (except man) the Dominion
over any other Creature; but to man God gave the Dominion over the fish of the
Sea, and over the fowl of the Air, and over the cattle, and over every creeping
thing that creeps upon the Earth.

Would but man seriously consult with that Reason in him, that God has given
to him above all the Creatures upon the Earth, and believe the Truth that the
true light in him would make known and discover to him, in the reason that God
has given to him, man could not but in the consideration of the great love
that God manifests to him in his Creation, in calling the whole Divine Nature
to advise and assist in the making of him, which he did not to all or any of
the Creation besides man, and then to make him in the likeness and Image of
this Divine Nature, which he made none of the Creation besides in; and then to
consider of the largeness of the Dominion that he gave to man over what he had
created, and gave no Dominion to any other Creature over any thing that he had
Created. and if man would be serious in himself, consulting with that Reason
that God has given to him, and believe the truth of God in him, the true light
in him, if he would believe the Truth of what this true Light in him would make
known to him in the use of his Reason, he could not deny, but openly confess
and own, and that upon the consideration of what God has done for him in his
Creation, that it is a thing very reasonable that man should resign and give up
his will into the will of God, to be what God would have him to be, and further
the light of God in man, if man would be true to that light of God in him; that
would make known to man in that reason that God has given to man, That if man
did not resign and give up his will into the will of God, he would in the not
doing of it, show and manifest an exceeding deal of Unworthiness,
Unthankfulness, Disobedience, and Rebellion against God, who might very justly
and reasonably require and command of man to have his will resigned and given
up into his will, for the great love and care that he manifested and made known
to man above all other of his Creation, in making of man in his likeness and
Image, and the Dominion that he gave him above what he gave to all other of his
Creatures.

And if the consideration of Gods love to man in his Creation, will not work
upon man by the true light of God in him, to the reasonableness that it is for
man to resign and give up his will into Gods will, then let man consider the
unchangeableness of Gods love to man, in that although God had manifested and
made known so great love to man, in his creating and making of him, more than
to any or all the Creatures that he made besides man; and yet notwithstanding
this great love that God has showed to man, in making of him in his likeness
and Image, yet man proved so unworthy and rebellious to this God that
manifested and made known so much love to him, as that he rebelled against this
God, and as I may say, to speak after the manner of men, proved a Traitor to
this God that had manifested and made known so much love to him: For whereas
God in the Creation, as man was made in his Image, God ruled in man, and over
man, and man's will was resigned and given up into the will of God: But man like
a Traitor, set up his own will, and preferred that above and before the will of
God in him, and put the government of himself under his own will, to be ruled
by his own will, where all men in the fallen state now are; and while this will
bears the rule over them, they will not come to Jesus the true Light in them,
that they may have life, John 5. 40. And although man in his Treachery and
Rebellion, lost his love to God, and became an enemy to God, yet God as
unchangeable he continued his love to man, and his love was then so great to
man, when man was in his Rebellion against God, and an enemy to God, that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believed in him, should not perish,
but have everlasting life, John 3. 16. And God commended his love toward us,
that while we were yet sinners, and enemies to God, Christ died for us, Romans 5.
8. And God has sent his Ambassadors to beseech and pray you to be reconciled
to God, 2 Cor. 5. 20.

And what, shall not the unchangeableness of Gods Love to us, and the
willingness that is in God that we should be reconciled to him, and not to
perish? shall not this work upon us to be willing to resign and give up our
wills into Gods will, when there can be no reconciliation made between God and
lost man, but by man's being willing to resign and give up his will into the
will of God? That is the partition wall that must be taken down, that which at
first made the separation between God and man. It was man went out of the doing
of Gods will, into the doing of his own will; and to reconcile man again to
God, there must be a going out of man's will into Gods will again. And is not
this very reasonable, that man should resign and give up his will into the will
of God, being Gods love is so unchangeable to man? As that when man had no true
love in him to God, but was Gods enemy, yet then Gods love was such to man, as
to give his Son, his beloved Son, to keep man from perishing, and that man by
his love of God might have everlasting life: and therefore can there be any
thing more reasonable than this, That man should resign and give up his will
into the will of God.

And further, if the consideration of Gods love to man in his Creation, and the
unchangeableness of his love to man when man was turned Gods enemy, and Gods
willingness to have man to be reconciled unto him; if this will not prevail
with man to be willing to have his will resigned and given up into the will of
God, let man consider the absolute necessity that there is as on man's part to
have his will resigned and given up into Gods will; for if man's will be not
resigned and given up into Gods will, man perishes for ever. There can be no
reconciling of God and man together, without man's will being resigned and given
up into the will of God; for although indeed God is unchangeable in himself,
and so is a God of love, and so there is love in God to man his Creature, yet
also God in himself is a God of Justice, executing of his Justice to all, and
upon all, that stand it out in Rebellion against him; which all men do while in
their wills they oppose Gods will: And let men flatter themselves what they
will with the unchangeableness of Gods love to man, and so have thoughts that
God loves them, yet until there is a willingness in them to have their wills
resigned and given up into the will of God, I know by experience that these
thoughts of theirs of Gods loving of them, is changeable in them; and sometimes
they may have thoughts in them that God loves them, and at other times they are
afraid of Gods Justice and Judgments to fall upon them for their sins and
transgressions. And to be made free from the manifestations or making known of
Gods Justice and Judgments for sin in us, and to us, is to have our wills
resigned and given up into the will of God, and then we may say with Paul, Romans
7. For that which I do, I allow not, for what I would, that I do not; but what
I hate that I do. If then I do that which I would not, I consent unto the law
that it is good; now then it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in
me.

And as the will comes to be resigned and given up into the will of God, so
there is a knowing that there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit; there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, to them whose wills are resigned
and given up into the will of God, as their Father, as was the will of Christ
Jesus; and there is no being in Christ Jesus, unless in some measure, degree or
other the will be resigned and given up to God, as a Father, as was the will of
Christ Jesus: And as their wills are resigned and given up into the will of
God, so they walk not after the flesh, they walk not after their fleshly wills,
they follow not their fleshly wills, but they walk after the spirit, they
follow after the spirit of Christ Jesus the true light in them, that teaches
them to resign and give up their wills into the will of God; and those who are
not thus in Christ Jesus, who have not their wills resigned and given up into
the will of God, as Christ Jesus will was, they are still in the state of
condemnation, because they walk after the flesh, their own wills; and although
at sometimes they may have some hopes or apprehensions of Gods love toward
them, yet it is not lasting in them, it fails them when they stand in most need
of it; that is, it fails them when God is making known in them and to them his
Justice and Judgments due to them for their sins: Then they cannot apprehend
any love in God to them, but they are afraid of God, for then they cannot say
as Paul said, that what I would I do not; but what I hate, that I do; and then
that it was no more I that did it, but sin that dwells in me: They cannot
speak after that manner, but instead thereof, the light of God in them tells
them, that the sins that God is manifesting and making known his Justice and
Judgments against them for, is for such sins as that they would do; it is for
such sins as they were willing to do it is for such sins as they had a love and
desire to do; and therefore the Condemnation is upon them for such sins as they
were willing to do, and had a love to do. And in this state as they lie under
the sentence of Condemnation for their sins willingly done in them, and by
them, they can see no love in God to them; although at another time it may be
they may think that God loves them, when although in their own wills it is that
they are yielding an outward obedience to God; yet this apprehension of Gods
love to them, because of their yielding an outward obedience to God, it is not
lasting in them: And why is it not lasting in them? it is because their wills
are not resigned and given up into the will of God; but as soon as the Serpent
by his subtilty draws them into disobedience to God, then there rises in them
an apprehension of Gods anger, and a making known of Gods Justice to them for
their sins, which remain in them, until by the Serpents subtilty he sometimes
puts some of them upon it, to go into merry company, as they call it, and so
much as in them lies, by their vain mirth they slay the witness of God in
them, and make merry over it; and so for a time they get off or over that fear
and dread that was in them of Gods Justice for their sins; and if this will not
do to get off the fear and dread of Gods Justice for sin, as in many it will
not, then the subtle Serpent he puts them upon repentings, prayings,
mournings, humbling of themselves, fasting and promises, and it may be vows to
do so no more; and then upon these their doings and performing of worship and
service to God, as they call it, then it may be they can apprehend some love
again from God to them; but as soon again as the guilt of sin falls upon them,
and God sets home upon them his Justice and Judgments due to them for their
sins, then instead of beholding love in God toward them, they apprehend anger
and wrath in God toward them for their sins; and so they make God as
changeable in his love to them, as they are changeable in their obedience to
God; and so they in that state cannot come to a certain knowledge that there is
a reconcilement made between God and them: And why? because their wills are not
resigned and given up into the will of God; but what obedience is done in them
to God, is done in their own wills, and not in the will of God: And from thence
it is that when they fail in their obedience to God, they fail in their
apprehending love in God to them; and why? because all that is done in them is
done in their own wills.

And if the consideration of the necessity that is in man to resign and give up
his will into the will of God, to keep man from perishing, if this will not do
to cause man to be willing to resign and give up his will into the will of God,
then let them consider, that the same God that was and is able of stones to
raise up children unto Abraham, Matthew. 3. 9. that this God in his infinite
power was able to have left man in that dreadful state of a continual lying
under the manifestations and making known of his Justice and Judgments to man
for his sins, without ever having any hopes of Gods love to him: And in that
infinite power of his he might have bestowed the riches of his Love upon some
other Creature, and that this infinite God in his infinite power should not
leave man for ever, under the apprehensions and making known of his Justice and
Judgments to him for his sins, and to be without all hopes of ever receiving
any love from that God, that he had so offended by his sins. But that this
infinite God, instead of his thus leaving man in that dreadful state, as was in
his power so to do. He in this infinite power has notwithstanding all man's
ill-deserving at his hands, which in illness and badness of desert, man has
deserved worse at Gods hands than all the Creatures besides, because to none of
the Creatures God manifested so much love and care in the creating of them, as
he did to man, and no Creature has rebelled more against God than man has
done, and yet for this infinite God, who in his infinite power might so justly
have left man in that most miserable state, and might have bestowed the riches
of his Love upon some other Creature* and instead thereof he without any desert
on man's part, and without any desire in man. For this great God so freely to
bestow his infinite and unchangeable love upon man his so unworthy and
rebellious Creature, and so great love as he bestows not the like love upon any
of the Creation: And all that is desired or required* of man for his being made
sure of this great and infinite unchangeable love of God, is but for man to be
willing to resign and give up his will into the will of this infinite loving
God, to be ruled and guided and governed by the will of this infinite loving
God, as the will of this infinite loving God is made known in him and to him;
man need not to say, Who shall ascend into Heaven, to bring Gods will down from
thence, that he may know what is Gods will for him to do? Or who shall go down
into the deep, to bring Gods will from thence, that he may know Gods will for
him to do? No there is no need of that: for the Word, the true Light Jesus,
that makes known what is God, the Fathers will for man to do in obedience to
him, is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, Romans 10. 8. and that is
the word that the Apostles preached, that man ought to believe and obey God in.

And this great work of obedience to this great loving God, this great loving
God is willing to work himself in man, unto himself: And all that is required
or desired of man, is but to be like the Meal that does not hinder or oppose
the working of the Leaven in it, to change and alter the Meal, and make it like
the Leaven. And what, shall not the consideration of this infinite and
unchangeable love of God, so freely offered and tendered to man, that has been
so unworthy, so treacherous, and so rebellious against this infinite loving
Power, who is willing to give and to make to man a full and firm assurance of
this his unchangeable love to them, and require nothing else of man for the
doing thereof, but a willingness for man to resign and give up his Will into
the Will of this infinite loving God, to be ruled, guided, and governed by the
Will of this loving God? And this great loving God is willing to do it for him
and in him, (to speak after the manner of men, without putting him to any
charge or trouble in bringing the work to pass) and that freely, if man would
not in his Will oppose and hinder God in this his great work. And what will
man, whom God has endued with more Reason than he has all the Creatures upon
the Earth, will he be so ruinous and destructive to himself, as not to be
willing to resign and give up his Will into the Will of God, to be ruled,
guided, and governed by the Will of God made known in him and to him; and that
when this great, infinite, and unchangeable loving God is willing to do that
great work in him, of working up of man's Will into the Will of God, if man
would not oppose him in this his great work? And therefore may it not well be
said of man, that his destruction is of himself?

And lastly, I desire man to consider, that if he will not be persuaded by the
making known of the unchangeableness of Gods love to him, by Jesus the Son of
God, the true Light in him, to have his will to be resigned and given up into
the will of God, and by Gods willingness to do this great work in him, yet at
length Gods will shall and will be done; and man, in and by his will, cannot
nor shall not hinder Gods will from being done. Do we not see it by daily
experience, how God makes void and brings to naught the purposes that man in
his will determines to bring to pass? yea, the purposes and determinations of
the great men upon the Earth, made in their wills, how in their wills they can
go no further, nor do no more than God in his will of sufferance suffers them
so to do? And come to more inferior men of all sorts and degrees, how they in
their wills purpose and appoint the doing of this or that thing, and how by God
their purposes and appointments are made void, and come to nothing; and cannot
in any of them go or do the least, beyond the will of. Gods sufferance to
suffer them to go or do. Neither can men in their wills, by all the means that
they can use, keep or hinder from falling upon them, or from falling upon any
thing that they call theirs; or hinder the coming upon them, or upon any thing
that they call theirs; any thing whatsoever that God in his will intends and
purposes shall fall upon them or theirs, or any thing that shall come upon them
or upon what they call theirs.

And although man for a time may hinder Gods will, that is, Gods declared will
that man should obey God in, this will of God man* may by his disobedience
hinder from being done in him, yet at length Gods will will be done in them
whether man will or no; that is, Gods will in Gods administration of his
Justice and true Judgment in man for his disobedience against God. And that man
by all the ways and means that man in his will can use, he cannot nor shall not
hinder that will of God from being done in him. And therefore according to true
Reason, as God has made man a reasonable Creature, above all the Creatures
upon the Earth, what madness and folly is it for man to stand in his own will,
and not to become willing by the power of Jesus the true Light in him, to
resign and give up his will into the will of God, and take up his Cross to his
own will, and to be a Disciple, a Follower, a Learner of Jesus in him, who is
in him to that very end, to save him from sin, and to reconcile him to God.

All that is required for man to do, in the resigning and giving up of his will
into Gods will, is but to be as the Meal is to the Leaven, not to oppose God in
his work in man, as the Meal does not oppose or hinder the working of the
Leaven. So man in his will is not to oppose or hinder God in his work in him,
in the making known his love in man and to man, and thereby to work a love in
man to God again; and to work out of man that love that is in man to his own
understanding and knowledge, to his own desire, love, and affection, and to his
own will: for as man by the spirit of Jesus in him, receives and takes in the
love of God unto him, not as a righteous person, as if he deserved love at Gods
hands, but as a sinner, an enemy to God; and so as that there is no desert in
him that God should show any love to him, but as to desert in him, his desert
it is to have Gods Justice and Judgment to fall upon him for his sins: Jesus
calls not the righteous, but sinners to repentance; and man does not repent of
the love that he has to sin, but as he comes to apprehend love in God to him,
as a sinner; (man may for fear of Gods Justice, repent of the actions of sin,
but not of the love he has to sin.) And in this state and condition for man to
be brought to apprehend love in God to him, as a sinner, as an enemy to God,
although God does not love sin in man, yet God loves man as his Creature. And
this love in God begets a love in man to God, and from that love that is
begotten by God in man to God: for it is God that begets the love in man to
himself, and by that love man comes to obey God, because God first loved him:
And then man, according to that measure or degree of love that is begot in him
by God, he becomes a nothing in himself, that God may be all and do all in him.
And then is man as the Meal, not opposing the working of the Leaven of Gods
love in him bringing him to love God again: And so man then does all that he
does, in obedience to God, beca^^^ God first loved him. And this is the true
denying of self, of all self, and taking up the Cross and following of Jesus
that saves from ^in.

I have read in the 1 Kings 13. that there came a man of God out of Judath, and
by the Word of the Lord to Bethel, and he cried against the Altar in the Word
of the Lord, and ^y the Word of the Lord he was charged to eat no bread, nor
drink no water in that place, nor to turn back again by the way he w^nt. But an
old Prophet that dwelt in Bethel, went after the man of God, and said to him,
Come home with me, and eat bread. And the man of God said to him* I may not
return with thee, nor go in with thee: neither will I eat bread, nor drink
water in this place. For it was said to me by the word of the Lord, Thou shall
eat no bread, nor drink water there, nor turn again to go by the way thou
come. And the old Prophet said unto him, I am a prophet also as thou art, and
an angel spoke unto me by the word of the Lord, saying, Bring him back with
thee into thy house, that he may eat bread and drink water: but he lied unto
him. So he went back with him, and did eat bread and drink water. And while he
was thus eating and drinking, it was told him from the Lord, Forasmuch as thou
have disobeyed the mouth of the Lord, and have not kept the commandment which
the Lord commanded thee, but came back and have eaten bread, and drunk water
in the place of which the Lord had said, Thou shall eat no bread, and drink no
water, thy carcass shall not come to the sepulcher of thy fathers. And soon
after, a lion met him by the way and slew him.

I hope none will deny but that this was a man truly sent of God, and his
Message was true, and proved true; but because he did not continue in his
obedience to the Command that God had given to him, he was slain by a Lion. As
he was commanded to cry against Jeroboam's Altar at Bethel, an Altar set up by
Jeroboam under a pretense to worship God, but not in the way that God had
appointed; so he was also commanded not to eat bread, nor drink water in that
place. Jeroboam, as a King, threatening of him for crying out against the Altar
which God had commanded him to cry out against, in that he put forth his hand
saying, Lay hold on him, that did not in the least prevail* with him to disobey
the Command of God; neither could the show of friendship and kindness, although
from a King, prevail with him to break the Command of God. The King said unto
the man of God, Come home with me and refresh thy self, and I will give thee a
reward. And the man of God said unto the King, If thou will give me half thy
house, I will not go with thee, neither will I eat bread nor drink water in
this place: for so it was charged me by the word of the Lord; saying, Eat no
bread, nor drink no water, nor turn again by the same way thou come.

I pray mark! Neither the threatening of a King, nor the friendship and kindness
offered by a King, could not in the least prevail with the man of God to
disobey God in any part of the Command given him by God: And yet he was
prevailed with to disobey the Command of God, and for his disobedience it cost
him his life. And I pray observe how he was prevailed with: An old Prophet that
dwelt in Bethel, where he was to cry against the Altar set up under a pretense
of worshipping of God, but not as God was to be worshipped, and this old
Prophet he pretended that he was a Prophet, as the man of God was that cried
against the Altar at Bethel, and that an Angel spoke to him by the Word of the
Lord, saying, Bring him back with thee into thine house, that he may eat bread
and drink water: but he lied unto him. I pray observe what was the outward
ruin of this man of God, that was sent by God to cry against the Altar that
was set up under a pretense of worshipping God; the cause it was that he
departed from obeying the true Command that he in himself knew and believed
that God had given to him, and he believed the lie that the old Prophet told
him, that he had in command given to him by an Angel speaking to him by the
Word of the Lord.

Thus much is clear set forth in the Scripture, that I have often read without
me. Now shall I speak something of what I know of this Scripture within me: for
no Scripture is of any private interpretation; as there is the letter of it
without, so there is the mystery of it to be known within. I did and do know
that men and women may make a great show of an outward form of godliness, and
yet deny the power thereof, by the not yielding obedience to what they know of
God. And how ready they are, by the subtilty of the Serpent, to be deceived in
that they have a knowledge of what is Gods will that they should do, and what
is Gods will that they should not do; and from that knowledge that they have of
God, they set up to themselves an outward form of worshipping God, and are
ready with Jeroboam, who said of the Calves that he had made, Behold thy gods,
O Israel, that brought thee out of Egypt. So are men and women, in the
understanding and knowing part that they have of God, by the subtilty of the
Serpent in them, they are ready to set up or set upon an outward form of
worshipping God, according as they are led thereunto by their own wills, for
ends of their own, (as Jeroboam did, who in his own will set up the Calves, and
that for a self-end of his own, which was to keep the people from going to
Jerusalem to worship God, lest by their going to Jerusalem to worship God, he
should lose his Kingdom) and they are ready to say, as Jeroboam did, Behold thy
gods that brought thee out of Egypt.

Egypt signifies slavery and bondage, which men spiritually lies in, while sin
has the rule and dominion over them; and while they lie under the
manifestations or makings known of Gods Justice and Judgments to them for their
sins, they look upon themselves to be in Egypt, in the slavery and bondage to
sin, because then they are sensible of sins ruling over them; but when they can
get off the manifestations or making known of Gods Justice to them for their
sins, and are brought into an outward obedience to God, in doing the outward
things that God has commanded them to do, then they look upon themselves to be
brought out of Egypt, out of the slavery and bondage to sin, although the love
and desire to sin remains in them as live as ever it was: And so sin, in the
love and desire to it, rules over them as much as ever it did; but they dare
not, for fear of Gods wrath, the manifestations and making known of Gods
Justice and Judgments for sin; it is that which keeps them from sin: And they
do not forsake sin for any love that is in them to God, or for any dislike that
is in them to sin, but for a self-love that is to themselves, because they
would escape the punishment that they know is due to them for their sins. And
from this self-love that they have to themselves to escape Gods Justice and
Judgments for their sins, they set up their Calves, they set up an outward form
of Worship, (let it be what outward form of Worship it will, it is but as
Jeroboam's Calves) because it is not the Worship that God requires and accepts
of: for God is a Spirit, and requires to be spiritually worshipped; and he
accepts of no other Worship, but what is the Worship of his own Spirit in man,
done from a principle of love to God: And whatsoever Worship man in his will
sets up, because he would escape the Justice and Judgments of God for his sins,
is no Worship acceptable to God.

And this I do know, that when men are in this Worship, set up in their own
wills to escape the punishment of God for their sins, they say in their hearts,
as Jeroboam said outwardly of his Calves, Behold thy gods that brought thee out
of Egypt; Behold this Worship that I in my will have set up or taken up to keep
me from the apprehensions of Gods Justice and Judgments to me; it has
delivered me, it has brought me out from that slavery and bondage that I was
in under the apprehensions of the making known of Gods wrath, Gods Justice and
Judgments to me for my sins. And now they set up an Altar to these the Calves
that they have made, that is, their own outward obedience done in their own
wills, for their own ends; and upon this Altar they offer their Sacrifices,
they offer their outward performances of their outward religious duties, or
their outward service in the worship of their Calves, in worshipping and bowing
down to that outward form of Worship that in their wills they have set up,
thereby to escape Gods Justice and Judgments that they apprehend to be due to
them for their sins. And although for a time they may hereby patch up a peace
to themselves, yet it is no more lasting to them, than Adam's Aprons made of
Fig Leaves, were lasting to him: for as soon as he heard Gods voice walking in
the garden, although in the cool of the day, he was afraid and hid himself: And
so it will be with them, as soon as they hear the voice of God speaking in the
garden, in their hearts, saying, Adam, where art thou? Man, where art thou? Art
thou worshipping me in my Spirit, in my Truth, in my Jesus that saves thee from
sin; and that not only from the outward actions of sin, but from the love and
desire to sin? Man, where art thou? art thou in this Worship, or art thou in a
Worship set up in thy own will to escape the punishment that is due to thee for
thy sins? and yet in thy heart thou love and delight in sin as much as ever
thou did. Man, where art thou? And when this day comes, as that it will
certainly come, then their outward form of Worship, set up in their own wills
for their own ends, to escape the apprehensions of Gods Justice and Judgments
to them for their sins, will do them no more good than Adam's Aprons of
Fig Leaves covered his nakedness, and hid him from Gods Justice for his sin;
but they will be as open, and lie as naked to the manifestations of Gods
Justice and Judgments to them for their sins, as if they had never had any
outward form of Worship.

I having had experience how subtly the Serpent works, twisting and turning
himself about in the heart of man (the garden of God in man) upon the Tree of
knowledge, and when he sees he cannot keep man from being in some outward form
of Worship, and thereby be kept from running into outward sins and evils, as
once he had done, whereby the manifestations and making known of Gods Justice
and Judgments seize so upon man for his sins, as that man knew not how to bear
it; then the Serpent willingly let man in his will to set upon an outward form
of Worship, thereby to take off the fierceness of the manifestation and making
known of Gods Justice and Judgments that he once lay under for sin. And the
subtle Serpent cares not what outward form of Worship it is that man in his
will, will set up to worship in, so that he can but keep alive in him the love
to those sins that he outwardly leaves and forsakes: And because he is afraid
of Gods Justice for the committing of those sins, man may make the outside as
clear as he will, as did the Pharisees, if the inside be but foul, if the love
do but still remain to the sins, or to any one sin; the Serpent, rather than he
will wholly lose his Kingdom, he will content himself if he can but rule and
reign in the inward love to sin, although it be but to one dearly beloved sin.

I also knowing the readiness and the proneness that is in man to yield to the
subtilty of the Serpent, and for his own ends, for his own preservation, to be
kept from being killed or slain by the Justice of God, (as it was with Jeroboam
when he set up his Calves, which he did for his own preservation to be kept
from being killed, 1 Kings 12. 27.) Man to be preserved and kept from the
Justice and Judgments of God for sin, he sets up and sets upon an outward form
of Worship, and such an outward form of Worship as that he thinks that God will
be best pleased in: And in this Worship he sets up his Altar of outward
self-obedience to God, and upon this Altar he offers his Sacrifice of an
outward observance, and that very strictly too, of all and every of those
things that are outwardly required or desired in that outward form of Worship
that in his will he sets or takes up. And in this his offering of his Sacrifice
of a strict and devout observing and fulfilling of all and every of those
things that are outwardly required and desired in that outward form of Worship,
which in his will he sets up, and upon the Altar set up by him of his outward
selfobedience to God. In this man satisfies, pleases, and contents himself (as
Jeroboam did with his Calves) instead of the true Worship of God, which is to
worship him in his Spirit, and in his Truth, in his Jesus, in that which saves
from sin; and that not only from the outward actions of sin, for fear of the
punishment: but this Worship of God that is done in Spirit, and in his Truth,
in his Jesus, in that which saves from sin, there is in this Worship a knowing
of a being saved from the love to sin, as well as a being saved from the
outward actions of sin.

I say, I knowing and having experienced how man thus by the subtilty of the
Serpent, is ready to set up a Worship to himself (as Jeroboam did) instead of
the true Worship of God, and upon the Altar set up by himself of self-obedience
to God, and there upon that Altar to offer his Sacrifices of a strict and
devout doing and performing of all and every the outward things that is
required or desired in that outward form of Worship; and thereby and therein to
please, satisfy, and content themselves, as if they were worshipping God in
his Spirit, and in his Truth, in his Jesus that does not only save from the
outward acts of sin, but saves from the root of sin, from the love to sin.

God caused me to cry out against this Altar of self-obedience to God, and
against the Sacrifices offered upon it, to please, satisfy, and content
themselves in a strict observing, doing, and performing of all and every the
outward things required in the outward Worship that they did set up (as
Jeroboam did, and neglected the true Worship of God) and neglected the Worship
of God in his Spirit, and in his Truth, and in that which does not only save
from sin in the act, but from sin in the love of it. And in telling them the
danger that would follow and befall such a Worship, as I had experienced, and if
any of them had set up such a Worship, not charging any particular person with
so doing, but declaring what I knew of the subtilty of the Serpent putting man
upon so doing, and the danger that they were in who were in such a Worship: And
where is there a Meeting that there is no such Worshippers in? But that all and
every person that belongs to the Meeting, are such and only such as are
worshipping God in his Spirit, and in his Truth, in his Jesus, that does not
only save them from the outward actions of sin, but from the love and desire
to sin. And those that are not thus worshpping God, in his Spirit, and in his
Truth, in his Jesus, in that which saves from sin; and not only saves from
outward sins taken notice of by men to be sins, but saves from the root of sin,
from the love to sin. Let them be what they will be, and think of themselves as
highly as they will, and be never so highly esteemed of by others, yet I must
once more tell them, whatsoever outward Worship it is that they profess, it is
but a Worship that the subtle Serpent puts them upon; and they are with
Jeroboam, making of Calves, and saying in their hearts, these be the gods that
have saved thee from that bondage and slavery that once they were under by and
for their outward sins; and all that they are doing in that Worship, is but an
offering Sacrifice upon that Altar that they have set up of self-obedience to
God.

I shall not say, that upon my thus crying out against this Altar of self
obedience to God, and the Sacrifices offered thereon, that King Jeroboam put
out his hand, and said, Lay hold on him; but this I can say, that he that
looked upon himself as the chief man in the Meeting, and was so esteemed of by
others, he often, when I was speaking to the purposes aforesaid, would rise up
and go out of the Meeting, and the rest of the Meeting would follow him; I
shall not say that he had done as Jeroboam did, make Calves for his own safety
to preserve his life, and was offering Sacrifice upon the Altar of
Self-obedience, and therefore with Jeroboam could not endure to hear his Altar
to be cried out against; but the Tree is known by its fruit.

Some others although they followed his example of going out of the Meeting,
yet they show something more of the following of Christ's Command than he did,
and they would come sometimes and speak to me about my speaking, which I always
gave them mild and very gentle answers, as I know none of them dare say to the
contrary; and although they had nothing to say against what I spoke, but that
my words were true; nor had they any thing against my Life and Conversation,
they could not deny but that I lived as blameless as any of them. But the great
thing they had to say against my speaking, was because my words did not reach
the witness of God in them, or the seed of God in them, as they called it; but
when I spoke, there was something in them that was troubled and burdened, and
therefore they put out their hands to lay hold on me, d^siring me to speak no
more: And by what spirit it was that they spoke thus to me, I have here already
declared, in declaring in what spirit it was that Peter rebuked Jesus in, for
speaking what was true; and how Jesus words were a trouble and a burden to a
will that opposed Gods will in Peter and the rest of the Twelve, and so shall
say no more of it now.

From this great disturbance my speaking to the aforesaid purposes had made to
that will in them, that could not endure to hear true words spoken in declaring
and making known the subtilty of the Serpent, how he kept up his Kingdom in
man, in and under an outward form of godliness of being like God, when he
disobeys God in that he does not worship him in his spirit, and in his truth,
in his Jesus, as he persuaded man at first, and thereby caused him to fall,
telling him, by disobeying God he should be as Gods. This did so disturb,
burden, and trouble that will in them, that when there came any to the Meeting
that day, that they were willing to hear them speak words, that many times if I
did while such were there, when none was either speaking or praying, yet if I
began to speak a few words, then one or other of them would either stand up and
fall a speaking, or fall down upon their knees and pray, or else go out of the
Meeting, and so break up the Meeting; and so they put out their hands against
me, saying, Lay hold on him: Yet amongst all these that did put forth their
hands against me, there was never any one of them that would begin a discourse
with me, concerning my speaking, no not one of them; and yet I constantly when
the Meeting was ended, followed them to the aforesaid chief man's house whither
they constantly went, and there stayed till they went from thence; if they went
from thence that night, I saw their going away; and if they stayed there all
night, then I stayed there until they were about going to supper: And sometimes
I would begin the discourse with them, to know why they dealt so by me, but I
received very pitiful answers from them, sometimes they would say they thought
I had done speaking, because I did not follow on to speak so fast as some do;
and sometimes I had this answer, that if any thing be revealed to another that
sits by, the first was to hold his peace; and therefore when they began to
speak, I was to hold my peace; indeed I did so, because I would beget no
disturbance; but that is not the meaning of the Scripture, but the meaning of
the Scripture is quite contrary, for if any thing be revealed to one that
sits by, the first is to hold his peace, before he that had any thing
revealed to him was to begin to speak, or else how could they all Prophecy one
by one, and it was the practice of the Apostles, as you may read Acts 15. And
it is the constant practice amongst them, that the one leaves speaking before
the other begins; but so much the subtilty of the Serpent had prevailed with
them, as to excuse themselves for what they had done, as that they would wrong
and abuse the Scripture, and not only the Scripture, but their own practice.
Others of them wherein the subtilty of the Serpent did not so much appear in
sewing fig leaves together to make themselves Aprons to cover their nakedness
with: They dealt plainly with me, and told me, that indeed they had nothing
against the words I spoke, nor against me, but the reason why they did it was,
because they were informed that my speaking at other times was a burden and
trouble to many in the Meeting. These are truly in substance the very Answers
that have been given me, when I have begun any discourse with any of them, to
know why they dealt so disorderly by me: And I shall leave it to the witness of
God in every man's Conscience, whether these in their thus dealing with me, were
not in the same state and condition, and carried out by the same spirit that
the Twelve were in, when they met with one casting out Devils in Jesus Name,
and they forbade him, because he did not follow them.

When Jesus had cast out of the Gaderean the unclean spirits or devils, he
commanded him to go home to his house, to his friends, and tell them and show
unto them how great things the Lord had done for him, and had compassion on
him; and he obeyed the Command of Jesus, in publishing throughout the whole
City how great things Jesus had done for him, and all men did marvel, as you
may see Mark 5. Luke 9.

These Gaderenes, although for the great loss that they had of their Swine,
they prayed and besought Jesus in that body of his to depart from them out of
their Coast; yet when the man, out of whom Jesus had cast unclean spirits or
devils, prayed and besought him that he might be with that body of Jesus, but
Jesus would not suffer him, but sent him home to tell and to show to his
friends what great things God had done for him, in having compassion on him;
and according to the Command of Jesus, he went his way, and published
throughout the whole City how great things Jesus had done for him: And the
Gaderenes when they heard him begin to publish what great things God had done
for him, they did not go away from him, and would not hear him, and desire him
to hold his peace, and not to publish any more what great things that God had
done for him, neither ^id they fall a speaking to prevent or hinder him from
publishing what great things God had done for him; no, t^^y did not deal so by
him, but on the contrary, they staid and patiently heard him without
interrupting or hindering of him from publishing the great things that God had
done for him, there was not one of them that showed any dislike to what he
published of the great things that God had done for him; so far were they from
showing dislike at what he did, that all men marvelled at it.

I shall leave it to the witness of God in every one, to judge whether or no
these Gaderenes shall not rise up in Judgment and condemn some, that when Jesus
had cast out the uoclean spirits or devils out of a man, and commanded him to
tell, to show what great things that God had done for him, to his friends where
he lived that when he began to tell and to show what great things that God had
done for him, they would not stay to hear him, but went away from him, and
desired him to declare no more amongst them what great things that God had done
for him, or else some of them to begin to speak, to the end to prevent him from
making known what great things God had by his only begotten Son Jesus done in
him and for him.

But all this did not in the least disturb, disquiet, or trouble me, although I
was looked upon by most of them, as Ahab looked upon Elijah to be a Troubler of
Israel: for when I went after the Meetings were ended to the aforesaid chief
man's house, not one in five of them would take any notice of me, not so much as
to give me the hand, the usual custom amongst them, at their parting, that so
if I had wanted a hand to have been helped to Heaven thereby, I must have
stayed behind for any help I should have had of them: And if they were going by
me at their going away out of the house, they would turn their backs to me, and
their faces another way, because they would not see me; and yet all this never
in the least moved me, but I was kept by the spirit of Jesus in me in quietness
and peace in me, knowing whose work it was that I did; although by their
dealings with me, I understood I was not only slighted by them, but made an
hiss and byword among those called of the World; for what they did by me, was
not done in a corner, but openly, publicly, sometimes in the presence of some
hundreds that came to the Meeting out of several Parishes round about; and the
great man of the Meeting, when one time I was at a monthly Meeting, and there
made a complaint of the Meeting, that they did not deal by me, as I had in a
Book of theirs kept for the County at the place of the monthly Meeting, read,
That it was an order made in general for all Meetings, that they should do for
me or any other; and it was owned by the monthly Meeting, that they ought to
deal by me as I had desired of them, and as it was writ in their Book they
ought to do it; yet this great man of esteem stood it out against the Meeting,
that it should not be done for me, although it was owned by the Meeting in
general to be my right; and to excuse himself why it should not be done for me,
he openly fell upon me in words, saying, That I was the greatest trouble and
burden to the Meeting, that ever the Meeting met withal; and why was it, but
for the words I spoke in the Meeting? he could not deny but that my life and
Conversation was as blameless as his or any that did belong to their Meeting,
and so I was owned to live by the monthly Meeting, and I refer my self to those
that were at the monthly Meeting, how patiently I did bear it, and how little I
spoke in my own defense, although I had truth on my side, as in general the
monthly Meeting owned (and although as to all outward things they knew I was
not any thing beneath any of them.) All this their dealings by me did not in
the least abate or hinder me for crying out against the Altar of
Self-obedience, and against the Offerings offered thereupon, in a very strict
and devout observing, doing, and performing all and every the outward things
that is desired and required in that outward form of Worship in their Wills set
by them, and thereby and therein to please, satisfy, and content themselves,
as if they were worshipping God in his spirit and in his truth, in his Jesus
that saves from sin, and also telling of them what would follow and fall upon
them for such Worship and Service.

But at length it happened to me, as it did to the man of God sent to cry
against the Altar at Bethel, who King Jeroboam by his threatening nor by his
friendship could prevail with to disobey any part of the Command of God; but he
was prevailed with and brought into disobedience by an old Prophet, that told
him that an Angel spoke to him by the Word of the Lord; but he lied unto him,
he had no Angel spoke to him, nor no Word from the Lord to say what he did to
the man sent of God: It was the old lying Serpents self in him that spoke these
words to him, whereby he deceived the man sent of God; and so it happened to
me. All the bad dealings that I had received did not in the least hinder me in
my obedience to any part of the Command of God, in speaking what I had in
Command to speak; but it so happened that I was in Company with three Women
called Old Quakers, of great esteem amongst them, and although in plain words
they did not give themselves the Name of Prophetess, as the old Prophet did, or
say as he did, that an Angel spoke to him by the word of the Lord, yet they
spoke words to the same purpose, That they were moved by the spirit of God to
speak to me, and that it was in the Name of God, and for Gods sake, and many
words to these purposes that they used to me; and that although as they said
they did not know one another minds, nor had said nothing of it before, yet
they did speak to that purpose, as if they all of them severally one by another
had a Command from God, and that they were all moved by the spirit of God in
them, at that time to speak to me, and let me know from God, that what I spoke
in the Meeting, I did not speak by a true moving of the spirit of God in me,
but it was the wrong spirits self in me, that put me forward to speak; and very
many words they spoke to me to these purposes: And I having had a large
experience of the subtilty of the Serpents self in me, and how he had in former
times deceived me in a show of godliness, and then they all as the old Prophet
did, did affirm that they had a several Angel, or as they called it, a several
moving of the spirit of God, severally did move in each of them, and put them
upon it to speak to me by the word of the Lord in them (although I now know
they all lied to me, as the old Prophet did) yet these their lying words then
spoken in the Name of the Lord, deceived me, as the lying words of the old
Prophet deceived the man sent of God, and they caused me as the Serpent did
Eve, who at first resisted the Temptation, but afterward she yielded to
question or doubt of the Command of God, whether God had said, Ye shall not eat
of every tree of the Garden; and so at first I resisted them very strongly, yet
at length through their many words, I questioned or doubted whether God had
commanded me to speak as I had spoken, although I did before know that God had
Commanded me to speak, as Eve knew that God had said they should not eat of
every tree of the Garden; there was one Tree that God had Commanded that they
should not eat thereof: And in this knowledge of what was Gods Command, Eve had
obeyed God in, as I in that knowledge that it was the Command of God for me to
speak, had obeyed God in; but it was with me as it was with Eve, and the man
sent of God (who at first resisted and said Nay to the old Prophet) after the
Serpent by his deceit and lie, had caused Eve to question or doubt, whether God
had Commanded what she in her self before knew to be the Command of God, and
from that knowledge that she had in her self that it was the Command of God,
she had yielded obedience unto it; but soon after the Serpent had wrought in
her to question or doubt, whether it was the Command of God or no, he soon by
his lying brought her to disobey God in his Command, and it cost her her life;
and so the man sent of God, he knew that it was the Command of God in him, that
he should not eat bread or drink water in that place, and he for a time obeyed
the Command of God in him, and did not yield to the desire of the old Prophet;
but when by the lying of the old Prophet, and that in the word of the Lord, as
the old Serpent in him caused him to say, he questioned the truth of the
Command of God in him, which before he had obeyed, and would not for the fear
or friendship of a King be prevailed with into the disobedience of any part of
it; yet by the lie of one that called himself a Prophet, and sent of God as he
was, he went from obeying what he had known to be the true Command of God in
him, and believed the lie that the lying old Prophet had told him was the
Command of God for him to obey God in, and that cost him his life; and so it
was with me, although at first I resisted them strongly, and would give no way
to them, yet afterward by the lies that they told me in the word of the Lord,
as they pretended to me, that it was by the motion of the spirit of God in
them, that they spoke to me, I giving some credit to them, as Eve did to the
Serpent, and the man sent of God to the old lying Prophet, I began to question
the truth of the Command of God in me, which before I knew to be the Command of
God in me, and had obeyed God therein; and I did with Eve and the man of God,
who gave more credit to the lie the Serpent told, and the old Prophet told,
than to the truth spoken in them and to them by the spirit of God; and so did I
give more credit to the lie that they spoke to me, in that they told me it was
by the moving of self in me that I spoke, and not by the Command of God; and by
believing them in their lie, I went out of the obedience to what I knew was the
Command of God in me, and to me, and for a time I had obeyed God in, which all
the hard or bad dealings that I had met withal could not in the least prevail
with me, to disobey the Command of God in me and to me, to speak what God had
given me in Command to speak; but I was prevailed with, and prevailed over by
the lies spoken in the Name of the Lord (as was pretended) by the three old
Quakers (so called) and no sooner did I by the lies that they had spoken to me,
begin to question or doubt of the truth of Gods Command in me to speak, but
there quietly got up in me a disobedience to the Command; and when I found in
me a motion to speak as formerly I had, I did not yield obedience to the
motion, but went into the disobedience, and kept silence, as they had desired
of me to do, and so it cost me my life, for soon after a Lion by the way met
with me and slew me.

Jesus, as he is the Lamb of God in making known in man and to man the Commands
of God, what man is to do in obedience to God; and so in man's yielding of
obedience to the Commands of God, he makes known the love of God to man and in
man, and thus as a Lamb, and act in man like a Lamb in innocence, so he may be
slain, yea, he is slain in man by his disobedience to God. As I have known the
slaying of him, by my disobedience to the Command of God, and as he is thus a
Lamb in man, and acts the part of a Lamb in man, so the same God, the same
Power, that has sent him as a Jesus to save man, to save all men that will
believe in him, that will yield obedience to what he makes known in them and to
them, to be the Command of God for them to obey God in; so the same God, the
same Power has made him Judge both of the Living and of the Dead: And so as he
is a Judge, he is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, and that as a Lion, as a
Judge I found him, soon meeting of me after my disobedience, in not obeying the
Command of God, to speak as he gave me a Command to speak, and he slew me, he
passed the sentence of Condemnation upon me for my disobedience, and made me
sensible of my disobedience, and I knew I had transgressed, and I willingly
submitted to Gods Chastisement, as did the man sent from God, when it was told
him, that for his disobedience that his Carcass should not come to the
Sepulcher of his Fathers: You do not read in the Scripture that in the least he
murmured or reflected upon the Chastisement of God for his disobedience.

And the passing of this sentence of Condemnation upon me was so great, as that
I may truly say it slew me; that is, as to my own apprehensions I was as it
were slain, in that I did not find any more movings of God in me to speak, as I
formerly had, nor did I find in me any more stirrings or drawings of the spirit
of God in me, to Meditation, Contemplation, or musing of God, and of his
Goodness to me, as before my disobedience I often had and was much refreshed
and comforted thereby, in what God in those Meditations, Contemplations, or
musings of God, and his Goodness made known to me of himself, in what he was to
man as a Creator and a Redeemer, and what man was in his Image and likeness, as
Created and Redeemed; nor did I find such fresh manifestations and making known
of Gods love to me, as before I had done, thereby to cause my love to increase
to God; and although I went to the Meeting, and kept it constantly as before,
yet I found no comfort or refreshment thereby, as formerly I had done when I
stood in my obedience to God.

And in this slain state for my disobedience, I continued a long time. At
length, the first appearance that I apprehended or took notice of that God
stirred or moved in me by his Spirit, was the movings or stirrings up of a
desire in me to understand the mystery of Adam, the Woman, the Garden, the
Serpent, the forbidden Fruit, and the eating of it, and the death that man died
in the day he eat thereof: And to leave something of it in writing (not in
print, I had no thoughts of any such thing then) that others might know what
God had made known to me of the subtilty of the Serpent in man; and so little
did I then think of writing much, that I began upon half a sheet of Paper,
thinking upon that I might write what was Gods will that I should leave in
writing; but it exceeded the half sheet, and came into several sheets: And when
I thought I had done writing, and had tacked the sheets together, intending to
send them to printing, it pleased God to take from me a Child, whom I loved, as
being in the outward body more like me than any Child I had; and such was Gods
goodness to me, although I had a natural affection to her as a Father, yet I
was so well satisfied with the will of God therein, that it was no inward
trouble or disturbance to me, but I was as if it had not been, in having my
will resigned and given up into the will of God therein. And then God moved and
stirred in me to write something of what I knew of denying my self, and taking
up the Cross and following of Jesus; and I did not think therein to have writ
so much as would have filled one sheet of Paper; not having the least thought,
as God is my witness, of making any the least mention of what I knew of taking
up the Cross and following of Jesus, when I stood in my obedience to him, in
speaking what he had given me in command to speak through all the opposing I
met with; but finding it lay as a duty upon me, after I had began to write of
self-denial, and taking up the Cross and following of Jesus, I was then and
thereby, as my duty required to make known what I knew, how the subtle Serpent
deceives man in an outward form of Religion, persuading them that in that
outward form of Religion, they are denying of themselves, and taking up the
Cross and following of Jesus; when indeed and in truth they are but a setting
up of self in them: And I have yielded in doing my duty therein, lest through
my disobedience therein, God might have dealt with me as he did by me for my
disobedience in not speaking.

And if any that shall read what I have herein writ, and there shall and does
rise in them a spirit to think or to speak that I have not done well in it, to
make so public the failings, weaknesses, infirmities, or miscarriages of
Friends to me, or rather to that of Jesus in me; I shall say, that by the same
Spirit they may upon the same grounds as well think and say that Matthew and
Luke did not do well, or rather the spirit of God in Matthew and Luke did not
do well in making, by writing so much, more public the failings, weakness,
infirmities, or miscarriages of the Twelve to Jesus; as I have done the
failings, weakness, infirmities, or miscarriages of others to that which was of
Jesus in me. But so it has pleased the infinite wise God to leave their
failings, weaknesses, infirmities, or miscarriages, and not only theirs, but
others of his faithful Servants, in writing, and now in print; not to the end
to be as Examples for us to follow, but to be as Warnings for us to have a care
that we by the subtilty of the Serpent, do not fall as they did: for they and
we stand and are saved by all one and the same Faith, in the same Jesus; and
what is written, is written for our Instruction and Learning.

And I know that the same Spirit that will blame me for making so public the
dealings of Friends by me, will also blame me for meddling with the failings,
weaknesses, infirmities, or miscarriages of the Twelve; as it did in some
Friends for speaking of the failings of Job, who although perfect and upright,
and how patiently he bore what God suffered Satan to afflict him with, yet his
patience did not always continue the same; for if it had, he would never have
cursed the day of his birth, etc. I made but use of this in my speaking in the
Meeting, to show what great need we all had to stand upon our watch, lest at
any time we be overcome by the subtilty of the Adversary; and this gave such an
offense, that I was by two, counted no small Friends, at two several times,
rebuked for mentioning Job's failings.

And therefore I expect no other, but by the same Spirit I shall be sentenced
and judged for my making so public the dealings of those called Friends or
Quakers to me, or rather to that which was of Jesus in me; but if they do, I
know by what Spirit it is that they so judge and censure me: That it is not by
the spirit of God, for the example of the spirit of God I follow; it is the
example of God by his spirit in Matthew and Luke, to make public in writing
the dealings of the Twelve by Jesus: It is the example of God by his spirit in
Paul, to make public in writing Peter's not walking uprightly according to the
truth of the Gospel, but dissembled: It is the example of God by his spirit in
the holy men of old, that gave forth the Scriptures, to make public in writing
the failings of the best of his Servants; as of Noah, Abraham, Lot, Moses,
David, Job, and others: And therefore I shall conclude with the words of Jesus,
Mat. 10. 24, 25. The disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above
his lord. It is enough for the disciple that he is as his master, and the
servant as his lord: if they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how
much more shall they call them of the household?

I have forborne the mentioning of any Name or Names, and so I shall, unless I
hear what I have written be contradicted, or the truth of it questioned; and
then I may not only name the Names of the Persons, but the Places where they
either spoke, or did what I have herein mentioned.

READER,
WHosoever thou art that shall read what I have writ, if upon the reading of
what I have writ of the dealings of some of those called Quakers to me, thou
shall therefore judge or think the worse of the Truth those called Quakers own
and believe in, that is, of the true Light in them, which Light is Jesus that
came to save his People from their sins; and that Jesus who is the true Light
which lights every man that comes into the World, it is only he, and there
is none other that can save any one from their sins; and the way that they own
that God is to be worshipped in, by this Jesus the true Light in them, is to
worship him in his Spirit and Truth.

That evil Spirit that would lead thee or cause thee, upon the reading of what
I have writ, to judge or think the worse of the Truth owned and believed by
those called Quakers, and of the way owned and believed by them that God is to
be worshipped in, because of the dealings of some of them to me; the same evil
Spirit, upon the same ground, may lead thee or cause thee to judge or think the
worse of Jesus, and of the way that he declared that God the Father was to be
worshipped in; and that because of the dealings of the Twelve by him, as I have
in what I have writ, mentioned of their dealings by Jesus; as that they did not
believe all that he said to be true, nor did they always understand the truth
spoken by him, but by Peter he was rebuked for speaking the truth; and all of
them did contradict him in his speaking the truth, saying to him, That should
not be done to him, and that by them, that he had said should be done to him,
and that by them; as when he told them they should be all offended because of
him that night, and so offended as to be scattered and forsake him; and as he
said they should therein deal by him, so they did deal by him, although they
had all said they would not deal so by him. And moreover, there was one of the
Twelve that for the love he had to money, betrayed him and sold him to them
that he knew sought for him to take away his life. Thus much you may read in
the Scriptures, of the dealings of the Twelve by Jesus: And therefore I do say,
that the same evil Spirit that would have thee to judge or think the worse of
the Truth that is owned and believed by those called Quakers, of their
worshipping God in Spirit and Truth, because of what I have writ, that some of
them have done to me. The same evil Spirit, upon the same ground, may cause
thee to judge and think the worse of Jesus, and of the truth that Jesus
preached, because of what the Twelve did to him, that thou may read written
in the Scriptures.

God knows and bears me witness, that why I make mention of their dealings to
me, is to do what I believed I ought to do; thereby to make known what
knowledge and acquaintance man may have of Jesus in the flesh, and yet not know
Jesus in his Death and Resurrection, as the Twelve who had the most knowledge
of him and acquaintance with him in the flesh, and were sent by him to preach
and cast out Devils, and yet knew him not in his Death and Resurrection. And
therefore man may go a great way in an outward form of Worship, and in an
outward following of Jesus, and yet not come fully to know what it is to deny
himself daily, and take up his Cross to all self, and be a Follower of Jesus in
the Spirit. As the Twelve, although they followed him in the flesh, and so had
the most acquaintance with him, yet they had not in that time of their knowing
of him and following of him in the flesh, so fully learned that Lesson of
selfdenial and taking up of the daily Cross to their own wills, as they learned
it when they knew his Death and Resurrection in themselves, and followed him in
the Spirit: And as Paul said, They knew no man after the flesh: yea, though we
have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more.

Oh, how subtly the Serpent self in man can and does act in an outward form
of worshipping God, tempting man in that knowledge and understanding that he
has of God, to eat of the forbidden Tree, that he might thereby be as Gods?

I do therefore beseech the Readers to have a great care that they be not
deceived by the Serpents subtilty therein, as I do know he has formerly
deceived me.

And also I do beseech them not to answer the desires of the subtle Serpent or
Tempter in them, as to judge or think the worse of the Truth, the true Light in
man, or of those called Quakers, because of some ill dealings done by some of
them to.

Henry Abbut.

FINIS.

