THE BULL OF Pope Alexander VIII. Published Two days before his Death.
Annulling all the Proceedings of the FRENCH CLERGY, Assembled at PARIS, 1682.
Published by Authority.
ALEXANDER VIII. Pope.

In the Name of God, Amen.
KNow all men by these Presents, That in the Year of our Lord Christ 1691.
Indiction the 14th, January the 31th, and in the second Year of the Pontificate
of our most Holy Father in Christ, our Lord Pope Alexander the 8th: I, deputed
Official, whose name is Subscribed, did see and read some Letters, sealed with
the Seal of the Fisher, after the manner of the Court of Rome; which said
Letters were neither blotted, vitianor interlin'd, and were of the Tenor,
following.

ALEXANDER VIII, Pope. For the perpetual Memory of the Thing. Amongst the
manifold Cares of our Pastoral Office, with which we are perpetually exercised;
This One, has a peculiar Influence upon us viz. That we may preserve and
maintain the Rights of the Apostolic See, and of the Universal Church; and
also the Privileges of each particular Church, Holy Places, and Ecclesiastical
Persons, every where entire and inviolate against whatsoever Assaults may be
made against them to their Infringement; and to vindicate them from all injury
and damage, according to the Power committed to us by God, by such ways and
means as, after due and mature, consideration, we shall judge in the Lord to be
agreeable to Justice and Reason. Since then it has pleased the most High; by
the inscrutable Mystery of his Divine Providence, to raise Us, how unworthy
soever, to the Highest Dignity in the Church Militant; Before all other
Businesses, which have offered themselves to our Pontifical Care, Those have
most sorely and grievously afflicted Us, (in regard of the Bowels of Love which
We bear toward our dearly Beloved Son in Christ, Lewis the most Christian
King, and his most flourishing Kingdom of France,) which have been acted in
that Kingdom, either against the Rights of the Churches thereof, or against the
Authority of the Pope of Rome, and of the Universal Church. For some Venerable
Brethren Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Persons of that
Kingdom in an Assembly of the Gallican Clergy, held at Paris, Anno D. 1682*
upon the Account of Extending the Right of that which they call the Regalia,
over all the Churches of the said Kingdom, to which they gave their Assent,
have acted things very grievous and bitter to Us; as also by publishing a
Declaration thereupon, concerning Ecclesiastical Power, containing Four
Propositions; and besides after. That Assembly, there followed prejudicial
Mandates, Arrests, Confirmations, Epistles, Edicts, and Decrees whatsoever they
be, published by any Persons, either Ecclesiastic or Laick, in any Office or
Authority whatsoever; Besides many things of late years having been any other
way acted in that Kingdom, prejudicial to the Apostolic See, and the Roman
Church or to any other Churches, Monasteries and Holy Places, their Persons,
Estates, Goods and Rights, respectively; or any otherways to the Detriment of
the Jurisdiction, Immunity and Liberty Ecclesiastical. We, whom God has
appointed upon Earth to be the Assertor of Ecclesiastical Rights, Day and Night
in the bitterness of our Soul, have had serious Thoughts of these Things, and
lifting up our hands to the Lord with Tears and Groans, have earnestly prayed
him from the bottom of our heart, That he would assist Us by his powerful
Grace, That We might rightfully Execute this difficult part of the Apostolical
Office, committed to Us. Upon which Consideration, as also that We might give a
good Account of our Stewardship to the Supreme Judge, and might not be charged
with Negligence in the Administration of our Office, (as far as God of his
Goodness has enabled Us) We have hitherto left no Means unattempted, whereby
We might cause the Authors of such prejudicial Grievances aforesaid, seriously
to retract what they had done. And to the intent, that We might more
effectually, and fully make Provision for the Indemnity of the Sea aforesaid,
of the Universal Church, of the Jurisdiction, Immunity and Liberty
Ecclesiastical of Churches, Monasteries, and Places of Devotion, and of the
foresaid Persons therein, for all times to come; having heard the Opinions of
many of our Venerable Brethren, Cardinals of the Roman Church, and other
Graduates in Theology, who were specially chosen by Us to examine the Decrees
of the Doctors in this Business, They having maturely discussed the Point, and
laid it all before Us, out of the Desire, as far as God shall enable Us, to
Remedy the foresaid Inconveniences; And also calling to mind the Carriage of
Pope Innocent the 11th of Happy Memory; who in way of Answer to some Letters,
which the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Persons aforesaid
wrote to him, to acquaint him with what they had done in that Kingdom; He by
his Letters inform of a Breve, dated the 11th of April, 1682. did Condemn,
Rescind and Vacate all that was done in the said Assembly, in the Business of
the Regalia, with whatsoever followed thereupon, or what might be hereafter
Attempted to that purpose: These he declared to be utterly Null and Void. We
therefore treading in his Steps, having considered what was Acted in the
Assembly aforesaid, Anno D. 1682. As well concerning the Extending the Rights
of the Regalia, as concerning the Declaration of the Ecclesiastical Power of
such Acts; as also of all and singular Mandates, Arrests, Confirmations,
Declarations, Epistles, Edicts, Decrees given forth or published by Authority,
either Ecclesiastical or Lay: And also of all other the Grievances aforesaid in
the said Kingdom Acted and done by whomsoever, or for whatsoever Cause, and
whatever Manner; as also of whatsoever followed thereupon, Having a special and
particular Regard to the Tenor of what was formerly Acted; and those Memoirs
being faithfully and sufficiently Copyed and Expressed Word for Word; By our
own mere Motion, certain Knowledge and mature Deliberation, out of the Fullness
of our Apostolical Power, all and singular Things acted and done in the
aforesaid Assembly of the Gallican Clergy, in the Year 1682. as well concerning
the Extent of the Right of the Regalia, as concerning the Declaration of their
Ecclesiastical Power, and the Four Propositions contained therein: Together
with all and singular Mandates, Arrests, Confirmations, Declarations, Epistles,
Edicts; Decrees given forth or published by any Persons either Ecclesiastical
or Lay, however Qualified, enjoying any Authority or Power requiring particular
Mention; and also all other things, how many, or whatsoever, any ways
prejudicial to the said Apostolic See; and to either the Jurisdiction,
Immunity or Ecclesiastical Dignity of the Roman Church, or otherwise to
Churches, Monasteries and Holy Places aforesaid; and the Persons, Estates,
Goods, Privileges, Prerogatives and Rights whatsoever belonging to the Persons
therein Respectively, which have been Acted in that Kingdom, with all in
General, and every thing in particular, whenever or howsoever following
thereupon, or which may follow thereupon at any time hereafter. We by the
Tenor of these Presents, do Declare and Decree, That they are all Null and
Void, invalid, and of no Force or Effect; and that they were so from the very
beginning, are so, and for ever will be so; And that no Man is bound to observe
them, or any of them, though he has taken an Oath so to do: And that no Man has
had, or has at present any Right Action or Color of Title of Possession, or
cause of Prescription for Possession, for a long time past and immemorial, though
no Disturbance or Interruption has followed, or should follow; And less Title
can accrue thereby for time to come. Neither have they made, or do they make
any right Settlement, but are so to be reputed and taken, as if they had been
never done nor extant. And yet nevertheless to show our abundant Caution, as
there is need, though by our mere Motion, Knowledge, Deliberation and Plenitude
of Power, We Disown, Abrogate, make Void and Null the Acts and Deeds, and all
the Premises aforesaid, and do Vacate them, as altogether without any Force or
Effect; and do Protest before God concerning their Nullity, Decreing these
present Letters, and whatsoever is contained in them, to be always Firm and
Good, notwithstanding that some having an Interest in the Premises, though
worthy of special and particular Mention, did not consent thereto, nor were
Called, Cited and Heard; Nor the Causes for which these Presents were given
forth, were sufficiently produced, verified, or any ways justified; or for any
other Cause whatsoever, Color, Pretense, and Head, even in the close Body of
the Law, at no time upon the Account of Surreptitiousness, Stealth or Nullity,
or Invalidity, or Mistake of our Intention, or the Consent of those who have an
Interest, or pretend to have an Interest, or any other defect whatsoever, though
great, unthought of, or which could never be thought of, or from any other
Head, drawn from Law, Fact, Statute, Custom or Privilege; notwithstanding all
which, these Presents ought not be Questioned, Impugned, Invalidated,
Retracted, called into controversy, or be reduced to terms of Law; but are, and
are to be, valid and efficacious for ever; and ought to have and obtain their
full and entire effect, and be inviolably observed by all and every one to whom
it belongs, or at any time hereafter shall belong. Thus and no otherwise, in
all and singular the Premises, all ordinary Judges whatsoever, the Auditors of
Causes of the Apostolic Chamber, the Cardinals of the Sacred Roman Church,
even the Legates de Latere, and the Nuncio's of the foresaid Apostolic See, or
any other whatsoever, enjoying or which may hereafter enjoy any Eminent Place
or Dignity, are to judge and determine, We taking away from them, and from
every one of them all Power and Authority to judge, declare, and interpret any
otherways; and if any one shall attempt, either knowingly or ignorantly, to
judge otherwise of these Presents; by any Authority whatsoever, we declare it
to be Null and Void; notwithstanding the premises, the Apostolic Constitutions
and Ordinances made in General or Provincial Councils, and Synods either
General or Special; and, as far as need is, our Rule and the Rule of the
Apostolic Chamber of not abridging any Man's Right; as also the Imperial and
Municipal Laws, and also all Statutes, strengthened by Oath, Apostolic
Confirmation, or any other Establishment, or Custom even time out of mind, as
also Privileges, Indulgences, Concessions, granted by Letters Apostolic to any
Places or Persons, though Crowned Heads, or eminent for any other Dignity, either
Ecclesiastical or Civil, or qualified any other way, or requiring Special
Nominations under whatsoever Tenor or Forms of Word, and with what Derogatory
Clauses whatsoever and other more efficacious and unusual Clauses and Decrees,
even like to Those made by our mere Motion, certain Knowledge, and Fullness of
Power, though Consistorially or any otherways, Granted, Published, Made,
oftentimes iterated, and at diverse Seasons approved, confirmed, and renewed, to
the Contrary; concerning all and every of which, though for their sufficient
derogation a special, express and particular mention ought to be made of them
and their Contents, Word for Word, and not in general Clauses importing the
same thing; or if any other Expression were to be made, or other exquisite Form
to be kept, yet we accounting those Tenors to be fully and sufficiently
expressed by these Presents, as if they had been inserted Word for Word, and
judging the Form delivered in them to be observed, we do specially and expressly
derogate them, as to the effect of the Premises; and our Will is, that they be
derogated, any other thing to the contrary hereof notwithstanding. Our Pleasure
also is, that the same Credit is to be given in all Places and in all Nations,
both in Judicatories and out of them to the Transcripts or Copies of these
present Letters, Subscribed by the hand of some Notary, and Sealed with the
Seal of some Person in Ecclesiastical Dignity, as if the Breve it self had been
shown, to be Read by them. Given at Rome in St. Marys the Greater, under the
Seal of the Fisher, the 4th Day of August, 1690. and of our Popedom, the first.
J. F. Cardinal Alban. In the Place + of the Seal of the Fisher. Upon which
Letters, I, Public Notary, whose name is Subscribed, have made this present
public Instrument and Transcript, that it might be stood to, and firmly
believed, both in Courts of Justice, and without. Given at Rome, as above, in
the presence also of D. John Baptista Rigantes, and of Ernestus Ziglinus, who
were called to witness the Premises, etc.

The Pre-inserted Apostolic Letters being compared with the Original, do agree
therewith.

Joseph Paulutius, Official deputed.


In the Place of the Seal. B. Cardinal, Datary. J. F. Cardinal Alban.

It Is so,

Witness Seraphinus Crucianus, deputed Notary of the Apostolic Chamber. In the
Place of the Sign.



ALEXANDER Papa VIII.

IN nomine Domini Amen. Cunctis ubique pateat, and sit notum, quod Anno a
Nativitate Domini Nostri Jesu Christi Millesimo Sexcentesimo Nonagesimo primo,
Indictione xiiij., Die vero trigesima prima Januarii, Pontificatus autem SS. in
Christo Patris and Domini Nostri Domini ALEXANDRI PP. VIII. Anno ejus secundo:
Ego infrascriptus Officialis deputatus vidi, and legi quasdam Litteras sub
Annulo Piscatoris more Romanae Curiae expeditas sanas, integras, and non
vitiatas tenoris qui sequitur ult. ALEXANDER PP. VIII. Ad Perpetuam rei
memoriam.

Inter multiplices Pastoralis Officii Nostri curas, quibus jugiter premimur, in
illam peculiari studio incumbimus, ut Apostolicae Sedis, ac universalis
Ecclesiae, nec non etiam singularum Ecclesiarum, Locorumque Piorum, ac
Personarum Ecclesiasticarum Jura ubique farta, tecta, ac illibata tueri, and
conservare, eaque adversus quaecunque, per quae illis aliquid detrimenti
inferri posset, tradita nobis divinitus Potestate vindicare satagamus, sicut
omnibus mature ac debite pensatis Justitiae, ac rationi consentaneum esse in
Domino arbitramur Cum itaque ex quo primum humilitatem nostram inscrutabili
Divinae suae Providentiae arcano in suprema militantis Ecclesiae specula
collocavit Altissimus, prae caeteris, quae Pontificiae Nostrae sollicitudini se
se obtulere, negotiis, illa in primis gravissima ac nobis, qui Charissimum in
Christo Filium nostrum Ludovicum Francorum Regem Christianissimum, ac
florentissimum illius Regnum in visceribus gerimus charitatis, permolesta and
plane acerba acciderint, quae sive adversus dicti Regni Ecclesiarum Jura, sive
adversus Romani Pontificis, and Ecclesiae Universae authoritatem nonnullis
Venerabiles Fratres Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, and alii ejusdem Regni
Ecclesiastici Viri in Comitiis Cleri Gallicani Parisiis Anno M.DC.LXXXII
congregati tum praestito inibi per eos extensioni illius Juris quod vocant
Regaliae ad omnes dicti Regni Ecclesias assensu, tum edita subinde de Potestate
Ecclesiastica quatuor propositiones continente declaratione, peregerunt,
quaeque ipsa Comitia subsequuta fuerunt Mandata, Arresta, Confirmationes,
Declarationes, Epistolae, Edicta, and Decreta, quaecunque a quibusvis Personis,
sive Ecclesiasticis, sive Laicis quavis authoritate, and potestate fungentibus
edita, seu publicata, nec non quae alias demum nonnullis abhinc annis, in Regno
praefato eidem Sedi Apostolicae, Romanaeque Ecclesiae, seu quibuscunque aliis
Ecclesiis, Monasteriis, and Locis Piis, illorumque respective Personis, Rebus,
Bonis, and Juribus, seu alias Jurisdictioni, vel Immunitati, aut libertati
Ecclesiasticae, quomodolibet praejudicialia quovis modo peracta ac gesta
fuerunt: haec Nos, qui Jurium Ecclesiasticorum Assertores in Terris a Domino
constituti sumus, dies, noctesque in amaritudine Animae nostrae cogitantes,
manus nostras cum lachrymis, and suspiriis levavimus ad Dominum, eumque toto
Cordis affectu rogavimus, ut Nobis potenti gratiae suae auxilio adesset, quo
ardua hac in re commissi nobis Apostolici muneris parts salubriter exequi
valeremus. Eaque consideratione adducti, ac ne Supremo Judici rationem
villicationis nostrae reddituri negligentiae in credita Nobis administratione
argueremur (quantum Divina Bonitas dedit) nihil hucusque praetermisimus, quo
praejudicialia praefata ab iismet, qui eam peregerant, ex animo retractarentur.
Verum quo efficacius, ac uberius Sedis praefatae Ecclesiae Universae,
Jurisdictionisque and Immunitatis, ac Libertatis Ecclesiasticae,
Ecclesiarumque, Monasteriorum, and Locorum Piorum hujusmodi, illorumque
Personarum praefatarum indemnitate perpetuis futuris temporibus consultum sit,
auditis quam plurium ex Venerabilibus Fratribus Nostris S. R. E. Cardinalibus,
and nonnullorum in Sacra Theologia Magistrorum, ac etiam in Decretis Doctorum
ad examen negocii hujusmodi a Nobis specialiter delectorum, qui illud mature
discusserunt, remque totam nobis exposuerunt, sententiis, quantum Nobis ex Alto
conceditur, providere volentes, ac fell. rec. Innocentii PP. XI. Praedecessoris
nostri, qui occasion rescribendi ad Litteras, quibus Archiepiscopi, Episcopi,
and alii Ecclesiastici Viri supradicti, de rebus ab ipsis gestis certiorem eum
reddiderant, per quasdam suas in simili forma Brevis die 11. Aprilis
M.DC.LXXXII. expeditas Litteras improbavit, rescidit, and cassavit, quae in
del. Comitiis acta fuerunt in negotio Regaliae cum omnibus inde sequutis, and
quae subinde attentari contigisset, eaque perpetuo irrita, and inania
declaravit, vestigiis inhaerentes, nec non in dictis Comitiis Anni M.DC.LXXXII.
tam circa extensionem Juris Regaliae, quam circa declarationem de Potestate
Ecclesiastica hujusmodi actorum, ac etiam omnium, and singulorum Mandatorum,
Arrestorum, Confirmationum, Declarationum, Epistolarum, Edictorum, Decretorum
quavis authoritate sive Ecclesiastica, sive etiam Laicali editorum, seu
publicatorum, nec non aliorum quomodolibet praejudicialium praefatorum in Regno
supradicto quandocumque, and a quibusvis, ac ex quacunque causa, and quovis
modo factorum, and gestorum, ac inde sequutorum quorumcunque etiam specificam,
and individuam mentionem, and expressionem de necessitate requirentium tenores,
and datas etiam veriores praesentibus pro plene, and sufficienter expressis, ac
de verbo ad verbum insertis, and exactissime specificatis habentes Motu
proprio, ac ex certa scientia, and matura deliberatione nostris, deque
Apostolicae potestatis plenitudine omnia, and singula quae tam quoad
extensionem Juris Regaliae, quam quoad declarationem de Potestate
Ecclesiastica, ac quatuor in ea contentas propositiones in supradictis Comitiis
Cleri Gallicani Anno M.DC.LXXXII. habitis acta, and gesta fuerunt cum omnibus,
and singulis Mandatis, Arrestis, Confirmationibus, Declarationibus, Epistolis,
Edictis, Decretis a quibusvis Personis sive Ecclesiasticis, sive Laicis
quomodolibet qualificatis, quavis authoritate, and Potestate, etiam individuam
expressionem requirente, fungentibus, editis, seu publicatis, nec non reliqua
omnia quotcumque, and qualiacumque eidem Sedi Apostolicae, Romanaeque Ecclesiae
vel Jurisdictioni, Immunitati, vel Libertati Ecclesiasticae, seu alias
Ecclesiis, Monasteriis, and Locis piis praefatis, illorumque respective
personis Rebus, Bonis, Privilegiis, praerogativis, and Juribus quibuscunque
quomodolibet praejudicialia in dicto Regno peracta, and gesta cum omnibus, and
singulis quandocunque, and quomodocunque inde sequutis, and quocunque tempore
sequuturis, ipso jure nulla, irrita, invalida, inania, viribusque, and effectu
penitus, and omnino vacua ab ipso initio fuisse, and esse, ac perpetuo fore,
neminemque ad illorum, seu cujuslibet eorum, etiamsi juramento vallata sint,
observantiam teneri, neque ex illis cuiquam aliquod jus, vel actionem, aut
titulum etiam coloratum, vel possidendi, aut praescribendi causam, etiamsi
longissimi, and immemorabilis temporis possessio, etiam citr^ ullam
interpellationem, vel interruptionem subsequnta sit, vel subsequatur,
acquisitum fuisse, nec esse, minusque ullo tempore acquiri, and competere
posse, neque illa ullum statum facere, vel secisse, sed perinde ac si nunquam
emanassent, vel facta fuissent, pro non extantibus, and non factis perpetuo
haberi debere tenore praesentium declaramus, and decernimus. Et nihilominus ad
abundantiorem cautelam, and quatenus opus sit, acta, and gesta praefata aliaque
praemissa omnia, Motu, scientia, deliberatione, and potestatis plenitudine
paribus improbamus, cassamus, irritamus, and annullamus, viribusque, and
effectu penitus, and omnino vacuamus, and contra illa, deque eorum nullitate
coram DEO protestamur. Decernentes easdem praesentes Litteras, and in eis
contenta quaecunque etiam ex eo quod quicumque in praemissis interesse habentes
etiam specifica, and individua mentione digni, illis non consenserint, nec ad
eo vocati, citati, and auditi, neque causae propter quas eaedem praesentes
emanarint, sufficienter adductae, verificatae, aut ullo modo justificatae
fuerint, aut ex alia quacumque causa, color, praetextu, and capite, etiam in
Corpore Juris clau^o^ nullo unquam tempore de subreptionis, vel obreptionis,
aut nullitatis, vel invaliditatis vitio, seu intentionis nostrae, aut interesse
habentium, vel habere praetendentium consensus, aliove quocumque etiam
quamtumlibet magno, ac incogitato, inexcogitabilique defectu, aut ex alio
quovis capite a Jure, vel Facto, aut Statuto, Consuetudine, vel Privilegio
resultante notari, impugnari, invalidari, retractari, in controversiam vocari,
seu ad terminos Juris reduci ullatenus posse, sed ipsas praesentes Litteras
semper and perpetuo firmas, validas, and efficaces existere, and fore, suosque
plenarios, and integros effectus sortiri, and obtinere, ac ab omnibus, and
singulis, ad quos spectat, and pro tempore quandocumque spectabit,
inviolabiliter observari. Sicque and non aliter in praemissis omnibus, and
singulis per quoscumque Judices ordinarios, and delagatos etiam Causarum Sac.
Palatii Apostolici Auditores, ac Sac. R. E. Cardinales etiam de Latere Legatos,
and Sedis Apostolicae praefatae Nuncios, aliosve quoslibet quacumque
praeeminentia, and potestate fungentes, and functuros, sublata eis, and eorum
cuilibet quavis aliter judicandi, declarandi, and interpretandi facultate, and
authoritate semper, and ubique judicari, and definiri debere, ac irritum, and
inane si secus super his a quoquam quavis auctoritate scienter. vel ignoranter
contigerit attentari; non obstantibus praemissis, ac Apostolicis, and in
Universalibus, provincialibusque, and Synodalibus Conciliis editis generalibus,
vel specialibus Constitutionibus, and Ordinationibus, and quatenus opus sit,
nostra and Cancellariae Apostolicae regula de Jure quaesito non tollendo,
legibus quoque etiam Imperialibus, and municipalibus, nec non quibusvis etiam
Juramento, Confirmatione Apostolica, vel quavis firmentate alia roboratis
Statutis, and Consuetudinibus etiam immemorabilibus, Privilegiis quoque,
Indultis, Concessionibus, and Litteris Apostolicis quibuscunque locis, and
Personis etiam Regali, and alia quavis sive Ecclesiastica sive Mundana
Dignitate fulgentibus, and alias quomodolibet qualificatis, ac specialem
expressionem requirentibus, sub quibuscunque verborum tenoribus, and formis, ac
cum quibusvis etiam derogatoriarum derogatoriis, aliisque efficacioribus, and
insolitis Clausulis, and Decretis etiam Motu, Scientia, and potestatis
plenitudine similibus, ac Consistorialiter, and alias quomodolibet in
contrarium praemissorum concessis, editis, factis, ac pluries iteratis, and
quantiscunque vicibus approbatis, confirmatis, and innovatis. Quibus omnibus
and singulis, etiamsi pro illorum sufficienti derogatione de illis, eorumque
totis tenoribus specialis, specifica expressa, and individua, ac de verbo ad
verbum, non autem per Clausulas generales idem importantes, mentio, seu quaevis
alia expressio facienda, aut alia exquisita forma ad hoc servanda foret,
tenores hujusmodi ac si de verbo ad verbum inserti essent, praesentibus pro
plene, and sufficienter expressis, and insertis, formanique in illis traditam
pro servata habentes, ad praemissorum effectum specialiter, and express
derogamus, ac derogatum esse volumus, caeterisque contrariis quibuscunque.
Volumus autem, ut earundem praesentium Litterarum transumptis, seu exemplis eam
expressis manu alicujus Notarii subscriptis, and Sigillo Personae in
Ecclesiastica dignitate constitutae munitis, eadem prorssus fides ubique
Locorum, and Gentium in Judicio, and extra illud habeatur, quae haberetur ipsis
praesentibus, si forent exhibitae, vel ostensae. Datum Romae apud Sanctam
Mariam Majorem sub Annulo Piscatoris die quarta Mensis Aug. M.DC.XC.
Pontificatus nostri Anno Primo. J. F. Cardinalis Albanus. Loco Annuli
Piscatoris. Super quibus quidem Litteris Ego Notarius Publicus infrascriptus
hoc praesens Publicum Transumpti Instrumentum confeci, ut eidem stetur,
firmiterque credatur in Judicio, and extra illud. Actum Romae ut supra
praesentibus itidem DD. Joanne Baptista Rigante, and Ernesto Ziglino ad
praemissa vocatis, etc.

Praeinsertae Litterae Apostolicae cum suo Originali revisae concordant.

Joseph Paulutius Officialis deputatus.


Loco Sigilli. B. Cardinalis Prodatarius. J. F. Cardinalis Albanus.

Ita est.

Seraphinus Crucianus Cancellariae Apostolicae Notarius deputatus. Loco Signi.



Printed by Edw. Jones in the Savoy, 1690.


