A LETTER Of General GEORGE MONCK'S, Dated at Leicester 23 Ian. and directed
unto Mr. Roll to be communicated unto the rest of the Gentry of Devon:
occasioned by a late Letter from the Gentry of Devon dated at Exceter 14 Ian.
and sent by Mr. Bampfield to the Speaker to be communicated unto the Parliament.

Read in Parliament Ian. 26.

London, Printed by John Redmayn in Levels Court in Pater noster row. 1660.

Most honored and dear Friends,
MEeting with a Paper dated at Exon the 13 instant, directed to W. Lenthal Esquire
Speaker of the Parliament, and subscribed by diverse of my friends and
relations, purporting the recalling the Members secluded 1648, as the best
expedient for establishing these Nations upon a foundation of lasting peace. I
have taken the boldness from my relation to some of you as allied, and my
affectionate respects to all of you as dear friends and Countrymen, to
represent to your consideration my present apprehensions of the State of
Affairs here, in order to all our better satisfactions; wherein I humbly crave
your leave of freedom without prejudice. Before these unhappy Wars the
Government of these Nations was Monarchical in Church and State: these Wars
have given birth and growth to several Interests both in Church and State
heretofore not known, though now upon many accounts very considerable, as the
Presbyterian, Independent, Anabaptist and Sectaries of all sorts as to
Ecclesiastics, and the purchasers of the Kings, Queens, Princes, Bishops,
Deans and Chapters, and all other forfeited Estates, and all those engaged in
these Wars against the King as to civils. These Interests again are so
interwoven by purchases and inter-marriages, and thereby forfeited; as I think
upon rational grounds it may be taken for granted, That no Government can be
either good, peaceful or lasting to these Nations, that does not rationally
include and comprehend the security and preservation of all the foresaid
Interests both Civil and Spiritual, I mean so far as by the word of God they
are warranted to be protected and preserved. If this be so, Then that
Government under which we formerly were both in State and Church, viz.
Monarchy, cannot possibly be admitted for the future in these Nations, because
it is support is taken away, and because it is exclusive of all the former
Interests both Civil and Spiritual, all of them being incompatible with
Monarchical Uniformity in Church and State thus expired. That Government then
that is most able to comprehend and protect all Interests as aforesaid must
needs be Republique. Wherefore to me it is no small doubt, if upon the Premises
to admit of the Members secluded 1648, were not to obstruct our peace and
continue our War, rather than establish the one, and end the other; in that
very many of those Members assert the Monarchical Interest, together with the
abolition of all Laws made since their seclusion, Which I fear upon account of
self-preservation both of Life and Estate as well as Spiritual liberty, will
immediately involve all these Nations in most horrid and bloody War afresh; the
very apprehensions whereof, I confess, I do infinitely dread, and submit the
dangerous consequence thereof to your prudent considerations, and the rather,
seeing the Army also will never endure it. Having thus briefly laid before you
the present condition of affairs, let me now entreat you to consider whither it
were not better to desist from that Paper, and submit to the Proceedings of
this Parliament, who have resolved to fill up their House, determine their
sitting, and prepare a way for future successions of Parliament; by which means
being full, and thereby comprehending the whole Interest of these Nations, they
may through Gods Mercy and all our patiences establish such a Government in the
way of a Commonwealth as may be comprehensive of all Interests both Spiritual
and Civil, to the glory of God and the weal and Peace of the whole. But if by
your impatiencies they be obstructed, our Peace will be so much the longer a
stranger to us, and we thereby a Prey to ourselves and all foreign Enemies.
Wherefore humbly pressing these upon your serious considerations with all the
friendly and affectionate respects and service to you all, I remain

Dearest Friends Your very humble and affectionate Servant, GEORGE MONCK.
Leicester, 21. Ian. 1659. For the honored Robert Rolls Esquire to be
communica-to the Gentlemen of Devonshire, who signed the late Letter to the
Speaker of the Part of the Commonwealth of England.




