A LETTER From William Basil Esquire; Attorney General of IRELAND, TO The
Honorable, William Lenthall Esquire; Speaker of the Parliament of England,
Concerning a Great VICTORY Obtained by the Parliaments Forces AGAINST The
Rebels in Meleek Island, On the Five and twentieth of October, 1650.

Together with an Order of Parliament for a public Thanksgiving within the
City of London and Liberties thereof, on the next Lord's Day, being the First of
December. 1650.

Die Martis, 26 Novembr. 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Letter and Order be forthwith printed and
published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England, 1650.

Right Honorable,
YOur Honor may please to understand, That upon the Sixth of October last,
Colonel Axtel Governor of Kilkenny, drew what forces could well be spared out
of this place and other adjacent Garrisons, viz. Eight hundred Horse and Foot,
and marched toward the Kings County, both to supply and settle our Garrisons in
those parts, lying upon the Shannon side; and being Frontiers upon the Enemy,
as also to put them into a tenable and defensive posture, as well to prevent
the Enemy from Quartering there, as to secure our own Quarters from their
Incursions. Before he came thither, he had certain Intelligence, That upon our
Northern Forces drawing themselves from Athlone, the Enemy in Connaught taking
that advantage, came over the Shannon River, their number was Three thousand
Foot, and about Three hundred Horse, all under the command of Clanrickard (whom
Ormond has lately made his Deputy) and had Besieged Kilkolgan a Garrison of
ours; and the night before had taken Forbawn-Castle, being one other of our
Garrisons, which blockt up a Pass, which is an Inlet to Kilkolgan; Colonel Axtel
with a small Body faced the Pass, and drew back his main Body to attempt
another Pass, whither when he came, he found it strongly fortified with
Breastworks, and Manned with Horse and Foot; beside, there was a deep River
(though but narrow) between him and the Enemy: They had an hours Dispute, each
being drawn up in full Bodies on either side the River: There were killed of
the Enemy One hundred and fifty Horse and Foot; we only lost one Lieutenant,
and had not above five or six common Soldiers wounded. In respect of the depth
of the water and steepness of the Banks, ours could not get over, but retreated
about half a Mile, to invite the Enemy to draw over into a Champion ground, but
they declined it. Immediately upon this, there came an additional strength to
the Enemy; for young Preston, with those which marched out of Waterford with
him, and others whom he had raised since, together with Irish Forces out of
Conaught, conjoined with the Enemy, so that in all they were in number upward
of Four thousand Foot and Five hundred Horse. They marched with their whole
Body over the Forbawn River, and came within two miles of Berr, a Garrison of
ours, wherein two great Battering Guns were lodged, Colonel Axtel not thinking
it fit to engage so great a Body with so small a party, retreated into Ossory,
both to procure a conjunction with more Forces, and a further supply of
provision. In the interim the Enemy summoned Berr, and took in three of our
Garrisons near thereunto, viz. Carry Castle, Streamstown Castle, and Clogan;
Colonel Axtel being conjoined at Roscrea with an additional strength out of the
counties of Tipperary and Wexford (who for that purpose had notice to
Rendezvous at Roscrea, upon the One and twentieth of October) in all consisting
of Thirteen hundred Foot, and One thousand Horse and Dragoons, advanced toward
Berr; whereupon the Enemy raised their Camp, and retreated to Meleek Island,
bordering upon the Shannon, into which there is only one Pass, with Bogs on
each side; and that was also fortified in three several places, one behind
another, as Reserves to each other, which were all to be forced, before any
entry could be obtained into the Island. Upon the Five and twentieth of
October, half an hour before night, our Forces made an attempt upon the Enemy,
and after a small Dispute beat them off from the first and second guard on the
Pass; but at the third the Dispute was so hot, that they came to But-end of
Musket, and God being pleased to give our Forces an entrance into the Island,
the whole Body of the Enemy was presently Routed: They left all their Arms, we
took Two hundred of their Horse, all their Wagons, Oxen, Tents, Provisions,
and whatsoever else they had in their whole Camp; among which were Clanrickards
own Wagons and Tent (he himself the day before having gone over the Shannon,
to give order for the rest of his Forces to march toward Limbrick) being
confident that the Army which he had left in the Kings County, together with
those whom he expected would have gathered to their assistance, would have been
able to carry all before them in these parts. The number of what Men the Enemy
lost, is not certainly known; for beside those who were killed, Multitudes were
drowned: Five hundred of them were forced into the Shannon by one party of our
Horse in one place, and there were all drowned in one company together. The
Irish Report, That there was not above Three hundred of the Enemy which
escaped, and that most of those were such as swam over the Shannon: which
agrees with the Relation of a Trumpeter, who was the next day sent by their
Major General Taaff, to enquire after prisoners, who confessed that all but
Three hundred were lost; we lost only one Captain, viz. Captain Goff, with
Eight common Soldiers and twenty wounded. The next day the Enemy quitted all
the before mentioned Garrisons taken from us, fired them, and fled away into
Conaught. This being done, Colonel Axtel on Friday last, being the First of
November instant, with part of the Forces returned to this place (these parts
being much infested in his absence with a party of Horse and Foot, consisting
of about Five hundred, under the command of Dungan, Pierce Rea and Cavanagh)
and the same night with a party of Horse and Foot drew out toward Thomastown,
where he heard the Enemies last mentioned Forces were gathered together, being
about Seven Miles distant from this place; the other part of the Forces marched
out of Kings County unto my Lord Deputy, who has besieged the Castle of Nenagh
in Lower: Ormond about four Miles from the Shannon, having drawn off the Forces
from before Limbrick, the unseasonableness of the Weather not admitting our
Army to lie in the field so long as the gaining of a place of so great strength
will require. I have not else at present to trouble your Honor withal, only to
let your Honor know, That the late sad Visitation of Sickness, want of Clothes,
cold and wet Weather, and Hard Duty, have weakened our Army; and therefore
humbly offer unto your Honors consideration, the Necessity of sending Recruits
of Horse and Foot, and of having a provision of Money here by the beginning of
March, whereby the Army may be (with the first season of the year) enabled to
take the field for Conaught. I humbly crave your Honors pardon for this
boldness of,

Kilkenny, 4 Nov. 1650. Right Honorable, Your Honors most humble Servant,
William Basil.
Since writing, News is come, That Nenagh Castle is Surrendered; and that my
Lord Deputy will suddenly take up his Winters-quarters in the City.



Die Martis, 26 Novembr. 1650.
Resolved by the Parliament,

THat public Thanks be given by the respective Ministers in the several
Parish Churches, Chapels and Places of Public Worship within the City of
London, and Liberties thereof, and within the late Lines of Communication, on
the next Lords day, being the first day of December, 1650. for Gods great mercy
in giving a Signal and Seasonable Victory to the Parliaments Forces in Ireland,
against the bloody Rebels there, on the Five and twentieth of October last, and
mentioned in this Letter: And it is Ordered, That the Lord Major of London do
take care that timely notice hereof be given to the Ministers of the several
Parishes within the said City of London and Liberties thereof; And that the
respective Justices of Peace within the late Lines of Communication, do take
care that timely notice hereof be given to the Ministers of their several and
respective Parishes within the said late Lines of Communication.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

FINIS.

