(...) The MAGISTRATES of ABERDEEN.
THE ha^ing (...) at Di^der and (...) in the Town of Aberdeen, at the (...) of
M^ last (...) the Oc^^sion of the Mag(...) M(...) to (...) in the New (...) of
the (...) was a Pro(...) Man before the (...) of the (...) of the (...) and
(...) thereto; And concluding them guilty, and that they ought to be punished
as Art and Part.

When this Process was called, many of the Students were absent, and the Libel
with a Reconvention raised by the Masters for their own Defense, were admitted
to Probation before a Commit.

The Probation adduced by either party being now taken, The Cause is ready to
be advised.

The Principals and Masters are not to trouble the Lords of Privy Council with
a Relation of the Libel, concerning the Circumstances of the Tumult and Rabble
committed by the Students and others; For albeit many of the Particulars
Libelled be not proven, yet it was from the beginning acknowledged, that there
was a Tumult upon the Occasion foresaid whereof the Principals and Masters were
not only Innocent, But they did ever testify their abhorrance of such Methods
of Rabbling upon any Occasion; Especially upon the LORDS Day, which they
consider as an open Contempt, not only to Civil Authority, and the flourishing
of Letters; But also to be inconsistent with the Reverence and Honor due to
the Divine MAJESTY. And therefore, they neither did nor will Paliat, or
Alleviat any Circumstance of all that is Libelled against these who were
accessory to the Tumult, but singly clear themselves of any Guilt or Accession
thereto; And shall endeavor to satisfy the Privy Council, that they had used
their outmost endeavor to prevent any such Disorder, and restrain the Students
from being Interested in it, and that they had punished these who were guilty,
with the greatest severity that the Rules, or Foundations, or any former
Precedent in either College did allow.

The points libelled against the Masters of either Colleges, were either for
making appear their accession to, or countenancing of the Rabble, or their
negligence in restraining and punishing of the guilty.

As to the Defenders Accession, There is nothing at all proven against the
Principals or Masters of either College, nor was there so much as one
Interrogatur offered to the Witnesses to fix a guilt upon any of them, except
Mr. Robert Paterson, the Principal of the Marischal-colledge, and there are
particular satisfying Answers subjoyned for clearing him of any guilt that can
be imported from the Depositions of the Witnesses, as to his Part.

It is also clear, That the Masters did use all possible means to prevent that
Disorder, in so far as the Students of either Colleges were conveened, either
in the Common hall or in their several Classes, and were there Admonished by
the Masters or Principals, that they should neither occasion or be assisting in
any disorder, nor be present at the New Church, holding forth the bad
consequences that might follow both to themselves, and their Parents: And
likewise that they employed such of their Scholars, and Pedagogues, and
Governors, as might have most influence to divert them from any irregular
course; And farther, upon the Sabbath, the Masters of the Kings College being
accustomed to go along with the Students from the College to the Church, They
were careful to shut the College gates, and to call all that were within to
the Common-School, and to mark the Absents, which was very useful to discover
those who were interessed in the Tumult. And the Masters of the Marischal
College, not being accustomed to conveen their Scholars, and to go in a body
to the Church, they went timeously to the Loft appointed for the Masters and
Students; And so soon as the Scholars came in, were careful to lock the door of
the loft; that these who came once in, could not get out, Tho it be clearly
proven, that several attempts were made by the Scholars within to escape out of
the loft, so that if they could not reclaim such as had ^wn off their
subjection and Obedience for a time, they at least restrained all that (...)
their power.

When the Rabble was ended, some time was spent in communing with the
Magistrates for laying down such rules as might prevent the like in time coming,
and annent the manner of punishing what was past; And that communing having
taken no effect, every single person that was guilty, was publicly whiped with
as great severity and shame to them, as ever was practiced in the College: And
that none might escape; Intimation was made to the Magistrates, before the
Masters proceeded to discipline, that they might afford what evidence they
could.

Nothing was insinuate by the Libel or since, for loading the Masters of either
College with any Accession or so much as negligence in the matter; But what
may be clearly elided by the probation and relation abovementioned: But for
rem^ving everyshadow. The masters shall more particularly answer the several
grounds insisted on.

And, 1mo. As to the Kings College, it was alleged that when the Masters
observed their students absent, they ought to have gone to search after them,
or caused do the same. To this it is Answered, that the new Church being above
the distance of a Mile without their bounds and jurisdiction, and the Masters
not knowing that there was any disorder, But having only used precaution for
preventing it. Their care was more prudently employed for retaining these who
remained, being the far greater part, than to expose their authority by
searching these who were absent, whereby these who remained were much more like
to break loose, then the absents were to be reclaimed,. Besides the full number
uses never to be present; Some being accustomed to go to meeting houses, others
to stay in the Town; And the Masters had never any Information of the tumult,
till both the Sermon, and it was ended, and what they did was only for
preventing disorder.

As to the Marischal College, It is Alleged against all the Masters, that
the tumult having happened in the new Church, divided only by a Partition Wall
from the Church where they sat, they used no means to restrain the Rabble; And
farther, that Kincousies Son one of the Rabble, having entered to the Church,
where the Principal and Masters were, with a drawn sword in his hand, and
having gone to Mr. Burnet Minister, then sitting at the Pulpit, desired him to
preach in the New Church, yet the Masters did not apprehend or restrain him.
2do. That Mr. Alexander Moor the Youngest Regent, having offered to go out of
the Loft, to seize upon that irregular Student, the Principal would not suffer
it, as the said Regent declared to one of the Witnesses.

It is answered, 1mo. The probation clears that the Rabble and Tumult was so
great, as to dissipate the whole Congregation, And this Rabble was composed not
only of the Students of both Colleges, but of the Inhabitants of the Town,
over whom the Principal and Masters of the Marischal College had no influence,
so that if they should have attempted to dissipate the Rabble, who could not be
restrained, by the Respect that was due to the worship of GOD, when the People
were singing Psalms; They had no reason to believe that their appearing would
have had any other Effect, then to make their Authority contemptible. And
Experience teaches, That a Rabble is not to be compesced, but either by Force
or course of time. 2do. Principal Paterson had mixed himself with a former
Rabble, for reclaiming of certain Students, and that was interpret to be a
Crime, and upon which he was called before the Privy Council, as an Abbater of
that Rabble, from which he was Assoilied by the Justice of the Privy Council,
after long Attendance, and much Expense, which taught him that Prudence not to
meddle or immix himself with a Rabble again: And really many Beholders may more
easily observe who are amongst the Rabble, then what part they act in it; And
therefore he did abstain from joining any manner of way with that irregular
Company; But it is very hard upon him, that he should first be pursued by the
Magistrates, because he Did, And again, because bid Did Not, go toward or
immix with a Rabble, to reclaim his Scholars; So that either side of the
contradiction is made a crime to him. 3tio. The Witnesses clear, And it is also
evident by an instrument taken by the Magistrates, That the Rabble shut the
whole doors of the New Church, and would not suffer the Magistrates or others
to have Access.

4to. As to what relates to James Irving Kincoussies son; It is true he entered
the Church, where the Masters were, in a most Irregular manner, whither with a
Sword or not, does not clearly appear; But it was not possible to restrain or
secure him. For 1mo. The Witnesses Depone he remained only two Minutes in the
Church, and then run out to his Accomplices; in which time it was impossible to
have reached him, the Masters Loft being at a great distance, and Mr. Burnet
the Minister does specially Depone, that the Masters could not possibly have
come his length. 2do. It had been undecent and improper for the Masters to have
made Noise and Disturbance in the Church, during the moment he stayed, which
would have increased the Disorder, neither were they in safety to meddle with
him, all his Accomplices being in the Churchyard; and these who attempt upon
one single person concerned in a Rabble must expect the furry of all who are
Interested in it. 3tio. The Depositions of the Witnesses clear, that these who
were within the Loft, and under some measure of Obedience (who were three
fourth parts of the whole) made several Attempts to open the Loft door and
escape; And if any of the Masters had made the door open, it was obvious that
these who attempted to get out, would then have gone and joined with the
Rabble; So that there was a more apparent danger, that these who remained in
Subjection, would throw off the same, than that others of their Scholars who
were but a small part of the whole would be reclaimed. 4to. As to the
allegiance that one of the Regents offered to remove to secure Kincoussies
son, and was hindered by the Principal. It is answered, this is only Deponed by
a single Witness, ex auditu, who says, that Mr. Alexander More Regent declared
so to him. But farther the Principal is content that Mr. More be examined, who
will Depone that the thing is false in Fact, and that the Principal never spoke
to him upon that Subject, and the Principal is content to purge himself upon
Oath, and it carrys no probability in it self, Mr. More being at a considerable
distance, three Elder Regents Interveening betwixt him and the Principal, who
could not but have heard what was spoken to him, neither is it of import, tho
the Principal had said it, Because it was neither prudence in him, nor in any
of the Regents, to have given opportunity to the Students within the Loft, to
have escaped by opening the Door.

It is farther alleged against Principal Paterson, two Witnesses have deponed,
that he said the Best and Worst of the Rabble was Extrusion.

To this it is answered, 1mo. None of the Witnesses do Depone, that they heard
the Principal say so; But one of them declares he heard some Students say, that
they heard the Principal say it, but that he does not know, who were these
Students; Another Witness Depones, be heard two of the Students whom he names,
say it, But neither of these Witnesses are probative, both being ex aditu, that
they heard men say, that the Principal said so, and Oaths only and not
Assertions are probative: But farther, To satisfy the Privy Council, that the
thing is false on the matter, the Principal is willing to purge himself upon
Oath, that he never said any such thing, and that he never spoke with the
persons who are alleged to have heard it. And albeit no party be bound to
undergo two manners of Probation, both by Oath and Witnesses, yet he is willing
to undergo both.

It is farther alleged against Principal Parterson, It is deponed against him,
That he said, he saw the Rabble go by Clerk Hayes house, and saw Kincoussies
son join with them.

To this it is answered, 1mo. There is only a single Testimony as to this
point, and so not probative, 2do. Tho he had seen the rabble, It did import
nothing, seeing it was not in his power to restrain it, but as it has been
formerly said, the Students in the College whereof he was principal had thrown
off the Masters Authority, And they were but a very small part of the whole
rabble, so that it was neither possible to restrain, nor prudence to have
meddled with them, but his care was excercised in retaining these who remained
from Joining with the rest.

And as to what is lybelled, That an Indignity was done to the Magistrates at
Dr^m's Son's burial, it is clear by the depositions of the Witnesses, that the
Masters endeavored to restrain the Students from that alleged disorder, and
that the only three persons who were guilty thereof. Viz, James Grant, James
Irvine, and James Lesly, were publicly extruded the College, for the same,
And discharged to be received back again to the College, until first they
made satisfaction to the Provost of Aberdeen for that Offense, and none of them
have been received within the College since that time.

And whereas, It is pretended, That the punishment inflicted by the Masters,
was only a Sham; And that they delayed to inflict any punishment until they
were informed, That a Council process was raised against them; And that Mr.
Robert Paterson by his constant meddling in all the Towns affairs, is the chief
Instrument and Occasion of all the Disorders that happened in that place these
several years bygone. It is answered, That it is evident by the probation, that
the punishment inflicted was the most Universal, Impartial, Severe, and
Ignominious Ceusure, that ever was inflicted in these Colleges; None of the
guilty persons having escaped the same, neither have the Masters power by the
foundation to inflict any greater punishment then that was. 2do. It is an Act
of the greatest malice, and disingenuity that can be imagined for the Pursuers,
to Object the Masters, Their delaying to inflict that punishment for some days,
Because the Masters apprehending justly, that this disorder deserved a more
severe punishment then they were capable to inflict, They Applied to the
Magistrates for their Advyce and Concurrance anent the Way and Manner of
punishing of what was past; and laying down of methods for preventing the like
disorder for the future; And had several Trystings and Communings with them
from time to time thereanent, during all which space, the Masters were
endeavoring to get information and probation anent the whole Students, that
had been any ways accessory to that Rabble; And having gotten full and exact
probation against them all, They punished the whole Students in both Colleges,
in manner above represented, the very next day after the trysting and communing
was given over; And as the punishment was inflicted many days before the
raising of this lybel; So it is most faise, That the Masters knew of any
Application made to the privy Council, before the inflicting of the said
punishment, the Magistrates having denied the same to them, at all their
meetings and communings.

And as to Principal Paterson, his alleged meddling in the Town affairs; It
is answered, That the Principal of the Marischal College being, past all
memory, in use to be-elected a Counselor of the Burgh of Aberdeen, and the
said Mr. Robert being elected a Counselor in the years 1686, 1687, and 1688,
when some of (...) plyance with a Letter from a great man, Endeavor to (...)
brought in upon the Town Counsel, And to have the Trinity Church allowed for a
Popish Chapel to the Priests, Mr. Robert Paterson did openly oppose and resist
the same, for which he was severely threatened by those who were then eminent
in the Government, And for which he can produce clear and unquestionable
documents. And a Proclamation having then come out, discharging all Oaths to be
imposed upon any person. The Principals and Masters of both these Colleges did
meet, and firmly resolved, notwithstanding thereof to cause their Students
swear to mantain and defend the Protestant Religion before they were Graduat,
and actually made the Students of both Colleges, swear the same; And for doing
whereof, there was an complaint raised against them all before the Privy
Council, at the then Kings Advocats instance concluding deprivation and other
punishments; as is clear by a double of the Letters produced in process. And
when Buchan and Cannon did attempt to attack the Town of Aberdeen; The
Principal and hail masters of that College did cheerfully take Arms in defense
of the place, when most of these pursuers were not to be seen as is weel known
to some of the honorable Privy Council who were then there present, and
others of his Majesty's Officers who were there likewayes present at the time,
And this is all the meddling that can be obtruded against Mr. Robert Paterson.

And as to that pretense, that Mr. Robert Paterson is a Commissar, and so
cannot attend both Charges. It is answered, that this being jus tertii, to the
pursuers, their libelling the same as a Crime against Mr. Robert Paterson,
demonstrates their unjust and implacable malice against him, and the Sallarie
due to the Principal of the Marischal College, being less then 500 Mrks per
annum. No person is able to live on such a mean Sallary, nor was there ever any
Principal in that College, who had not an other Employment besides; And this
individual objection was proponed before the late Visitation of the College at
Aberdeen, and justly repelled upon the account foresaid; And the Instance given
anent Commissar Wishart is most calumnious, Commissar Wishart having been both
Commissar, and one of the Regents of the College of Edinburgh for 18 years at
least; Until by reason of his old Age, he thought fit to demit his place as
Regent; And albeit there be a competent Sallary due to the Principal of
Edinburgh College, Viz. 2000. merks, and a dwelling house; Yet the said
Principals have always been one of the Ministers of the Town, and received a
distinct Stipend for the same.

And seeing the Masters of both these Colleges, did all unanimously comply
with, and submit to their Majesty's Government; which none of the other
Colleges of the Kingdom did. And that it is evident from the premises, that
no Masters in the World could have done more to have prevented that disorder,
and to punish all that were accessorie thereto, with exemplar severitie then
these Defenders did, They ought to be assoylied from this groundless and
malicious complaint; And the Pursuers ordained to refound the expense they have
been put too; Especially, seeing by an Act of privy Council produced in
process, The Magistrates are oblidged to apprehend; And secure all Students who
commit any disorder within the Burgh. And Albeit it be acknowledged in their
own Lible, That both the time of the Tumult, and daily thereafter, the guilty
students were frequently walking on their streets, yet they used not the least
endeavors to apprehend or secure any of them.

The Lords of Their Majesty's Privy Council, are Humbly Desired to Consider,
That there is no Probation as yet adduced, For proving that part of the
Reconvention against Cruckshank, and Gellie; And therefore, before any Report
be taken in, That Their Lordships would Ordain the Witnesses to be examined,
Who its presumed, will prove against them, in the Terms Lybelled.


