SICKBED Thoughts, Upon those words of the Apostle, In Phil. 1.23.

Having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better. PART.
I.

Containing an ANSWER TO That great and solemn QUESTION, What that State and
Condition is, which a Person must be found in, before he can have good and
sufficient ground, not to be afraid, or unwilling to Dye?

By J. B.

Printed in the Year, 1667.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
WHilst all the World is in an hurry, tossed here and there with vanity and
vexation, whilst few or none almost, are looking after their future state, or
regarding what will become of them to Eternity; I judged it not amiss, a little
to call thee aside into such serious thoughts, as it pleased the Lord lately to
cast into mine own heart, whilst I passed away some restless nights on my
Sickbed. If thou shall vouchsafe to read them over, with a candid mind, and
an honest intent, I hope thou will not think thy time lost, nor be unwilling
that two or three pieces more, much about the same bulk and price, should
follow this their forerunner, to complete what I propound, if the Lord spare
life and health, farther to handle; viz. An Answer to a second great and solemn
Question, What state of Grace a person must arrive at, before he can truly say
with the Apostle Paul, that he has a vehement desire to depart and to be with
Christ? This will make up another little Treatise of its self. The next to
which, will be an Answer to a third Question, viz. What posture and frame of
heart, a person must be found in, that can truly say, he is fit and ready to
Dye? that can say with good old Simeon, Now let thy servant depart in peace: To
which will be subjoined, a Discourse, to prove that a righteous man's death, is
no other than a going to Christ. This will make a third Treatise. Lastly, the
enquiring into the reasons, why a good man should, and will by all means,
desire to be with Christ, and that as soon as possibly may be (let his
condition here in this World, be never so pleasing to flesh and blood) will
make up the fourth part, and so finish the whole design: That which this last
Discourse will be founded upon, will be those words, Which is far better.

And now if any should ask, why I choose this Subject of all others, to write
upon, at this time? I answer, not only because the Lord cast it strongly into
my mind, at a season, when I knew not but that I might leave the world, and so
was willing to be preparing for my change; but also because all things here
below, seem to have a face of death upon them; as in all places, so most of all
in this our poor ruinated City of London; for besides the wonderful desolation
of the Inhabitants thereof, by the late raging Pestilence, even beyond what
has been known in any former age; and the late scattering, impoverishing, and
almost utter undoing of many thousands more, in the loss of their estates,
trades, and other outward comforts and enjoyments, and this all England over,
more or less: I say, besides all this, has not the wrath of God and men, as
'twere, joined in one, to lay the very houses also, and the habitations
desolate; and to make them likewise feel, such a stroke of death and
dissolution, as they were any way capable of receiving? Oh! where, under the
whole heavens, is such another woeful spectacle to be seen! such an angry mark
of divine displeasure! such avengements from an offended and highly provoked
God! The devouring flames that have wasted many famous Cities in former ages;
viz. Constantinople, Rome, Alexandria in Egypt, Paris, Amsterdam, Hamburrough,
the late Imperial City of Aka in Germany, yea, and in this our London too, (as
we find upon record in ancient story, and as well in the French and Dutch, as
our own English Chronicles,) came short of this.

Nor indeed were the sins of any of them all, of so deep a Dye, and aggravated
with such incensing circumstances, as the sins of this our England, and
especially of London, are, some of the chief of which, the iniquity of the
times is come to that height, as not to suffer them to be so much as
mentioned; and if they must not be so much as mentioned, how can they be
confessed? and when will they be forsaken? Oh poor sinful England! Oh England,
laden with iniquity! when will thou be reformed? when will thou be washed from
thy filthiness? when shall it once be? do thou look for healing, and yet all
the while do what thou can, to make thy wounds wider? and thou the
Metropolis of England, once famous London, can thou hope for better things?
upon what ground I pray? do thou at all repent of thy manifold
transgressions, and thy mighty sins? do thou at all prepare to meet the Lord
in the way of his judgments? were this evident, there would be some hope
indeed: Then perhaps, those good words, and comfortable words, which the Angel
spoke to the Prophet Zachary (chap. 1.13, 16.) viz. that he would return to
Jerusalem with mercies, after it had been burnt 70 years before, by the
Chaldean Army, may be applicable to thee also. But alas! is there any, the
least appearance of such a spirit as this among us? surely nothing less: For
who, or where (almost) are any to be found, that do indeed lay things to heart?
where are the men and women, that mourn, that sigh, for the abominations of the
Land? for the detestable things of the Sanctuary? Such as Ezekiel complained of
in his time, chap. 5.11. and chap. 8. throughout; where are any that lay to
heart the afflictions of Joseph? nay, that are affected with their own
afflictions, in any such measure and manner as they ought? is not the sense of
things already off? nay, rather was it ever on, so as it ought to have been?
for how else could it be so soon gone again? do we not see men walk every day
through the heaps of rubbish with dry Eyes? yea, with merry Countenances? as if
London were London still, and had known no sorrow, or felt the force of such a
consuming Fire? and (which of all things else to me, is as calamitous, as any
that can be named, and as bad an Omen) are not many, very many, even of those
that suffered most in their Trades, losses, and sad effects of both, as little
affected as any other, and as unreformed? Mercies before did no good upon them,
neither sparing mercies, whilst saved from that over-spreading Plague, that
carried away so many of their Neighbors, Friends, Kindred, and Relations; nor
enriching mercies, by which they abounded in the things of this life; and now
Judgments do no good upon them neither, no, though thereby reduced to great
extremities, and become the objects of misery to all that know them. Oh! how
must this insensibility, this incorrigibleness, needs exasperate an holy God?
if people will not return to him when he contends with them, when he smites,
and smites so smartly too, and seems to threaten yet worse things, when will
they return? Truly the sight of this, were there nothing else to trouble one,
would make a true mourner in Zion, not care how soon he were taken out of this
evil World, no more to have to do with it. Farewell therefore, Courteous Reader,
whoever thou art, and let you and I prepare with all speed for heaven. This is
the counsel, and shall be (through Grace) the practice of him, that as
passionately wishes for thine eternal welfare, as for his own.

J. B.

THE CONTENTS.
Section. 1. THe Words explained, the Text divided, and Doctrines raised.
Section. 2. The first Doctrine propounded, and the method laid down, for the
handling of it. Section. 3. The true causes assigned, that justly fill men with
horror and dread, at the thoughts of death, and so render them much afraid,
and unwilling to dye. Section. 4. What it is that gives a good and sufficient
relief against the fear of death, greatly fortifying and encouraging the heart;
when it makes its approach unto it. Where first, the remedy is laid down
generally. Section. 5. Two more special remedies added to the former, viz. A
reconciled God, and a good conscience. Where first, of a reconciled God.
Section. 6. Of a good Conscience, which is the second special remedy; and
wherein it consists, there are two branches. It is a quiet Conscience, and an
excusing Conscience; A quiet Conscience consists also in two things. (1) In a
settled and well grounded peace. (2) In being void of offense, both toward
God, and toward men. Where of the first. Section. 7. Of the second branch of a
quiet Conscience; namely a conscience void of offense, both toward God, and
toward men. Section. 8. Of an excusing Conscience, which makes its own
defense. (1) Against the challenge of exacting justice. (2) Against the malice
of an accusing Devil. Section. 9. Two important Objections answered, against
the preceding Doctrine, and what has been said upon it. Section. 10. The Uses
and improvement of the point. First by way of Information, and then of
Exhortation both to good and bad.
SICKBED Thoughts;
PHIL. 1.23. Having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ.


SECT. 1.
The words explained, the Text divided, and Doctrines raised.

AMong the many advantages that accrued to the Gospel in general, and to Paul's
own spirit, in particular, from his sufferings at Rome, this was one; that he
was gotten loose from the world, was raised in his desires after heaven, and in
more vehement longings after Christ, so the words ((...)) having a desire,
plainly intimate, The words are very emphatical, and says Zanchy upon the
place, import three things.

1. An ardency of affection, from (...), ardere, which signifies to burn;
whence, appetitus ardens, effrenis libido, a burning desire, a strong,
vigorous, and intense desire; with great vehemence and earnestness.

2. This desire is intrinsecal, and productive by the soul only ((...), quasi,
(...)) it is properly the work of the mind, which is the fountain from whence
all desires flow, the mint where they are all coined; as that is, such are the
desires, good or bad: If that be holy, pure, active, heavenly, so are the
desires; but if the mind and heart be impure, cool, and faint in its
affections toward God, and the things of God, then the desires are so too,
impure, weak, and faint; therefore

3. The participle of the present tense ((...)) having a desire, notes a
continued act, a desire always in action, ever working, till the thing desired
be accomplished, and fully attained: It is not slothful, nor idle at all, puts
a man upon running without weariness, upon praying without ceasing.

Now this desire here, is carried out after two things; to depart, and to go to
Christ.

First, To depart ((...)) or, to be dissolved, say our old English Bibles,
agreeable to Jerome's Translation, by the Latin word dissolvi, which is to be
resolved into our first principles, the body to the dust, and the spirit to God
that gave it: Which also Scaliger and Erasmus follow. Many learned men have
criticized upon this Greek word, and given their various opinions about the
true notion of it; the chief of which, because they have something of
instruction in them, I will here take notice of, and recollect together.

Sometimes it is the Mariners word, ( verbum a nautis translatum, says
Erasmus) when he does (soluere Anchoram) loosen his Ship, weigh Anchor, and
upon the very first fair wind, makes haste to be gone to his desired Port:
Thus the Syriack reads it; so does Chrysostom and some others. And indeed,
what is this life of ours here in this World, but a flitting up and down, and
changing place, as a Ship at Sea, that still is passing to and fro, from shore
to shore? and whilst it does so, does it not meet with many troublesome and
rough Seas? and is it not often endangered by high winds, boisterous waves,
rocks and quicksands? than which, what can be a more lively Emblem of the life
of man, which always encounters so many hazards and tossings, till at last it
grows leaky and crazy, like an over-worn Ship, that can sail no longer? and is
it any marvel, if then it be willing to weigh Anchor, and get with what speed
it may, to the Heaven and Haven of its rest? Even an Heathen has passed this
sentence upon the life of man, Seneca by name, who, writing to Polybius, has
these words, ( in hoc tam procelloso and in omnes tempestates exposito mari,
navigantibus, nullus portus nisi mortis est. Ad Polyb. c. 28.) in this
tumultuous and stormy sea, exposed to all manner of tempests, no safe Port is
found to the Sailors, but that of Death. The like passage Ambrose has after
him in his Book, de bono mortis, c. 8. Justo mors salutis portus, to a just
man, death only is the safest Haven.

Sometimes it is the Soldiers word, when he does (soluere funes) at the
command of his General, loosen his Tent in which he lies upon the ground,
plucks up the stakes, unties the cords, that he may quit his old quarters for
new ones: And what metaphor can be more proper than this also, to set forth
our condition here? for is not the life of every good Christian in this World,
a Soldiers life, under his Captain General? and must he not always be, both
in a fighting and moving posture, ready to follow his General wherever he
marches? must he not sit loose from every place, and carry, as I may so say,
his Tent with him, to pitch it down, and take it up again, as occasion serves;
till at last the cords be not only loosned, but broken, and especially that
silver-cord, mentioned in Eccles. 12.6. by which the soul is fastened to its
body, as to its Tent? and what else do the two great Apostles, Peter and Paul,
mean, but this, when they speak of their earthly Tabernacles, in which Paul
said, he groaned (2 Cor. 5.2, 4.) and which Peter said, he must shortly put off
(2 Pet. 1.14.) Erasmus falls in with this construction of the Word likewise, as
well as of the former.

Sometimes it is the Waggoners, or Carriers Word ( verbum ab aurig is ductum,
says Beza) when he does (sovere lora) unharness his Horses at his journey's
end. And do we not unharness, as 'twere, and put all off when we prepare for
the grave, toward which we have been fetching many a weary step, and drawing
many a hard draught all our lifetime, and this too, with many a smart lash,
and sometimes goades, to quicken us, how gawled soever our sides have been, in
the mean while, with heart-akeing cares and griefs, and the sorrows which we
every day meet with.

Sometimes it is the prisoner's word, when he does, solvere vincula and catenas
post se relinquere, unfetter and unshackle himself, or has his bonds and his
chains knocked off, as Peter's were by the Angel when he was in prison, ( Acts
12.7.) And this is the way Tremelius seems to go while he translate's the word
(Liberari) to be set at liberty, or freed out of prison. Pythagoras that knew
nothing above, or besides nature, could instruct his Disciples in this, that
the Body is but a prison to the Soul; and that it is one of the chiefest
businesses of Philosophy, (animam de carcere corporis liberare) to deliver the
soul from the prison of the body, as he is quoted by Jerome against Ruffinus:
And many times what a dark, loathsome, and uncomfortable prison is it? a kind
of a nasty and filthy dungeon, especially to men of melancholy constitutions,
and under the power of their own filthy lusts, and guilty-consciences.

Sometimes says Erasmus again, It imports as much as (farcinas colligere, and
ad iter preparare) to take up ones pack and be gone, and so it is a word proper
to Porters and Pedlars, which carry heavy burdens, and packs at their back, as
having no other Trade to drive but this. And I pray, what is this body of ours,
but a burden of clay, a clog of fresh, which we every day, wherever we go, do
bear about with us? And oh how heavy and tiresome is it in a time of sickness
to be troubled with it! How painful to the weary bones, and the feeble knees,
to tumble and toss, first on the side and then on the other, and this an
hundred times in a night! Sometimes chill and cold, causing every joint to
shake, and as it were to beat together; at other times, all in flames and
burning, like a fiery Oven! After which, perhaps, it is parboyl'd in its own
moisture, and at last, left so faint and weak, as if all its nimble and
volatile spirits had quite forsaken it! Has not many a strong man, many a
lusty, hail, debonair son of Adam been thus surprised on a sudden? Once it was
my lot to be in company (on a Tuesday-night) with a person of as great strength
and vigor, as any I knew: who speaking of his great prowess and courage in
many feats of Activity, and particularly of his wrestling, leaping, vaulting,
and how many hundred pound weight he could take up with his Teeth, and swing
over his head with one hand, and that with ease, stripping up his brawny arm,
in a kind of a boasting way, caused me to take some more than ordinary notice
of him: but this vain man, having at that time gotten a little cold, before
forty eight hours more were passed, was so enfeebled with a Rheum and Cough,
that he lay groaning in a very pitiful manner, to the admiration of all that
knew him, not having strength enough to turn him in his bed, so that he dyed on
the Thursday, and the next day after, which was Friday, in the same week, I
followed him to his grave. Well therefore does the Prophet say, Let not the
mighty man glory in his might; for even such an one may die in his full
strength: whilst his breasts are full of milk, and his bones are moistened with
marrow (Job 21.23, 24.) though he be wholly at ease, at present: yet before
another day comes, he may be in great pain, and upon his sickbed, may have
cause to cry out with the Apostle, (2 Cor. 5.4.) We groan being burdened. And
here, methink's, may very aptly be sub-joined that excellent passage of Seneca,
in the 35th. Epist. of his first Book of Epistles, the consideration whereof
(referring to what went before) will elevate and lift up the Soul, says he,
Animum, qui gravi sarcina pressus, explicari cupit, and reverti ad illa quorum
fuit, nam corpus hoc animi pondus ac poena est; premente illo urgetur, in
vinculis est, nisi accessit Philosophia, quae a terrenis dimittit ad divina:
the Soul, which, being pressed down with an heavy burden, desires to return
from whence it came; for this Body of ours is but a weight and punishment unto
the Soul, so long as that oppresses it, it is as 'twere in chains, till it
returns from this earth to Heaven.

Sometimes it is the Traveller's word, when he does (migrare ex hospitio) quit
his Inn, and goes farther on, and so Beza translates it, as some others before
him had done: and what thence can we infer, but that this world is no more than
an Inn? where we make but a little stay, having a journey to go, and so must
not take up our abode here. Excellently speaks M. T. Cicero, in his Cato major.
Ex vita hac discedo, tanquam ex hospitio, non tanquam ex domo, commorandi enim
natura, diversorium nobis, non habitandi, dedit: I depart out of this life, as
out of an Inn, not as out of an House, Nature having given it to us, as a
place only to lodge in for a short time, not to dwell in.

Sometimes it is the Strangers word, who is a kind of Pilgrim abroad in foreign
Countries, far from home, which when he desires, and is resolved to repair to,
either as weary of his wanderings, or by a call from his Father who sent him
thither, is then said ((...), redire Domum) to return home: Thus Athanasius
takes it; yea, and a greater than he, even the Holy Ghost it self, ( Luke
12.36.) where, when the great Lord there mentioned, is said to return home,
it is thus phrased, ((...)) Now how aptly this also expresses our condition
here, the holy Scriptures do frequently tell us. For did not the Patriarchs of
old account themselves as pilgrims and strangers in this world? What says
Jacob (Genesis 47.9.) The days of the years of my pilgrimage are an hundred and
thirty years, few and evil have the days of the years of my life been, and
have not attained to the days of the years of the life of my Fathers, in the
days of their pilgrimage. So David, (Psalm 39.12.) I am a stranger with thee,
and a sojourner, as all my fathers were: And has it not been thus with all the
sons of men, in all ages? though it is true, few, or none almost but good men
have thought so, that have been thoroughly convinced, and believed that their
home is somewhere else, even in heaven where their father dwells: there, there
it is, that they have a dwelling indeed, a dwelling properly their own, an
house built on purpose for them, a sure house that will always be new, and
never grow old, that is their home, and thither they all hasten, even upon the
very first call of their heavenly Father.

Once more ere I leave this Word, and then I Will have done with it. Tertullian
about the middle of his Book de Patientia, translates it thus, Cupio recipi
jam, I desire now to be received, or taken up, (he means into the Heavens): as
it is said of Christ himself, when he ascended ((...)) he was received up into
heaven, (Mark 16.19.) Luke varies the word, and says, (Chap. 24.50. (...)) he
was carried up. And (in Acts 1.9. (...)) he was caught up, and a Cloud received
him; it comes all to one, and intimates thus much, that in our passage out of
this life to Heaven, we are not alone, but are accompanied with blessed Angels,
that do as 'twere wait to receive our souls, as soon as ever they leave our
bodies, and then carry them up, where they carried the soul of Lazarus, even
into Abraham's bosom, (Luke 16.22.) and this was it which the Apostle longed
for, and which it seems, as to his own particular he most desired, namely, to
be carried up to heaven, as I may so say, on the wings of Angels: he had often
fled thither himself upon the wings of Faith and Prayer, but now he would fain
go thither for good and all, as our Proverb is; he would have the winged
Cherubims now come and fetch him from hence, as being weary of staying here any
longer; I, but whether would he be fetched? whether would he go? Himself tells
us, He would go to Christ, ((...)) I desire to depart, and to be with Christ;
Mark the words, he does not say, I desire to go to heaven, or to be among the
souls of just men made perfect; to be where the general Assembly of the
firstborn are; or to be in the heavenly Jerusalem, to be a glorified Saint,
and among the innumerable company of Angles, but, to be with Christ, as if that
were (instar-omnium) in stead of all, or better than all. Heaven it self is not
so much an Heaven to an holy heart, no, not when it is in Heaven, as Christ is;
all the rest of the glories there, are but beams of this Sun: it is the
presence of Christ only, and of God in Christ, that makes Heaven, Heaven:
(Coelum ipsum non esset Coelum, absente Christo) Heaven it self would be no
Heaven, if Christ were absent.

But perhaps some will say, Was Christ absent from Paul, or Paul from him, and
that even now at this time, when he says, he desires to be with him? How could
he have been so valiant, so courageous, so bold for the truth, and that even in
the face of the Imperial Court it self, under the very nose of that bloody
Nero, that was then Resident at Rome, while he was a prisoner there, had not
Christ been with him? and been with him, i more than an ordinary manner?

To which I must answer without any denial at all, that it is most true; a
great presence of Christ was with him, no doubt is to be made of it: how else
could he have suffered so great things for his Name, as was by Christ himself
foretold he should, ( Acts 9.16.)? How else could he have run through so many
and great sorrows, which himself innumerates in 2 Cor. 11.23-29. Where he tells
us, that he was in labors more abundant, than any other of the Ministers of
Christ, in stripes above measure; in prisons more frequently, in deaths often: Of
the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one: thrice was I beaten with
Reds: once was I stoned: thrice I suffered shipwreck: a night and a day I have
been in the deep: In Journeys often: in perils of waters: in perils of Robbers:
in perils by mine own Contrymen: in perils by the Heathen: in perils in the
City: in perils in the Wilderness: in perils in the Sea: in perils among false
Brethren: in weariness and painfulness: in watchings often: in hunger and
thirst, in fastings often: in cold and nakedness, besides those things that
are without ((...)) that which comes upon me daily, the care of all the
Churches. Now had not Christ been with him in all these troubles, what had
become of him? would not the wrath of men have swallowed him up? The manifold
dangers he encountered with, have destroyed him? Would not both Sea and Land
have been against him, and many a time have devoured him? Yes verily, had it
not been that Christ was with him, strengthening him, supporting him,
comforting him, enabling him both to do, and endure all things, he had been as
miserable a man as had been then alive. But it is most evident that Christ was
indeed with him, and took as much care of him, as ever good master did of a
most faithful servant, or the most benign Prince did of a most loyal Subject,
that did him the most singular and eminent service.

But though this be acknowledged, and cannot be in the least denied, yet Paul's
words are not vain words, or any way inconsistent with this Truth: when he
says, He desires to depart, and to be with Christ: For,

First, Though Christ was with him in, and by his Spirit; with him in his Image
upon his Soul, and the divine impressions thereof upon his Heart: Though he was
with him by protecting him, blessing him, delivering him from a thousand evils,
that otherwise would have befallen him. Though he had many a kind message from
Christ, many a sweet Love-letter, as I may so speak: yea, and more than all
this, many a precious Jewel, as 'twere sent as Tokens from him; though he found
and felt the secret influences of Christ shed all abroad in him, and such
powerful attractions after him, by the effusions of his Ointments and sweet
smelling Myrrhs; yet all these were rather the things of Christ, and some
expressions of good will from him at a distance, than Christ himself. It was
the Person of Christ that he desired: I mean, his personal presence, and
personal communion with him: not only interest in him, (for this he had where
ere he was) but Vision, as Penelope said to her Ulysses. Ovid. Ep. 1.

Nil mihi rescribas, attamen ipse veni.
'Twill not suffice if thou thy Letters send,
Thy presence only will the matter mend.
Write what he would: 'twas himself only coming in person to her that would
satisfy her. Thus the Persian Lady to her Prince, when he offered her a very
precious Jewel to wear for his sake, it is your self Sir I desire to enjoy (Tu
mihi, sola gemma es) these without you lose their value, and in my account will
be little worth. In like manner our Apostle here, places his chiefest
happiness in the sight of Christ, and being in person with him. Bernard (in
Psalm. qui Habit.) expresses it to the life: Esse Christum cum Paulo magna
securitas: esse Paulum cum Christo summa foelicitas, Christ his being with Paul
was his great security; but Paul's being with Christ, was his highest felicity.

Secondly, when Paul desires to be with Christ, the meaning of it in this place
is, so to be with him, as to have the most full enjoyment of him that he could
be made capable of, to be in the full view of him, even face to face; Here he
had but glympses of him, and that by faith only, and through thick clonds, and
this but now and then too, which though very refreshing to him, yet far from
making up such a blessedness as the constant and un-interrupted enjoyment of
him would give. This, and nothing less than this will put an end to his
desires, and afford him the content he seeks for, omnis motus tendit in
quietem, all motion aims at rest, but this most of all.

Thus we have the Apostles desires, what they are, and how vehement, and the
object about which they are conversant, together with the Medium, or way for
the attaining of them: he would depart and be with Christ, Let us next see the
reason of his desires, (...), which is far better, so it is translated: but it
would be better expressed by a right Englishing of the causative particle
(...), for: for it is far better, far better, multo magis melius, says the
vulgar translation, much more better: Long enim optimum est, says Beza, for
that is far the best. Properly, the words may be rendered, by much rather
better, better by much; or, as it is in the old bibles, best of all. But for
whom? not for you, says the Apostle, but for me, I am sure. Indeed for your
sakes; Methinks I could be content to stay a while longer; but when I consider
how sweet it will be, to be with Christ for altogether, and in the highest and
fullest enjoyment of him, then I am impatient till I am with him. His love to
the Phillippians was great, and his love to himself was great too; Willing he
was for their sakes to stay, and yet for his own sake more willing to go.
Egomet mihi proximus ipsi, I am nearest to my self, may every man say. It were
something strange, if a man should not love himself first, I was about to say
best too, next unto the God that made him, and sweet Jesus his Redeemer; yet
Paul says, that even in this case he was in a straight ((...)) I am in a
straight between two: he was besieged on both sides, which to yield to he does
not well know, but at last resolves, that for their furtherance and joy of
faith, if Christ should see fit he would abide and continue yet longer with
them; verse. 24.25. he that could wish himself even accused from Christ (amazing
expression!) for his brethren his kinsmen according to the flesh ( Romans 9.3.)
was here willing, all things considered, to come somewhat the later to Heaven,
(which yet he most of all desired) on condition to help on the word of the
Gospel yet a little further, and to give a more firm establishment to the
Churches of Christ. Oh rare temper! What an holy struggle was now in Paul's
heart, between the love which he bare to Christ and his people in this World,
and the love which he bare to Christ and himself in the other World! Will it
not be hard to determine, in which of these he exercised the greatest Grace?
and also which of the two graces now at work in his heart was the most noble:
his self-denial, or his self-love?

But enough of glossing upon the Words, which I have been the larger in, in
reference to what will follow in the several Points to be handled from them.

As for the division of them, they fall into two parts: (1) a declaration of
the Apostles desire, which is to depart and to be with Christ. (2) the reason
of this his desire, which is far better.

The Doctrines arising from the words are these four: the first is a Doctrine
that lies couchant in them, necessarily employed, though not so plainly
expressed, it is this:

That whoever has a true and saving interest in Christ, has good and
sufficient ground not to be afraid, or unwilling to dye; this I take it is
included and must be understood, for he that desires to dye, and to go to
Christ, must needs be supposed not to be afraid, or unwilling to dye, (omne
majus contines minus) every greater contains the less: a man must first be
past the fear of Death, before he can have a desire of death, especially such a
vehement desire, as is here meant; as in goodness. No man can be positively
good, but he that is first good negatively; first he must (removere prohibens)
take away that which hinders his being good, before he can be truly good; even
so here in the case of death; The fear of death must first be removed and
conquered, before there can be any actual desire, at least any great and strong
desire of it: This then is the first Doctrine.

The second is this: That no person whatsoever is so fit to dye, as he that can
truly say with our Apostle here, he has a desire, an earnest and ardent desire
to depart, and to be with Christ.

The third is this. A righteous man's death, is no other than a going to Christ.

The fourth this, from the se words, for it is much better: That there is
reason, very great reason, how happy soever a man's condition may seem to be in
this world, yet even then when it is thus with him, to depart hence and to go
to Christ; yea, and to desire it, and that greatly.

SECT. 2.
The first Doctrine propounded, and the method laid down for the handling of
it.

THe first Doctrine then is this: That whoever has a true and saving interest
in Christ, has good and sufficient ground, not to be afraid, or unwilling to
dye.

The method I intend to handle it in, shall be this: (1) To consider what are
the just causes of the fear of death. (2) What it is that gives a good and
sufficient relief against the said fear; which, whatever it is, is likewise a
clear evidence of a true and saving interest in Christ. (3) I shall endeavor
to answer two very important objections, which may seem strongly to oppose the
whole Doctrine, and all that is said upon it. (4) Make use of the whole, partly
by way of information, and partly by way of exhortation, and that both to good
and bad.

SECT. 3.
The true causes assigned, that justly fill men with horror and dread of the
thoughts of death, and so render them much afraid, and unwilling to dye.

THere are many things that justly cause a fear of death, even a great and
terrible fear.

First the consciousness of sin and guilt, especially in the state of
unregeneracy, which is always accompanied with impenitency and unbelief; the
two damning sins, not but that all other sins, even the least that is, has
demerit and provocation enough in it, to damn any one that is guilty of it, but
Faith and Repentance wherever they are in Truth, will take all off; even
millions of guilts, and make the blackest sins that are, as white as snow;
scarlet and crimson sins to be as wool, (Isa. 1.18.) Now where these are
wanting, and so the guilt and filth of every sin remaining, and upon all
occasions flying in a man's face, and fixing their venomous stings in his heart
and conscience: How terrible must this needs be? For do not thoughts of the
wages which these sins not repented of, do deserve, come pouring in upon him,
as at all times, so most of all when Death approaches? Though before he lulled
his conscience asleep, and would not suffer it to be awakened, neither by a
quickening Soul-searching Ministry, nor the plain-dealing of faithful friends:
Yet now Satan and Conscience too, will both speak, and speak aloud too; yea,
though Satan should say nothing, but be altogether silent; yet
self-accusations, and self-condemnations will speak enough to fill the soul
with horror, and leave it in such distresses, as no remedy can be found, for
while the aforesaid impenitency and unbelief remains to be ((...) a semet ipso
damnatus) self-condemned: Who can express the terror of it? and indeed this is
that, not so much Death it self, as begets so much fear and dread: As Ambrose
in his discourse de bono mortis, does learnedly argue; where in his eighth
Chapter, he has many excellent passages to this purpose: Mors peccatorum
pessima (says he) non utique mors pessima generaliter, sed pessima specialiter
peccatorum, unde liquet acerbitatem non mortis esse, sed culpae; the death of
sinners is the worst of deaths, not death in general, but the death of sinners;
From whence it is evident, that the bitterness is not from death it self, but
from the crimes that merit it. Again a little farther, he has these words:
suae igitur unusquisque conscientiae vulnus accuset, non mortis acerbitatem.
Let every one therefore that by his Sin has wounded his own conscience, lay
the blame there, and not upon death. And again, Non enim habemus, quod in morte
metuamus, si rihil quod timendum sit, vita nostra comisit; There will be no
cause of fear in death, if in our lifetime we have done nothing, that we have
cause to be afraid of. Once again, Prudentibus delictorum supplicia terrori
sunt, delicta autem non mortucrum actus sunt, sed viventium; To wise men, the
punishment of offenses is matter of fear, now these are the acts, not of
dead-men, but of the living: This then is the first thing that gives just cause
of the fear of death; Sins not repented of.

Secondly, The apprehension of Divine displeasure hereupon, and the Wrath of an
Offended God, a Wrath unappeased, an infinite wrath, a wrath intellerable, and
unexpressible; a wrath inflicted by an Omripotent Power, in comparison of
which, all the rendings, tearings, cruciatings, burnings, rackings, torturings
of men's bodies here, by all the most exquisitely invented torments, upon Racks,
Gibbets, Wheels, Gridirons, and other engines of cruelty, are but a
flea-biting. The principal torments here, I mean from the sense of Divine
wrath, being chiefly seated in, and mostly inflicted upon the mind; not but
that the body too, when it is risen from the Grave, shall have its share in
these sufferings in conjunction with the soul, even to its utmost possibility
of bearing them.

Thirdly, An obnoxiousness to all this, by the fixed Law of God, which cannot
be altered, and by which he stands accursed, and subject to all the direful
threatenings thereof, so long as he remains in this his unregenerate and
impenitent state. This is another thing that adds unto his fear.

Fourthly, The thoughts of that most just, and great Tribunal, at which he must
one day stand, and where an account must be given, of every thought, word, and
deed, how wicked, how vile soever, and howsoever circumstanciated; all must be
detected then, and laid open before Men and Angels: All night-sins,
secret-sins, heart-sins; The Thief, the Murderer, the Adulterer, the closest
and most undiscerned Hypocrite, shall then be known what he is, and all his
iniquities start up before him: The Books shall be opened, the Book of a man's
own Conscience, the Book of Gods omnisciency, the Books of Record in Heaven:
And then shall the impenitent, hardened sinner stand before his great God and
Creator, (who will now be his Judge) as a guilty Malefactor; and as I said
before, self-condemned. There shall need no farther evidence than himself
against himself; All his scoffings and scornings of God, and the things of God;
of his holy Ways, Ordinances, People; all his contempts of Christ, and
tramplings under-foot of his most precious blood; all his fleightings,
neglectings, and opposings of the Spirit of Grace, and the work of it upon his
own heart, all his abuse of Mercy, and of the Patience, forbearance, and
long-sufferings of God toward him shall be remembered, and set in such order,
as to give him a full view of all at once: Now how dreadful must the very
thought of this also needs be to an impenitent and hardhearted sinner, if ever
his Conscience be but in the least awakened?

Fifthly, The Heart-sinking expectation of that most dreadful Sentence of
Condemnation to be pronounced upon him, in these or the like words: Go you
cursed into everlasting destruction, into Hellfire, there to be tormented with
the Devil and his Angels. I and to be tormented by them, as well as with them.
For the Devils shall not only be companions, and sharers with the damned Sons
and Daughters of men; (or rather the Sons and Daughters of men, shall be
sharers with the Devil and his Angels, for whom, as for the first Offenders,
Hellfire is said to be prepared, Matthew. 25.41.) but shall also be their
tormentors and Executioners: and what greater aggravation can there be to the
misery of Malefactors, than that those that hate them most, and likewise have
the greatest skill, and strength in inflicting torments, yea, and exceedingly
delight in such cruel work, and are never weary of it, should be their
Tormentors?

Sixthly, The consideration of a most severe and impartial Justice, which in
case of non-satisfaction otherwise made, will certainly have the utmost
vengeance taken in the Execution of the aforesaid sentence.

Seventhly, And of an utter impossibility of making the satisfaction required.
For who can do this, that has no Christ to undertake it for him: as a Man
living and dying in a state of unregeneracy has not, nor can never hope for
it. And having no Christ to satisfy for him, so no Mediator nor Advecate to
stand betwixt God and him, to plead for him, or put in out kind word on his
behalf.

Eighthly, Thereupon sees an absolute necessity of his being unspeakably
miserable, and this too, more ways than one, (1.) By the punishment of less.
(2) By the punishment of sense. By the punishment of loss, a tetal separation
from the comfortable presence of God, and the Glory of his Power; 2 These. 1.9.)
I say, from the comfortable presence, for from his essential presence none can
be separated, no not either men or Devils, though they make their bed in Hell.
( Psalm. 139.8.) and then also by the punishment of sense, of which I gave a
touch before. In these two (paena damni. and paena sensus) the punishment of
less, and the punishment of sense, the whole torment of the damned consists;
and therefore in the sentence given upon them, both are contained, Depart from
me ye cursed: There Is the first, the punishment of loss; into everlasting Fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels; there is the second, the punishment of
sense; what this Hellfire is we find expressed elsewhere, in other terms, in
Matthew. 8.12. it is called outer darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of
teeth, a fire without light, which has something of comfort in it, but here is
all darkness; in Matthew. 13.42. it is called a Furnace of Fire, and wailing is
there added to weeping, in Isa. 30.33. The Fuel of this Fire, It Is said to be a
pile of much wood, and that the breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone
does kindle it; Rev. 14.10. It Is called the wine of the wrath of God, a cup of
indignation without mixture; that is, it is pure wrath, it is all wrath, and
nothing else but wrath; Justice without any the least tincture of mercy: And
it is poured out too, poured out, q. d. without measure, to note the abundance
of it.

To which, Lastly, must be added that all this is eternal, it is everlasting
Fire, everlasting as well as devouring Flames: everlasting burnings! Isa.
33.14. not only without the least hope of mitigation, or abatement, but of
intermission too; When millions of millions of millions of ages are past,
still, still, there is as much to come, and the reason is, because it is an
infinite punishment that is due, which since finite Creatures can never
undergo, therefore they do as it were compensate by the eternity of it. Christ
be being an infinite person, could, and did stand under infinite wrath for
those he dyed for; and so God has received full payment, his Justice is fully
satisfied for them, which it can never be by the sufferings of the damned, to
eternity.

Now lay all this together, and how can it do otherwise then minister most
dreadful terrors to the mind of any unregenerate man (that is not totally
blinded, and of a seared conscience) to think of dying?

SECT. 4.
What it is that gives a good, and sufficient relief against the fear of death,
greatly fortifying, and encouraging the heart, when it makes its approach unto
it: Where first, the Remedy is laid down more generally.

HAving spoken of those things which do justly cause a very great fear and
dread at the thoughts of Death: I will now apply my self to the best Remedies I
can, against the said fear.

And the first and surest Remedy of all, is a fundamental one, that never
fails; that is, never fails of becoming a good and sufficient ground against
the said fears: It is a true and thorow-change upon the heart, a saving work of
Grace, whereby a man is regenerated and become wholly a new Creature: When a
man can give good proof of this, that he is indeed translated from the power of
darkness into the Kingdom of the dear Son of God; is no longer under the power
of the Prince that rules in the Air: He may then also truly say, and build
upon it, that he is no Child of Wrath, and so consequently, has no cause to
be afraid of death; for why is death terrible to any, but for this reason?
Among others, as we have heard, because it is an inlet unto Wrath, that is, to
such as are Children of Wrath, but to none others: not to such as are born
again. For as it is true on the one hand, that except a man be born again, he
cannot see the Kingdom of God, (John 3.3.) So on the other hand, it is every
whit as true, that he that is born again, shall never see Hell, much less
shall he feel it, or come into it. But then let not any man deceive himself,
and take that for a New Birth which is no such thing. Many pretenders there are
hereunto, many that will needs pass for the Children of the Kingdom, such as
the self-justiciary, the civil, just, moral, righteous man; that harms none,
is charitable, beneficent, and helpful to many; affable, courteous, and ready
to do good to all, as opportunity is given him; yea, and seems to do what he
does cheerfully, and as one glad of the occasion, and perhaps goes further than
this too, is very zealous, holy and religious in his way, keeps his Church
constantly, and it may be prays in his Family, also instructs Children and
Servants, and what not of this kind? but if you search him to the bottom; a
fine spun Papist may be as good as he, his light within him, and his holy
conversation without, may be no better than Popish merit; he may be off from
the foundation for all this, and be far enough from the true work of
Regeneratign, and such a faith and repentance as only fits for Heaven. How
many, and especially in this our present age, have, and still do, split upon
this Rock, in establishing their own righteousness instead of submitting to the
righteousness of God, as the Judaizing Christians did in the Apostles days,
Romans 10.3. and for such as these, whatever conceits they may have of
themselves, I will not warrant them from the fear of Death, or secure them
against it, their conscience may possibly be better informed, concerning their
inward state, and then what will follow we may easily guess, either another
more thorough work upon them, or such terrors at the hour of death, as cannot
be removed.

And if any shall ask, How may we know when the work of regeneration is right
and sound indeed?

I briefly answer: The Apostle has given the character of it, in few words,
but very fully and significantly, in 2 Cor. 7.10, 11. Godly sorrow works
repentance to salvation not to be repented of: For behold this self-same thing
that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it wrought in you; yea,
what clearing of your selves; yea, what indignation; yea, what fear; yea, what
vehement desire; yea, what zeal; yea, what revenge: In all things ye have
approved your selves to be clear in this matter. Here are inward works, works
of mortification, works of sanctification, heart-works, such as all the
faculties and affections of the soul are employed in; not mere external acts,
and outward formalities, without life and power: An Hypocrite may go as far in
these seemingly, yea, and farther too, than some sound and sincere-hearted
Christians. Look therefore into thine heart, examine the matter there, and do
it faithfully, without putting a cheat, or fraud upon thy self, and if thou
find thy self under this character, that the Apostle here gives of a true
penitent, then I dare pronounce thee a regenerate person, and one that have no
just reason to be afraid, or unwilling to dye.

SECT. 5.
Two more special remedies added to the former, viz. a reconciled God, and a
good conscience. Where first, of a reconciled God.

TO the aforesaid general remedy, I shall add two special ones, which yet do
more or less, always accompany the former.

The first is, a reconciled God, which speaks much; particularly these five
things.

First, That Divine Justice is fully satisfied, so fully, that it can lay no
farther claim; upon which God presently says, concerning the soul for whom
such satisfaction is made: Deliver him, for I have found a ransom: I am well
appayed for all the wrongs he has done unto me, and for every debt he has
contracted.

Secondly, That Gods anger is thereupon appeased, his wrath extinguished and so
himself wholly pacified, and attoned: All displeasure, is now gone; not an
angry word now, nor an unpleasing look any more; And when all frowns are out of
Gods face, why should not all tears be wiped from our eyes?

Thirdly, It always brings pardon with it. Reconciliation necessarily
supposes a total removal of guilt. No charge comes in against that soul, with
whom God is reconciled; nor none will be heard against it; How busy soever
Satan is, that great accuser of the Brethren, yet he can do nothing now; when
the Atonement is once past, and remission obtained through the blood of Jesus,
it abides for ever; It Is everlasting mercy, everlasting love. As God is
unchangeable in his Nature, so in his Word and Promise: Has he made it one
branch of the Covenant to pardon the iniquity of a poor penitent Believer, and
remember his sin no more? Jer. 31.34. He will be as good as his word, and the
Soul that trusts him shall find it so.

Fourthly, By means of this the soul stands wholly blameless, and as 'twere,
without the least spot or wrinkle before God: It Is a pure and an holy Soul, so
thoroughly washed by an all-cleansing blood, (so it is called, 1 John 1.7.) that
no defilement remains upon it; nothing unlovely, or displeasing. It is become a
great beauty, as I may say, now, and a very taking Object in the eye of God.

And thereupon, Fifthly, he takes it into his peculiar favor, and admits it
into his very bosom, as his Spouse-Royal. Queen Hester, when first purified,
and perfumed with the Oil of Myrrh, and other rich Odours ( Esth. 2.) was not
more acceptable to the embraces of Ahashuerus, than a soul thus cleansed and
purified by the blood of Jesus, and sweetened by his precious Ointments, is unto
the God of Glory: He is no longer now a stranger, much less an enemy unto the
soul, but a dear Lord, and Husband; a God in Covenant with it for ever.

All which considered, tell me what reason is there, or can there be for any
man to be afraid, and so consequently unwilling to dye, with whom God is thus
reconciled? Sure none at all. And this is the first special Remedy.

SECT. 6.
Of a good Conscience, which is the second special Remedy, and wherein it
consists: It has two branches; it is a quiet Conscience, and an excusing
Conscience; a quiet Conscience, consists also in two things; (1.) In a settled
and well-grounded peace. (2.) In being void of offense, both toward God, and
toward men. Where of the first.

I Come now to the second special Remedy, a good Conscience, which does
likewise much fortify against the fear of Death. I shall not here speak of
Conscience at large, neither of its Nature, nor several operations, nor enquire
whether it be properly an Habit, as Scotus, Bonaventure, and Durandus, with
other Schoolmen, would have it, but only briefly lay down a few things, for
the right understanding of it.

First, Then it may be thus described. It is the judgment of a man concerning
himself, as it is subjected to the judgment of God the supreme Judge; and is
that which God himself, as I may so say, appeals to, ( Isa. 5.3.) Judge, I
pray, betwixt me and my Vineyard. So, 1 Cor. 11.31. If we would judge our
selves, we should not be judged, And

Secondly, It Is said to be a good Conscience, when it judges rightly, and
according to the Word of God, which alone both directs and binds it; Thus it
is, honest bona, good in respect of the honesty and integrity of it, when it
accuses or excuses rightly, and according to truth; and this in all the
actions of a man's life, whether good or bad: For in Conscience are two things,
by which it is enabled to make a judgment of its own Acts. (1.) That which
Divines call (...) a treasury of Knowledge, in which the Notions of things to
be done, or not to be done, are as 'twere kept and conserved. (2.) That which
is called judicium practicum, or rather the act of a practical judgment,
proceeding from the understanding faculty, which is the chief seat of
Conscience; and because it alone next to God himself knows its own act, and
none else, therefore the knowledge of it is called (...) a con-knowledge, as I
may so say, or a knowledge in combination with Gods knowledge, which he has
of man, and of his actions, as o^^ Learned Perkins expresses it, whom Amesius
follows.

But to say no more about this, but what the Apostle does, 1 John 3.20. If our
heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and knows all things. I
proceed to speak of a good Conscience, as it is, pacate bona, a quiet
Conscience; of which there are two branches, wherein it does consist.

The first is a settled and well-grounded peace: It is not any kind of peace,
a slight and unsound peace, that makes a quiet conscience, or can give such a
rest and complacency unto it, as to cause it to become a Nightingale in a man's
own bosom, and that in the time of the greatest distress that can befall him in
this world: No, but it is a firm and sollid peace that must, that can, do this
and no other.

Now that I may be the better understood what I mean by such a sollid, firm,
settled, and well-grounded peace, as constitutes a quiet Conscience, that is at
peace within it self, and makes its own Music; whatever clamours otherwise,
may be round about it; I shall lay down several things, to which it bears a
faithful witness, and of which it has clear and satisfying evidences within it
self: in which sense it is that Solomon speaks, Prove. 14.14. where he says,
that a good man is satisfied from himself.

First Then, a quiet Conscience, and settled in such a firm peace as aforesaid,
bears witness to this, that it has truly and savingly closed with Jesus
Christ, and this by a double act; an act of faith and an act of love: By an act
of Faith, considering him as Christ-Crucified; in which sense most properly he
is the next and immediate object of Faith; And by an act of Love considering
him as a most excellent and lovely person; In which sense properly he is the
highest object of our love; for it is amabile, something lovely, that is most
properly, objectum amoris, the object of love. Now when Conscience gives
evidence of such a double closure with Jesus Christ, both as a Prince, and a
Savior; as a dying Mediator, and a dear Lord and Husband; and that it has
not only done this for once, as I may so say, but continues to do this
always, by new acts of Faith, and Love, by repeated acts every day, and so is
always united to him, has and does always accept him, is as 'twere, always
embracing him, and cleaving to him, and that as heartily, and affectionately,
as ever a pleased Bride did to, and with her beloved Bridegroom; and that it
has taken him, and ever does take him, as God gives him, with all his Offices
and Powers over the Soul; as King, Priest and Prophet, to be taught, and ruled,
as well as saved by him. I say, when Conscience bears witness to this, and has
an undoubted and clear proof of this within it self: What greater foundation
can it lay for its own peace and quiet? For does not peace come in by
believing? The Apostle says it does, Romans 15.13. and indeed, where is such a
peace to be had, a peace so sweet and satisfying, as a soul enjoyes that has
contracted a friendship, a great and intimate friendship, between Christ and it
self? Now this, every believing soul does, every true lover of Christ, that
closes with him by such a double act of Faith, and Love, as has been now
mentioned; For does not such a closure: (1.) Necessarily make an union betwixt
Christ and the soul, a strict, firm, and entire union? And where such an union
is, does not communion follow too? Sweet and blessed communion, for does not
Christ and the Soul now live in each others bosoms? Is there any more than one
heart, as it were, between them? Espousals when finished give more than
co-habitation here, more than a mere dwelling together; namely, a mutual
in-dwelling in each other; the Soul in the very bosom, and heart of Christ;
and Christ, and Christ only, in the soul. So says the Apostle, Christ in you
the hope of Glory, Col. 1.27. And if any man be in Christ, he is a new
Creature; 2 Cor. 5.17. And can there be so sweet a peace then, any where as
here?

Secondly, When Conscience bears farther witness, that as it has closed thus
with Crucified Christ, and lovely Christ, in his person, so that it has done
as God himself does, laid all its sins upon Christ's back, transferred all
thither, transposed them all from its own back to his, who is best able to bear
them, yea, who alone can bear them, and the wrath of God due to them. Compare
Isa. 53.6. with 2 Cor. 5.21. Where it is said, that God has laid upon him the
iniquity of us all; that is, of all that believe; and that he has made him to
be sin for us: What else did the slain Goat which was offered up for all the
sins and uncleanness of the children of Israel, signify, Levit. 16.7, 15,
16. and the live-Goat over whose head, all the iniquities of the Children of
Israel, and all their transgressions in their sins were confessed, and upon
whose head they were all put, and he sent away into the Wilderness; or, as some
say, into the land of forgetfulness, verse 21, 22. I say, what did they both
signify but this, that Christ is he, whom these two Goats typifyed, Christ
only, that bears our sins, dies for them, and carries them away, so as they
never come into remembrance any more; and that he was antitype to both these
Goats, and that in this respect only, is evident in the New Testament, first
to the slain Goat, therefore is called, the Lamb slain, Rev. 5.6, 9. and also
to the Scapegoat, therefore said to be the Lamb of God that takes away, (or
bears away; so it is in the Margent, in the Greek (...)) the sins of the
world, John 1.29. Upon him then it is, that every true Believer lays all his
sins, and that even every day, as fast as he commits them, brings new loads,
new burdens to Christ's back; all his new contracted guilts, and were not
Christ mighty to bear, as well as mighty to save; how could he stand under such
increasing weights? And from so many hands too, that continually lay load upon
him? For does not a true Believer, and right improver of Christ Crucified,
every day, do two things, bring something to Christ, and fetch something from
him?

First he brings something to Christ. What Is that you will say? Why he brings
both his worst, and his best to Christ. His worst, that is, his sins, and lays
them on Christ's back; his best, and that is, his heart and affections in all
the Services he performs to him.

And then fetches something from him every day; and if you ask what that is? I
answer, nothing but his All; all his Pardons, all his Comforts; all manner of
supplies from his rich stores; strength against his Corruptions and
Temptations; abilities for the Exercise of every Grace, and Performance of
every Duty. Now then if Conscience bears witness to this too, is not here new
matter of peace still?

Thirdly, When Conscience bears witness, that since the soul has come into
Christ's arms, and transferred all its sins upon his back; it has also arrayed
it self with his Robes, his Robes of Righteousness; that the same Faith which
united it to his Person, has put (...) his Ornaments; and so is not only (...)
to him, but wears him, and is thereby become beautiful and glorious; Beautiful
with his Beauty and comeliness, which he has put upon it, Ezekiel. 16.14. with
those Garments of Salvation, which he has now clothed it with, and all
be-deck'd it, as a Bride is decked with Jewels, Isa. 61.10. for how tattered
and terne soever a poor soul be, before it is espoused to Christ, yet when that
day once comes, that blessed day of all others, it is in rags no longer, but
puts on its Robes of state. When Salomons Queen stands by him, she stands there
like her self, as one made meet to be his Queen, in gold of Ophir, and
clothing of wrought Gold. Psalm. 45.9, 13. So does poor captive Hester, when
taken out of her captive-condition, and made Queen, she throws away her
captive-weeds, and comes to her Liege-Lord and Prince, with the Crown Royal
upon her head, and in robes of Majesty; though all still, not at her own cost
or charges, or by her own procurement, but by free-gift from her gracious
Prince, who finding love enough in his heart to make her his Queen, found money
enough in his Coffers thus richly to adorn her. And thus is it here between
Christ and the Soul; he provides it sumptuous attire and the soul by Faith puts
it on, and Oh! now how lovely and taking is it in the eye of Christ? what a
goodly person is it? How does it dazzle in it^ Cloth of Gold! and in such a
cloat^ of Gold as is Coat of Male too, which Divine Justice it self with its
keenest Arrows can never pierce; all which, while Conscience has an evidence
of, within it self, and can prove that it has thus put on Christ; Is not here
also another ground of peace? of admirable peace? Yes verily, says the
Apostle, Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith we have peace with God, through our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, When Conscience bears witness, that it is not content only with the
mere work of Regeneration, and that it has indeed passed that over, whereby
it is become a Child, as well of the second Adam, as of the first; and bears
the Image, as of the Natural man, so of the Heavenly too; but also, is every
day endeavoring to perfect holiness in the fear of God, and to be growing in
Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; and so, more
and more making sure of Heaven; according as the Apostle excellently
discourses, in 2 Pet. 1.5, -- 9. For so, says he, An entrance shall be
ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. So, how? why, by giving all diligence to add to Faith,
Virtue; and to Virtue, Knowledge; and so of the rest: that is, to add new
degrees to every Grace, for otherwise, there is no new Grace can be added, that
was not received in the first work, when the soul was first regenerated and
became a new creature. The meaning therefore is, that he is not satisfied with
mere habitual Grace; but is careful that every grace may grow, and grow at
root, and branch too, in fairness, sweetness, fragrancy: He would not have the
earthly plants and (...) in his Garden, out-grow the Heavenly ones that are in
his heart; he would not have the Sun, Showers, and Influences of the visible
Heavens, fall (...) upon his Violets and his Roses, than the powerful Be^^^s
and Influences of the Sun of Righteousness upon his Soul; and therefore he
takes pains with his own heart, waits upon every Ordinance, improves every
opportunity he meets with, seeks all ways and means, and uses all possible
endeavors that he may thrive in his inward man, and at last attain to that
stature in Christ, that may render him meet to partake of the inheritance of
the Saints in light; However others spend their time in this world, this is one
of his main businesses, and this his Conscience bears him witness; and is not
here again more matter of peace?

Fifthly, when Conscience bears witness to a man, that to the utmost of his
power, he has faithfully discharged all relative duties that lie upon him;
either as a good subject to his superiors, and the powers he lives under, as
far as may any way consist with his loyalty to Jesus Christ, or in his
domestic relations in his family, as an Husband, a Father, a Master; or as a
Child, a Servant; or what ever other Family- Relation, he or she has stood
in; or as related to a Church of Christ, of which happily he is a member; or to
any other of his fellow-Saints abroad, or Neighbors, Dealers, Traders, with
whom he any way converseth. I say, when Conscience accuses for no want of duty
here likewise; It is a quiet Conscience, and at peace within it self.

Sixthly, When Conscience bears a man witness that he has been, or, at least,
is of a God-like Spirit, that is, of a gracious and benign Disposition. (1.)
To all men in general. That as his Sun shines both upon the Just, and unjust;
and his Rain falls on good and evil; Matthew. 5.45. So he has been, and always
is ready, as occasion serves, to do good to all sorts of men, even the very
worst that are, so far as may consist with the Rule of his Duty, and he has
any warrant for it. But more especially toward three sorts of persons in the
World. (1.) To Malefactors, Enemies, such as hate him, have much offended him,
and done him wrong; yet has been always ready to lay aside revenge, and to
pardon and forgive, even to seventy times seven: Thus God does, and thus his
Conscience bears him witness, it is his not only endeavor, but delight to do;
even to overcome evil with good. (2.) To persons in misery, he is like God here
too, of a merciful disposition; can say as Job, yea, and appeal to God himself,
as he did, concerning his compassion and helpfulness to the Widow, the
Fatherless, the poor, and the oppressed, that had no friend to speak for them
in the Gate; No Morsels to feed upon, nor Garments to wear, but what they
received from his Table, Bounty, or Procurement, Job 31.16-22. (3.) But most of
all to the poor suffering Members of Jesus Christ; to them, of all others, his
Bowels yearne; them, to be sure, he will not fail to relieve, cherish, visit,
comfort, and every way, as far as able, minister unto them, and this without
distinction of Persons, or Parties; it is not this, or that difference in
Opinion, (provided it be such as leaves a man upon the foundation) but the
grace of Christ, that draws his heart, and his compassions from him.

Seventhly and lastly, When Conscience yet farther bears witness, that in all,
he has purely sought the glory of God; even in all that he has done,
throughout his whole course, in one kind or another; yea, and that he has not
only been ready to do what Service he could for God, in any capacity wherein
he has at any time set him, since he had any saving knowledge of him, but has
been ready also to suffer for him, and give testimony to his Truths, Ways,
Ordinances, and holy Institutions, in opposition to whatever has been
contrary unto them: Whatever Sufferings of his, might any way advance Christ
his Name, Honor, and Interest in the world, he has willingly undergone them,
and still is ready, as much as in him lies, in all lawful and warrantable ways
to do his utmost for the raising of Christ and his Kingdom higher and higher,
even above the Thrones and Scepters of all that oppose him. If Christ might
ascend but one inch by his becoming a footstool to him, he would joy and glory
in it; he cares not how much he decreaseth, so Christ may increase: No proud
ambitious Haman ever sought his own honor, so much as he seeks Christ's; his
heart, his wholeheart, is set upon this; his time, his estate, his parts, his
power, and interest among men (if any he has) all shall be improved this way,
to serve Christ; let his sufferings be what they will, or can be; in his Name,
Liberty, bodily Pains; no Prisons scare him, no sorrows whatever, so Christ may
gain by it. Now when Conscience bears witness to this also, as well as to the
former particulars, that this is the frame of his heart, or, at least, that he
sincerely desires and endeavors that it may be so: this man, I dare avouch
has a quiet Conscience, a Conscience settled in a well-grounded peace, and so
has no just reason to fear death.

SECT. 7.
The second Branch of a quiet Conscience, namely, a Conscience void of offense
both toward God and toward men.

A Conscience void of offense toward God, is a Conscience impelling and
putting a man upon his utmost endeavors, in all things, to approve it self to
God; and to walk before him ((...)) unto all pleasing, Col. 1.10. Which the
Apostle says, is to walk, ((...)) Worthy of the Lord, who in all things
deserves to be pleased by his own Creatures, especially by man above the rest,
for whom he has done more than for all the rest, more than for Angels
themselves. Now he that upon consideration thereof does all he can to testify
his gratitude to his most obliging God, in avoiding every thing that may offend
him, not only every sin, but every occasion unto sin, every shadow of it, and
so hates the very garment spotted of the flesh; and also in doing whatever may
be acceptable and delightful to him; this man, if any, has a Conscience void
of offense toward God. For to be sure he always does three things, that none
else do.

First, He makes it his great care and study, to find out the whole will of
God concerning him, to understand all his Duty.

Secondly, To practice all that he knows thereof, even to his utmost; So that
God himself may say of him, as he did of his Servant David, Act. 13.22. I have
found David, my Servant, a man after mine own heart, he shall do ((...)) all my
wills; and indeed herein lies the very excellency of our obedience, that it is
done in compliance with, and pursuance of, the Divine Will, and to have our own
wills engaged in so doing: for as it is the will in God, that an holy man
chiefly looks at, as the ground and great reason of his obedience; so it is the
will in man that God also chiefly eyes in all he does: If there be, first
((...)) a willing mind, says the Apostle, it is accepted, 2 Cor. 8.12.
Intimating that if this be wanting, let the Duty in the matter of it, or
seeming performance otherwise, be never so splendid and glorious, yet it is not
accepted. 'Twill be no better than a gilded iniquity, as the Lord says to
Judah by the mouth of the Prophet Jeremiah, Chap. 2.22. ((...), iniquitas tua
inaurata) it is but a fine painted sin, when all is done. We say in Philosophy,
forma dat esse, it is not the matter, but the form that specificates every
thing, and distinguishes it from all things else; it is much more true in
Divinity; the heart and Soul of the man must be in every act of that obedience,
which pleases God, he must be sincere in it, and that universally, and
constantly, every command must be readily embraced, and gladly obeyed, and he
that does this, or at least, strongly desires, and endeavors it, is upright
before, and acceptable to God; especially, it being added in the

Third place, that wherein he fails, it is the great grief and sorrow of his
heart; that which costs him many a sigh, in secret, and many a tear between God
and him: and this briefly is to have a Conscience void of offense toward God,
and concerning which, he can appeal to God, as Job did, whatever men say, or
think of him, ( Job 16.19, 20.) Also now my witness is in Heaven, and my
Record is on high, my friends scorn me, but mine eye pours out tears unto God.

The next thing is, That it is a Conscience void of offense toward men too.
When is that you will say? When there is a great tenderness in the Conscience, of
doing wrong to any, no not in the least; and a great impulse to do to every man
what is right and just; and this from a principle of holiness: For holiness
toward God is the root upon which Righteousness toward men stands, and from
whence only it springs and grows. And the truth is, without both these,
Conscience cannot be good, neither as a light, nor as a witness, nor as a
Judge; It can perform none of its Offices in fit manner, nor due order: the
rule holds here, as much as any where, ad constituendum bonum, ponenda sunt
omnia requisita, sed malum fit ex quolibet defectu: to constitute a good thing,
all requisites must be present, but one defect only makes it evil: Therefore
the Apostle, when he would describe a good Conscience, puts in comprehensive
words, words that take all in, that render it every way good, Honest bona, and
pacate bona, good in the integrity of it, good in the calmness and
peaceableness of it. Void of offense! How large is that? and void of offense
toward God! how large is that too? What needed he have added any more? The
truth is, whoever offends men, and himself, among others; whoever interrupts
his own peace, brings any guilt upon his own Soul, as well as does wrong to
another, does he not even therein also offend God, and transgress his Law:
However, the Apostle notwithstanding adds that also, Void of offense toward
men, and thought it necessary to do so, not only for the more full vindication
of himself before the Roman Governors, to whom he appealed; but to intimate
that his actions were every way such, that he durst appeal even to men also,
whoever they were, though enemies, as well as a righteous God, if they would
but be impartial, and lay aside passion, and prejudice, that he was unjustly
accused.

But this by the way only; Let Us consider what the Apostle means in this
place, by a Conscience void of offense toward men; I conceive he does not
place it in mere moral acts of justice, such as fair dealing, paying every man
his own, giving every man his due, and such like, but in a pious, and religious
care, no way to become an offense, a stumbling block, or scandal to any, by any
dangerous opinion, or evil example; and that this is the Apostles sense, or at
least his principal meaning, two things induce me to believe. (1.) What he
says in the foregoing verses, (14, 15) where he speaks of the soundness of
his Faith, believing all things that are written in the Law and the Prophets;
and of the holiness of his practice, in a pure and right worshipping of the God
of his Fathers, to both which he immediately subjoyns this his double exercise
of a good Conscience, or a Conscience void of offense both toward God, and
toward men. (2.) The Annotation of the Greek word ((...)) translated void of
offense; properly signifying one that does not cause another to stumble, for so
this very word is used in Luke 4.11. For dashing ones foot against a stone
((...)) when Balaam taught Balak how to bring Israel into sin, by Whoredom and
Idolatry, it is said ( Rev. 2.14.) he taught him to cast ((...)) a
stumbling block before the Children of Israel. Hesychius, Estius, Beza,
Grotius, and many other learned men criticize upon this word variously, but all
in effect amounts to this, when a man becomes an occasion to his Neighbor, any
way to sin, he is then a scandal, a stone of offense, a Trap, Gin, or Snare to
him, and is guilty of the curse pronounced (in Lev. 19.14.) upon those that lay
stumbling blocks before the blind. Now he that by all means takes heed of
this, as well in things Spiritual, as otherwise, he it is that most truly may
be said to have a Conscience void of offense toward men.

Thus have I done with the first general Branch, of a good Conscience, a quiet
Conscience. I come to the second.

SECT. 8.
Of an Excusing Conscience, which makes its own defense, (1.) Against the
Challenge of exacting Justice; (2.) Against the malice of an accusing Devil.

I Will begin with the first, The Challenge of Exacting Justice; What is that
Challenge, you will say? Why it challenges for the breach of the whole Law of
God; and this a thousand and a thousand times over, for manifold and great
wrongs done to God; besides such, as an abuse of his patience, forbearance and
long-sufferance, great and high ingratitudes, for many Mercies received;
non-improvements of the means of Grace, with many other crimes of like nature,
but especially for Gospel-sins, and the neglects of those offers, which, for a
long time were made, before ever they were at all regarded, or hearkened to; For
all which, Justice cries out to the God of Justice, against the Sinner; calls
for satisfaction, and that to the utmost farthing, both principal and interest:
or else, away let him go, says Justice; away with him to Prison, to Hellfire,
there let him lie, and there let him be punished too, according to the merits
of the cause; spare him not, says Justice: let him know what it is to sin
against such a God, and abuse such Mercy as he has abused. This, and abundance
more has Justice to say, even against the best man and woman in the world.

To all which an excusing Conscience makes answer, and defends it self thus, by
pleading three things, against which even Justice it self can make no reply,
but is left wholly speechless.

First, Acknowledges that Justice is just in its Challenge; that it self is
indeed the person guilty of all this; of all these debts, and these crimes; but
withal, that both the debt, and the guilt is transferred, and that Justice it
self must herein be just also, in making its challenge where the debt and the
guilt lies, which is not now upon me, says Conscience, but upon Christ my
surety, who has undertaken for me: my gracious God has laid all my sins upon
his back, and my gracious Redeemer was willing he should; and thither, I also
have carried them, and laid them too.

Secondly, Conscience excuses it self again thus: Christ has not only taken
my debts and guilts upon him, but he has endured the punishment, and paid the
whole debt. First, for my debts, I shall never contract greater or larger debts
than he has already discharged for me, and that beforehand too, and in better
coin than ever could have been paid by any other; not with silver and gold,
but with that which is much more precious, his own heart-blood, 1 Pet. 1.18.19.

And for Punishment, has he not undergone that also? And for whom did he
undergo it, if not for me, and such as I am? He had no sin of his own to suffer
for; no sin by inhesion, his holy heart had not the least defilement in it.
Well then, it was for my sins that he suffered: And did he not suffer to the
full? Pray speak Justice: Was one lash forborne? One wound abated? Was he not
all over wounded for my transgressions, even all in a gore-blood? How did the
drops run trickling from him, while the stripes were laid thick on him? And why
so, says Conscience, but that I might be healed? ( Isa. 53.5.) Has not the
Holy Ghost it self taught me to say so, and commanded me to believe it: Now
then what can Justice it self desire more? Ought any debt to be paid any more
than once! or does any just Law inflict punishment more than once, for one and
the same offense?

Thirdly, Conscience proceeds yet farther in its own defense, and adds one plea
more, and it is a great one, without which the two former could never be
verifyed by him, as to his own particular: What is that you will say? Why, it is
the blood of sprinkling; for says Conscience, that it may indeed appear, that
I am one of those for whom Christ has done this, for whose sins he has
undergone his sufferings, and whose debts he has paid; that I am indeed one of
his saved and redeemed ones: Behold here the sprinklings of his blood upon me.
Wherever that is found the Conscience cannot not be evil, the heart is washed
thoroughly, ( Heb 10.22. But this (thorough-Grace) you cannot deny to be upon me,
and therefore, while I adore the Mercy that has thus sprinkled me, I fear not
you Justice, nor any Challenge that you do, or can make against me.

But then Satan, happily will come in, with his Accusations, and these great
and heavy. For that malicious foul-Fiend is wont to lay his charge deep
(calumniari fortiter) and to the very best of Saints too in their Generations.
Thus he did to Job, to Paul, yea, unto Christ himself; he wants not impudence,
as we may see in Jobs case, nor cares he how many lies he tells, to traduce
God, and trouble a Saint, and he never does it more than when sickness, or any
other troubles seizes him, and death approaches. And the whole charge which
he brings in usually, is threefold, or may all be reduced to three general
heads.

First, Sins of Commission, these he enumerates, multiplies, and aggravates
with all manner of horrid circumstances, of time, place, manner, measure,
endeavors to make them all no less than presumptuous sins; sins, against
Conscience, against much light, great love, many obligations from the God of
all Grace and Mercy. For the circumstances of time, and place; don't you
remember, says this Accuser of the Brethren, when and where you have been
about your pretended holy Duties, what wanderings of your eyes there were (by
which one might guess at the wanderings of your heart) how incomposed you were,
how soon wearied and tired out, sooner by far, than when at your vain sports
or recreations? and don't you remember, how at such a time, and in such a
place, you slept away the Sermon, how drowsy you were in Prayer; and the like
again, at such a time, and in such a place, and so lost your precious season of
grace, and the benefit of it, which at that time you might have enjoyed? Don't
you remember these things? If you don't, I do: And then he proceeds to sins of
another kind, and of another, and of another after them, and so comes pouring
in with a great and long Catalogue of sins of Commission, with their
aggravations.

Then Secondly, He brings in a new Charge, (as great and heavy as the former)
of sins of Omission and neglects of Duty; neglects of secret Duties,
Family Duties, all sorts of relative-Duties, and aggravates them also by their
Circumstances. And

Thirdly, Hereupon, what does he infer, but that all the Profession which
has been made, has been but a mere pretense to holiness; but mere
Hypocrisy, which he labors yet more strongly to prove, by carrying his Charge
farther: for says he to the soul that he is now accusing; is not all that is
done by you, from such and such rotten grounds; for such and such unworthy
ends? that you may get a name in the world? or make such or such carnal
advantages to your self? not out of any pure love at all, either to God, or the
Duties; that you would be believed to be sincere in: And what is all this, but
a kind of holy-cheat, and a grand Imposture, both to your self and others? and
consequently, will not the hopes and confidences you build upon these false
foundations deceive you? And as for that repentance which you think to fly to
for your refuge, whilst you would make your self and others believe, that you
thereby get off from your guilts, and heal all again. Alas! Is not that a mere
cheat too, and a miserable deceit of your own heart? For if there were a true
repentance in you, such as you pretend to, would you fall into the same sins
again, and again, and that often? True Repentance, even you your self know, is
always accompanied with an effectual Reformation and a total breaking off from
every evil. Now lay all this together, and are you, or can you, be the man, or
the woman, you would have the world take you to be? No verily, it cannot be,
your own Conscience being Judge, as well as I: Thus you see what the Charge is,
and how heavy, that Satan brings in: to all which an excusing Conscience, makes
answer, and defends it self thus.

First, For those sins, says Conscience, that you like a Devil accuse me with,
when the matter is well-looked into, will they not (at least, very many of
them) prove more yours, than mine? especially such as you call presumptuous
sins, and aggravate with such grievous circumstances, 'twas you that tempted me
to them, that hurried me on to the committing of them, was it not? It Is you
that laid the objects before me, by which I was enticed; that stirred up the
old corruption, which at first you foisted into my nature, and which you have
ever since fomented, and brought fuel to. This is one excuse that Conscience
makes. But

Secondly, Conscience adds. I deny not, but though you as a soul-murderer, most
maliciously tempted me, yet since I consented the sins were mine, as well as
yours, both the sins of Omission, and the sins of commission; but three things
I can say for my self, that you can never say. (1.) I have a most gracious
Savior, and Redeemer, that is given to me, and that has undertaken for me:
Can you say this Devil? you know you cannot; He took not upon him the nature of
Angels, but the seed of Abraham, even of the faithful Abraham, whose seed I am.
(2.) I have two natures in me, a new Nature, not the old only; I am a new man,
a Son of the second Adam, as well as of the first: I am regenerate and (through
Grace) am born again; I have something of Heaven in me, but you are all Devil,
all Hell. (3.) I can truly say, whatever you say to the contrary, that I have
sincerely repented, and do repent daily, which you can never do. For you are
given up to a damned state, sealed to destruction, and reserved for the day of
wrath. As for my Repentance, which you object so much against, and by all your
might do labor to invalidate; and my Profession too, which you so falsely
asperse, as if it were mere hypocrisy: I can evidence the truth of both of
them thus: (1.) I hate the sin which I do, and the evil which I do, I would not
do, my will is against it; and the good that I would do, it is true, I do it
not, because sin is present with me, but my will is to do it, notwithstanding;
and in Gods account, it is the Will that denominates the man, as the will is,
such the man is 2 Cor. 8.11, 12. (2.) Whereas you charge me with falling into
the same sins again, and again, I confess it, whilst I carry a body of death
about me, and a Law in my members warring against the Law of my mind, and both
these agitated by such a tempting Devil as thou art; I do fall daily. Sins of
daily incursion and infirmity come in upon me: But have thou not heard Devil,
that the Righteous man falls seven times, (that is often) and rises again,
Prove. 24.16. For repentance is not only one single act, but it is an habitual
grace in the heart, proceeding from the new Creature formed there, whose proper
act it is. All distinct natures act according to their kind; and act
necessarily; the Sun shines, and always shines, because it shines naturally,
and can do no other; So does grace, always act like it self, and cannot cease
acting. But yet, (3.) Conscience farther excuses it self, and tells the Devil
to his face, that as he would accuse it of more evil than it is guilty of, so he
has more good in him than the Devil knows of, for whatever Grace, whatever
good thoughts or affections are in the heart, the Devil knows nothing of all
that, the heart and the workings of it, being altogether a secret unto him, so
that how many an holy struggle may be in the heart, against this or that sin,
against this or that temptation; How many a sharp fight and combat there, the
Devil is ignorant of: Though he see the tears that drop, and hear the sighs and
groans that the afflicted and grieved soul utters for sin, yet he knows not
what it is for, unless it be made known to him in so many articulated words.
Now then how many thousand holy sighs and groans; how many repentings may there
be; how many ardent affections, and pious ejaculations may pass from the heart
to Heaven, which the Devil may not know the reason of, and of which alone, God
is witness? This then is another excuse that Conscience makes for it self, and
it is none of the least. And yet, (4.) There is one more, a very good one, when
all else is said that can be, the Conscience flies to that, in 1 John 1.7. The
blood of Christ cleanses me from all sin. So that let the Devil accuse as
home, and charge as deep as he can, yet here, to be sure, is a full answer for
him, an irrefragable one, and such as he can never invalidate, or take away the
force of.

And in case Satan should be so impudent as to urge the matter farther, and
say, that is true, the blood of Christ cleanses from all sin, but that belongs
to none but a true Beleiver, which you can never prove your self to be.

To this Conscience answers likewise, and that roundly and smartly: Thou lie
Devil; and besides thou art no Judge in this case, it comes not within thy
cognizance; what transactions are in my soul, what mutual embraces, betwixt
Christ and me; what acts of faith and love are in that secret place; as I said
before, thou know not: It does not therefore follow, it is not; de non
entibus and de non apparentibus idem est judicium; things that appear not, to
one that is ignorant, are as if they were not; Let that matter alone Devil, for
as cunning as thou art, thou art no Judge in it; it is enough that my God, who
alone is ((...)) the knower of the heart, Acts 15.8. knows that I love him, and
believe in him, whether thou know it, or not.

Thus now we see what a good Conscience is, in both the parts of it; both (as
it is honest bona, and pacate bona) as it is a quiet Conscience, and an excusing
Conscience, every way void of offense, both toward God, and toward men; and
where such a Conscience is; is it not a sufficient fortification against the
fear of Death? What is it that can be a just ground of trouble to this man?
That which is the most disquieting thing of all, namely, his sin, and the guilt
of it, that is removed; Christ has taken it off from him; What is it can be
matter of terror to him, at the great Tribunal, which he must one day stand
before? No enemy will appear against him there, for God is reconciled to him;
and he that shall sit there as his Judge, is no other than his Redeemer. And
if Conscience here, even in this life (whose internal motions are known to none
but God himself, upon which ground none else but he can impose a Law upon it,
and oblige it) be at so much ease. Surely it is from the same God that he is
going to, who alone can comfort, or afflict the person to all eternity
hereafter, whose conscience he alone also can comfort or afflict in time.

But I hasten to answer two impertant objections, which seem much to contradict
all that has been said hitherto.

SECT. 9.
Two important objections answered, against the preceding doctrine, and what
has been said upon it.

FIrst, It may be, some will say, shall we think that all those that are
afraid, or unwilling to dye, are to be looked upon as persons without such a
quiet, and excusing Conscience or, as those which have not such inward
testimonies of a good estate, and that in all the particulars, which have been
mentioned? Would not this be very uncharitable to pass such a censure? Yea, and
very unwarrantable too, and against plain evidence both of Scripture and
Experience? Of Scripture, which positively affirms ( Heb. 2.15.) that some (and
those precious ones too, for it is spoken of Saints) through fear of death are
all their life time subject to bondage. And does not experience farther prove
it, almost every day? How many choice Servants of Christ, have met with hard
struggles when they come to dye? Have been willing to live yet longer, if it
might be? Have they not had their dreads on them? Yea, their ((...)) pangs and
bands in their death, like a woman in travel?

Secondly, On the other hand, is it not a very ordinary thing to see wicked men
live and dye in peace? Men as vile, as profane and deboished as any the earth
has, and yet their Consciences are quiet notwithstanding; they have no
disturbance at all from them: nor as the Psalmist says, have they any bands in
their death, ( Psalm. 73.4.) but seem to pass out of the world, as innocent as
Lambs, and without any fear at all upon them.

These are two considerable Objections indeed, and must be answered, and to
satisfaction too, least the truth before delivered, be prejudiced and shaken
by it.

I answer therefore to both in order, and first to the first objection, I say
three things.

First, by way of concession, I grant it, that many who have indeed such a
quiet and excusing Conscience, a Conscience void of offense both toward God,
and toward men, as I have been speaking of, do notwithstanding dye with fears
upon them, and seem to be taken out of the world by violence, rather than
freely to go out of it, and this contrary to the very precepts, even of an
Heathen moralist. For what says Seneca in his 104th Epistle, Vir fortis and
sapiens exire debet e vita, non trahi; a wise and a valiant man, ought to go
readily out of this life, not to be drawn. And again, quid est obsecro, cur
timeat mortem homo? What is there in death (considered simply in it self) that
a man should fear? cum illa nihil sit mali, nisi quod ante ipsam est, timeri;
the greatest evil of it, is to be afraid of it, before it comes? Thus he, even
a very Heathen: Well, but yet for all that, such is the extraordinary timidity
of some persons, and good ones too, such is their aptness to despond, partly
from the natural constitution and temper of their melancholy bodies and minds;
partly from the molestation of the great enemy of mankind (through Divine
permission) the Devil, that the work of natures dissolution, comes off hard
with them, and is a much more difficult task to them, than to some others: And
the truth is, who, that is a Son or Daughter of Adam, let them be never so
holy, and never so fit for Heaven, but more or less, have something of a
cohorrescency of death upon them? Two such old friends, and so intimate as the
body and the soul, are loath to part; It is natural for every thing to desire
and seek the preservation of it self, and to oppose and be afraid of that which
destroys it. Hence it is that Aristotle in the third Book of his Ethics, the
fixth Chapter, tells us that ((...)) Death is most dreadful. Thus also another
Heathen (Epicur. Ad me nunc. Apud Laert. ((...)) of all evils, death is the
most formidable: But what need we go to Heathen Authors for this, since the
Scripture it self affirms it, whilst it says of Death, that it is the King of
terrors? Job 18.14. But

Secondly, I answer, That though these fears are found stirring and disturbing
the minds, even of good men and women, as well as others; and we have often
experience of it, and cannot deny it; yet this I affirm, that the persons
qualified as aforesaid, with a good and a quiet Conscience, have no just reason
to be so fearful, but have good and sufficient ground to the contrary. What
men's fears are (de facto) is one thing, and the ground of them is another: that
good men have no just ground, no reason to be thus affrighted, I still
contend; for why should they, since God is reconciled to them, as has been
said; and since they have such a Mediator and Advocate in the Heavens, as
Jesus Christ; and since they have their Pardon in their own bosoms, and clear
evidences of their own regenerated and sanctified state, and of their being
already received into favor with that God, that they are going to? And
therefore,

Thirdly, It is very rare that any Child of God dies under these fears, but
sooner or latter, they make a conquest over them, at least, in some good
degree; buffetings they sometimes have, and may have, for some time, and it is
seldom that the most eminent of the Saints escape them ( Heman's case may be
many a good man's besides, Psalm. 88. throughout) but when do we hear of any of
them that dye despairing, and go out of the world with these terrors
unvanquished? I would be tender in the case, and not be positive in
determining, one way, or other, for Francis Spira's sake: But am most inclined
to think, that who-ever are delivered from the wrath to come, are also
delivered from the prevailing fear of it, before they breathe out their last
breath. Many and famous are the instances, which we have of this kind; such
as Mistress Honywood, Mr. Throgmorton, Mr. John Holland, Mris. Katherine Brett,
and many others, which are recorded by such as have left their Funeral
Discourses in Print, and have written the lives of holy men and Women; Those
that list may find some of them in the works of Dr. Thomas Tailor, Mr. Bolton,
Mr. Gataker, Mr. Samuel Clark, and elsewhere.

To the other Objection, I likewise answer. Suppose a profane Sensualist, a
Drunkard, a Whoremonger, a brutish Rioter, that wastes his body, his estate,
his time, his conscience, in the pursuit of his beastly and silthy lusts; that
revels it out, night and day, without any the least regard to God, and his
ownsoul: Suppose a covetous earthly muck-worme, that grip's and grasp's (per
fas, and nefas) right, or wrong, he cares not how, so he get an estate, fill
his coffers with silver, and his heart with guilt, by fraud, deceit, and
oppression, that squeezeeth the Fatherless and the Widow, the poor and needy;
that over-reacheth his innocent and well-meaning Neighbor. Suppose the proud
and superstitious person, that over-looks, and scorns every one below himself;
yea, those that are every way his equals at least, if not better than he; the
high and lofty person that can debauch himself without any scruple, and
renounce all former principles, and practices; that can swear, and for-swear;
do any thing be it never so vile, and impious, so that he may rise by it, grow
higher in place and esteem among men, and attain unto such a grandeur, and
greatness that he has propounded unto himself. Suppose a malicious envious
person, (and therein as like the Devil as any you can meet with) a bloody
minded man, that hates God, and all goodness, that persecutes a Saint with
greatest rage and fury, for no other reason but because he loves God, owns his
Ways, Ordinances, and Institutions; Walks holily, and by the shining light, of
his conversation, condemns the Generation of the wicked. Suppose an Athiest, an
Apostate, that has outlived all Conscience; that bids defyance to that holy
profession which once he seemed to make to God, and every thing that has his
Image and Superscription upon it. Once more, suppose an Hypocrite, not only a
gross but a fine-spun Hypocrite (of which there are too many in these days)
that make great pretensrons to Religion it self, that seems as devout, as
zealous, and as much concerned for God and his Truth, for his holy Ways and
Worship, as those that are most sincere; but all this, not in pure love, to
those things, but for some worldly, or Carnal ends, which otherwise he cannot
accomplish. I say, suppose that these and many such like, as guilty of other
evils, as great as any that I have now mentioned, should after their whole life
thus spent, and that impenitently, dye in peace without any the least remorse
or check of Conscience, would you say, or can you think, that these men have a
good, and truly quiet Conscience? Men thus obdurated, and given up ((...)) to
an injudicious and reprobated mind, as the Apostle's phrase is, Romans 1.28. Men
of so profligated a life, and so prodigiously wicked, that after the hardness
of their heart, and that cannot repent, have treasured up to themselves wrath
against the day of Wrath. I say, is there, or can there be any ground to
imagine that they have a good and a quiet Conscience? What, because they live,
and dye thus, like an Hog in his stie, that dies of the Measles, or the
Murraine, (or some other such Plague that a beast is subject to) with scarce a
grunt or a groan, is all well therefore with him? Alas! is there not a great
deal more cause to say, and that without any breach of charity, that the
Conscience of such as these, is at best, but a sleepy Conscience, a Conscience
lulled into a damnable security, and insensibility, a seared Conscience, a
Conscience past feeling? Than which, what can be a greater Judgment, or sorer
Doom? When God says of any man, (as in Rev. 22.11.) He that is filthy, let him
be filthy still; Let the Adulterer, the Blasphemer, the Idolater, be an
Adulterer still, a Blasphemer still, an Idolater still; When he shall say as he
did to Ephraim ( Hos. 4.17.) Ephraim is an Apostate, he is joined to Idols, let
him alone; Let him live and dye in his sin without repentance; Let him perish
and go down to Hell; and let him go without all sense, or apprehension of his
danger, with a blinded mind, and an hardened heart; Let him fall into his own
destruction, and that without recovery, when he is least aware of it. Can any
thing be more terrible than this? And yet what less than this can they look
for, who live and dye in a state of unregeneracy, let their passage out of this
world seem never so peaceable and quiet? For though they have no bands in their
death, as the Psalmist himself confesses ( Psalm. 73.4.) Yet being wicked men
and women, they are far from a truly good and quiet Conscience. And so now I
think I have answered this objection too, and that without leaving any room for
a Reply. I come next to the use of all which is twofold.

SECT. 10.
The uses and improvement of the point. First by way of information, and then
of exhortation, both to good and bad.

By way of Information.
SEe here the difference the vast difference, between men and women, regenerate
and unregenerate; between men reconciled to God and unreconciled; between men
of a good Conscience, and an evil Conscience; and that both in their life, and
in their death.

In their life, which in many things differs very much, I will reduce all to
four heads, briefly. (1.) One of them, the regenerate person, lives holily, the
whole course of his life is holy, in all the designs of it, in his continual
practice, in a sincere, thorough, universal, constant obedience. He is freed
from the bondage and power of sin; he is no way under the dominion of it; it
does not reign in his mortal body; but he is very much dead unto sin, and alive
unto God. There Is nothing in the world that he hates and flys from, so much as
sin and all occasions and temptations, leading to it; He Will as soon adventure
himself into a nest of hissing Serpents, or into an house infected with the
Plague, as to go into any place or company, where his heart may be endangered,
or his eyes and ears be vitiated, with corrupt, and corrupting objects,
discourses and examples: And as for the Devil that is always injecting
filthiness into his thoughts, or laying snares before him, and still some way
or other, is soliciting him to evil, he is so much aware of him, that he stands
upon his guard continually; is evermore struggling with him, and by his holy
combats with him, (through the strength of Christ) never fails of making some
conquest over him, more or less and whilst he resists him, causes him to fly
from him: But now the other, the unregenerate person, how wickedly and
wretchedly, does he live? What an unholy and impure life? How does he wallow in
his filthinese, as a Swine in its mire; and lick it up, as a Dog does his
vomit? how does his heart lie asoak in sin? and what a miserable Vassal and
Slave is he to it? (multos Dominos habet, qui unum non habet) How many Lords is
he under, whilst he disobeys the Lord his Maker? every lust exercises a
domination over him, a great, and a severe Tyranny. How is he distracted
betwixt this sin and that, betwixt this temptation and that? And how busy is
he to make- provision for every Lust? I, and he must please the Devil too,
whose Vassal he likewise is, so far is he from resisting or opposing him; and
indeed how can he, he having laid his chains upon him? For does it not fare
with the Devils Bondslaves, whom he holds Captives at his will, (as the
Apostle speaks 2 Timothy 2.26. as it does with the Turkish Galley-Slaves, who
being both Manacled, Shackled, and fastened to their Seats and Oars, are made
to work till the Irons eat into their very flesh, and besides that, to suffer
as many cruel blows as their savage Taskmasters have a mind to give them: This
then is one difference. A second is this, The Regenerate person walks with God,
is in amity and friendship; with him, as Enoch was; there is a great good will
betwixt God and him; they are agreed together, as the Prophets Phrase is ( Amos
3.3.) can two walk together except they be agreed? It is the regenerate man's
daily and constant care, in all things to please God, to do his will, yea, all
his will, this is meat and drink to him; he is never better pleased, than when
like Christ himself ( Luke 2.49.) he is about his Fathers business; this he
minds more than his appointed food. (as Job. did, Job 23.12.) He will rather
lose a Meals meat; two or three (for fail) than an opportunity of doing a
service for God, or wherein he may any way enjoy some good from him, in this or
that Duty, or Ordinance: Which kindness God takes great notice of, and will be
sure to answer again to him, and some way or other makes him sensible, how well
he takes it at his hands: This blessing, and that, shall speak it out unto him;
he will make good all that he has promised to them that keep his Statutes, and
his Judgments to do them, Deuteronomy. 28.1.-15. All manner of blessings shall come
upon him; the blessings of the City, and of the Field, of the Basket, and of
the store; yea, of Heaven and of Earth, as is there at large expressed. But
now, as to the unregenerate person, it is quite otherwise with him, he is at
enmity with God, and God with him; he walks contrary to God, and God to him; he
hates God, and God hates him, as it is said of the howling Shepherds, (so they
are called, Zach. 11.3.) that had no pity upon the Lords people; ( ver. 5.)
their soul, says God, abhored me, and my soul loathed them, ( ver. 8.) the
wicked and him that loves violence his soul hates, Psalm. 11.5. And thereupon
must not such an one needs be under a curse a dismal one, and may he not
reasonably look for it, every day? Yea, every hour, every moment, has he not
cause to fear that one curse or other; one sore Judgment or another, will fall
upon him? What says David, Psalm. 7.11, 12, 13. God is angry with the wicked
every day, if he turn not, he will whet his Sword, he has bent his bow, and
made it ready. He has also prepared for him the Instruments of death; he
ordains his Arrows against the Persecutors. And again, Psalm. 11.6. Upon the
wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible (in the
Margent, it is a burning) tempest, this shall be the portion of their Cup.

And this is a second Difference, the third follows. A regenerate person has
an awakened an enlightened, a tender Conscience, a good and bonest Conscience,
that will do all its Offices faithfully; It will inform, accuse, give true
evidence, rebuke, and pass a right Judgment too, as the case requires. It
will not suffer him to lie in his sin, or to neglect the means that may remove,
either the guilt or filth thereof, and it is his constant care always to keep
it wakeful and tender, apt to be convinced, and apt to rebuke upon all
occasions: He no way despises the fore-warnings of it, to prevent sin, and the
checks of it, when sin is working, and ready to put forth it self, for by this
means, principally the amity is kept up between God and him, and the peace that
he injoyes inwardly, maintained. But how much otherwise is it with an
unregenerate man? either he is a man of no Conscience, that is, makes no
Conscience of any thing he does, scruples nothing doubts nothing, but
adventures upon any thing, any breach of Gods holy, and righteous Law, any act
that may satisfy his own evil heart, be it never so foul; either sees no hurt,
or will see none in it, is willingly ignorant, as the Apostle speaks, in
another case, (2 Pet. 3.5.) and to that end, hates to be reformed, cannot
endure a soul-searching Ministry, or a plain-dealing Friend that may convince
him of the sinfulness of his heart and ways, and so lies drowzing under a
sleepy, and kind of dead Conscience; or else, if his Conscience does stir, at
any time, and begin, either latrare, or lacerare, to bark, and it may be, to
bite too; what does he do presently? Does he not do by this his barking and
biting Conscience (ready to fly in his face) as a man that has a fierce
Mastiff-Dog, tie him up or Muzzle him? Thus he deals with his Conscience; and
that he may be the less at leisure to hearken to, or hear the brawlings of it,
is it not his common practice to go into some such company, or engage in some
such business, or indulge himself in some such pleasure, recreation, or other
sinful divertizement, as may wholly take him off from giving any, the least
attendance, or regard to it? So long as he can keep his eyes open, he is thus
employed, and when night comes, what care does he take either to ingorge, or
intoxicate himself, so as he may sleep it out, till daylight returns, or at
least, that hour of it, that gives him the advantage of his accustomed course
of sinning, with his wicked Companions, day after day? Thus he lives and wastes
his precious time, not caring, or knowing, how soon death may Arrest him, and
spoil his sport.

Fourthly and Lastly, A regenerate person is a man Crucified to the World, and
the World to him: He is no more moved, or affected, with the pleasures, the
delights, and lying vanities of this world, than a living man is pleased with
the presence of a dead Wife, lying by him; and all the splendours, grandeurs,
blandishments, allurements, and bewitchments of this world, work no more upon
him, than upon a dead man that has neither sense nor motion, nor life in him:
But yet, in the mean while, though his heart be dead to this world world and
all the fine toys and trifles of it, so as all the wealth, riches, gauderies,
and glories thereof, be nothing to him, yet he is so wise, as to mind the
things of the other world; these as he highly prizeth and values them, at their
just rate, so he earnestly seeks after them: His whole business lies here,
namely, by patient continuance in well-doing, to seek for glory, honor,
immortality, eternal Life. ( Romans 2.7.) and this being the trade he drives,
every step he treads is toward Heaven, and to a being made meet for the
enjoyment of it. Contrariwise, an unregenerate person takes quite another
course, he is all for earth, and for earthly things; all for, either the
profits of the world, if his heart be choked with covetous cares and thoughts;
or for the pleasures of the world, if he be a brutish sensualist; or for the
honors, dignities, and highplaces of the world, if he be of a lofty and proud
Spirit: As for the enjoyment of God, or the saving of his soul, they are
matters too serious for him to mind; mundus cum suis frivolis, the frivolous
World is his Idol, and that he will adore, though with the loss of Heaven it
self, and all the blisses thereof for ever, which being so, may we not
conclude, that every step he treads is toward Hell, and that he is ripening
apace for it?

Thus we see what a vast difference there is, between a regenerate person, and
an unregenerate in their lives. Let us see now what the difference is in their
deaths.

The regenerate person, (1.) Has no stings, nor gaulings of Conscience his
main work is done, when he comes to lie upon his dying-Bed. It has been his
every days work to set things right, and to keep them so, (to the utmost of
his endeavor) betwixt God and him, to get, and grow up into an entire
friendship with him, and still to call himself to an account for every thing
that might offend, and with all speed to hasten to the blood of sprinkling, to
be washed and cleansed: he would never be at rest, so long as guilt remained
upon his own heart, or one frown in the face of God toward him. But this the
unregenerate person never did, nor would ever by any means be persuaded to it;
self-Examination, self-Reflexion, and self-Judging, were Duties which he was
always a stranger to, these were works for an awakened, and a tender
Conscience, which he never had, nor desired to have; and so now, judicially, is
given up, happily, to a Conscience past feeling, and that cannot be sensible of
any thing. (2.) In case a regenerate, and holy person should be under some
little clouds for a while, and through the malice of Satan, by Divine
permission, be somewhat damped in his inward peace and comfort, when he is
about his last work of dying, yet, as has been said, there is no just reason
why it should be thus with him; and it is very rare, that any good man or woman
is long vexed thus; but to be sure, the storm ends at last, and the rest of
their passage is usually under a pleasant and fair gale, God himself as I may
so say, sitting at the stern, and the holy Angels spreading the Sails: And Oh
then! the calmness of their minds! the serenity of their peace! the inward
quiet of their souls, how great is it! How is not Death then at all dreadful!
but rather a welcome Messenger, which they now look for, and wonder that his
Chariot wheels move no faster! which blessed repose being now cast into, after
their buffetings and combats with Satan, on a sudden, they breathe forth their
perfumed breath, and so fall asleep in Jesus.

But alas! How far otherwise is it with a wicked unregenerate man, when he
comes to this dying work? For, if his Conscience be not so far seared,
blinded, and left judicially insensible, as was but even now mentioned; but is
let loose upon him, and enabled by the God of Conscience, to charge him, and
accuse him home: If it calls all his sins to remembrance, and sets them in
order before him (a work, which sometimes God, to show his Power, will assist
this or that wicked man's Conscience in as himself speaks Psalm. 50.21.) I say
when once Conscience acts this part upon some obstinate and impenitent wretch,
and has a commission so to do. Oh then! the roarings! the yellings! the
howlings, of such a Conscience! How then does death come with all its stings!
how does Hell fire flash in his face with all its flames! And how does the
Devil himself, as 'twere haunt and affright him with all his Feinds? Oh now the
horrors, the terrors, the soul-sinking overwhelming dreads that are upon him!
may not his Name be now changed into magor-missabib, fear round about? He that
before seemed to have no such power, faculty, or principle of Conscience in
him, (call it what you will) no such vicegerency of the Divine Majesty, for
what is Conscience, but Gods Vicegerent?) Behold now he finds it much
otherwise: he now experiments the truth of those words in Prove. 20.27. The
Spirit of a man is the candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of
the Belly; and it is not only a shining, but a burning Candle too, that kindles
wrath, as well as discovers sin: and can you imagine it possible for such
tormented ones, as this poor miserable self-condemned man, is not to be afraid
to dye? Doubtless they are afraid, and afraid to such a degree, as is not easy
to be expressed; and yet whilst they live in this manner, is not their very
life a burden to them, and a sore torment? are not these the men of whom
Epictetus speaks, apud Stob. c. 120. ((...).) a certain wonderful sort of men,
that are weary of life, and yet have no mind to dye, or of whom Seneca speaks
in his fourth Epist; Inter mortis metum and vitae tormenta miseri fluctuant,
and vivere nolunt, and mori nesciunt, that are miserably tossed betwixt the
fear of Death, and the torments of Life; have no desire to live, and yet know
not how to dye? And the same Seneca again, Epist. 101. Invenitur qui malit
inter supplicia-tabescere and perire membratim, and toties per stillicidia
amittere animam quam semel exhalare? Invenitur qui velit trahere animam tot
tormenta tracturam? Usque adeone mori miserum est? Est tanti habere animam, ut
agam? Would one think that the man should be found upon earth, that would
rather waste away by degrees among grievous sufferings, be content to rot in
pieces one member after another, and let his soul go out, as 'twere by drops,
rather than to send it out all together, at one single groan? That any man
should be found that would endure the lengthening out of his life under so
many torments? Is death so miserable a thing, to be thus affrighted at it? Yea
and is life too, of so great value, as to be thus defired? The like passage we
find in Cyprian also (in his Book de Mortal.) concerning some in his age; Pati
non vultis, exire timetis, quid faciam vobis? Ye are unwilling to live under
your sufferings, and yet ye are unwilling to dye, what shall I do unto you? Or,
how shall I comfort you?

Second Use for Exhortation.
TO good and bad; to regenerate, and unregenerate. First to the unregenerate,
to whom (would they could all hear it) I would make it my most earnest request
that they would do five things. 1. Sit down and bethink themselves, that they
would go into their retirements, though 'twere, but for one half hour in a day,
and seriously consider, what their condition is, how doleful! dismal!
dangerous! How angry God is with them, and that continually and unappeasedly,
whilst they remain impenitent and unbelieving in this their unregenerate state!
That they would consider, what vengeance hangs over their heads, hourly, and
that if they live and dye. Thus, there can be no possible hope of good for
them. That, if still they remain fearless, and careless of God, and will not
hearken to his calls and counsels, now in their life time, when pangs of death
come upon them, and they then cry out for mercy, miserably roaring in the very
anguish of their soul, God will be so far from hearing them (who when time was
would not hear him) that he will laugh at their calamity, and mock when their
fear comes, Prove. 1.24.-33. (2.) That hereupon they would pity themselves, and
be no longer cruel to their own precious souls; that they would no more neglect
their own salvation, the great salvation offered them in the Gospel: For how
much sorer punishment than ordinary, must not they look for, who neglect so
great salvation? Heb. 2.3. (3.) That they would suffer the words of
Exhortation, instruction, and counsel from plaindealing friends, and such as
have a true pity for them, whether they have any pity for themselves or not;
(4.) That they would be prevailed with to break off from their evil company,
and fall in with the Lords precious people; give attendance upon his holy
Ordinances, that of Preaching, especially, which is a converting Ordinance, and
where God is present with it, will soon make a change upon the most perverse
sinner in the world. (5.) That they will delay no longer, but hasten to do
this, with all speed, least the door of Mercy be shut upon them, and the
opportunity of Grace past before they are aware of it.

To the regenerate, even all the true Saints and Servants of the high God; My
Exhortation to them is twofold: First more General, then more Particularly to
some of them.

My General Exhortation to all, is, unto three things. (1.) To pity all such as
still abide in their unregenerate estate. Though they hate you, yet do you pity
them, yea, and pray for them, watch for all opportunity of doing good to their
souls, give them the example of an holy life, and every way do your utmost if
it be possible, to pluck them as firebrarnds out of the devouring flames. (2.)
Bless God for your own most rich and unspeakable Mercy, that your selves are
not in the same case with them. That he has made such a vast difference
between you: What are you naturally better than they? Were not both hewed out
of the same Rock? And whence does the difference rise? Is it not altogether
from Free Grace? Yes verily, altogether from free Grace; Not by works of
Righteousness, which we had done, (says the Apostle Titus 2.5.) But through
his Mercy he saved us, by the washing of Regeneration. Oh then be thankful. For
what greater thing than this, can God himself do for you than he has done, in
making such a change upon you. (3.) Walk worthy of all this Mercy and Goodness.
Let God have something from you answerable to his kindness, and this his
distinguishing love to you; and from you of all others, from whom he has
removed the fears of Death, so that it is no way dreadful to you, but come when
it will come, it shall be welcome to you.

But as for such of you, among the Lords People, as happily may not be quite
gotten over these fears, and yet may be truly willing to be with Christ, and
thereupon could even wish that you had once shot this Gulf of Death; Let me
speak to you more particularly, and entreat you, (1.) That you would seriously
consider, how uncomely, at least, if not a kind of inconsistent thing it is,
for those that pretend for Heaven, and do, in good earnest set their faces
thither-ward, to be afraid of Death? Even an Heathen could say, I mean Seneca
(Epist. 24.) Confirmandus est animus, vel ad mortis, vel ad vitae patientiam,
the mind ought to be armed with patience, as well for Death, as for Life. The
sufferings, which we may meet with in both, may call for it, and what he
farther says, (Epist. 95.) is too true. Interdum obnixe petimus, quod oblatum
recusaremus; multa videri volumus velle, sed nolumus, aliud optamus, and verum
ne Diis quidem dicimus. Sometimes that which we earnestly wish for ('it is of
death he speaks) when it is offered us, we refuse; we seem to will many things,
which yet we again reject, and desire something else in the room of it, and so
speak not the truth even to God himself: would not one wonder, that a poor
Heathen should speak thus? Cyprian (in his Book De Mortal.) utters himself
almost in the same manner, and with great elegancy, Quam praeposterum est,
quamque perversum, and cum Dei voluntatem fieri postulemus, quando evocat nos,
and accersit de hoc mundo, non statim voluntatis ejus imperio pareamus, hoc
nitimur and reluctamur, and pervicacium more servorum, ad conspectum Domini,
cum tristitia and maerore perducimur, non obsequio voluntatis. Et volumus ab eo
praemiis caelestibus honorari, ad quem venimus inviti. How preposterous and
perverse a thing is it, that we pray to God that his will may be done, and yet
when he calls us hence, and sends for us out of this world, we do not presently
obey his Sovereign will, but oppose it, struggle against it, and like untoward
Servants are afraid to appear in the presence of our Lord? With sorrow and
grief we are dragged to him, rather than go to him in obedience to his command:
We go unwillingly to him, and yet desire to be honored by his Heavenly
rewards: And then a little after, Quid rogamus and petimus ut adveniat regnum
caelorum, si captivitas nos terrena delectat? Quid precibus frequenter iteratis
rogamus, and poscimus ut acceleret dies regni, si majora desideria, and vota
potiora sunt servire isthic Diabolo, quam regnare cum Christo? Why do we pray
and desire that the Kingdom of Heaven may come, if we be still in love with
our Earthly captivity? Why do we so frequently desire that that day may hasten,
if we have greater desires, and do more strongly wish, rather to abide here, in
the Devils Service, than to Reign with Christ? thus we see, even many ages
since, not only among Christians, but among Heathens, what a kind of
Hypocrisy they reckoned it to be, to seem to long for Heaven, and an immortal
state, and yet when the time comes for such a blessed change, to be loath to go
to it. Una ista catena, amor vitae, quam nos alligatos tenet? ( Sen. Epist.
26.) How does that one chain, the love of life hold us here as Prisoners, says
Seneca? Whoever thou art then that reckonest thy self a true Christian, and a
Believer, let these passages even of an Heathen affect thee, and hereafter
cause thee to blush for shame, at thine own fears. But,

Secondly, That thou may the better get over these thy fears, and be the more
ready with cheerfulness to welcome Death when it comes, do these three things.

(1.) Be every day preparing to dye, and putting thy self into a posture for
it: among the many excellent passages that Seneca has about this subject, even
through most of his works, there are two of them worthy to be written in
letters of Gold; One is in his Book de brev. vitae c. 7. Vivere tota vita
discendum est, and quod magis fortasse miraberis, tota vita discendum est mori:
A man all his life time had need be learning to live, and which perhaps thou will more marvel at, he must be all his lifetime learning to dye too. The
other is in his 30th. Epist. Magna res est, and diu discenda, cum adventat hora
illa inevitablis, aequo animo exire. It is a great thing, and always to be
learned, that when that inevitable hour (of death) comes, we may depart this
life with a well-composed mind, which who can do, but he that has set all
things right, and so having attained to a meetness to partake of the
inheritance of the Saints has left nothing farther to be done, in order to the
getting into the possession of it, but to breathe forth his last breath.

(2.) Meditate much upon death, and that every day, that so you may thereby
grow familiar with it. This the Holy Ghost calls the wisdom of man, and that
which every good man prays that he may be enabled to do. Moses himself did so
(Psalm 99.12.) so teach us to number our days, says he, that we may apply our
hearts unto wisdom; and whoever has any of that Spirit which moved in him
will do the like. When I read that passage of Plato apud Plut. de placit
Philosoph. (...), They best act the true Philosophers, that are most
sollicitous about death: I am apt to think sure he had read this prayer of
Moses; yet among all that sort of ancient Writers, I find Pythagoras, who
lived in the time of the siege of Jerusalem, by the Caldean Army, and so in the
Prophet Jeremiah's days, at least two hundred years before Plato, and so
(according to our learned Usher's account) some six hundred and forty years
before Christ's Nativity, was the first that called Philosophy the Meditation
of Death; after whom Socrates also and many others had the like expressions
which makes me think, had these, and the rest of those famous men, even among
the Heathen, that knew nothing of the true God, been alive in our days, and
been blessed with such a saving light of the Gospel, as some few are, what rare
instances would they have been? How would they have out-stripped us in their
affections and desires Heavenward! and in their Masteries over Death and the
fear of it? How would they have made it their great business to converse with
Death, even as much as we are wont to do with our intirest friends! They which
made Philosophy chiefly to consist in the Meditation of death, would have made
the Christian Religion to consist in it much more.

(3.) Store your selves with passages from the holy Scriptures, replenish your
mind with the great and precious Promises, let Divine Truths, and the Heavenly
Sentences thereof dwell in you richly in all Spiritual Wisdom and
Understanding, that so when you lie upon your Sick, or (it may be) your
Dying-Beds, you may have them so fixed in your heads and hearts, that they may
afford much sweet and precious matter unto your thoughts: If you make this a
good part, not only of your business, but of your delight too, in your
lifetime, may you not well hope and expect, that when Death comes, the Holy
Ghost will bring things, to your remembrance, and apply such Cordials from
thence to you, as shall marvellously comfort and refresh you, even when the
pangs of death it self shall be upon you? Many and pleasant are the stories
that might here be told, of the great and powerful consolations, that have come
in upon Dying Saints, from this or that Promise, or other Passage of Scripture,
upon the wings whereof, they have gone up in Triumph to Heaven.

FINIS.

