A LETTER FROM General Monck. From Dalkeith, 13 October 1659. Directed as
follows.

For the Right Honorable William Lenthal, Esquire, Speaker; To be Communicated
to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, at Westminster.

London, Printed, An. Dom. 1659.

For the Right Honorable William Lenthall, Esquire, Speaker; To be Communicated
to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, at Westminster.
Right Honorable,
I Received Yours of the 7th Instant, and cannot but with thankfulness
Acknowledge the Great Grace and Favor the Parliament are pleased to vouchsafe
to me, in taking Notice of my weak and worthless Endeavors in their Service. I
confess such Encouragement is sufficient to Reward the Highest Merits; I hope I
shall make such Use of It, not only to satisfy my self as the best Recompense
for my former poor Services, but as a Motive to Future Obedience and Loyalty to
them: I bless the Lord I have a Witness in mine own Heart, That my Designs tend
not to any other End than my Countries Good, and I shall with more Cheerfulness
return the Sword into Your Hands, than ever I received it with, and desire to
attend Your Pleasure if You shall have no further Use of my Service: I shall
give You the best Account I can of the Forces here, and endeavor to keep them
in due Obedience to You, (but I cannot undertake for men of some Spirits.) I
shall not trouble your Councils with my Impertinencies any further, but Entreat
You to give me leave to mind You (what I know is much upon Your Hearts already)
That You would be pleased to hasten the Settlement of the Government of these
Nations in a Commonwealth Way, in Successive Parliaments, so to be Regulated in
Elections as You shall think fit; and that You will increase your Favor to the
Ministers of the Gospel, and the Sober Professors thereof, and God will be in
the midst of you, and bless you, and you need not doubt but the Hearts and
Hands of all good men will be with you, and for my self I desire, That you
would be assured that I do not think my life too precious to hazard in the
Defense of The Supreme Authority, the Parliament of England. The Lord bless
your Councils with Peace and Success, and make you a Terror to the Nations
round about you, which is the Earnest Prayer of Him, who is,

Your Lorpps. most humble and faithful Servant, George Monck.
Dalkeith, 13. October. 1659.

