A COMPANION FOR PRAYER: OR, Directions for Improvement in Grace and Practical
Godliness in times of extraordinary Danger.

^y Rich. Alleine, Author of Vinditiae Pietatis.

LONDON: ^rinted for Thomas Cockerill at the Three Legs in the Poultrey, 1680.

Reverend Sir,
THE motion made in yours concerning Prayer, has much affected me, and has
occasioned some workings of my thoughts, which though (in a conscience of mine
own weakness I more than once laid aside, yet they still returned upon me; and
I do now here offer the result of them to your Consideration.

We all know and teach, that they are only returning and reforming Prayers that
will prevail with God; and it is to be doubted, that in this dead and decayed
age there are too many professors who will join in the design of Prayer, whom
this must serve instead of Reformation; it is to such especially that the
Directions in the enclosed Paper are intended. I send them to you, desiring you
to read them, and then to do what you please with them; beseeching you, and
tru^^ing upon your friendly faithfulne^^ herein, that you will take your f^^
freedom, either to keep them in silen^ to your self, or else to communic^^^ and
make them public I should thankfully accept af any expungings, alterations or
additions that you shall thi^^ needful The Lord pardon the failings and accept
the sincere aims of my so^ herein. To his Grace I commend yo^ and in him I rest,

Dear Sir, Your unworthy Friend and Servant, RICHARD ALLEINE

A COMPANION FOR PRAYER: OR, Directions for Improvement in Grace and Practical
Godliness, etc.
TO make way for, and to press to the diligent observing the following
Directions, let these things be premised.

1. That the Power of Religion is much fallen, at least is at a stand, amongst
multitudes of Professors England. Sure this needs no proo^ when we have so many
sad ocul^ Demonstrations hereof before us.

2. That for this, the Lord ha^^ a controversy with us at this day Rev. 2. 4.
Whatever controversy t^^ Lord has with the Belials among^^ us, whose horrible
wickedness ha^^ even ripened them for vengean^^ his special quarrel seems to be
wi^^ his own people. We may guess against whom the special anger is, b^^
observing at whose faces chiefly h^^ arrows are levelled. Against who^ do our
enemies (the rod of his a^ger) make a wide mouth, and dra^ forth the tongue,
and lift up the^^ fiercest hands?

3. No Prayers will avail, no^ have the least help in them, but the Prayers of
such, with whom the Lords controversy is taken up an^ composed; those with
whom h^^ has a particular quarrel, are lik^ to be unhappy Mediators for others
We choose the favorites of Princes to be our Intercessors with them.

4. There can be no taking up Gods controversy, unless the matter of it be
removed by repentance and reformation, Rev. 2. 5. Isa. 1. 15, 16, 18. When ye
make many prayers, I will not hear, your hands are full of blood; wash ye, make
you clean, etc. Come now, and let us reason together. Josh. 7. 10. Get thee up;
wherefore lie thou thus upon thy face? Israel has sinned -- they have taken
the accursed thing; and v. 12. I will not be with you any more, except the
accursed thing be destroyed from amongst you. Is there no accursed thing
amongst, even the professors of Religion? Behold! the wedg of gold, and the
Babylonish garment, their pride and their covetousness, hid in their hearts for
a tent. Go search out these, and every other accursed thing within you, let
them be destroyed if ye would have the Lord to be at peace.

5. If there may be such a spirit of Prayer stirred up amongst us, as may have
its fruit unto Holiness, and real reformation of the evils of our ways; this
would comfort us, and give us great hopes in the hardest cases.

6. Therefore, in all our crying to God for his help, in case of public fears,
dangers or distresses, our eye should be firstly upon, and we should wrestle
with the Lord for the pardoning, purging, and sanctification of our own hearts
and lives; wherein if we prevail not, we shall be as a rotten tooth, or a bone
out of joint, for any help there is in us, or in any thing we do; unless we can
pray up a spirit of Holiness in our selves, a spirit of Love, and of Power, and
of a sound mind, we are not like to do any thing to purpose, in praying down
Mercy for the people; the Devil will give us leave to visit the Throne of
Grace, so we will but carry our hard and uncircumcised hearts with us; if we
cannot get to be of the Lords holy Ones, though we make many Prayers, he will
not hear; here the interest and the hopes of the people of God lie, in the
shedding abroad of the sanctifying and quickening spirit upon them; for this
therefore should we firstly pray.

7. It Is not praying alone that will do: to the bringing on our Reformation,
there must be also a constant and sedulous use of all Gods other means, in our
whole course of life.

8. Some of these means are presented in the following Directions.

1. General Directions.
Direct. 1. Take up a deep and serious design of making an advance in serious
Religion. Sit not down by, take not up with what you have already attained, but
resolve for reaching forward, and following after, toward that which you have
not attained; content not your selves to drive gently on, as your flesh will
bear, but stir up your selves to follow hard after the Lord; and let this be
the deliberate decree and intent of you hearts. Say to thine heart, How is it
with me? Does my soul prosper? Are my ways such as please the Lord? What is
mine expectation and mine hope? What is the aim and business of my life? Is it
that Christ may be magnified by me, and that I may be made partaker of his
Holiness, and show forth his Virtues in my generation? Can I say with the
Apostle, To me to live is Christ? Ah wretch that I am! how deeply has this
self and this world gone shares with my Lord! O! how little of my time, my
parts, my strength, yea and of my very heart also have been enclosed and
consecrated as Holiness to the Lord! how much of me has been left out in
common for the world? Well, but what meanest thou for the future? will thou
henceforth change the purpose and intent of thine heat? Come man, wilt take up
a design for, and henceforth determine, and set thine heart upon a more
watchful, fruitful and heavenly life? If thou will not be brought to decree,
and resolve upon a better life, much less will thou be persuaded actually to
it. What Is begun well, is half done; and an holy design deeply laid, is a good
beginning.

Direct 2. Let Gods Calls to extraordinary prayer, and a sense of the necessity
of your recovery and reformation, to your prevailing in prayer, quicken you on
in the vigorous pursuance of your holy design. Now is a time, wherein you have
your hearts at the advantage, having such weighty arguments before you, and the
opportunity (...) doing two such great things more, as the saving of your
selves, and also of the people, both from iniquity and calamity.

Direct. 3. Do all you do, in pursuance hereof, in the Name of the Lord Jesus.
Be not discouraged at any prospect of difficulty, trust in him for his help.
Encourage your hearts with the words of the Apostle, Phil. 4. 13. I shall be
able to do all things through Christ that strengthens me.

Direct. 4. Keep your eye and your heart much upon God and the other world; Be
able to say with the Apostle, Phil. 3. 20. Our Conversation is in heaven; that
is, there the business of our life lies; and that not only above spiritual and
heavenly things, but with God himself. Live at the fountain and springhead;
thence all your light, and (...) and holiness, and strength must flow down. Be
much in looking upwards; and beholding in a glass the glory of the Lord, you
will be changed from glory to glory, into the same Image, 2 Cor. 3. 18. Look
much and often upon the things that are not seen, if ye would be delivered from
the power and malign influence of the things that are seen; let your eye be
upon the Sun, and you will see a dimness and darkness upon the earth; get you
clothed with the Sun, and you will get the Moon under you feet.

Direct. 5. See that there be no allowed sin in your heart or practice, Psalm.
66. 18. If I regard iniquity in mine heart, God will not hear my prayer, nor
help me. An allowed sin is as the d^^^ flesh in the wound; whatever methods or
medicines be taken, there will be no healing till the dead flesh be eaten off;
you may profess, and pray, and hear all your life long, and yet will never
prosper whilst you are privy to any one indulged sin.

Direct. 6. Be constant and instant in daily, secret and family Prayer. Let not
extraordinary Prayer excuse your ordinary; and let not your neglect of ordinary
Prayer unfit you for extraordinary: Let not your way to your Closet be untrod.
He that holds his acquaintance in Heaven by being often with God, will be the
most like to prevail with God in the most pressing and difficult cases; those
that are much in Prayer, those are the men that use to be mighty in Prayer.

Direct. 7. In all your praying, both ordinrry and extraordinary, let your eye
be (I say not chiefly, but) firstly upon the case of your own Souls: What
improvement you obtain here will be of this double advantage; 1. There will be
the more hope of your ^^ing heard for the public. 2. If ^^e Lord be not
prevailed with for ^^blick mercies and deliverances, ^^t you will be the better
prepared ^^r sufferings. If God should show ^ercy as to the public, should
scat^^r our clouds, and blow over our ^^orms, should cause our light to ^reak
forth as the morning, and our ^^ghteousness also as the noonday; (...) what
would all this be to thee, ^^ho art unrighteous? What would ^ be to thee, if in
all the Land of ^^oshen there should be light, and ^^ou in the midst thereof
should (...) covered over with the darkness (...) Egypt? if there should be
dew (...) all the grass of the field, and thy ^^ece only should be dry? if thou
^^ouldest live to see thy people a fa^^d people and an holy and fruitful
^^ation, and thou should stand as a ^ithered and dry Tree amongst all ^^e
flourishing Cedars? Get up ^^ine own heart into good proof, (...) whatever
spiritual plenty thou may see in Israel, yet thou will (...) eat thereof.
Talk no more of thi^^ hopes of seeing good days, how ^^tle would that be to
thee, unl^^^ thou get thee a better heart?

Direct. 8. Let your Prayers followed with a constant care of y^^^ ways. Let
not your pray^^^ serve you instead of repenting a^^ reforming, but let it
quicken you (...) your whole duty; let your entri^^ into your Closet be your
ascendi^^ heavenwards; and let not your (...) turns thence be the falling down
(...) your Souls from Heaven to Ear^^ Let your duties and ways be all o^ piece;
live like praying Christian Let not the spirituality of yo^ mornings and
evenings, countena^^ or encourage you in your all-d^^ carnality. Be in the fear
of the Lo^^ all the day long, Prove. 23. 17.

Direct. 9. Whatever incomes (...) receeive from God into your own Sou^^ ^e
free in dispersing to others: I mean in a way of holy discourse and conference.
Dispersing and communica^ing is the best way to thriving, Pro. 11. 24. There is
that scatters, and ^et increases; there is that withholdeth, and it tends
to poverty. It Is true with respect to spirituals as well as to temporals. There
are none that grow more rich toward God, than those, who by bringing forth
what they have received, labor to make others rich also. Give the holy fire
within you a vent, and it will burn the clearer. Keep not ^our Religion to your
selves; let your full cup run over, let your lips drop as the honeycomb, let
your mouth be a well of life, and your ^ips feed many, Prove. 10. 11. Build up
one another in the most Holy Faith; provoke one another to love and to good
works, let your Fami^ies, your Wives and Children, your Neighbors and
Acquaintance, have ^ight from your Candle, and be warmed by your Fire.
Doubtle^^ its one special part of Gods quarr^^ with Christians, That they are,
^^ very many of them, of such carn^^ and unsavory converses. Is it [ thy case?
have thou this to charge upon thy self? O! amend, amend, an^ see that thou
continue not such ^ barren Soul; as low as it is with the in grace, think not to
rise high, unless thou will make better use (...) what thou have.

2. Particular Directions.
Direct. 1. Consider what it is where to you have already attained, and b^
thankful; and thence be encourage^ to press on and hope for more. Ha^ thou
obtained Grace from the Lord and has he caused his Grace to abound toward
thee and in thee (...) and have thou a witness within the^ that thou have not
received the Grace of God in vain? But do^^ thou study to walk worthy of tha^
Grace wherein thou stand? O rejoice in the Lord, and let all within thee
bless his Holy Name; and take what thou have thus received as an earnest of
more. Set thy foot upon the neck of every mortified lust, take the more heart
to thee to go on in the fight, and rejoice in hope of a total and final
victory. The Soldier, when one Wing of his Enemies Army is routed, or they do
but give ground, and begin to fall, this raises his courage, and he falls more
smartly on. Go thou and do likewise; and let thy beginning, much more thy
growth in Grace, and thy experiences hereof, be the ^oiling of thy wheels, for
thy more ^igorous following on after yet a greater increase.

Direct. 2. Consider what your special corruptions, infirmities, wants,
neglects, temptations, or your most ordinary falls are. 1. What your special
corruptions are, how far forth you have conquered them, and where you stick. In
some professors, Pride, in others Covetousness, in others Sensuality, in others
Slothfulness, in others Peevishness or Frowardness, or the like, may have
gotten such head in them, that these weeds overtop, and even choke up all their
flowers, 2. What your special wants or weaknesses are in point of Grace; what
graces they are, whether Faith, or Love, or Peacefulness, or Meekness, or
Humility, or Patience, etc. wherein you are most deficient or weak. 3. What
Du^ies they are, as either Prayer, Meditation, Communing with your own hearts,
etc. which you are most apt to neglect, or find most difficult to go
comfortably through. 4. What Temptations they are, by which you are most
commonly assaulted or foiled. 5. What your most ordinary Falls are in point of
practice. And here let Professors of Religion be warned to consider, if they be
not overtaken (besides many others) by some of these three evils. 1. An
over-eager and greedy following after the World: The zeal of some men's spirits
after riches, has eaten up all their zeal of God. O! into what poverty has
thy Soul fallen, whilst thou have been so busy in the world, and have felt the
prosperities thereof come crouding in upon thee! Some rich Professors may
remember the days of old, and be troubled. This thought, When I was but a
little one in this world, then was it better with me than now; this thought may
be an Arrow in their hearts, and kill the joy, and let out the juice and
sweetness of their greatest abundance. I remember the kindness of my youth, and
the love of mine espousals; but O where am I now! my very rising has given me
the fall. 2. A liberty for carnal jollity, a jovial and vainly merry life; such
there are, who have left off to walk mournfully before the Lord of Hosts, and
have given themselves to live merrily with the world; who have given over to
weep with them that weep, and are fallen in to laugh with them that laugh; to
jest and sport and be vain with the vain ones, yea and it may be to drink and
to sit by it with those that drink. It Is now grown too creditable to frequent
drinking Houses: Tradesmen that are Professors, especially in Cities or great
Towns, how ordinarily do they, upon pretense of dispatch of business, sit many
hours over a dish of Coffee, or a cup of Ale, or a glass of Sack; and carry it
so, that they can hardly be distinguished from the good Fellows of the world,
but perhaps by this only, That they are not down right drunken into Beasts. If
there be a liberty of such Houses, and meetings in them ^^metimes necessary (as
perhaps it ^^y) yet let not this liberty be ^^d as an occasion to the flesh.
(...) Gaudiness or over-costliness in ^pparel, wherein some of them ^itter and
shine amongst the great^^ Gallants of the earth. Some ^^ongst professors do not
only shun ^^t disdain and despise the old self^^yal that was wont to be among
^ristians in these and the like par^^ulars. as if they were set at liberby the
Gospel from the Laws of ^^rist, as well as from the Law of ^^ses. To these
three let me add (...) evil more: 4. A neglect of (...) Families; of the
Instructing, ^^chising, and due disciplining (...); the consequents of which
^^lect are very sadly to be seen in ^ignorance, errors, rudeness and
^rderliness abounding amongst ^^y of them: there are not a few (...) take some
care of themselves, (...) leave the bridle on the necks of ^^irs, and reap many
heartbreaking crops in them, as the fruits (...) their own negligence. O let
ho^^ Joshua's resolution be yours: (...) for me and mine house, we will ser^
the Lord, Josh. 24. 15.

Now diligently search and consi^der thy self in all these things; a^^ when
thou have faithfully studi^^ thy self and thy ways, and h^^ found what it is
that thou art m^^ peccant or wanting in, and m^^ prejudiced and hindered by;
th^^ conclude, here my great difficu^^ lies, and therefore here my gr^^^ work
lies, if ever I would prospe^^ to get this or that corruption to (...)
mortified, this or that gr^^ strengthened, such and such tem^^^tations to be
shunned or provid^ against, and such and such faults be amended; now I have
fou^^ what hinders me; and that wh^^ does hinder will hinder, till it (...)
taken out of the way.

Direct. 3. Bend the main force of (...) your Religion upon those very (...)
wherein you are most failing or ^^lty. The Devil will allow us to (...) busy
in other matters of Religi^^, so he can but keep us off from ^^ose things where
our great stresses (...): And the deceitful heart will (...) up with that which
is most easy (...) pleasant, that there by it may (...) better shift it self
of that which (...) more hard, and would go to the ^^ck with it. We never purge
or (...) to purpose, till we hit upon (...) right humor, and strike the (...)
vein.

This is to act rationally and in ^^gment; to bend our great ^^gth there, where
our great ^^culty or weakness lies. When (...) have by searching found out
(...) you mostly stick at, let it be (...) first grand errand in every ^^ver,
whether ordinary or ex^^^ordinary, to beg special help in (...) particular
case: your weakness in any particular grace or duty, the power of any
particular lust, co^ruption or temptation, your m^^ ordinary and common falls
in poi^ of conversation; let these have (...) special place in every prayer
yo^^ make: And also let them be mo^^ heedfully watched and labored (...)
against in your lives. Turn in (...) strength of prayer and watchfuln^^ upon
the strength of sin; let yo^^ main batteries be against the stron^^ holds; and
where your walls (...) weakened, there set the strong^^ guard and watch.

Direct. 4. Measure your prof^^ency in Religion, by the power (...) get in
those particulars, wherein (...) have been most deficient or faul^ Judge not
your selves by the things which are most easy in Re^^gion, but by your coming
off (...) your most difficult case.

Some professors may at ti^^eem to be full of good affectio^^ ^^rangely
elevated and enlarged in ^^eir prayers, yea, and to live in so ^^eat peace, as
to take themselves (...) have attained to the riches of full ^^ssurance, and
yet for all this may (...) but very poor Christians all the ^^hile. Let them be
asked, How ^^it with your Soul? O! I bless the lord I find it very comfortable:
I ^^ve sweet communion with God in ^rayer, and I live in the sweet and
^^freshing light of his countenance; (...) washes my steps with Butter, ^^d
his Sun shines upon my paths* (...) thank the Lord I go comfortably (...). But
stay man, How is it with ^hine old corruptions? Thou were ^^ce intollerably
proud, or fro^^ard, or earthly, or a jolly and ^^ainly merry soul; what ground
^^ast thou gotten of those very cor^uptions under which thou most ^^groanedst?
How is it with thee with ^espect to temptation? Do thou ^ear and fly from
temptation, and ^o what thou can to keep thy self out of harms way? and when
the fallest into temptation, when th^^ art actually tempted to Pride (...)
Covetousness, when thou art pr^voked to passion or impatience, ho^^ goes it
with thee then? how stan^est thou in the day of temptation^^ How is it with
thee in regard (...) thy wonted evils in thy conver^^tion? Have thou sounded a
retrea^^ from thy eager chase after the grea^^ things of the world? Thou ha^^
been a zealot for increasing thin^^ eart^ly Substance, art thou now become more
moderate? Thou wert^ once a slothful, lazy soul in the matters of God, art thou
now more diligent and industrious? art thou (...) servent in spirit serving the
Lord (...) Thou once livedst a jolly, frothy and merry life, do thou now
carry it with more seriousness? Have thou left thy lying and deceitful dealing?
Thou have been a self-seeker and a flesh pleaser, but can say, through the
Grace of God, I have now betaken my self to a self-denying life; ^^d do thou
deny thy self in those ^^ry things wherein thou were used ^^st to seek thy
self? Put thy self ^^on a close and severe trial here, ^^d know that if the
strong hold (...) not battered and broken, if thine (...) lusts do still hold
their power in ^^ee, if the old sore be still issuing (...), the old stream be
still running (...) course; if thou can not say, I ^^ave kept me from [ mine]
iniquity, (...) at least am fighting more resol^^edly against it; if thou still
stickest where thou were wont to stick; (whatsoever flush thou seem to have
of good affections, whatsoever confidence thou have of thy good condition) it is
a sure sign it is not so well with thee. Look to what degree of success thou
have attained in those things wherein thy great difficulty lay; to such a
degree of soul-prosperity thou have attained, and no more.

Direct 5. Measure your hopes of the answer of your Prayers for the public, by
your experience of their speeding in your own particular cases. If thy sin can
stand before all thy prayers, thine enemies, and fears, and dangers are not
like to fall ever the sooner for such praying; what God may do upon the prayers
of others, thou know not; but nothing is like to go the better for thee. If
thou have run with the footmen (within thee) and these have been too hard for
thee, how will thou contend with them that ride upon horses? If thon can not
stop the muddy streams of thine own cistern, how will thou stand before the
swelling of Jordan? If thy prayers prevail so little to the setting thine own
heart, or thine own house in order, how can think they will do any thing
against the hosts of the uncircumcised? God hears not sinners; not only such
sinners as are in a state of sin, and totally alienated from the life of God,
but even such also, who though for the main, they have been once washed in the
blood of Christ, are again fallen into, and wallowing in the mud and mire of
any one allowed sin; they are all like to be but miserable comforters in the
day of distress. Remember that Scripture mentioned before, Psalm. 66. 18. If I
regard iniquity iu my heart, God will not hear my prayer.

But on the other side, if thou do obtain, if thou do prevail in thine own
personal case, this has good hope in it. It Is an argument that thy prayers are
accepted with God; and if the Lord accept thee when thou prayest for thy self,
or for thine house, thence the greater hope will spring that he will accept
thee when thou prayest for his own house and people. And if he does accept thee
for them, he will either deliver them out of their distress, and thou shall
have the honor to be one of those for whose sake deliverance comes; or if he
should not grant thy request as to the public, yet he will not fail to give
thee thine own soul for a prey, though he do not give thee the lives of them
that sail with thee in the Ship.

And now you see the best way that is open to you, to help at a pinch, to save
the poor distressed Churches of God in this time of their need, such praying as
may have its fruit unto holiness in your selves; by this you may do much to
promote the holiness and happiness of the people; if any thing, this will do it.

Wherefore gird up your loins, and set in in good earnest upon this seasonable
and mighty duty. Go into your closets, lift up your hearts, draw forth your
souls, pour out your tears, weep in your prayer, weep over you own and the
peoples sins and fears, and bow your selves with your might before the Lord;
this once try what you can do, try the strength of prayer. Pray all to rights
within you and at home, and then seek and cry, and wrestle, and trust, and wait
for the Salvation of God to be revealed in due time upon his people.

Let us at length hear the conclusion of the whole matter, what shall be the
fruit of all this: what will you now do? If I should only ask, Who among you
will join in and pray, pray for the peace of Jerusalem, the Church of the
living God? every one would readily answer, I will be for one, I for another,
God forbid I should hold my peace, I will pray for the peace of Jerusalem, Let
them prosper that love thee: Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within
thy palaces. For my brethren and companions sake I will pray, Peace be within
thee, because of the House of the Lord our God, I will seek thy good.

If it be asked further, and who will pray for the destruction of Babylon? O,
every one of us that have an heart for the peace of Jerusalem. Down with it,
down with it even to the ground, Remember, O Lord, the Children of Edom, in the
day of Jerusalem, who said, Raze it, raze it even to the very foundation. O
Daughter of Babylon that art to be destroyed, happy let him be that rewards
thee as thou have served us.

But would you that your prayers should be heard? Then arise out of your
places, and fall every man upon a personal Reformation. Down with your sin, and
out with the world; list up Christ in your own hearts, is you would have
Antichrist ^all in the earth; let Christ have a name within you above every
name, and let every one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity,
from his own iniquity; feek not for corn, and for wine, or for freedom to sit
down every man under his own Vine, and under his own fig tree, where none shall
make them afraid; but seek the Lord, that the Lord God may dwell among you, may
delight in you and be exalted by you, that you may indeed become the people of
his Holiness, and the people of his Prayer; seek to be made partakers of his
holiness, and follow after holiness, and so follow after that ye may obtain.
Let there be such a heart in you, and such an holy design heartily taken up,
and zealously pursued by you, and the Lord will certainly accept you* and
answer your prayers; and your profane enemies will then learn to take heed how
they again mock or boast themselves against the prayers of the Saints. It was
reported of a great Churchman, that when several Ministers were turned out of
their places for nonconformity, he said in disdain, We Will turn them out, and
let them see if they can pray them in again. Once lift up [holy] hands to the
Lord, and God will give such Answer, that they will take heed of boasting again
against prayer. And if yet they should take unto them the hardiness, to say
where is your God? Doubt not but in a little time you shall have this song put
into your mouths, Lo this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save
us, this is the Lord; we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in
his salvation.

But if it must suffice you to pray and you will still go on to traverse your
old ways, suffering your sins and the world to hold the head of you, let not
such men think they shall receive any thing of the Lord.

Wherefore once again be exhorted to come to a point in this matter, and
determine what ye will do; If yet will not heartily come in, in this necessary
design of advancing in holiness, you may even stand aside, and sit out from
that of Prayer, for any good we can expect from you: But if you are resolved on
the former, and that with all imaginable seriousness, you will the more prosper
in the latter; let both go together in one, and thenceforth look for good speed
in either.

Well, shall this Decree immediately go forth? Say the word once, but let it be
with an unalterable resolution; at least, be advised to this (which I pray
forget not) from the day of your next solemn appearing before God in this duty
of Prayer for the public, let your Decree be dated; and if need be, let the
very day be written down, and so go, and let it be heedfully prosecuted; and
upon each return of this solemn service, let it be actually and expressly
renewed. O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac and Israel, keep this for ever in the
imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy people, and prepare their heart
unto thee.

FINIS.
Books Printed and Sold by Tho. Cockerill, at the Three-Legs over against the
Stocks-Market.
THE Morning-Exercise at Cripplegate of several Cases of ^onscience,
practically resolved by ^^dry Ministers, in Quarto.

A Supplement to the Morning-^xercise at Cripplegate, or several ^ore Cases of
Conscience practical^^^ resolved by sundry Ministers, (...) 4to.

Speculum Theology in Christo: (...) a View of some Divine Truths, which are
either practically ex^^plified in Jesus Christ, set forth (...) the Gospel, or
may be reasonably deduced from thence; (...) Edward Polhil of Burwash in
Susse^^ Esquire; 4to.

Precious Faith considered, in nature, working and growth; (...) Edward Polhil,
Esquire etc. 4to.

Christus in Cord: Or the Mys^cal Union between Christ and Bel^^vers
considered, in its Resemblance^ Bonds, Seals, Privildges and Marks by Edward
Polhil, Esquire 8vo.

The Faithfulness of God co^^dered and cleared, in the gr^^ events of its
works: or, a seco^^ part of fulfilling the Scripture; (...) the same Author, in
8vo.

De Causa Dei: Or, a Vindi^^tion of the Common Doctrine (...) the Protestant
Divines, concer^^ing Predetermination ( i. e. (...) Interest of God as the
first Cau^^ in all Actions, as such, of all ^^tional Creatures) from the
In^^dious consequences with which (...) burdened by Mr. John Ho^^ in a late
Letter of Postcr^^ Gods Prescience, in 8vo.

A Dialogue between a Romish ^riest, and an English Protestant, ^herein the
Principal Points and ^rguments of both Religions are ^ruly Proposed, and fully
Examined, (...) Matthew Pool, Author of Synopsis ^riticorum, in 12s.

The Spiritual Remembrancer (...) a brief Discourse of those who ^^tend upon
Preaching the Gospel, (...) Samuel Wells, in 8vo.

God, a Christians Choice, com^^ated by particular Covenanting ^^th God,
wherein the Lawful^^ss and Expediency is clared; (...) Samuel Winney, in 12s.

The Court of the Gentiles, in (...) parts; by Theophilus Gale, 4to.

Poese ^s Grecae Medulla; in qua ^^tinenter Insigniores Poetarum ^^aecorum
gnome, versus Proverbi^^s, and Epigrammata quaedam se^^a, and in memoriae
subsidium Al^^beticae disposita; cum reisione latina in usum Scholarum; per
Johannem Langston, 8vo.

Poems in two parts; first an Interlocutory Discourse concerning the Creation,
Fall and Recovery of Man. Secondly, A Dialogue between Faith and a Doubting
Soul; by Samuel Slater, in 8vo.

Mr. West's Legacy, being a Discourse of the Perfect Man, in 12s.

Geography Rectified: or, a Description of the World, in all its Kingdoms,
Provinces, Cities Towns, Seas, Rivers, Bays, Capes, Ports; Their Ancient and
Present Names, Inhabitants, Scituations, Histories, Customs, Governments, etc.
As also their Commodities, Coins, Weights and Measures, compared with those of
London: Illustrated with above Sixty new Maps. The whole work performed
according to the more accurate discoveries of modern Authors in 4to.

A Renuncitation of several Popish Doctrines, because Contrary to the Doctrine
of faith of the Church of England, by R. R. B. D. in 8vo.


