A LETTER FROM Genesis MONCK in Scotland, to the Commissioners of Parliament in
Ireland, Touching his present ACTINGS.
For the Commander in Chief of the Forces in Ireland, to be communicated to the
rest of the Officers of the Army there.
Sir,
HAving received yours of the 4th of this instant, signed by your self and some
others: You are pleased to signify your apprehensions of our undertakings, and
your hopes that we have received from our Brethren in England such satisfaction
as we may acquiesce in, in their late actings. I have sent to you by this
Gentleman these enclosed Papers, wherein you will fully be informed of our
endeavors and pains, to keep a right understanding with our friends and fellow
Soldiers: But we sincerely profess to you, That we cannot be convinced of any
such necessity or sense of duty, that could engage them in actions so violent
and unwarrantable, contrary to such late and solemn Engagements: Indeed it
makes our hearts mourn in secret, to confider what the issue of this dangerous
and rash change of the Government may be: but we hope we shall be found in the
way of duty, and shall walk according to Gods Word, in that we have borne our
Testimony according to our Consciences against that which is evil; and we
humbly desire you to lay to heart the great dishonor that will lie upon the
holy Name of God, by our inconstancy and (I wish I could not say) treachery.
Are we not an Army that have the Highest Engagements upon us? Never such a
professing Generation for God! yet to make no Conscience of obedience to those
God sets over us; Nay, such whose Authority has been witnessed to, by Almighty
God, in many successes; and for restoring of which we were, but the other day
rejoicing and praising God; and for the asserting whose just Authority, our
Brethren in England so lately hazarded to blood, from whom we have all received
Commissions and encouragement:and this to be done without half an hours
deliberation! We tremble to consider of it, and that a few persons, and of them
some unknown to us, to be entrusted with the Power of abolishing Laws, raising
Moneys, choosing General Officers, creating new Models of Government, making
Peace and War; and this derived from the Officers of a few Regiments quartered
in England; and our consent to all this, Authoritatively required. We cannot
but witness against such proceedings, as must needs make us a scorn to our
Enemies, a shame to our friends, and odious to all the people of God in the
world. Is this the Good Old Cause, the defense of the Parliaments Privileges,
to dissolve them with the greatest contempt? Are the peoples Rights now
secured, when their Consciences, Estates and Persons, are abandoned to the will
and pleasure of nine or ten Persons? Are the Churches of Jesus Christ like to
be protected, when the encouragement of the MINISTRY of the CHURCHES is to be
removed? Now we beseech you, in the bowels of the Lord Jesus, to lay to heart
these things, and consider whether our jealousies and fears be not real. And we
declare in plainness and singleness of heart, (as in the presence of God) with
you, that our Brethren in England, are very dear to us in the Lord; that it
wounds us deeper to consider these actings, then the wounds we have received
from our Enemies; for then we could have borne them. We bless the Lord that you
are so sensible of the hazard and blood that may follow. So we beg of you to
remember what blood has been shed, and who will answer for it, if we be worse
then those God cast out before us. We bless God that we need no umbrage, for
our actions; but testify before God and man, that we will not admit any Single
person whatsoever, nor House of Lords; that we desire Successive Parliaments,
and Councils of State established by Authority of Parliament for the Government
of these Nations; and that there may be a Legal Foundation and Succession. We
desire you our Brethren in Ireland, to join with us, in your desires to the
Army in England, That this Parliament may be restored, and put a legal period
to their sitting; and settle such Expedients as may be for the securing of
these Nations, against the Common Enemy. And we shall take this as a renewed
Engagement of your brotherly love and kindness to us. And having no further to
trouble you, but to let you know, that I am,

Honored Sir, Your humble servant, George Monk.
This Messenger after some time being in this City, carried himself very
indiscreetly, so that I thought fit to confine him to his Chamber; which I hope
you will not take ill.



Printed at Dublin by special Order: and Reprinted at London, for Nath. Brook,
at the Angel in Cornhil.


