All in an Epistle. OR, A LETTER From a Gentleman to his Father, upon Occasion
of the Armies Retreat to WICKHAM.

Calculated for a private Meridian at first, but (in a way of Satisfaction) may
serve Indifferently for the whole KINGDOM.

Printed in the Year, 1647.

A Letter from a Gentleman to his Father, upon occasion of the Armies Retreat
to Wickham.
Dear Sir,
LAst week I had not leisure to enlarge my self, and apprehending yesterday
by your Friends discourse, that it were a matter of charity to settle your
opinions, take what I write for certain: Yesterday the General removed from
Uxbridge to wickham. This Retreat staggers many Royallists, who (for the most
part) expected and wished for an immediate in-rode to the City, with a present
dissolution of this Parliament, and makes them fear, as if the Army meant to
give over those Resolutions, which assure your self they will maintain to a
tittle, and immediately settle the Kingdom. Give me leave to state the policy
of proceedings unto you, thus:

The Army having declared and remonstrated highly against a prevailing Faction
(which is indeed the Scottish-Presbyteriall Party, and drive on their Interest
in this Nation, to the prejudice of the Public, for their own private ends,
under a pretense of Reformation) in the House; and having impeached the Heads
of that Party in a public Charge, it was necessary they should appear
resolute in Action, as well as Declaration; and therefore thought the only
expedient to quicken things to a period, was an approach to the City, (not to
enter it, or prejudice it in the least measure, only to lie about it at a
competent Neighborhood) till satisfaction were given in all particulars, or
(at least) things put in a way conducing thereto.

This Resolution certified by Letters from the Council of War, dated from
Saint Albanes to the Parliament and City, rang an Alarm in every corner; and
that very afternoon the Lord Mayor summoning a Common Council, it was
unanimously agreed by the whole Heard (though all Presbyters) to act nothing
that might represent the face of a New War, in opposition to the Army, but
rather to comply with them in all respects; and to that purpose they went and
desired the Houses to give them leave to stand noutrall, and become Mediators
with the Army; which being assented to, they dispatched away Commissioners of
their own, to lie Leiger with the General, where they still remain.

The City thus leaving the Faction in the lurch (like Covenant-breakers, say
our State Divines in every Pulpit) it was time for the Impeached Members to
adjourne; but unwilling to have an inglorious Exit, they resolved upon one
maine lift ere they parted, to overthrow the Design of the Army; for, knowing
well (howsoever they and their Priests pretend the Proceedings of the Army as
Anti-Parliamentary to the people) that the Armies ay me is not to go against
this Parliament by closing with the King without Them (which would sound ill in
History hereafter, being they were an Army first raised by Them;) but first to
make terms with the Parliament, in behalf of the King, Themselves and the
Kingdom (which will now be freed from all Scottish Encroachments under
pretense of Reforming,) and then to carry the King into his Throne, through
Parliament, upon their own shoulders: Those Impeached Grandees (I say) knowing
this, endeavored with all their might in the House (if possible) to adjourne
or dissolve the Parliament by Vote; and so besides an impediment to the Design
of the Army, hoped to leave the scandal of it upon the Army, by pretending it
was occasioned for fear of Them.

But this Plot not taking, they thought meet in the close of the day to bid
good night; which Hollis did first to this sense, that rather then he would
betray himself to a suspicion of guilt, by standing out upon a Plea of
Parliamentarie Privilege against the impeachment, he did willingly consent
(according to the demand of the Army) that himself and partners might refrain
from the House, and come to a Trial; which they would attend a months space
in expectation here to acquit themselves; and if it were not effected in that
time, that then the House would be pleased to permit them to travel. According
to this they have all agreed and absented themselves ever since, lurking still
in Town for a good hour: But so sharp an accusation is drawn by the Army in
particulars (which will be punctually proved) to manage the Trial, that I
suppose as soon as it comes in at one Court of Guard, they will out at another
to take the Air beyond Berwick: So that now the Faction being flat, the Votes
begin already to shrink to the other side, insomuch as it is resolved by both
Houses, that they do own the Army as Theirs, and will take care that they be
provided for, and paid from time to time.

Now, things standing thus, that the Army has brought the City to their own
Bow, quelled the adverse party, hush't all preparations or thought of a new
War, and all this by the mere noise of an approach, and having all parts
(and most hearts) of the Kingdom besides, firmly devoted to them, they judged
it convenient so far to comply both with the Parliament and City, who have
thus fairly complied with them, as to remove at more distance, that they may
lessen all Jealousies, and not be burdensome by raising the price of Victual
in London; and also to Parle of such expedients, as may tend to a speedy Allay
of all distempers, by settling the King in his just Rights, the Subject in due
Liberty, and the whole Kingdom in Tranquillity and Unity.

Let this be one Argument to confirm you in an opinion of their well meaning
toward the King, because they can have no lasting assurance of what they aim
at, without the Royal Assent in Parliament: And also it highly concerns them
to see him re-instated with Freedom, Honor, and full Authority that the
greater reverence may be given to those Acts, which shall be provided for, in
behalf of themselves and the whole People.

And thus (Sir) because you are my Father, I have adventured (though in haste.
cursorily) to give you a Breviat of the whole scope of Affairs, for the
satisfaction of your self and friends.

The King was Voted back again to Holdenby (which very Vote breeds all this
Jealousy of the Armies deserting Him;) but he being unwilling that way,
Windsore Castle was judged most convenient (according to the Kings desire) if
so be His Majesty conceived that the very name of a Castle would not cause
scandal, and create a new Jealousy. Howsoever the King lodges this night at
Windsor, and Commissioners both from the Parliament and Army, are met together
at Uxbridge, to draw things to particular Heads, in order to a composure of all
differences, and a speedy settling the Peace of the Kingdom.

Your most Obedient Son.
London, July. 3. 1647.
FINIS.

