THE Godly MAN'S PORTION AND SANCTUARY Opened, IN TWO SERMONS, Preached August
17. 1662.

By R. A.

London, Printed Anno Domini.

The CONTENTS.
THE Principal Doctrine, Those that obey the Gospel, whatsoever or whenever
they want, shall ever abide in a peaceful and blessed Condition.
Reas. 1. The God of Peace shall be with them. The Riches of this Promise
opened. 1. God is in the Promise. 1 God is in the Promise as the God of Peace.
2 He that is the God of Peace, is the God of Power. 3 He that is the God of
Peace, is the God of Patience. 4 He that is the God of Peace, is the God of
Hope.
2. God's being with them, signifies, 1 The Heart of God with them. 2 The Help
of God with them. 3 The Presence of God with them.

Reas. 2. If God be with them, all things shall make for them. Romans 8. 28.
opened at large. 1 What things they are especially, that shall work for good. 2
To what good they shall work. 3 To whom. 4 How they shall work for good. 5 That
they shall work for good to them that love God.
Proved in 3. Propositions. 1 The Providence of God governs the World. 2 The
Design of Providence (as to the Elect) is the accomplishment of Gods good
purpose and Promise. 3 Providence shall not fail of accomplishing its end.
Two Cautions. Two Objections answered. Ob. 1. How can the Re^^val of the
Gospel, and the Ministry of it, be imagined to work for good? Answered. Ob. 2.
Suppose a Saint to fall into distraction, and so live and die, what good can
possibly be wrought out of this? Answered.
Two particular Inferences. 1. Rejoice in the Promise of God. 2. Lay your
selves down quietly and peaceably under it.
The General Application. 1. To the Ungodly, persuading them, and directing
them how to get within this Promise. Of these, 1 Some are far from the Kingdom
of God. To them, after a Word of Conviction, and Expostulation, are given 7.
Directions. 2 Others are near the Kingdom of God, Almost Christians. Six Words
of Counsel to them.

2 To the Godly. The Exhortation to them bottomed on Philip. 1. 27, 28. And is,
1 General, 2 Special.
The General Exhortation, Let your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel. Let
it answer and be suitable to 1 The Ends of the Gospel. 2 The Dignities the
Gospel invests you with. 3 The Names which the Gospel puts upon you. 4 The
Reward and Riches which the Gospel promises. 5 The Supports which the Gospel
gives. 6 The spirit of holiness which the Gospel pours forth upon you.
The Special Exhortation, Containing Directions for a Christian's daily Walk.
Let this Gospel-Conversation be carried on, 1 In an holy Union. Directions for
the promoting an holy Union betwixt all Saints, though of different
persuasions. 2 In an united Contention. 3 In an holy Boldness.
Arguments pressing the Exhortation. 1. This shall be to your Adversaries an
evident token of Perdition. 2 To you, of Salvation. 3 The Argument of the Text
farther urged in two Particulars.
1 If God be with you, all shall work for your good. 2 If God be with you, you
shall shortly be with God.
The Conclusion and Valediction.
PHIL. 4. 9. Those things which you have both learned, and received, and heard,
and seen in me, do, and the God of Peace shall be with You.
WHat the particular Reason of my choice of this Scripture this day is, if you
compare my present station, with the intent of the Apostle, in these words, you
will easily understand.

These words of the Apostle, being part of the close of his Epistle to the
Philippians, are his Valediction, or Parewel to them: It is not unknown to you,
that I must now be parted from you; and I have pitched on this Scripture, to be
the Close of my Twenty Years Ministry among you.

God has sent me among you to be a Builder; and I have chosen this Text, to be
an Hammer to fasten, and drive home those Nails of Instruction and Consolation,
which I have been so long endeavoring to enter into you.

God has sent me among you, as a Fisherman; and I have chosen these words to
be as the closing of the Net. Behold! once more the Net is spread, and I am now
making my last Draught; and oh that it might have the same good speed, as
Peter's last had, Luke 5. 6. It would then pay the Charges, though the Net
break.

God has sent me among you as an Husbandman, to plough, and to sow; and I am
now come to cover what has been sown.

What is my aim in Preaching, let be yours in Hearing: Oh that both Preacher
and Hearers might heartily join in this Desire! This once more, God speed the
Plough.

In this desire and hope I drive on.

In the Text observe, A Precept, A Promise, An Entail of the Promise on the
Precept.


In the Precept we have,

1. An Act; [Do.] 2. An Object; [The things that you have learned, received*
heard, and seen.]
The Promise is in these words, [The God of Peace shall be with you.]

The Entail of the Promise on the Precept, you have in the Connective Particle
[And] which knits them up together. Do the Work, and have the Reward; Obey the
Precept, and enjoy the Promise; Do what you have received and heard, and the
God of Peace shall be with you. Be careful of the former, and be not careful
about the latter; if the Precept be performed, the Promise shall be made good.

Doct. 1. Christians must be Learners, before they can be Doers. [What you have
learned, that do.]

Doct. 2. He has learned well, that has lerrned to do well.

Doct. 3. Christians Eyes, as well as their Ears, may help them on in Religion;
Or, The Holy Examples of Ministers, should be living Sermons to People. [What
you have seen in me] Therefore the Apostle exhorts, Phil. 3. 17. Mark them
which so walk, as you have us for an Example; and 1 Cor. 11. 1. Be ye Followers
of me, as I am of Christ; that is, either, I have been a Follower of Christ, be
ye therefore Followers of me; or else, Be ye Followers of me, as far forth as I
have been a Follower of Christ. Those Ministers may go off the Stage with
Honor and Comfort, who have left behind them the good Seed of sound Doctrine,
and the good savor of an Holy Example.

For mine own part, what my Doctrine and manner of life has been among you,
you are Witnesses, and God also. And however, I have great reason to judge and
condemn my self before the Lord, and to bewail it, that my Conversation has
been less exemplary and useful, than, oh that it had been! yet I go off from
you, with this Testimony upon my heart, that I have not been of those who bind
heavy Burdens, and lay them on other men's shoulders, but will not touch them
with one of their fingers; but my endeavor has been, to press on mine own
Soul, and to hold out in my own practice, that Word of Life which I have
preached to you; and therefore am bold, in this sense, to exhort you, in the
words of the Apostle, Be ye Followers of me, as far forth as you have seen me a
Follower of Christ.

Doct. 4. Godly Ministers, when they are parting from their People, would fain
leave God behind them. Though it be not unusual, when the Lord sends them away,
he goes with them; God and his Messengers, do not seldom take their farewell of
People together; yet their earnest desire is, that though they must away, yet
the Lord would stay.

Doct. 5. Faithful Ministers would be Messengers of Peace, going, as well as
coming.

As the Apostles first words were to be, Peace be unto you, Matthew. 10. so some
of this Apostles last words were, The God of Peace shall be with you.

Doct. 6. When ever Ministers part with their People, if they can but leave
Godlyness in them, they shall certainly leave God with them. Or,

Those that obey the Gospel, whatsoever, or whomsoever they want, shall ever be
in a peaceful, and blessed condition.

These things do, that is, live in the practice and power of that Doctrine of
Godliness, which you have received, and heard; and then fear not, the God of
Peace shall be with you.

This Doctrine, I shall fully prove to you, after I have premised,

That the Doctrine which I have preached to you, is the Doctrine of Godliness;
the sum whereof take in these four particulars:

1. That Jesus Christ, who came into the World to save sinners, came also to
sanctify and purge them from their sins.

2. That those that believe in Jesus, must be careful to maintain good Works,
or to live a Godly Life.

3. That this Godliness is not such a slight and easy, and empty thing, as the
mistaken World imagine; but stands in an exact Conformity of the whole Man,
Heart, and Life, to the whole Will of God.

4. That as whosoever believes not in Jesus, so whosoever is short of this
true, sincere Godliness, cannot be saved.

This is the sum of that Doctrine, which I have preached unto you; which
being the Eternal Truth of God, I herein imbarque my own Soul and Life,
desiring to be found in that same Jesus, and to be found walking in that same
way of Righteousness, which I have declared unto you.

2. That my Design and Aim, in preaching this Doctrine to you, has been, to
beget in you, and through the influence and assistance of the Eternal Spirit,
to bring you to, this true Godliness. I have travailed in Birth with you, that
Christ might be formed in you; that I might leave you possessors and partakers
of that Grace, which accompanies Salvation; that your Faith might stand not in
the Wisdom of Men but in the power of God; That your Repentance might be
Repentance unto Life, not to be repented of; that you might obey from the
heart, that Form of Doctrine that has been delivered unto you; that you might
stand complete in all the Will of God; that you might be holy, and harmless,
the Children of God without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked Generation,
amongst whom you must shine as Lights in the World, holding forth the Word of
Life; that being rooted, and grounded in love, you might comprehend with all
Saints, what is the height, and depth, and length, and breadth, and might know
the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, and be filled with all the fullness
of God: To this end, have I taught every one, and warned every one, that I
might present you perfect in Christ Jesus.

3. That as far forth, as the success has answered my Design, and aim, upon
any of your Souls, so far forth stand you entitled, to this glorious promise in
the Text, the God of Peace shall be with you. Look how many Souls there are
amongst you, that live in the power and obedience of those truths you have
received; to so many can I with confidence, give this farewell of the Apostle,
without Ifs, or Ands; the God of Peace shall be with you. To whomsoever the
Lord has been a God of Grace, to them will he be a God of Peace. Whoever
amongst you, have this God of Grace, dwelling and ruling in you, shall
certainly find this God of Peace, dwelling and abiding with you: As for all
others, though I can heartily make this, my parting Prayer, the Lord be with
you, the God of Peace be with you; yet I cannot turn this Prayer into a
Promise, nor give you any assurance, that the God of Peace will be with you.

These things premised, I shall now give you the full proof of the Doctrine, in
the following Reasons. The Doctrine you remember is, those that obey the
Gospel, whatsoever, or whomsoever they want, shall ever be in a peaceful, and
blessed Condition.

The Reasons are, 1. The God of Peace shall be with them. 2. If God be with
them, all things whatsoever bef^ll them, shall make for their good.


Reas. 1. The God of Peace shall be with them; these things do, live in the
obedience of the holy Doctrine which you have received, and the God of Peace
shall be with you. This glorious Promise is pregnant with all the blessings,
that Heaven and Earth can afford.

If you ask, why, what is there in it? I demanded of you, What is there in God?
God is in the Promise, all that is in God, is here assured to the Godly. The
Philosophers, of old, attained to some glimmerings of the excellencies that are
in God, by these 3. ways.

1. Per viam Negationis, conceiving of him as a Being, removed from all things,
signifying imperfection: as ignorance, impotence, iniquity, corruptibility,
composition, alteration, or any limits or bounds of this Essence, Power and
Glory.

2. Per viam ca^salitatis, conceiving of him, as the Fountain of all other
Beings; and thence concluding, that whatsoever Excellencies, or perfections,
are scattered up and down, in the whole Creation, are all united in him, from
whom they had their Original.

3. Per viam eminentiae, by way of Excellency; so that whatever perfections,
whatever goodness is to be found in any Creature, though it be not to be found
in God, formaliter, yet there is that in him (he being the first cause of all)
that does infinitely, superabundantly answer them all. Though there be not the
same Specific Excellencies in him, nor those very pleasures and delights
issuing from him, which the creatures yield; yet there are such Excellencies,
such perfections, as transcend and surpass them all.

The Scriptures tell us more positively, and plainly; that God is Almighty,
Omniscient, Omnipresent, Infinite, Eternal, Unchangeable, All-sufficient, Holy,
Righteous, Gracious; the Portion, the Protection, the Rewarder, yea the
exceeding great Reward of them that diligently seek him. And this is he, that
is in the promise. God is in the promise. I must not enlarge in this spacious
Field; I shall keep nearer the Text, and shall confine my self to these four
particulars.

1. God is in the Promise, as the God of Peace, as the Author and bestower of
Peace. The greatest of Blessings, is the Blessing of Peace, Peace has all
blessings included in it. It has possession, fruition, and security; it has
plenty, pleasure and s^fety: where there is no peace, there is no security for
the holding, nor opportunity of enjoying what we have. Whatewe have, we have it
as if we had it not. Peace is the greatest of Blessings.

Peace with God is the most glorious of Peace. What is there that is excellent,
what is there that is desirable, that is not comprehended in this Peace with
God? Where there is Peace, there is Pardon; guilt cannot consist with this Peace;
being justified by Faith, we have peace with God. Where there is Peace, there is
Grace, and holiness; there is no Peace says my God, to the wicked. Where
there is Peace, there is Love, and good will. As love, so peace is the union of
hearts. The God of Peace is with you, signifies no less then this; the Almighty
God bears you good will. These two, peace and good will, are Twins: On Earth
peace, good will toward men. Where there is peace, there is life everlasting
life; Internal, is the seed of eternal, peace.

This peace is a Portion; peace with God is our possession of the God of Peace:
This peace is a Sanctuary; if the God of Peace be with us, the Peace of God
will keep our hearts.

Christians, in the Wo^ld you must have trouble; suppose you have, yet in him
you shall have peace, who has overcome the World. Isa. 26. 3. Thou will keep
him in perfect peace, (in peace, peace it is in the Original) whose mind is
stayed on thee, Psalm. 85. 8. I will hear what the Lord God will speak, he will
speak peace to the People, and to his Saints. What a clattering is there in the
World? what tumults, and commotions, are raised about the followers of Christ;
as if the World were falling about their ears? The Devil speaks wrath; evil
men speak death, and bonds to them; breathing out threatenings, reproaches,
persecutions against them. In the midst of all this fearful noise, I Will hearken,
says the Psalmist, what the Lord God will speak, Whatsoever men or Devils
speak, I Will hearken, if the Lord God speak at the same rate. Oh no, he will
speak peace to his Saints: Let the Sons of contention do what they can, the
Sons of God shall be Sons of Peace; they shall live in peace, they shall dye in
peace, they shall dwell in peace for ever. Isa. 32. 17. 18. The work of
Righteousness shall be Peace, and the effect of Righteousness shall be
quietness, and assurance for ever. And my people shall dwell in a peaceable
Habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting places; Oh how great is
the peace that they have, who love thy Law. Christians fear not to follow God;
let not that sad word, nor the fulfilling of it, scare you out of your duty.
All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. What if
they do? wh^lest you are able to say, I am persecuted, but I have peace; I am
poor, but I have peace; in a Prison, but I have peace; in a Wilderness, but I
have peace; though all the World be against me, God is at peace, my Soul is in
peace; what discouragement should all that be to you!

2. He that is the God of peace, is the God of power. He promises peace, and he
promises no more then he can perform. He can create peace, he can make their
enemies to be at peace with them. He can make a league for them, with the
Beasts of the field; with the Lions, with the Wolves, with the most brutish
among the people. He can say to the proud Winds and Waves, peace, be still, and
they obey him. He can give them rest [from] the days of adversity; he can give
them rest [in] the days of adversity; he can give his Beloved sleep, upon the
points of Swords and Spears.

3. He that is the God of peace, is the God of patience. This is my great fear,
that though God g^ves, yet I shall break my peace; The God of peace with me?
oh! this is he whom I dishonor, and disoblige daily; by my distrusts,
discontents, impatiencies, murmerings; and what peace to such an heart? what
peace, so long as such unbelief; so much iniquity, as I find daily within me,
remains upon me? Will he, with whom no iniquity can dwell, dwell in that heart,
where there is so much iniquity, by which he is provoked every day! but he that
is the God of peace, is also the God of patience; who though he will not bear
the iniquities of his adversaries, yet he will bear much with the infirmities
of his People. Psalm 89. 30. etc. If his Children forsake my Law, and walk not
in my Judgments; if they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments; then
will I visit their transgressions with a Rod, and their iniquities with
stripes. Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor
suffer my faithfulness to fail.

4. He that is the God of peace, is the God of hope. I have no peace in
possession, whatever there be in the promise. I live in the fire, am born a man
of contention. What likelihood is there, that I should ever live to see a good
day? my comforts are broken, my Estate is lost, my liberty is gone; friends I
have none, enemies I have many, and mighty, I dwell in Mesech, I have my
habitation in the Tents of Kedar; I am for peace, they are for War: whither
ever I look, round about me, before me, behind me, on the right hand, or on the
left, all speaks trouble and error to me. I have no peace; What, nor no hope
of peace neither? where is thy God man? have thou a God in thee, and yet no
hope in thee? the God of peace, and yet no peace! the God of hope, and yet no
hope! the God of hope will yet fill thee with joy and peace in believing. Romans
15. 13. Why art thou cast down oh my Soul, and why art thou disquieted within
me? hope in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my
countenance and my God. Psalm. 43. 11. The God of hope will open a Window of
hope in the darkest times, a door of hope in the most desperate cases. The God
of hope will bear up the spirits of his Saints, in hope against hope; and this
hope will never disappoint them. It shall never be said, there is no peace,
there is no hope, till it can be said, there is no God in Israel.

But how, or in what sense, is it to be understood, that this God of peace will
be with us.

I answer in 3. particulars.

1. The heart of God will be with you. Joseph's blessing, the good will of him
that dwelt in the Bush, will be thy portion. Deuteronomy. 33. what was that Bush? the
Church, or Israel of God. What case was the Bush in? 'twas all on a light fire;
'twas all in a flame. Who was it that dwelt in the Bush? God was in the Bush;
And that kept it from consuming, though not from burning. The good will of this
God shall be with thee: his love, his favor, his care. I love them that love
me, Prove. 8. 17. The Lord loves the Righteous, Psalm. 146. 8. The love of God,
is the womb of all good. Hence sprang the morning Star, from the love of God
came the Son of God; hence came that womb of the morning, the blessed Gospel;
which is so big with glorious grace; with light, life, pardon, peace, glory,
immortality; from the love of God came the glorious Gospel of God. The upper
Springs, all spiritual and heavenly blessings; the nether Springs, all earthly
and outward blessings do all rise, and bubble up out of this Fountain, the love
of God. The precious things of Heaven, the precious Fruits brought forth by the
Sun; the precious Fruits put forth by the Moon; the chief things of the ancient
Mountains, the precious things of the lasting Hills; the precious things of the
Earth, and the fullness thereof; All these flow in with the good will of him
that dwelt in the Bush.

Love is all; the Apostle tells us, Romans 13. our love to God, is the fulfilling
of the Law; that is, it will bring forth all that to God, all that duty, and
obedience, which the Law requires. I may tell you, that Gods love to us, is the
fulfilling of the Gospel, that is, it will power down all that upon us, it will
do all that for us, which the Gospel promises. Look over the whole Gospel;
read, and study every precious leaf, and line of that blessed Book; and if
there be enough in all that, to make thee blessed, and to encourage thee on in
thy holy course, all this is thine. Thou have that love of God with thee, which
will fulfill the Gospel; there shall not one jot or tittle fail thee, of all
that the Gospel promises. The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this. Isa.
9. 7.

2. The help of God will be with you, the Lord will be your helper in the day
of your distress. Heb. 13. 5, 6. He has said, I will never leave thee nor
forsake thee. So that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, I will not fear
what man can do unto me. He has said, I will not leave thee; and therefore we
may say, I will not fear: He has said, I will be, and therefore we may boldly
say, the Lord is my helper: He has said, He will not forsake, he will help;
and who is he that shall say, There is no help for thee in thy God.

There Is no man, whose Case may not be so desperate, as to be above all humane
help. If he should cry out, as the Woman to the King of Israel; Help O King;
the King must answer, If the Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help thee?
If he should cry out, Help O Man of God; the Man of God must answer, If the
Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help thee? If he cry out, Help O my
friends, my Wit, my Policy, my Purse; all these must answer, If the Lord do not
help thee, whence shall we help thee? But what case is there, wherein an [Help
Lord] will not do.

Foolish men count their case desperate, when they come to their [God help,]
that is an usual expression, to set forth the extremity and helplesness of any
man's case. When we see men even lost in any misery, and their case even utterly
hopeless; then to signify our sense of such men's lost condition, we cry out,
God help that man, God help that woman, they are lost Creatures. I, but if men
did understand and consider what the help of the Lord is; they would see there
could be no case so desperate, but an Help Lord, might recover all: 1 Samuel 30.
6. when David was greatly distressed, and all was gone, he encouraged himself
in the Lord his God. Consider here two things.

1. What his Case then was; he was in great distress; he had lost all that ever
he had; his spoils that he had taken were all gone, his Corn, and his Cattle,
his Wives, and his City were all lost; he had not an habitation in all the
World; he had nothing left him but a poor Army, and these were worse than lost,
they were even ready to fall upon him. The people spoke of stoning him, but he
encouraged himself in the Lord his God.

2. What the event hereupon was; why God helped him to all he had again: verse.
19. There was nothing lacking to them, neither small nor great, neither sons,
nor daughters; neither spoil, nor any thing they had taken, David recovered all.

Hence note,

1. That a Christian when he has lost all, has yet a God to go to at last.

2. Whilst a Christian has a God to go to, his case is never desperate; let
him but encourage himself in his God, and all will be recovered.

Sinners, triumph not over the poor people of God; when they are at their
worst, when they are brought as low as your Pride and Malice can lay them;
though they should be stripped naked, and left destitute of all their comforts,
though all the World should ride on their backs, and tread on their necks, yet
rejoice not against them: though they fall, they shall arise; when they are at
their worst, there is still help for them in their God.

3. The presence of the Lord shall be with them. Whither soever they may be
scattered, they shall not be scattered from their Go^. That Promise made to
Moses, Exodus 33. 14. My presence shall go with thee, belongs to all the Israel
of God. [My presence] in the Original, it is my face; in the Septuagint, my self
shall go with thee.

The presence of God is either, General, or Special.


By his general presence, he is every where; 1. Per essentiam, he fills all
things. 2. Per Cognitionem, he beholds all things. 3. Per Sustentationem, he
upholds all things. 4. Per Dominium, he governs all things.


But to let this pass, as not so proper to our purpose.

2. There is his Special, or gracious Presence; whereby he manifests himself
to be with his people,

1. In some visible, and standing tokens of his presence; as in those
extraordinary, the Pillars of the Cloud, and of the Fire; and in those
ordinary, the Ark and the Temple, of old, and the Ordinances of the Gospel now.

2. In some inward influences, and irradiations, upon the hearts of his people.

3. In some visible and signal effects of his presence; whereof there are very
many. There are, amongst others, these two notable effects, of Gods gracious
presence; which his people, by virtue of this Promise, may with confidence
expect, Conduction, Covering;
they shall be Led in their way; and they shall be Hid in their way.

1. Conduction; the Lord will be with them, to lead them and guide them in the
way that they should go. Psalm. 25. 9, 12. The Meek will he guide in Judgment,
the meek will he teach in his way. Psalm. 107. 7. He led them forth by the right
way, that they might go to a City of habitation. Psalm. 5. 8. Lead me, O Lord,
in thy righteousness, because of mine Enemies, make thy way strait before my
face.

The Lord leads his people in their way, chiefly by his Word, which is a light
to their feet, and a lanthorn to their paths: And sometimes also by his
Providence, hedging up all by-ways, and leaving but one way open to them,
that has the least appearance of the way of God. So ordering the matter, that
any other way that is before them, look; with too foul a face, to leave any
doubt upon them, whether that be the way of God or not.

It Is never uncomfortable to the people of God, while they see their way before
them: Doubts about their way, are more perplexing, than dangers in their way.
When they know what God would have them do, they can cheerfully trust him for
any thing they are like to suffer. Do thou meet with Wolves or Lions in thy
way? thou may bless God it is there thou meetest them, 'twould be ill meeting
them elsewhere.

2. Covering or Protection in their way: Psalm. 31. 20. Thou shall hide them in
the secret of thy presence, from the pride of man; thou shall keep them
secretly in a pavision, from the strife of tongues. [Thou shall hide them in
thy presence] or face; thy light shall be their dark place to cover them: Thou
art my hiding place, Psalm. 32. 7. [In the secret of thy presence] the Saints
hiding place is a secret: Such, where neither the pride of men can find them,
nor can they understand wha^ it is. Reproaches shall not find them,
persecutions shall not find them, whose Souls are hid in God: they are not
found, when they are found; they are hid when they seem to lie most open, and
most exposed to men's will, and lust. Sinners do not understand what refuge the
Saints have in God. It is a great secret, a mystery to them: as the joy of the
Saints, the comforts of the Saints, are a secret; A stranger shall not meddle
with his joy: So is their safety or security; they do not understand what kind,
nor how great security; what sure, nor what sweet repose, the Saints find in
God. The secret of God's presence is a sure, and a sweet resting place, for all
his Saints; but how sure, and how sweet, no man knows, but they that enjoy it.
The secret intimations, of the care of God for them; of his everlasting
kindness to them; of his governing hand, in all that befalls them, working it
to their greater good; the secret supports and refreshings darted in, as the
beams of his Countenance; their secret sense, that their head, their main, is
in safety, though they have bruises in their heel, will yield such rest in the
day of greatest adversity, as men can neither see, nor take from them. The
Pillar of the Cloud interposed, did both hinder the Egyptians pursuit, and hide
from their eyes, the comfort of that light which shined upon the Camp of
Israel. Moses knew what the comfort of God's presence meant, when he said,
Exodus 33. 15. If thy presence go not with us, carry us not hence. It Is (if
considered) a great word: Israel was then in a Wilderness; among wild beasts,
among briars, and thorns, in a weary pilgrimage; but they had God among them:
The Lord was carrying them to Canaan, the Land of their rest, a Land flowing
wi^h milk and honey: but Moses prays, If thy presence go not with us, carry us
not hence. We had rather be where we are, in a Wilderness with God, than go to
Canaan, and leave our God behind us. If thy presence go with us, we are willing
to go; when thou will, whither thou will, which way thou will; though by the
Tents of Edomites, Ishmaelites, Moabites, Hagarens; though through the Armies
of Anakims, Zamzummims: we will go any whither, so God go with us. The absence of
God makes a Canaan worse than a Wilderness; the presence of God makes a
Wilderness better than a Canaan: And this presence of God, shall be the Lot of
all his Saints.

Reas. 2. If God be with you, all shall make for you: All Providential
Occurrences, and Events whatsoever; all Difficulties, Straits, Disasters,
Disappointments, whatsoever, that may come upon you, shall make for your good.
Romans 8. 31. If God be with us, who can be against us? Who can be against us!
that is, None can be against us: Or if any be, yet those that are against you
shall be for you. Genesis 42. 36. Joseph is not, and Simeon is not (said old
Jacob) and must Benjamin away too! all these things are aginst me: but yet as
old as he was, he lived to see all making for him. Romans 8. 26. We know all
things shall work together for good to those that love God. This is such a
Promise, as, if it were thoroughly believed, would set our feet on the necks of
all our fears and dangers; and will prove the truth of Sampson's riddle, Out of
the eater came meat, and out of the strong, sweetness.

Now because there is so great encouragement to godliness in it, I shall spend
the more time in enlarging upon it; and shall show, 1. What those things are
which are especially intended, in that comprehensive term (all things.) 2. What
that good is, which these things shall work to. 3. To whom these things shall
work for good. 4. How these things shall work for good. 5. That they shall
undoubtedly work for good, to them that love God.


1. What those things are, which are especially intended, in that comprehensive
term [All things.] Some there are, as Augustine with others, who understand it
universally, of all things whatsoever, whether good or evil, extending it even
to the Sins of the Saints. It Is true, God does often bring good our of these
evils; making use of former sins, to be forces against future: as the thorn,
that did hurt in the Garden, will be of use in the hedge; sin often becomes its
own death, which was intended to be the death of the Soul: There Is nothing that
does make the Sinner more weary, and wary of sin, than Sin it self; the review
of what we have done, does oftenest fright us from doing so any more. When you
look back on sin, and see its face, (for sin carries its face in its back)
you will fear it the more, when ever you meet it again. There Is no argument does
more effectually humble, and break the heart, and make it more fearful, and
watchful against sin, than the shame, and the smart of those sins we have
fallen by: he that has felt the wound, will take heed how he plays with
edge-tools. This is true, God does often make this use of sin, to be its own
cure: and therefore it is not seldom seen, that the chief of Sinners have come
to be the chief of Saints. Yet, besides, that this is not the subject matter
that the Apostle is here treating of; let those that bring sin within the
compass of this promise, and make this to run into the sense of it; that even
all the sins of the Saints shall work for their good, let such tell us, how, or
in what way it is imaginable, that the sinful decays of such who backslide from
God, and never recover to their former life, and vigor, but live and die in a
languishing state of Soul; let them tell us, how such sins can be imagined to
work for their good: till then, we must enter our dissent from this
Interpretation.

This then is not the sense of the promise, that all sins shall work together
for good.

And yet if it were, it would be but a poor argument, to take the more liberty
to sin, because God will turn it to good; this would be even as rational, as
for a man to tear his flesh, break his bones, pluck out his eyes, burn his
house, etc. because God will turn all his suffering to good: he is little
better than mad, that would not conclude such a man out of his Wits.

Others restrain it to the evil things that befall the Saints; not the turpia,
but the tristia, their sufferings and afflications; to that vanity, and those
vexations, they are in bondage under, and under which, with the whole Creation,
they groan and travail in pain, waiting for their redemption; of which, the
Apostle had been treating in the former part of the Chapter. And yet while they
pitch the sense, especially on such things as these; they grant it may be
extended to all other things, sin only excepted; ad omnes res, creaturas,
eventus, tum secundos, tum adversos: To all things and events, whether
prosperous or afflicting. So Paraeus, with others.

And these I take to have hit the right. All heavy things, all the sufferings
and afflictions of the Saints; and not only these, but all things else
whatsoever, that in the whole course of Providence be their lot or portion: all
the dealings of God with them, all the dispensations of Providence toward
them, shall all work for their good.

2. What is that good, which these things work to the Saints; or in what sense
all things may be said to work good to them. The sense in general is this;
They shall all work to their welfare; they shall all happen to them for the
better: there shall nothing befall them, but one time or other, they shall have
reason to say; 'Twas well for me, that it was thus with me. The wisdom and
goodness of God, did cut out suce portions continually for me, did lead me
through such a series and succession of cases and events, which though I could
not understand, yet now I see that every condition, every contingency and
occurrence of my life, through which Providence led me, was useful, and could
not well have been wanted, but it would have been the worse for me. Thus in the
general.

Particularly, for the fuller understanding what good it is that all things to,
consider, That there is a Twofold good of the Saints; Such as they obtain and
enjoy, whilst they are in via, in their way or Course; or such as they shall
obtain, when they are in termino: when they are gotten to the end of their way,
when they are come to their place. Or thus; There is a Threefold good of the
Saints, Temporal. Spiritual. Eternal.


1. Temporal good, or our bona corporis, the outward good things of this life,
which may serve, and please, and delight us in these days of our pilgrimage;
which may abide with us, and attend us to our graves, but there will take their
leave of us.

2. Spiritual good, or our bona animae, and those are either, 1. External, as
the Ordinances of God; the Light, Liberties, and privileges of the Gospel; the
Society, and Communion of Saints, and our peaceful and plentiful enjoying of
them. 2. Internal, as spiritual Grace, Faith, Love, Hope, Patience, etc.

3. Eternal good, or that glory and joy, that everlasting rest and peace, the
possession of that Inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, that is reserved
in Heaven for us.

Now here note these things.

1. That our bona corporis, our outward good things, are only good for us, as
they are conducible ad bonum spirituale, to the good of our Souls. The bona
viae, are only good in the event, when they tend to the bonum Patriae. This
World is but a Nursery for Eternity; we are planted in this, in order to our
transplanting into the other World; and whatever we have here, is either good,
or evil, according to the respect that it bears to hereafter: As far forth as
our immortal part is improved by these perishing things, so far forth only are
they good for us. He that has this Worlds goods, and is not hereby made more
rich toward God; he who prospers in this World, and yet his Soul does not
prosper; much more, he whose worldly fullness becomes the emptiness, and
leanness of his Soul: Are these good things good for him? Is he in prosperity
upon a true account, whose Soul prospers not? It is not ever good to prosper in
the World; it cannot be universally said, It Is good to be rich, it is good to be
in health, it is good to be in honor, it is good to be at liberty; the contrary
may sometimes be true; it is good to be poor, to be sick, to be in disgrace, to
be in bonds; the necessity of our Souls does not seldom require it: Then alone
is it good to be full, and to abound, when our outward abundance farthers our
spiritual welfare.

Christians, could we receive this truth, That our outward good things are only
good for us, as far forth as they conduce to our spiritual good; could we
receive this truth, and live under the power of it; what a different judgment
should we then have of all these worldly matters, from what we have? and how
strangely would the course of this world be then changed? Would there then be
such violent and eager pursuing these carnal things? Would there then be such
whining, and complaining, and murmuring at every cross providence? We would
then say, This may be good for me; good for my Soul, how sad soever it looks.

2. That external spiritual good things, the Ministry, and Ordinances of the
Gospel, etc. are so far good to us, as they conduce to our internal spiritual
good: and they being ordinarily so, it must be concluded, That ordinarily it is
good for us, that we enjoy them, and be not deprived of them. God may see the
cutting Christians short of those privileges, and Liberties, to be sometimes
needful for them; and then even this also makes for their good: Whereof more
anon.

3. That our inward spiritual good, is good for us, so far forth as it tends to
our eternal good: and therefore grace is ever good for us. It Is ever true; It Is
good to be holy, good to be humble, to be in the fear of God, and to flourish
in his grace. We may have too much Money, too much Credit, but we can never
have too much grace. Our greatest flourishing and fruitfulness in grace, will
certainly abound to our more full reward.

4. Note, That this is the plain sense, and meaning of the promise, All things
shall work [for good,] that is, Whatsoever befalls, shall certainly promote our
internal, and eternal welfare; And as far forth as the outward Privileges of
the Gospel, yea, and the good things of this life, conduce toward this, all
shall work for these also. If it be good for us to rich, if it be good for us
to be in honor, good for us to be at liberty; good for our Souls, good in
reference to our eternal state; if it be good for us that we enjoy the Ministry
of the Gospel; there shall nothing befall us, that shall hinder; there shall be
nothing wanting to us, that might further this our good.

The Sum is, That all providential dispensations shall be so ordered, that we
shall want nothing but what it is better want than have: We shall uffer nothing
but what we cannot well be without, but what the good of our Souls requires;
and that which we do possess, and that which we do suffer, shall not fail of
bringing about its end, the advancing our eternal good.

And if this be the meaning, what a glorious Promise is this? What can any
rational man desire more? nothing shall befall him but shall be for his good:
He shall be deprived or kept short of nothing, but what he had better be
without than have. He that is unsatisfied with this Promise, it is either from
Lust or Unbelief; Either he does not believe, that God is true, and will
perform this Word: or else it is because his Lust must be satisfied, though with
the denial of his Reason and Interest; he that desires an Estate in the World,
Ease, Pleasure, Liberty, or any thing else upon any other terms, but as they
may be for his real good, has as much lost his Wits as his Faith: and he that
will take upon him to know what is good for him, better than God, may as well
take upon him to govern the World. You may with as good reason, desire a
Fever, or a Dropsy, that you may have the pleasure of your drink; as for the
pleasures that carnal things would bring you in, to desire them, when they
would be a snare to your Souls.

3. To whom these things shall work for good; To them that love God, to them
that are called according to his purpose: To the people of God; who, you see,
are here described by their Election and Vocation, [the called according to his
purpose] and their Sanctification, [they that love God,] Love is, as I told you
before, the fulfilling of the Law. Love God, and you will live in the obedience
of his whole Will: These are the people, to whom this Promise is made; prove
your Calling and Election, prove your Sanctification, and you may write your
names in this glorious Promise; All things shall work for your good.

To those that are Rebels, and Reprobates from God, all things shall work
together for evil. Whilst things hurtful work together for good to the Saints;
all good things work together for the hurt of Sinners: their Peace hurts them,
their plenty hurts them, their pleasure hurts them; yea, both their prosperity,
and adversity; their plenty, and their poverty; their pleasure, and their
trouble; their honor and disgrace, every thing that befalls them, turns to
their prejudice. Their prosperity destroy^ them; their Table is their snare;
their pleasures are their plagues; and their very punishments are turned into
sin: every thing that befalls them, heightens and hardens them in their
wickedness, and ripens them for vengeance. God is not with them, and therefore
nothing prospers with them. God is with his Saints, and therefore nothing comes
amiss to them, but all for their greater advantage: Christians, this is your
portion, and your peculiar, wherein the men of this World shall neither partake
with you, nor be ever able to deprive you of it.

4. How all things shall work for their good; in special, how shall the evil
things, the Sufferings of this life be for their good: How can this be? Must we
disbelieve our Senses, lay down our Reasons, ere we can believe the Scriptures?
Must we call evil, good; and good, evil? Must we count darkness light, and
light darkness? Is pleasure pain, and pain pleasure? Is loss gain, and gain
loss? Is ease torment, and torment ease? Does Religion make things cease to be
what they are, and to be what they are not? or at least, Must we believe, that
darkness is the Mother of light, that good is the daughter of evil? Can we
gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Can darkness give light, or death
it self bring forth life? Must we say, that contraries no longer destroy, but
produce each other, and that the womb brings forth its own destruction? How can
these things be?

But must God give a Reason of his actions, or else they are not! though evil
cannot bring forth good, darkness cannot bring forth light; yet, Cannot God
bring forth good out of evil, light out of darkness? Though darkness cannot
bring forth light; evil cannot bring forth good, by a natural causation; yet,
Cannot God make evil an occasion of good? Though it do not work efficiently,
yet can it not work objectively neither to it? Though the torment the Medicine
puts men to, be not ease yet, May it not work toward ease? May not the storm,
though it help not, yet hasten the Labourer on his work, the Traveller on his
way? May not the darkness of the night, make more diligent in the day? May not
sickness teach men more temperance, and poverty more frugality?

But to proceed more distinctly; How can the Saints evil things work to their
good? That they do so, cannot be denied, unless we will deny, not only
Scripture, but common Sense, and Experience; but how comes it to pass?

I answer, in 4. Particulars:

1. The Afflictions and Tribulations of the Saints are the way that leads them
on to the possession of that good, which God has intended to them; afflictions
are the way of the Kingdom; the Cross is the way to the Crown. Acts 14. 22.
Through many Tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of God. Psalm. 66. 11,
12. Thou broughtest us into the net, thou have laid affliction upon our loins,
thou have caused men to ride over our heads: we went through fire and water,
thou broughtest us into a wealthy place.

Observe it; Their Troubles are their way to their Triumph; their very falling
into the net, their way to escape. Their Enemies boast; Escape! Arise! yes, let
them free themselves with such hopes while they will, we have them sure enough,
we have them under foot, we have them in the net: If this be their way, we will
keep them in their way long enough; now we have them down, they shall not be
able to rise. I, but yet it appears, through all this the Lord led them forth
into a wealthy place. The Highway of the proud is not their more ready way to
the dust, than the dust of Saints is their sure way to honor. When Israel were
to go to Canaan, they must take the Brick-Kilnes, the Red Sea, the Wilderness,
Jordan, in their way: Could any one have imagined, that the bondage, the
straits they were under, the doubling their Tasks, the cruelty of their
Taskmasters, their enclosure at the Red Sea, did mean any good to them? yet,
How fell it out at last? their darkest dispensations had light in their latter
end; Their greatest bondage leads on to their greatest liberty.

Every cross Providence, is a step to the accomplishment of the Promise; the
Wheel is ever moving on to its end; it moves still forwards, even when it seems
to go quite backwards: As the River, by its many turnings and windings,
forwards and backwards, is still in motion to the Sea, when it seems to be
running quite contrary.

Christians, if ever the Salvation of God seems to be removed farther off from
you; if the work of God should at any time seem to go backwards; if cross Winds
should turn the whole course, so that you appear rather to be marching back to
Egypt, than on to Canaan; yet be not discouraged; though your way be an
unlikely, and unpromising way, though you be led about forwards, and backwards,
yet still you are making on: though the lesser Wheels be never so cross and
contrary in their motions, yet the great Wheel is still moving Right on to your
blessed and hoped end. God intends your good, your spiritual good here, your
eternal good hereafter: and believe it now, for he will let you see it
hereafter, that those very things which most threaten your miscarriage, and a
total abortion of your hopes, are made all to concur to the bringing them
about, and to your more full and speedy possession of them.

Note farther here two Things.

1. All things work; not they shall work, de futuro, but de presenti, they do
work; as the Apostle says, The Mystery of Iniquity; so we may say, The Mystery
of the Saints Redemption does already work; the work is already on the wheel,
and every wheel is in its motion for you: not only your Brethren; the Saints
and Angels, who all are praying for your peace, and seeking your good, but your
Enemies also, the Dragon, with all his Armies, are at work for you; all the
Councils of this World, are already sitting upon the very matter: God has
called them together for this purpose, the Pope, with all his Conclave; the
Jesuits, Priests, Monks, and Friars, with all their Covents; yea, the Devil,
with all his Conclave of Hell, are all at work for the good of Saints. It Is
true, they mean not, nor intend any such thing, their Designs are against you;
they count, they are working for themselves; as it is said concerning the
Assyrian, Isa. 10. 6, 7. God sent him forth upon a Design of his own, to
execute his Counsel, in the punishing o^ Hypocrities; to purge out the Chaff
from the Wheat^ nevertheless, he means not so, nor does his heart thi^^ so:
the Assyrian minds not what God's Design is (...) but follows his own Design;
fights for himself, an^ spoils for himself; but God's Design is still carrye^
on by him, though he think not of it.

All the Events in the World are driving the sam^ way; every Disease or
Infirmity that comes upon you, every Loss that you sustain, every Scoff or
Re^proach that you suffer; the shame in your Faces the Sorrow of your Hearts,
the Torment in you Bowels, the Aches in your Bones, are all workin^ your good.
All the changes of your Conditions, you fair Weather and your foul, your
Sunshine and you Clouds, your Plenty and your Wants, your Eases an^ your
Pains, your Liberties and your Prisions, are (...) making for you; your good is
already working (...) all these Things.

See Christians, what an Harvest of Blessedness (...) growing up to you, out of
this Promise; the Seed (...) already sowing, your good is already working; Go^
is at work, the whole Creation is at work, Men an^ Angels, good men and evil
men, Friends and Enemies, Heaven and Earth, and Hell, are already ing^ged to
work your good.

2. They work together, that is, as some understand it, they work together with
God: all these second causes work together with the first cause; or (...)
others, They work together amongst themselves There is such a concatenation and
concentring of (...) these second causes, in the same Design, that however they
seem to thwart, and cross, and destroy some of them, what the others build and
advance, yet the^ are all united in their End; they jointly contribute to the
Weal of the Saints. Though, if I mistake not, this latter be the more sense of
the two: Yet I know no reason, why both may not be understood. In the hand, and
under the conduction of Providence, all these lower Things concur and
cooperate in the good of the Church.

By the way, observe, what an Harmony there is, in all the Works of Providence:
The most cross and thwarting Occurrences, do all conspire, and go hand in hand,
to bring about the same End. As the differing Virtues of various Drugs, do all
concur to make up the Medicine: As the differing sounds of several strings or
Instruments, do altogether make up the Melody: As the differing Colors in a
Picture, the dark as well as the brighter, do jointly contribute to the Beauty
of the Piece; no less do the most contrary, and contradictory Actions and
Events, both make up the Beauty of Providence, and jointly subserve that one
End, to which, by an unseen Hand, and an all-seeing Eye, they are directed, and
intended.

2. The evil things that befall the Saints, come upon them to keep out worse
things. Where ever the cross comes, if it had not come, something worse might?
The Cross may be a means to secure from the Curse: The Curse was slain on the
Cross of Christ; and our Cross also has its use, to the delivering us from it.

1 Cor. 11. 32. We are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned
with the World; Periissem nisi periissem: I had died, if I had not suffered:
It Is more men's cases, besides his that spoke it; it is no bad Exchange, to have
a Cross in stead of a Curse.

3. The evil things of the Saints, prepare them for better things; That they
may work good for them, they are working them to good; working out their sin
and iniquity, wearying them of sin, Hosea 2. 6. I will hedge up her way with
Thorns, then shall she say, I will return: Sin brought in Afflictions into the
World, and Afflictions help to carry sin out; the Cross, to which Sin was once
nailed, is now nailed to Sin: The Saints can seldom be meddling with Sin, but
they find it too heavy for them; The Cross, that is nailed at the farther end
of it, makes it a Burden which they cannot bear. In some sense, not only the
Blood of the Lamb, but the Blood of the Sheep may purge away Sin; though only
the (...) can expiate and take away the guilt; yet the (...) may have their
place, in purging away the filth of sin: By this shall the Iniquity of Jacob be
purged, and this is all the fruit to take away his sin. Our Lord beats the
Devil with his own Weapons, by those very means, purging his Saints, by which
he endeavors to pollute them; making those very Persecutions, by which he
labors to force them from Holiness, to fix them in it: A fawning World does
them more mi^chief, than a fuming Devil, By that the Devil has cast up his
Cards, he will find himself a Loser by all his Rage.

Christians, comfort your hearts; those Floods that are cast forth against you,
shall but wash you the whiter, and make you more meet to be partakers of the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light: your Purgatory prepares you for your
Paradise. No unclean thing must enter in thither; and you are not like to be
made so clean, as by falling into the ^ands of the unclean. The Saints never
look so well; like Sheep come from the washing, as when they come up from the
pots, their very black makes them comely.

Oh Christians! what a comfort would it be, if your Experiences might come in,
and seal to this Truth: If you could say, Thus it has been with me; before I
was afflicted, I went astray: I was proud, and vain, and wanton, and slothful,
and carnal, but now have I kept thy Word.

Sinners, whatever your mind be in persecuting the Saints, never think to
debauch them by it; if that be your aim, you mistake your course; the living
Spark which God has kindled in them, will not be blown out, but be blown up,
by your puffing at it; the Dirt you cast upon them, does but scour them the
brighter: You take the best course you can, to keep them closer to the Lord,
and his way: The warm Sun, will more hazard the loss of their Garments* than
the blustering Wind: Let them alone, the Spirit of the Lord within them, will be
too hard for Hell, with all its black Regiments; and will not only secure
them, but advance them yet higher, by all their Assaults. These Stars shine the
brightest, when the Night is darkest: When you have done your worst, 'twill be
the better with them; though they will not thank you, yet they will thank God,
for what they have suffered by you. If this be your aim, to make them like your
selves, you may set your hearts at rest, and give over such a vain attempt:
Your fury is like to do as little to force them, as your virtues are to invite
them to a compliance with you. Your Faces are too foul to draw them into your
love, and yet not fierce enough to drive them into your fear. Satan, try thy
utmost strength and skill, and if thou losest not by thine own play at last, if
thou find'st not the poor people of God gotten nearer Heaven, by thy attempts
of plucking them down to Hell, ^hen let thy Lies be believed, before the
Everlasting Gospel.

Christians, make me not ashamed in this same confident boasting of you; yea,
contradict not your God, by suffe^ing your selves to be corrupted by evil men.
The Lord himself has adventured deep upon your integrity and stedfastness: The
Honor of his Truth and Faithfulness lies at stake, he has said, They shall
not be afraid of any evil tidings, their heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord,
Psalm. 112. 7. He has said, By this shall their iniquity be purged, and this
shall be all the fruit, to take away their sin. God has said, All things shall
work together for good to them. They shall not be the worse, but the better,
for all that befalls them: They shall love me and my holy ways the more, they
shall cleave unto me the closer, they shall be made more pure, and more tender:
by all they suffer for Righteousness sake, they shall love Conscience, and
their Integrity, and Faithfulness to it, never the worse, for that it has cost
them so dear; but shall prize it the more, and be the more wary and tender, how
they pollute and turn aside from it. God has adventured deep on you, make not
him a Liar; the Devil and his Instruments will be ready to say, concerning you,
as once he did to the Lord, concerning his Servant Job: Put them into our
power, let us have the handling of them a while, and thou shall quickly s^^
what truth there is in them* or what trust there is to them; they will curse thee
to thy face, they will deny thee to thy face, they will eat their own words, they will
be ashamed of their God, their Godliness, and Confidence. Let God be true,
Christians, and the Devil a Liar; be living commentaries on this Blessed Text:
Let the World, and their black Prince see, that they cannot make you miserable,
because they cannot make you sinners like themselves: That you are still the
more upright, for falling into the hands of a crooked Generation: Let them see,
that though your God will not suffer you, yet you are contented, to serve him
for nothing. That though his He^ge be re^^oved from you, yet your Heart is not
removed from him: Be able to say, Though all this be come upon us, Our heart is
not turned back, neither have we deelined thy way. Let your standing and
increasing in the Grace of God, and abounding in the Works of Righteousness, be
a standing Witness for God in the World, and a Seal to his Scriptures, and in
special to the Glorious Truth of this Text.

4. The evil things of the Saints, prepare better things for them; their
sufferings go into their Reward: As the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so
our consolation also abounds by Christ: Every suffering comes with a comfort
in its Belly; and the sweet is so great, as swallows up the bitter; it is a
hundred fold, that the Saints gain by all their Losses in this Life, but how
great shall their Reward be in Heaven, 2 Cor. 4. 17. Our light affliction,
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding Eternal Weight
of Glory. They shall not only have weight for weight, measure for measure;
their Load of Glory, for their Load of Sufferings; but they shall have
over-weight, over-measure; good measure, pressed down, heaped together, and
running over, shall then be given unto them: According to their deep Poverty,
shall be the height of their Riches; according as their blackness has been in
their Houses of Bondage, shall be their Brightness in the Land of Promise; for
all thy shame thou shall have double: The double of thy Reproach in Renown, the
double of thy Tears in Triumphs, all thy bottled Tears shall be returned in
Flagons of Joy, yea in Rivers of Eternal Pleasure.

By this time Christians, you see what Glory there is in this good Word: All
things shall work together for good to them that love God. And that none may
have the Face to say all this is but conceit; I shall, in the next place, bring
in clear, and undeniable Evidence, that it is certainly, and unquestionably, so
as has been said: And therefore know,

5. That all things do, and shall certainly work, for good to them that love
God. This (besides the Testimony of this Scripture) I shall make evident, from
these three Propositions:

1. There is a Divine Providence that governs the World.

2. The Design of Providence, is the accomplishment of the good purpose and
promise of God.

3. The Providence of God shall never fail of accomplishing its End.

1. There is a Divine Providence which governs the World; the Epicur^ans, who
deny Providence, and leave all on Chance and Fortune, may as well deny that
there is a God, which yet they are ashamed to stand to. Of Epicurus himself it
was said, Quem nihil pudendum pudet, pudet tamen Deum negare.

It can be no way reconcilable to the infinite Wisdom of God, who made this
Glorious Fabric, with the various Creatures therein, either not to determine
them to their Ends, or else to take no care for their accomplishing those Ends
they are determined to. The whole Current of Scripture is so plain in these
matters, that he that runs may read: Let the following Scriptures, amongst
others, be considered.

Psalm. 97. 1. The Lord reigns, let the Earth rejoice, let the Isles be glad,
Psalm. 67. 15, 16. The Eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou give them their
Meat in due season: Thou openest thy hand, and satisfiest the desire of every
living thing. Psalm. 36. 6. Thou preserved Man and Beast. Psalm. 75. 6, 7.
Promotion comes, neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South;
but God is the Judge, he puts down one, and sets up another. Amos 3. 6.
Shall there be Evil in a City* and the Lord has not done it? Psalm. 17. 13, 14.
Deliver my Soul from the wicked, which is thy Sword; from Men which are thy
Hand. The confessions of those Infidels, Nebuchadnezzar and Darius, speak the
same, Dan. 4. 35. All the Inhabitants of the Earth are reputed as nothing, and
he does according to his Will, in the Army of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants
of the Earth; and none can stay his Hand, or say unto him, What do thou?
Dan. 6. 26. I make a Decree, that in every Domi^ion of my Kingdom, Men tremble,
and fear, before the God of Daniel; for he is the Living God, and steadfast for
ever; and his Kingdom that, which shall not be destroyed; and his Dominion
shall be even unto the End: He delivers and rescueth, and he works Signs
and Wonders in Heaven, and Earth; who has delivered Daniel from the power of
the Lions.

But more distinctly, the Lord governs all inanimate and sensitive Creatures,
in their actions; he orders the Stars in their courses. The Stars in their
courses, he made to fight against Sisera. He governs the Winds, and the Floods;
he brings forth the Winds out of his Treasures, he rides upon the wings of
the Wind. He makes the Clouds his Chariots, he sits on the Floods; the
Thunder, and the Hail, and the Rain, and the Frosts, are all at his Command. He
gives Snow like Wool, and scatters the hoar frost like ashes. He casts
forth the Ice like morsels; he sets bounds to the Sea, which it shall not
pass; the Birds of the Air, the Beasts of the Field, the Fishes of the Sea;
yea the stones and dust of he Earth, are all at his beck.

More especially, he rules an governs the men of this World. He sits in all the
Counsels of men, though they see him nor; he orders all their Decrees; there is
no Decree can pass, unless God gives his Vote. He rules in all the actions of
men; even those things that are acted through our improvidence, come not to
pass without the Providence of God. He rules in all the changes that are in
the World; he changes the times, and the seasons; he changes Kingdoms, and
Governments; he removes Kings, and sets up Kings; he make War, and creates
Peace; he bends the Bow, and he breaks the Bow, and cutteth the Spear in
sunder, and burns the Chariots in the fire: Peace, and War, Health and
Sickness, Plenty and Famine, Life and Death, are all the disposures of his
hand. He orders all the events and causalities of the World; even from the
greatest to the smallest. Without him, not a Sparrow shall fall, nor a hair of
the head shall perish: though there be to men, yet to the Lord there are no
causalities, or contingencies. But all things come to pass, according as his
Hand and Counsel had before determined.

2. The design of Providence (as it respects the Elect) is the accomplishment
of Gods good purpose and promise. Providence governs the World, and the purpose
and promise governs Providence. All the works of Providence have rationem
mediorum ad finem. God does nothing in vain; it is not consistent with the
wisdom of God, to do any thing for nothing. God would have his People look
farther than to the things that are before them, because all those things have
a farther aspect themselve. All the works of Providence have a double aspect;
they look backward, to the purpose and promise; and they look forward, to the
end for which they are; as they look backward, so they have truth in them,
exactly answering the purpose and promise from which they have their birth. As
they look forwa^d, to their end, so they have good in them; and that good
(their subservience to their end) is the reason of their being. Here note 2.
things.

1. That the subserviency of things to their end, is the goodness of them; if
the end be good, the means must (as such) be good also; If what God has
purposed and promised be good, then all things that fall in between, having the
respect of means to their accomplishment, must upon that account be good. If
our crosses and afflictions, do subserve the bringing about of Gods good will,
and good word, we must say concerning them, Good are the Works of the Lord. It
is not, how any thing looks, or feels at present, but what it means, and to
what it tends. If the potion be bitter, and yet it tends to health; if the
Messenger be ill-looked, and ill-favored, and yet comes upon a good errand,
you may bid them welcome. And thus all the Providence of God are good. If you
should ask of any Providence, wherefore art thou come? come thou peaceably?
come thou for good? they must all answer, yes* peaceably, for good and no
hurr. It Is but to help all that good into thy hand, which has been in the
heart, and has proceeded out of the mouth, of thy God that loves thee. There
is not a Messenger of Satan, that comes to buffet thee, but is also a
Messenger from-God, that comes to thee for good. They very thorns in thy flesh
shall serve thee for Playsters, thine eye-sores shall be thine eye salve, and
thy very maladies thy Medicines.

2. That this relative goodness of all the works of Providence, is the reason
of their being. Therefore God does what he does, that hereby he may do what he
has said and intended. I do not say that the reason of Gods taking this or
that me^ns, is always from any thing in it self, or for its natural tendency
to such an end above any thing else; God has his choice of means, he can choose
here or there at pleasure, can make use of what he will to serve his design;
but the reason why things are, is this, God in his Wisdom, saw their
ordinability to this good end, and thereupon in his Providence, he orders and
brings them to pass.

So that now, what ever befalls a Christian, he has this to allay and take off
the grievousness and sharpness of it; This had never been, but for the good
will, and good word of the Lord to me. The Lord God has said he will bless me,
and do me good; he will heal me, and sanctify, and save me, and now he is
about it; by this, he is working that Salvation for me.

Christians, you have no reason to say, If the Lord be with me, why am I thus?
why so poor, why so pained, why so persecuted, so scorned and trampled upon?
sure, if the Lord had meant my good, it would have been better then it is with
me: No, no, it is because the Lord is with thee, and means thee well, that he
deals in this manner with thee. The Design of his Providence toward thee, is
the accomplishment of his Promise.

3. The Providence of God shall never fail of accomplishing its end. There is
nothing wanting that might give us the fullest assurance hereof. For,

1. The Providence of God has power with it. He is the Almighty that has
promised; he that rules in the Earth, dwells in the Heaven, and does
whatsoever he will. Our God is in Heaven, and does whatsoever he will. I will
work, and who shall let it? Is. 43. Who can stay his hand, or say unto him,
What do thou? were it not for our unbelief, our case would be still the
same, in greatest difficulties, as when the Coasts are most clear. We might say
of difficulties, as the Psalmist of darkness; there is no darkness with thee,
to the the day and night are both alike. Difficulties are no difficulties with
thee, nor is there difference betwixt hard and easy. He can save with many, or
with few; and with none, is as well as with some. We once read he had too many,
but never that he had too few, to bring about his work. Oh how do we disparage
the power of God, when our difficulties make us doubt? Is he God, and nor man?
Is he spirit and not flesh? Wherefore then do thou doubt? Whatever God has
said he can do: Believe he is a God* and thou will never say, How can these
things be?

2. The Providence of God has Wisdom with it; he is the only wise, he is the
all wise God; He knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations. 2 Pet. 2.
9. He knows what is good for his Saints, and when 'twill be in season; he
understands what is proper, and pertinent to every case. What Is proper to
every purpose, to every people, to every person, and for every season; he
knows when it is a season to abate, and when to exalt; when to afflict, and
when to deliver; when to put on the yoke, and when to take off the yoke; When
to pull down, and when to build up; every thing is beautiful in its season. If
mercies come out of season* mercies would be no mercies; and if troubles come
in their season, troubles should be no troubles; He knows the best method, and
means to his end; the finest means; he sees sometimes, the unfittest to be the
fittest; the most unlikely unpromising means, do often best serve Gods end.

Christians, if you would receive every dispensation, as coming from the hands
of the wise God; you would never quarrel with your lot, nor say of any thing
that befalls, I might be happy, but this stands in my way. If you would give
God leave to be wiser than you, you would say where ever you are, its good for
me to be here, this is my way to my rest.

3. The Providence of God has faithfulness with it. Psalm. 25. 10. All the
paths of the Lord are mercy and [truth] to them that keep his Covenant, and his
Testimonies. Psalm. 111. 8. His Works are done in truth. Gods Works may be said
to be done in truth, in a double sense, In Reality. In Fidelity.


1. In Reality, not in specie, or in show only, but indeed. Gods Comforts, are
Comforts indeed, Gods Salvation, is Salvation indeed. The Devil will come with
his gifts, with his comforts, and deliver^nces; but they are for the most part,
but spectra, like himself, shows, and apparitions; quite another thing, than
what they seem to be: sinners comforts, deliverances, enjoyments, wherewith the
Devil feeds them, do leave them in as poor a case, and worse than they found
them: you will never thank the Devil for his kindness, when you have proved
them what they are. If you do not find your selves as fast bound, in the midst
of all your liberties; if you be not warped up in as many sorrows, after all
the joys he has procured to you; if the glittering glories, the gloring
pleasures he entices you by, and entertains you with, prove not trash and dirt,
and mere lies in the end, then say, the Devil has forgotten his trade of
lying: the Devils works will be even like himself, false and deceitful. But God
is true, and all his works are done in truth.

2. In Fidelity, his Work are according to his Word. 1 King. 8. 24. Thou have
spoken with thy mouth* and have fulfilled with thin^ hand in thy faithfulness
thou have afflicted me. Psalm. 119. Not only in thy faithfulness thou have
saved me, in thy faithfulness thou have comforted me, in thy faithfulness thou
have succored me; but in thy faithfulness thou have afflicted me; in thy
faithfulness thou have humbled, and broken me, and cast me down. The promise of
God is, that we shall want nothing; we shall neither want his Staff, nor his
Rod; neither comforts nor crosses; neither joys nor sorrows; we cannot well
want either, and we shall want neither, because God is faithful. You may not
only write down with the Apostle, God is faithful, and will not suffer you to
be tempted above that which you are able to bear; but you may write also, God
is faithful, and will not suffer you to want a temptation. When it is
seasonable, your hear^s shall be glad; and if need be, for a season you shall
be in heaviness. God is faithful, he will ever be true to himself, and
therefore to you. 2 Timothy 2. 9. He abides faithful, he cannot deny himself.
Should he be false to his People he cannot be true to himself, to his purpose
and promise; his Word is not yea and nay. God is not as a man, that he should
lie, or the Son of man, that he should repent; that he should say, and unsay;
that he should say, and not do; you may write Gods name upon every word he has
spoken, you may write his Name [I Am] upon all that he has said: It shall be.

Now Christians, put these three Particulars together, and if you cannot spell
out the conclusion out of them, the Providence of God will certainly accomplish
his good Purpose and Promise concerning you: You are of little Understanding as
well as of little Faith.

If God governs the World, and nothing comes to pass but by his Providence; if
Providence governs according to Gods Purpose and Promise; if Providence cannot
fail of accomplishing both;

If God be Almighty and can, if God be Wise and knows how, if God be Faithful
and true, let the Devil if he can, with all his Sophistry, evade the
Conclusion, That he will certainly do all that good for you, which he has
purposed and promised: If God be not able to perform, he is not good; if he
mistake his way, if he use impertinent, improper means, he is not the All-wise
God. If he do not actually perform what he is able, and knows how to do, when
he has said it, he ceases to be the true God: So that the matter is brought
plainly to this Issue; If God be God, if God be the All-wise God, if God be the
true and faithful God, this Word which he has spoken, [All things shall work
together for good to those that love God,] shall not fail of its accomplishment
in its season.

Having thus proved the Doctrine, I shall, after I have added a few words by
way of Caution, and answered an Objection or two against the Sense, I have
given, of this Promise, and subjoyned a few particular Inferences, descend to
the general Application.

1. By way of Caution.

1. Limit not the Lord to your time and way; God will make good his Word, but
you must give him leave to take his own season. He that believes shall not
make haste; believe God, but do not prejudge nor precipitate, lest you fall
into temptation. Put no more into the promise, neither for matter nor
circumstance, than God has put in it: put not that into the Promise, which God
has not put in it, lest you miss and come short of that which God has put in
it. Let others mistakes and miscarriages be warnings to you: till God has
manifestly said, do not you say, This is the time; build not your confidence on
conjectures, your Faith on the strongest Presumptions; left your Faith prove
but a fancy, and your confidence your confusion: make not the Promise of God of
none effect, by looking for its effect out of season.

Believe not your selves into Infidelity: Consider, Acts 1. 7. It is not for
you to know the times and the seasons, which God has put in his own Power.
Study the Word, and it Commentary, the Works of God, but be sober in your
Conclusions.

This you may safely depend upon, and this will be enough, if you have no more:
God will make good his good Word to you, sooner or later, in one time or other,
in one way or other; in the best time, in the best way* in the appointed time,
the Vision shall speak and shall not lie; Habak. 2. 3. Though it may tarry,
wait for it; because it will surely come, and will not tarry; At least, at the
end of the days, when you shall stand in your lot; when you shall be gotten on
the banks of Canaan, and shall thence look back on the Promises and Providence
of God, you shall see and say, God is faithful, there has no^ failed one word
of all that he has promised: Now I understand, though once I could not, how
every Wheel was turning, every Instrument was moving, every event was working
toward my good and eve^^^ welfare.

2. Let not your expectation cause an abortion. Let not your looking for mercy,
hinder the working of your affliction: It is not seldom, and the Lord grant it
be not too common a case, that our door of hope becomes a door of sin. W^ do
not set our selves with that seriousness, to humble, to pu^ge our selves from
our iniqui^ies, as we would do, did we apprehend ou^ case more desperate; our
fears and our ^or ow^ have not their kindly work upon us our hope hinders it.
We might have been more broken hearted, had it not been for our hopes of
building up: as it is with a person who conceives himself to be dying; he then
falls ^o praying and repenting, and setting his heart in order, because he must
die; but upon a little hope of recovery, he lays by his dying thoughts, and
preparations.

Christians, When ever you are under afflictions, take heed that your
expectation of deliverance to be near, put it not so much the farther off.
Watch narrowly over your selves, and look di^igently to it, that your hope of
redemption do not harden your hearts, nor hinder your humiliation and
repentance. Hope in God, and wait for the Promise of his coming: But know,
That till the Rod has done its work, it is not like in mercy to be laid by;
and it is better to be continued in the Furnace, than to be brought forth with
your dross unpurged away.

Against this blessed Truth, there are some Objections; as,

Object. 1. Can it ever be said, That the removal of the Gospel, and the
Preaching of it, can be for good?

Sol. This is an hard Truth; but yet a Truth; That even this shall work for
good to those that love God.

1. It Is true, That the removal of the Gospel, and the Ministry of it, is a
most grievous Judgment; and that which carries with it a greater evidence of
wrath, and Divine displeasure, against a People, than any thing that ever
befalls them in this World. How great a Judgment it is, we may guess, if we
observe those Scripture-expressions by which it is set forth: It Is called the
famine of the Word, Amos 8. 11. The glory departed, 1 Samuel 4. The Kingdom of
Heaven taken away, Matthew. 6. 41. The Salvation of God sent away, Acts 28. and
can there be any thing worse befall a People? a Soul-famine, an Eclipse of
their spiritual glory, the shutting up of the Kingdom of Heaven, the carrying
away of the Salvation of God: What worse thing can come unto them? It Is a great
wonder there should be no deeper Sense of this most dreadful of evils, than is
mostly found: Men little understand what they do, who either in a way of merit,
o^ instrumentallity, procure, and bring on this plague; and few understand, or
are sensible, what they herein suffer; to be an instrument in this hellish
work, is an office for a Devil; and the suffering of such a plague, (to them
that understand it) is an hell above ground. This darkness is the very same for
kind, with the darkness of Hell; as the light of the Gospel is the same in
kind, with the everlasting ligh^: as glory under age; so is this thick
darkness, in specie, and in semine, the darkness of the pit. Oh, what an hell
of wickedness does this World then become! the Devil is then in his Region; is
let loose, rules the World at pleasure, deceives, devours, destroys Souls,
without contradiction; takes them captive at his will, carries them down by
whole shoals to destruction: Those that observe what a World there is, where
the Gospel is not; what oaths, curses, blasphemies, belluine lusts then abound;
what Lions, Tigers, wild Bulls, wild Boars, Men then become one to another,
need not be to seek for an Argument, to prove there is an Hell; they see an
Hell aboveground.

These dark and dismal seasons, are the Devill's Marts, where he may vent his
Hellish Wares, his snares, and temptations, his deceits and delusion^ and every
abominable thing, by whole sale: there is nothing so false, so vile, and
abominable, but he can put it off at pleasure; Adultery, Drunkenness,
Witchcraft, Sodomy, Buggery, Blasphemy Idolatry, Atheism, any thing that Satan
has offer, he will find Customers enough to receive: and the truth is, the Devil
may spare his pains; men then need not a Devil to damn them, they will do it fast
enough of their own accords.

Oh 'twere happy, if Saints were so busy in improving their Light, to hasten
them Heaven-wards, as Sinners do their Darkness, to hurry them to Hell. Oh the
sad proofs, that the World affords of this Dreadful Truth: Look into all the
dark Corners of the Earth, especially there where there has been Light, and
see, if you find not all this fully proved to your hand. Can he then be
accounted a Christian, whose heart does not tremble at the Thoughts and the
Fears of such a sore Judgment? He is both dark and dead indeed. to whom such a
Mist is not as the firstborn of Death, or the King of Terrors.

Christians, if ever this should be your case, make not light of it; and take
heed, how sad soever it may seem in its first appro^ch, that no Tract of Time
do wear off the sense of it.

Those that are weary of the Gospel, that cry out of too much Preaching, that
are sick of the Light that shines unto them, you may know by what has been
said, what Judgment to have of them.

But is it not strange, that there should be any such? That those that have
lived in the Light, and seen something, what difference there is between Light
and Darkness, should yet love Darkness, rather than Light? Is it not yet more
strange, that any that pretend to be set up for Lights, should be for Da^kness?
That the Prophets should be against Prophesying; That the Pulpits should ring
against Preaching? Some there are, that are not ashamed to tell us, that hence
come all our mischiefs and miseries; to tell us, and to stand to it, that
there is now, in such a Land as this, little need of Preaching; that it had its
use in the first publishing and planting of the Gospel; but now that the Gospel
is received, and embraced, and competen^ly understood, there is now little more
need of Preaching, Praying, and Reading may now serve turn. I would put in a
word or two to such.

No need of Preaching? Why? Is the end of Preaching accomplished? Till the end
be attained, there is still need, that the means he continued: And what was the
end of Preaching? Was it men's Instruction only, to bring them to the knowledge
of Christ, to turn them from Darkness to Light? Was it not for their Conversion
also, to turn them from the power of Satan unto God? Yea, and their
Edification and Building up in Holiness to Salvation? Let these following
Scriptures be consulted, Act. 26. 18. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. the Apostle Peter, 2
Pet. 1. 12, 13. told those Christians to whom he wrote, that he would, and he
thought it meet so to do, to put them in remembrance, as long as he lived, and
to stir them up to their Duty; though, says he, You know and be established in
the present Truth. You say, you need no more Preaching the Preacher can tell
you no more than you know already; and might not these have better said it,
when the Apostle acknowledges of them, that they did know; and more than that,
were established in those very Truths, he meant, to continue Preaching to them?
And yet he tells them, it is meet they be still put in remembrance of them: Sure
Peter's Authority weighs not so much with these men, as his, that pretends to
sit in Peter's Chair: But has the Gospel indeed done its Work, and reached its
End? Witness the Objectors own cases. Let not only their Lewdness and
Impenitency, but their Ignorance and Unbelief, come in and testify, whether it
has or no. They that have most need themselves, are they that say, There Is no
more need of Preaching. There needs no more Argument, to stop such Mouths, but
the showing them themselves: Or if it should have done its work upon you, yet
has it done its work upon all? Are there no Unbelievers left? Have all men
Faith? Faith comes by Hearing; and how shall they hear without a Preacher? If
you say, they have Bibles to instruct them, and their own Consciences to preach
to them, I answer;

First, for their Bibles, two Things:

1. Those that are no Friends to the Pulpit, are none of the best Friends to
the Bible: Those that would not that the people should hear, care not how
little they read the Scriptures: And be sure, when ever Preaching is let fall,
the Bible will in a little while be laid aside.

2. Understandest thou what thou read? How can thou without a Guide? He
knows but little of the Scriptures, that does not understand, that they are
hard to be understood. There are, the Apostle tells us, (...) in the
Scriptures, Things hard to be understood: As there are many (...) to all that
read, so to many that read, all are so. The Vulgar can as well read the
Scriptures, without their own Eyes, as understand them without the Preacher'^
Lips. Till we come to hold, that Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, or that
Images are Laymens Gospel* till then, let it be granted as necessary, that
the Preacher's Lips preserve Knowledge.

2. For Conscience, let the Word, at least, be p^eached so long, till it be
made manifest in the Consciences of the Hearers: That Conscience that has not
been sufficiently preached to, will prove an insufficient Preacher: Let
preaching be con^inued, till the Word be manifested in the Consciences of all
the Hearers* and if you will needs have it so, then let it be forborne.

Secondly, Has the Devil yet given over Preaching, and are the Preachers yet
silent? Has the Devil yet given over his Preaching? his deceiving Souls, his
perverting the good ways of the Lord, and discou^aging persons from walking in
them? Sure there is need that Christ be preached, while there is a Devil that
impeaches him. Has the Devil them that preach him every day, and must not
Christ have them that preach him, at least, every Sabbath Day? may once a
month, or once a quarter, be enough for these, when every day, and all the
day-long, doe^ scarce suffice for those? When, or where are evil men silent?
Are they not preaching daily? in the House, in the Streets, in the Taverns, on
the Stage, i^ the Stews? Preaching by their Oaths, their Curses* by their L^es,
by their Scoff^, by their Habits, b^ their Cups, by their W^ores, and almost by
all their words and work^? And is there no need that Christ be any longer
preached any where, when the Devil is preached every where? If in such a case
the Preachers of Christ should altogether hold their peace* might we not expect
that the very stones would cry out? This is but a seasonable Demand. Let Faith
and Holiness, first have none found that preach against them, before those that
preach them, be concluded, such as may well be spared: But what need we reason
any longer, in a case so plain, wherein I can have no Adversaries, but such as
the Apostle had, when he fought with Beasts at Ephesus. Whosoever is an
Adversary to Prea^hing, is either an Infidel, or a Brute. I shall only leave
one word for such to show upon, and so leave them and their cause to the
Judgment of God, Act. 13. 46. It was necessary that the Word of God should have
been first spoken to you; but because you put it from you, and judge your
selves unworthy of everlasting Life, Lo we turn unto the Gentiles? Let all
back-friends to Preaching, pause s^dly upon that Word; you have prevented the
Judgment of God, by putting the Word from you, you have given your selves your
own Sentence, you have judged your selves unworthy of Everlasting Life. Well,
by what has been said, notwithstanding all that can be said against it, it
appears, that the removal of the Gospel, and the preaching of it, is a grievous
Judgment.

2. This grievous Judgment shall yet work to the good of Saints: That which
comes in Wrath on some, may be in Mercy to others: It Is the ignorant, the
unconverted, the unbelieving part of men, on whom the Vengeance of this
Judgment falls: It Is those that are weary of the Word, that can worse it.
Sinners, you that say to the Seers, see not; to the Prophets, prophecy no more
to us; let us alone, we have enough of this preaching; if God once say, as you
say, Let it be according to their word, it is your Souls are like to go for it:
And it is not the least aggravation of the Sorrows of the Saints, the misery
they see, hereby coming on you: As for themselves, (that I may answer more
distinctly)

1. The Gospel shall never be totally removed from them; they shall never see
days of Famine: If they never again hear the joyful Sound from without, they
shall have it within. The Word which they have received, shall be in them a
Well of Water, springing up unto Eternal Life: If the Showers and the Rain
fail, yet the Spring which is within them, shall supply that want: If they have
no Bible in the House, no preaching in the Pulpit, yet they have (...) Bible in
their Hearts, a Preacher in their Breasts, th^^ shall instruct and comfort
them. Pharaoh's Dream* and the Interpretation of it, shall be to the Egyptians,
and not to Israel. The lean Kine shall not devour the fat ones; there is a
Storehouse, from whence they shall be supplied.

Whatever scarcity there be, this is certain not one of them shall want a
Viaticum, to bring them to the^ Journeys end. God will not suffer one of his
Ele^^ to starve or perish in the way: There shall not fa^ means of one kind or
another, till the whole Bod^ ^e perfected and built up: Till (we all) come unto
p^rfect Man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

2. That Scarcity, that does at any time befall the^ shall happen to them for
the better, and not for the worse.

1. For who knows, when ever the Ministry is removed, but it may be in orde^ to
a greater Glory: it is Return? Perhaps, God's sending away Pasto^ from a People,
may be as Paul's absence from the Romans, that they may return, in the fullness
of the blessing of the Gospel: Or as Onesimus his departing from Philemon:
Perhaps, they therefore depart for a season, that they may be received for
ever: Or, if this should not be the case of any particular Church, if they
should return no more; yet,

2. Their want of means shall supply their want of means; their want of means
shall be their means: When they have no Preacher, their empty Pulpits shall
preach to them; this most smarting of Rods will have its voice. If they have no
longer the Light with them, their Darkness shall instruct them; if they want
their [burning] Lights, the very Cold shall preserve and increase their inward
vigor; the wickedness of others, shall make them more holy; the violence of
evil men upon sin, shall enkindle their zeal for God; the darkness that is here
below, shall make them to live more above, and all this shall make to their
fuller Reward. It Is a greater Ver^ue to keep up the Heart, to keep on our way,
where there is a want, than where there are abundance of means and helps; and
an higher Virtue shall have a greater Reward.

3. The failing of the Word, will bring back to their Memories, and upon their
own Hearts, that which they have received; and as the emptiness of the Stomach,
will cause a second and better Concoction, and turn it into better nourishment;
when there are no more Loaves, they will gather up the Fragments, that nothing be
lost; the less there is, more to be h^d; the more reckoning, and the better use
they will make of what they h^ve; their present want, will be a rebuke of their
former wantonness: their want of Remembrancers, will help their Mercies, and
whet their Appetites. Every old truth, that has been too much laid by, will
then be precious.

4. Whenever ordinary means fail* God will either find extraordinary means
fail, God will either find extraordinary, or else will feed them more
imm^diately from himself. Psalm. 34. 9. God has promised, that those that fear
the Lord, shall want no good thing. If that be meant of temporal good things*
yet sure, it will yield us an Argument, that will reach the present case. If
God will provide for their Carkases, much more for their Souls. If God will
supply them with less necessaries, then doubtless he will not be wanting, in
what is absolutely necessary. Psalm. 23. 1, 2, 3. The Lord is my Sh^pheard, I
shall not want; and so on, throughout the Psalm. Surely goodness and mercy
shall follow me, all the days of my life; and I shall dwell in the House of
the Lord for ever.

Here we have the Psalmists conclusion, and it is foundation; or his confidence,
and it is ground; his foundation, or ground is, the Lord is my Shepherd, his
conclusion and confidence is, I shall not want; that is, neither for Body, nor
Soul; as appears by the following part of the Psalm. If David's Logic, and his
Faith too, does not fail him, the conclusion is firm; let the Lord be his
Shepherd, and he shall not know Famine or want.

Gods relation to his people, is their security, for a sufficient provision in
all times. If the Lord be their Shepherd, he must see them fed; he must either
find them those that shall, or do it himself. He must either find them Pastors,
or be their Pastor; He must either provide them, or be their Pasture. If
ordinary means fail, he must find extraordinary, if both fail, he must be
instead of means to them.

Here two things.

1. That God stands engaged, as the Shepherd of his people, where ordinary
means fail, either to provide them extraordinary, or to feed them more
immediately from himself.

2. That extraordinary means, or no means, when God brings his People to it,
will be better than their ordinary means,

1. That God stands engaged, as the Shepherd of his People, where ordinary
means fail, either to provide them extraordinary, or to feed them more
immediately, from himself. Feed them he must, or he cannot be faithful; and if
means fail, he must supply that want one way or other. Now God is faithful, and
will not see his Sheep to starve. Isa. 41. 17, 18. When the poor and needy seek
water, and there is none, and their Tongue fails for thirst, I the Lord will
hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them. I will open Rivers in
high places, and Fountains in the midst of the Valleys, I will make the
Wilderness a Poor of Water, and the dry Land, Springs of Water. Oh what a good
World is here, for the poor Saints to live upon, in hard times. It is
interpreted, to have an immediate reference to the outward, and yet a special
respect also, to the spiritual wants and distresses. And it will appear, if we
compare it, with the like expressions. Chap. 44. 3. I will pour water upon him
that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground, I will pour my Spirit on thy
Seed, and my Blessing upon thine offspring.

From the former Scriptures note,

1. That the poor People of God, may sometimes be (as to the visible
Soul-provisions) but in a poor case. Needy, and hungry, and thirsty, their
hearts fainting, their tongues failing for thirst, and their waters dried up.
[If they seek water, and there be none.]

2. All the wants and straits of the Saints, are before the Lord. [I the Lord
will hear.] Christians, though those that should, will not, yet he that can,
will hear the cries of your Souls; all your faintings, and pantings, and
longings for the water of life, are before your e^es, and come up into the
ears of the Lo^d of Sabbath.

3. God has more ways than one, to relieve the wants, and refresh the bowels
of his hungry ones. He has extraordinary means for extraordina^y ca^es. If
they can find no common Rivers, he will open, or make new Rivers (...) high
places, the dry places, the very Rock will yield a River, when God commands it.

4. Gods extraordinary Provisions shall not be scant^, and penurious, but rich
and plentiful. It Is not some drops, or now and then a draught, a little to
stay the longing, or barely enough to keep them alive; he prepares them Rivers,
Fountains, Pools, Springs of water, [I will open Rivers in the high places,
Fountains in the Valleys, etc.] Wherever they be cast, in the high places, in
the Valleys, in the Wilderness, in the dry Lands, wherever they be cast, I
will cause Provision enough to meet them; though they have neither Bag nor
Bottle, nor any thing to carry with them, they shall not want; the River shall
meet them, Springs shall arise and break forth to them.

5. They are not the wanting, but the thirsting, the seeking Souls, whom God
will supply. When the poor and needy [seek] water, and there is none. Oh
Christians! how many poor are there, that sit down by their poverty; who if
they starve, yet will not beg, their emptiness has taken away their Appetites.
These are sad Souls; it is a sad sight, to behold a company of hunger-bitten
Souls, sit weeping, and sighing, seeking after the Bread, and Water of life,
and finding none; but to see empty, and yet not hungry; fainting, and yet not
panting Souls; to see Souls even dying away for want, and yet not desiring or
craving a supply, this is a much sore^ spectacle. A starveling thirstless Soul,
is next to a Ghost.

Well, if ever such Souls find, who never seek water, it is more than God has
promised them. It Is they that seek water, to whom God will open a River.

6. What ever difficulty there be, to furnish the hungry Sain^s, with a
sufficiency of Provision, yet one way or other, it shall be done. I [the Lord]
will hear. I [the God] of Israel, will not forsaken them. Upon me be all their
wants. I am [God] and can, I am [their God] the God of Israel, and will,
provide for them. They must and shall be provided for; whatever course I be put
to take, I must not see them starve.

The Lord will not be wanting to them, if his Word be not heard, his Works
shall speak; if Preachers cannot, Providence shall preach to them; if their
f^iends cannot, their enemies, their stripes, their wounds, their rods, shall
instruct them. Thy Rod and thy Staff comfort me. If they have no other, the
Sun, Moon, and Stars, the Fouls of the Air, the Beasts of the Field, shall be
their Prophets, and Apostles. If all should fail, yet the Spirit of the Lord
shall not fail, to be their Teacher and Comforter.

2. Extraordinary means have more in them, than ordinary, and no means more
than means.

1. Extraordinary me^ns, when ordinary cannot be had, are sweeter, and better
feeding for the Saints, then ordinary would be. The l^ss of the Creature, the
more of God; the less of common Providence, the more of special Grace. Water
out of the Rock, was more precious than out of the River; the Manna of the
Wilderness, was (to them that understood it) better than the Milk of Canaan.
Elijah never made better meals, than what he got out of the Ravens mouth. I
have heard of Woman, in great distress of Soul, who received comfort, when the
Word was brought her by the mouth of a child, which she had failed of receiving
from the mouths of many excellent Ministers.

2. No means, often prove better than means; when I say, no means, I do not
understand simply none, means they shall have, of one kind or other; their
understandings, their memories, their secret duties, Prayer, Meditation, etc.
but by no means, I understand nothing from without, no Ordinances, Friends,
Societies, Books, etc. Gods feeding of a Soul, more immediately, is much
sweeter, then when he sends Provision by the hand of another; the Samaritans
hearing Christ^ Words, from his own mouth, was much more to them, than the same
words reported by the Woman. Dulcius ex ipso font. Water is the purer, the
nearer the Fountain; the Bread that comes down from Heaven, is better Bread,
than that which grows up out of the Earth, though that be originally from
Heaven also. By how much the more immediately our comforts come from He^ven, by
so much the more they have of Heaven in them. If upon the failing of public
Communion, it be made up so much the more in secret, sure the Saints have no
reason to complain. And whether this be not so, let the Prisons, into which the
Saints have been sometimes cast* the Wilderness into which they have been
sometimes banished; let Elihu's Songs in the night, Peter's, Paul's, Silaghs
Songs in the Prison, in the Stocks, stand forth and testify. If Prison joys,
and exile comforts, have not been often both fuller and sweeter to them, than
when they have rolled in Manna, and lived in the fullness* and freedom of all
helps and means; then not a few Christians, have either mistaken, or
mis-reported their experiences. To pretend to live above Ordinances, whilst
God affords them, is a wickedness that some men have to repent of; but where
God denies them, he does, he will provide a better subsistence without them.

Now lay all this together, and then you will see, that even this also, this
most grievous of Judgments, the famine of the Word, when ever it befalls, shall
work for good to those that love God.

Christians, cheer up your hearts; whatever drought, or dearth, may fall upon
the World, you are provided for, you shall have enough. If the shoures fail
without, you have within you, that which shall spring up to eternal life. If
your streams should be dried up, if your Pastures should be trodden down, you
have a God, that will be both your Pastor and Pasture. If the Rive^ fail you,
the Rock shall supply you; what you want in ordinary, you may look to be made
up in extraordinary means. The drying up of the waters, shall but drive you up
to the Springhead. If ever the Stars fail you, God shall but exchange
Starlight for Sun-light; while there is light in the Sun, you shall not walk in
darkness. See but to this, make sure that this God is yours, and he must find
out a comfortable feeding for you; if you can but say David's first words after
him, the Lord is my Shepherd; you may then with confidence, say the whole Psalm
after him. I shall not want, he will make me to lie down in green Pastures; he
will lead me by the still Waters; though I walk through the valley of the
shadow of death, I will fear no evil, thy Rod and thy Staff shall comfort me.
Thou shall prepare me a Table in the presence of mine Enemies; Surely Goodness
and Mercy shall follow me, all the days of my life, and I will dwell in the
House of the Lord for ever.

2. There is another Objection, that seems to have ^ore difficulty in it.
Suppose a Saint to fall into Distraction, and thereby to be deprived utterly of
the use of his Reason, and so to live and die.

How can it be imagined, that this can work for his good, either in this World,
or the World to come? Can any good arise, out of an incapacity of any longer
doing, or receiving good, or patiently suffering Evil? Can either his Grace
here, or his Glory hereafter, be increased or advanced, by a man's being
converted into a mere Bruit?

1. There Is no doubt at all, but this may make for the Churches good: Is there
nothing that others may learn out of such a sad Providence? If others may reap
good by my evil, is it nothing to me? May it not be said to be good for any
particular Saint, to bear the sorest Affliction, by which the Church may have
benefit? He has not much of a Saint, to whom, if it were aforehand proposed,
whether for the benefit of the Church, he would be content, if God see it good,
to fall into such a calamity: He has little of a Saint, that would
deliberately refuse it. Doubtless, a sincere Christian, who would count his
usefulness to the good of the whole Body, to be his good, would say even
concerning such a Message, were it brought to him, Good is the Word of the
Lord: And that which aforehand, he would judge to be good for him to submit
to, may it not be good for him to be under?

2. It may also be more directly for his particular personal good. For,

1. It may do him the same good, which Death will do for him: Concerning which,
the Apostle says it is yours, 1 Cor. 3. that is, it is for your advantage: It
may take him from the evil to come; from those Sorrows, and that Trouble of
Heart, which God might foresee falling upon him, by any calamities, coming
either on the Church in general, or himself, or Family in particular: which
being deprived of his Reason, and power to reflect on, he cannot feel, or in
the least be afflicted by. If you Reply, But the Remedy is worse than the
Disease: To be useless and unserviceable is less eligible, than to be sorrowful
and afflicted: Will any man choose to fall into a Lethargy, or Apoplexy,
because 'twill secure him from the Torment of a Fever? If there be any weight
in this Reply, I shall add a farther Answer; which, if I misjudge not, will
cut off all R^plyes.

2. Who knows, what Sins and Temptations he might have fallen into, and fallen
by, had not the Lord by this means prevented it; he might possibly have been a
Back-slider, have fallen into gross sin, by which he might have been a Terror
to himself, and a Scandal to the Gospel; and is it not good for him, that this
is prevented? Is not that Affliction (...) Mercy, which secures from such
Iniquity?

Who can say it is not thus? that the Lord foresaw he would have fallen into
sin, and for prevention, brought him into this Affliction: Who can say, it is
not thus? If none can, then this is no Objection. If you Reply, you say [it may
be] this is the case; and I may as well say, [it may be not]; there might be no
such thing, that God foresaw, as the Reason of this Providence. It Is but a
Conjecture, and an Uncertainty, when you have made the most of it: Be it so;
yet it will fully answer my end: I am not now proving, that all things work for
good to the Saints, that is sufficiently done already: But you are objecting
against it; and till you prove your Objection, which you can never do, unless
you prove, that this is not the case; you must give me leave again to tell you,
your Objection comes to nothing.

And so at leng^h you see this Blessed, Glorious, Comfor^able Truth, stands
it is Ground, and Triumphs over whatever has any Shadow of Contradiction to it.

By the way, learn hence two Things:

1. Rejoice in this Promise of God: Has the Lord put in thy name here, let
thine Heart say, It is enough. Be more joyful in this, that God has thus
undertaken the Care of thee, than if God had wholly put thee to thine own hand;
giving thee power to help, and liberty to choose for thy self. In what will thou
rejoice, if not in this, that the whole Creation are engaged to do thee a
kindness, to help thee into the possession of thy God? Thou may now not only
submit to, but thankfully embrace every Providence, knowing upon what Errand it
comes to thee; for good, and not for hurt. Thou may now triumph, not only in
the Consternations, but in the Triumphs of thine enemies. Whether they ride
over thy back, or thou tread on their neck, it is all one, the issue will be the
same. Thy Troubles and thy Consolations differ only in their Countenance; with
what ever grim face thy afflictions look, there are smiles under; learn to see
through them, and thou may see light on the further side. Believe this Word,
thou may read it written upon every thing that befalls thee: there is no
Messenger that comes, but brings this promise in his hand, Even this shall work
for good. Read it, and rejoice.

2. Lay thy self down quietly under it. No more perplexing or distracting
cares, what shall become of thee; no more unwarrantable shifting for thy self:
Let God alone. Shift not for thy self, lest God leave thee to thine own shifts.
Let not the violence of evil men disturb thy Peace, or provoke thee to
unpeaceableness. What ever provocations thou may have, avenge not thy self,
neither give place unto wrath, murmuring, or fears. In thy patience possess thy
Soul, thy God, and his good Word: Thy strength is to sit still. Stand still and
see the Salvation of God; thou have nothing to do but to be H^ly let that be
thine only care; thy God will see to it thou shall be happy: he is faithful
that has promised. Love God, and leave thy self and thy whole Interest in this
blessed Word, All things shall work to thee for good.

By this time you see something of the Riches of this Promise: God is in the
promise; the God of Peace, the God of Power, the God of Patience, the God of
Hope; the heart of God, the help of God, the presence of God; by virtue
whereof, all that ever befalls them shall work for their good. Methinks the
hearing of this Promise opened, should set your Souls, and all that is within
you a crying out, Oh that this were my portion! Where ever my Lot do fall, as
to outward things, though in a prison, though in a desert, though on a
dunghill; let the lot of my Soul lie in this Promise, The God of Peace shall
be with you. W^y Brethren, will you take up with Godliness: you have learned,
and received, and heard the Word of the Lord; the Word of Faith, the Word of
righteousness, and holiness, will you hearken to, will you obey these words?
These things do, and the God of Peace shall be with you.

Oh what foolish Creatures are we, that ever we should be afraid of Religion,
afraid of Holiness, afraid to own, obey, and follow God and his holy ways.
What unreasonable fears are these, to those that believe the Scriptures? If the
Scriptures be true, this is the only way, this following God in holiness, to
put your selves out of all danger, to put your selves into the heart, arms,
presence, protection, of the Almighty God of Heaven and Earth.

Oh that I could persuade you in thither, and there leave you; if you are once
in the Lords Arms, you are safe enough, into what ever hands you fall.

Use. By way of Application, let me once more speak a few words, 1. To the
Ungodly. 2. To the Godly.


1. To the Ungodly; my work with them shall be to persuade and direct them, how
to get into this peaceful and blessed state: Amongst the ungodly,

1. There are some who are far from the Kingdom of Heaven; as,

1. Those upon whom the Ministry of the Gospel has done nothing at all; that
miserable forlorn multitude of the grossly ignorant; who as they were born
blind, have had all their days such a mist of thick darkness abiding upon
them, that they are incapable, without a miracle, of being savingly wrought
upon. Speak unto them of Faith in Christ, of Repentance unto life, of obeying
the Gospel, in the plainest way possible, and you will be as a Barbarian to
them, as one of a strange Language, they know not what you say; if you should
speak Greek or Latin to them, they would understand it as well, as the
plainest truths of the Gospel: A poor Minister of Christ may break his heart,
and rend his bowels, in mourning over them; may draw forth his Soul in the
most melting expressions of his compassions to them, may break his brains, in
studying how to convey a little light into them, and yet cannot help them,
cannot make them to understand so much, as that they understand nothing. Their
Minds are so wholly blinded by the god of this World, that the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, though it shine round about them, cannot find so
much as a cranie into their hearts; but being alienated from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in them, they give up themselves to
lasciviousness to work all uncleanness with greediness; walking in the lusts of
their hearts, after the course of this World, in riot, luxury, excess of wine,
revellings, banquettings, covetousness, lying, blasphemies, and abominable
adulteries, and Ido^atries; and yet remain without any conscience of sin, or
fear of their danger; being as natural b^uit Beasts, as if they were made for
slaughter and destruction.

Are there none such in this place? Does not the Earth every where groan, our
Land mourn, our Congregations travail in pain? Is not this Congregation black'd
and burdened with such miserable creatures; who after all the instructions,
counsels, wooings, warnings, threatenings, and Judgments of God, which have
been in their ears, and before their eyes, remain to this day a stupid,
blockish, brutish generation, without the least sense of their sin, or wish to
be delivered from it?

Oh you blind and dark Souls, consider and understand, if it be possible, these
two Scrip^ures, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to those that
are lost. In whom the god of this World has blinded the minds of those that
believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel should shine unto them. This
darkness is from Hell; the Prince of darkness has held you under your
blindness; and this darkness leads to hell to the blackness of darkness for
ever: You are lost, you are lost Souls, lost for ev^r, if the Gospel leave you
in this state of blindness in which you have so securely continued to this day.
Isa. 27. 11. It is a people of no understanding, therefore he that made them
will not have mercy on them, he that formed them will show them no favor.

2. Those upon whom the Gospel has seemed to have done its work; but it is its
strange work.

There are two works which the Gospel does: some it enlightens; others it
smites with blindness: some it softens; others it seals up under hardness: some
it gains over to Christ; others it gives up to the unbelief and impenitence of
their hearts. Isa. 6. 10. Make the heart of this people fat, and make their
ears heavy, and shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, etc. Go and
preach to this people, but preach them into hardness and blindness: because
they refused to see or hear, let the light put out their eyes; let the joyful
sound strike them deaf, and stop their ears: never leave hammering them, till
thou have hammered them into rocks, or anvills. Some there are that have so
trifled with Convictions, baffled Conscience, and suffered their lusts so to
resist and bear down their light; that have had so many heats, and colds; so
many thawings and freezings; that have taken up so many purposes, and made so
many promises, and yet all comes to nothing; that the Gospel has received a
Charge from the Lord, to make an end of its work: Go, says God, and make an
end with these men; I Will be mocked by them no more; I Will be trifled and dallied
with by them no longer; wound them no more, fright them no more, persuade them
no longer; make their hearts fat, their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, and
give them up to their hearts lusts, that they may walk in their own counsels,
and fill up the measure of their iniquities.

you, that after all the warnings you have received from the Lord, and after
some workings of them, sometimes upon your Consciences, are yet going after
your Lusts, prostituting your selves to your belluine and sensual pleasures,
filling up daily the measure of your iniquities. Oh tremble, and consider
sadly, whether this be not likely to be your case; that the Gospel has even
done with you, and given you over unto an impenitent heart, and reprobate mind.
In hope, that how near soever you are to this dreadful state, you may be yet
one step at least short of it, I shall this once more adventure a few words
upon you, together with them that I have already mentioned: And first let me
reason a little with you.

1. Art thou one of them that obey the Gospel, or not? Art thou one of them
that love God, one of the called, according to his purpose, or not? Art thou
not an Alien, an Adversary against God, and a Rebel against his Word? Let thy
Conscience speak, let thy ways speak, let thine Oaths, and thy Drunkenness, and
thine Adulteries, thy scoffing at God, and his holy ways, thy hating his
Instructions, and kicking at his Reproofs, thy hardnings against his Calls, thy
treacherous dealings in his Covenant, and the Vows of God that are upon thee;
let these speak what thou art: Is this that which God has chosen and called
thee to? Are these the Things thou have learned, and received, and heard of
him? Did he ever say, These things do and the God of Peace shall be with you?
Thou need no other Conviction, than that of Isreal's, Jer. 2. 23. How can
thou say, I am not polluted? See t^y way in the Valley, and know what thou have
done. How can thou say, that thou art not a Wretch? With what Face can thou
deny, but thou art an Enemy of God, and of all Righteousness? See thy way in
the Valley, trace the Footsteps of tby Life; behold thy practices and thy
course: Sure thou art very blind, if thou behold thy self in this Glass, and
do not see thy Face, as the Face of a Devil.

There are some, whom it may be harder work to convince, who have the Face of a
Christian, the Tongue of a Saint, but within, the Heart of a Beast. Hypocrites
are as hard to be convinced, as Hypocrisy is hard to be detected.

But thou who carryest thy wicked Heart in thy Forehead, upon thy Tongue, upon
the Palms of thine Hands, and in the very prints of thy Feet, whose Malice
against God and his Holiness, may be read in every look, in every word, in
every Line of thy Life; need thou any further proof, that thou art not of
God? Thou may as well put me to prove, that Hell is not Heaven, that the
Devil is no Saint, as that thou at no Christian. Do [thou] love God, art
thou under the hope of the Promise? Ask thy Ways man, and let these tell thee.

2. Do thou mean to keep at this distance from God to the Death? Do thou
in earnest? Is there nothing in those rich Promises, that have been laid before
thee, which thou can wish 'twere thine? Is there no such word in thine heart,
Oh that my Lot were here! Art thou content thy name should be left out for
ever? Is there so little in the peace of God, that thou can sell it for the
pleasures of sin? Art thou content that nothing should prosper with thee, but
that every thing should be a Gin, and a Snare, and a Curse to thee? Art thou
content, that the Pit should be thy place, Eternal Wrath thy portion, and that
every Creature, every Comfort, every Cross that comes, should give thee a pluck
down from Heaven, and a kick toward Hell? Can thou think they mean thee any
thing else, when all does but harden thee in thy sin, and make thee kick
against thy God? Art thou so unwilling to leave thy sins, for the hope of the
Promise of God, that thou art content to give up thy hopes, for the love of thy
sins? Dare thou say, Let me have my part in the pleasures and contentments of
this life, and I am cnntent to relinquish my part in Christ? Let God let me
alone in my sins, and let him damn my Soul? Let me live at my ease, and my
liberty, and let my name be blotted out of the Book of Life: I am content to
take my ylace, and my lot, among the damned in another World, so I may have my
pleasure with them in this World? And do thou say less, or other than this,
whilst thou refusest, or resolvest against following thy God? He that refuses
to accept of the Redemption of Christ, upon the holy Terms, upon which it is
offered, says, in effect, I am lost, I am sold for a Captive to the Devil; my
first Father sold me for an Apple, Christ would now buy me back again to my
self; but, for my part, I am content that the first Bargain stand: As to my
interest, I confirm the Bargain: As for my Soul being sold to the Devil, to the
Devil let it go. This is the voice of every wilful Refuser of the Terms of the
Gospel. Oh Wretch! does not thy heart tremble? does not thy hair stand on end?
do not thy knees shake? and are not the Joints of thy Loins losed, to consider,
what thou have done, and art still a doing?

Sinners, I have but little more to speak to you; but shall that little be
nothing? Hitherto you have stood it out, and will not be persuaded, by ought
that God has spoken by me: But oh! must I leave you thus? Why may not a word
at parting, do more than all that has been spoken? Oh that it might! Shall
neither my first, nor last words prevail with you? What if [my] last, should be
[your] last? If the l^st that I must preach, be the last that you must must
hear? There is a day set, that will be your last day: There is a Sabbath, that
will be your last Sabbath; There is a Sermon, that will be your last Sermon:
There is a Warning, that will be your last warning: Oh what if this should be
it? If the Lord should take your this days denial, for your final Answer, and
never ask your consent again for ever? But whether it be your last, or no, I
must be henceforth silent to you? And oh will you send me away with so sad an
Heart, with the sorrow and shame of the disappointed? Will you break my Heart,
by persisting to harden yours? Is this all that I shall have, to return to the
Lord, that sent me unto you? I have declared thy Name un^o them, but they did
not regard it: I have invited them to come to thee, but they would not follow
me: I have warned them to return from their sins, but they would not hearken?
Are you willing that I shall give in this Answer, and bear this Witness against
you at the Great Day? Sinners hearken; Is there not one blind person among you,
that is yet willing to have his Eyes opened? Is there not one Captive to Lust
and Vanity, that is willing to be set free from his Bondage? Is there not one
more that will be persuaded to be wise, and to prefer an immortal Soul, God,
Glory, Eternity, before his brutish perishing pleasures? Is there not one
Drunkard more, that will yet be persuaded to be sober? Not one vain person that
will be persuaded to be serious? Am I making my last Draught among you, and
shall I take nothing? Not one Soul more? If you will not yet be prevailed with,
then hear the Word of the Lord, Ezekiel. 3. 19. If thou warn the Wicked, and he
turn not from his wickedness, he shall die in his iniquity, but thou have
delivered thy Soul.

But if there be any few relenting Hearts among you, who are brought but thus
far, to cry out, Why what must I do? I would leave with such, these few words
of counsel, and oh that my counsel might be accepted by them.

1. Get a deep sense of thy dreadful state: What art thou sinner? What is thy
state? at ease? in peace? out of fear? in pleasure? What, and yet a sinner? in
the Bond of Iniquity? Captive to the Devil? without Christ? without the
Promise? under the Curse? Study these Scriptures, Joh. 8. 34. He that
commits sin, is the servant of sin. ver. 44. Ye are of your Father the
Devil. 2 Timothy 2. 26. Held Captive by him at his will. Act. 8. 23. in the gal^
of bitterness, and the bond of iniquity. 1 John 5. 19. The World lies in
wickedness. Psalm. 11. 6. Upon the Wicked he shall rain Snares, Fire, and
Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest, this shall be the portion of their Cry.
Psalm. 49. 15. Like Sheep they are laid in the Grave, Death shall feed upon them.

Rise Sampson, the Philistims are upon thee; awake sleeper, the Devil is upon
thee; Death is at thy back, the Grin is at thy heel, the Curse is over thy
head, thy very next step may be Hell; Thou lie in wickedness to day, and
may be in fire and brimstone before to morrow: Sure thou art in a dead sleep,
that can take thine ease in such a Lodging. Is this the state thou art so
loath to change? Is this the state thou so boastest of, and blessest thy self
in? When thine heart is merry with thy Wine, swelled with thy pride, jolly
amongst thy Companions; put in such a serious Question: But what am I all this
while? Let this Thought, sauce thy sweet Morcel, spice thy pleasant Cups, and
be the Burden of thy merry Songs: After this, Hell, Snares, Fire and
Brimstone, the Vengeance of Eternal Fire. Oh an Heaven, a Paradise, oh my dear
pleasures, oh my sweet Daughter, oh my merry days, what Mortal can part with
you? I but what comes after? What is there at the bottom? Look a little before
thee, and if that sight turn not thy stomach, sure thou art sufficiently hardy.

Study thy case, and tremble; and when thou tremblest, there is hope thou will
turn. Think not of Repentance, or escaping from thy sinful state, till thou see
and fear it. We read, Isa. 42. 7. that Christ was sent, to open the blind eyes,
and to bring out the prisoners out of Prison. If the prisoners eyes be shut,
it is to little purpose, that the Prison doors be open: Their Eyes must be first
opened, not only that they may see their way [out,] but that they may see
themselves [in] Prison. Open thine Eyes sinner, if ever thou will escape; open
thine Eyes, and see where thou art? Thy Fools Paradise, wherein thou blessest
thy self, is thy Souls Prison, where thou art like to be held under Eternal
Bondage.

2. Give a present Bill of Divorce to every sin; hug not Death one minute
longer in thy Bosom: If thou love thy Life, say not of any one sin, Nothing
but Death shall part thee and me: No, nor so much as this, Yet a little while,
and I will let thee go. To day, to day, if you will hear his voice* hearden not
your hearts.

3. Dread it as Hell, that thy hope in Christ, should lessen thy fear of sin.
Let not the hope of a Savior be thy damnation. Make not Christ the Pandor of
sin; continue not in sin because Grace has abounded.

4. Break off from thy Companions in sin; will thou love them to the death?
Christ and thy Soul can never be married, till thy Soul and Sinners be parted.
Escape for thy life, get thee up from the Tents of these men; linger not. Thou
art held under the power of the Devil, by cords, and by knotts; by the cords of
thy sins, and by the knots of thy Companions. There Is no hope that the cords of
sin will be broken, till the knots of evil Companions be loosed. Sinner, these
binding Cords will, if thou look not to it, become whip-cords to torment thee.
Oh take heed thou never come to be lashed with such knotted cords!

Thy Companions in sin, as they now heighten thy pleasures, so will they
hereafter sharpen thy plagues. Sinners comfort their hearts with this thought,
That if they be damned, they shall have store of company: but let them know,
That the fire of Hell will burn just so much the cooler, for the multitudes
that are there: as the fire of their Chimney does, for the store of fuel.
When thou art charmed with the roaring of thy Companions in the Alehouse,
think what music their roaring with thee will make, when you shall all meet in
your eternal Prison. Away from evil company; you will remember hereafter, when
it is too late, how much, and with how little success, I have labored with you
in this thing.

5. Bafflle not Conscience once more. Awakened Sinner, charm not thy Conscience
into silence, nor dash it out o^ countenance. Thy Conscience is the only Friend
that God or thy Soul has left within thee. Thy will, and thy affections, and
thine appetite, are all gone; the Devil has stolen them away, and hired them
all against thee, thou have nothing but poor Conscience left.

Thy Conscience has been often upon thee; pleading with thee for God, and for
pity to thy Soul: It has warned thee, reproved thee, and often whispered thee
in thine Ear; What do thou mean? whither art thou going? when will thou
return? Away with thy sins, have done with thy Companions, no more of this
drunkenness, this riot, this covetousness; Thou art a lost man, thy Soul is
lost, if thou go on. Thus Conscience has warned thee, and thou have sometimes
hearkened to it; and spoken it fair. The throbs, and the pa^gs, and the wounds
thou have felt and received from it, have wrung from thee, now and then, a
promise: Well, through the Grace of God, I Will hearken to Conscience, I Will be a
new man: Away from me ye Sinners, I will keep the Commandments of my God. And
yet shortly after, when thy Temptations return, thy Companion; come, all is
forgot^en; and along thou go, as a fool to the Stocks, or an Ox to the
slaughter; and this has been thy way and thy manner, from time to time: Now
and then Conscience draws a sigh, or a tear from thee; and by and by receives a
kick or a stab.

Beware Sinner; Conscience will not always be thus used. If ever it speak
again, say it not Nay. Its next word may be its last; if ever thou weariest it
into perpetual silence, then farewell all for ever. Conscience is the only
Friend thou have left.

Convinced Soul! How will thou bear the revenges of an awakened abused
Conscience? all thy bafflings of it here will be repeated over in eternity: How
will all this look when it shall meet thee before thy Judge? Save thy self from
that hour: Baffle not Conscience once more.

6. Let not the greatness of thy sins, nor the difficulty of Christ's terms,
hinder, or discourage thee, from making a present close with Christ. Say not,
his Yoke is too heavy his Cross is too grievous for me to bear; or my sins are
too great for him to bear. Set the Throne against the Yoke, the Crown against
the Cross, infinite Merit and Mercy, against mighty sins; and go unto Jesus,
cast thy self on his blood, and bowels, and put thy self under his Yoke and
Scepter. If he will give Life to thee, be content that he give Laws to thee:
and as ever thou expectest to live by him, be resolved to live to him, and no
longer to thy self. Go to Jesus, and when thou go, take with these two
Scriptures,* Matthew. 11. 28. Come unto me, all ye that are weary, and heavy
laden, and I will give you rest; Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, and
you shall find rest unto your Souls. Joh. 6. 37. Him that comes unto me, I
will in no wise cast out.

7. Fall close to Duties, and keep close to Ordinances.

1. Let secret, and Family Prayer be thy daily exercise. Count not thy self a
Christian, till thou give thy self to prayer.

2. Let not reading the Word, Catechizing, etc. be strangers in thy house.

3. Prize, improve, and sanctify Sabbaths; The Lord on those days comes down
upon eis Mount, to meet thy Soul, to commune with thee, to bless thee, to feed
thee, and fill thee with whatsoever thy Soul desires or wants. Get thee up
to meet thy God: But remember when thou go, leave thy stuff behind thee.

4. View often, and take an account of thy self, of the in-come and success of
all thy Duties: What is all my praying, reading, hearing, etc. come to? What is
brought forth? Is the work done for which all these are? Are my Sins and my
Soul parted? Are my Companions in sin abandoned? Is Christ and my Soul united?
Beware you never make Praying, and Hearing, to serve you [instead] of
Believing, and Repenting. But to help you on to it.

Remember these Seven Words when I am gone: 1. Get a deep Sense of thy dreadful
state. 2. Abandon presently every sin. 3. Let not thy hope in Christ lessen thy
fear of sin. 4. Shake off every sinful Companion. 5. Baffle not Conscience once
more. 6. Make a present Close with Christ. 7. Fall close to Duties, and keep
close to Ordinances.


These things do, and the God of Peace shall be with you: But remember, There Is
no peace, says my God, to the wicked.

2. There are others that are near the Kingdom of God. Thou art not far from
the Kingdom of God. There are some that are like Ephraim, Hosea 7. 8. cakes
half baked; like Agrippa, almost Christians; Acts 26. 29. Almost thou
perswadest me to be a Christian; (...), Thou have brought me within a little of
Christianity. They are come to the threshold of saving Faith; within a step of
sincere godliness. They have been professing, and praying, and hoping, and
wishing themselves in, and yet are short of it. They have been enlightened, in
the knowledge of Christ; have tasted of the heavenly gift; have felt something
of the sweetness of Christ; have been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, of many
excellent and useful gifts; have tasted of the good Word of God, and the powers
of the World to come. They have set out after Christ, have left the blind and
profane World, much behind them; have escaped much of the pollutions of this
world; left many sins, taken up with many duties, have a name among the Saints,
have suffered many things for the Name of Christ; and notwithstanding all this,
here they stick, they cannot give up themselves fully to Christ; something or
other, either the World, or their Companions, or their pleasures, or their
ease, or their sloth, has such hold on them, that they cannot, unreservedly,
resolvedly, give themselves up to the dominion of Jesus Christ; nay, it may be,
they cannot tell w^y, yet they cannot do it. Though they can say, I would be,
yet they cannot say, I will be, the Lord's. these are near the Kingdom of God;
but yet short of it. He that cannot say, I will be, can less say, I am, the
Lord's.

But here I must distinguish of two sorts, of almost Christians.

1. There are some that have reached to almost* and are still reaching
forwards; the state of such is hope^ul, though it be not safe. Oh that we could
see more such almost Christians!

2. There are others that have reached to, and rest in almost; who mistaking
almost, for altogether, do there take up their stand. These are far from the
Kingdom of God.

Brethren, I much fear, that among the number of Professors, there are more of
these almost Christians, than we are aware of: Oh it would make our hearts
shake to consider, how far many go, to what degree, of resignation, resolution,
affection, action, submission to sufferings, they attain; and yet fall off at
last, and thereby show they were still short of Christ; They went out from us,
because they were not of us.

I particularly pity many of the more sober Gentry, who have a good will to
Religion, and a fair respect for the Professors of it; countenancing holiness,
doing many worthy things for the Name and Servants of God; refraining from the
vitiousness, and vanity, of many of their Rank and Quality; who yet dwelling in
Temptations, being entangled in carnal correspondencies, entertained with an
affluence of carnal delights and pleasures; and finding hereby a strict
self-denying and mortified life, to be of greater difficulty to them, than to
men of lower rank, are apt to think it not of such necessity; who may possibly
upon a narrow enquiry discern, after all their good hopes of themselves, and
the great opinions of others concerning them, that they are yet short of that
simplicity, and godly sincerity, which alone will prove them Christians indeed.

Blessed be God, there are amongst us such, those who have broken through all
temptations; have adventured upon the disobliging all the World; have hid down
their honors, pleasures, friends, and all their carnal interests whatsoever,
at the feet of Christ; and preferring a close Communion with God, the peace of
a good Conscience, the joys of Religion, yea the very reproach of Christ:
above all their worldly Honors, and fleshly pleasures, have given themselves
up to the power of the Gospel, and an exemplary Spiritual and Heavenly life.
But it is to be feared, least there be also such, who have deservedly gained
great respect among the Saints, and gone far along with them, who yet are come
but to the threshold of Christianity; and being afraid to put in, there they
are in danger to perish everlastingly. Quod fere fit non fit. He that is, but
almost saved, is damned for altogether.

Oh Friends, what do ye mean? Will you loose all the ground you have gotten,
all the things you have wrought? shall all your sufferings for the name of
Christ be lost, and in vain? after you have tasted the bitterness of the Cross,
will you not go one step farther, and take the joys of the Cross? Is the work
of Regeneration brought to the Birth, and shall it at last miscarry, and prove
an abortion? would one step more land your Souls in the Kingdom of God, are you
gotten so near a shore, and will you perish in the Harbor? are you gotten off
from the Tents of the Edomites, and gotten even to the Borders of Canaan, and
will you not enter? Are you gotten to Pisgah, and have a view of the Land of
Promise, and see that it is a good Land? are you come so near, a^ to see, that
true holiness is such a beautiful State, such a blessed State, and do you wish
your selves in, and will you yet die on the other side Jordan? you have prayed,
put on; a little more prayer may do it: you have labored, and reasoned with,
and persuaded your hearts, give not over, a little more labor may prevail. Oh
that I knew what to say more, that might bring you on. Oh that the Lord would
yet put one word or other in my mouth, that might overcome you! that I might
shoot one Arrow more, that might strike home, use one Argument more, that might
be cogent, and gain your full consent to Christ; that I might see you safely
landed ere I be parted from you. Oh think, think what a dreadful disappointment
this will be for you, that are come so near to godliness, as that you verily
think you have attained it; if after all the joys, pleasures and hopes, the
little Religion you have had, has fed you withal; you should at last have a
TEKEL written for your doom; and hear that cutting word pronounced upon you.
Thou art weighed in the balance* and art found wanting. With you also would I
leave a few words.

1. Loose not both Worlds, this World thou have lost already, by leaving them
so much behind thee; loose not that which is before, for want of coming on a
little farther: think not of hanging always betwixt Heaven and Hell; In the
other World there is no middle, either go back, or come on, turn thee to the
right hand or to the left.

2. Mistake not all most, for altogether, such a mistake may be mortal. Do
not too easily conclude, thou have already attained; if thou take something
of Christianity to be all, thy all is nothing. It Is a wonderful thing, to see
how easily men satisfy themselves in a matter of such weight and intric^cy.
Thine heart is deceitful, try it thoroughly before thou trust it. One g^ain too
light, and thou art undone. God, Glory, Soul, Eternity, all lie a^ stake; one
tittle short of sincerity, and all lost. Be jealous of thy self, never give
over suspecting thy State, till thou have put it past suspicion: Conclude not,
till thou have thoroughly disputed the case, give not over the dispute, till
the matter be no longer disputable. Can thou be too sure? the least mistake
is as wide as Heaven and Hell; the bottomless Gulf reaches home to the
threshold of glory; thy tantum non, will be as much as the Devil looks for,
only not in, though never so near, will be thy eternal perdition.

3. Beware that this thought, one time or other, I shall have more power,
slacken not thy present care and labor. Let not thy hopes undo thee. Lose not
a present opportunity, in hopes of future ability. Labor each day, to bring
the matter to a present Issue; and that with no less earnestness, than if this
day were to give a final determination; and thou were sure, that thou were
just come, to thy now or never.

4. Let not a small matter part Christ and thee, Heaven may not cost thee half
so much more, as it has cost thee already. Art thou come within one penny of
thy Lords price, and shall that break the bargain?

5. Let not thy Oil thou have gotten, serve only for fuel for thy fire. Let
not thy common grace thou have obtained here, be of no other use, but to add to
thy confusion hereafter: every beam of light that has shined to thee here,
will add to the horror of thine everlasting darkness. Every drop of Honey thou
have tasted in Religion, will be thy Gall and Wormwood, in the day of thy
condemnation. Be not more miserable hereafter, for that thou have been less
wicked here; the remembrance how fair thou were once for Glory, will be one of
the sharpest Teeth of thine everlasting Worm.

6. Lastly, Be all or nothing; come up hither, or get thee Down to thy lot;
particularly, 1. Be all unto Christ. 2. Let Christ be all to thee. 3. Let all
Christ be accepted, and improved by thee.


1. Be all unto Christ; have none to please but Christ, and for Christ; h^ve
nothing to seek but Christ, and for Christ; resolve against Reserves and
limits; give up all, and keep back nothing; say not, thus much I can spare, and
no more; hitherto I will go, and no farther. Divide not thy self, thy love, thy
care, thy aims betwixt Christ, and any thing else. Let thy whole Soul run in
one Channel. Rest not short of a full resignation, and when thou have resigned,
repent not.

2. Let Christ be all to thee; say not, I must have an Estate too, my Friends
too, my pleasures and my ease too; let Christ be enough, and all to thee;
Father, Mother, House, Lands, Portion; say concerning all thou have else, Be
thou mine Lord, and let these go their way.

3. Let all of Christ be accepted and improved by thee. Divide not thy self,
and divide not Christ; leave not any thing of thy self, for any but Christ,
refuse not any thing of Christ, for thy self. Think not thy all, too much for
thee to give, nor Christ's all, too much for thee to embrace. Thy half will not
satisfy Christ, nor will half of Christ suffice thee. Thou must give and have,
and therefore resolve to give and take, all or none. Let all Christ be
accepted, and improved by thee.

1. The merit of his blood. 2. The light and Authority of his Law. 3. The power
of his Spirit.
1. Accept the merit of his blood; renounce thine own, and rely on his
righteousness; as God has, so do thou, lay on him, all thy iniquities. Think
not of Sanctification, without satisfaction. Think not to satisfy in the
least, by ought that thou can do, let that lie upon him. Judge thy self, but
seek to be justified alone through faith in his blood. Say unto the Lord, what
I owe to thee, put it upon his account; my Christ must answer for me.

2. Accept, and submit to the light and authority of his Law. Think not, he is
thy Priest, unless he be thy Prophet, and thy King: If he must answer for thee,
let him instruct thee, and be thou willing to learn of him; since he has
bought thee, let him govern thee; say not of any thing he requires, this is too
much to do, since he said not to thee, it is too much to die. Count not thy self
a Christian, whilst thou art unwilling to receive the utmost light, or to
submit to the utmost of thy duty; say not of any one thing, of all that Christ
requires, This I must have abated, and then I will be his.

3. Accept and exert the power of his Spirit, the Spirit of the Lord is a
Spirit of Power. The same Argument which the Apostle uses to prove himself a
Minister of Christ, is necessary to prove thee a Christian, 2 Cor* 13. 3, 4.
Since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me, which to you ward is not weak,
but is mighty in you. Though he was crucified through weakness, yet he lives
by the power of God; for we also are weak in him, but we shall live with him by
the power of God. (Ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me,) ye put me to
prove that I am a Minister of Christ; why, here is the proof of it, My preaching
has not been weak, but mighty in you; It has been followed and attested, by
the power of Christ, which has wrought mightily in you; as weak as we are, yet
the power of Christ has been manifested and magnified in us. Do thou seek a
proof of thy Christianity? why, here must be the proof, that though thou art
weak of thy self, yet thou live in the power of God, which is mighty in thee.
Though thou can do nothing of thy self, yet thou art able to do all things
through Christ which strengthens thee.

Thou say thou art willing, but thou art weak; thou desire to be, and to
do, what God would have thee, but thou can not perform.

This may comfort and support thee much, under thy failings and miscarriages in
some particular duties; but if this be thy case in ordinary, in the main of thy
life; that to will is all thou have, thou art not a Christian. He that has not
the Spirit of Christ, is none of his. And he that has the Spirit of Christ, it
is in him as the living power of God, actually carrying him on in an holy life.
Ezekiel. 36. 27. I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
Statutes; and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them.

I will not only command, persuade, incline you, but [cause] you. It shall be
done, my Spirit shall bring you on, and help you through. Ye [ shall] keep my
Statutes, and do them. Where ever the Spirit of God has breathed in the life
of Grace, there are more than breathings out after a gracious life. Sincere
grace has more in it, than wishings and wouldings, than Attempts and
Overtures; Life is a power to act. Phil. 2. 12, 13. Work out your own
Salvation, for it is God that works in you, to will and to do. Where ever God
works the (...) velle, he works also the (...) operari. Where ever God works
[in] he gives us a power to work [out] the Works of Christianity. Oh rest not,
till thou find thy self in^ued with this power from on high, and enabled to go
through with thy work: They are not thy Attempts, but thy Atchievments: They
are not thy Offers at an Holy Life, but thy acting it, that must prove thee a
Christian; He that does Righteousness, is Righteous.

Be it thus with thee; be all to Christ, let Christ be all to thee; let all
Christ be accepted and improved by thee; heartily accept the merit of Christ's
Righteousness, submit to the Light and Authority of his Law; get thy self
possessed with, and live in the power of his Spirit: Be it thus with thee, come
up hither, and then thou art safe: Thy almost is now come to altogether; and if
I must ^ow leave thee, thou will be the better able to spare me: These things
do, and the God of Peace shall be with thee. Thou art gotten into Sanctuary;
and now whatever Tossings and Tumblings, whatsoever unpleasing or afflicting
Changes* may be thy Lot in this World, thou may sing that Requie^^ to thy
self, Return unto thy rest, O my Soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with
thee: Go thy way, eat thy Bread with joy, and drink thy Wine with a merry
heart, for God now accepts thee.

Though thou walk through the shadow of Death, thou may now sit thee down
under the shadow of thy Lord, with great delight, and with great security,
whose Fruit shall be ever sweet to thy Taste: Though thou dwell in Mesech,
and have thy Habitation among the Tents of Kedar, yet thou may lay thee down
in peace, and take thy rest, for the* Lord does, the Lord will make thee to
dwell in safety.

2. To the Godly.

Happy Souls, The God of Peace is with you, all things shall work for good to
you; only that he may continue with you, continue you with him, in the
obedience of that Gospel, to which you have delivered up your selves.

My Exhortation to you shall be.

1. General; Respecting the whole course of your Lives. 2. Particular;
Respecting your daily Walk.
My general Exhortation shall be bottomed on that of the Apostle, Phil. 1. 27,
28. Let your Conversation be, as it becomes the Gospel of Christ; that
whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear of your Affairs, that
you stand fast in one Spirit, with one Mind, striving together for the Faith of
the Gospel. In nothing terrified by your Adversaries, which is to them an
evident taken of Perdition, but to you of Salvation, and that of God.

[Let your Conversation be as it becomes the Gospel] Walk worthy of the
Gospel; let your lives be suitable, and answerable to the Holy Gospel which you
profess.

1. Let your lives answer the ends of the Gospel, the ex^ltation of the Name,
and glorious Grace of God in Christ; live an humble, self-denying, selfabasing;
this is a Christ exalting life.

2. Let your Lives answer the Dignities, and Honors the Gospel invests you
with; You are the children of God, the Heirs of Glory, the Spouse of Christ,
the Bride, the Lambs Wife: You are a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a
peculiar people; know your privileges, and do not live below your selves;
defile not your glory, by stooping to a Carnal and Earthly Life: a Jewel is not
more unbecoming a Swines snout, than fleshly Husks a Saints Palate: It Is below
you, who are a peculiar people to your God, to live in common with the men of
this World: humble your selves, into the least of Saints, but do not humble
your selves into Bruits: Live in the Spirit, converse with God, be dealing for
Glory, Honor, and Immortality.

3. Let your Lives answer the Names, which the Gospel puts upon you; Doves,
Lambs, Lillies; be harmless, peaceable, gentle, beautiful, fragrant, sending
forth a precious savor in the World.

4. Let your Lives answer the Riches, the Reward, the Crown, the Kingdom, which
the Gospel sets before you.

Live a contented life, be satisfied, be well pleased, with what you have here,
be it little or much; disgrace not your portion, the Gospel allots you, as if
it were a poor insufficient portion: Let your Souls say, How small an handful
soever you have of this Earth, it is enough, Christ is mine: A discontented
Christian says, Christ is not enough, Heaven is not enough: Let the
Contentation of thy Spirit, declare before the World, that the Lines are fallen
to thee in a pleasant place, and that thou have a goodly Heritage: Do not put
this Scorn upon God, and Glory, that thou must be beholding to the Devil, to
mend thy portion.

Christian, Either thou art within the Promise, or a stranger from it: Either
thou have the God of Peace with thee, or not: If not, me thinks thou should
find other matter to take up thy Thoughts, and not have leisure to perplex thy
self with every ^^ivial want; that thy meat, or thy drink, or thine house, or
the carriage of thy Friends toward thee, are not according to thy mind; thy
Soul, thy Soul man, thy life is in danger. Oh what an Eternity art thou like to
have of it? Can thou want a God, a Christ, an Heaven, and thine Heart never
stir at it? And is the dissatisfaction of thy vain mind or appetite such a
Burden? Is the Devil in thine heart, and it never moves thee? and shall an ill
Neighbor be a vexation to thee? Can thou feel a Feather, when thou have a
Talent upon thee? The Curse, the Curse of God is upon thee: I cannot wonder
[thou] should be discontent; but me thinks these small matters, by a man in
thy case, should not be minded.

If Christ and the Promise be thine, is not that enough? Are not all things
enough? God is all things: He that has the Son, has not only, with him, but
in him, all things: Are all things nothing with thee?

What would thou have more than all? The Heathens acknowledged, That Virtue
is sufficient. It was a Maxim, among the Ancient Philosophers, (...), Virtue
is self-sufficient: A virtuous man has no need to be beholding either to
Friends or Fortune: He has enough in himself. The Apostle tells us, That
Godliness, (...), with its self sufficiency, is great Gain, 1 Timothy 6. 6.
Solomon tells us, Prove. 14. 14. A good man is satisfied from himself. He has
that within him, out of which his satisfaction grows. A Christian has the
whole Gospel within him, He has Christ, the Promise, the Everlasting God;
Heaven, Glory, within him: As rich as he is, he may truly say, Omnia mea mecum
porto. He carries his [All] in his Heart, and can thence get out a Living, a
Sufficiency, for all Times, Cases, and Wants: Cast him out naked, out of his
Habitation, out of his Country, yet he carries all with him, he leaves not an
Hoof behind him.

Christians, leave it to the Poor of the Earth, to carnal men, (the richest of
them is poor enough) leave it to them to be discontent: A carnal man has so
many to be beholding to, to patch up his contentment, that it is no wonder he
falls short of it; the Sun, the Clouds, his Fields, his Folds, his Friends, his
Enemies, his Honors, his pleasures, his meat, his drink, his house, his money,
yea the Devil and all, and his Lusts, every Creature must come in with their
part, to contribute to his contentment: if but one thing fails him, there is
something wanting to make it up: Nay, if none fail, but they all do their best
to please him, yet all will not do, in the fullness of his sufficiency he is in
straits. When he has all he can have, his still hungring Heart cries out of
what it has, Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity. Leave it to these, Christians,
who have nothing but emptiness to fill their Souls withal, leave it to them to
be discontented. Will you lay the same imputation upon the God of Glory? The
Discontent of a Christian, is a kind of Blasphemy: it proclaims concerning God
also, and all the Glory of the Gospel: This also is Vanity; Vanity of Vanities,
all is vanity.

Christians, study your Riches more, count over your Treasures; dwell more in
your God, and his Gospel: Read over your Privileges, Promises, and Hopes; feed
more on that Bread of Life, drink more freely of those Living Springs, which
are broken forth to you: Prove more what Godliness has in it: Get out the
sweetness and the pleasure of it, (none in the World live such a voluptuous
Life, as he that lives most with God) get out the pleasure of Godliness* lie
more at the Breasts, suck harder; press the Clusters and the Wine, and Milk
will come; make the most of Religion, and you will have enough; never blame it
for empty, or unsatisfactory, while there is more to be h^d.

Gad not into other Pastures, ^un not from Flower to Flower, keep you Home: Let
not your God find you in another Field: If you keep with God, the less you have
of Creature-vanities, the more full will your Contentment be. Christian, Honor
thy God, and his Gospel, let his Breasts satisfy thee, and err thou always in
his Love. Let the World read the Gospel-sufficiency in thy Souls pleasure, and
satisfaction with it alone.

5. Let your Conversations answer the supports of the Gospel, and its succors.
Live a patient life; Jam. 5. 7. Be patient, brethren, unto the coming of the
Lord. Patience is a Grace suited to our present Gospel state. I may call it, a
Friend that is born for the day of adversity. If you are Christians, you have
need of Patience; and if you have Patience, you need no more. Jam. 1. 4. Let
Patience have her perfect work, that you may be entire, lacking nothing.

Patience, is a submitting, sedate, and calm frame of spirit, whereby a
Christian, from Gospel grounds, is born up under all his Troubles, and born
through all his Duties.

Betwixt Patience and Contentedness, there is this difference; Contentedness is
the quiet of the heart, and its satisfaction with its smallest portion of good
things. Patience is the quiet of the heart under the greatest pressure of evil
things.

A patient spirit is a submitting spirit; It Is heartily content that God should
have his Will. With whatsoever God is pleased, it will not be displeased. It Is
the Lord, let him do whatsoever seems good in his Eyes. What seems good in
God's eyes, shall not seem evil in mine.

It is a Calm and quiet spirit: It will not strive nor cry, nor lift up its
voice in the street; it can mourn, but it does not murmur; it can feel, but it
will not fret at the hand of God. A patient person is ever composmentis; has
the command and government of his spirit; keeps it sober, and in due order;
does not rave, and rage. Impatience is a kind of frenzy; such persons are
besides themselves. In our patience we possess, and by our impatience we lose
our Souls: we lose the rule and government of them, the peace and the use of
them. An impatient man is besides himself, both as a Man and as a Christian.

1. He is besides himself as a Man: Impatience turns Reason out of doors; and
for the Affections, they are all in an uproar, and will know no command or
government.

2. He is besides himself as a Christian; turned quite out of course: Duties,
Comforts, Experiences, Hopes, all are laid aside. Keep you quiet, keep the
peace in your heart, and you keep your heart.

In this calmness and quietness, it bears up under troubles. Patience has
Fortitude in it, it neither frets, nor faints, under all its ^ur^hens.
Christians [must] bear, and patient Christians [can] bear any thing that comes
on them. The proper exercise of patience, is enduring: he endures not that
suffers only, but that can bear what he suffers.

It bears through its Duties: The passion of a patient person does not hinder
his action. He holds his course, keeps on his way, whatever load he has in his
back. He (runs) with patience, the race which is set before him; he is not
discouraged nor diverted from his holy course by any suffering it costs him.

And indeed, Christian Patience stands not in a bare forced quiet, in a biting
in, or keeping down, our fretting aestuations, from venting themselves in word
or carriage, or in a sullen silence or stupidity; but in the maintaining such a
tranquillity of spirit, under all we suffer, as that we can still, both enjoy
and serve the Lord. He is a patient Christian, that is as much a Christian in a
storm, as in a calm; that can pray, believe, love, bless God, follow God, and
keep his way, when he smites, as when he smiles.

Lastly, in all this, a Christian is upheld and carried on, from Gospel
grounds. It Is not a natural hardiness apathy, it is not the spirit of a man
that does sustain his infirmities; it is upon the everlasting Gospel that he
stands.

There are three Things especially, that bear him through. His viewing, The
Hand of the Lord. The End of the Lord. The Help of the Lord.


1. He sees the Hand of the Lord in all that befalls him: Whence was David's
patience? Psalm. 39. 9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou Lord
did it. Whence was Elie's patience? 1 Samuel 3. It is the Lord, let him do what
seems him good. Whence was Job's patience? Job 1. 21. The Lord has given, the
Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord. By the way Note, That a
godly man is not only patient under his afflictions, but thankful. He is not
only thankful for Mercies, but for Chastisements. It Is not only, the Lord has
given, blessed be his Name; the Lord has built me up, the Lord has filled me,
the Lord has hedged me, blessed be his Name: but also, the Lord has taken
away, the Lord has humbled me, broken me, undone me, left me naked, left me
nothing, blessed be the Name of the Lord. This by the way.

2. He sees the End of the Lord; that God intends his good by all that comes
upon him. He knows that all things, and therefore this which is upon him,
whatever it be, shall work to him for good.

3. He feels the Help of the Lord. When the hand of the Lord is upon him, he
feels also the hand of the Lord under him: underneath the everlasting arms,
Deuteronomy. 32. 27.

The Gospel, as it has allotted him many Tribulations, so it has allowed him
mighty Supports. A mighty God, who is the rock of ages, Isa. 26. a merciful
high Priest, who being tempted himself, is able also to succor those that are
tempted, Heb. 2. 18. precious Promises, 2 Pet. 1. gracious experiences, Romans 5.
4. patience works experience. This last support, [experience] has all the
rest in it. Experience is the whole Gospel proved. A patient, experienced
Christian, has proved all things, what they are; has proved the World, and
what it is, and the worst it can do: has proved the Word, and what there is in
it: has proved what God is, what Christ is, what grace, and peace, and a good
Conscience are: Tribulation often takes away God, and his Gospel; and we never
so well prove what God is, as when we have him alone; what grace is, what a
good Conscience is, as when we have nothing else left us. Our Religion never
shows so much what is in it, as when it is most put to it. When the Adversary
has gotten the greatest advantage of us; of the Sun, of the Wind, of the
Ground; when he presses with most violence, with most fury upon us, then we
best know, what the weapons of our Warfare are. The comforts and supports of
Religion are not known, either of what strength, or of what sweetness they are,
till they are thus proved. Hezekiah had never such a taste of his integrity, as
when he received the Message of death. Stephen had never such a sight of
Heaven, as through a storm of stones, Christ is never so sweet in a Prison.
When God meets his Saints in a Wilderness, then he speaks comfortably to them.
A patient Christian has more or less experience of all this; and hence is he
supported, keps quiet under all his sufferings, and carried with courage on his
way.

Be patient therefore Brethren unto the coming of the Lord. You have need of
patience, and no excuse for your impatience. The sufferings of the Gospel call
for patience; and the supports of the Gospel will condemn your impatience. If
you will be godly, count upon it that you have a great fight of afflictions to
endure. Venture not into the fight without your armor: An impatient Creature
is a naked Soldier; How easily will Satan destroy, whom he has once
disarmed. The more you [can] the less you [shall] suffer. Secure your spirit,
and you save your self from harm. There Is no Dart shall hurt you, that does not
hit your heart. Keep your heart whole, and the Devil loses all his shot. Be
patient, and you possess your Souls; keep your Souls, and the Enemy loses the
day.

Christians, it is of great consequence to you, to be of a patient spirit, and
it is a great Duty; there is much more in it, than every eye observes.

When I persuade you to Patience; know, that it is no small thing that I am
persuading you to: It Is no less than, 1. To the whole of Christianity. 2. To
the height of Christianity.


1. To the whole of Christianity: To be truly Patient, has as much in it, as
to be a Christian: To be ho^y, humble, meek, mortified, self-denying, crucified
to the World, heavenly minded; all this you must be, or you cannot be patient.
Patient and proud? patient and peevish? patient and unmortified,
earthly-minded, a self-seeker? This is as great a contradiction, as to be proud
and humble, fleshly and spiritual, earthly and heavenly, a Christian and no
Christian. If ever you will be possessours of this grace, you must be partakers
of all grace. Get a believing, broken, self-denying heart; get your spirits
furnished with the love of Christ, the hope of the Gospel, the contempt of the
World; live above in the other World: Let Christ, Glory, Honor, Immortality,
be the portion of your Souls, and the pleasure of your lives, if ever you would
be truly patient.

2. To Christianity in the height of it. In pressing you to Patience, I am
herein pressing you to get Assurance. Without assurance though patience be
possible, yet you will find it both difficult, and very impe^fect.

What Patience, when I question whether my sins be forgiven? whether God be
reconciled, and be not dealing with me as an enemy? What Patience, when I
doubt, whether my afflictions be not the pension of a bastard, rather than the
portion of a son? when I am not sure, but my present sufferings are sent to
carry me down to eternal sufferings? I am in misery and perpetual torments:
never a day without its evils; I can see no end of it, nor it may be never
shall; this or worse may last for ever. Oh if I were sure it would be well at
last, I could be quiet; but for ought I know, the Furnace I am in, may be the
very mouth of Hell: The diseases, the wounds I am under, may be sent to let out
my Soul into everl^sting burnings; how can I be patient under such doubts and
fears? Make God sure, Christian, make Heaven sure once* and then thou may
set thine Heart at rest; then thou may almost as easily exercise, as thine
Enemies find thee Exercise of, thy patience.

Christians, if you will be patient, you must be painful: give diligence; be
diligent in making your Calling and Election sure: be diligent in duty, be
vigilant against iniquity: If you will be patient, be impatient of sin, and you
will be patient of sorrow; make sin sure; get it slain by the cross, and buried
in the grave of your Lord, sealing the stone, and setting a watch: have nothing
to conflict with, in the day of your affliction, but your affliction: beware of
carrying guilt with you up upon the Cross; Let* not the gall of guilt be
mingled with the vinegar of affliction: A mortified spirit will deaden all our
pain, and a pure Conscience will bear all our burdens.

Till this be done, I must tell you, you will find suffering to be hard
service. It Is an easy matter to talk of the sufferings of the Gospel, and to
boast great things aforehand; as you know who did once, and what came of it;
Though I die with thee, I will never deny thee. But when it comes to the pinch,
when Troubles come upon us, when the hand of the Lord touches us, and touches
where it is most tender; brings those calamities on us, which are most contrary
to us, strips us of those comforts which are most dear to us, takes away all
from us, and leaves us naked; when we feel the smart of the rod, when every
stroke fetches blood; when the feet are hurt in the Stocks, and the Iron enters
into the Soul; when the vinegar and the gall comes, when the thorns and the
nails of the Cross are struck in; when shame and reproach, when scorn and
contempt, when hunger and thirst, when cold and nakedness, when bodily torment
and pain, are all measured to you for your portion, and mingled in your cup: If
ever God should call you out, to take your part with that Cloud of Witnesses,
Heb. 11. who were tortured, had trialls of cruel mockings and scourgings, of
bonds and imprisonment; who were stoned, were sawn asunder, were tempted, were
slain with the Sword; wandering about in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, being
destiture, afflicted and tormented; wandering in deserts and mountains, in dens
and caves of the earth: If ever this should be your case, then you will know
how much there is in Christian Patience; and how necessary self-denial,
mortification, living in the faith, and fellowship of God, and the power of his
spirit, and assurance of his love, are to your patient possessing of your Souls.

Believe i^, Christians, the Gospel has not furnished us with such large
provision of Graces Comforts, Promises, Hopes, for nothing; you will find need
enough of them all. Such amazing astonishing trialls you may be called out to,
as nothing less, than the richest stock of Promises, the greatest treasure of
Experiences, the highest pitch of spiritual Graces, your greatest conquest over
Lust and the World, your living under the fullest influences of Divine Power,
and the clearest Sense of Divine Love, will furnish you with an enduring
spirit; nothing less will, but this will do it. Get Sin, and the World under,
make God sure, make the Promises sure; live in a daily conflict with Sin,
contempt of the World, and exercise of all Graces; Live in the obedience,
vision, and fruition of your God, and then you are ready for the Enemy. Let
your Sufferings be what they will, come when they will, your Souls are at
Anchor, and shall have a continual Calm within, how Tempestuous soever the
Weather be.

As a farther Encouragement, and Help to this great Duty, consider, that your
patient suffering will be, 1. Your witness to the Gospel. 2. Gods witness to
your Adoption. 3. The cure of your Corruption. 4. Your triumph over Temptation.
5. The improvement of your Sanctification. 6. The advance of your Glory.


1. Your patient suffering will be your witness to the Gospel* Who were that
cloud of Witnesses, mentioned Heb. 12. 1. but the suffering Saints; that Army
of Martyrs recorded Chap. 11. whose patience is set forth as a Pattern to those
that should come after: These are the Witnesses.

What was it by which they bare Witness, but by their patient suffering?

To what did they bear Witness, but to God and his Gospel?

What Witness did they bear? Why, That the Gospel is true: The sufferings of
the Saints, are their Seal to the Gospel: As he that believes, so much more,
he that suffers in Faith, has set to his Seal that God is true. In the Faith
and patience of the Saints, may be seen (as the Seal in the Wax) the prints and
impressions of the Truth, and Faithfulness of God. God has said, He will
uphold, he will not forsake them: and their patience shows, he does uphold, he
has not forsaken them. 2. That the Gospel is a Glorious Gospel: That God is a
good Master, that it is good being with Christ any where; That they are no
Losers by their Religion, but that it is Wages are above it is Work, and its pay
above its pain.

It were not possible, when they prove how much the Gospel costs them, but they
should be weary of it, and repent of their Faith, and renounce their
profession, if they did not find the Lord a good play master.

The Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 3. 3. that Christians are the Epistles of Christ,
or his Letters of Commendation to the World, in whom may be read his
Excellencies and Glory, and the incomparable advantages of his Service. And as
all Christians, so especially suffering Christians: The Character of Christ is
never so visible and legible, as when it is written in Blood. The Bowels, and
Bounty, and Kindness of God our Savior, never appeared in more Glory, than
upon [his] Cross; and there is no such lively Transcript of them, as upon [our]
Cross. On his Cross, his Blood; on our Cross, his Spirit, and the precious
grace and comforts of it, are most plentifully shed forth, 1 Pet. 4. 14. If ye
be reproached, that is, and endure it* the Spirit of Glory, and of God, rests
upon you. The Spirit and influences of a Crucified Jesus, do never shine forth
to such advantage, as in his Crucified Saints. Upon the patience of a Saint,
under the sufferings of Christ, he that runs may read, this written, I serve a
good Master. Our patient suffering is our witness to Christ and his Gospel.

Christian, when God sends thee to Calvary, he sends thee thither as a chosen
vessel, that thou should there bear his Name before the World. Art thou
impatient at this? What can thou not bear this honor thy God has laid upon
thee? Has God chosen thee, thee amongst all they Brethren, to do him this
honor, and will thou be angry, that he did not rather choose some other? 'Twas
an unworthy Answer, of a good Man, M^ses, when God sent him to Egypt, to appear
for him before Pharaoh, and to be the Deliverer of his People, Exodus 4. 13.
Send, I pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou will send. Send whom thou will,
any body but me. By our sinful shifting our selves of Trouble, or our
Murmurings under them, we say the like; Send whom thou will to witness for
thee, but let me go free: Let me have my ease, and my quiet, and my liberty,
and take this honor, who will for me. Unworthy Spirits! Oh me thinks,
Christians, we should rather step one before another; and when our Lord
demands, Who will go with me? Who will bear my Cross? Me thinks we should
readily answer; I will go; let me bear it Lord; and not grudge as we do, that
he puts us to it.

Our Impatience bears false witness against God, and his Gospel; what is the
voice or the meaning of Impatience, less than this?

Whatever is said in honor of the Gospel, what a blessedness, what an
ineffable advantage it is, to all that heartily own it; yet having proved it, I
find it even as much as nothing, by that all the costs and charges of it are
cast up: The Comforts of it will never balance them; set one against any
other, the bad against the good, the bitter against the sweet: Set one against
another, and I have made but a bad Bargain, by becoming a Christian. This is
the Voice of Impatience. Christian, Thou passest over thy Murmuring, as a light
Evil; as if thy pain might excuse they pettishness: As if it were, because it is
so common, a very small thing: But is it nothing to belly God, to bear false
Witness against his Gospel? Thy Repining at the Sufferings of Christ, is next
to Repenting that ever thou were a Christian.

Brethren, Let us do the Lord this Right, by the patience of our Spirits, to
confess before the World, That all the sufferings of this Life, are not worthy
to be compared to the Glory that shall be revealed; And looking unto Jesus, the
Author and Fi^^sher of our Faith; Let us learn of him, for the Joy that is set
before us, to endure the Cross, and despise the Shame: That we may sit down at
his, as he is set down at the Right Hand of the Throne of God.

Secondly, Your patient suffering, will be God's Witness to your Adoption, Heb.
12. 7. If ye endure chastening, God deals with you as with Sons: The LORD
does not use to deal so with strangers.

Afflictions are Gods Family Discipline. Yet mark, it is not, if the suffering
alone will not prove our Sonship, (the Rod is for the fools back, as well as
the child's;) but patient suffering will, for

1. Patient suffering is it self, an evidence of our adoption: it is the mark
of the Lord Jesus upon us. If thou have both the same lot, and the same spirit,
that was upon Christ, there is thy Lords mark upon thee, whereby he marks thee
out for one of his own. Men had need of other marks to prove them Christians,
than what the Rod has made on their backs; it is our quiet submitting to it,
and that upon Gospel grounds, as has been before showed, that must do it, and
this will be evidence enough. None but a Son will thus submit.

2. The suffering state of Christians, is ordinarily attended with other
evidences. Sufferings will set patience on work, and patience will set every
other grace on work. Whatsoever it be, that finds work for patience, will
therein find work for faith, and love, and hope, and self-denial. Christians
never appear so much believers, so humble, so mortified, as under the Cross. If
there be any faith, or love, or hope in the heart, 'twill appear in the day of
adversity. If there be any fire under the ashes, throw on water, and then you
shall hear it, when, it may be before, you could see none there. As Solomon
says, folly, so we may say, wisdom, grace is bound up in the heart of a child,
but the rod of correction will fetch it out. We seldom know, either how bad, or
how good our hearts are, till they are thus proved; This I did to prove thee,
and to know what was in thine heart.

Besides, this is the season, when ordinarily there are most plentiful
illapses, and incoms from above. God seldom sends such Tokens of his love, as
to his Children in prison. The light of his Countenance he often reserves for
their darkest estate, he sets to his Seal, when the Wax is on fire. There have
been Christians, that would never believe that they were such, till God has
told it them at the stake; the highest joys, the fullest sense of everlasting
kindness, have been most ordinarily the portion of Gods Martyrs. When Hell is
let loose upon them, then Heaven is most open. Many Christians have met with
such refreshings in their bonds, that their enlargement has been their Prison.

If this be so Christians, who would fear sufferings? who would not be patient?
would it comfort you, to know that God is your Father? Be patient, and you
shall know it. What would you not bear, so you might be sure you are the Lords?
It may be you have been held under doubt and fears, and sad uncertainties,
hitherto all your days; you have gone about from duty to duty, from Ordinance
to Ordinance, from Christian to Christian, enquiring, and mourning, and
complaining, and crying out. Oh if I were sure that Christ were mine; that my
faith, and my love, and my hope, and my obedience were sound, and sincere, such
as would prove my adoption, then I could be quiet: Why, if ever GOD calls thee
to Sufferings, follow him cheerfully: He calls thee out, to prove to thee, that
thou love him: Fear not to go up with him on the Cross, Assu^ance is a Fruit,
that most ordinarily grows on that Tree.

Let hypocrites only fear sufferings, 'twill be sad indeed to them; there is
many a self-deceiving Professor, that never suspected himself to be an
hypocrite, till persecution made him an Apostate: that is a woeful case, to have
Sufferings come upon him for the Gospel's sake, only to tell him, That he has
no part in Christ nor his Gospel. Let hypocrites be afraid and unquiet, but let
Saints be patient. The same trialls which will prove them bastards, will prove
you sons.

3. Your patient suffering is the cure of your Corruption. Sufferings are our
medicine for corruption, and patience our cure: To what degree of patience a
Christian has attained; that degree of power has he gotten over iniquity.
Till lust be conquered, there is no patience: If there be but one unmortified
corruption remaining, and an affliction comes and grates upon that, this will
provoke; there is no bearing it. Whence is impatience, but from this, for the
most part, that we cannot bear any violence that is offered to lust? What is
Patience, but this, that we can bear that pain, that Lust, when pinched, will
put us to? quietly to suffer, our pride, our envy, our passion, our sensual
appetities, to be cut short of what would gratify them; and freely to leave
them under that which comes to kill and crucify them; to be able to want that
fuel that feeds, and endure that water that does quench these fires; This is
Patience. When our Pride is stripped of its ornaments, our appetites deprived of
their delicates, our covetousness of its substance, our flesh of its ^ase; and
we either feel no smart, or can bear the smart of it, then we are Patient. And
when we can thus leave our Corruptions, to whatever sufferings come upon them,
without taking part with them in their sufferings; then lust is conquered. Lust
no longer lives nor maintains its power and interest in us, than whilst, in
all its afflictions, we are afflicted; when we feel its sufferings as our
sufferings, its disappointments and dissatisfactions as our own, and fly out
against whatsoever falls upon it, as if it fell upon our Souls. When we can
say, it is my passion that suffers, but not I; it is my Covetousness that
suffers, my Pride that suffers, but not I; and let them suffer (for me), let
them be pinched, and pained, and starved, and die; none of all this shall move
me: nay, herein I do and I will rejoice: There Is patience. Patience is Lust
conquered.

Christians, you complain of Corruption, you tell one another sad stories, what
a Burden, what a bondage it is you are under, whilst Lust has such power in
you; what Briars and Thorns, what plagues and stings they are in your hearts!
You pray, and you mourn, and groan, and sigh in your selves, waiting for your
redemption from this bondage and misery. Oh for an humble heart; oh for a
broken mortified spirit! oh this earthliness, this envy, this peevishness, this
slothfulness^ I am weary of my life because of these daughters of Heth.
Wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from this body of death? Why,
would you be delivered?

Be patient under Afflictions; they are the Executioners sent from God to slay
your Enemies, the M^dicines sent from you^ Physician to cure your Diseases:
Never quarrel with Affliction, unless you Resolve to be friend Corruption.
What, will you be so foolish, as not to be patient of your Disease, nor your
Remedy; either bear the Cross, or else never make your selves believe, but you
can bear your sins well enough? Whatever your Complaints are, it is a sign they
come not very deep; It Is an Argument, that sin sits light, where the cross
lies so unsupportably heavy.

4. Your patient suffering, will be your Triumph over Temptation: A patient
Christian is a Conqueror over all the World* By this alone* naked Job overcame
the Devil: When Satan and his Instruments have persecuted you into patience,
they have therein brought their Neck^ under you^ Feet. This Brazen Wall will
make their short recoil on their own heads and hearts: Your Patience will be a
Shield to yours, and a Sword in your Enemies Souls. Be patient, and you have
won the field, and gotten the day. They will have no hope to drive you to sin*
where they see you can suffer. This was Job's Triumph, and shall be yours; In
all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. You may now make your boast
in the words of the Apostle, Romans 8. 35. Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? Shall Tribulation, or Distress, or Persecution, or Famine, or
Na^edness, or Peril, or Sword? In all these things, we are more than
Conquerours through him that loved us.

5. Your patient suffering, will be the improvement of your Sanctification,
Heb. 12. 9, 10. We have had Fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we
gave them Reverence: Shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of
Spirits and live? For they verily, for a few days, chasten'd us after their
pleasure; but he, for our profit, that we might be partakers of his Holiness.
The Fathers of our flesh correct us, and so does the Father of Spirits; they,
at their pleasure; he, for our profit. You Will say, it may be, for what profit?
What profit is there in our Blood? in our Bonds, in our Poverty? Why, there is
this profit; we are hereby made partakers of his Holiness. There Is seldom any
towardliness in a Child, till it be whipped into him. God's School of Affliction,
is a Nursery for Heaven: Were it not for his House of Correction, Sion would
quickly become as Sodom. Seldom does any come out thence, but their Complexion
shows where they have been. It Is with them that feel the Hand of the Lord, as
'twas with him that saw his Face; his Face did shine; his very spitting in
their Faces; does wash them the cleaner. Of all Saints, there are none raised
so high toward the Third Heaven, as those that have been in the Deep: No
Providence give such a lift to the Soul, as those that most humble.

Christians, What ever pains you travail under, believe it, the Births may be
such, as will make you forget your Sorrow.

I have heard of an Holy Woman, who used to compare her Afflictions to her
Children; They both put her to great pain in the bearing; but as she knew not
which of her Children to be without, notwithstanding her. Trouble in the
bringing forth, so neither which of her Afflictions she could have wanted,
notwithstand the Sorrow they put her to in the bearing, Heb. 12. 11. No
chastning for the present is joyous, but grievous; but afterward it yields
the peaceable Fruit of Righteousness, to them that are exercised thereby.

Oh when you see the Fruit, where then will your Sorrow be? Joh. 16. 21. A
Woman when she is in Travail has Sorrow, because her hour is come; bue as soon
as she is delivered of the Child, she remembers no more the anguish, for joy
that a Man-child is born into the World.

If the Joy of the Birth will make you forget, why should not the hope of the
Birth make you to bear the pain?

Beloved, Would you bring forth Fruit unto God, and will you not bear the
Plough and the Harrow? Will you expect an Harvest, and yet must God let you lie
Fallow, and still sow among Thorns? Let me ask you, and answer deliberately:
Would you be more holy than you are, more fruitful than you are, or would you
not? If you would not, you are no Christian; Si dixeris sufficit, defecisti: If
you would, is that Desire conditional? You would increase, so it co^^ you not
overmuch labor and pain; That desire comes to just so much, as no desire at
all: Or is your desire of an increase, absolute? Would you be more holy,
whatever it cost you: Do you so prize, and love an holy, and fruitful life,
that you are heartily content, that God should take his own course with you,
should take any course that is needful, to bring you on to it? Can you freely
say, Oh Lord, I am weary of this Tri^ling, I am weary of this dead and barren
life; Lord quicken me, Lord enlarge me, Lord perfect thy work, and fulfill in
me all thy good pleasure of thy* Will: So thou will but hear me in this thing,
I freely put it into thy hand, to take thine own way, and use thine own means.
Use the Word, or the Rod. Command me, or chastise me, spare not this flesh for
all its crying, strip me of what thou will, inflict on me what thon wilt, throw
me whither thou please, let me not want the most bitter Pill that is needful,
any thing, any thing Lord; I hope I can be poor, if thou will have me so; I can
be in pain, in disgrace, if thou will have me: But I cannot be unholy, I cannot
bear it to be such a starveling in the sta^e of my Soul. Lord, for more
holiness, Lord for more life, and care, and zeal, and fruit, let me have it,
upon what terms thou please; only let me have it. Can you say thus to the
Lord? I hope you can; what, and yet be displeased, if he take you at your word?
can you pray thus, and yet repine and murmur that the Lord hears your Prayers?
Christian, when the Lord comes to deal roughly with thee, entertain his
chastisements, whatever they be, with this thought. Now the Lord is about to
give me my hearts desire; now is my day of hope. This distress, this sorrow and
anguish, the Lord has brought upon me, may be come to perform that work which
I have longed to see: What the Word has been so long a doing, and yet is not
done. What Sacraments, Prayers, Mercies, have been so long a doing, and yet is
not done. Now is the time, this may be the means to bring it about. This bitter
Cup has health in the bottom; this Plough, and these deep furrows it makes,
look toward an Harvest. The work is doing that I have been so long a begging.
This froward, this senseless, this sloathful, this earthly, barren heart, which
I feel to day, I hope now, in a little time, I shall be rid of for ever. If
this be the meaning of my troubles, I hope it is, I will wait, I will wait for
this fruit, and if this be the fruit, oh welcome, welcome this blessed
Providence.

6. Your patient suffering shall be the advance of your glory. Remember what I
have told you already, Your suffering shall go into your reward; according to
your deep poverty, so shall your riches be: As 'twas said concerning Babylon,
Rev. 18. 7. How much she has glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so
much sorrow and torment give her. So shall it be said concerning you; How much
they have been abased, and afflicted for me, so much Joy and Glory give them.
As sure as the persecutings of the ungodly shall meet them in hell; so
certainly shall the Perfecutions of the Righteous, meet them before the Throne
of God. This shall be written on their everlasting Crowns, Here is the Patience
of the Saints.

By this time you see Christians, that a suffering state is not so formidable,
nor patience under it so impossible, nor your impatience so excusable, as your
hearts are apt to tell you. Suffering you cannot avoid, but you may abide them;
your carnal hearts will cry out, I cannot endure, and therefore whatever shift I
make, I must avoid them. The Gos^el tells you, You may endure; but (if you will
be Christians) you cannot avoid them. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus,
must suffer persecution. Well, since it is thus, Gird up the loins of your
Minds, and follow your Lord. Consider him that endured such contradictions of
Sinners, and be not weary, nor faint in your Minds: The Captain of your
Salvation was made perfect through sufferings; and (if ye will be patient) so
shall you his followers. Turn to your strong hold, ye Prisoners of hope; Prove
to the World that your Faith is no fancy, nor* your Rock a refuge of lies; that
your profession o^ holiness is not a mere talk, or vapor. Fear not to bear
yours, and thankfully accept your Lords Testimony; when the Lord has fulfilled
his sad Predictions, let your faith and patience seal to the fulfilling his
Promises. When^ver the hand of the Lord touches to the quick, and you feel in
earnest, that it is hot service to be a Christian; when your flesh begins to fly
in your face, and cries out against your Soul, either as Zipporah against
Moses, ^ bloody Husband have thou been to me; or as Job's Wife to him, Curse
God and die, chide it into silence; Thou speak as one of the foolish Women
speaks. If it will still kick, and fling, and groan out to thee, do thou
still retain thy integrity? hearken not to it; leave it to groan alone; as thy
flesh has left thy Soul to groan alone under sin; so let thy Soul leave thy
flesh to groan alone, under affliction. While thy Soul is quiet, there is the
glory of patience, though extremity of torment make thy flesh to roar; nay the
more the flesh roars, and the Soul yet keeps silence, the more patience.

If your fears affright you, and prophecy to you before hand, oh I shall never
be patient; if the foresight be so dreadful, what will the encounter be? yet be
not discouraged. You say you could be content to suffer, if you were sure you
could be patient; that is, you would venture into the water, if you had first
learned to swim; why when you are in, then you will learn, and not before.

Tribulation works patience, where it finds none; when you are in the
fight, you will find your Weapons; your very sufferings will learn you to bear.
It Is the flesh that flings, and frets, but by that it has been tamed in the
house of affliction, it will be quieter. Be jealous of your selves while you
will; let not fore-hand presumption, hinder fore-hand prep^ration. But whilst
you suspect your selves, distruct not your God; follow the Cloud of Witnesses,
and lean on the Rock of Ages; and when you are put hardest to it, let your Soul
take Sanctuary here, When my flesh and my heart fails me, God is the strength
of mine heart, and my portion for ever.

Lastly, As that wherein I shall take in most of these former particulars. Let
your lives answer that Spirit of holiness which the Gospel has powered forth
upon you; Let your lives be gracious and holy lives. Particularly,

1. Let the grace of the Gospel be visible, and conspicuous in your lives; show
forth the virtues* of him that has called you out of darkness, into his
mavelous light; Let your lives be the Image of that holy Doctrine, or the
holding forth of that word of life, which you have received. Admire that grace
of God, which has appeared to you; and let his Grace appear, and be admired in
you; let Grace appear in you, in its Purity, Power.


1. In its Purity, represent your God, and your Christ, and your Religion, in
its holiness, to the World. Teach the World to love, or at least, to reverence
holiness, by letting them see it before their eyes.

Holiness has such a glory in it, that it will command respect and reverence,
when it is clearly seen. Let your paths be pure; as God has separated you, so
separate your selves from the lusts of men, to the Law of your God. Keep your
selves upright in thee sight of God; keep your selves unspotted of the World;
if they will be spotting of you, let it be only with your beauty spots; your
Wisdom, Truth, Holiness, Mercy, Meekness, Patience; the Excellencies, and
Virtues of your god appearing upon you. Let this, that you are too pure, too
precise, too tender, too watchful, too fearful of sin, too zealous against sin,
be all they have to charge you with.

Keep thee from thine own Iniquities; say not so much as this, I am my
beloveds, and my beloved must be mine. Kick out thy Dalilahs. Thou must part
with thy darling, or thy God; Let there be no secret league, let there be no
peace, betwixt thy Soul and any Iniquity; to which thou may either steal out,
to delight thee, or turn in to hide thee; let no iniquity be thy leisure or
protection; if when thou art pursued by a persecuter, any sin, as Jacl to
Sisera, should call to thee, turn in hither, and thou may escape, remember
the nail, and the hammer; let no iniquity find a corner in thee to lodge in
quiet, that thou may not think to find a corner with it, where thou may
lodge in safety; say to all thy sinful delights, and sinful hopes, get you gone,
I will neither love you, nor trust you; however thy sin may please thee,
whatever it may promise thee, be sure thou will find it a sting in thy Soul,
and a stain upon thy glory.

Keep your selves from the sins of others, beware of the Leaven, of the proud
Pharisee, of the formal and vainglorious Scribe, of the extorting Publican, of
the debauched Prodigal, the ambitious Diotre^hes, the vir^lent Tertullus, the
backsliding Demas; beware of all Epidemical Leaven, the sickness of the Times
you may live in: Take heed lest you be dtawn away with the Errors of the
Wicked, and so swimming down the Stream, you fall from your own stedfastness:
Let sinners come up to you, go not you down to them.

Let them never say of any of you, The Man is become as one of us; our spot is
become the spot of his Children. Let your Lives be a rebuke to the ungodly
World, whilst you live as the Children of GOD, without rebuke in the midst of
the World.

2. In its Power; Let the power of Grace be seen, in its preserving its self,
in its Being, and vigorous Exercise, against all the Powers of Hell: The
st^ength of a Man is seen in this, that he can bear Wind and Weather; can live
any where, without impairing his Heal^h: The strength and metal of a Sword is
seen in this, that Iron will not turn its edge: True Grace is such a Plant,
that all the Weeds of the Field, and Thorns of the Forest, are not able to
choke: That will endure not only the Summers Heat, but the Winters Frosts.

Christians, prove your Grace to be a right Plant, the right Seed, the Seed of
God; let it bear up against all the World* Let not the Winds of Persecution put
out your Light; nor the Waters cast out of the Serpents Mou^h* quench your
Love, nor so much as cool your Zeal; especially take heed, that the D^agon's
Tail do not draw you down amongst the Falling Stars. You know what a World you
live in; You know the old Quarrel, betwixt the Seed of the Woman, and the
Serpent, both what it is, and that it has been kept on foot, through all Ages,
to this day.

You know the [White] at which Satan, and all his Archers, have been so long
Levelling, and so ho^ly discharging; The White Stone in your Breasts, the White
Robe on your Backs: A good Conscience, and a Holy Life, are the Mark, upon
which all the Fury of Earth and Hell is spent. Oh now prove your Grace to be
Grace, by its preserving it self against all this Violence. Let the Devil see
you will be Holy, whether he will or no: Let the evilworld see, you wily be
godly, do what they can; though they may make you poor, and destitute, and
naked, yet let them despair of ever making you ungodly: Let Grace hereby appear
to be Grace, and the mighty power of God in you: Which that it may do,

2. Let Grace ripen toward Glory; let not the scorching Sun wither your
Blossoms, but ripen your F^uit. If you would hold out, get you on: If you would
not have your something to come to just nothing, increase your Store. Let your
Spark grow up into a Flame, your Grain of Mustard Seed into a Tree. I tell you
a Myst^ry, The tallest Cedars on God's Mountain will best escape the Wind,
whilst the lower Shrubs are in greater danger of being overturned; if you
would stand sure, get you up on the higher ground.

Christians, Befool the Devil, let him see himself a Loser, by all his stirs he
makes against you. It is not the first time, that his cross Winds have proved
the most auspicious Gales, to put the Saints the sooner into Harbor. What he
has intended for a withering Storm, has often proved a fruitful Dew: Those
very Clouds he expected should rain down Snares, have often dropped down
Fatness: If you will go on, Hell shall hel^ you forward; the Devil's Rods on
your back, shall but help to mend your pace; his Thorns shall be Spurs in your
sides: By stripping you of your fleshly Delights, he shall but starve your
Lusts, his Friends; his Burdens shall be your Ballast, to make your Course
more steady: Christians are seldom in such a thriving and prosperous state, as
when they are just come out of the hands of a persecuting Devil.

Christians, grow in Grace; there is no Season* but may be a growing Season:
Grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: Let
that Living Spring, which is broken forth in you, be like the Waters of the
Sanctuary, Ezekiel 4. 7. Which at their first Rising, were but up to the Ankles;
but a little further were up to the Knees, a little further they were up ^o the
Loins, and at length they grew to a great River, Waters to swim in, the bottom
whereof could not be felt. It may be the Waters of Grace do yet run low with
thee, a little Bay will stop, or turn the stream; thou art yet gotten but to
Ankle deep, or Knee deep, get thee on, stay not, till thy Spring become a
River; let every Day, every Duty, every Experience, yea every Affliction, add
to thy streams; that as the accession of every little Brook to the main
Channel, raises the Water as it passes along, so it may be with thy Soul; that
the farther thou go on, the fuller thy Banks may be, till thou come to be
like Jordan in the Harvest, whose Waters fill all its Banks. To quicken thee on
in this growth in Grace, consider,

1. That a little Grace will make but poor work with thy mighty sins; where
Grace is low, Lust is high; and how is an Infant like to stand before a Man of
War?

2. That a little Grace will not suffice, to bear thee up in great Afflictions;
that which thou may^st make a shift with in a Calm, will not serve thee in a
Storm.

3. That a little Grace will be sadly put to it, if ever thou come to have but
little means of Grace.

4. That he that has but little Grace, is like to have no Assurance that he
has any at all. If thou would have power over Corruption, if thou would
stand in the Day of Temptation, if thou would not starve in the day of
Famine, if thou would have the comfort of the Grace thou have, let it grow
up to its fuller stature; Grace, when it is come to Age, will speak for it
self, and shift for it self the better; which whilst it is in its Infancy,
neither knows, nor can help it self.

Christians, let your Grace grow, and let the Fruits of it increase: Let your
Fields ripen to the Harvest. I may say concerning Sinners, no^ as our Lord
said, Behold, the Fields are already white to he Harvest; but behold the Fields
are already black to the Harvest. The Word is ready to be given* Come, put in
thy Sickle, the Harvest is ripe, the wickedness is great. The Fields of Tares
are already black to the Harvest: But oh when shall it be said of you: Behold
the Fields are white to the Harvest? Shall evil Weeds grow so fast, and shall
only the good Corn be at a stand?

Brethren, Let your Fruits grow more plentiful, and more perfect daily: Let
that Scripture be verified in you, Prove. 4. 18. The path of the Just is a
shining Light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day. Let your hearts
be so filled with the fullness of God, that your Paths may drop fatness. Let it
be said of you, as of the Spouse, Cant. 4. 18. and Chap. 5. 5. Her Lips dropped
as the Honey Comb, and her hands dropped sweet smelling Myrrh. Let your Lips
drop as the Honey Comb; as you have drunk in the Milk and Honey, that comes
down from above, so be ever dropping it down to others: Let something of the
sweetness, something of the fatness, that you have received from above, be
always dropping down: Be dropping* according to what you have drank: As you see
Sinners, of whom it is said, They drink iniquity, to be always dropping
iniquity; dropping Oaths, dropping Lies, dropping Scoffs and Reproaches: So let
it be said of you, They drink the Dew of Heaven, and this they are dropping
down. Let no Child, no Servant, no Friend, come into your Company, and go away
without some sweet Drops from your Lips: A word of Heavenly Instruction, a
gracious Admonition, a word of Encouragement, or a quickening Word, let them
have; or lift up a prayer, and drop down a blessing upon them. Something or
other of the Dew of Heaven let them feel flowing from our Lips.

Let your Lips drop as the Honey Comb, and your Hands drop sweet smelling
Myrrh. Let your Holy Practices, your Holy Examples, second, and set on your
wholesome Counsels and Instructions. Let your words be savoury, and your works
be gracious: Let Lip and Life speak the same things, and lead on the same way.

Christians, By your nursing up the Souls, and Fruits of others, you will ripen
and increase your own. If you should look on all the Fruit as little, which
your selves have brought forth to God, you will have this to comfort you, That
you have born more upon your Brethren's knees: The Fruits of those Fields which
you have planted, or watered, will abound to your account.

Bring forth much Fruit unto God, and be much in immediate converse with God,
Phil. 3. 20. Our Conversation is in Heaven. Be more elevated and raised in your
Spirits daily, above Things Sensual and Carnal.

Above Carnal Delights. Above Carnal Discouragements.
1. Above Carnal Delights; Live more purely in the Spirit, let your Hearts be
wrought up to such a Spiritual Frame; That all the Joys, Pleasures, and
Comforts, of your Lives may be Spiritual. Let the Lord be all your delight,
Psalm. 37. 5. Let it be with you as much as may be, as it is with the Saints
already in Glory; to whom God is all; who being changed into his Image, and
dwelling in his presence, are satisfied in him. Let God alone, be as much to
you, as God and all the World. Let the Fashions, and Pleasures* and Delights of
this World, be so much beneath your Spirits, that it may neither be an
abatement of your Joy, to want; nor an Addition to your Content, to possess
them. Let the Light of all these lower Sparks, be swallowed up in God; when the
Sun shines, all the Stars disappear, and are not needed.

Lift up thine Eyes Christian, and see, what pleasures there are within the
Veil: Come, drink thy fill of this new Wine, let thy Faith draw the Curtains of
Eternity, and take a view of those heights, and depths, and lengths, and
breadths, of that Glory and Joy, which there it may discover. Look on him that
sits on the Throne, and those everlasting Treasures of Light, Holiness,
Goodness, and Mercy, which are ^treaming from his Face* on those overflowing
Bowels of Kindness and Compassion; on those Rivers of pure and Ete^nal
Pleasures, Rest, and Peace, that rise from that Glorious Throne, and run
through the City of God. Behold the Tree of Life, and feed thy Soul on its
precious Fruit, whose very Leaves are for the healing of Nations. Hearken to,
and fill thine Ears and Heart with, those Triumphs and Exultations, those
Reptures and Ecstasies, of unspeakable and glorious Joys; those Blessings and
Praisings, those Hallelujahs that are tuned upon the Hearts and Tongues of the
Heavenly Chore, the glorious Angels, and the Spirits of just men made perfect,
by the vision and fruition of thy God, the God of Glory.

Look on, and possess, this Joy and Glory; Say to thy Soul, as God (...)
Abraham, Genesis 13. 14. Lift up thine Eyes, and look from the place where thou
art, Northward, and Southward, and Eastward, and Westward, though all the
Coasts, and all the Dimensions of the Blested Land of Promise, and Holy City;
and then say, Come Soul, take up thy rest here, all this is thine,

Look and love, love and long, long and hope, hope and rejoice in hope, of this
glory of God. Look on thy God, and never leave looking, till thou art changed
into his Image, and satisfied with his Image; And here let thy delight and thy
dwelling be.

2. Above all carnal discouragements, from any adversaries, or dangers,
wherewith you are baited and affrighted, as you walk in the Lord; let the joy
of the Lord be your strength, let your Sun be your shield, let your hope be
your confidence, and fear not your du^y nor danger. Look to your hope, and you
will laugh at fear. Dwell in your Reward, and you will not be afraid to dwell
in your Duty: But of this, a word more by and by. Thus much for general
Directions.

2. I shall next give you some special Directions for your daily walk.

Generals necessarily depend on, and subsist in, Particulars. As there can be
no Religion in a Kingdom, unless it be first in particular Families, nor none
in Families* unless it be in particular persons; so a general course of
Christianity there cannot be, unless it be supported in our particular daily
walk.

The Advice I am giving you, I have in part borrowed for your use, which some
of you may possibly have received elsewhere.

Before I give you the particular Directions, I shall first premise these
things:

1. Count upon this, That the Directions I am now giving you, (if you ever mean
to bring it to any thing) will cost you pains and labor: and how can you count
your selves Christians, if you refuse to be at the necessary cost of
Christianity? If you think to be Christians without labor, or if you will
stand out from Christianity, to save your labor, you are alike wise in both.
Either come to a Resolution to fall upon an industrious painful life, or 'twill
be in vain to give you counsel.

2. Practice* the Directions I shall give you in pursuance of your Covenant
with God; wherein you have engaged to take the strictest severest Laws of
Christ, for the Rule of your Life. What I am pressing on you, for the matter of
it, is no more than you have bound your selves to, as Christians. Remember your
Bonds, and let this holy practice be followed on by you, as the paying your
Vows. Remember daily, the Vows of God are upon you, and there is not any
material thing here prescribed to you, which falls not under your vows. Your
Covenant, if your eye be much upon it, will be a cord to hold you to your work.

3. Press hard for sensible Communion with God in all your Duties.

4. Keep up a spiritual and holy Frame from Duty to Duty. Remember what I have
elsewhere spoken to you more at large, on these two Particulars. See that there
be Religion in your Duties, and confine not your Religion to your Duties.

5. Be Watchful. The Life of all Religion lies much here; whatever you resolve
upon, will come to nothing without it. Watchfulness is the Executioner of your
Will. Let your eye be upon your Rule, and your Work. Especially watch against
your prevailing sins. There Is no Christian that observes himself, but may find
some one sin or more, that in regard of their power over him, are taller by the
head and shoulders than all the rest. In some Pride, in others Worldliness, in
others Passion, in others Slothfulness. It may be, if thou searchest, some one
of these four, or possibly some other, may be it, that by a Specialty thou
may call [thine Iniquity.] Find out what it is, and know, that there thy
main Work lies. In vain will thou strive in other duties, till that which
hinders be removed out of the way. Fight neither against small nor great, but
against the King of Israel. Where the Enemy most ordinarily makes his breach
upon thee, set the stronger Guard. Let thy daily conflicts be here, and observe
diligently, with what success.

6. Walk on thy course in the Name and strength of the Lord Jesus. Live by
Faith. Depend on Christ for the assistance of his mighty Spirit. Forget not
this, for otherwise thou will go but lamely on.

These things premised, I shall now give you the particular Directions.

1. Directions for the Evening.
Every Evening before you sleep, withdraw your selves from the World, and
having set your heatts as in the Presence of God, Charge them before God, to
answer to these following Interrogatories.

1. Concerning your Duties.
Q. 1. Did not God find me on my bed, when he expected me on my knees?

2. Was there not more of Custom and Fashion, than of Conscience and
Affection, either in my Secret, or Family Duties?

3. Had I any sensible Communion with God in my duties?

4. Have I not neglected, or been careless and overly in reading the Word, and
Holy Meditation?

2. Concerning your Sins.
Q. 1. Do I live in nothing, that I know to be a sin?

2. Have I kept me from MINE Iniquity? What victory have I yet gotten over it?

3. Am I a mourner for mine own, and the sins of the Land?

3. Concerning your Temptations.
Q. 1. Have I feared, watched against, and not run into temptation?

2. What Temptations have I overcome this day?

3. Have I had a care of my Company?

4. Concerning your Heart.
Q. 1. Have I held mine heart in a serious, spiritual, gracious frame? have my
calls to Duty ever found me in a preparation to Duty?

2. Has the Lord been ever before mine eyes, and Eternity upon mine heart?

3. Have I been much in holy Ejaculations?

4. Have I not given liberty to the workings of Pride, Sinful anger,
Discontent, or Impatience?

5. Have I made conscience of evil thoughts?

5. Concerning Conscience.
Q. 1. Has my Conscience neither been blind nor dumb, nor my heart deaf or
headstrong against it?

2. Have I done nothing against, nor with a doubting Conscience?

3. Have I neither defiled mine own, nor wittingly scandalized my Brother's,
Conscience?

6. Concerning your Tongue.
Q. 1. Have I bridled my Tongue?

2. Have I spoken Evil of no man?

3. Has the Law of the Lord been in my mouth* as I sat in mine House, or went
by the Way, as I was lying down, and rising up?

7. Concerning your Talents.
Q. 1. Have I not wasted or vainly spent any part of my Estate? has neither my
Pride had a share, nor my Appetite more than its share?

2. Have I not sent Christ away without an Alms* when I had it by me?

3. Have I redeemed my time from Needless Visi^s. Idle Imaginations. Fru^^le^s
Discourse, and Unnecessary Sleep?


4. Have I not lost an opportunity this day, of doing or receiving good? have I
not neglected to exhort or reprove, when occasion has been given? and if I
have been reproved, how have I born it?

8. Concerning your Tables.
Q. 1. Did I not sit down, with no higher ends than a Beast, only to please my
appetite? Did I eat and drink to the Glory of God?

2. Did I not eat or drink to excess?

3. Did I not rise from the Tablewithout letting fall any thing of God there?

4. Did I not mock God, when I pretended to crave a Blessing, or return Thanks?

9. Concerning your Calling.
Q. 1. Have I been serving the Lord this day, in my particular Calling?

2. Have I not been Idle?

3. Have I not over eagerly minded my earthly affairs?

4. Have I defrauded no man, wronged no man?

5. Have I dropped never a Lie, no broken promise in all my dealings?

10. Concerning your Relations.
Q. Have I Faithfully discharged, and done nothing against my duty to my
Relations? Have I behaved my self As a Christian
Husband, Wife,
Parent, Child,
Master, Servant?



11. Concerning your carriage to those Within.
Q. Have I carried my self toward all Saints,

1. Lovingly, Delighting in them. Bearing with them. Covering their Infirmities.


2. Peaceably, not provoking them to Envy?

3. Profitably, provoking them to love and good works?

12. Concerning your carriage to those Without.
Q. Have I carried my self to those without, 1. Wisely, that they have not been
a snare to me, nor I through my fault, become a Prey unto them.

2. Inoffensively: Have I not been a stumbling block to them?

3. Courteously and compassionately, that I might the better win upon them?

3. Concerning Providence.
Q. 1. Have I diligently observed all the remarkable Providence of God toward
me, especially such as have come in, as the Returns of Prayer?

2. Have I been thankful for my daily Mercies?

3. Have I born this days crosses?

14. Concerning the use of your Liberty.
Q. Have I kept my self far enough within my bounds?

In Sum,
Q. 1. What have I done for God or my Soul this day? have I not lost one day
more?

2. Have I led, this day

A Diligent Watchful Self-denying
Life.

Directions for the Morning.
1. If through necessity or carelessness, you have omitted the reading and
weighing these Questions in the Evening, be sure to do it now.

2. Ask thy self. Waht Sins have I committed? what Duties have I omitted?
Against which of these Rules have I offended, the day foregoing? And renew thy
Repentance, and double thy Watch.

3. Examine, whether God were first and last in thy Thoughts, Morning and
Evening.

4. Be careful to set thine Ends right, for all the day.

An Advertisement.
If you want time to make daily enquiry upon every one of the forementioned
Particulars, (they being so many) set a mark upon, or write out such of them,
as most especially concern your Case, and let not them be forgotten. Think not
thy self excused from this course, because it is too long; when, if need be,
thou may thus make it shorter: Better cut short, than wholly give out.

For the help of the weaker, I shall gather out these few of the chief
Interrogatories, which when they are straightened for time, they may only use; and
to which they may add more as they have occasion and opportunity.

Q. 1. Was I serious, and had I any sensible Communion with God, this day, in
my Secret, and Family Duties?

2. Has it been my care to keep mine heart in an holy Frame, from Duty to Duty?

3. Have I been much in holy Ejaculations

4. Have I not given liberty to the working of Pride, sinful Anger, Discontent,
or Impatience; nor so much as to vain Thoughts?

5. Have I not inordinately minded Earthly things?

6. Have I kept me from [Mine] Iniquity, and not lived in any known sin?

7. Have I wronged no man in word nor deed?

8. Have I been temperate and self-denying in the use of the Creatures?

9. Has the Law of the Lord been much in my mouth?

10. Have I not sent Christ away without an Alms, when I had it by me?

11. Have I not lost an opportunity of doing or receiving good?

12. Have I not neglected nor done any thing against my duty to my Relations?

13. What have I done for God or my Soul this day? have I not lost one day more?

14. Have I been diligent and watchful?

Christians, here is a course prescribed, which by the ordinary assistance,
which the Lord does not deny, you may take up if you will; and which if you
conscientiously observe, will be, without doubt, through the blessing of God,
attended with great suc^ess. And those that do not take up this course, or some
other equivalent to it, let them never think to ease their hearts, by idle
complaints, I cannot attain to such a holy, even, fruitful, heavenly life, as I
desire, I would, but I cannot; God will abhor such lazy Complaints, and look
upon them as they are, a mere device to keep you quiet under a sloathful heart.

Set your whole Duty daily before your eyes, charge it upon your hearts, take
an account of your selves, how you discharge it; set upon it as that which is
no other than you have vowed to the Lord; commit your selves, and your ways to
him for success: and if this does not mightily conduce to advance you in point
of holiness, and establish you in point of peace, then say, that both the
Precepts and Promises of the Gospel have deceived you.

And thus I have set before you that holy Conversation which becomes the
Gospel. Take up this holy Course, let this be your Life you mean to lead; and
let it be carried on, In an holy Union. In an United Contention. In an Holy
Boldness.


1. In an holy Union; So the Apostle there adds, Stand fast in one s^irit with
one mind. Never look to thrive in Grace, if you do not live in Peace. The
decays of Christianity lie much upon the score of the divisions of Christian.
The Devil has also taken up that Maxim, Divide et Impera, Rent them and Ruin
them. The reason why our love is so cold, is because our differences are so
hot. The reason of so little zeal against sin, has been the great strife among
Brethren. The Combinations of Sinners have not so much prejudiced the power of
holiness, as the Contentions of Saints. There are not a few who go under the
name of Saints, that have maintained disputes about Religion so long, till they
have disputed themselves out of all Religion; their searching for Truth, has
been the loss of both love and life.

Christians, if ever you would be any thing, be one; be of one heart, of one
mind, holding the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. It were greatly to
be desired, that the people of God were both of one heart, and of one way: But
if this may not yet be, if there cannot be Uniformity, yet let there be Unity,
betwixt all that fear the Lord in truth.

A few words I shall leave with you for your direction herein:

1. Divide not from the Head, to unite with any pretended Members; hold not
with them, that hold not with the Head. Sell not Truth, clear, fundamental
Truth, to buy Peace.

2. Divide not from real Members, lest you hereby prove your division from the
Head. Christ has but one body, if you be not in union with the body, you are
divided from the head.

3. See the head in every member; see Christ in every Saint.

4. Prize Christ where ever you see him. Love Christ, and love his Image; if
you will not slight Christ, slight not any Saint. See thou an humble, meek,
patient, brokenhearted, self-denying, mortified Christian; in whatsoever
unpleasing form (as to matters circumstantiall) he appears, despise him no^,
reject him not.

5. Prize Peace and Union, as the strength and honor of the Body.

6. Pursue Peace and Union, with the utmost strength of thy Soul. And that you
may obtain it,

1. Let all parties that are named of Christ, be humbled under former
Divisions. What Peace so long as God is angry? Oh how have we provoked the
Lord, by provoking one another! Let him only who has been without sin in this
matter, be without sorrow and shame.

Sure they are hard hearts, who are not broken under such breaches. Let us not
mistake our selves, nor mis-call that Zeal for God, which God will call Pride,
and peevishness.

I speak not against our being offended, either with error or iniquity; we may
not call evil, good; or darkness light, for peace sake; but at our unreasonable
passions, against whom we suppose erring Brethren.

If the Reproach of the Gospel, the hardening of the perverse, the stumbling of
the weak, if the hindering of Edi^ication, the promoting of Confusion, and every
evil work, which have been the sad Effects of our Divisions; if Pride and
Haughtiness, if Vanity and Wantonness, if Envy and Uncharitableness, which have
been the Womb from which our Contentions have sprung, be matter of Humiliation,
then sure we had need be brought upon our knees: We must be melted, e're we can
be molded up into one.

2. Let all parties unite sincerely in their ends: Let the honor of Christ,
the advancement of practical Godliness, the destruction of the interest of the
flesh, the edification of the whole body, in Faith and Holiness, be looked at
with a single Eye, and pursued with a plain and honest heart; Let not the
interest of a party, the affection of Superiority and Dominion, the carrying on
of selfish or fleshly Designs, let the God, or the Christ, you are driving for,
unbyass your Spirits, take the right mark, and let your motions be sincerely
levelled at it. If we were once set right in our ends^, an accommodation of all
our differences, about, the means, would be more facile and feisable, Prove. 11.
3, 5. The integrity of the upright shall guide him, the Righteousness of the
perfect shall direct his way. Humble, single, honest hearts, are most like to
hi^ upon the good and honest way: if we had nothing (...) do, but to please the
Lord, we should not have much to do to please one another.

3. Let all parties unite in this Rule, Do as you would be done by; that is, as
being well informed, and advised, and freed from evil, and discomposed
Affections, (for so the Rule is to be understood) you would that Men should do
unto you: Allow to others, what you challenge to your selves; or would, if you
were in their Circumstances: Deny not what you would demand: The same Liberty,
the same Charity that you would expect from other Christians, allow to them.

4. No longer tie up Christ to a party. Say not, Lo here is Christ, and not
there: Say of all Believers, though of different Forms, As we are Christ's, so
they are Christ's. Of all the Subdivisions of Protestants, that are considerable
amongst us, there is no party, the union with which makes us, or the separation
from which unmakes us, Christians. We had need to have more to show for our
Christianity, than that we are Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists,
Episcopal, or Erastians; and the Devil must have more to prove us no
Christians, than this, that we are in union with either of these, or in
separation from them.

5. In matters circumstantial, be not overhasty in stamping a Jus Divinum on
Things disputable and doubtful: Put no more weight, nor a greater necessity, on
any thing, than God has evidently put on it; and spend no more of your zeal
about it, than is proportionable to its weight and evidence.

6. Allow for the imperfect state the Church is in, we know but in part; and
till that which is perfect is come, and that which is imperfect is done away,
we must bear with one another, if in any things we be otherwise minded.

7. Stretch not your Authority beyond your Line, take not too much upon you:
Think not to bring all others, in every thing, to your Standard; impose not
your Consciences, as a Law upon others.

8. Put not Conscience to the ill office of being a mere Makebate, catch not
up every Notion, and presently charge it upon Conscience, as that which must be
maintained, though to the greatest prejudice of the whole Interest of Religion,
and so rent and run away from all those that agree not with you. Be not rash,
be not heady; be tender, but be wary; be well instructed, if you will be truly
tender: first carefully inform thy Conscience, and then peaceably follow it.

Of what is that Conscience tender, that is not tender of making Wounds and
Rents, in the Body of Christ?

9. Beware of Censurings and Judgings, of biting and devouring one another. If
ye bite, and devour one another, ye shall be consumed one of another. Let him
that is without fault, cast the first stone at his Erring Brother. Be not
bitter against the bitterness of others: if others sowerness offend thee, yet
let it not leaven thee: Be not reviled into a Reviler, scoffed into a Scoffer;
overcome Evil with Goodness: It Is not seldom that our Invectives against others
Bitterness, are more keen and cutting, than what we complain of: Justify not
what thou judge; Practice not thy self, what in the same Breath thou
condemnest in thy Brethren: Throw not back thy Brother's Fireballs in his
face, le^t in censuring him, thou be also thine own Judge: Pursue not matters
in difference over hotly, but learn modestly and meekly to differ, where you
cannot agree.

10. Let your Conversation be so holy, humble, and heavenly, carry your selves
in such simplicity, and godly sincerity, toward God, toward one another, and
toward all men, that you may command each other to believe, that however you
agree not about your Mother, yet you are all the Children of the same Father;
that you are of God, and that the Spirit of the Living God dwells in you.

11. Hold Communion in the Things wherein you agree, and Charity where you
differ: May you not pray, and fast, and hear, and hold Christian Conferences
together? Sure there is not overmuch of Gospel Spirit, where this will not be
granted?

12. Impose not on each other any hard and unnecessity Conditions of your
communion. Suppose, upon your differing Judgments, there be in some things
different practices, which some of you judge less warrantable, whilst the
Consciences of others allow and use; press not the relinquishing such
questionable practices, as the condition of your communion; especially, if they
be not mingled with the Daties wherein you join, but are used by any of you, at
other times, or in other Assemblies. Excommunicate not them from you,
excommunicate not your selves from them, with whom Christ holds Communion.
Judge not that Christ withdraws, from all those, who are not in every thing, of
your Mind and Way* Destroy not all communion, by seeking after a purer, than in
this out imperfect state, we shall ever attain. According to this principle,
(No Communion at all, if not in all) where shall we rest? In all Societies
something will offend.

13. And lastly, in your communion receive not one another to doubtful
Disputations: Let your Prayers, Conferences, and all Holy Exercises, be
studiously so managed, that there may be a sweet Accord of your Spirits
therein: Come not together to strengthen Parties, or propagate Opinions: Let
all matters of Controversy be waved; and hereof let there be such mutual
Assurance given aforehand, that you may be together, without fear of becoming
Thorns or Snares one to another: Which, if it be not unanimously consented to,
and inviolably observed, your communion will be impossible, or dangerous.

Christians, Are the clear and fundamental Truths of the Gospel, and the more
necessary and weighty Duties of Religion, sufficiently understood and
practiced? Are your Souls safe? Is your Calling and Election sure? Is the Love,
and Life, and Zeal of God, grown up to that maturity, that you need not mutual
help this way? Have you any spare time from these things, to spend in
perplexing Controversies? Build up one another in your most Holy Faith, provoke
one another to Love, and to good Works, encourage, establish, and strengthen
one another in the known ways of Holiness, and if you find not this both better
work, and work enough for you, then take your Liberty.

These things do live in peace, and love, and the God of Peace shall be with
you.

Hear, oh all ye Friends of Christ, by what oblique Names soever unhappily
distinguished! will you come and be Friends one with another? Are you for
peace? Your God is the God of Peace: Your Jesus is the Prince of Peace: Your
Gospel is the Gospel of Peace; and will you not be persuaded to be Sons of
Peace? Your God is one, your Mediator is one, your Faith one, your Baptism one,
your Hope one; you are one Body, one Spirit, and will you not yet be one Soul?

Oh how hopeful would our Condition be, were our Hearts generally set upon
peace! We should certainly obtain, did we more resolvedly pursue it: and what
should hinder? Have you not yet enough of your Contentions, and Quarrellings?
Have not your Souls been sufficiently neglected, your Lusts strengthened, your
Faith weakened, your Love withered, your Comforts wasted, your Names blemished,
your Holy Profession blamed? Has not your God been sufficiently provoked, and
the Devil sufficiently gratified? Are your Bellies so filled with Gall, and
your Mouths with Gravel, and have you not yet enough of your Contentions?

Christians, Slight not these Counsels and Warnings. As you would prove your
selves the Friends of Christ, be ye followers of peace. Study, oh study these
things that make for peace. Follow peace with all men, as much as in you is,
but especially with the household of Faith. Let there be no longer strife
betwixt us, for we are brethren.

Yet always remember, I am pressing you to an holy Union; whilst I persuade
you to follow peace, I must still add [and holiness:] I persuade you not to
pursue peace, upon terms dishonorable or prejudicial to Truth; They must have
both together, that will be blessed in either: Truth without Peace, is as a
Jewel without its Cabinet; Peace without Truth, is as a Cabinet with nothing in
it. Peace without holiness, is as a fair and promising shell, with a rotten, or
worm-eaten kernel; holiness without peace, is as a precious kernel, under a
cracked and broken shell.

They that have peace without truth, have nothing worth the securing; they that
have truth without peace, have little security for what they have. Peace
without truth, is beauty without worth; Truth without peace, is worth with its
beauty marred. Let both go together, and then they will be, both the Columna
Ecclesiae, the Pillar of the Church, rendering it consistent within it self; and
the Corona Ecclesiae, its Crown, rendering it comely and glorious before the
World.

Be it thus with us, and then Satan look to thy self, thy kingdom shall down
amain; when thou can no longer hold up division, thou losest thy dominion.
Then Saints lift up your heads, your Communion shall be sweet, your glory shall
be great, your light shall shine, your fruit shall abou^d, the smell of your
spices shall slow forth; your adversaries shall envy, and your King shall
grea^ly delight to see your beauty. Oh may this Grace, thi^ Peace be granted us
from the Lord; and let all that love the prosperity of Sion, say Amen.

2. In an united Contention. Striving together (says the Apostle) for the
Faith of the Gospel. Unite, but strive; strive not one against another;
Christian against Christian, but strive together; Let your Contention be in
Communion. Strive together against sin, and unbelief; against hypocrisy, and
ear^hliness; strive against strife, and debate, and envyings, and judgings;
strive together with God, in your prayers, and supplications: We often pray,
but our prayers do not agree: by keeping at such distance, we know not one
another hearts, and are, so many men, so many minds; every one prays
according to his single apprehension, and affections: What one prays, another
unprayes; insomuch, that we should put the Lord to do contradictions, if he
must give particular answers to all our prayers. And possibly, that may be the
reason, why the Lord defers his answer so long, he will st^y till we are better
agreed what we would have. Matthew. 18. 19. If two of you agree on earth,
touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father
which is in heaven. S^rive together in all holy and united endeavors, to
comfort, confirm and establish one another in the faith of the Gospel. Keep up
the Communion of Saints, and an united Contention against Sin and Unbelief;
Remember Heb. 10. 25.

3. In an holy boldness, in nothing terrified by your adversaries. In nothing,
that is, either in no degree; not at all terrified: or else in nothing, that
you have to do; be frighted out of no part of your duty: or el^e at nothing
that they do, or threaten to do against you. Be not afraid to be holy. Tell
your adversaries, when they have said and done their worst, you must, and you
will, make bold to serve your God. Fear them not, and they cannot hurt you;
they never hurt you, unless they divert you from your duty.

To establish your hearts in this holy boldness, and against your carnal fears,

1. Consider, That,

1. By how much the more you fear God, by so much the less you will fear men.

2. By how much the more your fear sin, by so much the less you will fear
trouble.

3. By how much the less your adversaries fear God, by so much the less need
you to fear them.

2. Believe: Psalm. 27. 13. I had fainted, but that I believed. Faith is a
Buckler against fears and faintings, Ephesians. 6. 16. Above all, take the shield
of faith, whereby you shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the devil.

[The Shield of faith] A shield is a Wall of partition, interposed betwixt a
person and harm; It Is only our apprehensions of harm that raise our fear: Faith
will save a Christian harmless, and thereby preserve him fearless. The Shield
is ordained for a security to all parts* and against all assaults. Some pieces
of our armor are appropriated to one part only; the Helmet is for the head,
the Breast Plate for the breast, the Girdle for the loins, the Shoes for the
feet; but the Shield is a moveable, that is to be lifted up, where ever the
blow comes. Faith is an universal security.

Faith may be said to be a Shield,

1. Instrumentally: As it provides us of a shield, as it lifts up a shield, and
sets a guard upon the Soul to secure it. It holds up Christ for a Shield; it
holds up the Promises for a Shield: the very Commands, and I^stitutions, of
God, for a Shield, and Safeguard to the Soul.

Sometimes the sense of guilt assails and weakens the heart: It is not so much
any thing without us, as something within us, that raises our fears. How small
a matter will fright a guilty Soul? Guilt will make every stroke a stab. It Is
the barb of the arrow, the venom on the dart, or the sore of the heart, that
makes every stroke formidable and terrible. It Is the guil^less Soul that has
courage, and boldness. Hic murus ahaeneus esto -- Now against this dreadful
Dart, Faith holds up a Buckler, with a Crucified Jesus upon it; and so that is
quenched.

Sometimes darkness and uncertainties, about the way that we are in raises our
fear. A Christian that knows himself in his duty, in his way, is out of fear.
Clearness gives boldness. Whilst we question the warrantableness of the way we
are in every shadow of danger will shake us: Against such fears, Faith holds up
a buckler, with this Inscription, Have not I Commanded thee? It shows the
Command, and in that, our warrant, and in our warrant our security.

When we question whether our Worship, for which we are like to suffer, be
right or no, Faith holds up an Institution for our ^hield.

If this Fear (oh I shall not hold out, I shall deny my Lord, and his Faith, if
put to it) assails the Soul; here Faith holds up the Promise for a Buckler: He
has said, I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee: so that we may boldly say,
The Lord is my helper.

2. Formally; Faith not only lifts up a Shield, but is our Shield; The very
believing in a crucified Jesus; the very believing the Command, the
Institution, the promise, stays and supports the heart, against whatsoever may
befall it; I had fainted but that I believed.

Christians, whatever your duties, difficulties, despondencies, straits,
temptations, afflictions, weaknesses, are; believe, and you shall be carried
through; believe, and you shall be established* Believe in Christ, and you
shall dare to follow Christ; believe in Christ, and you shall go through with
Christ, and hold out to the end. Believe, and you shall neither fear, faint,
nor fall. Your Faith will both keep you faultless, and save you harmless, and
thereby secure you from sinking, and fainting, in your minds.

If this be not enough, let me add, That Faith will yet farther scatter all
your fears, by this double Act: 1. It will put your reward into your h^nds. 2.
It will put all your troubles to a present end.


1. It will put your reward into your hand; it will set the Crown on your head,
even whilst the Cross is on your back. Faith makes things to come, present,
Heb. 11. 1. It is the subsistence, or being, of things hoped for; it gives
being to the good things promised, before they are. Hope carries the eye to the
object; looks on things to come, as to come: Faith brings the object to the
eye, looks on things to come, as come; it looks on distance of time, as God
looks on it; on a thousand years but as one day. It looks on God's saying and
doing, on God's promising, and performing, as all one. It a^^^dates Glory, and
gives a kind of present possession of it in hand, Romans 8. (In) all these things
we are more than Conquerours: In Tribulation, in Persecution, in Famine, in
Nakedness; [In] all these things we are more than Conquerours: Not only
afterward we shall be, but in all these things, even whilst we are under
them, we are more than Conquerours: The Conquest is obtained in the very
entrance of the Combat. This is the Victory that over comes the World even our
Faith. Believe Christian, and thy Faith will be thy Victory, thy Shield will be
thy Palm.

2. It will put all our Troubles to a present end: Faith looks on things to
come as present, and thereby, on things present as past: It looks on all
things, according as they will be in their issue and end: It looks on things to
come, according to what they will be, when they are come. It looks on things
present, according to what they will be, when they are past. It sees all
passing, and considers it as past already. It sees all passing, the World upon
its Wing, the Fashion of it passes away. It sees the Riches of the World upon
their Wings; the Pride, and the Pomp, and the Gallantry, and the Glory of the
World, upon their Wings: And it sees the Poverty of the World, the Troubles of
the World, all upon the Wing. It look; on the blackest Clouds, as flying
Clouds, and it considers all, as gone already. It looks on the clear, that is,
beyond the Clouds; it says, as God says, Babylon is fallen, is fallen: Not
only it shall fall, but it is fallen, and shall not be able to rise.

And what place can there then be left for fear or fainting? Was the Red Sea a
Terror to Israel, when they saw themselves gotten to the other side? Did
Sampson's [dead] Lion fright him? Will the Remembrance of what you [have]
suffered be a Terror to you, when you have gotten through, and are come out of
Tribulation? Why, open the Eye of your Faith, and see the Coast already clear?
You will see the Red Sea behind you, the Wilderness behind you, Jordan behind
you, and your selves gotten safe on the Banks of Canaan.

Come on Soul, what should hinder thee? May be, thou supposest, thou have a
great Fight of Affliction to endure; grant thou have, yet fear none of those
things [thou shalt] suffer, till thou can fear those things thou [hast]
suffered. Though thou be now putting on thy Armor, believe, and thou may
boast as if thou had put it off: Death where is thy sting? Grave where is thy
victory? Where is the Fury of the Oppressor? Thine Enemies are already under
thy feet man, Death it self is swallowed up in Victory.

Christians, Cherish, improve, increase your Faith, and this will clear your
way of all your fears. Wherefore did thou doubt, oh thou of little Faith? Oh
it is a sign our Faith is but low, when our fears are so high. The day, the Lord
hears you in this Prayer, Lord increase our Faith, He delivers you from your
fears: Wax st^ong in Faith, and you will wax bold in your God.

3. Be humble; 'twill be your advantage, that you stand on the lower Ground: He
whose Heart has already laid him in the Dust, will not fear how low his
Enemies can lay him.

4. Be peaceable; your Preces and lachrymae, will be your best Weapons: The
guilt of your unquiet and unwarrantable Resistance, will weaken your hearts,
more than all your partakers will strengthen your hands, Prove. 20. 22. Say not,
I will recompense evil, wait on the Lord, and he will save thee. Patient and
peaceable suffering, will be the best way to abash your Persecutors, and
embolden your Souls.

Now gather up all these Particulars, and you have the Conversation that
becomes the Gospel; wherein, that I may persuade, as well as direct you,
consider these following Arguments;

1. This is to them, to your Adversaries, an evident token of Perdition: This
united, humble, peaceable, unanimous boldness, in your holy course, whereby you
walk in the Spirit and power of the Gospel, and are ^ot frighted or terrified
out of it; this is, and will be to your Persecutors, an evident token of
Perdition. The falls and slaws in the Lives of Saints, and their Quarrellings
and Divisions amongst themselves, do strengthen the hands and the confidence of
sinners against them: The Fears and Faintings of Saints, are the flushings of
sinners; when Saints hang the Wing, sinners lift up the Head.

The Majesty and Beauty of an Holy Life, joined with an humble and patient
Magnanimity and undantedness, will be a Dart in the Liver of the Enemies of it,
It is an evident tok^n [to them] of Perdition: It is not only a Death-Token
[upon them], Persecution is a black Mark of a Son of Perdition; but it is an
evident Token [unto them]: It will read them their Doom; it will make their own
hearts to fall upon themselves, and their own Consciences to give them their
Sentence.

2. This is to you an evident Token of Salvation, [but to you of Salvation] The
Word is sure. To him that orders his Conversation aright, will I show the
Salvation of God. If we be dead with Christ, we shall also live with him; if we
suffer with him, we shall also be glorified together with him. To him that
overcomes, will I give to sit with me on my Throne, even as I have overcome,
and am set down with my Father on his Throne. Fear none of those things which
thou shall suffer. Be thou faithful unto the Death, and I will give thee a
Crown of Life.

[Salvation, and that of God] There Is much in that Addition [and that of God]
it notes, that the Salvation of the suffering Saints shall be

Sure, Great.
1. It notes, That their Salvation shall be sure: You shall certainly be saved,
for God has undertaken for it; that is the import of the Expression. If it be
God that justifies, who shall condemn? If it be God that will save, who shall
destroy? The matter is sure, you shall be saved, and that of God. It may be
Satan will promise, Hearken to me, and I will save you harmless. But he is a
Liar and a Deceiver; he is weak and cannot, false and will not. It may be the
evil World will tell you, If thou will cast in thy Lot with us, take our
Advice, follow our Example, come along with us, thou may save thy self all
this harm and loss. But there is as much trust to the Children, as to the
Father of Lies: But if the Lord God, the God of Power, the God of Truth, says,
I will save, who shall say nay?

2. It notes, that their Salvation shall be great: The great God will do for
them great Things; He will save them by a mighty Salvation. He will save them
against all those mighty hindrances that lie in the way. Who art thou, O great
Mountain! before Zerubbabel, thou shall become a Plain. All the difficulties,
and unlikelihoods, all the astonishing, and flesh-non-plus-ing Obstacles, that
stand in the way of their Redemption, will be nothing before the Mighty God. He
will save them from their mighty sins, sufferings, and fears; from the vanity
and vexations of this Earth, and from the Vengeance of Eternal Fire.

Christians, Do but go on, walk with Christ, suffer with Christ, and fear none
of those Things, which you shall suffer: and this shall be to you an evident
Token of Salvation, and that of God.

3. Consider again the Argument of the Text: These things do, and the God of
Peace shall be with you.

What encouragement there is in this Promise, I have already showed you.

Two things I shall only mention here, one of which has been insisted on
already.

Consider, First, If God be with you, all shall make for you. Secondly, If God
be with you, you shall shortly be with God.


1. If God be with you, all shall make for you: Remember what you have heard
out of Romans 8. 28, ^1. Christians, perhaps you will not know, how ^o make a
good Construction of some Providence that may possibly befall you, before you
die. Such Cases there may be, that Providence may seem to be (...) plain
Contradiction of the Promise. Suppose the People of God, in any Nation under
Heaven, should ^t any time have not only an Innundation of Temporal
Calamities, Famine, and Pestilence, and ^word, Oppression, Rapine, and Cruelty;
but a Flood of Spiritual Judgments also, breaking in upon them; A Famine of the
Word, an Eclipse of the Light of the Glorious Gospel among them; their green
Pasture trodden down, their pure Waters ^uddled, God's Spiritual Worship made
to give place to Will Worship, Superstition and Idola^ry; the Institutions of
God, to the Inventions of Men; his House made an Habitation for Dragons, for
the Scritch-Owl, and the Bittern, for Ziim and ^im, and every unclean thing.

And that, in such a time, when they had given themselves to more than ordinary
praying, and fasting, and humbling themselves, and repenting of their
iniquities; when they had set their faces toward Sion, and were full of hopes,
that the Lord was about to build, and to plant; to cast out their rubbish* to
repair their ruins, to bring in their peace like a River, and to establish his
Tabernacle amongst them. Suppose that in such a time, the Lord should even spit
in their faces, should dash all their hopes, and put into their hands a cup of
trembling; should bring trouble upon their loins, and cause darkness to cover
their faces; should expose them to scor^ and contempt, make them a reproach,
and a byword; should suffer them to be trampled upon, as the filth of the
World, and the offscouring of all things.

Suppose you should have lived in such times and places, and have heard them
complaining thus; All things work for good, why we see all things fall cut for
the worse; so far are our evil things from working for good, that our good
things have wrought our hurt. Not only our outward good things, our peace, and
our plenty, but our spiritual good things, have undone us; our spiritual
liberties, and Privileges, our Ordinances, our Duties, our Prayers, our
Fastings, our Zeal for the Lord of Hosts; not only our sins, but our Prayers,
our repentings, our reformings have undone us. We have prayed, and fasted, to
good purpose; we have even prayed our selves into poverty, contempt, darkness,
confusion; into the snares that have been laid for us, and into the hands of
those that hate us. All these things are against us; all our fears are come
upon us; all our comforts, yea, and our hopes too, are running from us; the
whole ^ourse of Providence, seems to be driving on to our (...) ruin; every
day, every hour, it grows darker and darker, worse and worse; every spoak of
the Wheel, every turn of the wheel, renders our condi^^on more helpless, and
hopeless. Our adversaries (...) become rampant; our Soul is filled with their
^^orn and fury; our friends, are as a broken tooth, (...) a foot out of joint;
our hopes are a Spiders Web, (...) as the giving up the Ghost; the Almighty
causes (...) his storms, and billows, to pass over us; one day ^^lleth
another, one night certifieth another, and ^^ophesies to us, nothing but
destruction upon de^^ruction, desolation upon desolation; and where i^ (...)
promise of his coming? the hope of Israel is ^^leep, her Savior is a stranger;
the Ark of God is ^^ken, the glory is departed; yea, and God himself ^^ems to
be gone over to the Camp of the Philistines, and marching against us; we have
waited for light, ^ut behold obscurity for brightness, but we walk in ^arkness;
the Harvest is past, the Summer is ended, and we are not saved, neither is
there yet any to ^ell us how long.

Suppose you should have stood by, and have ^een or heard any such things any
where in the World, would you not have said, can any good come ^ut of such a
dark abyss? out of such a concatena^^on of so many dreadful and dismal
Providence? Why, by what has been already said, you might have ^nswered thus,
Stay but a while, till the whole wheel ^e come about, till God has brought off
his work from the wheel; and then you shall see, Providence and the Promise,
meeting together, and kissing each other, and shall be able to say in this
case, what Solomon did in Isreal's, 1 King. 8. 56. Blessed be God, tha^ has
given rest to his people Israel, according to all tha^ he promised; there has
not failed [one word] of all his good promise, which he promised by the hand of
his Servants.

Christians, whatever may come upon you, at any time, while you live in this
World, distrust not you^ God, not be at all dismayed; you shall see the day^
either here, or hereafter, and 'twill be never the worse, if it be not till
hereafter (take it upon the credit of this word, All things shall work togethe^
for good) You shall see the day when your hearts shall rejoice and say, oh
'twas happy for us, that matters went so cross with us. 'Twas happy we were so
poor, and brought so low, and laid in the dark, and st^ip'd so naked, of all
that we either took pleasure, or put confidence in.

Now we see, that the Lord had a more glorious design, that he was carrying on
for us, step by step^ by every thing that came upon us, than we were aware of,
or could have imagined. It Is true, the Shimeis have been cursing, the Ishmaels
have been mocking, the Rabshakes have been railing, the Ploughers have been
ploughing, the Hunters have been pursuing, and had almost overtaken, overcome,
and swallowed us up quick; but blessed be our God, that has not turned our
captivity, and saved us by a mighty Salvation; but has done us good, by all
their mocking, and cursing, and raging against us: Now we see, there was such
light sowing in our dark days; such a Peace, a sowing in those deep furrows;
such an Harvest of joy sowing in the days of our tears, as has now sprung up
unto this glory, and blessedness. We are beholding to the Devil, and his
Instruments; our enemies have befriended us, though much against their Wills:
We could never have shined with such beauty on earth, had we not been scoured
with such unclean wispes; we could never have laid up such Treasure in Heaven,
as by their cursings, and cruel persecutions, our enemies have laid up for us.
So our Lord has told us, Great is your reward in heaven, Matthew. 5. 12. Blessed
are you that are persecuted, blessed are you that are reviled for my sake, for
righteousness sake; for great is your reward in heaven. It had not been so
great, had it not been for our great tribulations: Hell has given us a lift
nearer the Throne of Glory. Comfort and encourage your hearts with these words.

2. If God be with you, you shall shortly be with God; Father I will, that
those whom thou have given me, be with me where I am: And if I go and prepare a
place for you, I will come again, and receive you to my self, that where I am,
ye may be also. If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him. Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation
of the World. So shall we be ever with the Lord.

Brethren, you that lie among the potts, it is but a little time, and you shall
hear that Word, Come up hither, into the Kingdom, the Inheritance, prepared for
you. There are two Comes, or Calls of our Lord; the first come, is, Come and
work with me, come and watch with me, come and follow me. The second is, (...)
and rest with me; your work is done, your watch is over, your race is run, come
and enter into my rest.

The first Come is, Come down with me, from the pride, from the pomps and
jollities, of this present World; come with me into the wilderness, into the
valley of tears, come and suffer with me, come and die with me.

The second Come is, Come up with me, up out of the wilderness, up out of your
Prisons, up from your bonds: your Jubilee is come; come up with me: Come, put
off your prison-garments, and put on your robes; shake off your fetters, and
take up your palms; lay down your Cross; and take up your Crown: from your
prisons, to your Palace; from the stocks, to the Throne: You that have
descended with me, are the same who shall now ascend with me, to my Father and
your Father, to my God and your God.

The first Come, is the come of a Suitor; Come grant me your love; give me your
hearts, and accept of mine: This is the Errand, upon which his Ambassadors are
dispatched; As Abraham's servant, to take you as a Wife for your Lord. This is
the meaning of all those Jewels, and Bracelets, they bring in their hands; the
Lord sends Servant upon Servant, Epistle upon Epistle, Token upon Token, and
all speak the same word, Come, come, come away and accept of your Lord, and be
married to him.

The second Come is, the Come of the Bridegroom, Come home with me, into my
holy City, into my Royal Mansion; come into my Chamber, come into my Bosom;
come and lodge between my Breasts, live in my presence, and rest in my love for
ever.

Christians, my business whilst I have been with you, has been, to bring you
to God, to espouse you 10 Christ; and you that have already, or will yet at
last be persuaded to give your consent, and will give me leave to make up the
Match, I can give you assurance, That he will shortly come and make up the
Marriage; and must say to you, as Naomi to Ruth, Ruth 3. 10. Sit still my
Daughter, till thou see how the matter will fall; for the Man will not be in
rest, till he have finished the thing this day. Sit still, Christians, till you
see how matters will fall; and however they fall, know, your Lord will not be
in rest, till he have finished this thing, and brought you home, to be with him
where he is.

I am now parting from you in this confidence, that however, after a few days
I shall see your Faces no more in this World, yet I shall shortly meet you in
the Bride-chamber of Glory, where we shall ever be with the Lord.

Beloved in the Lord, I must now leave you, but give me leave e're I go, to
deal freely with you, and yet a little further, in the close of my day, this
once more to open my heart to you; and to tell you, 1. What my parting Fears,
2. What my parting Wishes for you are, which I carry upon my spirit.


1. My parting Fears, I go off from you with, are especially these:

1. I am afraid, that there are many of you, upon whom I have bestowed my
Labor in vain; I am afraid that I have Instructed you in vain, exhorted,
persuaded, beseeched, and reproved you in vain: 'Twas the Apostle's case, and
his fear, concerning the Galatians, Chap. 4. 11.

It is my grief, that when I would have no more to speak, but an healing word,
a comforting word; I must yet drop down a bitter word on some of you; That when
I would speak only from Mount Gerizim, I must yet again speak to some from
Mount Ebal; That when I would leave a Blessing behind me upon you all, I am
like to leave some bound under a Curse. It Is grievous to me thus to speak; yet
for the discharge of my Duty, and for your own Necessity, bear with me: I am
afraid, that whilst I have been preaching to you, of an incorruptible Crown,
of an Everlasting Rest, a Kingdom of Joy and Glory: I am afraid there are many
of you, That have no part nor lot in this matter, but are still in the Gall of
Bitterness, and Bond of Iniquity; If the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that
are lost: And are there none among you, from whom this Gospel is hid? hid as to
the Light of it, hid as to the saving power, and efficacy of it? I am afraid
there are too many; I am afraid there is many a blind Eye, many an hard Heart,
many a Spirit still in Prison, under the power of their Lusts, and Brutish
Sensu^lity: I am afraid there are many such among you; and are not you afraid
so to? Oh that you were!

2. I have a greater fear than this; I am afraid of some of you, that not only
all my past Labors, but this last will be lost also. Those that stand it out
to their last day, do usually stand it out in their last day. Blessed be God,
that there are amongst you those, over whom my Soul is comforted: To whom I can
speak in the words of the Apostle, Romans 6. 16. God be thanked, that ye were the
Servants of sin; but ye have obeyed from the heart, that form of Doctrine that
has been delivered unto you; and being now made free from sin, you are become
the Servants of Righteousness. Oh that I could thus speak! Oh that I could thus
rejoice over you all! But as the Apostle said to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 12.
20. I fear, lest when I (come) I shall (find) you such as I would not. So must
I say, with a grieved heart, I fear that now I am going I shall leave you such
as I would not. I would not leave one blind person, one vain person, one loose
liver, not one unbeliever, or impenitent, amongst you all. Oh what a good day,
would this day of my departure be; what Light would there be in this dark
Evening, were it thus with you: If I might see you all recovered out of the
Snares of the Devil, every man's Eyes opened, every man's Fetters off, every
man's Prison broken, and his Soul escaped from that deadly bondage: if every
poor deadly Creature among you, who yet lies bound hand and foot, in his Grave
Clothes, might now at last stand up from the Dead, and live the Life of God,
this would be mine and your great rejoicing. But oh I fear with this Apostle, 2
Cor. 12. 21. My God will humble me, and grieve me, and afflict me, to see in
what an woeful plight, I must leave diverse of you.

Oh ye Sons of the Night, you poor, ignorant, and da^k Souls, upon whom the
Light has shined, but your Darkness comprehends it not: Oh you poor,
obstinate, and hardened Souls, upon whom I have been ploughing, as upon Rocks,
and hewing as upon Adamants, who still remain under as great hardness, as if no
Dew nor Rain had ever fallen on you. Oh you poor, half-bak'd, almost
Christians, that have taken up your stand in your present Seize; my Soul
is under great fears, and must weep in secret for you, whilst my Tongue must
be henceforth silent: Oh every Soul, that is without fear of himself, my Soul
is afraid for you, the fearless Soul is in a fearful state.

Sinners, let my fears be your fears: What, is there such astonishing guilt
upon you, and yet not afraid? Such a dreadful Roll writ against you, and yet
not afraid? So many Sabb^ths, Sermons, Warnings lost, and never to be recalled;
nor any Assurance left of one Sermon, or Warning more, and yet not afraid? Such
a subtle Devil, such a deceitful Heart, such a tempting World, that you have to
deal withal; such a black and bottomless Pit into which you are falling, and
yet not afraid: Oh what Stocks and Stones has the Gospel to deal withal!

Beloved, I have labored much with you, both publicly, and from house to
house, to bring you under a due fear and jealousy of your selves; but hitherto
your hearts have been too hard for me: Oh yet for trembling hearts, tremble and
sin not; fear and pray, fear and hope, fear and repent; Work out your Salvation
with fear and trembling. Oh if my fea^s were once become your fears: your fears
would become my hopes! Oh what a Dayspring of hopes, would arise from the
shaking of secure hearts! These Fears would be as the thicker Darkness,
Forerunners of Break of Day.

2. My parting Wishes, and Desires for you, are,

1. That the good Seed which has been sown amongst you, were well rooted in
every heart: I wish that my Twenty Yea^s Ministry among you, may not be lost
Labor, to any one of your Souls.

2. I wish that your next Seeds man, may be more skilful and successful; that
the good Lord will provide you a man, that may teach you in Wisdom, gain you in
Love, lead you on to Life, by an Holy Example; and if the Lord grant you this
mercy, I wish that such an one may be deatly prized and cheerfully accepted by
you. God keep this Flock from a Ravening Wolf, and a deceitful Shepherd.

3. I wish that there may be no Root of Bitterness springing up amongst you;
that there be no Divisions or Contentions, but that you may live in peace and
love, that the God of peace and love may be with you.

4. I wish that this place, where so much good Seed has been sown, may become
a fruitful Field, that the Fruits of Faith and Repentance, the Fruits of
Righteousness and Holiness, may be in you, and abound; that you may be neither
barren, nor unfruitful; that Religion, in the power and practice of it, may so
visibly flourish, in the several persons, in the several Families, of this
Congregation, that they that go by, may see, and say, This is the Field which
the Lord has blessed.

5. I wish, that whatever Clouds may at any time gather over you, may not fall
down in a withering Storm, or a sweeping Flood, but may pass away in a Mist, or
dissolve into a fruitful Dew; that no Persecutions, or Temptations, may ever
carry you down the Stream with evil men, nor blight any hopeful beginnings,
that are budding forth in any of your Souls: If Tribulation should be any of
your Lots, I wish it may not be to you, as the Hail of Egypt, but as the Dew of
Hermon.

6. I wish you a joyful Harvest, that you may reap in Eternity, what has been
sown in Time; may you now sow in Righteousness, and hereafter reap in Mercy:
May every one that is now sowing in Tears, for ever reap in joy: May you that
go on your way weeping, bearing precious Seed, return with joy* and bring your
Sheavs with you: May the Showers of this day, be the watering of your Seed,
that it may spring up to Eternal Life.

Brethren, My hearts desire for you all is, that you may be saved; and if there
be any persons, that bear evil will to me, my particular wish for them, is, The
Good Will of him that dwelt in the Bush be those Men's Portions for ever.

These are some of my Wishes for you; will you join your Wishes with mine: Will
you turn your Wishes into Prayers, and let this be your Prayer; The Lord grant
thee thine hearts desire, and fulfill all thy Mind.

Brethren, Do I wish you any harm in all this? If not, if it be to wished, that
the Word of Christ were rooted in your Hearts, and your Souls thereby rooted in
the Grace of God; if it be to be wished, That your Lusts were rooted out, your
sins dead and dried up, your foot gotten out of the Snare, your Souls brought
into the Fold, your Fruits of Righteousness and Holiness abounding, and growing
up unto Eternal Life: If all this to be to be wished, then give in your Votes
with mine; wish and pray, pray and press on, press on and wait for the
accomplishment of this Grace in you all. I tell you again, I wish you well; and
not only I, but the Lord God that has sent me to you: The Lord Jesus wishes
you well; he wishes and wooes, wooes and weeps, weeps and dies, that your Souls
might live, and be belssed for ever: He has once more sent me to you, even to
the worst amongst you, to tell you from him, that he is unwilling you should
perish; that he has a kindness for you in his heart, if you will accept it: He
has Blood and Bowels for you; Blood to expiate your guilt, to wash away your
filth; and Bowels to offer you the benefit of his Blood; with this Wish, Oh
that it were theirs! Oh that they would hearken and accept! Only I must add,
That the Lord has two sorts of Wishes concerning sinners: The first is, Oh
that they would hearken! Oh that they would come in, be healed, and be saved,
Deuteronomy. 5. 29. This Wish is an Olive Branch, that brings good Tidings, and gives
great hopes of Peace and Mercy.

His last Wish is, Oh that they had hearkened, that they had accepted, Psalm. 81.
13. Oh that my people had hearkened to me. Luke 19. 42. Oh that thou had known
in this thy day, the things that concern thy peace. This Wish has nothing but
Dread and Death in it: it is the Black Flagg hung out, that proclaims Eternal
Wars. The sense is, Israel had once a fair time of it; a time of Love, a time
of Grace, a time of Peace: Oh that they had hearkened then, that they had known
the Things that concern their peace! But woe, woe to them, it is now too late,
the Door is shut, the Season is over, the Day is past; But now they are hid
from thine Eyes.

There are three deadly darts in this Wish [oh that thou hadst] it includes in
it these three cutting words,

Thou have not. Thou might. Thou shall not for ever.
1. There is this in it, [Thou have not.] What have I not? why, thou have not
known the things that belong to thy peace. Thou have had the door of Glory, the
Gate of Heaven open to thee, and have been called for, and invited in, but thou
have lost the opportunity. Thou knew not when thou were well offered, nor
would take notice what a day was before thee, what a price was in thine
hand; thy peace, the Gospel of peace, the Prince of peace, a Kingdom of peace
was set open, offered, and brought home to thy doors, but thou had so many
other matters to look after, that thou tookest no notice of it, but have let it
slip. There Is one Dart. [Thou have not known.] There Is a Gospel gone, there is a
Christ gone, there is a Soul, a Kingdom lost.

2. There is this in it, [Thou might.] Oh that thou had? why, Might I? yes
thou might, if thou would thou might. Thy God did not mock thee, when he
preached peace to thee; he was willing, and wished it thine; if thou would,
thou might have made it thine own; but whilst he would, thou would not.

There Is another Dart [I might have known] I have none to thank but my self for
the loss, mine undoing was mine own doing. There are no such torments, as when
the Soul flies upon it self, and takes revenge on it self; oh the gashes that
such self-refluctions make, Soul, how came thou in hither, into all this
misery? oh it is of my self, my self, that my destruction is. The door was open,
and I was told of it, and was bid come in, but I would not. That I am lost and
undone, was not my Fate, which I could not avoid, but my Fault and my folly. It
seems to give some ease of our torment, when we can shift off the fault. It was
not I, but the Woman, said Adam, It was not I, but the Serpent, said the Woman;
if that had been true, it would have given ease, as well as serve for an excuse.
This thought ['Twas mine own doing] tears the very caul of the heart. Oh I have
none to blame but my self, mine own foolish and froward heart. This is my
ignorance, this is my unbelief, this is my wilfulness, my lusts, and my
pleasures, and my Idols, that I was running after that, have brought me under
this dreadful loss. 'Twas my own doing.

3. There is this in it, [Thou shall not for ever.] Oh that thou had! why,
may I not [yet?] Is there no hope of recovering the opportunity? not one word
more, not one hour more, may not the Sun go [one] degree backward? No, no, it is
too late, too late; thou have had thy day; from henceforth no more for ever.
There Is the last Dart, [Times past] there is the death, the Hell, the anguish,
the Worm that shall gnaw to eternity.

This one word [Time's past] sets all Hell a roaring; and when its once spoken
to a sinner on Earth, there is Hell begun. Go thy way wretch, fill up thy
measure, and fall into thy place. The Gospel has no more to say to thee, but
this one word, Because I have called, and thou refusedst, I have stretched out
my hand, and thou regardedst not, but have set at naught all my Counsels, and
would none of my reproofs; I also will laugh at thy calamities, and mock
when thy fear comes; when thy fear comes as desolation, and thy destruction
comes as a Whirlwind, when distress and anguish comes upon thee; then shall
thou call, but I will not answer, thou shall seek me early, but shall not find
me.

Beloved, my hopes are, and I am not able to say, but that you are yet under
the first wish; Oh that they would. Christ is yet preaching you to faith, and
sends his Wish along with his Word, Oh that they would believe. Christ is yet
preaching Repentance and Conversion to you, and wishes, O that they would
repent, that they would be converted; and to this wish of my Lord, my Soul, and
all that is within me, says Amen.

Brethren, will you yet again say your Lord nay? shall Christ have his wish?
shall your Servant for Jesus sake shall I have my wish? will you now at last
consent to be sanctified, and to be saved? let me have this wish, and I dare
promise you from the Lord, you shall have yours, even whatever your Soul can
desire.

Brethren, this once hear, this once be prevailed upon; be content that your
lusts be rooted out, and your Lord planted into your Souls. Be content to be
pardoned, content to be converted, content to be saved. This once hear, lest if
ye now refuse, ye no ^ore be persuaded with, oh that they would! but be (...)
ever confounded with, oh that they had! Lest all our wishes, and wooings of
you, be turned into weepings, and mournings over you; this once hear; oh that
you would.

I heartily thank you, for your good wishes, and good will toward me; for your
willing and cheerful entertainment of my person, and attendance on my Ministry.
And particularly, for your passionate desire of my longer stay among you. Which
desire if God had not, my Soul could not have denied you. Though the Almighty,
to whose pleasure it is meet that we all submit, has said Nay to that wish of
yours; yet let your Souls say Amen, to this last of mine, that the Lord God
would dwell among you, and in you, both now and for ever.

And having thus finished my Labors among you, I shall now close up with this
double account.

1. Of my discharge of my Ministry in this place.

2. Of my deprivall. And shall so commit you to God, and to the word of his
Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance amongst
all them that are sanctified.

1. Of my discharge of my Ministry; what my Doctrine and manner of life has
been, is known to you; and what my aim and intent has been; is known to God.
The searcher of hearts, knows, that it is the salvation of Souls, that has
been the mark at which I have levelled. My way has been to use all plainness,
that I might be made manifest in your Consciences: Weaknesses, and infirmities,
both natural and sinful, (the Lord pardon it) I have had many. I am sensible,
that much more might have been done, both in public and in private, had it not
been for a weakly body, and a sloathful heart.

I repent that I have had no more zeal for God, no more compassion to Souls; I
repent that I have been no more constant, and importunate with you, about the
matters of Eternity. Oh Eternity, Eternity, that thou were no more in the
heart, and Lips of the Preacher in the hearts, and ears of the hearers. But
while I thus judge my self for my failings. Blessed be God for any sincerity to
his name, and good will to your Souls, that he has seen in me. Blessed be God,
I have a witness in my Conscience, and I hope in yours also, that I have not
shunned to declare to you, the whole Counsel of God. Brethren, I call Heaven
and Earth to witness this day, that I have set before you life and death, good
and evil, and have not ceased from day to day, to warn you to choose life, and
that good way, that leads to it; and to escape for your lives, from the way of
sin and death. Oh remember the many instructions I have given you, the many
Arguments whereby I have striven with you, the many Prayers that have been
offered up, for the guiding and gaining your Souls, into the path of life, and
the turning your feet out of the way of destruction. Oh might I be able to give
this Testimony concerning you all, at my departure, they have trodden in the
right path, they have chosen the good part that shall not be taken from them.

Brethren, Beloved, with whom I have traveled in birth, that Christ might be
formed in you; I must shortly give up my account in a more solemn Assembly;
will you help me to give it up with joy, by showing your Souls before the Lord,
as the Seal of my Ministry. Every sincere Convert among you, will be a Crown
of rejoicing to me in that day. So let me rejoice, and let my joy be the joy of
you all.

What shall I say more? If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort
of love, any bowels and mercies; if the Glory of the Eternal God, the Honor
of the everlasting Gospel, the safety of your immortal Souls, the incorruptible
Crown, the exceeding, eternal weight of glory, weigh any thing with you, then
once more let me be^eech you, by all this, to hearken to that word of the
Gospel, which God has spoken to you by me.

2. Of my deprivall. The most glorious morning has its Evening; the hour is
come wherein the Sun is setting, upon not a few of the Prophets; the shadows of
the Evening are stretched forth upon us; our day draws, our work seems to be
at an end. Our Pulpits, and our places must know us no more.

This is the Lords doing, let all the Earth keep silence before him.

It is not a light thing for me, Brethren, to be laid aside from the work, and
cast out of the Vineyard of the Lord; and it must be something of weight, that
must support under so severe a doom.

I know there are not a few, that will add to the affliction of the afflicted,
by telling the World, it is their own fault, they might prevent it if they
would; whether this be so or no, God knows, and let the Lord be Judge.
Blessed be God, whatever be, this is not laid to our charge, as the reason of
our seclusion, either insufficiency or scandal.

You are not ignorant, what things there are imposed on us, as the condition of
our continuing our Ministration; which how lawful and expedient soever they
seem in the Judgment of many, yet have the most specious Arguments that plead
for them, left me utterly dissatisfied in my Conscience about them.

I must profess before God, Angels, and men, that my non-submission, is not
from any disloyalty to Authority, nor from pride, humor, or any factious
disposition, or design; but, because I dare not contradict my light, nor do any
thing concerning which my heart tells me, the Lord says, do it not.

After all my most impartial Enquiries, after all my seeking counsel* from the
Lord, after all my considering, and consulting with men of all persuasions,
about these Matters, I find my self so far short of satisfaction, that I am
plainly put to this choice, to part with my Ministry, or my Conscience. I dare
not lie before God and the World; nor come and tell you, I approve, I allow, I
heartily consent, to what I neither do, nor can; but must choose rather, that
my Ministry be sealed up by my Sufferings, than lengthned out by a Lie: Through
the Grace of God, though men do, yet my heart shall not reproach me while I
live; If our heart condemn us, God is greater than our hearts, and knows all
things. But however, though I must now no longer act as a Minister. I shall,
through the Grace of God, endeavor peaceably, and patiently, to suffer as a
Christian.

I should, to testify my Obedience to Authority, have become all Things to all
Men, to the uttermost that I could, with any clearness of heart: But since
Matters stand so, that I must lose my place, or my peace, I cheerfully suffer
my self to be thrust off the Stage.

And now welcome the Cross of Christ, welcome Reproach, welcome Poverty, Scorn,
and Contempt, or whatever else may befall me on this account. This Morning I
had a Flock, and you had a Pastor; but now behold a Pastor without a Flock, a
Flock without a Shepherd: This Morning I had an House but now I have none;
Thi^ morning I had an Living, but now I have none: The Lord has given and the
Lord has takes away, Blessed be the Name of the Lord.

Beloved, I am sensible of many Weaknesses and Disadvantages I am under, which
may rende^ a suffering state the harder to be born; help me by your Prayers;
and not me only, but all my Brethren also, with whom my Lot must fall; Pray
for us for we trust that we have a good Conscience, in all things willing to
live honestly. Pray,

1. That God would make our Silence speak, and preach the same Holy Doctrine,
that we have preached with our Lips.

2. That he would give Supports answerable to our Sufferings; that he who
comfort those that are cast down, will also comfort his Servants that are
cast out.

3. That according to our earnest expectation, and our hope, as always, so now
also, Christ may be magnified in us, whether it be by Life, or by Death.

And thus, Brethren, I bid you all farewell, in the words of the Apostle, 2 Cor.
13. 11. Finally, Brethren, farewell, be perfect be of good comfort, be of one
mind, live in peace; and the God of Peace and Love shall be with you.

And that God of Peace, that brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus that
great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant,
make you perfect in every good Work, to do his Will; working in you that which
is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; To whom be Glory, for ever
and ever, AMEN.

FINIS.

