ALL THE TRANSACTIONS BETWEEN The Noblemen and Gentlemen Now in Arms for the
COVENANT, AND The Officers and Soldiers now in Arms by Authority of the
Parliament of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND.

Together With Several ORDERS made by the Committee of Estates in that Kingdom,
against all that have acted in the late unlawful ENGAGEMENT against the Kingdom
of ENGLAND.

SIgned by Command of the Commissioners for the Treaty, Mr. THO: HENDERSON.

Edinburgh, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty:
And Reprinted at London by John Field, October. 17. 1648.

Articles concluded upon by the Officers and Soldiers, now in Arms by Authority
of the Parliament of the Kingdom of Scotland.
WE being servants to the State, and unwilling to engage in a Civil War, do
conceive our selves obliged to remit the ways of prosecuting of all duties to
Religion, and to our King, to the determination of Church and State; And let
them move in it, as they will be answerable to God: Our lives shall ever be
ready to be exposed to all hazards for the good of both, and if all duties for
them, and for our friends release in England shall now be deserted, let the
blame before God and men lie upon the obstructors of it: And if no further use
be made of our service, We do Demand, I. That security be given to all who are
or have been engaged in this Service for their Persons, Honors and Estates,
whereby they may be free from all dangers, prejudices and censures whatsoever,
whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, for their Accession to the late Engagement, or
any thing done by them relating thereunto, or to this service for our own
defense: And this to be confirmed by Parliament, or the lawful Authority of the
Kingdom. II. That in regard of our extraordinary charges and loss, one Months
pay be instantly delivered unto us, for payment of the Irish Forces, and that
Boats and Ships presently he provided for their transportation into Ireland:
And for preventing all disorders upon their march through the West Country by
Free quartering, We do desire that a regular course may be taken for their
entertainment during their abode there, which shall be no longer then wind and
weather shall serve, and Boats be provided to Transport them. III. That one
Months means be provided for the Scottish Forces, and that they be not
disbanded, until the Irish Forces be Transported; and that sufficient pledges
be delivered for performance of what is desired. And that our Disbanding and
Transportation be done by Authority of the Committee of Estates.


These reasonable demands being performed, We the Irish are ready instantly to
march toward any part of the West coast which shall be thought most fit for
our Transportation into Ireland, and we of the Scottish, instantly to Disband:
Otherwise, rather then expose our Lives and Fortunes to the mercy of any, by
the want of fitting assurances for what is past, or the loss of our Honors by
deserting the Interest of those commanded by, or joined with us, We are
resolved to sacrifice our selves at the dearest rates we can; And take God to
witness how free we are of the guilt and consequences that may follow thereupon.

Stirling 18. September. 1648. We have appointed our Commissioners to stay no
longer then six a clock at night, to morrow the 19. and that the Treaty shall
then end; and that the Cessation shall expire eight hours thereafter, unless
the desires before mentioned be fully granted.


Signed by Warrant and Command of the Officers now in Arms by the Authority of
Parliament, JO: SPALDGUGE.

The Answer of the Noblemen and Gentlemen now in Arms for the Covenant, to the
Articles of the Officers and Soldiers that joined in the late unlawful
Engagment against England, and now continue in Arms to disturb the Peace of
this Kingdom.
WE have considered the Desires of the Officers and Soldiers at Sterling, and
do return this Answer, That the Imputation of neglecting duties to Religion and
to the King, mentioned in the Preface to the Articles, cannot be charged on us,
who have never been wanting in the use of all lawful means, to prosecute the
ends of our solemn League and Covenant: But upon those who joined in
prosecution of the late unlawful Engagement against our Neighbor Nation of
England, which has been destructive to all these ends.

Touching the first Article, we refer you to the Answer given in our former
Papers, and do here again declare, That we shall not challenge, nor incite any
other to challenge any of your number for their lives and Estates, but shall
endeavor to secure them so far as we can without approbation of their Actions,
or the breach of Covenant and Treaties. As for that which concerns exemption
from Church censures, we cannot meddle therein without breach of Covenant, but
must refer you to the Judicatories of the Kirk, to whom you may make your own
address, and receive their Answer.

Concerning the second and third Articles, we refer you to the Answer given by
our Commissioners, to the Commissioners on your side; which was, That we held
it unreasonable that they should desire any thing from us, or any other who
adhere to us, for satisfaction of their Officers and Soldiers, because we will
not involve our selves in any thing which may import an accession to the late
Engagement, or may be the ground of a quarrel to England against this Kingdom;
But if they had real Inclinations to Peace, they and their Adherents might,
without our accession thereunto, take course amongst themselves for giving
satisfaction to their Officers and Soldiers, and therefore did desire (and do
now again renew the same) that all their Forces, and the Forces of these who
adhere unto them, may be disbanded betwixt and the twenty fifth, or at furthest
the twenty eight day of this month of September, and that none of them be
found together after that time in Troops, Companies or Regiments; and we shall
betwixt and the said day, disband all our Forces, and none of them after that
time shall be found in Troops, Companies or Regiments; for the punctual
performance whereof on both sides, mutual pledges are to be given: And further
we cannot say in Answer to these Articles.

If you shall not agree to the Desires made in our last Papers of the 16 of
this Instant, and not rest satisfied with these Answers, but shall continue in
Arms to the disturbance of the Peace of this Kingdom, and persist in the
courses in which you are now engaged, contrary to the Declarations of the
General Assembly and their Commissioners: We do hereby certify unto you, that
all who have been active in the late Engagement, as well those in England, as
those in this Kingdom, and all such as have, or shall hereafter join with you,
are to be declared Enemies to both Kingdoms, and that this Kingdom will be
necessitated to concur with the Kingdom of England for punishing them
accordingly as breakers of the Covenant and Treaties; and we leave it to you
seriously to consider, whither the ways and courses you are upon, be really for
the good of the King and this Kingdom, or a safe way for the relief of your
friends that are prisoners in England.

We do declare, that unless the Desires contained in our Papers of the 16 of
this Instant, and in this Paper be clearly and positively agreed unto, and we
advertised thereof, before Friday the 22 of this instant, at twelve of the
Clock in the day, that then the Treaty shall end, and that the cessation from
Acts of Hostility and marching of. Forces shall expire eight hours thereafter.

September 20. 1648. Subscribed by command of the Noblemen and Gentlemen now in
Arms for the Covenant. Mr. THO. HENDERSON.

The last Offers of the Noblemen and Gentlemen now in Arms for the Covenant, To
the Earls of Crawford, Glencairn and Lancrick, George, Monro, and others joined
with them in the late unlawful Engagement against the Kingdom of England.
WE have seriously considered the sad and deplorable condition to which this
Kingdom is now brought, by your proceedings and actions in pursuance of the
late Engagement against our neighbor Nation of England, with whom we are joined
in Covenant, and the fearful desolation that is likely further to come upon it,
by the return of a part of that Army which invaded England; And after several
Debates and Conferences with your Lordships, these several days by past, both
by word and writing, We do find the state of the difference betwixt your
Lordships and us to be this: That which hinders agreement upon our part, is the
point of Conscience, forbidding us to do any thing which may infer an accession
to the late Engagement, the desire we have to keep the Covenant and Treaties,
and not break the Union betwixt the Kingdoms, and to avoid a quarrel with
England, which may destroy this Kingdom, and entail a War upon us and our
posterity, and to prevent the exposing of the Cause and Kingdom to the same
dangers under which they now lie, from which grounds we cannot part; Whereas
the Articles on your part, which hinder agreement, are such from which your
Lordships may easily recede. We have very much endeavored in our last Paper to
give your Lordships all just and reasonable satisfaction; yet that it may
further appear how desirous we are to prevent an Intestine War, and to have the
Peace of the Kingdom settled, we offer unto your Lordships these Articles
following to be agreed on.

I. That for easing the burdens of the Kingdom, and to prevent famine and
desolation, all forceson both sides, whither in the field, or in the Garrisons
of Berwick and Carlisle, or the Garrisons within the Kingdom, be disbanded
betwixt the 25 day of this instant month of Sep. II. That the securing and
settling of Religion at home, and the promoting the work of Reformation abroad
in England and Ireland, be referred to the determination of the general
Assembly or their Commissioners, and that all Civil questions and differences
whatsoever, be referred to the determination of a Parliament to be speedily
called. III. To prevent the imminent dangers to Religion, and a quarrel with
our neighbor Nation in the mean time, until the meeting of a Parliament (which
cannot be done without a Treaty betwixt the Kingdoms) That all of your number
who have been employed in public place or trust, shall forbear the exercise
thereof, and not come to the Committee of Estates, to the end there may be a
Committee of Estates consisting of such Members as are free of the late
Engagement, and against whom England may not have this exception, That such
have the managing of the affairs of this Kingdom as they esteem their Enemies,
and with whom they cannot treat. And if your Lordships shall out of love to
this almost ruined Kingdom, yield to those our just Desires, we are very
confident that the Peace of this Kingdom shall be settled, the Union betwixt the
Kingdoms continued, and all quarrels prevented.
Woodside, 16 Sept. 1648. Signed by command of the Commissioners for the
Treaty. Mr. Tho: Henderson.

At Edinburgh, 22 Septem. 1648.
An Order of the Committee of Estates, declaring all those enemies to Religion,
King and Kingdoms, that shall persist to commit any Rapines, do any violence,
or acts of Hostility, under any pretense of Authority whatsoever, and forthwith
to lay down Arms.
WHereas diverse persons in the Isles and Highlands of this Kingdom, under
pretense of Commissions issued to the Captains and Chieffs of Clanns by the
Duke of Hamilton, or others who Authorized the late unlawful Engagement against
England, and are now in Arms in this Kingdom for prosecution of the same, have
combined themselves, and entered into a Confederacy, to invade, fall upon, and
destroy the L. Marquis of Argyles Lands; and to spoil, ruin and lay waste
other places of this Kingdom, by exercising all acts of Hostility against the
well affected. To the end therefore that all such persons may be rightly
informed, and not misled, by entering into so a horrid a Rebellion, of following
such desperate Counsels and Courses, tending to their own destruction, and the
disturbance of the Peace of the Kingdom; especially in the present condition of
Affairs, when the Army which lately invaded England is wholly dissipated and
routed, and considerable Forces already raised, and more to be leavyed for
suppressing the remainder thereof now in this Kingdom, and others whosoever
shall adhere to them, or join with them in Arms to the promoting of that
Engagement, and continuance of our Troubles; When the Parliament of Englands
Forces are also presently lying before the Towns of Berwick and Carlisle, for
reducing the same to the Kingdom of England, whereby the Kingdom was in a fair
way to attain an end of Troubles, and all Obstructions of the Union betwixt
both the Nations to be happily removed. The great desires that we have of the
Peace and quiet of the Kingdom; And that all such who are or shall be ensnared
by false Suggestions, may be reclaimed and drawn off such Rebellious
Interprizes, which will kindle the flames and combustion of the Kingdom, and
retard the establishment of a desired Peace, Have made us to exhort, like as we
do require and charge all such Captains and Chieffs of Clanns, and others who
are now in charge, or adhere to them in this their Rebellion, To show
themselves good and dutiful Subjects, forthwith to lay down Arms, to forsake
that Rebellion, and to behave themselves in all quiet and peaceable manner;
certifying them and each of them, That if they persist and continue to commit
any Rapines, do any Violence, or acts of Hostility under any pretense or
Authority whatsoever, They shall be esteemed as Enemies to Religion, King and
Kingdoms, and pursued and punished accordingly: And hereof they are to take
special notice, and give obedience under all highest pains. And we Ordain these
presents to be published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and other places
needful; and also to be Printed, that none pretend ignorance.

Mr. Tho: Henderson.

Edinburgh, 22. September, 1648.
Whereas many within this Kingdom have joined in Arms for prosecuting of an
unlawful Engagement against our Neighbor Nation of Ecgland, contrary to the
Solemn League and Covenant, and Treaties betwixt the Kingdoms, the Warnings and
Declarations of the Commission of the General Assembly, 1647. And likewise
against the unanimous Proceedings and Declarations of the late General Assembly
and their Commissioners: And whereas God has evidently manifested his
displeasure and wrath against their sinful ways and proceedings, in oppressing
the welaffected in this Kingdom, invading the Kingdom of England, by Routing
and Defeating their Army there: And now some of their Army have returned to
this Kingdom, and joined with others their associates to disturb the Peace
thereof; By which their Proceedings and Actions, the work of Reformation of
Religion has been almost wholly overturned, the Liberty of the Subject very
near destroyed, Authority weakened, the Person of the King put in hazard, the
Union betwixt the Kingdoms endeavored to be broken, occasion of quarrel given
to our neighbor Nation, and this Kingdom brought to so sad and deplorable
condition, as (if the Lord in mercy prevent not) Famine and Desolation is like
to de added to all our troubles and miseries: Therefore to prevent the eminent
dangers to Religion, and to the King, for settling the Peace of this greatly
distracted Kingdom; And to the end the affairs of this Kingdom may not be
managed by such persons as the Kingdom of England do esteem Enemies for their
concurrence in the late Engagement: The Committee of Estates consisting of such
persons as were no minated to be on the Commission of Parliament, and did
disassent in Parliament from, and Protest against the late unlawful Engagement,
Do declare, that they are resolved to Act and Direct in the public affairs by
virtue of the Authority of that Nomination of the Parliament, and their Legal
Protestation in it: And that in Acting and Directing, they resolve to proceed
with the advice and consent of such Members of the late Parliament, as did
concur with them in the said Protestation, and do now concur in Arms in
prosecuting of the same: As also with the advice and consent of such two
Commissioners, and one Burgess as shall be entrusted respectively by the Shires
and Burghs joining with us in Arms for the Covenant; and that they will not
admit into their Counsels, or Committees, any persons who have concurred in
arms or Counsel for the late unlawful Engagement, or who have Subscribed the
Bond, or Sworn, or Subscribed any Oath, or Declaration for prosecuting that
Engagement. And further, that they will admit none who have been aiding, or
shall be aiding or assisting to, or abetting and agenting for these who are now
joined in arms with the Earl of Crawford, Earl of Glencairn, Earl of Lanerick,
Lord Sinclair, Lord Register, George Monro, and their adherents, nor any such
as have, or shall declare their judgment against this Cause and our
Proceedings in pursuance thereof. And we ordain these Presents to be published;
and also to be Printed that none pretend ignorance.

Mr. THO: HENDERSON.

Edinburgh, 22 September, 1648.
THe Committee of Estates considering that the putting of the disaffected and
Malignant Persons in Places of trust and power, in the several Shires and
Burghs of this Kingdom, has been one of the greatest causes which has brought
all these evils upon this Kingdom: And for the reasons contained in the former
Act, do therefore find it necessary to require, And do hereby command and
require the several Shires in the Election of their Commissioners to
Parliament, and Burghs in Election of their Commissioners to Parliament,
Magistrates and Counsel, that they make choice of none but such as have
continued constant and faithful in this cause: And that they will not admit any
to be in the former places of Trust, Commissions, Magistracy or Counsels, who
have concurred in Arms or Counsel for the late unlawful Engagement, or who have
subscribed the Bond, or sworn, or subscribed any Oath or Declaration for
prosecuting that Engagement: And further, That they will admit none who have
been aiding, or shall be aiding or assisting to, or aborting and agenting for
these who are now joined in Arms with the Earls of Crawford, Earl of Glencairn,
Earl of Lanerick, Lord Sinclair, Lord Register, George Monro, and their
Adherents, nor any such as have or shall declare their judgment against the
Cause, and our proceedings in pursuance thereof. And we Ordain these presents
to be published at the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and other places needful; and
also to be Printed, that none pretend ignorance.

Mr. THO: HENDERSON.

FINIS.

