THE Last Will and Testament OF SVPERSTITION: Eldest Daughter to Antichrist,
THE Eldest Son to LVCIFER, the Prince of this World, of the Family of Popery,
in the Kingdom of Idolatry:

Being fallen into a grievous fit of Sickness, without all hopes of Recovery.

Made in the Prelates Clymactericall year, Anno Domini. 1641.

LONDON Printed by John Hammond. 1642.

THE Last Will and Testament of Superstition, eldest Daughter to Antichrist,
eldest son to Lucifer, the Prince of this World, of the family of Popery, in
the Kingdom of Idolatry:

Being fallen into a grievous Fit of sickness, without all hopes of Recovery,
wade, An. Dom. 1641.

IN the name of his Holiness, Antichrist the Pope, sobeit.

I Superstition, of the Parish of blind Devotion, in the County of Corrupt
Doctrine, and in the Kingdom of Idolatry, being infirm and weak of body,
crased in memory, and worse in Mind, have made this my Testament and last Will
in writing, bearing date the Twelfth day of February, in the year of my
confusion, 1641. Wherein I bequeath as follows.

Inprimis,
I give and bequeath my Annimalls, and interioriors, to be disposed of, by
Lucifer, the Prince of this World; whom I have devoutly and faithfully served,
during my prosperity, as shall please him; whether it be in Purgatory, or
otherwise; and as for my exterior body, and fleshly Members thereof, I commit
and bequeath unto the earth, from whence they came, having been Earthly
sensual and devilish, after my Funeral Expenses and debts be paid and
discharged, in such manner and form as hereafter I shall prescribe, to be
therein interred, and covered, with perpetual oblivion.

Item, I give and bequeath all my Tenements, that are Freehold, lying or false
being, in the Parish of Ignorance, within the County of Blind Devotion, before
mentioned, with all the Appurtenances thereunto belonging, commonly called, or
known by the name, or names of Lack-witt, and Want-Vnderstanding, unto my
elder Brother Little wit, and the heir Males of his body lawfully begootten;
and for want of such issue, to his heirs female, and their heirs; and for
want of such issue, to his heirs general at Law.

Item, I give and bequeath all those tenements, lying or false being, which are
Coppihold within the Parish and County aforesaid, commonly called or known by
the name of Rash-wit, and Self-will, unto my younger brother Obstinate
Perverseness, to have and to hold the same during his Natural life: and after
his extinguishment to my right hei^es.

Item, I give and bequeath my Goods and Chattels as follows.

Imprimis, I give and bequeath my whole Library of Books both in Print and
Manuscript, containing his Holiness Traditions, and Inventions, the holy
Apocrypha, Prayer Books to Saints, Ave Mary's, and the Old and New Testament
mis-interpreted, and corrupted, and other the like, to my well-beloved Uncles,
Cardinal False-heart, Cardinal Would have wit, Cardinal Want-wit, Doctor
Corrupt-doctrine, Doctor Wrest-scripture, Doctor Canon, and Doctor Ambition, to
use and study such things as may be necessary to uphold and maintain his
Holinesses Kingdom.

Item, I give and bequeath all those Goods and Chattels placed in my Closet and
private Chambers, as Pictures, Images of the Virgin Mary, of Christ and the
twelve Apostles, of Saints and Angels, and the like, unto my well-beloved
Cosens, Newters, half Protestant, half Papist, or otherwise, to be privately
conveyed to Rome, there by his Ho^^nesse to be disposed of; or, at my decease
to ^e burned as a sacrifice accompanying me to desolation.

Item, I give and bequeath all those Ornaments in my house of Divinew or ship,
Masses, Diriges, Altars, Bowings, Cringings, Cr^eping, whipping, Beating,
Kneesing, Standing, and all other the appurtenances to that exercise belonging,
to be with me abolished, and for ever buried in everlasting obscurity.

Item, I give and bequeath all my wearing appatrell, both woollen and linen, my
outward garments, as Plush, Velvet, Satin, Scarlet, Crimson, Purple, and the
like, to my well-beloved friends, Dukes, Earls, Lords, Barons, and other
temporal Knights, and to be by them worn for my sake, and not any more by any
of the Clergy, whether Cardinal, Prelate or Bishop; as heretofore. My other
garmen s.as Lawn sleeves, Hoods, Cop^s, Bag, Surpluses, and the like, I give
and bequeath unto Drapers, Sempsters, and the like, to be converted to other
uses more necessary for the body and profitable for the purse. My Beads,
Crosses, shaven Crowns. Leather-pared Friars garments, black and gray, I give
and bequeath to Priest, Jesuits, Monks, Friars, Capuchins, and by them to be
used and exercised in any parts of his Holinesses Dominions and Kingdoms of
Idolatry, where they can profess the same; and where not immediately after my
departure to be expulsed and extirpated.

Item, I give and bequeath toward my Funeral Expenses, 3000. Wax Candles, as
many Tapers, 10000. pounds to the Singers that shall sing Mass, and Dirges at
the same; and 5000. pounds per Annum, for Prayers to be continually used for my
resurrection again, in due time.

Item, I do nominate and appoint my ill-affected friends, whom otherwise I
cannot choose, but must trust as Executors of this my Last Will and Testament,
The Laws and Ordinances of the High Court of Parliament now assembled in the
Kingdom of England, by whom I have received my deadly wound; And the Justices
of Peace, and other Officers within the several Counties, where I have been
affected and prosperous, I do nominate and appoint to my Overseers, to see
this my Will executed and duly performed.

In witness whereof I have set to my hand, SVPERSTITION, In the presence of R.
P. C.D. P.I. F. etc. Per I. B. Gent.

FINIS.

