TWO LETTERS From William Basil Esquire; Attorney General of IRELAND;

The one, To the Right Honorable, John Bradshaw, Lord President of the Council
of State:

The other, To the Right Honorable William Lenthal Esquire; Speaker of the
Parliament of England, Of a Great VICTORY Obtained by the Parliaments Forces in
the North of Ireland, on the Plains of Lisnegarvy, against the Enemy there:

Wherein were 1400 slain, Colonel John Hamilton taken Prisoner, and Seventeen
more of quality.

With a Relation of the taking of Dumcree; and of the Surrender of
Carrickfergus upon Articles.

ORdered by the Parliament, That these Letters be forthwith printed and
published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of
England. 1649.

To the Right Honorable John Bradshaw, Lord President of the Council of State.
Right Honorable,
SInce my last unto your Lordship, viz. on Thursday last, being the sixth of
December instant, our Forces in the North engaged with the Forces of the Enemy
there, which consisted of that Party which the Lords of Ardes and Clanduboys
brought with them out of Munster, and also of those under the command of George
Monro, part whereof were formerly his own, and part were of Owen O Neals
Ultoghs, in the whole consisting of about Two thousand Foot and Eight hundred
Horse; their Design was to Relieve Carrickfergus, but were met withal by ours
near unto Lisnegarvy: After some dispute between our Forlorn and their
Rere-guard, at a boggy pass on the Plains of Lisnegarvy, their whole Army were
so frighted and disordered, that they were soon totally Routed, and the chief
work of our main Body was only Pursuit and Execution, which was done
effectually by the space of about eight or ten miles. Letters from the place
speaks of a thousand of the Enemy to be killed; but the Messenger who brought
the News hither, who was present at the Work, affirms Fourteen hundred; four
hundred whereof were killed by a Party commanded by Major King, Son to Sir
Robert King, who possessed himself of a Pass, to which the Enemy was likely to
come; this was the place where George Monro swam over, who with the Lord of
Ardes fled to Charlemount in great haste at the beginning of the Business: All
the Enemies Ammunition and Baggage were taken, together with Five hundred of
their Horses, with most of their Foot Officers; Colonel Henderson a Scotchman,
who betrayed Sligo to the Irish, was killed; Colonel John Hamilton, one other
Scotchman, who killed O Conelly, and burnt Lisnegarvy, is taken Prisoner: also
it is affirmed, That the Lord Clanduboys, and Philip mac Mull Moor O Relly, one
of the most active men amongst the Rebels, are slain. Our Party was in pursuit
of the Enemy when the Messenger came away; we lost but one Corporal of Horse,
and three private Soldiers. Your Lordship may please further to understand,
That Drumcree, a strong Garrison of the Enemies, being twelve miles from Trym,
and a Receptacle for their Thieving Toryes, was upon Friday last was sevennight
taken by Major Stanley Governor of Trym. To morrow is the day whereon
Carrick-fergus is by Articles to be Surrendered: Here are about One thousand
three hundred landed from England since Saturday last. It is an exceeding great
comfort to us all here, to see the good hand of God so evidently with us
against our bloody Enemies: He alone, I hope and pray, will settle Peace and
Happiness in England and Ireland, In the continuance of these his Mercies.

Dublin, 12 December. 1649. My Lord, I am your Lordships most humble Servant,
WILLIAM BASIL.

This night Colonel Chidley Coot is come to Town with Letters from his Brother
the Lord President, the substance of his Brothers Letters and his own Relation,
is briefly thus:

THe Scotch Lords and George Monro, fell into the Clanboys with 4000 men, and
the fifth of this instant the Enemy drew out their Army, and would have fought,
but our Party wanting some Horse, forbear to engage; the next day the Enemy
drew off, and our Army following them, sent out a Forlorn Hope of 200 men, the
Horse Commanded by Captain Dunbar, of Sir Theophilus Jones his Regiment, and
the Foot by Major Gore, of the Lord Presidents Regiment; the 200 men fell into
the Rear of the Enemy, and before the Army could come up, with the loss of one
Corporal, and two private Soldiers, routed the whole Army, of whom were slain
in the place a thousand men, the President writes. And a Party of Horse
Commanded the nearest way to the Blackwater, to stay that Pass, slew Four
hundred more there, where George Monro saved himself by swimming; the Lord
Clanboys is supposed to be slain, and Philip mac Mulmore O Relly, and most of
their Foot Officers; Colonel John Hamilton is Prisoner, and seventeen more of
Quality, they gave no Quarter to any Irish: Thus you may see what wonders our
God does for us, the Lord give us thankful hearts suitable to such mercies. All
their Foot Arms taken, and Five hundred Horse, eight Barrels of Powder, and all
the Baggage they had.

To the Right Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the Parliament of
England.
Right Honorable,
IN my last I gave your Honor an account of the taking of Killileagh and
Down-Drum by our forces in the North; since which time (viz.) on Thursday last,
being the Sixth of December instant, they engaged with the Forces of the Enemy
there, which consisted of that party which the Lords of Ards and Clanduboys
brought with them out of Munster, and also of those under the command of George
Monro, part whereof were formerly his own, and part were of Owen O Neals
Ultoghs, in the whole consisting of about Two thousand Foot, and eight hundred
Horse; their Design was to relieve Carrickfergus, but were met withal by ours
near unto Lisnegarvy: After some dispute between our Forlorn and their
Rereguard, at a Boggy Pass on the Plains of Lisnegarvy, their whole Army were
so frighted and disordered, that the chief work of our main body was only
Pursuit and Execution, which was done by the space of about eight or ten miles;
Letters from the place speaks of a thousand of the Enemy to be killed: The
Messenger who brought the News hither (who was present at the Work) affirms,
Fourteen hundred; all their Ammunition and Baggage were taken, together with
most of their Foot Officers, Col: Henderson a Scotchman, who betrayed Sligo to
the Irish was killed, and Col: John Hamilton, who killed O Connelly, and burnt
Lisnegarvy, taken Prisoner: Our Party was in pursuit of the Victory when the
Messenger came away; no account is given of the Lords of Ards and Clanduboys,
but it is affirmed, That Monro adventured to swim over a River to save himself:
We lost but one Corporal of Horse, and three private Soldiers, to God only be
the praise. Drumcree a strong Garrison of the Enemies, being twelve miles from
Trim, a Receptacle for their thieving Toryes, was upon Friday last was
sevennight taken by Major Stanley the Governor of Trim. To morrow is the day
whereon Carrickfergus is by Articles to be surrendered, whereof I made mention
to your Honor heretofore. Col: Moor is safely arrived here with his Recruits
for his Regiment, and about Six hundred others, and desires to have his service
presented unto your Honor; and withal, to signify unto you, That these men
thus arrived, brought neither Arms, Victual, Money nor Clothes with them.

Whilst I am writing, some other particulars worth your notice are come unto
my hand; (viz.) That the Enemies. Army was at least Four thousand; And that
upon the routing of them, Major King, Son to Sir Robert King, with a Party
possessed himself of a Pass to which the Enemy was likely to come, and there killed
Four hundred of them; this was the place where George Monro swam over, who with
the Lord of Ardes made haste away with the first for Charlemount; and
Clanduboys and Philip Mac Mul Moor O Relly are reported to be killed, the latter
being one of the most active men the Rebels had. To God only again be the
praise, and that he would be pleased to continue our God in the manifestation
of his mercies toward us, and Justice against our bloody Enemies, is the daily
prayer of

Dublin, 12 December. 1649. Your Honors most humble Servant, William Basil.

FINIS.

