To the High Court of Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and
Ireland. The Remonstrance and humble Petition of Susanna Bastwick (the
distressed Widow of John Bastwick Doctor in Physic) and her Children.
SHOWS,
THat upon your Petitioners Husbands just Complaint made to the Parliament in
the year (1640) they called him home from his long Exile in the Isles of
Scilly, and freed him from his many years cruel close Imprisonment, He then
petitioned the House of Commons for Reparations, They referred his Petition to a
Committee, Witnesses were examined, and after a full Hearing of his Cause in
the House of Commons, it was there Resolved upon the Question, That all the
Proceedings of the High Commission Court, Star Chamber, and Council Board, in
Sentencing, Excommunicating, Suspending from the practice of Physic, Fining,
Pilloring, Cutting off the Ears, Close Imprisoning, and Banishing of your
Petitioners Husband, were contrary to the Law, and the Liberty of the Subject;
and that all those who had so unjustly sentenced him, should make him
satisfaction for his Sufferings and Damages sustained thereby. That troubles
coming suddenly upon this Nation, the Lords and Commons Ordered no private
business (for a time) should be heard, and that Order being often renewed, put
a stop to the begun Justice in his Cause.

That your Petitioners Husband being then employed in special Service by the
Parliament, was taken Prisoner, and for full two years and four months kept
close Prisoner in Dungeons and loathsome places for his fidelity to the
Parliament, which hindered the further prosecuting of his Petition; but when by
way of Exchange he had obtained his Liberty, his Cause was presented unto the
House of Lords, where it had also a full and deliberate Hearing, and his
shameful Sufferings (which were so cruelly executed that thereby he lost the
hearing of one Ear irrecoverably,) his cruel close Imprisonment, Banishment,
great Losses in his Estate (being necessitated to sell his Land, which was your
Petitioners Jointure,) besides the loss of his practice in Physic (which
before his troubles was very great,) were by sufficient Witnesses (sworn and
examined) fully proved. The Lords Ordered, That the several Sentences and
Proceedings against your Petitioners Husband should be for ever totally
vacated, obliterated, and taken off the File in all Courts where they were
remaining, as being illegal, most unjust, and against the Liberty of the
Subject, the Law of the Land and Magna Charta, and unfit to continue upon
Record.

That the Lords gave Judgment, That your Petitioners Husband should have four
thousand pounds paid him by way of Damages: They appointed a Committee to
consider how to raise the four thousand pounds.

That it was Ordered by the Lords, your Petitioners Husband should by the
advice of his Council Learned, bring in an Ordinance to be passed both Houses
of Parliament, That the four thousand pounds assigned him by that House, may be
raised out of the Estates real and personal, of the Duke of Lenox, the Earl of
Dorset, the Lord Cottington, and Sir Francis Windebank; An Ordinance was
presented, passed in the House of Lords, and from them sent by their own
Messengers unto the House of Commons, where it lay Dormant a long time, but at
length it was there read the first and second time, and the House of Commons in
the Debate thereof (considering that your Petitioners Husband and his whole
Family were utterly ruined by the foresaid unjust and cruel Sentences) referred
it to a Committee, to proceed upon that Ordinance sent from the Lords with
Amendments and Additions of Names for the raising his Reparations out of the
Estates of all those which that House had formerly voted ought to give him
Damages.

That Committee met, They proceeded upon and perfected that Ordinance, and in
their Amendments it was Ordered and Ordained by the Lords and Commons assembled
in Parliament, That for increase of Reparations your Petitioners Husband should
have five thousand pounds paid unto him, and to be raised out of the Estates of
Dr Juxon, James Duke of Linox, James Marquess Hambleton, Philip Earl of
Pembrook, Henry Earl of Holland, Edward Earl of Dorset, John Earl of
Bridgwater, Francis Lord Cottington, Sir Henry Vane (the elder) Knight, Sir
Nathaniel Brent Knight, Sir John Bramston Knight, Sir John Finch Knight; or out
of the Estates of any one of them, as in that Ordinance it does more fully
appear.

That Colonel Rigby Chairman to that Committee was appointed to make the Report
and to present that Ordinance with the Amendments and Additions of Names to the
House of Commons, but in the interim he was made a Judge, and (as he said) could
not sit in the House except they called him in to sit amongst Them; yet he
earnestly desired some others of that Committee to make the Report and present
the Ordinance; and for that end, when he was to ride the Circuit, he delivered
unto your Petitioners Husband all his Orders and the foresaid Ordinance of the
Lords and Commons as it was agreed upon and wrote with his own hands in the
Committee, promising if it were not presented by some other, that when he
returned he would adventure to go into the House of Commons to present that
Ordinance unto them; but soon after his return from the Circuit he departed
this life: others promised fair, but delayed the performance; in so much as
that Parliament was dissolved before the full consummation of our Suit was
obtained, and our Ordinance then lay as dead until the Sessions of the last
Parliament, to whom your Petitioners Husband presented his Grievances.

The Committee appointed by that Parliament for Petitions, took special
Cognizance of his Cause, and they unanimously agreed that he ought to have five
thousand pounds Damages paid unto him out of the Estates of all those, or any
one of those, which the former Parliament in their Votes and that Ordinance of
the Lords and Commons with the Amendments and Additions of Names, had Ordered
and Ordained should give him Reparations: They Ordered, that Alderman Ireton
should report their Result, but before he could make the Report that Parliament
was also dissolved.

That your Petitioners Husband then made his Addresses unto his Highness the
Lord Protector, who held it most just that he should have the five thousand
pounds Damages which was assigned him by the Parliament; his Highness refer^d
it to his Council to consider of a speedy course for the raising of his
Reparations, The Council Ordered, That Alderman Ireton should bring in the
Report, which he should have made of our Case to the last Parliament, and upon
the Hearing thereof, his Highness with his Council, Ordered, That your
Petitioners Husband for his then present supply, should have two hundred
pounds, which he no sooner had received, but he was forced to pay it away unto
several men to whom he was indebted: And his Highness, with his Council, did
then also by an Order recommend his Case, and Petition, unto this present
Parliament, that so the begun Justice of the two former Parliaments in his
Cause might be fully completed, and his Reparations confirmed, and settled upon
him in Parliament by your Honors. Now it has pleased the Almighty lately to
put an end to her dear Husbands Sufferings, by receiving him into Everlasting
Happiness, but the Sufferings, Afflictions and Miseries of your Petitioner, and
her fatherless Children, are thereb^ daily more and more increased; therefore
your Petitioner, humbly spreads their deplorable condition before your Honors,
and has here stated their Cause, which she hat^ done with as much brevity as
her dear Husbands, her own, and families sufferings, the long depending of the
Cause in the former Parliament, and the many impediments of our Redress, would
permit.

Now your Petitioner in a real confidence, that that Justice which has so far
proceeded in her dear Husbands Cause, and was always cordially owned by the two
former Parliaments, and by his Highness and his Council so we(...) approved of,
and by them recommended to this present Parliament, will be by your Honors
effectuated; She humbly entreats you to look upon his long shameful and cruel
Sufferings (it being full one and twenty years since his troubles first began)
and consider how most unjustly he was sentenced, suffered in his Body, Estate,
Reputation and Relations; was utterly undone, his Life made miserable, his
Death hastened, and thereby your Petitioner is made exceeding miserable, and
now in the Winte^ of her age is comfortless, helpless, left indebted, and
reduced to such want and poverty, that unless your Honors do her speedy and
impartial Justice, she and her poor Children are like inevitably to perish.
Therefore she does humbly present unto your pious Considerations these
particulars. 1. That her Jointure is sold, the money long since spent, with
paying many debts contracted by her dear Husbands many years troubles, and to
supply his families necessities. 2. She is now aged, weak and sickly. 3. That
by the Death of her dear Husband she is deprived of all ways and means to ^et a
subsistence. 4. That as poverty is very grievous to all, so it is extremely
bitter to those that have lived in plenty. 5. That she has been for many years
(and now in a more special manner is) a woman of sorrows, and all her hopes of
future comfort in this life wholly depends upon your doing her Justice.

And here we her Children thrice humbly beseech your Honors to consider, 1.
That by the unjust and cruel Proceedings against our deceased Father we are
deprived of our Inheritance. 2. That now with our years our miseries increase,
we having no way whereby to get a livelihood, that Estate being sold and
consumed by vexatious troubles, which by our Birth, we all both Sons and
Daughters, had a right unto for our Portions. 3. We are nipped in the Bud, left
poor and fatherle(...), and by the oppressions and pressing necessities which
lie heavy upon us and our most dear Mother, are constrained to cry and humbly
to sue to your Honors for Justice 4. That our Fathers blood, which was so
unjustly and shamefully shed, has a voice, and cries loud to God and to your
Honors also for Justice, that so Reparations ^ay be made unto his distressed
and ruined family: And as the Lord has now cast us upon your Honors care to
see us righted, and has given you full power to help us so we doubt not but he
will give you ears open to hear our Cry, and hearts willing to improve that
power God has given you to relieve us; and will bring to your remembrance our
Fathers piety, and integrity both toward God and men, and that after all his
other unjust Sufferings he did undergo close Imprisonment for his faithful
adhering to the Parliament, and seriously lay to your hearts how many years,
with great expenses and the neglect of all other his affairs, he waited for
Justice, which added to his Sufferings; and how in all his sufferings we have
deeply suffered.

In Consideration of the Premises, we both Mother and Children do jointly
again and again humbly beseech your Honors, as you are Husbands to Wivs, and
Fathers to Children, compassionate our sad and distressed condition, and take a
speedy course for the raising and sure settling upon your Petitioners the five
thousand pounds which was Ordered and Ordained by the Lords and Commons
assembled in the former Parliament for our Reparation: That after our so long
waiting for Justice it may be so perfected by your Honors, that an end may now
be put to our great Sufferings.

Thus to consider the Cause of the poor Widow and Fatherless will be a
righteous and just act in you, well pleasing to God, acceptable to all good
men, will draw a blessing from Heaven upon you and your posterity, and thereby
you will oblige your Petitioners to praise the Lord for you.

And ever to pray for your Honors.

