THE Holy Scripture Owned, AND THE Athenians Injustice Detected, By the Abused
QUAKER.
THeir charge (in their Mercury of June 11. 1692.) upon the Quakers, as
speaking contemptibly of tae Bible, is contradicted by themselves in their not
only saying, they equal Apocrypha with Scrptare, but also in accusing Samuel
Fisher, for esteeming some of those Books called the Apocrypha of as Divine
Original, as those called Canonical; and for saying, if such Synods as
shouldered out all those Books from sharing with the other writings, in what
they lay just claim to had been spiritually discerning, they would have seen
cause to have joined some, at least, of these Apocryphal Scriptures to an equal
Participation of the Plea of Divine Original, and Inspiration with the rest:
And further that whatever is truly to be predicated of the one, or can be
pleaded sollidly on the behalf of the one, which you call your Canon; as to the
Divinity of their Original, the same may be pleaded on the behalf of not a few
of the other, instancing 2d of Esdras, Epistle of Jer. Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom
of Solomon.

From all which observe, that Samuel Fisher is so far from speaking
contemptibly of the Bible, that he confesses the Scriptures which are esteemed
Canonical, to be of Divine Original and Inspiration, and argues for Some, at
least of those Apocryphal Scriptures to participate of the Plea of Divine
Originaul and Inspiration (and so does some of your own Doctors). How should he
then contemn the Bible? Or with the Papists invalidate the Authority of those
Writings, as charged, when he confesses them to be of a Divine Original and
Authority? The Apocryphal Scriptures he modestly owns some of them, to be of
the same Authority which these men deem Popery, so that it seems the Bible is
more magnified by Samuel, Fisher, than by these pretended Athenians.

And it is observable that after they have instanced Sam. Fishers Book, for some
Apocryphal Scriptures to be of Divine Original, they dare not in plain words
deny, nor do they refute what he says in that Case; but conclude with a
scornful Reflection, and false-infinuation, viz. Whence we may judge, whether
he traveled to Rome for nothing. And yet we presume they dare not say, that
none of the Apocryphal Scriptures, were given by Divine Inspiration.

Their other false charge, against the Quakers in general, on Samuel Fishers
account is, viz. Lastly, They use the same detracted Expressions concerning it,
with the Papists and Jesuiss, calling it a Nose of Wax, a Lesbian Rule, a dead
Letter, etc. and bid us see S. Fisher, p. 48, of Rusticus ad Accidemicos, And
we would have them see it better. 1st, That there is no proof against the
People called Quakers, that they call the Scripture, a Nose of Wax, etc.
Secondly, Nor does Samuel Fisher so call it with the Papists and Jesuits (as
falsely charged) But that in its meanest, and most altered, and adulterated
Capacity, as wrested and torn, and like a Nose of Wax; twisted and twined into
several Shapes by men's untrue Transcripts, Variety of Lections, and Senses
through Misrenderings, corrupt Copyings, Correctings, and Commentings, etc --
With more of the same Import, naturally depending thereupon, in all which he
does not appear upon his own Judgment and Principle, to give the Holy Scripture
the Title of a Nose of Wax. etc. But infers it as the consequence of such Men's
Abuse of it, who alter, adulterate, wrest, twist and twine it: Therefore you
pretended Athenians have dealt very disingeniously in this matter. First, In
thus charging the Quakers in General, from a Particular. Secondly, In
perverting Sam. Fishers Words and Sense to an evil End, never designed by him;
that he should one while own the Holy Scripture to be of Divine Original and
Inspiration, aed another while contemptibly term it a Nose of Wax; is so
monstrous that it is incredible to rational men, especially to such as knew him,
his Sobriety and Learning, which he himself set little by in Comparison of the
Excellency of the Divine Knowledge of Christ Jesus, which God in Mercy made him
a Partaker of.

Besides he writ of the Scriptures under diverse considerations, and considered
it in it is primitive, best, and purest Aspect, as at first given forth,
declaring himself to be No Pander for the Papists, as belyed, but a just,
plain, and impartial Pleader for the Scripture; a Doer of right to those Holy
Writings, which are egrediously wronged by both Papists and Protestants, and
vindicates many, falsely supposed to be Slighters and Disowners of the
Scripture, i. e. (Our Friends) that they do own, value, honor and exalt the
Scripture, both in ascribing all that to it which it assumes to it self, and in
Preaching and practicing that holy Life which is the end of it (Thus far S. F.)
in his very Answer unfairly cited against him, p. 48, 49 of his Rusticus, and
2d Apologetical and Expostulatory Exercitation.

Thus you may see how unjustly these men have misrepresented Samuel Fisher, and
the People called Quakers, on his account, concerning the Holy Scripture.

Their Charge that they not only equal the Appocripha, but their own Writings
with it, and indeed more than equal their own Writings unto them, for they
plainly prefer them before 'em (i. e. the Scriptures) both which we utterly
deny. First, That we so equal our own Writings. And secondly that we so prefer
them, we make no such Comparison, but prefer the Spirit to the Letter, as Paul
did. And we prefer the Scriptures before all other Books and Writings, extant
in the world.

And as for our believing, or affirming, that the Holy Ghost sometimes moves
among us to speak, or prophecy.

This our scornful Adversaries (instead of confuting) do scoff and deride,
saying, they have learned to be God's Ape, which bespeaks their Levity and
Profaneness, (if not Atheism) as well as Ignorance of God's Promises, for his
pouring out of his Spirit in the latter days, and the Effects thereof: And pray
what Scripture have they for their Style, in calling us God's Ape? These are
the Persons that profess the Scripture to be their Rule, but seeing they will
have it that, we equal our Writings with the Scripture, in saying, thus says
the Lord; and G. F. Junior saying, What I have written are the words which the
Father gave me to write: Tho this be short of proving their Charge, yet it
contradicts their falsely, saying we speak contemptibly of the Bible, for we do
not speak contemptibly of our own Writings herein, when we believe any of them
contain Words given us of God.

Another charge is, That they will by no means allow, the Bible to be the Word
of God. Whilst we allow the Bible to be what it says of it self, that is, a
book we prefer before all other writings and books, a book containining the
Holy Scriptures, and words of God; first given by Divine Inspiration, as well
as containing a true History of the Devils, and wicked Men's Words and Actions,
for warning against them. I think no honest man will condemn us either for
contemning the Bible, or the Holy Scriptures on this account. And tho the
Bible, or Books, as made up of Paper, Ink, and Literal Characters, will wax
old, decay and moulder in time (as S. F. says) Yet the word of God, by which
all things are upheld, together with those divine Truths, Doctrines, and
Testimonies contained in the Holy Scriptures, will live and endure for ever;
and this can be no contempt of Holy Scripture, nor contemptible speaking of the
Bible, any more than to say, the Foundations of the Earth which God laid, and
the Heavens which are the Works of his Hands (tho a more copious book than the
Bible) yet they shall wax old as does a Garment, and they shall perish; but he
(that word that made them) remains the same, and his Years fail not, Psalm.
102.25, 26. Heb. 1.10, 11.

But from W. P. in his Key of their Principles, p. 240, they Charge, viz. That
the Quakers deny the Scriptures (or Writings) to be the Word, is because they
never call themselves so, but denominate Christ by that Title, and that it is in
reverence to Christ. Yea and not with any disesteem of the Holy Scriptures, nor
any common Falacy, as these Men fasly judge, which is their common course to
recriminate, when they cannot give a fair Replication. But how do they desire
the word of God with their Learning? They grant Christ is called the Word of
God figuratively, because he proceeds from him, that the Scriptures are more
properly his Word tho written, not the very Letters, which is ridiculous to
suppose, and was never affirmed (how then is the Bible the Scriptures, or the
Writing the Word? Thus inconsistent are these men). But the Sense and Divine
Truths therein contained, and thereby conveyed unto us, and by the Cooperation
of God's Spirit working in us Faith and Obedience, which come by Hearing and
the Word of God. That its proper to call them the Word of God, tho Christ is so
also, (thus far Athenians.)

Whence it follows, that when they call the Bible (or those books) the Word of
God, or when they call the Scriptures, written the Word of God, more properly
than Christ: (It seems there is several degrees of Comparison in the Case. We are
not to understand the very Letters, or writing in Ink and Paper, to be the
word) (that is improper) but the Sense and Divine Truths therein contained, and
thereby conveyed unto us by the Cooperation of Gods Spirit working in us Faith
and Obedience, etc. And surely this is more than the writings, books or
Scriptures written, therefore they are not properly called the Word, but rather
that which is the living Word, or Spirit of God, which works in us Faith and
Obedience, and conveys unto us the Sense and Divine Truths of the Scriptures;
and we are sure that this living Eternal Word is often mentioned the
Scriptures, but never find that the Holy Penmen (or several of them) call their
Writings the Word, much less that it may be so proved from one hundred places
in Scriptures. For which we have but these Athenians bare say so, instead of
any real Scripture proof, their calling the Writings the Word of God, we are
gotten over, and that on their own self conttadicting Concession before. That
the Divine Truths conveyed by the Cooperation of Gods Spirit, working Faith in
us (and not the very Letters or Writings) are the word of God, in these Men's
unstable Sense, from which they suddenly vary; for out of these pretended
hundred places of Scripture to prove the Holy Penmen called their Writings the
word of God; they only bid us take two or three, 36. Jer. 4. Baruch wrote from
the Mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the Lord, v. 10 they are called the
words of Jeremiah, and yet in the 2. and 11. verses the words of the Lord, add
to these Verses, 6, 11, 13. 16. 17 18, 24, 27, and 32. Where they are called
the words of the Lord, these words, and the words, etc. which were wrote with
Ink in the Book or Roll, which the King of Judah burnt. But he could not burn
the word of the Lord which came unto Jeremiah, for that remained when the
writing was burnt, and after the King had burnt it, the word of the Lord again
came to Jeremiah, and required him to take another Roll, and write in it all
the former words that were in the first Roll, which Jehoiachim the King of
Judah had burnt. 36. Jer. 27, 28. Therefore that word that came again to Jerem.
could not be the Roll or Book that was burnt, but it was the word of the Lo^d
which gave unto him these words which were written in the Roll. We could not
have a more apt proof against our Opposers, for our Distinction between the
word of God, (which came to the Prophets before they writ Scripture) and the
sayings or words of the Lord, and of his Prophets written in the Scriptures)
and this the People called Quakers profess, and will easily grant them. But
this will not satisfy these conceited witty Athenians, for they will needs not
only have it, that the Holy Penmen call their writings the word, but they will
have this very place of Jer. chapter 36. for their principal proof.

And what is their most pregnant proof therein pray? Not that these are the
words of the Lord, nor that these are the words of Jeremiah, v. 6.10. for this
we freely grant them. But now their Blow and Proof comes with a Bang upon the
Quakers. Nor will their silly Evasion help that it is words not word, for in the
first Verse of the same Chapter, it is said, this word came to Jeremiah from the
Lord... take thee a Roll of a Book, ctc. -- But here they fallaciously leave
out [saying] after [Lord] in which chapter there are the words and sayings,
which the word that thus came to Jeremiah said. Surely this word which came to
Jer. it was neither the Roll nor the Writing therein; for Baruch wrote it at
the mouth of Jeremiah after the word of the Lord came unto him, and it was the
same' word of the Lord that came again unto him, after the Roll and Writing in
it was burnt, that had the words of the Lord written in it, yea the very same
word of the Lord, that caused all the former words that were in the first Roll,
to be written again in another Roll; consequently that writing Roll or Book
could not be the word that came to Jeremiah, and which was as a Fire in his
Bones, and as a Hammar and a Sword, therefore he well distinguished between the
word of the Lord, and the words of the Lord, as also where it is said Jer. 1.2.
The words of Jeremiah, etc. to whom the word of the Lord came. And Chapter 51.64.
Thus far the words of Jeremiah.

I suppose these Adversaries will not adventure to say, that the Bible came to
Jeremiah, nor that all the Holy Penmens writings in Scripture came to Jeremiah;
or were that word which came to him. How short are they then of Scripture proof
for their position, and charge? And what a hard (but impertinent) shift are
they put to to prove it, when on Jer. 36.1. they allege, viz. Where are many
more words than one, tho the singular is used for the plural, a common scheme
of speech in all Nations. A mere shift indeed, but they wrong the Prophet here
also, for he does not here use that Impropriety of singular for plural, but
speaks distinctly of the word of the Lord, which came to him, and the words of
the Lord written with Ink in the Book or Roll; to conclude this point we are so
far from contemning, or undervaluing the Holy Scriptures, that we grant them to
be (or contain) the words of God, and ascribe Holiness to the Divine Truths
therein contained (not to the mere Letters, Characters, or Writings in Ink and
Paper) and we are conscienciously concerned in keeping to the Scripture
Language, in calling them what they call themselves, and in calling him
(Christ) the word of God who was before all Scriptures or Writings were.

And however tho they say Christ is figuratviely, the word of God yet he is so
called more properly than so to call the Bible, Books or Writings from the
beginning of Genesis, to the end of the Revelation, insomuch that many so
frequently calling the Bible the word of God without distinction, and so little
minding the Eternal, Internal living Word, that many People are kept so
ignorant, that they know no other word, nor what they may so call but the
Bible, Books, or outward Writings: It Is to be lamented to see the sense of the
ingrafted word in the Heart so much lost, by many poor ignorant Souls.

To their loud clamorous and general Charge, That the Quakers term their own
blasphemous writings the word of the Lord; and this more than once repeated,
it is too gross and too general to be true, therefore in the name and behalf of
the People called Quakers I deny their Charge, and suppose any one has so
termed any book, paper or papers of his (which ye^ I may not grant till proved)
this will be no proof of their general Charge upon the Quakers, that they so
term their Writings, much less that they are blasphemous, and I do not believe
any of us have so termed their Writings, Papers or Books, without reference to
the internal word of Life, or immediane movings thereof to write, or declare.

Their Charge and Accusation of Turning the most satred Truths of the Scripture
into Jejune Allegories, we also sincerely deny, together with their subsequent
Charge, of turning all, both our Saviors Death Resurrection, Heaven and Hell
into Alegory: Which is so gross ^n Untruth, that I never knew any before, that
ever read our (...) objects so charge us, if these men have ^ead them they have
done ve^^ wickedly, thus souly and fals^y to charge us and if they have (...),
they have very blindly sought to smite us in the Dark, in their dark Envy, but
missed their Blow; for the reality of these weighty matters aforesaid, of our
Saviors Death and Resurrection, etc. we have really believed as the Scriptures
declare, and I am to examine these men's pretended proof, elsewhere, against us.

These Athenians seem to make a great buzzing Noise against the People called
Quakers, whom they very grossly and falsely accuse, for Idollizing and formally
Praying to each other, for which general Calumny and Slander their chief
instance is about two Letters, the one pretended to be Josiah Coals, and the
other John Audlands, for which they quote Faldoes book, and Francis Bugs for
their Authority; and then having taken their Citations upon trust they
subjoined, viz. with all these Blasphemies when they were charged. Here they
pretend to cite George Whiteheads Answer, tho they cite but one Question out of
it, quoting Innocence against Envy, p. 18 Wherein I must tell them they have
dealt very disingeniously, by G. W. in this very matter; leaving out his
previous Questions to Bugg about the said 2 Letters, as also his following
Answer and Testimony, which were thus, viz. As to his Charge of Idolatry, if
not Blasphemous Names and Titles given to G. F. p. 29. from two Letters, the
one from Jos. Cole, and the other from J. A. We question whether he has truly
cited them, and especially that from J. A. How proves he they are theirs as
cited? And we are sure that the man G. Fox, did own himself a Servant of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and did preach and pray in his Name, and to him, and not in
his own; as many Thousands can testify.

All these recited Passages both Questions and Testimony, these Athenians have
unfairly left out; although the said G. W. appears more positive about the 2 said
Letters, pretended to be Jos. Coals, and John Audlands, in his Treatise against
Bugg, entitled, tho Contentious Apostate, and his Blow Refelled, p. 23. G. W.
Words are these (against Bugg) viz. He has accused J. C. and J. A. (both long
since deceased;) with Idolatrous and Blasphemous Names and Titles given to Man;
Prayers given or offered to G. F. Deifying and Adoring him, etc. p. 7. in two
Letters before mentioned, which I have not only questioned the Truth of his
Citation thereof, but disowned. Especially the latter, as cited by F. B. who
has also varied in his citation thereof, nor has he gone about to prove
either that they are truly cited by him, but rather the contrary by his
manifest variation therein, so that still it remains for F. B. (to whom I may
now add, and for these Athenians) to prove that the Persons charged (i. e.) J.
C. and J. A. were the Authors of the said Letters, as cited by him which I do
not believe nor own, nor can I understand them to be Prayers, as he calls them,
when there is not so much as the form of a Prayer in them. These things
considered F. B.'s Clamours against us, of justifying Idolatry and Blasphemy,
etc. do all fall to the ground, as mere empty and envious Railery and Abuse.

And now to you pretended Athenians, in the Case in hand: I am persuaded you will
have cause to be ashamed of F. Buggs Authority, which you have so cordially
espoused. If you inspect how he has been detected and justly charged, as a self
condemned Apostate; And since you have been so credulous of his, and John
Faldoes, Authority about the two Letters aforesaid, I have reason to bring the
matter more closely upon you. First, cause appears to us to deny both their and
your Citation thereof, to be justly or truly made; Bugg varied in his in two
differing Citations (and so have some of the Baptists lately) We do not believe
eihter of them to be perfect entire Copies of the whole Original Letters, but
rather corrupted, minced and perverted, designedly by the evil minded Persons
(if not fictitious Forgeries) especially the latter. Both Prayers and Praises
may be ascribed to God and Christ, in a Letter to a Friend, which by an Enemy,
possibly may be easily perverted, and directed to the Person to whom the Letter
is directed. How prove you they are true and perfect Copies, as cited? 2. You
have made your Charge and Indictment, for Idollizing, and formally praying to
each other; general against the Quakers, and it is high matter of Fact and
Criminal. That is charged by you. It touches not only 2 or 3 particular
Persons, but also the People called Quakers in general, in whose behalf I
therefore plead not guilty, and your proof must either be as general as your
Charge, or else you will come off but faintly. 3. And if you will place your General
Charge on the said two Letters, as cited (tho no just way of arguing) I am
persuaded the first, ( i. e. J. C's which you say Mr. Pen has it seems
undertaken to defend, suppose it as it is, which yet I question), will not
amount to any real or positive proof of their Charge against him in particular,
much less against the People called Quakers in general, who are unconcerned in
it Fourthly, Since you are so credulous, so general, and so loud in: your
Charge; we may reasonably expect from you, exact and punctual proof of both the
said Letters as cited, and as before proposed, either by producing the
Originals to compare them by, or sufficient credible witnesses thereof' that
are no parties nor our professed Adversaries or Enemies, as both Bugg and Faldo
are. 4. As for the latter, said to be J. A's we do positively deny it as it is
cited in yours; and doubt not but we can easily clear both the men (and G. F.
also) from your odious charge, and that upon their own professed Christian
Principle, and declared intentions in their own books extant, and that they did
not own or worship any other Lord Jesus Chrisi, than the very same, who is the
only begotten of God, of whom the Holy Scriptures do testify: Nor could they
ever intend to ascribe any Dignity of Glory that is only peculiar to Christ
Jesus) to the person of any mortal upon Earth, according to their own professed
principle. We knowing them also to be both understanding and honest men,
fearing God and Ministers of Jesus Christ (the only begotten Son of God) in
their day and time.

The Reader may expect to hear further from us (if the Lord will) to manifest
the Abuse of these Adversaries scandalous invective Libels, and to vindicate
the People of God, commonly called Quakers, and the Truth professed by them,
from their Ca^ (...)

T B. ^. E. (...) S (...)


