A SERMON Preached at BRIDGWATER, AT AN Ordination of Ministers, August 2. School.

By J. B.

Published at the Request of some of the Hearers.

LONDON, Printed for J. Roberts, and are to be Sold by him at his Shop in
Bridgwater; and by John Sprint in Little-Britain. 1699.

JER. XXIII. 21, 22. I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran: I have not
spoken to them, yet they prophesied. But if they had stood in my Counsel, and
had caused my People to hear my words, then they should have turned them from
their evil ways, and from the evil of their doings.


THis Prophet Jeremiah lived in the declining time of the Kingdom of Judah; in
which (as he complains) Profaneness was gone forth into all the Land. For the
reforming of which, he was raised up, but not prevailing herein, he does
foretell the Captivity, which was now at hand. Hereby it appears what critical
Circumstances the Prophet was in; for it was hard to believe, that what he had
foretold would come to pass, was not what he desired should come to pass. This
put him upon that solemn appeal to God, I have not desired the woeful day, O
Lord thou know. It did perhaps make the People suspect him to be a man
disaffected to the Government, that he differed in a manner from all men as to
the interest of the Nation as things then stood; for he all along told them,
that it was their only way to preserve themselves from utter Destruction, to
submit to the Babylonians and Chaldeans, and not to depend upon the vain
Succors of Egypt, this would prove a broken Reed, Egypt was then declining, and
perhaps they had it still in their remembrance, that Josiah by taking part with
Assinia against Pharaoh at Megiddo, did not only lose his life, but gave such a
blow to the Kingdom of Judah, that it did never after that time recover it
self, 2 Kin. 23.29. It seems, that the measures which wise Princes should take
for their own safety must change with the Times. For that which at one time may
preserve, upon the change of circumstances, may undo a Kingdom. Now this
Counsel of the Prophet not to depend upon Egypt displeased the Court, but it
did much more provoke them, that the Prophet did so plainly and particularly
tell them of those Sins that provoked God against the Nation. All men, but
chiefly great men, above all others, Courtiers are impatient of Reproof, a
Prophet of the Lord that does not gently handle them, must needs fall under
their Displeasure; for they that go in soft Raiment, and are in Kings houses do
expect to be complemented as well in the Pulpit as in the Street. It is no
marvel if the Prophet in these hard circumstances was uneasy; for he had King
and Court, City and Country, Priests, Prophets and People against him, as one
that had deceived the People, as one disaffected to the Government; hence are
his Complaints, cap. 15.10. Woe is me that my mother brought me forth as a man
of Contention to the whole earth. He had neither lent nor borrowed upon Usury,
yet every one hated him, every one was against him. But that which above any
thing gave him trouble, was the false Prophets, that told Prince and People the
contrary to what Jeremiah had prophesied. These were they that cried Peace,
that endeavored to persuade the people that no evil was coming, v. 16, 17.
Hearken not the words of the Prophets that prophecy unto you; they make you
vain, they speak a Vision of their own hearts, and not out of the mouth of the
Lord And what was it that these Prophets would have the People believe? why,
that no evil was coming upon them, there was no need of a Reformation, all
would end well, and in this they express great confidence, and pretended
Inspiration, v. 18. Who has stood in the Counsel of the Lord, and has
perceived and heard his word? i. e. who besides our selves, who better than we
are acquainted with the secret purposes of God to this Nation? And therefore
believe not Jeremiah, he is a person disaffected to the Government, and speaks
his own discontent, and not what shall come to pass. Egypt will relieve us, and
save us out of the hands of the Caldeans and Babylonians; we shall have Peace,
there will be no Captivity. Now these Prophets did not only deceive the people,
but they did also strengthen the hands of evil Doers. So that none did return
from his Wickedness, Profaneness was gone forth into the whole land.

Now concerning these Prophets, Jeremiah in these words does observe two
things, viz.

1. How they made themselves Prophets, but God had not sent them.

2. How they had abused the people and deceived them, speaking as from God what
God had not revealed unto them. I have not sent these Prophets, yet they ran: I
have not spoken to them, yet they prophesied. They thrust themselves into the
Ministry, and ran without their errand. And it is for this that they are
severely rebuked.

So that from the words I may observe how necessary it is for those that come
in God's Name, that they be sent of God, for to go before we are sent, to
prophecy before God speak to us, is to do what these false Prophets did, who
failed in these two things, viz.

1. In entering into their Office, being not called to it.

2. In the execution of their Office, for they prophesied to the people, but it
was not what God had spoken to them; for they told the people there was no evil
coming upon them, no Captivity at hand, all would end well; Egypt with its
Succors would be able to preserve them from the growing greatness of the
Babylonians and Caldeans.

I confess, that I find my self under one disadvantage which I did not
consider, when I first applied my self to speak to these words, viz. that in
speaking to them I must apply what is spoken of Prophets extraordinary, and
immediately called and sent to that which is ordinary, for so is the calling of
a Minister, for I will not meddle with those that pretend to be immediately
called and sent of God. However, allowing for what is extraordinary, and the
words may be fitly enough applied to a Gospel-Minister. We must be sent, as
well as those Prophets that were immediately sent; though I confess, it is not in
all respects as they were sent. Romans 10.15. How shall they preach, except they
be sent? Who can in the name of God declare the word of Reconciliation as the
Messenger of God, that is not authorized and qualified so to do? and yet it is
not the meaning of the Apostle that every Minister must be sent as he himself
was, 1 Cor. 11.23. I have received of the Lord, that which I have also
delivered unto you. We do not pretend that we have received either our
Commission or our Errand immediately from Christ, as the Apostle did, and yet a
Minister that preaches the same Doctrine, may without presumption speak the
same words. Something the Minister receives, which he is not to deliver: the
Officer may, and in some cases ought to show his Warrant that gives him
Authority, but not to part with it. However as a Minister is to take heed, that
he don't deliver what he has not received; so also he must not pretend to come
in God's name, except God has sent him. He that is not sent, has no Authority
to make use of that man's Name that did not send him.

This I confess, may be a suitable Subject upon this occasion, to show how
necessary it is for Ministers to be sent of God, in order to our Acceptance with
God, and Success among the people, that the want thereof may not lie at our own
doors. As it was with these false Prophets, If they had stood in my Counsel,
and caused my people to hear my words, then they should have turned them from
their evil way, and from the evil of their doings.

But because it is agreed upon on both hands, that they that preach the Gospel
must be sent; and the difference is chiefly in this, how they must be sent, who
are they that under God must invest them in the Ministry; I say, for this
reason I shall wave the usual method of a Sermon, and spend the remainder of
our time in speaking to this Question, viz.

How may it be known to the satisfaction of our selves, and the people that
attend our Ministry, whether we are sent of God? I mean, as far as it is
necessary for those that pretend not to be immediately called and sent of God.
We all love glad Tidings, and are apt to welcome the Messenger that brings
them, and indeed it is but fit it should be so. Isa. 52.7. How beautiful are
the feet of them that bring glad tidings? And yet it is not fit that every one
that knows (as Ahimaz) something of the matter, should go without sending. Our
Brethren that satisfy themselves in their Conformity are not content that the
public Maintenance is engrossed to themselves, but they would engross the
Ministry, many of them; and don't only condemn us for the exercise of our
Ministry as Schismatical, but they would have it believed among the people,
that our Ministry is a Nullity, that we are not sent of God. Now to relieve our
selves against this Censure, and to give what satisfaction I can; I shall make
it my business at this time to answer this Question, viz. How shall it appear
that we are sent of God? No man takes (ought to take) this honor to himself,
but he that is called of God, Heb. 5.4.

Now in answer to this Question, I shall lay down these three things, viz.

First, He that is duly sent of God does sincerely design, and chiefly desire
the Glory of God, and the good of Souls, by turning men from Darkness to Light,
and from the power of Satan to God. The design of the Ministry is to better
Mankind; and for this end St. Paul was sent.

Secondly, A Minister sent of God is competently qualified for that Service,
with the Gifts of Knowledge and Utterance, both which are essentially necessary
to the Ministry.

Thirdly, To make him a Minister, he must be approved, devoted, consecrated and
ordained by such as have received power to invest men in the Ministry. He that
has these Qualifications, viz. a sincere desire to serve God in the Ministry,
is qualified for it, not only in his own conceit, but in the Judgment of those
to whom it belongs to ordain, and is by them set apart for the work; the People
ought to own him as a Minister, as one whom God has sent.

First, We can never justify our selves before God, no, nor to our own
Consciences, except there be a sincere desire to do good to men's Souls, except
we can say with the Apostle, I seek not yours but you, your good more than your
reward. For to design the Ministry as a Calling to live by, and to look no
higher, is so low and mean, that he that looks no higher is unworthy of the
Name. True it is, that he that preaches the Gospel must live by the Gospel, as
they that serve at the Altar had their maintenance from the Altar, 1 Cor. 9.13,
14 For if it be a Calling, and if Ministers ought as much as they are able to
give themselves to the work of their Ministry, as their Calling, and that
wholly, as the Apostle commands Timothy to do, 1 Timothy 4.14, 15. Give
Attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine, neglect not the gift that
is in thee, which was given thee by Prophecy, with the laying on of the hands
of the Presbytery. Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them. I
say, if it be a Calling, it is almost as easy to prove that a maintenance is
due to them, as it is to prove that they must eat and drink: and the people are
to consider this more than (I fear) they do. The want hereof must in time quite
extinguish, or at least cause the Ministry to dwindle away into Contempt. And
the Lamp must needs go out, when it is not maintained with Oil, though not so
soon as when it is blown out. People therefore should take heed that they do not
that by detaining a maintenance, which their Enemies would do by force and
violence. And yet to design the Ministry as a Calling to live by, and to have
no higher ends is base and mercenary.

The first Question in the Office of Ordination is this, viz. Do you trust that
you are inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost to take upon you this Office and
Ministry to serve God, for the promoting of his Glory, and for the edifying his
People? And the answer that every one must make that will be ordained is this,
viz. I trust I am. Surely the thing is to be considered by all Ministers, by us
that are Ministers, that if our design was not entirely the Glory of God and
the good of Souls, to be ashamed of it, and humbled for it that we came under
that Curse that was threatened against the house of Eli, 1 Samuel 2.36. Put me
into one of the Priests Offices that I may eat bread. And those that at this
time are entering upon the Ministry should seriously consider that Question,
whether they can with a good Conscience make that answer, and not lie in the
Presence of God, and the Congregation in so solemn a manner, and upon so solemn
an occasion. And yet it is too evident that many Ministers never had that inward
motion nay perhaps did never consider what it is. If it were well weighed, that
heat that they have to be made Ministers would soon abate in them, that have
nothing more in their Eye, but some Benefice, to which they cannot have
Presentation and Induction, but by Orders. And so they enter into the Ministry
as men do into secular Employments and Callings to get a livelihood. Now if men
do make their first step into the Ministry by a Lie, such an open solemn Lie as
this, that they are moved by the Holy Ghost to take upon them this Ministry; to
serve God in the edifying his people, and yet as to this inward motion they
know nothing of it but this, that they know they never had it. It is no great
wonder if such Ministers having gotten into the Ministry as into a Calling to
maintain and enrich themselves, do endeavor to make the best of their
Calling, by grasping into their hands as many places as by Favor or Simony
they can get, and then substitute some poor illiterate Curate, a thing so
openly scandalous, that the Council of Trent would have reformed it in the
Church of Rome; nay it is reformed in some Churches belonging to that
Communion, but not in the Church of England, notwithstanding the great outcries
we have made about our Separation from them. I say the Council of Trent would
have reformed it, had it been overruled by the Court of Rome. The present King
by his Injunctions to the Bishops does enough show his dislike of this matter,
if they to whom it belongs to prevent it will do their part.

Secondly, A Minister that is sent of God must be qualified with those Gifts of
Knowledge and Utterance, as are highly necessary to the Ministry. Though it is
hard to determine what degrees of Gifts are necessary, yet it is easy to see
that degrees of Knowledge are necessary to him that is to teach and instruct
men above what is necessary to others. The Master should know more than the
Scholar, the Guide should know the way better than the Traveller that takes him
for his Guide. Though the Church of Rome would keep the people in ignorance, they
are for a learned Clergy. God does make so great use of the gifts of Ministers,
that it is strange that any that pretend to Learning should make light of the
Qualifications of Ministers, under a pretense that the Office suffers, and
that people should not much concern themselves about the gifts of their
Ministers, God (they say) having instituted the Office will bless it, and is
not tied to the gifts of Ministers. True it is that God is not tied to means
and instruments; he can do his own work without means, and by weak instruments.
But yet this is no rule to us, for we are not to consider what God can do, nor
what he has done when means have failed, when upon the Nations coming out of
Popery able Ministers were not to be had; I don't doubt but that good was done
by such as could be had. Some could do no more than read. But we are to
consider what is the most likely way, in which we may expect the Concurrence of
God's Grace and Blessing in the use of means. Whether it is not more likely
that God may bless a laborious, faithful, holy Ministry, than an ignorant,
idle, wicked one. Except in extraordinary Cases, God does use means adapted for
the work he employs them about, and surely a Minister that takes no care of his
own Soul, is not like to save other men's. Moses was raised up of God to bring
the Children of Israel out of Egypt. Moses was in every thing fitted for that
work except in a readiness of Speech, which was supplied by Aaron, who was to
be his Spokesman. Moses was bred up at Court, and trained up in the Learning of
the Egyptians; a man that understood the rules of Policy, and the meekest man
upon earth. One that was for forty years an Herdsman, and had traversed that
Wilderness through which he was to lead the Children of Israel. Whatever St.
Paul was before his Conversion, God that put him into the Ministry made him an
able Minister; and though our Savior chose for his Disciples unlearned
Fishermen, yet St. Paul charge Timothy to look well to the Gifts and
Abilities of such as he should take into the Ministry, 2 Timothy 2.2. The same
commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others, and to lay
hands suddenly on no man, 1 Timothy 5.22. Is it not evident, that it is not the
Office but the Gifts of Ministers and their diligence and industry that must
convert and edify the people? What is the Ministry, but an Office ordained for
instructing the people? And what is the Office but an obligation to do the work
of the Office? and is the work done by an obligation upon men to do it? Does
the Office of a Constable, or the Mayor of the Town prevent and punish
Debauchery and Profaneness, or the care and diligence of him that is in the
Office? Is a sick man healed by the Office, or rather is he not healed by the
skill of the Physician? Why should the Kingdom be at that charge to give a
liberal Maintenance to the Ministry, if there be little odds as to the Gifts
and Abilities of Ministers? Gifts therefore of knowledge and utterance are
highly necessary to him that would prove himself to be sent of God. The Priests
lips should preserve knowledge, and they (the people) should seek the law at
his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 2. And the
qualifications of a Minister should consist in these two things, viz.

First, Ministers should be able to speak from the people to God, to open the
case of the people, their wants and desires, and his own wants and desires in
Prayer. Ministers should be able to do this in orderly, clear, and congruous
Expressions, according to the several occasions that will happen, which a
stinted form can never comprehend. And that a stinted form cannot comprehend
the several occasions for which Prayers and Praises ought to be offered up to
God appears from hence, that as often as days of Humiliation and Thanksgiving are
commanded to be observed, Prayers are composed and sent down to be used for
that occasion, which is an open acknowledgment that there is a Defect in our
Liturgy, and that it is necessary to supply that Defect. But what provision is
there made for the particular occasions of each Congregation, and for the
several Members of the Congregation? If new Prayers are necessary for days of
Humiliation and Thanksgiving, why not for such particular occasions of the
Congregation? The Minister had need to be able to do this, for a stinted Form
cannot comprehend the various Accidents of Life, for which Prayers and Praises
are to be made. There will be inconveniences that may attend conceived Prayer;
and are there none on the other hand, that will attend composed Forms? Every
thing that is the work of man, will savor of the imperfection of man. However,
we are (as I think) on the surest side, for the Scripture commands us to pray;
but what place of Scripture commands that Prayer must be always as often as the
Church comes together in the same words? If a stinted Form were so necessary as
is pretended, I don't think it would have been left undetermined in the
Scripture; neither would the Apostles have left the several Churches that they
planted, unprovided of a Form of Prayer, if a Form had been necessary. This
Argument which some have well improved, carries that weight with it, that they
that are for the imposing of Forms, do yet acknowledge that such Forms of
Prayer from which it was not lawful for the Minister to vary, were not imposed
for the first three Centuries; and consequently that they came not into the
Christian Church till about four or five hundred years after Christ. Now to
take off this prejudice, they tell us that then there was no need of them,
Ministers were supplied with extraordinary Gifts, Gifts of Tongues, Gifts of
Miracles, Gifts of Prophecy. I confess, it is very evident that such
extraordinary Gifts were then bestowed; but that every one that was ordained to
the Ministry, had thereupon a constant extraordinary Gift either for Prayer or
Preaching, is sooner said than proved. Nay rather the contrary to this is
evident, that though the first general Preachers of the Gospel that were not
limited to this or that Church, but were to spread the Gospel in all Places and
Nations; though I say these (no doubt) had such an extraordinay Gift, it does not
appear that all others had it. The directions that St. Paul gives to Timothy
and Titus about the Qualifications of Ministers do plainly intimate the
contrary. So that stinted Forms of Prayer coming into the Church not till four
or five hundred years after Christ; whether the imposing of Forms of Prayer be
to be justified from hence, because about 500 years after Christ, they were
imposed; I say, whether this be a good argument must be determined from the
state of the Church at that time. As to this all that I shall say is to repeat
the words of one that has ransacked all the Corners, penetrated the inwards,
and dived to the bottom of Antiquity, viz. Mr. Clerkson, p. 181. speaking of
the Introduction of Liturgies. They were not entertained, till nothing was
admitted into the Church, de novo, but corruptions, or the Issues of them; no
change made in the ancient Usages, but for the worse, no Notions from its
Primitive State, but downwards into degeneracy, till such orders took place as
respected, not what was most agreeable to the rule and primitive Usage, or what
was best to uphold the life and power of Religion in its solemn Exercises, or
what might secure it from that dead Heartlesness and Formality, into which
Christianity was sinking. In a word, not till the Church was rather to be
pitied than imitated. Thus far Mr. Clerkson.

I confess, however, it is a cunning Device, for by this means, viz. the casting
out of all Prayer but what is read out of a Book, there will be no discernable
difference of Ministers Gifts; but they will hardly be able to prevent the
people from saying, this way of Pryer is no more than we our selves can do, why
should we maintain and honor men for doing no more than a Boy of ten or twelve
years old can do? nay there will be a greater inconvenience than this; Let
Ministers be provided for with Forms of Prayer made to their hands, without
putting forth themselves to exercise the Gift of Prayer, and in time they will
be unable to pray otherwise.

Secondly, A Minister should be able to speak from God to the people; to
declare the whole Will and Counsel of God to them. The Work and Design of the
Ministry is to better Mankind, to turn men from their evil ways, and from the
evil of their doings; surely such a work does require Gifts of Knowledge and
Utterance. Conversion does restore man to the image of God, which consists in
Knowledge, Righteousness, and Holiness, and the means must be fitted to the
end. Ministers should be able not only to make Sermons, set studied Discourses,
but upon all occasions to speak a word in season. I am sure this is that which
Ministers promise to do, viz. to use both public and private Monitions and
Exhortations as well to the sick as to the whole: Spons. 3. Office of
Ordination.

Thirdly, Together with these, there ought to be the approbation of those to
whom it belongs to judge of the Qualifications of those that would devote
themselves and their Labors to God in the Service of the Ministry, when these
have approved them as persons duly qualified, and commended them to God, and
have by Prayer and Imposition of hands invested them in the Ministry, these are
to be owned by the people as Ministers sent of God.

I know that some engross this power of making Ministers to such as are now
called Diocesan Bishops, whom they make so necessary to Ordination of
Ministers, that whoever is ordained without them by Ministers of particular
Congregations, some of our Brethren are pleased to say, these Ordinations
having not the concurrence of a Diocesan Bishop, are a mere nullity. And the
Parliament that made the Law, that required Reordination of all such as had
been thus ordained, were no doubt of this opinion. Some indeed have said their
Ordination was required to the exercise of their Ministry, and not the Office.
A License would have done that without Ordination. Moreover there was no
difference made betwixt those that had been ordained before, and those that
pretended not to it; which proves that our Lawmakers, of whom the Bishops were
a part, looked upon all those Ordinations as a Nullity, for no less was
required of us that had been ordained than of those that had not been ordained.
And yet they would not declare that all our Ministration were a nullity. So
inconsistent are all they with themselves that design the interest of a Party,
more than of the truth. This puts me in mind of what a reverend Minister then
told one of the Bishops; viz. I am afraid (said he) there is that Severity
shown in the Act of Conformity, that it is to be feared very many Ministers will
not conform: To whom the Bishop replied, I am afraid there will be too many.
Surely (to speak modestly) that Prelate was not of the opinion of the Apostle
Paul, who rejoiced that Christ was preached, though some that preached him were
no great friends to the Apostle. But in confirmation of what I have to say, I
would not make Reflections upon what is past any further than our own
Vindication will make it necessary.

First, Therefore to prove this, let it be supposed that a Minister of a
particular Congregation (whom for distinction-sake we call a Presbyter) be of
an inferior order to a Bishop. It is upon this pretense that the power of
Ordination is denied to them. Now if these Ministers (Presbyters) being but the
Ministers of particular Congregations may make a Bishop, they may certainly
make and ordain Ministers; for if they can do the greater, they may do the
less. This was the answer of Archbishop Usher to King Charles the First, who
told that King, that in the Church of Alexandria the Presbyters always made
their own Bishop. And the thing is so necessary, that Episcopacy cannot well be
preserved, except the inferior Clergy have a power to make their own Bishops.
Suppose as sometimes it has fallen out here in this Kingdom, that there were
not Bishops enough to consecrate Bishops, who can make them but the inferior
Clergy? It fell out so in England at the coming of Queen Elizabeth to the
Crown. Cardinal Poole then Archbishop of Canterbury died within four and twenty
hours of Queen Mary, and upon his death the Sea of Canterbury being void, Dr.
Parker was preferred to it, there were not (as Dr. Burnet now Bishop of
Salisbury observes) Bishops enough of the Protestant Religion to ordain him,
and the Popish Bishops would not: so he was made Bishop by Barlow, Story,
Coverdale and Hodgkins, three of these were only Titular, and had no Sees, and
the other a Suffragan. So that the first Bishop that was made here upon the
coming of Queen Elizabeth to the Crown, was made by Presbyters, and not by
Diocesan Bishops. This put Mr. Mason upon the writing of his Book in
Vindication of the English Ministry against the Papists, who triumphed much
upon this occasion. Surely therefore, if Ministers may make Bishops, who
pretend to be a superior order to them, what should hinder that they should
not have a power to ordain Ministers? Just such another absurdity the Papists
run themselves into; for they also appropriate the power of Ordination to
Diocesan Bishops, and yet according to the Doctrine of Transubstantiation,
every Priest by a few words speaking can make a God, and turn the Elements of
Bread and Wine into the natural Body of our Savior, but they must not presume
to make Ministers.

Secondly, The nature of Ordination proves our Ministry to be no Nullity.
Ordination is but a determining of the persons to be ordained, as persons duly
qualified for the Office, whereupon they are by Prayer and Imposition of hands
invested in the Ministry. Now what is there in this, that Ministers may not do
without a Diocesan? We do not give them their power and ministerial Authority,
that is from God, and what that power is that God gives them, it is not we, but
the word of God that must determine. The power and authority Eccesiastical or
Ministerial is from God as the civil power. Now it is not usual for Kings to be
invested by Kings, it is always done by their Subjects. True it is in the Office
of Ordination as appointed in the Church of England, the Bishop is directed to
say, Take thou Authority to preach the word of God, and to minister the holy
Sacraments. But it is not the Bishop that is the Donor of that Authority, and
that it is not so, will appear to him that does but consider this one thing,
they that ordain men to the Office, don't make the Office. He only gives the
power that made the Office to which the power belongs. As the King that can
make Corporations and Mayors, does give them what power they have. Our Brethren
that would nullify our Ministry, are pleased to tell us, that Bishops in
ordaining Ministers do give them what power they have, and that Ministers can
have no more power than the Bishops intended to give them in Ordination; and
that therefore Presbyters can have no power to ordain, because the Bishops in
ordaining them, intended it not to them. True it is that about two hundred
years ago all our Ordinations came from those that were of the Episcopal
Persuasion and Communion; and who can pretend that they that then ordained did
intend to give this power? The argument were of weight, if the Bishops had made
the Office, but it being not so, it matters not what their intentions were that
then ordained Ministers. Were it not so, what I pray would become of the
Reformation? Had our Reformers no more power than the Pope and his Bishops
intended to give them? Surely they never intended them a power to reform.
Ordination therefore being but a determining of the Persons, and an investing
men in the Ministry, what power thereupon Ministers have, is from God: as when
one of your Neighbors is made Mayor of your Town, he does not receive his
power from them that chose him, nor from him that swears him, but from the
King, that gave the Charter.

Thirdly, I would argue from the necessary consequence of that opinion that
would engross the power of Ordination to a Diocesan, and make all other
Ordinations a mere Nullity. It follows (and they own it) that their Ministry
is no Ministry, their Sacraments no Sacraments, their Churches no Churches, and
it is well if they allow them to be in a state of Salvation: and yet these very
men acknowledge that they are true Ministers and Churches, that have Roman
Ordination, proclaiming hereby an utter Renunciation of the reformed Churches,
which have no such Ordinations, and yet a Coalition with the Roman Church and
Clergy, whom they will allow (if any of them will come over to us) the exercise
of their Ministry without Ordination, but not the Protestant Ministers that
were driven out of France. That I do not wrong them, see Mr. Dodwell's Preface
to the Unity of the Priesthood, p. 11. where he says, That we are guilty of
abetting a divine Authority in men, to whom God has given no such Authority,
that we are guilty of forging Covenants in God's name, and counterfeiting the
great Seals of Heaven in Ratification of them. And what can be more treasonable
by all the principles of Government? what is more provoking and more
difficultly pardonable? These are his words; and they are indeed severe and
frightfull; but as one says, the Devil hurts those most he least affrighteth.
Our Comfort is, that the old Church of England owned the foreign Protestant
Churches as true Churches, and their Ministers as true Pastors. It is but a few
(I hope) of the Innovators, that call themselves the Church of England; that
say, they have no true Ministers that have not an uninterrupted Succession of
Diocesan Ordination from the Apostles. It was these men, or men of these
Principles that made the severe Acts, that required Reordination; and have
been the great Agents of all the dividing, persecuting, silencing Laws, to
which God Almighty, by bringing in of our Protestant King, has put a stop. I
shall mention one consequence more that they must necessarily own that go this
way; if our Ministry without the concurrence of a Bishop in our Ordination be a
Nullity, our Ministrations also in the giving the Sacraments must be a Nullity,
a counterfeiting of the broad Seals of Heaven, to speak in the words of the
beforementioned Author, those that we baptized are not indeed baptized. It
follows hence that our Sovereign Lord the King had need to address himself to
them for Baptism; for I am persuaded he that gave his Majesty Christian Baptism
was not Episcopally ordained. And surely that Prince that would be supreme head
of the Church, had need to be initiated by Baptism.

More might be said in confirmation of this, but I shall spend the remainder of
our time in drawing some practical Inferences from the Discourse.

APPLICATION.
First therefore, It appears from hence, that they that nullify the Ministry
of such persons, who have all that is necessary to prove their Mission, are no
real Friends to the Reformation. Our first Reformers, though they differed from
the Foreign Protestant Churches, acted from Catholic Principles, that
comprehended the Foreign Ordinations, choosing rather to assert the Identity of
Bishops and Presbyters, than to expose those Churches that had thrown out our
English Prelacy. And though they pleaded for Episcopacy, they acknowledged that
it was not necessary to the being, but only ad been esse of the Church. And it
was not till our Reformation went backward by an endeavor to bring in a
Coalition with the Church of Rome, that Reordination was required of them that
had been ordained before by Presbyters. Peter Martyr at Oxford, Martin Bucer at
Cambridge had Ecclesiastical Preferments in the Church of England; Cranmer that
invited them hither never required Reordination of them. Whittingham was made
Dean of Durham though it was known, that in his Exile in Queen Mary's time, he
had been ordained by Presbyters only. Mr. Travers ordained by a Presbytery
beyond the Sea, was suffered quietly to hold the place of a Centurer at the
Temple. Mr. Camero ordained in France had the like liberty, by the Permission
of King James the First, when that King was about to set up Episcopacy in
Scotland; it was argued whether the Bishops intended for Scotland should not be
ordained first Ministers, because they had not received Ordination by a Bishop,
and it was carried in the negative by the means of Bishop Boncroft. Thus this
matter went till Archbishop Laud (whose great design it was to bring about a
Reconciliation between the Church of England and the Church of Rome) made it
his business to please the Romanists, and it could not but please them to see
those that had the management of our Church affairs here in England, declare a
Nullity in our Ministry and Ministrations, they knew it would be a good step
toward Popery. This design dying with him was revived again upon the coming in
of King Charles II. Surely those learned Men and Bishops that had been with
that King in his Exile beyond the Seas, must be supposed to know that King's
Religion, and what his designs were; these were they that among other hard
things that they imposed upon us to the exercise of our Ministry, brought a
necessity of Reordination.

Secondly, Seeing the sincere desire of doing good to Souls is so necessary to
prove Ministers to be sent of God, I beg of you that are to be ordained this
day to look to your Aims and Ends, that they be such, for Purity of intention
is absolutely required to the acceptance of what we do; so that though we do
what is commanded, but not because it is commanded; it is as if we had not done
it, nay it is in some respect as if God had not commanded it. Remember the words
of the Prophet concerning Jehu. He was command-to destroy the house of Ahab,
and yet because he did what he was commanded, but not with that Purity of
Intention as was necessary to his acceptance, not to destroy Idolatry as he
pretended, but to establish himself in the Kingdom, therefore, says God, I
will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, Hos. 1.3, 4. The more
entirely we aim at this, the doing of good, the turning men from the evil of
their ways and doings, the more contented we shall be in our present
circumstances; in which, though we have not that encouragement as we could
desire, yet we have more than the Primitive Preachers of the Gospel obtained
for the space of three hundred years: we have more encouragement than we
expected, or indeed could rationally expect, enough therefore to make us
thankfully to acknowledge it is the Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our
eyes.

Thirdly, Seeing the Gifts of Knowledge and Utterance are so highly necessary
to the Ministry, let us more endeavor to qualify our selves with those Gifts
that may evidence it to the People, that we are sent of God, and not trust to
the Ceremony of Ordination, which when it is applied to men utterly destitute
of those Gifts may be a mere Nullity. A Mute or an Idiot is no Minister though
ordained. Our care therefore should be, ours that are in the Ministry, and
yours that stand as Candidates for the Ministry, to keep and increase those
Gifts that may enable us to the performance of all Ministerial Duties.

First, We are the mouth of the people to God. What! should a Minister look no
further to accomplish himself for that part of his Ministry, but to read out of
the Book what he has to pray for in behalf of the people? God commands
Christians to pray with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.18.
And is the Ministry exempted? should he not be able to do that which every
private Christian is required to do? A Minister should not be confined to the
Fetters of other men's narrow defective Words and Books, whatever may be said on
behalf of such as need the help of a composed Form, I wonder that men should
think it necessary that all should be confined to them. It cannot be supposed
that all do need them. Let us not be affrighted out of our duty by a pretense
that the thing is not attainable, on a sudden to express our desires. Remember
the words of the Apostle, Romans 8.26. Likewise the Spirit also helps our
Infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we ought. The Apostle
does not say, the Book will tell you, for then there was none, for ought
appears, but the Spirit helps our Infirmities. So that Spiritual Prayer was
in the Church, before the Jesuits brought it in. This Gift of the Spirit all
ought to pray for, Ministers especially, that they may not only desire
graciously, and acceptably things necessary, but express these desires on
behalf of the people, that they by joining with us may make them their own
desires. And we should endeavor to excel in this Gift, that we may avoid all
those Indecencies, which those that idolize Forms are apt to take notice of and
expose, viz. a foolish Loquacity, pouring out (as one says) tumultuous
indigested thoughts. We are not rashly to utter any thing before the Lord,
Eccles. 5.2. We should also avoid vain Repetitions, for we shall not be heard
for much speaking, Matthew. 6 7. We should also avoid affected Words and Phrases,
for certainly the more plain and familiar our words are, the better they suit
with the nature of Prayer. In a word, we should endeavor to observe the
general rule of our Savior, not to be as the hypocrites. Thus let us all
endeavor to accomplish our selves for this part of our Ministry; and if our
Brethren out of a fondness to their own way of Devotion will ridicule our
Performances, and expose us to their people, let us patiently bear it, it is no
new thing for men to pretend that there are Barbarisms and Solecisms in the
Prayers of Ministers. This St. Austin takes notice of in his time. Ita enim non
irredebunt, se aliquos autestetes and ministros ecclesiae forte animadveniunt,
vel cum barbarismis and solecismis deum invocare. So they will not jeer, if
perhaps they take notice, that some Bishops and Ministers of the Church do
invocate God with Barbarisms and Solecisms: to such as feared this, he says,
God minds not so much the Expression, as the inward Affection. This passage
by the way proves that such Prayers were then used, in which some might pretend
there were Barbarisms. Surely they could not be Forms prescribed by the Church.
However if we meet with the same usage, the same Language that St. Austin in
his time observed, let us not wonder at it; it seems it is no new thing, and
therefore we should the more patiently bear it, and watch our own Spirits, that
we do not expose and make their way of Devotion worse than it is, because they
expose ours. For the Spirit of Prayer and true Devotion may be in those that
confine themselves to a Form. And they that use no Forms may be as formal as
other Men. There is (as one says, and I think he says well in it) a
particular Gust as to Spiritual things, that may differ as much as men do as to
Meat and Drink. In which one likes and is nourished by that which another
loatheth, and it may be would do him hurt, if it were imposed upon him. I do
believe that the true Spirit of Prayer may be in those that do not well relish
our way, and they ought (and I doubt not but many of them do) think so of ours.
Let every one have what he likes, and let no man be drenched with what he
loatheth. It is but a few of that way, and they (I doubt) none of the most
devout Persons, that will dare to impose upon any, but especially upon such
frivolous pretenses, Christians have more need to be rebuked for the neglect of
Prayer in Secret and in their Families, than for praying without or with a
Form. However it should quiet us to consider, that if the Controversy be (as
for ought we know it is) who shall do best, it is the more pardonable, provided
it be done on both sides, with that Reverence and Unweariedness as it ought to
be done, but woe be to that Hypocrite that shall be found in the Omission of
that great Duty, for which he was such a Stickler. They eat up my people, as
they eat Bread, and call not upon the Name of the Lord, Psalm 14.8. To conclude
this particular, it does seem to me, whatever is pretended to the contrary,
that our first Reformers who composed the Liturgy, were far enough from the
mind of those that plead for its Imposition; they composed those Forms to
assist Ministers, that coming newly out of Popery must be supposed to need
those helps, not with an intent to exclude and run down extempore, conceived
Prayer. There is one passage in the Office of Ordination, that makes me think
so; it is immediately after the Sponsions, and in these words, viz. After this
the Congregation shall be desired secretly in their Prayers to make their
humble Supplications to God for all these things, for the which Prayers, there
shall be silence kept for a space. By this passage it appears that the
Compilers of our Liturgy, as being sensible of the defect of a Form of Words,
thought it necessary to give the Congregation a space of time, that every
person might abound in his own way of conceived Prayer.

Secondly, Being we are to speak from God to the people, in which respect a
Minister is as God's Mouth to declare the whole counsel of God to them; we
should endeavor to accomplish our selves for this work, that we may do this
according to the direction that St. Paul gives Titus, chap. 2. v. 1, 8. With
soundness of Doctrine, and with Speech that cannot be blamed.

First, Let us endeavor to do it with Soundness of Doctrine, v. 1. Speak thou
the things which become sound Doctrine: Now to do this there is need of skill,
the Christian Religion is baited with many Controversies, and that in some
material points. The Enemy has sown his Tares, Books that strike at all
revealed Religion are in all parts of the Nation; Ministers whose Calling it is
to look into Books, should be able to discern, that they may do their part to
prevent the spreading of those opinions, 1 Timothy 4.16. Take heed to thy self,
and to thy Doctrine.

Secondly, Soundness of Speech that cannot be blamed, v. 8. That not only the
matter we deliver be agreeable to the Analogy of Faith, but we should be able
to express our Thoughts so as that the wording of our matter be not despised.
The English Tongue is much refined of late years. I confess we should avoid on
the one hand quaintness of Speech, that which the Apostle calls the words of
man's wisdom, 1 Cor. 2.4. In the use of this it is possible for those that
affect a florid Style, to preach to the people to as little purpose almost, as
if we preached in another Language; he no doubt is the best Preacher, that can
make every thing that he preaches to the people, easy to be understood. And
yet we should take heed of falling into an extreme this way, and fill men's ears
with an empty Sound of Words, nauseous Repetitions, and for want of Matter, say
over and over the same thing, and deliver words without Matter.

Having gotten these Gifts, let us see to it, that we don't lose them. The way
to have the continuance and increase of these, is to use them to the end for
which they are given. The way to pray better is to pray more, the way to preach
better is to preach more. Every one learneth by teaching, and gets at least a
more orderly digested knowledge. Let every one do his best, and stir up the
Gift that is in him, and by this means he will attain to do better, and his
profiting will appear. God threathens the Idol-shepherds, that their arm should
be dried, and their right eye darkened, Zech. 11.17. This is a Judgment to be
feared by all men, Ministers especially, even the darkning, withering
Operations of God's Spirit.

In a word, we should endeavor in a particular manner to accomplish our selves
for occasional Discourses, I confess it is more natural for some men, all have
not a presence of Mind and Thought, nor a command of words to express their own
thoughts, and yet it is that which Ministers especially should endeavor after,
that upon all occasions we may be able to speak a word in season suited to the
occasion.

I could not but take particular notice of what I lately met with in a Book
written by a Jesuit, one of the Missionaries that the French King employed in
that great Empire of China, to convert them to Christianity in those parts: He
observes that he found more good done by those occasional Discourses, than by
his studied Performances; People were more affected and wrought upon by what
was said to them in particular concerning a future State, the day of Judgment,
than of what he had said with more strength of reason in the Congregation.

Fourthly, Let us then deliver and look after the success of that Message that
God has sent by us; a faithful Messenger ought to deliver the whole Message.

First, let us deliver our Message with all faithfulness, and without
Partiality, and respect of persons. Say to the wicked, it shall go ill with
him; say to the righteous it shall go well with him. Have we a care of mincing
the matter; Matthew. 28.20. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
command you. Our Savior as sent of God kept within the bounds of his
Commission, John 12.49. I have not spoken of my self, but the Father which has
sent me, he has given Commandment, what I shall say, and what I should speak.
And therefore surely Ministers should take heed, that we may be able to say
with our Savior, my Doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me.

Secondly, And yet we should not only deliver, but look after the success of
our Message, and to take care to do every thing, that may promote and not
hinder the success of our Ministry, Coloss. 1.28 Warning every man, and
teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in
Christ Jesus. And this we should endeavor,

First, By a Life suitable to our Calling. Surely our Relation to God, as sent
by him, does oblige us to take heed of our selves, that our Ministry be not
blamed, for if we do not live well, not only we in our Persons, but our
Ministry will be blamed, 2 Cor. 6.3. It Is true it should not be so, why should
the Ministry be blamed for the faults of some men? And yet because men will do
it, therefore we should take the more heed to our ways. The people should not
have abhorred the Lord's Offerings, because Eli's Sons were wicked lewd men,
and yet it was an Aggravation of their Sin, that they gave the people that
occasion. The Apostle says to Timothy, let no man despise thy youth, 1 Timothy,
4.12. He does not say it to the people, because generally when we are despised,
the fault is in our selves; and the way to prevent, that the people may not
despise such of us as are young, or upon any other account, is to do what the
Apostle there exhorts Timothy to, Be thou an example to believers, in word, in
conversation, in spirit, in faith, in purity. The greatest Gifts of Ministers
will never do that good, as their bad example will do hurt. The people not only
that are ignorant but such as fear God, will take bad Impressions, and many
times will be led away by the example of Ministers, especially in things that
are disputable, the Apostle observes that many were carried away by the
Dissimulation of Peter; so that he was constrained to reprove him openly before
the Church, Gal. 2.14. In a word, we should be the more careful to give in all
things a good example, for they that scruple to hear us, will be quick-sighted
to observe what is amiss in us.

Secondly, We should not only deliver but endeavor the success of our Message
from God to the people by our incessant Prayers; for it is Prayer that renders
our endeavors in the Ministry fruitful and successful. Paul may plant, and
Apollos may water, but it is God that must give the increase. Let a Minister be
never so rational and convincing in his Discourses, all his labor will be
fruitless without divine Grace succeeding it. A Key that is exactly fit to all
the Wards of the Lock, cannot open it without an hand to turn it. Let the most
proper and powerful motives to work upon the heart be represented in the
proper light, and evidence to the utmost advantage; they cannot open the heart,
this is God's work, and this we should pray for. It is observable, that
Abraham's Servant would not deliver the Message for which he was sent, till he
had first prayed to God to succeed it, Genesis 21.12. And then just as he prayed
so it fell out. Thus when Nehemiah was to make his Request to the King, he
darted up a short Prayer to the God of Heaven, before he would speak to the
King, Neh. 2.5, 6. For what do thou make thy request? So I prayed to the God
of Heaven, and said to the King, Let us do the like. The Gospel is the power of
God to Salvation, but still Prayer is requisite to obtain the holy Spirit, by
whose influence the word proves effectual. What is more worthy of our constant
Prayers than precious immortal Souls? I do remember what I read in the Life of
that most eminent Man of God, Mr. Walsh a Minister of Scotland, who being to
preach in the Afternoon, he tarried so long at his house, that the Congregation
thought fit to send the Clerk to see what the matter was that Mr. Walsh staid
beyond his usual time; the Clerk drawing near the room where he was, heard a
very loud Voice, and standing still, he heard him with great importunity, often
repeating those words of Moses to God, If thy presence go not with me, I will
not go from hence; as if he had determined not to preach till God should hear
his Prayers for the success. Accordingly it fell out, he had never that success
as at that time, and yet none had greater at other times.

Lastly, As for you the people that are assembled together upon this occasion,
I have a word or two to speak, and I have done. If Ministers thus disposed and
qualified, thus approved of and invested in the Ministry, are sent of God, your
duty is to own them and receive them as such. Pray consider two things, viz.

First, Who it is that has sent them. We Ministers are in all other respects
as you are, but we are in God's stead, 2 Cor. 5.19. We pray you in Christ's
stead be ye reconciled to God. God in this matter deals wisely in dealing
familiarly with you, he does not speak immediately to you from Heaven, that the
terrors of his Majesty may not make you afraid, but sends men, men of like
Passions with our selves, who, if they deceive you, they must deceive their own
Souls. Take heed therefore of despising the methods of the Almighty, that it is
by the foolishness of Preaching, or that it is by men that the Message of the
Almighty is brought unto you. In other matters the Messenger is received
according to the respect we have to him that sent him. Our Savior does much
insist upon this, that he came not in his own name, but in the name of him that
sent him. And he tells his Disciples, as the Father sent me into the world, so
I send you, abating only for what is extraordinary; as Christ sent the first
Apostles, so he sends the ordinary Ministers of the Gospel; lo I am with you to
the end of the world; with you as long as you shall live, and with them that
shall succeed you in the ordinary work of the Ministry. The Apostles were sent
with extraordinary Gifts, endued with an infallible Spirit, to write
Scriptures, with Gifts of Miracles, Gifts of Tongues; but for the main, the
substance of the Commission is the same, viz. to testify the Grace of God to
every man, and to reveal the Will of God.

Secondly, Consider the Message that Ministers bring you. God and man were at
variance, the Son of God has done and suffered all that was necessary on his
part to make peace; Ministers are sent in the stead of Christ to persuade men
to accept of those terms, upon which peace may be had. Behold we come as
Abraham's Servant, to propose a Match between the Son of God, and the Sons of
men, to espouse you to Christ. God has sent us to invite you, nay to compel
you to come to the Marriage Feast, and to tell you that all things are ready on
God's part. We can show you, as Abraham's Servant did, Genesis 24.22. the
Bracelets and the Earrings, and the precious things that God has sent you by
us. I don't speak this to gain outward Respect and Precedence before men, but
you are to consider, that whatever respect you show Ministers, it is infinitely
short of what is due to them, till the Message they bring you be entertained.
To receive us and entertain us as one Friend does another at your Table, alas
what is this? To receive a Prophet in the name of a Prophet is to receive the
Message he brings you. We are sent to persuade you to be reconciled to God;
your kindness to us is not enough, till you are become the Friends of God that
sent us. When Ehud told Eglon that he had a Message from God to him, he arose
out of his seat, Judge. 3.20. Our Message is not as his was, but it is a Message
of Peace and good will. Surely therefore, whatever the Messenger is, the
Message is weighty. And whatever opposition we may meet with from oothers, that
condemn us and our Preaching as schismatical, our Ministry as a Nullity; though
they accuse us for counterfeiting the great Seals of Heaven, if we can prevail
in our Message, which is to persuade you to be reconciled to God, to espouse
you to Christ; it is this will support us under all the hard Speeches of men
otherwise minded. Now it lies upon you to enable us, to use the words of the
Apostle to the Corinthians, among whom there were some of their Ministers that
did not only despise his Person and Gifts, but did also question his
Apostleship, 1 Cor. 9.2. If I be not an Apostle to others, yet doubtless I am
to you; for the Seal of mine Apostleship are ye in the Lord. See you to it that
you disprove them that nullify our Ministry. Perhaps you are not able to
answer all the Objections that may be made against our Ministry, and Preaching:
No more was the blind man in the Gospel able to answer all that the Jews said
against Christ; but he had an inartificial Argument drawn from the good he had
received from him, that put them all to silence. Whereas I was born blind, now
I see. Says the Psalmist, I will never forget thy precepts, for by them thou
have quickened me. Whilst others expose our Prayers as nonsensical, or worse, if
by this Mode of Praying, in which we lead you to the Throne of Grace, you keep
up the Spirit of Devotion; if by our Ministry we persuade you to be reconciled
to God, and espouse you to Christ; if our Ministry obtain its great end upon
you, which is to better Mankind; by this means we shall be encouraged, and you
shall be established.

FINIS.

