Mrs. Wardens OBSERVATIONS Upon Her HUSBANDS Reverend SPEECH In the presence of
certain Gentlewomen of RATCLIFFE and WAPPING.
THE right Worshipful Mr. WARDEN, calling for his flowred Sattin-sleeves with
the Canvas-backe, his Wife perceived by that, and the brushing of his
Demicaster, it was Hall-day. His Breeches were Velvet, intayled to the Heirs
male of his Family, ever since the Scottishman begged the Wardrobe. Thus put
into Print (his Garters composed into a true-loves knot, and his Shoes shining
to the terror of poor people) away He trots, with as much grace is an
Hartfordshire-horse, leaving his thrice reverend Wife with a penny-pot of
Alligant and a toast in her hand: J say, his Thrice reverend Wife, as shoe had
been sometimes a Schoole-Mistresse, now a Midwife, and Mrs. Warden.

She had scarce likt her lips after the first glass, but five or six of
her Daughters from Ratcliffe and Wapping, came to offer their Eggs and
Muskodell unto her. They had lately delivered a Petition concerning their
opinions in redress of matters in State, and had elected Mr. WARDEN (since the
same of his Speech had spread him) to be their Spokesman when occasion should
offer.

Now after some three or four Quarts, and a little bandy talk the Eggs
provoked, one of them very demurely rising drops a Wapping curtsie, simpers
twice or thrice, cast up her squints, and begins (with a look like skim'd
Milk) as morally as the Song of Towle, Towle, Towle, gentle Bell for a soul,
etc. to be very Religiously angry with the King and a Malignant party of
Nobility, Clergy, Judges, Gentry, and Reprobate Cavaliers; nay, and in truth
it is feared (says she) that three parts of the Kingdom have their eyes
blinded with a kind of Duty and Conscience, and what is the root of all this
unrighteousness, but that abominable Profane, Superstitious, Idolatrous,
Babilonish, and conjuring book of Common --. Here her face grew black, and
she sat down to take breath: whilst another of the Nymphs, called Gammer
Toad-fish starts up in her place, and cries: Nay, Mother, there be some that
blush not to talk of a Perogative, and I know not what, as if we of the Elect
could speak Treason; Nay, (profane wretches) there want not some that dare
laugh and gibe at Mr. Warden himself, and his thrice-endowed Speech, at our
Petition too, though it were penned by as Zealous a Brewers Clarke, as ever
prayed in Hebrew. With that the very ancient Gentlewoman (in a kind of anger,
like an Ape when it is mocked) throws a clean Partlet upon her shoulders, and
nestling in her Chair like a Bear, that is to show tricks, after three or
four mops and mowes, thus bespoke attention.

Most pure and chosen of the Times, my Daughters and Companions in
Predestination, I know you will not doubt that truth, which a most Learned man
and friend of ours, has very ignorantly and impudently set forth, that
Democricy, Aristocricy, etc. (he might have added Hypocrisy) are as much from
God, as Monarchy. By which position (to speak truth) he shows his wisdom in
his Ignorance by proving nothing. It may hold that a Stable, or an house of
Office are places, and as ancient as Churches; therefore as Sacred and proper
to teach in. And by the same belief (when He shall but please to say it) are
we to obey and confide in our own opinions before all things. Which inference
and your ascertion throws me very pregnantly upon my Husbands argument of the
Malitia.

The Malitia (dear Daughters and Sisters of the Pint) has already been most
faithfully handled by one great Observator, and not unlearnedly by my Husband,
on which I raise my first observation. That, as the Philosophers have a Maxim,
we are borne for our Country, so the Lawyers have a Rule, That every man is
next to himself: By which it will follow (and must) If men be bound either to
hazard their Lives, or words for their Country, that Leg^talionis, their
Country is bound to hazard their Estates, Wives, and Children to requite and
uphold them; for what are their estates, wives, and children, if not protected
and secured theirs? So that to an easy judgment it will appear, the Militia
is but a mutual bond and enterchange of men's estates and affections, and (as
that worthy lover of his King says) a very legal invention to keeps City
loyal to the King, and to make the King confide in the City. Beside the great
and unknown benefit it brings to Feather-makers, Brokers, and other dutiful
Subjects, whereas the Commission of Array is another thing, and if any be so
presumptuous to think it legal, yet by the same Author we are informed, there
is an equity in the Law beyond the letter, by which we may dispense with our
estates and consciences as we please, believe what we list, and take up new
Opinions and Arms, as we shall think fitting for Church or Commonwealth. Nor
stand we bound (an happiness of these present times before any other) to
confide in any such exposition of Judges or Lawyers before our own: But as I
have often heard my learned and double-combed Husband say, Oh what a
flourishing Commonwealth should we see, if it were contrived into Halls and
Companies, and governed by Wardens and Masters? Indeed this would come very
near that Model of Church government laid down by that most hypocritical and
seditious Fox of the Church, who begot the Protestation protested (pardon me
Elect Members of the Conventicle) they be Hieroglyphick terms to express his
zeal, learning, and boldness by. And now I am come so near the Church, I
will place my observation upon my Husbands point as it stands, and only peep in
at the window, because I know you are all Gentlewomen of the function, and
showed your abilities in all those places by him mentioned. It is nothing what
language their Liturgy is in, for they confess the most unlearned may know
enough to be saved by: Ergo, Learning is needless, and if needless, why not
profane? Nay I gather further thus: If learning were either necessary or
convenient, the Scriptures would injoyne it as it does other things that are
so, but the most unlearned may be saved, nay are saved; Ergo, Learning is
neither necessary nor convenient: and so from the major consequently to the
minor; if not Learning, neither Reason nor Sense. For as that man of
Revelations Mr. Green proves it fully, Ignorance and Noise, are marks
sufficient enough whereby to know our Election: and the other with the
sanctified Lungs, Mr. Hunt, in his tale of a Tub, both maintains and makes
good, Learning to be a mere trouble and vexation to Religion. By which reasons
weo can (if it please us) as easily prove it as lawful for women as men to be
Bishops (if Bishops were lawful at all) which we must deny. And therefore J
hope it shall not need much breath to prove them Antichristian, where it is so
orthodoxly believed already; not because of their estates and honors (for
riches and honor are not to be despised, if placed upon the right Saints) but
because they will not resign them to us and our righteous seed, who ought to
inherit the Earth. And here again, we have just cause to vent out holy malice
against the Laws for putting a profane bridle on us; but thanks be given,
the bowels of our hope is somewhat enlarged.

The Anabaptists most excellently deny a great part, if not almost all the
Scriptures that make against them any way, and do not we as religiously leave
out diverse Epistles making against us, or call them Apocryphal? By which
Spirit, I hope it is no hard thing to prove a Ba^ne, or Stable, or any hole,
places most proper to our doctrine and conversation; for it is Religion makes a
church, not the Church Religion; therefore any place may be made a Church.
Besides you know we congregate together in the Spirit, to feel as well as
hear; and I pray, in what Church of our opposites have you that free
convenience? Then for the universality of it, what Church can be more
universal for Simplicisme, Dotagisme, and Hypocrisisme?

As for the Babylonish Rags and Antichristian Wardrop, let us leave them to the
Kirk of Scotland and Amsterdam; their Surplices to make sarkes, and their
Copes to make cushions: Only our observation voluntarily here thrusts it self
in, in which I must heartily admire our brothers of Scotland, that at their
first coming hither, they could forget (for what it had been for them to
remember a greater matter?) and over-looke all this needless trumpery in the
Church, when they begged the leads of it: Which if I could but believe they
assayed, I should think their modesty not the less meritorious, though they
hardly mist.

Now concerning the pearl Hatband my most ever-Round-headed Husband yawnes at
in his Speech, you shall see it, but truly I confess I never wore it with that
pride and delight since he compared it to Popish beads, a word so unnatural
to me, that verily I must drink the other cup to reconcile my stomach; but
let me tell you ingeniously, it is more for the Popes sake and the King of
Spaines, then the Religion merely it self; for insooth there be many
principles in that Religion which we do not deny for wholesome and Orthodox,
only we scorn to own them from the Jesuits, our own inventions being the
only and infallible rule of all our Faith, Hope, and Charity: As first, that
Church holds Ignorance the Mother of Devotion, an Article of our Faith. Then
they have their Revelations, Visions, Dissentions, so have we. They have
private Shrifts, so we. They call it a Venial sin with a sister, and in case
of necessity can forgive a Neighbors wife, so we. They allow Deposing and
regulating of Princes by tumults and other ways, so do we. They endeavor to
domineere over Church and State, so would we. They hatch Factions, and say it
is good fishing in troubled streams, so do we. And lastly, they deny all this
in plain words, but grant it in effects, and so do we.

And although we cannot endure a Surplice, or Cross, the Popes Bulls, nor his
fiercer beasts the Jesuits, yet we hold it lawful by the same virtue of
equivocations, and mental reservations, to cheat, swear, and lie with any
that is not one of us, nay even among our selves, if there be an holy cause.
And to say which is the best subject, or most honest, the Jesuits or we, would
be a very hard question, if we were suffered to make our own laws: Yet by my
Husbands leave, though he speak in the abundance of his good will to the
advancement of the holy Brethren, me thinks it would be a more heavenly sight
to see Mr. How, or the grave Observator himself in his Barre-gowne, mounted
upon the steps at the Banqueting house in White Hall, expounding Chapters to
the Courtiers and Cavaleers, and to have all the Privy Council chosen out of
the Elect, the Pentioners Lay doctors, and the Guard devout Elders; then for
Lord Chamberlain, Groom of the stool, and Bedchamber (places indeed most
consonant to women) some of the Holy Sisters, who received their education
against the world, the flesh, and the Devil in the Zion of New England, that
both the King and State might the more securely confide in their Continence and
purity. Let us all fling up the whites of our eyes in an holy hope, that the
strong breathing of the spirit may stir up some worthy instruments to say Amen
to the work.

But to draw to a conclusion, because I perceive by the fervent twinkling of
your eyes, and ardent licking of your lips, you would be at your devotions, I
shall but wag my petticote at the first of his two last reasons concerning
Ireland. And I observe that the spirit does never leave us destitute of
sanctified shifts to overreach our adversaries the Protestants; for if we be
constrained to break in knavery or beggary, yet we still have some refuge or
land of Promise to fly to. Yet sincerely for living in Ireland (though I
confess the advantage great we have wrought of it and the present times) I
know not what to say, because no venomous beast will live there; nor need we
care, since New England (as I verily believe) was found out to that purpose:
For the design there I will speak little now, because (as the case stands)
for my part, I had rather all the Soldiers were in Hull then in Ireland; for
if the King once take that, by the help of his loving and dutiful Subjects
(as he calls them) it will put the Brethren to a great many of hard texts and
tedious prayers, if it do not break the heart of our Conventicle: And what
jealousy and fear can be like that? I appeal to any Reverend Roundhead that
is not a Cuckold (if there be such an one,) therefore it is high time to
bestirre us, (and so please you Mistress Spritsayle but lend me the Chamber Pot)
we will have the other quart, and I will conclude, as the same Gentleman began,
applying all in these words, that as our case is not like Scotlands, so
Scotlands never was, nor (I think) can be ever like ours.

Dixi. J. B.


