SPECIAL NEWS FROM THE ARMY AT Warwick since the Fight:

Sent From A Minister of good note, to an Alderman here in London:

Wherein is related the names of such that are slain and taken prisoners of
both sides:

And also the coming of the Marquess of Hartford toward Hereford with 2000.
men, but made to Retreat again by the appearing of the LORD Stampford and his
Forces:

Also the Funeral of Colonel Charles Essex at Warwick, His Body being borne to
the grave by the Lo: Mandevill, Lo: Brooks, and some 4. or 6. Colonels:

With other remarkable Passages of truth touching that great Battle, not yet
printed, which will give great satisfaction to the READER.

Also a most pious passage uttered by his Excellency to Master Marshall, upon
their discourse of the Battle.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Overton, at his Shop in Pope's Head Alley. October. 29.
1642.

Warwick, October. 27. 1642.
WHatsoever was in Dr. Coxe his Letter to your son, I likewise affirm, and
thereunto make some addition. The Earl of Lindsey I saw brought dead under his
wounds, into Warwick Castle upon Tuesday night, the Lord John, brother to the
Duke of Lenox, was slain in the fight. The Kings red Regiment of 12. hundred
men, most of them Gentlemen, were first routed by my Lord Generals Lifeguard of
Gentlemen, and then abundantly smitten down by the Orange Coats, and Sir
William Constable his blew Coats, one of whose Ensigns, Mr. Young by name, had
the first honor of taking the Kings Standard, which afterward an horseman got
into his hands, and rid away with it to the Lord General, who bravely
flourished it in the field, and then gave it his Secretary, Master Chambers to
keep, and how he lost it I know not. There are slain on the Kings side at
least ten for one, though well nigh three parts of those who are slain on our
side were Waggoners, Carters, and poor unarmed people that stood in the Reere
to see the fight, some of them old men, women and Children, a poor piece of
valor for such a boasting enemy. It is reported that Prince Rupert was so wise
as not to come near much danger, but in stead of fighting, spent his time in
pillaging our Noble men's Wagons behind our Army. We have many men soarely
wounded, but it was more with flying, then fighting. The Earl of Bullingbrooke
his son, alias, my Lord Sanit-Johns was the chief man that was slain on our
side, whose body is now embalmed, and prepared for an interment: Colonel
Charles Essex was buried with the solemnity of a Soldier in a Church at
Warwick on Wednesday (which was your Fast day, but by the command of his
Excellency was our day of thankfulness) his Corpse was borne to the grave by
the Lord Mandevill, the Lord Brook, and some four or six other Colonels. On
Monday the King sent an Herald of Arms to his Excellency, some say the
message was to offer a general pardon upon laying down of Arms etc. And the
answer, That the Parliament must determine what in this case should be done,
but I cannot confidently speak this. When the left Wing of our Horse (which
were most of our horse which we chiefly relied upon) fled, and likewise the
Gunners which on that part of the Army should have played upon the enemy,
almost 5. Regiments of the foot on the right Wing fled soon after. The Lord
Mandevils men would not stand the field, though his Lordship beseeched them,
yea, cudgelled them: no nor yet the Lord Whartons men: Sir William Fairefax his
whole Regiment, as I heard, and all Colonel Chomley his Regiment, except some
80. of them, used their heels. It is shrewdly suspected that there was
treachery in the business, for the Soldiers swear that their Commanders ran
first, and bid their soldiers run too, after farther examination I suppose you
will hear more. Colonel Hollis his Regiment of red-Coates, under God did most
gallant service, every one fighting like a Lion, with such a glorious success,
that by the help of the Lord Brooks purple-Coats, they won the field, and
crowned a most bloody battle with an honorable victory: and yet I must not
forget to tell you that the Lord Roberts his red-Coats, and the Lord Says
blew-Coats, together with part of Colonel Ballards gray-Coats, did good
service. In general the right Wing of the horse, and the left wing of the
foot bore the brunt of the day, and obtained the victory. If I should relate
how admirably the hand of Providence ordered our Artillery and Bullets for the
destruction of the enemy, but how seldom or never almost we were hurt by
theirs, you would stand and wonder: those that rid most gallantly among an
hundred thousand bullets, and faced, and charged the enemy; where first his
Excellency, the Lord of Bedford, Sir William Balfore, Sir John Meldrum,
Commander of the Lord Say his Regiment, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir Arthur
Haslerig, Sir Samuel Luke, Sergeant Mojor Hurny, Captain Hunt though left all
alone, these are some of those which are chiefly spoken of for their valor;
some of our Prisoners now with the King, are Captain Austen, Captain Scroope,
Captain Lydcot, two or three of my Lords guard.

The present news with us is, that London provides bravely, which we are glad
of, and that the Counties Southward are all ready to assist us, I hope it is
true. The Kings Army are mad in pillaging since the fight, and now threaten
Bambury; we hear this day that the Earl of Westmerland is taken at
Northampton: You may assure my Lord Mayor that his son is as well and
cheerful as ever, though he and I have lost three or four precious friends of
our acquaintance in the fight, as namely one Master Cardinal, Master
Michelthawrt, Master Nelson, Master Elice, the first is certainly slain, the
other three we fear are slain or taken prisoners, for as yet we cannot
hear of them. The Marquess of Hartford lately came toward Hereford with some
2000. men, but the Lord Stamford who lies there in Garrison, by his very
appearing, made him glad to recreate. Our Army is now refreshing it self at
Warwick, what farther service it shall be put to, or when we shall march
again we know not; that which God has already done by it, deserves praise
from England to perpetual ages, especially since the godly part of the Army
have been isntrumental in this noble service. Master William Sedgwicke of
Farnham behaved himself like a brave Commander in the Army. I beseech you Sir
if there be any thing new to you in this Letter, be pleased to let my Lord
Mayor, and some special friends, have a sight of it, as Sergeant Major
Skippon, etc. and it would be a charitable work if some rich Citizen would
drop the silver oil of his purse into the wounds of the sick and maimed
soldiers who have so freely hazarded their lives for the Gospel, for their
bleedings move compassion in him who really presents his humble respects to
your beloved yoke fellow, and is ever resolved to be

SIR, Your Worships servant affectionately devoted. J. B.


COventry very nobly sent in 18. load of provision for the Army, and freely
gave it; we have taken about 30. of the Kings Wagons, with goods, Arms, etc.
had I time to relate it, I could give you eight or ten particulars of the
advantages which our enemy had, and the disadvantages which we had, the very
knowledge whereof will make it appear that the salvation of the last Sabbath
was very glorious; if it may be useful, you may print this letter as an
addition to that which I sent to my Lord Mayor, for I conceive you have many
false rumors, but what I write, you may be confident, for the maine is true.

Master Henry Boys is safe at Warwick, and because Master Sprat comes
immediately to London from his Excellency, he thinks it best to stay two or
three days for some other news, which he entreats your worship to impart to
the Committees.

One gallant passage of his Excellency I had almost forgot; it is truly worthy
not only to be known by all men, but unto his praise to be put into
Characters of Gold. It was this, Master Marshall was speaking of the success
of the battle, his excellency replied twice together, that he never saw less
of man in any thnig, nor more of God, which pious expression of a Generals
heart deserves a due Emblazon of praise.

SInce I sealed my Letter, I remember to tell you that Sir Edmund Varnee the
Kings Standard Bearer is slain; and generally all his best Commanders are
either slain or taken; but few are left with him, the Foot run away apace from
their colors, so that of Foot and Horse both, his Majesty has not many
thousands left; the number of the slain men on the Kings side between two and
three thousand, and our side is reputed to be not above 80. or 100. at most
upon the place of the fight, besides what were slain in the flight. We fear
that Banbury is yielded up, such news is just now brought, so that to morrow
his Excellency will march toward the King. Colonel Norris at Coventry has
taken eight of the Kings Wagons, one of which being opened has Plate in in
it, what are in the rest we know not.

FINIS.

