A BRIEF NARRATION OF THE EXAMINATION OF Geo. Bateman, Upon five ARTICLES in a
Charge laid against him by Henry Eddan and others. With the Sentence of the
Bench in Ordering him to be committed to the Jayl the last general Sessions of
Peace, holden in the City of Durham, the 5th of April, 1654. Diverse honest
people being present, who can witness with the truth of what is here declared.
The which Sentence let the world Judge, whether Just or Unjust.

For the Vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the House of Israel, and the men of
Judah are his pleasant plant; he looked for Judgment, but behold Oppression,
for Righteousness, but behold a Cry. Isa. 5.7. Fear none of those things that
you shall suffer, for the Devil shall cast some of you into Prison, that ye may
be tried, and ye shall have tribulation ten days: Be thou faithful unto death,
and I will give thee a Crown of Life. Rev. 2.10. London, Printed, Anno Dom.
1654.

IT is not unknown to those who know any thing (of order and course in former
dispensations) that when God began to make himself more manifest to the sons of
men (then in former ages) and to appear strongly for the making his name
glorious, in choosing out and delivering some people from the evils and bondages
of the world: we see upon such occasions, what hurly burly was always raised
in those Kingdoms, where such a work was to be brought to pass; as in Egypt
when God was about to deliver Israel, and likewise when Christ appeared in the
flesh, though at that time the world had peace, and the Land where Christ was
born was brought into a quiet condition by Caesar: yet when Christ was born,
indeed what tumults were raised, the history of Scripture will declare. Now we
see it plainly recorded, that those who were the greatest and most eminent in
raising those persecuting tumults, were the Priests and holy people, so called,
and the Magistracy, who were blinded by the Priests; in all ages it has been
found that the generality of the national Priesthood, and formal holiness,
were the greatest opposites to God; the truth of this is verified by the
Prophets in many places, being so well known, it needs no further proof: and
in the time of Christ's appearing in the flesh (which was the nearest appearance
of God to men, of all his former appearances) yet the more near that God
appears to the Son, the more violent will the Priests and outward formalities
appear also; and as the truth of this was made apparent when Christ came in the
flesh, so this shall be come to pass and be completed when he shall come in a
far more nearer appearance then ever; viz. when he shall appear in Spirit, and
makes himself manifest in the hearts of his people, the which appearance shall
be as far hid from the beholding and believing of the generality of the
national Priesthood and outward formality, as his appearance in the flesh was
to the Priests, Scribes and Pharisees in those days; and as in these days the
looking at the observation of some part of the Law and Circumcision blinded
them by reason of the lust in their hearts, so that they could not close with
Christ in the flesh; even so shall it be when he begins to appear in Spirit,
the Priests and outward formalities shall be blinded by looking at Christ in
the flesh, and by their carnaland fleshly apprehensions of him, whereby they
shall create a Faith to themselves, which being joined to the lust in their
heart from whence they shall be made the greatest enemies and persecutors of
Christ in spirit and his Saints, in whom he is, and who are to bear witness of
the truth thereof, for the mystery of God must be fulfilled in its time; and
in the fulfilling of this Mystery there will be Persecutors, and people to be
persecuted, and the more near that the Mystery of God becomes fulfilled, the
more mystical will the persecution be; and will it not be thought very strange
to see any such thing now amongst us in this present age, when so many men's
lives have been lost for the peace, and liberty of the Saints, as is pretended,
and when the present Government seems to be established amongst us, tending to
the very same end? yet who can believe that under all this, any persecution of
Christ and the Saints should arise? but for all the blood that has been spilt,
and for all the fair raised forms of worship, and for all the liberty that is
yet attained, do not think that the persecution of the Saints is at an end, for
under all, and out of all this outward holiness and liberty, so much spoken of,
shall arise a persecution, which shall be suitable for the time of the
Mystery; and whosoever you be that are true Saints indeed, take notice of
this, for the peace is not yet completed, for the Mystery of God is not yet
finished, and he that rides on the white Horse with his Army, is not yet
unmounted, nor will be, until the Saints warfare be accomplished, and the Kings
and great men, the Dragon and the Beast, and all the false Prophets, and the
worshippers of the Image, and those who have received the mark of the Beast, be
all of them overcome; but in the interim be of good comfort, and valiant for
the truth, though the Devil prevail to cast some of you into prison, for so it
must be until the time of the end; I need not go far for proof of this truth,
who am a prisoner my self for no other cause, but for the testimony of the
mystery of the truth, as it is in Jesus, and for my plain discovering of the
false Priests, and for the clear demonstrating between the shadow and the
substance of truth; setting forms in their proper place, and the substance in
its place, he which is a thing so far beyond the understanding of our blind
Priests, that they have combined together (though secretly) to take away my
life, if possible; and yet will they not be seen to act any thing against me
themselves, but make others to become their stalking horses, and to shut the
bolts that they have made, as thou shall see hereafter; but before I come to
the thing intended, I will give the Reader a short discovery of some things
that tend to making more plain to the understanding the things that are to
follow.

In the first I would have thee to know that it was put upon me a year and a
half since to write some things which might be useful for the present times,
either to convince, or to be as a witness against many, which things thou
may see in a book penned and owned by me, called, The Arrow of the Almighty,
shot out of the Creatures bow, etc. In which book there is something that has
not pleased as many of the unsent Priests as have seen it; for therein I
believe they have found such truth laid to their charge, as they can no ways
turn their eyes from beholding, but yet their pride and covetousness is so
great, that many of them do grievously grumble at me, and many long furrow have
they ploughed upon my back; yet to this very day not one of them would come to
my face to gainsay any thing contained in that book, though I live amongst the
very crowd of them: nor ever did any of them so much as oppose any thing in it
by writing against me; yet see the subtilty of some of them, for though they
durst not come to my face, to answer for themselves, yet by their secret
instigation of others, they go about to take away my life for my friendly and
plain dealing with them; and to bring about their devilish desire, some of
their poor blind proselytes, who being fitted for that purpose, being of the
murdering principle, have appeared openly to take away my life, that thereby
they might have my blood to satisfy the hungry desire of their greedy God,
whose hunger cannot be stayed but by the sacrifice of the blood of the Saints.

Now Reader, I will plainly show thee who are mine accusers, and what I am
accused of, and who were my Judges, and what their Judgment against me was, at
the last Sessions holden at Durham, the fifth of April, in this present year,
1654. and by this, if thou be not wilfully blind, thou shall see the strangest
work that ever has been heard of in England; the which when thou have rightly
understood, I leave to thee to Judge, what wise, honest, upright Justices we
have in this County of Durham; for which thou may praise God if thou will.

Now in my proceeding, I come to show thee who it was that appeared to be mine
accusers; the one called by name Henry Eddan, and the other Richard Raw, who
being men fitted for such a work, being strongly Priest-ridden, or if they
stumble at this expression, their understandings are so saddled and bridled by
the doctrine of the Priests, that they have them at command, in turning them
what way they please: as for Richard Raw, I have not much to say unto him,
because I have not had any acquaintance with him, but only as he appeared
against me with Henry Eddan; the which, as far as I could perceive by outward
expression was not much, but that might be because the poor blind man had but
little to say openly to my face; therefore what he said against me when he
whispered secretly with the rest of the Justices upon the bench, he best
knows; only thus much I am apt to believe, that he is so zealous for the
glory of his God, that he would give consent to kill Christ, if he were in the
flesh, if he should but cross him in his principles; and thus much I can
witness against him, by his giving consent to have me imprisoned for holding
out Christ in his Divine Nature, which seemed to thwart his Christ of flesh,
blood and bone. I will not say much more of him at present, but as far as he is
guilty in acting against me with his fellow Eddan: Let him read and apply to
himself what here I lay open against him -- As for this Eddan, I am somewhat
acquainted both with his person and his principles: As for his person, I say
nothing but only this, and would not have said so much, but that his actions
make manifest what was presented to me the very first time I saw him, where I
took good notice of his phisiognomy, which told me that he was a man very much
addicted to earthly mindedness, and malice, and envy, for I clearly viewed all
these to be figured out in his very face; and for his principles, I know them
to be such as suite very well with such natural addictions; and these are the
Presbytery principles, the which I sometimes call the murdering principles,
for where these be, they lead the persons to persecute to very death any that
will not own these principles; witness his saying once in a discourse to one of
a contrary judgment, That he was bound in conscience to persecute him to
death, because he would not go to Church, as he called it; as is too truly
manifested in all places where these principles were accompanied with power:
and I hope many in this Nation can witness to this, and do truly know that they
are as a gangren in our Commonwealth, and will be gnawing at the very heart
thereof, if by any means to overspread the whole body; and when the chief
governors of our land have any mind to persecute any for conscience sake, let
them but let loose the Presbytery Principle, and give it power, and it will
persecute to purpose, etc. -- Now this Eddan, who is very well furnished for
such a work, both by principles and by nature, and the devil driving both, he
wanted nothing but power; but was it not pity that such a suitable person
should not have power also? yea, I believe some thought so, and may be he
thought so himself likewise; and to come by this power, I do not say that the
Priests in New Castle petitioned to Authority to get him and Richard Raw the
power they vvanted; neither do I say that Henry Eddan made use of some friends
at London to get himself and his fellovv Richard Raw established in power; no,
I do not say any such thing, but they have something within them that can tell
whether these things be so or not; and in case the Priests in New Castle did
so, and shevved Authority what suitable men they were for having power
conferred upon them, I cannot blame them; for every thing that has life,
would preserve its own life, if it were with the death of its equal; and
for the Priests I think they are not such fools, but know what would pull
them down, and who will hold them up in their places, and this I think that
they believe in part, and what they want of believing in the whole, I can
believe for them, and upon my belief may they depend, that if they have not
Authority and Magistracy to uphold them, down they must, for God will not
uphold them in the way they are in, therefore they had best devise all means
possible by way of Authority to stay themselves by, or down they go root and
branch; but let me tell the unsent Priests once again, Authority shall not be
able to keep them from what is determined with God, and what I have foretold
them, shall as surely come to pass as the skin is on their face, and that ray
of light which is in rising shall not go down until the thing determined be
brought to pass, for few as yet can see how or what will be the pullers of them
down, and that peradventure which they least suspect, shall be the thing shall
overturn them; I can do no more but give them warning, and if they will not
believe, I cannot help it; and if they should hang me for my faithful dealing
with them, I should forgive them; but I have digressed a little.

But now to come to speak a little more of Henry Eddan and Richard Raw. I find
them now in Authority, being made Justices in the County of Durham; I wish they
may do good in their places: and this I will say for them, that if they be but
as well fitted in parts, and as well acquainted and read in the Laws of the
Land, as they are fitted with the persecuting Principles, all the other
Justices may give them the right hand of fellowship. Now Reader, by this time
thou may understand, that those who were mine accusers, are now become my
Judges also; may thou not think that here would be a goodly piece of Justice
acted? But to let that pass a while, I will truly inform thee with the
particulars charged upon me in their information, there being five Articles in
all, and three of them wrong stated, and one of them a very false Article, not
so much as ever either spoken, or written by me, and another of them was right
stated, and that I owned; but what they were, and as they were stated, I give
thee the true Copy thereof, as follows:

The first Article: That I called the Ministers of the Gospel unsent Priests.
For proof hereof they quoted the first page of my book, which they called by
the name of a seditious book.

The second Article. Which they quoted, out of the second page of the same
book; Was that I most wickedly said, that who so lends a hand to pull them
down, shall be accounted happy, and shall receive a reward of God for their
work.

And the third Article, they quoted out of the 37. page of the same book, where
they say I positively speak against the observance of the Lords day, and says
it is not by Divine institution, but the precepts of Priests.

And the fourth Article was: That I was heard in public to speak against the
Ascension of the glorified body of the Lord Jesus.

And the fifth Article was: That deridingly I asked the question whether he was
seen to ride on horse back, or go on foot to heaven. These were the things laid
against me most falsely, as thou shall see in my answering all the particulars
in open Sessions, the day and year beforesaid, there being upon the Bench at
that time (to be my Judges) Sir George Vane Justice, Mr. Leddal Justice, Mr.
VVhitingam Justice, Mr. Hallyman Justice, Mr. Dailles Mayor of the City of
Durham, Justice, Mr. Raw, the one of mine accusers, Justice, Mr. Eddan, the
other of mine accusers, Justice, seven in all. But before I proceed, take
notice of this, viz. I was attending the Court in the forenoon that day, but
was not to be called until the afternoon; but when the Justices rose to
dinner, they gave me a charge to attend the Court at two of the clock, the
which I was willing to observe: Now in the forenoon, Justice VVren, and Justice
Dolnell, and Justice Clavering, sat upon the Bench with the other seven, but in
the afternoon they withdrew themselves from the other, and would not appear to
be Judges against me; the reason (as I conceive) was because they understood my
cause better then the other, and might see that what was charged upon me (in
case all had been true) was out of the compass of any known Law in England, and
so their wisdom might cause them to withdraw. But now to proceed, I will give
thee a true Relation of things as they were carried on in the afternoon between
the seven Justices and me; At two of the clock I attended the Court, and my
Information was presented to the Bench by the Clerk of the Peace, the which
they read amongst themselves; and what debate they had about it they know best,
for it was secret, and they paused upon it about half an hour, and if I may
guess at their thoughts by their outward appearances, I believe they were at a
stand what to do with it, insomuch that some judged they would have passed it
by, if they could have shut themselves of it, without being notice taken of;
for I do believe they knew well enough the Law of the Nation could not take
hold on me for any thing therein contained; and to Judge me by the Law of their
own wills, was a thing to be taken notice of; thus they paused, till at last
Justice Eddan, mine accuser, and my Judge, stepped nearer the other Justices,
and whispered something in their ears, what it was themselves best know; but
this I say, Truth seeks no corners, neither fears who hear or see it; but
after that whispering, the Bench gave order to the Clerk of the Peace to call
me, and let me hear my information read, and so it was, and I commanded to
stand up and give answer to my charge, the which I did immediately, without any
fear or dread, my spirit being carried up above its wonted condition, and
having no guilt at all upon my conscience, being I knew who was my guide both
to write that book, and likewise enabled me with courage to answer in the
defense thereof; by which my very countenance, which was smiling, did plainly
manifest my spirit was above the reach of the malice of men, the which thou
shall see presently what my Judges censured thereupon, and what Judgment they
passed upon me for it.

My charge being read, I desired to know who were mine accusers, so the Bench
ordered the Clerk of the Peace to read the names of mine accusers, where
Justice Eddan was found chief, who had informed the Grand Jury with these
things, and they poor men, not able to judge of these things, took all for
good, and so presented the same to the Justices: but I do not question the
Grand Jury for the breach of their oath in this thing, because ignorance
blinds men, and malice makes them oft-times do things which they may be
forry for afterward, and for my part I wish God may pass by them for any thing
done to me, for I do freely forgive them. Then Justice Vane spoke to me, and
asked me if I would own what was in my charge: To which I answered, What is
truly stated therein I own, but what is falf I will not own it; he asked me
what I owned in it, I answered, if they were pleased to examine me upon every
particular, they should know, and withal I propounded these things to them;
and said, Gentlemen, I desire to know of you whether you have called me before
you this day for matter of disputation, or to be Judged by the known Laws of
the Land, or by the Law of your own wills? if it be to dispute any thing
rightly stated in my charge, or in my book, I am willing to answer you; or if I
have offended against any known Law, I am willing to submit to the penalty of
such Laws as I have transgressed, only let not your own wills be Law. Then
answered Justice Vane, and said, we have not called thee to dispute, nor to
Judge thee by our own wills, God forbid, but by the Laws of the Nation, [All
was well thus far, so said and so done had been true Justice] Then it was
concluded to examine the particulars in my charge, to know what was true, and
what was false; so the Clerk was caused to read the first Article in the
charge, which was, that in page the first of my book, I railed against the
Ministers of the Gospel, calling them unsent Priests: Then said Justice Vane,
what say thou to that, is it true, or no? To which I answered, that was
false, for whosoever were the Ministers of the Gospel, I owned and reverenced
them. He answered, thou have written in general against all the Ministers of
the Gospel; Then I asked him if he did take all the National Ministry to be
Ministers of the Gospel, the which he would not conclude; Then I answered, to
those amongst the National, who are not the true Ministers of the Gospel, the
things in my book are written, and these are they which I call unsent Priests;
who they be, let him that is guilty Judge himself, for I have named none, and
though I have written in general to them all in some respect, yet have I made
exception of some amongst them, as my book it self will witness for me; which
book I own, and shall bear witness against mine accusers, in things wrongfully
stated in my charge; with that I pulled the book out of my pocket, and said,
Sirs, here is the book, I own it, and will maintain all that is in it against
any that will oppose it, and will seal the truth therein contained with my
blood; if blind ignorance lead Authority to put me to it, and more, I freely
offer this unto you, if you be pleased to accept of it: Take to you as many of
the Priests of the County, or all if you please, and I will give them a meeting
to maintain any thing in this book, whatever any of them can except against; to
which they gave no answer, but bid the Clerk read the second Article in my
charge, the which he did, which was, that I most wickedly said, That who so
lends a hand to pull them down, shall be accounted happy, and shall receive a
reward of God for their work, etc.

Then Justice Vane asked me if I would own that, to which I said, I own it, for
so it is in my book; the which is spoken by way of prophecy, as may be seen in
the book, the which in time shall assuredly come to pass; and said unto all the
Justices, I pray take notice of what I say, and if you please, Record it: will
you not think it a very strange thing, if some amongst your selves who are so
strong at present for the upholding of the Priests, will it not be strange to
see some of you lend even your own hand to pull them down? which saying made
some of them to laugh, it being a thing so unlike to be. So they passed on to
the third Article in my charge, quoted out of the 37. page of my book, the
which they stated thus, my charge saying, that I positively spoke against the
observance of the Lords day, and says it is not by Divine Institution, but the
precepts of Priests, etc. Then asked they me what I said to that -- To which I
answered, I did not own that Article, being wrong stated, as I should prove by
my book it self: So Justice Hallyman desired to see the book, the which I
delivered to him, and so they turned to the 37. page, and found it otherwise
then was stated in my charge, and could say nothing against what I had laid
down upon that subject; at which Justice Eddan, and Justice Raw, mine accusers,
were not well pleased, but were struck dumb, not having so much as one word to
say against me, but with a shameful blushing countenance sat silent on the
Bench; now when they saw they could not catch me in any of these Articles they
had alleged out of my book; Justice Hallyman, who had my book, would seem to
be some body (and to do some great piece of justice in the place he was in,
that the rest of the Justices might see his great skill, and the Country take
notice of his something he thought himself to have) -- He asked me if I set
that book abroad, and if I would own it, although he had heard me own it
formerly; I told him again, I was the penman of it, and owned what was in it,
and would answer for it against any that had any mind to oppose; with that he
gave it to the Clerk of the Peace to keep, thinking thereby to skare me; at
which I said, you need not except against that book only, for there is a
thousand of them in England; with that he begun to rail against me and the
book, and said I was a bold blasphemous person, and worthy to be punished for
my contempt of Authority: To which I said, Sir, is it your knowledge or your
ignorance that causes you to say so?

Then he asked me what religion or profession I was on? to which I said, if you
would know that, you may satisfy your self in a book I wrote in answer to Tho.
Ledger, that is all the account I will give you at present.

Then they proceeded to examine me upon the other Articles in my Charge, which
were not quoted out of my Book, but what mine accusers affirmed to be spoken by
me in public; which is as follovveth; That I was heard in public to speak
against the Ascension of the glorified body of Christ, and deridingly to ask
the question, whether he was seen to ride on hors-back, or go on foot to heaven?

Then Justice Vane asked me what I said to that? To which I answered, I never
spoke these words, and asked the Clerk of the Peace what day it was that I
spoke the words, who looked in my Charge, and found no day set down; the want
of which by Law should have made void my Charge in that particular, yet the
Justices not willing to let it pass, asked me if I had never spoken these
words, or some words to that effect: To which I answered, I confess at sometime
I had occasion to speak something, though not to the same effect; and if I may
but be allowed the benefit of my own words, I will truly rehearse them over
again, for I did not fear what any could do to me, for any thing I had spoken,
if they were but rightly understood; they bad me rehearse them; Then I answered
and said, The occasion I had to speak what I spoke, was from Mr. Eddan, who was
affirming against me, that I denied the glorious body of Christ, the which I
never did, and I knew him to maintain a corporeal body of Christ; to thwart his
popish principle, I said, if you affirm that Christ has a corporeal body in
heaven, tell me positively whether he be on horseback, or on foot in heaven?
this was all, and this I confess I spoke, make of it what you can: with that
looks up a Scotch Priest, he being in the company, and said Gentlemen, I am a
Minister of the Gospel, and am bound in conscience to speak against that
blasphemer, and to stand for the corporeal body of Christ; with that he speaks
two or three Scriptures, some about his body ascending, and some about his
coming again in the same body, and asked me if I would deny these? I turned to
him, and said, friend, whatsoever the Scripture says I own, and my belief
shall go with yours as far as the Disciples saw him; but this I say to you
again, if you can prove it, that Christ has a corporeal body in heaven, then I
say still I will prove it as well, that there are horses in heaven; with that
the poor Priest for proof went to his own belief, and said, that Christ was in
heaven, having a body of flesh, blood and bone, just such a one as himself had
where he stood; The most of the Justices ascenting to what the poor Priest
affirmed, because it suited with their own principles, took the tale out of his
mouth, and did conclude the truth of what he said, and then asked me if I would
deny that Christ had a corporeal body of flesh, blood and bone in heaven?

I still replied to them, if they could prove him to have such a body, I could
as well prove it that there were horses in heaven; which saying was such a
strange saying to them, that they knew not what to make of it but blasphemy at
least, and so would they have it recorded, -- When I perceived the great
ignorance of the most of the Justices, I said unto them, Gentlemen be pleased,
for I shall end the controversy, and clear the truth hereof in one word, and
that shall be by Scripture too, and I hope you will not deny Scripture; look
into the 19. Chap. and 11. verse of the Revelation of Saint John, and there you
shall see that the last vision that John had of Christ, he saw him on a
white-horse, therefore think not strange at what I say, being I speak but what
I can make good by Scripture; yet for all this, though the Scripture be so
plain in many places, to this very purpose, in the literal sense, yet could
they not get by this horse to be in heaven; but this they can believe, that
Christ is in heaven with the foresaid body, and much murmuring was amongst the
bench about this horse, but still they stumbled at him, because he seemed to
make gross what they affirmed of Christ; but here were the most of them still
at a stand; and I perceiving them so puzzled in this clear thing, and found them
so weak in understanding the very letter of Scripture; I told them plainly,
that I perceived them ignorant, and if they had not better knowledge in the Law
of the Land, then they had in the mystery of Divinity, that they were too
ignorant for the place in which they were; the which when they heard, they were
not a little displeased, that they should in the least be questioned for their
ignorance in Divinity, though they had made themselves fully known to be
ignorant in the very letter of Scripture; but the horse in heaven stumbled them
not so sore, but this other saying pinched them twice as hard, and then Will
begun to work; And Justice Vane said unto me, they would make me know my
contempt of Authority; to which I said, let not your own wills be Judge, but
let me know what Law I have transgressed in any thing laid against me in my
Charge, which is truly stated, or in any of my behavior before you, or in any
contemptible speeches given you, and wherein I have transgressed, I shall yield
my self to suffer what can be justly imposed upon me for the breach of that
Law; this I desired of them diverse times, but could not in the least show me
what Law I had transgressed; when I could not obtain this reasonable and lawful
request of those who were the elder Justices, I turned to the new Justices,
viz. Mr. Eddan, one of my Accusers, and my Judge, and said unto him, Mr. Eddan,
you who are one of the new Justices, I desire you to let me know what Law I
have transgressed, and wherein I have offended, that I may satisfy Justice;
but he could not answer me one word, but blushed exceedingly: so I could not
obtain this favor, though but just and lawful, neither of old Justice, nor
new, but being enraged against me, they caused the Clerk to Record my words as
they fell from my mouth, and would have wrested all that I spoke, but that the
Clerk of the peace and some other bare true witness of what I said: and so out
of what I had spoken, they caused the Clerk to draw up a new Charge against me,
to be presented to the Judges of the next Assizes, a true Copy whereof I here
present to thy view, --

In open Sessions of the Peace holden at the City of Durham the fifth day of
April, 1654.
Geo. Bateman appearing here in Court, and having read unto him the Articles
and Charge laid against him by the Grand Jury the last General Sessions of the
Peace, amongst which being questioned whether Christ's body of flesh and blood
be in heaven, he answered, that if they would maintain Christ's corporeal body
to be in heaven, he would maintain horses are in heaven; and he said further,
that if the Bench had no more Judgemennt in the Law, then they had in Divinity,
they were ignorant people, or words to that purpose, -- and also said, Mr.
Eddan, you are a new Justice, come let us see wherein I have offended;
Wherefore, and for his misbehaviour and evil carriage in the Court, it is
ordered by the Bench, that he shall find Sureties for his good behavior, and
to answer the premises at the next Assizes or General Jail-delivery, and he is
by the Court Committed to the Goal until he find such Sureties.

By Order of the Court.



Now Reader thou may be judge by what law they have committed me to Prison,
and thereby may thou see how things are carried on among the Justices of this
County; and for thy better satisfaction, I will discover unto thee what it is
they have charged upon me for my misbehaviour and evil carriage in the Court.

That which they charge me with for misbehaviour and evil carriage in the
Court, is, because I sometimes smiled upon them in my speaking to them, the
which is my ordinary gesture in speaking to any man, it being a natural
instinct belonging to my complexion, and can no more be removed then my bodily
life, and whosoever has any judgment in natural addiction, will conclude, that
where such an instinct is, anger, malice, and envy has no great residence in
that heart, the which I know by experience, and as many as have known me, are
able to witness, that to smile in my speaking is as ordinary as to draw my
breath; and let others Judge of me what they please, I am in as much favor
with my own constitution, as any that I know, and praise God for it, etc.

Now when some of the Justices saw me smile in my speaking, they censured me
that I laughed them to scorn, and said they would make me know my contempt of
them; and thus they gave it the names beforesaid, the which when I heard that
they took offense where none was given, I said Gentlemen, be not offended at me
for my boldness, and my smiling upon you, I am no God to change my own nature,
and it is an instinct in my nature, and do not censure so, as that I do it in
any contempt to you, but rather judge justly; for I profess unto you all, I
have neither anger nor malice upon me, nor toward you for any thing that you
have said or done to me, for I plainly tell you, God bears up my spirit, and
I know my cause is just, and there is no guilt upon my conscience, and
therefore I cannot fear before you; may you not rather judge by my smiling,
that I am not offended at you; but nothing would stand for current but what
their own wills led them to, and no way but Record my favorable countenance
for misbehaviour and evil carriage in the Court, and so it stands upon Record:
Now Readers you may learn something out of this, to know how to behave your
selves before our Justices; if you tremble and look sadly, and speak weakly,
and question nothing that they say, be it with or against you, then is your
behavior right; but thou had best take heed to thy self as thou come
before them with any infirmity of body, which they are ignorant of; for in case
thy lips be so short that they will not cover thy tooth, its two to one they
will say thou girnnest at them, and then thou may to Goal for thy
misbehaviour in the Court. But Reader, I must tell what difference I found
amongst the Justices on the Bench, and must freely confess that Justice Leddell
has more judgment in the things of God, then all the other six that sat with
him, and I clearly acquit him for having any hand at all in my commiting to
Goal, and when he perceived the ignorance of the other Justices, he would
gladly have made them understand the truth of things as they were in Scripture,
and would have had them to have understood me right in all things, but all to
no purpose; for their Wills must be Judge, and neither the Law of God, nor the
Law of the Nation was to come in place. --

And likewise when the Jailer himself saw how things were carried on against
me, was forced to speak, and said, Gentlemen, it is but reasonable and lawful,
that you should judge the man by the Law, for in case he were a Theif or a
Murderer, or any other Felon, he ought to be judged by the Law, and you ought
to show him what part of the Law he had transgressed, for where there is no
Law, there is no transgression: Then Justice Vane answered, and said, he had
best hold his peace, for in answering for me, he was as bad as my self, and
should be made a party with me, if he would not hold his peace.

So nothing would serve, but to prison I must go, and the Clerk of the Peace
was to let me hear the order of the Court, which was, that I must to prison
until I found sufficient Sureties for my good behavior, and to answer what
they had laid against me at the next Assizes; So when I heard the order of the
Court, I told them I had not broken any known Law of God or of the Land, and
my behavior had been such, that I would find no Surety at all, but rather
chused to take the portion of a prisoner, and so continue until the next Judge
release my bonds, either by setting me free by the Law of the Nation, or to
bring me into further bonds by the same Law; for to Authority I submit, and
desite nothing but to be Judged by the known Laws, either for freedom or bonds;
yet let me say thus much more for Justice Leddel; when the rest of the Justices
gave order for my committing, he would not in the least give his consent, but
disclaimed from what they had done.

When I saw their full determination, I turned to Justice Eddan, who was one of
my accusers, and one of my Judges, he being a man of great note amongst fools
for his religion, and seeking to advance Gods glory; and I said unto him, Sir,
you are a great religious man, and I know you take your self for a Christian;
let me plainly know whose example you follow: can you prove that either Christ
or any of his followers did ever persecute, or bring any before Magistracy, and
so into bonds for their principles? At which he blushed again, and could not so
much as answer me one word: but before I conclude, I will plainly demonstrate
to Justice Eddan, who is his God, and what his religion is, and what reward he
may expect when every one is to be rewarded according to their work. Now for
his religion, I very well know what it is, being made up of the Presbytery
principles, and does not much differ from the Papists, but only in a few gross
circumstances, but in substance one and the same, and yet does his principles
hold a more nearer correspondency with the Scribes and Pharisees then with the
Papist. Yet the Scribes and Pharisees out-passed him for zealous walking
according to the rule of Scriptures, the which I can very well prove; and
herein were they to be preferred before him; now herein stands the greatest
difference between him and them; and that is, the Scribes and Pharisees had
Circumcision, and the Ceremonial Laws, and he has a fleshly apprehension of
Christ, and some duties, and when they come to be well compared together, there
is not much difference in the substance, only the difference does chiefly,
consist in the circumstances; now herein he and they agree in one, and that is,
in persecuting: Now the Scribes and Pharisees had the Scriptures, and owned God
upon that account, and walked most circumspectly to what they knew of God by
Scripture; and yet our Savior plainly told them they were of their father the
devil, because they went about to kill him, for telling them the truth, and
shows further the nature of their father by a twofold character, viz. that he
was a murderer, and a liar, Joh. 8.40, etc.

Now this I plainly prove, that though Justice Eddan pretend faith in Christ,
and call God his father; yet he is of the devil his father, and his works he
lusts to do, and that is to lie and murder, as I shall plainly show him; for
herein I prove him to be a liar, in stating things wrongfully upon me in my
charge, consisting of five Articles, and four of them false, as was plainly
proved; and herein I prove him to be a murderer, in stating lies in my Charge,
the which he thought to be contained within the Act against blasphemy, that
thereby he might take away my life. And further, when nothing could prevail of
what he had falsely charged upon me, yet gave consent to put me in prison
without any Law, but only the Law of Will; let him not turn his eyes from his
own dealings, for he is caught in his own snares, and without repentance let
him make ready to receive his reward, the which is due to him for his work, and
let him own his portion amongst those set down in Rev. 21.8. amongst which
liers and murderers are stated.

Now I proceed to speak a word in general to all the Justices who were the
cause of my committing to prison.

Sirs, you who have been the cause of enclosing my body within the stony walls
of the prisonhouse of the City of Durham, to you I speak, and do truly own
Magistracy as an excellent ordinance of God; and the persons in that place
ought to resemble God in the true executing of Justice, in punishing the evil,
and in showing mercy to the good, and for the delivering the oppressed from the
hands of the cruel and bloody man; is it so with you? then will your deeds make
the same manifest: but for my part I must tell you, (whether you will see or
no) that I have found to the contrary, and have cause to cry for true Justice
and right Judgment, but long may cry to you before I shall attain it, I much
doubt, seeing your own will is the Law you have Judged me by; it is not unknown
to you, I hope, how often I desired in open Sessions, to be tried by the known
Laws of the Land, in any thing you could object against me, or in what mine
accusers could truly charge upon me, the which you would so often have turned
into blasphemy, and yet could show no law against me for any such offense, nor
for any other breach of Law, either of God or of the Nation; yet your wicked
wills were so bent against me, that instead of setting me at liberty, you
sought all occasions to increase my bonds, and when you could find no just
occasion in me, rather then the bent of your own wills should be frustrate, you
would institute new Laws to Judge me by; as may appear by these things you have
charged upon me in open Sessions, for which things you have committed me to
bonds, the which will truly be made apparent, the like has not been done in
any Christian Kingdom where there has been known Laws to Judge men by: are you
offended at me for saying, if you had no more knowledge in the Law, then in
Divinity, that you were not fit for your places? How can you turn your eyes
from the truth here of, seeing you have laid your selves open to the view of
understanding men, in not understanding the very letter of Scripture; much more
will your ignorance appear in Divinity, which is chiefly included in the
mysteries in Scripture? How can you say that you have read the Scriptures, and
yet be so ignorant in understanding this plain thing which I affirm by
Scripture, viz. That if you will maintain Christ to have a corporeal body of
flesh, blood, and bone in heaven, that I will maintain horses to be in heaven
also; Ignorant men! for so I cannot choose but call you: where would you be, or
what is it that you would be, at or what would you make of this, if you were
to be the only Judges of this thing? Surely blasphemy on my part, but great
honor to Christ on your part; I pray you, if you would be honored your
selves, or if you think you honor God in what you maintain, let me have part
with you; for what I affirm is as true as what you affirm, if Scripture may
be Judge; neither does what I affirm, in the least make void what you affirm,
though your ignorance cannot apprehend it; and if what I affirm be blasphemy,
yours is no less: therefore you must take part of the punishment with me, or
else both parties are vvronged. I need not much trouble my self with proving
you to be ignorant in Divinity, for this very thing it self which you have
charged upon me, will make manifest what your knowledge is, when the thing
comes to be laid open before men of wisdom.

And think you not that I have broken a great part of the Law of the Land, in
that other thing you have charged upon me? viz. That when I could not obtain so
much Right of you (who were Justices of a longer standing) as to be Judged by
the known Laws of the Nation; sure you think when I demanded the same of those
who were of a latter being, (and yet could not obtain it) that I had committed
a great transgression against the Law, or else you would never have been so mad
as to Imprison me for it, and keep me in bonds, until the Judge of the Assizes
should hang me for it; and I am sure if the Judge have not more wisdom and
descretion in judging of my cause, then you had when you committed me for the
cause, I am sure enough to lose my life for it, but I hope to see the thing
better cleared.

Sirs, Consider where you are, and what you have done to me; for if he that
executes justice without mercy, shall be judged himself without mercy, how
much more judgment will you have for Judging me without either mercy, or true
Justice? Let not your pride and malice blind your eyes, nor let not flatterers
deceive you, in making you do things contrary to Law; for the most high will
find you out one day, who will judge rightly both of you and me, for he
knows all the secret turnings and windings in your hearts, though you may
hide them from men; and do not think it a great honor to you when you see some
of your poor fellow creatures stand trembling before you, and not knowing how
to speak for fear of offending you, or for being catched in their words.
Neither think it any contempt or dishonor to you, when men stand boldly before
you, and when they be able to speak to you things that are right, and no
offense to the Laws of God or man; and have a care, as you call such things
misbehaviour, and evil carriage, and commit them to prison for such things as
you have done me, the which I hope to bear, or what ever beside injustice can
inflict upon me; for so long as I know my cause to be good, I will maintain it
against you all; and if you take away my life for so doing, I cannot fear the
face of any of you, and never shall I desire any favor at any of your hands,
but what the Law it self will afford me, and wherein I am found guilty, do not
spare me; for I assure you, where I find you as you ought not to be, when I
have to deal with you, I shall hardly keep silence, except you sew up my lips,
and cut off my hands; I at present say no more to you, but hereafter its
possible you will hear more of me, if occasion serve.

By me Geo. Bateman, Prisoner for the truth, as it is in Jesus.
Durham-Goal, the 7th of Apr. 1654.
FINIS.

