THE CIVIL MAGISTRATES Coercive Power IN RELIGIOUS MATTERS ASSERTED, IN A
SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES AT HERTFORD, March the 7th, 1683/4.

By Ralph Battle, M. A. Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY, and Prebendary of
Worcester.

LONDON, Printed by R. E. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, and J. Jones Bookseller in Worcester, 1684.

To the Right Worshipful Sir THOMAS FIELD. High Sheriff And one of His
Majesty's Deputy Lieutenants. AND Justices of the Peace For the County of
HERTFORD: And to all the rest of his Majesty's truly Loyal Deputy Lieutenants,
and Justices of the Peace for the said County.
Gentlemen,
Although the Consideration of my own Insufficiency makes me unwilling to appear
in Print, yet I will not refuse to Obey your Commands in the Publishing this
Discourse. Which if it may be of any, though but the least Service to the
Government, (the Vindication of which is my Principal Design) I shall not
concern my self for the Obloquies of such as will be offended with my Doctrine,
especially I need not, when countenanced and protected by you, and, Gentlemen,
that God will long preserve and prosper you for the Service of your King and
Country is, and shall be the Hearty Prayer of

Your Obedient Servant, Ralph Battle.

Matthew. VII. 12. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that Men should do
unto you, do ye even so to them: For this is the Law and the Prophets.


THE Words are a part of our Savior's Sermon upon the Mount. Their Dependence,
or Connection, Musculus refers to the first verse of the Chapter, judge not,
that ye be not judged. But St. Chrysostom applies it rather to the Promise made
ver. 9. You shall receive from God what you ask, upon Condition, that you do
unto others, what you would that they should do unto you. But the Coherence is
not so material to be known, as the Sense and Purport of the Rule is necessary
to be understood, which therefore I will enquire into, and endeavor, First, To
explain: And, Secondly, To apply.


Now for the due Explication of this Rule, several things are to be considered.
And,

First, We are to take notice, That this is no universal Rule for all our
Actions, it is not so Comprehensive as to take in the whole Religion; or, as the
Schoolmen call it, the totum jus natural, but only the second Table of the
Decalogue, that which contains our Duty toward our Neighbor. This Appeal to
our own Conscience is indeed a fitting and a full direction to us upon all
Occasions, how we ought to deal by our Brethren: but it were too great a
Presumption, (although but barely in thought) to set our selves in God's place,
or measure out our Obedience to him, from what we should expect from our
Creatures, if we were able to Create them. For we must not thus put our selves
upon the level of a Comparison with Almighty God, or presume to say, what we
would do, if we were like him; nor is it possible, that, if we did, our
Judgment could come near the Truth, unless our Wisdom were also equal unto his;
but as High as the Heaven is from the Earth, so far are his Thoughts above our
Thoughts. There is an immense Gulf between finite and infinite Wisdom, and to
him that thinks God altogether such a one as himself, Ps. 50, 21.
the Psalmist answers, but I will reprove thee, and set before thee the things
which thou have done.

Gods Revealed Will is the Truth which we ought to believe, and the Rule by
which we are to walk, and although indeed there is no one jot or tittle of that
contrary to right Reason, yet some evilly luxuriant Wits, have framed false
Descants upon it, and some sensual Minds have argued deceitfully and according
to their own Lusts; but of such Deceivers we must beware. We ought not to
measure Gods Mercies by the standard of our own kindness, without a strict
regard to his revealed Will; in so doing, we may be apt to speak per^^ersly for
God. And thus Origin, and others have done, who, out of an excess perhaps of
good Nature, thought that God would one Day put a period to the Torments of
Hell, although the Scripture does expressly tell us, they are Eternal. But all
that can be applied lawfully to God Almighty from this Rule, is only this; That
as we desire, and stand in need of his Mercies, so we should also show the like
Mercy, (as far as in us lies) toward our Brethren. And thus doing we may
justly hope in his Mercy, and in his revealed Promise, Matthew. 6.14.
that he also will forgive us ours, as we forgive men their Trespasses.

Secondly, As this Rule is not universal in regard of the Law of God, so
neither is it primary: It Is a Copy, but not an Original; for the Law of God,
the second Table in the Decalogue, ought to be taken for the Ground of this;
and not this, for the foundation of that; this may serve well indeed to explain
a Divine Precept, or to accommodate it the better to our understanding and
practice, by bringing it nearer to our Heart and Affections, but it must not
Impugn (any) the least Commandment; that which was only given as an e^^^rcement
of the Law, must by no means obstruct it; all Sin therefore and Wickedness, of
what kind soever it be, is at infinite distance from this Rule of Godliness:

Procul hinc, procul ite, profani. This is a Touchstone, or rather a Whetstone
for Virtue, but it blunts and breaks the Edge of Vice. Otherwise, the Unclean
and the Sensual might take their Pastime together, be Profane and Dissolute,
and corrupt one another by a confederacy of Sinning, a like proportion of
Vicious inclination, and all this while do by each other as they most Desire to
be done by: But what communion has Light with Darkness? do therefore unto
others, only what you may Lawfully and Honestly desire to be done unto; what is
agreeable to the Law of God, and the Principles of right Reason, and the known
Rules of Virtue, what is Pure, and Just, and Charitable; this is another
Qualification of this Rule, without which it were not so much an Engagement to
Goodness, as a License to all impurity, wherever the Subjects were mutually
disposed to one, above the other. But our Savior's applying of this to the Law
and the Prophets (of which only it is a compendious exposition) restrains it
strictly to Virtue and Piety, to such things as the Law of God does warrant and
allow, or require us to perform.

Thirdly, This Rule does not oblige us otherwise than with a respect to the
different Stations and Conditions of Life, in which by Providence we are
placed. For the Sovereign is not to pay Tribute to the Subject, because he
requires it from him; nor the Master to wait upon his Servant, because his
Servant tends upon him; for so Solomon's Evil would be daily visible, Servants
upon Horses, Eccl. 10.5.
and Princes walking as Servants upon the Ground. But herein lies the
Obligation, this Rule enjoins the same things proportionably, as we would have
any behave themselves; as Servants ought to do, if Servants, so must we demean
our selves as Masters, if we are Masters: And as we would have any demean
themselves as Masters, so must we behave our selves as Servants, if we are
Servants. Or else it enjoins the same Works conditionally, namely, if we were
in their circumstances, and they in ours. Thus Princes must Protect their
Subjects, and preserve all their just Rights and Privileges, as they would
desire to be protected and emancipated, if they were Subjects: And Subjects
must honor their Prince, and obey his Laws, and be content to support the
expense and Grandeur of the Government, as they would desire to be honored,
obeyed, and supported, if they were Princes. Parents and Children, Masters and
Servants, Magistrates and Private men, the Governors and the Governed, all
Relations and Conditions of Men must behave themselves in such manner one
toward another, as if the Scene were changed, and the Condition of the one
Party made that of the other alternately.

Now in this consideration, more especially, lies the peculiar excellence of
this Rule, if loving our Brethren be an Effect of the Love of God in our Hearts
(as St. John tells us, 1 John. 4.7.
it is) then how well does this Precept tend to build us up in this Love? when
even the tender Principle of self-love is here made the stock upon which we
ought to graft Charity to others. And sure we could not ordinarily nor easily
trangress the Bounds of Justice, and Honesty, and Charity, if we would but thus
look into our own Hearts and Consciences, and enquire, would we be content to
be thus dealt with our selves, if we were under the like circumstances? If not,
why are we thus Rigorous to those who are our Brethren, to those who are made
of the same Flesh and Blood, descended from one and the same common Parent
originally and (within the Pale of Christianity) united to one and the same
Head, Christ Jesus, Mystically and Spiritually?

Fourthly, To this I must add farther, That this Rule is not to be understood
particularly with regard to a man's private or single Humor or Temper, but
generally with respect to the common desires of Mankind. Whatever ye would that
men should do unto you, do ye the same unto them; that is, do as most Men do
naturally and ordinarily desire to be done by: For instance; the Poor do for
the most part desire Releif from the Rich, and it is natural and reasonable for
them so to do; therefore no Rich Man can with reason be excused from
contributing toward the Poor man's needs, although perhaps he is of so stately a
Temper, that he would scorn to ask relief from another Man, if he were in great
necessity. But it is not in these Cases the private Sentiments of a particular
man, or the Vote of a few, that is to be observed, but the general Instinct of
Nature; what is most commonly seen, or what may most rationally be supposed,
might be desired by other men, if they were in Low Condition, and we in High,
even so must we deal by them.

Fifthly, There is but one Particular more, to which it remains that I should
speak in the Explication of this Rule, which will lead me to the Application of
it, indeed the thing I chiefly designed in this Discourse: The last particular
is, that, as this Rule is always to be understood according to the Judgment of
Christian Discretion, so that Judgment does belong rather to the Superior, than
the Inferior; to the Parent who is of due Age, and ripe Reason, rather than to
the Child in his minority; to the supreme Government of any Nation, rather than
to the Common People. Here is therefore no room for any Private man to censure
the Laws of the State, because he does not think them suited so well to his own
Condition, as they might have been. For it is true indeed, that Governors
neither can, nor ought to have an Eye to the conveniences of particular men
(distinctly speaking) or perhaps of a few Societies; but they must consult the
Public good. And doubtless there has never been any Government upon Earth,
where some men have not thought themselves aggrieved, or perhaps have not
really been so by some Laws. But what then? must they presently reflect upon
their Lawmakers for dealing uncharitably by them, and transgressing this Rule
of my Text? Surely no; for then farewell all Government, since there can be none
free from the Exceptions of some: But such as these ought to consider rather
the many Privileges they enjoy from Government in General, and that should
make them willing to submit to some Inconveniences, for the sake of greater
Advantages; and such as will not quietly obey the Laws, where they conduce to
the good of the Nation, have as little reason to reap any Benefit from them,
where they tend to their own Particular good. If a Factious and Schismatical
Malecontent, (for usually they go together) shall repine, that the Crown or
Church Lands are taken from him by the Law, and still be restless, and ever
watching an opportunity to unhinge all again: has he not much more reason to
thank the Mercy of one of the most Gracious Princes that ever lived, that he
still enjoys his Life, and Liberty, and all his Lawful Acquisitions, (and might
I not say too, many of his unlawful ones also,) and ought not his Gratitude for
these make him live Peaceably under that Government that defends him, how
little soever he deserves it; he may do well to consider, that Lawful powers
have been more Merciful to him, than ever his Unlawful ones were to him; they
have not done by him, as they were done by themselves; Plundered, Sequestered,
Imprisoned, Slaughtered, and torn him up Root and Branch; but I may truly say,
they have, exceeding this Rule of the Text, they have not done by him as he
well deserved, or as He Rationally might have expected to have been dealt with,
or as Christianity in such Public Cases would have justified and allowed: It Is
well, if he improve this Mercy, but we have seen but bad signs of it of late.
And yet, alas, his cry of Persecution is now as Loud, upon the necessary
Execution of a few Penal Laws, as well to secure the Government of the Church
from his farther Encrochments, as if the Dragon in the Revelations were
devouring the young Child again; when God knows how little only there was
wanting, but that he had once more laid his Profane and Sacrilegious Hands
upon the Crown, and the Church, and all that were Loyal, and Orthodox, and
Friends to either.

Wherefore I will proceed in the next place to apply this Rule, with an Eye to
the wholesome Execution of Laws, and in asserting the Civil Magistrates Power
even in Religious Matters, which yet so many are unwilling to hear of, and
think they are hardly dealt with, in not being left to themselves, in all
things relating to Religion at least, whatever Laws are made about other
things. But I hope I shall be able to Justify our Governors as to that point
also, and show that nothing is done by them but what may both Religiously and
Lawfully be put in practice, any thing in this Rule of the Text notwithstanding.

The Excellent Lord Verulam observed long ago in his Essays, That as a Wound or
the Solution of Continuity, (as he calls it) is more dangerous to the Natural
Body than a corrupt Humor, so are Schisms and Factions to the Body Politic.

Other Vices may indeed call down a Judgment from above upon any Government,
that shall indulge and tolerate them, but these do nothing else here below but
contrive continually how to Subvert and Undermine all Government; and yet the
Mystery is, that they, who are this way most concerned, are for the King all
this while, or would be thought to be so; even just as some Practical Atheists
do upon occasion sometimes own Religion with their Mouths, and yet deny it
daily in all their Actions, so these men are for the King too in their
pretensions, and yet Oppose him in all his Measures, in all his Friends, and in
all his Interests.

And now, does this look so much like Religion, as perfect Combination against
the Government, which indeed they have awakened to defend it self against their
restlesness, by the seasonable Execution of Laws, which is nothing but what is
Just, and Reasonable, no ways transgressing this Rule of my Text, but rather
Prudently exerting it; no ways bordering upon Persecution or Irreligion, but
tending to confirm and strengthen the true Church of God. For that Heretics
and Schismatics ought to be restrained by the Temporal Powers, is nothing but
what is First, Founded in Reason. Secondly, May be proved from Scripture.
Thirdly, Agrees with Practice of Antiquity.


First, It is founded in Reason, That the Supreme Temporal Power should have a
right to suppress all the Errors in Religion, for else they would be defective
in a necessary part of their Life and Constitution, it were otherwise
impossible to hold the Rein steady, or keep the People in due Subjection: For
whatever other bonds of Government there may be, there is none so good as
Religion, and if you cannot prevail with men to be subject for Conscience sake
as well as for Fear, i. e. for fear of Men; It will be hard to lay the
Foundations of a lasting Peace in any Place, where there are either Bold, or
Ambitious, or Politic Men to be found: And so by consequence there would be no
Government upon Earth, but what would be as changeable as the Winds and Seas,
with which the Psalmist sometimes conjoyns the Madness of the People. Ps. 65.7.


Again, as Religion is the best Bond of Government, so the Pretense of it is
also the most Fatal and Ruinous to every Community or Society, no Commotions in
the Common Wealth are so Sharp, so Dangerous, and so Intestine, as those that
are set a Foot under the Color of Religion; almost all Ages and Places would
afford us Examples of this Nature, but I need not go beyond the bounds of our
own Time and Country for them; we our selves have seen one of the most
Unnatural and Bloody Wars, that ever was in the World, begun, carrried on, (and
by Gods Permission, as a Punishment for our Sins) Crowned with Success; and all
under the Banner of Hypocrisy, entitled Religion, or the Devil transformed
into an Angel of Light. And is it not then needful that the Magistrate should
have a Right to suppress the Pernicious Doctrines of Atheists, or Hypocrites,
and Enthusiasts pretending to Religion to the disturbance of Humane Society,
and to withold, or reclaim such as they would otherwise continually seduce?

But should not Religion be our Voluntary Service? does not God require the
Heart, and where that is wanting is it any better than Hypocrisy?

This may be granted, and more also, and yet the Truth of what I have asserted
will stand firm. It Is true indeed, that Religion is of no Value unless it be
sincere, yea it is farther true, that Religion (properly speaking) cannot be
forced, that is to say, as to its inward Act, and it were vain and foollish for
any one to attempt to go about it by Pure and mere Compulsion; but yet will it
not follow, that all Compulsion in order to Religion, is either Unprofitable,
or Unlawful: for Opportunity, and the use of Means, do many times prevail at
length, to perform what they could not bring about at first. And it is both
Prudent and Reasonable, that Men should be brought to use such Means as may
inform them, and bring them out of Error. And I am confident, that there are
many Thousands in this Realm, that owe their Separation from the Church of
England to nothing else, but the Neglect of Hearing what they might hear, and
learning what they might be taught, which Lessons, if received with a Meek and
Humble Heart, might be an effectual means to bring them into the Bosom of the
Church again.

But oh, will you force the Conscience? is not every man obliged to follow
that, and does not he sin, that transgresses its Dictates at any time?

Granting this to be also true, that every man sins, who does not follow his
Conscience. I moreover assert, that every man sins who follows it in Opposition
to the Law of God, or to the Law of Man, when it commands nothing, that is
Opposite to the Law of God. And therefore, they who transgress the Public
Injunctions of the Magistrate, upon suspicion only of Evil, are taken in their
own Fear, and certainly do Evil in endeavoring to avoid it; if it be so, that
it is really a Scruple of Conscience, and not a stubbornness in their Will, that
is the ground of their Disobedience? And therefore, if the Magistrate compel an
Erroneous Conscience in this Case, so far as to make it Enquire and Learn
better, what it ought to Believe and Practice, it is no less than a great Piece
of Charity in him; for he only forces the Man out of a perplexity, which if he
escape by this means, he is free from the Snare of Sin; but if he escape not,
he is in no worse Condition than he was before.

Secondly, As Reason requires this, so the Scripture, both by Examples and
Precepts, sets forth the fitness of some restraints in these Cases.
Nebuchadnezzer, when he was converted by the Miraculous escape of the Three
Children out of the Fiery Furnace, Dan. 3.29.
made a Law, that every People, Nation, and Language, that should speak any
thing amiss against the God of Shadrack, Mesheck, and Abednego, should be cut
in pieces, and their houses made a dunghill. This was a high Punishment, but so
was the Offense, ye will say, even Blasphemy against God. I shall mention some
of a lesser Degree. We read of Artaxerxes, Ezra. 7.26.27.
and the Text tells us, that God put it into his Heart to make an Edict, that
whosoever would not do the Law of his God, or the Law of the King, should have
Judgment Executed speedily upon him, whether it were by Death, or by
Banishment, or by Confiscation of Goods or by Imprisonment. And yet it was only
concerning the Religious Worship of God, and the Beautifying of the Temple,
that this Edict was put forth. 2. Kin. 18.4.
Hezechiah reformed Religion, removed the high Places, broak the Images, and
cut down the Groves. And we read more particularly of Josiah, that he took away
all the abominations, out of all the Countries that appertained to the Children
of Israel, 2. Chron. 34.33.
and made all that were found in Israel to serve the Lord their God. Josiah did
this agreeably to the Moral Law, which binds Magistrates still under the Gospel
by virtue of that Precept, Mat. 22.37.
of loving the Lord with all their hearts. But if any shall still object, it is
not now the temper of the Gospel to compel Religion, let me tell such, that
it is also agreeable to the new Testament to compel men to come to Church, and
to hear Gods word, and receive the Sacraments, which are the External acts of
Religion, and all indeed that can be compelled. Now St. Augustine proves this
from the Parable recorded by St. Luke, Luke. 14.23.
of a King who made a great Supper, and when they made excuse, he said to his
Servants, go to the high ways and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my
house may be filled. Where it is remarkable what St. Matthew observes from the
same Parable, that notwithstanding many of these came at first involuntarily
(as it should seem, Mat. 22.12.
) yet it proved succesful afterward to the greatest part, for we read but of
one, that was cast out for want of a Wedding Garment. Some we must save, St.
Jude tells us, ver. 23.
by fear, even pulling them out of the fire; and St. Paul, when the Corinthians
grew too exorbitantly licentious, 1. Cor. 4.21. Ephesians. 3.9.
threatens to come to them with a rod. In like manner also, St. John threatens
Diotrephes. Christ in the beginning of his Religion was in stead of a Temporal
Magistrate, and whomsoever the Apostles did worthily cast out, over them he
gave Satan power, 1. Cor. 5.5.
for the destruction of the flesh, that their spirit might be saved in his day.
The power which he did then extraordinarily execute, was in the Princes of the
Earth by right of their Dominion and Sovereignty, but they wanted his Grace,
and would not make use of it, and therefore all this while Christ by Miracle
supported his Church, and made it grow up in spite of Persecution, and when he
had done this long enough, to prove that his Religion came from God, then he
called the Princes into the house of Athanasius Sermon. de B. Virg. (...).
Jacob. And the power of the Magistrate is (now that Miracles are ceased)
become a part of that Rod, which St. Paul mentions, and both may and ought by
Temporal Punishments to strengthen the Spiritual Authority of the Church; and
for this also we have

Thirdly, The verdict of Antiquity, for thus Socrates Scholasticus expresses
the Question, (...).
when once the Emperors became Christians, the Church was subject to them.
Hence those expressions of Antiquity, calling Kings God's Vicegerents, the
Governors of true Religion, (...). the Captains and Conductors of Faith and
Godliness. And good and religious Magistrates have still, as they have seen
prudent occasion, taken upon them by Mulcts, or Imprisonments, or the like
moderate punishments to reclaim the perverse, and refractory. Thus Contra
Crescon. l 3.51. in hoc Reges, sicut eis praecipitur, Deo serviunt, si in suo
Regno bona jubeant, mala prohibeant, non solum quae pertinent ad humanam
societatem, verum etiam ad divinam Religionem.
St. Augustine declares himself, that Kings are to command good things, and
forbid evil, not only in Relation to civil Society, but in order to Religion.
And again, writing to Emeritus the Donatist, he says Ep. 164. nam et terrenae
potestates cum Schismaticos persequuntur ea regula se defendunt, quia dicit
Apostolus, qui potestati resistit, Dei ordinationi resistit, non enim frustra
gladium portat.
when the Civil power punishes Schismatics, it has a warrant from an
Apostolical Rule. Thus St. Jerome, speaking of the Kingly and Priestly power
says of the former, Hieron. in Epitaph. nepot. Ep. 3. ille nolentibus praeest,
hic volentibus, ille terrore subjicit, hic servituti donatur.
the King Governs, whether men will or no, he subdues them by Terror. And thus
History tells us of many good Christian Magistrates, that have exercised this
power for the good of Religion. Eusebius says, that Constantine for this reason
used to call himself, Eusebius de vita Constant. lib 4. cap. 24. vos intra
Ecclesiam, ego extra Ecclesiam, Episcopus a Deo constitutus sum.
A Bishop without the Church: and Sozomon reports of the same Constantine, that
he cut off unprofitable Questions to prevent Schisms, in the Church. And
Valentinian set a Fine upon the head of Chronopius, and inflicted diverse
Punishments upon Vrsicinus, Rufus, and others, for making Schisms to the
disturbance of the Public Peace. Nazianzen had once obtained some kind of
Toleration for the Sect of the Apollinarists, but when he saw how they abused
it, he write afterward sharply to the President, (...), your indulgence was
unseasonable, such men as these ought not to be treated any longer with
Gentlenss. I will sum up this, with that of Mr. Calvin, not that I think his
Authority so great, as the forecited, but because, perhaps his Opinion may
prevail with some, where the rest would not have been received Calvin. Harm.
Evang. in Luc. 14.23. Interea non improbo, quod Augustinus hoc te stimonio,
saepius contra Donatistas usus est, ut probaret, piorum Principum edictis
licite cogi praefractos et rebels, quia etsi voluntaria est fides, videmus
tamen ijs medijs utiliter domari eorum pervicaciam, qui non nisi coacti parent.
I do not disapprove (says he) that St. Augustine makes use of this place
against the Donatists, that he might prove that Stubborn and Rebellious men may
Lawfully be Compelled, for although Faith is Voluntary, yet by this means their
obstinacy is well overcome, who will do nothing, unless they are forced to it.

Now let the Presbyterian judge, whether it be not fitting, that if men will
not be reclaimed one way, they should be restrained another, when moreover the
Supreme Authority, and the Law of the Nation requires it. Indeed let every Wise
Man judge, whether the Magistrate does not then most judiciously act up to the
forementioned Rule of the Text, in doing as he in Prudence might desire to be
done by, when he applies the most Proper Remedy to the Distemper; for many will
hearken to the Rod, that would not have listened to the Instruction, although
seven wise men should have rendered a Reason. Especially such as act out of
Interest more than Conscience, and there has been, we all know, (I wish I could
say, that there were not still,) a Party in the Land, that carry on their
Designs by Masks of Piety, and Shows of Religion, a forni of godliness without
the power, Grace without Morality, or at best, a zeal without knowledge. Let
not us imitate them in these, but if we are Wise, let us learn Diligence from
them in our Honest Undertakings. Alas! must I say it, we want Activity, we want
Zeal, we trust a Cause, and we trust a Religion, that God will defend his
Church, and preserve our King, and truly so he has hitherto done by Miracle;
but we must take heed, how we tempt Providence by the neglect of ordinary
means, lest if Industry forsake us, success do also fail; for usually those two
go together. And it is pity, it should always be seen, that the Children, of
this World are Wiser in their Generation than the Children of Light. I speak
not this with the least thought of a reflection upon the Honorable Judges, or
other Subordinate Ministers of Justice here present, whose endeavors have been
constant and uninterrupted in the Service of their King and Country, but I
speak to excite others to become Imitators of their Steddiness; and in their
several capacities to be Active and Faithful, true to the King, true to the
Laws, true to their Oaths, and true to their own Consciences, and if all men in
any Public Employ would be but thus far careful, it would, by the Grace of
God, put an end at length to such Boutefeus in Church and State, as turn
Religion into Rebellion, and Faith into Faction, which have now for above these
Hundred Years (some, or more of them) infested this Realm; that, what neither
the length of time, or the indulgence of our Kings, or the industry of the
Regular Pastors has been able to bring to pass; the wholesome Execution of Laws
might perfect and consummate. It Is not the Punishment that makes the Martyr,
but the Cause, was long ago truly said, and no man is now required by the Law
to deny God, to Burn his Bible, or to do Sacrifice to Idols, as in the
Primitive Persecutions. And the Government may truly wash it is Hands, and say
with St. Peter, who is he, that will harm you, if you be followers of that
which is good? But if any man will suffer as an evil doer, or as a busy body in
other men's matters, who will have Reason to pity him? Much less, since the late
Horrid Fanatical Conspiracy has surely opened every Eye that was not before
wilfully closed, so as to make it see the danger of tolerating any such
Religion in the State, whose very Principles do abet and encourage Rebellion;
as I am sure the greatest Part of our Protestant Recusants (if not all of them)
do; as much as those of the Jesuited Romanists. But can that be True Religion,
that teaches Resistance to Lawful Powers, no, it is as impossible, as it would
have been for Christ, who was all Suffering, to have held Communion with
Belial, who is so called, because he would be without Yoke.

Consider then, Gentlemen, this Rule in the Text, and apply it to all it is due
applications; it is a large and an extensive Rule, it takes in all Orders and
Degrees of Men, yea it concerns not only time present, but it has an Eye to
Generations yet to come. Consider, and let it make you, first to do by the
King, as, Reason will tell you, every good Subject ought to do, assist to the
uttermost in the Execution of his Laws, and in the Defense of his Majesty's
Person, and all his Just Prerogatives, against the Turbulent and Seditious. Let
it make you do by your Country, what is the Part of true Patriots, and not of
Popular pretending ones; study to quiet and appease the least Fermentations in
the minds of the Heady People, and quash the first tendencies to Faction, but
not stand at the Helm and Steer, or give Aim as it were to them, who of
themselves are already too much given to Change. Let it make you do by your
selves according to the Prime Law of Nature, endeavor by your Vigilance and
Prudence to preserve those Lives, which his Majesty in his Declaration tells
you, were not long since designed for a Massacre. Let it make you do by
Posterity, what they may also justly claim, transmit to them the Rights and
Libertys of English Freeborn Subjects, which Rebellion has ever invaded, when
it most pretended to assert: And the soberly Reformed Protestant Religion,
which the Schism has ever dishonored, when it most pretended to Profess.

But this indeed is Gods Work, yours only the endeavor. Let us therefore Pray
unto him, that he will preserve our Church, and King, that the Gates of Hell
may never prevail against the one: And that neither the Counsels of any State
Achitophel, or the Rebellion of an Absalom, or the Maledictions of a Shimei,
may ever prosper against the other. Which God of his Infinite Mercy grant,
through the Merits of his Son Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and Holy
Spirit be ascribed all Honor and Glory now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

