A BATTLE Fought betvveen a Presbyterian COCK of the Right breed, and A
CRAVEN of the Independent breed.

With the CRAVENS desire, that the quarrel may be ended, either upon
Tower Hill, or at the narrow place turning up to PADINGTON.

Also the sad complaint the CRAVEN made to some of his friends at his death,
that he could not be buried, and ENTOMBED as Presbytery John was, he therefore
only desires one of the Beadles of Bride-Well to be his Excequetor.

With the Presbyterian Cocks Epistle to the HEADS-MAN.

depiction of two cocks ready for a cock-fight Presbyterian John revived.
Independent Craven a dying.


July 29 London Printed 1647.

SIR DERRICK:
IT is not in expectation of any future benefits, or desire of any further
acquaintance with thee; that I present this to thy view. But as thou art the
the chief Headsman, and a bettor at this sport against me, ha, ha; indeed, it
is thy due Cum Privilegio. And the rather considering (if I be not much
mistaken) thou thy self art an Independent; (thou know the old saying,
trust thee, and hang thee) for had thou the Law in thy own hand, (as may be
thou have already) thou would not care how many such Cravens fall into thy
pit. But now to come to thy Patient. This Craven must be cured out of hand, or
else these bitter and undigested pills or pellets will go near to spoil his
crowing: do thou not hear how he rattles in his guisard, and cries out give
me Liberty of Conscience to do what I list, or else I cannot continue long
lived; for I cannot abide Conformity o give me Liberty, etc. Nay here will be
further employment for thee, and for loan Ruggles thy wife, if thou have one;
one did I say? I do not forget, thou had like to have a mischance, (mean
only a turn in thy own Office for having two) but that was when Bishops did
rule: but now if thou have two, thou may plead for thy Liberty of Conscience.
But this Craven has some Hens that follow him to his Dunghils, which are good
breeders, and close sitters: As the Pheasant, and the Peacock Hens; they are
very sharp beackt, hollow eyed, and long clawed; and their feathers would be
very profitable to thee: and I observe by their looks they are troubled with
some inward griese; which is fitest for thy wife to look after: they keep a
vile chackling, they want (as the word is called) groping, for they are mad
they cannot hatch up their broude of contention no faster, to teach them to cry
up Liberty of Conscience, and down with Honesty. Sir, if this be not suddenly
cured, it may turn to the pip, or some worse disease: so leaving you to your
several Offices, being resolved never to trouble you my self.

TO THE READER:
READER,
What ever thou art that shall read this small Challenge between these two
Cocks, whether Presbyterian, or Independent (as I am confident thou art of one
side or other) You must observe Cockpit orders; That is done, and done; If thou
speakst in the time of their incountring, thou may happily lose thy wager;
now which side thou will take I know not, and indeed it is very difficult to
persuade thee, especially if thou art Weather-Cockly bent; well how ever thou
have notice where this challenge is to be, and brother Presbyter I will give
thee notice of one thing, to beware, for the Master of the Pit is a cunning
Roock, and seeks to draw in abettors by laying too to one, that the Independent
Craven will have the best of it; but I fear it not, yet if T. T. were to
encounter with him, I would hold the master of the Pit my self, and his Craven
too, (had I them but in a strong noose) for all he seems to flout, and say
this Cocks Come has been cut, I answer that was when might overcame right,
but Craven thou wast in a worse condition then, when thou wast like to be
choakt with a pair of Lawne sleeves; and they could not be more odious to
thee, then thou art to me, in thy odious clamerings after Liberty of
Conscience, so thou have that, thou carst not if the whole Kingdom where
become a sad and disconsolate Chaos; but God-forbid, I hope there will ever be
a strong and settled government to confine such Cravens as thou art: And now
Craven or Capon, having observed thy dunghill motions and Crowings, and
carriages, whereof there is never a one good, I profess my self thy utter
enemy; and my wishes and betts shall be, that the Presbyterian Cock, who is of
a far better breed may have the better of thee; I like his weapons and
carriage a great deal better then I do thine, and I tell thee, It were better
thy head were off, then to live to tread thy Peacock and Pheasant Hens of thy
own faction; to become as so many Dunghill Cravens, who are good for nothing
but to crow at unseasonable hours; And labor daily by their Crowings and
other unlawful actions to bring all to destruction; God forbid. I know any
honest Presbyterian will say Amen. Good Reader, do but observe the Impudence
and insolency of this poysond breath Craven; who not only strikes his spurs,
but spits his venomous and most approbrious scoffs and jeeres against many
Reverend Divines, and that not of the means sort, but even of the Assembly,
away Craven for shame if thou have any, I may without much wronging of thee
challenge thy fear to thy Maker, when thou so impudently abuses them that are
fellow laborers with him; but it matters not what thou say, neither do
they whom thou have wronged: I may say truly, that their seasonable and timely
Crowings have defended their young breed committed to their charge, from the
Roaring of the Lion; and shall still continue I hope, when thy Satanicall
breed, or Dunghills of these distracted times may have their Comes cut, and
their Cravenly feathers poold off their backs; It may very well be feared,
that if these Dung-hills, or Cravens, play so high as to strike at such lights
could get the better, (which God forbid) would soon seek to strike their
poisonous beakes into the very light of truth it self; and then to walk and
rule as they please, which they call Tolleration, or Liberty of Conscience,
that they may hatch and bring up their ungodly breed of Sectaries, as
Anabaptists, Antinomians, Anti-Scripturists, Seekers, etc. A divilish brood,
God defend us from them; these are they that hate true Reformation, and
setlement of true Religion; they are as the Scripture truly renders them, of a
perverse and crooked Generation, they sinell too much of the Onyons and Garlic
of Egypt, who outwardly make as if they were the sheep, or little flock, but
inwardly devouring Wolves, and hate to be reformed.

To conclude, Without an extraordinary sudden Antidote from heaven, to expel
these loathsome smells of Sectaries, they may not only trouble us with the
smell, but by their continuing, may be the cause of pulling down the plagues
of Egypt upon the whole Kingdom.

Farewell Independent CRAVEN. Lastly, My hearty Prayers to God for all my true
hearted Brethren the Presbyterians is, That the Lord would power out upon them,
and all sorts of persons in these Kingdoms a spirit of grace and supplication,
that it may repent us of all our iniquities, and that we may be reconciled to
the Lord; that so all the threatens of his wrath may be removed from amongst
us, and he may bless us with the sweet fruits of truth and peace.



The last WILL and TESTAMENT of the CRAVEN COCK.
And now my dear brother and Excequetor, you see how the case stands with me, I
shall trouble you but with a short Will, in regard half my estate is
sequestered, for the Headsman is to have my body, my head excepted.

Impr. I dee desire that my head may be set upon London Bridge, with my face
looking toward Horseydown, that it may be as a scarecrow to the fowls of the
air, that they may not hurt none of my young Brood when they go to purge
themselves of their fornication.

Item, I do bequeath my Feathers unto some of my fellow Cravens, if in case
they should fall into the like danger; they may help to cover them.

Item, I do bequeath those two precious Stones that lie within me, among my
Peacock, and Pheasant Hens; that in case their inward bowels should yearne
after those secrets of nature that has past between us; that they may not
loose the sight of them.

Item. For my two gouty legs, I do bequeath to each Hospital one; if they can
cure them, they will serve some of my brethren, that stand for Liberty of
Conscience.

Item. Jn the last place, for my spurs; J do freely bestow them upon those two
well affected Jndependent brethren Tim. Reed, and Jack. Pudding; who I am sure
will stand up stiffly for Liberty and Tolleration to play the fools, that they
may make others laugh, and themselves get money.

And now my dear brother and Excequotor, in case there should be nothing left
for you, I shall desire Mr. Derick (he being Master of the pit) to pay you, and
the rest of our Independent brethren to the full.

FINIS.

