SOME REFLECTIONS Upon the Earl of DANBY, In Relation to the MURDER of Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey.
In a Letter to a Friend.
SIR,
I Do in all Sincerity and Christian Love, give you the trouble of these Lines,
that you nor the rest of your Friends at a distance, may not be altogether
ignorant of the Causes which have prevented the Good we expected by the late
Sessions of Parliament, which has ended so surprizingly, indeed to the
amazement and trouble of all Parties, except some few concerned in the Black
Counsels, and Dark Designs have of late been taken: such persons will with all
Industry imaginable seek to spread abroad, That the obstinacy of the House of
Commons for the Trial of the Earl of Danby, before the Five Popish Lords, and
excluding the Bishops from having any Votes therein, contrary to the Judgment
of the Lords, made their continuance unpracticable; which though perhaps true,
as things have been managed, yet if the Reasons (which are here enclosed) be
observed, and the Grounds for those Reasons (taken in their Secret Committee)
be examined, they could not but proceed in the method they did, except they
would betray the Trust reposed in them, by suffering the great Incendiary and
Poison of the Nation to escape in the dark, whilst Floods of others Blood (and
perhaps some of Innocents) must have been let out, to Hoodwinck the People from
discerning the true cause of the decay of Trade, and other dangers and miseries
they at present lie under. Therefore the better to clear things to you, I have
verbatim transcribed a Paper sent to diverse Parliament Men, and examined in the
Secret Committee of Commons, which is in these words following.

IT is generally thought, and there is great reason to believe, that other
persons were concerned in the Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey, than have been
yet brought upon the Stage. Now to find who these are likely to be, the Rule of
Dr. Lloyd in his Funeral Sermon, in Casius his words, is the most proper way,
Cui bono? For whose Interest was it? if without partiality we can be guided by
that Rule.

Therefore not to find faults with others in their guesses, I will take leave
to enquire by some Matter of Fact, whether the Earl of Danby had not as much
reason to wish him out of the World, as any Papist? And then by the same way to
enquire, whether he was not as likely to have it in his Power to do it? And
lastly, whether by some strong Circumstances he was not willing to put that
Power in Act? leaving the proof of all to the Inquiry of such as are in
Authority to do it.

First, I am confident it is not hard to prove, that Sir Edmondbury Godfrry
when he took the Examinations from Dr. Oats and Dr. Tongue, did require of
them by the Oath or O^^^^ they or any of them had taken, to tell him whether
the Business had not been reveal^d by them to any other Person, before that
time.

To which after some disputes between them, whether they were bound to answer
such Questions; First, they did comply and acknowledge, that it had been made
known to the Lord Treasurer a long time before.

He then required the punctual time and place: To all which Questions he had
Answers proper.

Secondly, It will be as easy to prove, that all this Transaction he
immediately made known to Mr. Coleman, who at his request went to Windsor to
inform the Duke of it.

It is likewise certain, that the Duke immediately let the King know of it, who
acknowledged he had had a former account of the Plot, and had told the Lord
Treasurer the same, whom he believed had never heard of it but from himself.

It Is certain that my Lord Danby did always pretend both to the King, and the
Duke, he never had heard of it, till from his Majesty; when it is as certain he
had correspondence with Dr. Oats and Dr. Tongue, by the means of Mr. Kirby a
Merchant, Brother to Col. Kirby, long before the time he pretended to have
heard of it from the King.

Sir Edmondbury Godfrey was the person who sent the Duke the first account of
the Plot; he likewise let Mr. Coleman know from time to time all he could
gather of it, and it can be proved by many witnesses, that they had diverse
private Meetings to consult about something, during the King's residing at
Windsor.

When the Duke came back, Sir Edmondbury Godfrey attended him, desiring to know
his pleasure concerning the News he had sent him by Mr. Coleman. The Duke told
him, he had told the Lord Treasurer of it: At which Sir Edmondbury Godfrey
seemed extremely troubled, because he found the Lord Treasurer did not desire
to have it known, being he heard of it long before.

It is well known, Sir Edmondbury Godfrey after this received several severe
expressions, and much ill language from the Lord Danby, of which he complained
to diverse Persons of Quality, particularly in Danby's House, when he waited to
speak with him the very mor^ing of that day on which he is said to be Murdered.

Now suppose the Earl of Danby had reason to fear the King and Dukes Anger, for
concealing the discovery so long before made to him, and that he was willing to
keep them (...) an opinion he knew nothing of it, till he had it from his
Majesty; Then who had he so much reason to wish out of the way, as Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey? who had revealed the truth to the Duke, and who was best
able by the Examinations he had taken, to make the certainty of it appear to
the Parliament, the meeting of whom at that time seemed as dreadful to the Earl
of Danby, as it has since proved fatal. If this be true, as it is easy to be
proved, then certainly Danby had so much the more reason to wish him out of the
way, than any Papist; who could fear him no more than any other Magistrate left
behind, seeing the Witnesses of the Plot survive to swear the same before
others, as they had done before him: But being made away, none survived who
could with the like Authority make appear to the King and Kingdom the Earl of
Danby's Treachery, in tampering so long with, and concealing a Matter so
dangerous to both, as the Plot (whether true or false) must of necessity have
proved.

To leave then the first Head, we will come to the second, Whether it was not
in his power to put in execution his pleasure therein; and that I am confident
none will deny, who considers the mighty Authority he had at that time
engrossed, to which all men were forced to buckle, and for fear of which, Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey, after diverse bitter expressions, and severe reproofs, of
meddling too much with Persons and Affairs about him, and the like, was forced
(notwithstanding his known fortitude) to court, attend, and make friends to be
heard by him, in hopes of mollifying that anger he had reason to be
apprehensive of, knowing that he, who hazarded Kingdoms, would not spare
private men for his purpose: This must needs be the true cause of all his fears
and apprehensions, expressed to several Persons of Quality and others, from the
time of his complaints, which was then when he was disfavoured by Danby; and
when he had in all appearance (if not obliged the Papiste, yet) beeen as fair
and equal to them, as any person in his station. But supposing they joined in
his Murder, the benefit to be raised hereby was certain to be more the Earl of
Danby's then theirs; so that to contrive it, was mere infatuation in them, but
in him a mighty (...) of Diabolical Policy, which by Sir Edmundbury's first
attendance was much (...) him to compass, than for them who are sworn to have a
long time, under (...) Stratagems, to bring about that, which was the worst
mischief to their Cause, (...) have thought of in the world. But when it shall
be thoroughly considered, that (...) ^^knowledg'd to have been with the Earl of
Danby at his house, after one a clock that (...) said to be murdered, and
perhaps could be proved at the Lady Cook's Chamber at (...) ^lock, was he not
then more in the Earl of Danby's power, than in men's, who were (...) sworn)
forced to let him go from an unknown house by St. Clement's, and by a wile
(...) him into Somerset-House-Yard, there to receive his death. This, I
suppose, will make any indifferent person conclude, it was more the interest,
and more in his power to destroy (...) ^han all the Papists in England, who are
said not to have any confederacy with him for the doing of it.

The next thing to be considered is, Whether he was not willing to have this
wicked Action done, which plainly to prove (but by those that did it) is
impossible, and those who have suffered for it, say nothing of the matter. Nor
must we rely altogether on what the Evidence say, since a great part they spoke
to is by hearsay of others; or of the particular passages at and after his
death; and not much as yet to the contrivance of it: Nay, something is as easy
to contradict what is easy to be proved, (viz) That he was at the Earl of
Danby's House so late that day.

But let it, in God's Name, be examined, Whither Mr. Christian carried him,
when they took Water together at Whitehall; Mr. Christian, the L. Treasurers
Gentleman, with whom Sir E. G. took water at the Privy Stairs.
where he parted with him, and in what Company he left him; for that man
breathing does not yet appear, (except those that say they were concerned in
his Murder) who ever saw him alive, after Mr. Christian and he were together
that day. And it is strange, a man so well known as he was, should spend a
whole (...), and no man come to own the place he was in, for so many hours
(...) past between his being at the Earl of Danby's house, and the time he is
(...) to enter into Somerset House in the Strand. Can it be likely he (...) out
of his Enemies hands from the time that he remained invisible, to the time
(...) ^ther? No surely. Let Christian and Ramsey be thoroughly examined, and
pressd, (...) they kept him him all that time, what Jesuits or others they
confederated withal, to deliver or betray him to his Executioners, and where
they themselves spent their time that (...) if this be done impartially, and
things traced thoroughly, no doubt more will appear of the Murder and the Plot,
than has hitherto been revealed.

It would be necessary to trace from Dr. Lloyd, who first was Author of what he
was told, some hours before the discovery, (viz.) That he was found with his
own Sword through his Body; and that Report too that he had two Wounds about
him. Let this be done impartially, and suffer the honest Persons (who like
Daniel are zealous to discover the truth) be protected in their Enquiries, and
no doubt all the wicked Instruments will be discovered, to the glory of God,
and the revenge of innocent Blood, which otherwise may cry for Judgment against
the Land.

NOw if you observe, the Author of this, be it who he will, does only point
them out a way, to discover more of the great mystery of Iniquity on foot, than
had been before considered; which though the House of Commons did not directly
follow, yet upon scrutiny of many things therein, they found plainly these
Particulars:

First, That the Earl of Danby had held Correspondence with Oats and Tongue,
long before the Plot was discovered to the King; that diverse secret Meetings
were between them at Fox-Hall, where, in the Almshouse Oats and Tongue
lodged, to be ready for their meeting with the Earl of Danby, at an Inn kept by
a Painter near to the Landing-place there. These things being certain, they
concluded, that either the Earl of Danby was in the Plot, until he found it
discovered to the King, and then to save himself, fell on Coleman, and the
rest; or otherwise, that he was the original inventer of it, and procurer of
Witnesses, to involve the Nation in blood, and to ruin the Duke of York, and
destroy all the Papists, for purposes of his own; this made the Commons Resolve
on his Trial: For though they were sufficiently alarmed by the Plot, to
provide new Laws against Popery, yet are they unwilling to destroy Papists
themselves, (if innocent) that such Blood might not cry for vengeance against
the Nation. But if the Earl of Danby had been first tried, then upon the proofs
aforesaid he must have made his defense, either averring the Plot to be true,
and his willingness it should have taken effect, by his concealing it so long,
or that it was (...) invention of his own; that he by falling on a Party
suspected before, and now (...) such horrid Crimes and new Designs, might
justify the keeping up of an Army (...) opinion of Parliament, and escape the
Impeachment, he could not but expect at (...) Either of these defenses must
have enlightened the Commons in their (...) against the Lords; for if they had
been to be guilty by the Earl of Danby, and (...) joint Conspirator with them,
then the Commons had had much safer proof to rely (...) they have by men, whose
ill Lives formerly render them suspected testimonies, ever (...) often zealous
against Popery, and perhaps by counter-Evidence prepared by the Lord (...)
might have been fully set by as perjured men; or if he had owned the Plot, for
the (...) or any other Reasons, then had he naturally cleared such of the Five
Lords, as had not (...) parties perhaps with him in the Murder of Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey, which the foregoing ^per lays so close at his door. This is
the true cause o^ the Commons adhering to their Vote^ and upon the whole cannot
but be commended by all good men, and consequently their suddden breaking off,
is a trouble to all, who have no design but the discovery of truth; and I find
the Papists themselves have the most dreadful apprehensions of it, knowing that
during the recess, it is their Blood will be the pledge given to the People, of
their pretended zeal against Popery, who have had power to obstruct Justice
against the Earl of Danby. But I am confident such proceedings will find a
suitable return; for though some few of the Rabble for some time are gulled,
yet will such cruel Councils be detested by all thinking men, when they see
only those men destroyed, whose blind zeal at worst has made them Criminals;
and that not so much to punish them, as to blear the eyes of Justice, and to
save the Man, who of all the World has the most betrayed his Trust, in
corresponding with France to sell the Honor of the Nation, which as plainly
appears by his own Letters, as Coleman's did by his, by Contrivances to
establish a standing Army to enslave us, his Practices to sow discord in the
Royal Family, his bribing of Commons in Parliament to betray that Trust reposed
in them, and all other his visible black Crimes, does plainly appear the worst
(...) and the ruiner of his King and Country. I say, these things (let them be
who (...) advise them) threaten us with Judgment; from the coming of which
upon (...) humbly offer up our prayers to the All-seeing God, from whom none of
their secr^^^ ^^^es are hid, who is able, and will at last, return all their
Crimes into their own (...) in which day none will escape from his vengeance,
but such as from their souls (...) and preserve their hearts and hands from
seeking innocent Blood, and Malice, w^ (...) be the true and constant Endeavor
of

^^urs. J B.


