Englands Warningpiece.



1 Cor. 6 chap. 19. 20. ver And ye are not your own, for ye are bought with a
price, therefore glorify God in your body and in you spirit, which are Gods.
Englands Warning-piece. To all sleepy secure Sinners.

OR, The true Christians Subjection to Christ as their King and Savior.

Plainly and Powerfully setting forth to the Heart and Conscience, of all
Careless secure Sinners, their great Folly and Madness in refusing to submit to
Jesus Christ as he is tendered in the Gospel.

With many Cogent Arguments and Reasons to persuade all persons to come into
Christ for Salvation, now in the day of their Visitation, before the fire of
his wrath be kindled upon them, and the Gates of Heaven be shut against them,
and they perish for ever.

With some Rules and Directions how we may attain true Happiness.

2 Cor. 5 chap. 11 verse, Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord we persuade
men. Gathered from the painful labors of Mr. Richard Baxter, being the
substance of a Sermon.

Lycensed and Entered according to Order.

Printed for J. Conyers at the Black Raven in Duck-Lane, 1678.

The true Christians subjection to Christ, the only way to Salvation.
Psalm 2. 11. and 12 Verses. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with
trembling. Kiss the Son least he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his
wrath is kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put their trust in
him.
THe chief scope of the Psalm is, to foretell the Extent and prevalency of the
Kingdom of Christ: admonishing his Enemies to submit to his Government,
deriding the vanity of their opposing projects and fury, and forewarning them
of their ruin if they come not in.

I shall draw the scope of the Text into this one Doctrine. No power or
privilege can save that man from the fearful sudden consuming wrath of God,
that does not unfainedly love, depend upon, and subject himself unto the Lord
Jesus Christ.

In handling of this point, I shall observe ^ order.

First I will show you what this Love, Dependency, and Subjection are.

Secondly, what wrath it is that will thus kindle and consume them.

Thirdly, why this Kissing the Son is the only way to escape it.

Fourthly, why no power or privilege else can procure their escape.

Fifthly, Application.

First, Subjection to Christ is, the acknowledging of his absolute Sovereignty
both as he is God, Creator, and as a Redeemer over all the world, and
particularly our selves, and a hearty consent to this his Sovereignty,
especially that he be our Lord, and his Laws our Rule, and a delivering our
selves to be governed accordingly.

Secondly, this Dependency on Christ is, when we acknowledge the sufficiency of
his satisfaction, and his power, and willingness to save all that receive him
in his free universal offer in the Gospel, we do heartily accept him for our
only Savior, and accordingly [renouncing all other] do wait upon him
beleivingly, for the benefits of his Sufferings and Office, and the performance
of his ^^^hful covenant to us, in restoring us to all the ^^^ings which we
lost, and advancing us to a far ^ater everlasting glory.

Thirdly this Affection to Christ is, when in the knowledge and sense of his
love to us both common and especial, and of his own excellency, and the
blessedness of enjoying of him and the Father, and life by him; our hearts do
choose him and the Father by him as our only happiness, and accordingly love him
above all things in the world. These threefold descriptions contains the sum
of the Gospel, so has it nothing but what is of necessity to sound
Christianity.

Secondly, what wrath is it that will thus kindle and consume them; as there
are two Covenants, so each has his proper penalty for its breaking.

1. Then, till men do come in and submit to Christ, they lie under the wrath of
God for all their sins, as they are against the Covenant of works, or they are
liable to the curse of that Covenant. Christ's death has taken away the curse
of the Covenant, not absolutely from any man, but conditionally, which becomes
absolute when the condition is performed: the Elect themselves are not by
nature under the Covenant of Grace, but remain under the curse of the first
Covenant, till they come into Christ.

2. Whosoever rejects or neglects this Grace, and so finally breaks the
new Covenant, must also bear the curse or the penalty thereof, besides all the
former, which will be a greater curse, even as the blessings of this Covenant
are far greater than those of the first. It was a heavy punishment to be cast
out of Paradise from the presence of God, and to be cursed by him and subject
to Eternal death, and all creatures below cursed for our sakes, to bear all
those curses and Plagues threatened in Duteronomy 27. chapter 26. verse, Cursed be
he that confirms not all the words of this Law to do them: and all the people
shall say Amen. See Deuteronomy. 29. chap. 20 verse, Heb. 10. Chap. 28. 29. verses, He
that despised Moses Law, ayed without mercy, etc. Of how much sorer punishment,
shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has
counted the blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy
thing, and has done despite unto the spirit of grace.

3. Why this kissing the Son, [that is loving, depending on, and submitting to
him] is the only way to escape these curses: I answer.

First the proper Reason that can be given is; The will of the great Law giver,
who has absolute power over us, might dispose of us as he pleases, and make us
such Laws and conditions as seem best to his wisdom, upon which our
justification and salvation should depend: he bath resolved that this shall be
the only condition and way: And that as no man shall be justified by a mere
Christ, or his death abstracted from Faith [that is of Age or Reason] so this
Faith shall be the condition upon which they shall be justified: or, as a
Christ neglected shall save no man, so the accepting or receiving of him, shall
justify and save them, as the condition of the Covenant performed, under which
notion it is, that faith justifies. The Reasons from the former are,

1. From the Equity, it is but equal that he that has bought us so dearly, and
from a stare so desperate and deplorable, should be acknowledged and accepted
for our Savior and Lord. 1 Cor. 6. cha. 19. 20. verses, And yea are not your
own, for ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God in your body and in
your spirit, which are Gods. Romans 14. chapter 9. verse, For to this end Christ
both dyed and rose again that he might rule over both quick and dead.

2. As salvation by free grace through Christ, is away most suitable to God's
honor, and to our own necessities, as we could not have a more fitter way to
the Father, than by Christ; so neither could there be a fitter way to Christ,
or means to partake of him, than by Fatih, it is this Faith or accep^ation of
Christ for our Savior and King, which is here called kissing the Son, applying
and appropriating to our selves the person, righteousness and benefits procured
and offered, but not the least honor of the work, all we do is but to accept
what Christ has procured, and that must be by the special assistance of his
Holy Spirit.

4. Why no privilege or power in the word can save them that does not kiss the
Son? it might here suffice, that I have showed you God's determination to the
contrary; but further consider if any should hope to escape, by their Friends,
Strength, or other Endowments or Virtuous qualifications.

1. The must resist the unresistable will of God, they must do that which
Heaven or Earth, men or Devils were never able yet to do; they have resisted
his Laws and love, but they could never resist his Power, where dwells that
man, or what is his name that did neglect Christ and yet escaped damnation?
Job. 9 chap. 4 verse, who has hardened himself against him and has prospered?

2. He that will save the soul that loves not, depends not, and subjecteth
not himself to Christ, must first make false the word of God, and make the
faithful and true God a liar, for God has given it under his hand for a truth,
that he that beleiveth not is condemned already; Joh. 3. chapter verse 18. that he
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him, John 3 chap. ver. 36.
that those that are invited and make light of Christ, shall never taste of his
Supper, that is, shall be more easy for Sodom in the day of judgment than for
that City which refuses the offers of the Gospel, Matt. 10. ver. 15. Those
that would not have Christ Reign over them shall be brought forth at last and
destroyed before him as his Enemies, Luke 19. That they shall all be damned
that believe not the Truth, but have pleasure in unrightroussness, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
chap. 12. ver. Has the Almighty said thus, and who dare say it shall not be:
Thus you see his task that will undertake to save one neglector of Christ.

Use 1. You hear by the Text how you are like to speed at the Bar of Christ,
who shall dye and who shall live, the great Assize is near at hand, the feet of
the Judge is at the door, go thy way unbeleiving sinner, when thou have had all
the pleasure that sin can afford thee, the rousing voice will awake thee after
thou have lain in dust and flep a while, and thine Eyes shall see that dreadful
day, oh blessed, oh doleful day, blessed to the Saints, doleful to the wicked:
oh the triumphant shoutings of the joyful Saints, the hideous roaring cries of
the damned, when each man has received his doom, there is nothing but Eternal
glory, and eternal fire. You must all of you shortly appear, and hear what doom
must pass upon you, I hope you believe it. What would you now give to know for
certain how it will then go with you? why here is the book by which you must be
judged, and here is the sum of it in my Text, and the grounds upon which the
Judge will then proceed: will you but go along with me and answer the questions
I shall put to you, you may know your doom

And here you must know, that it is the Kiss of the Heart and not of Lips which
we must here inquire after: the questions will not be at the great day of Doom,
who has spoke Christ fair, or who has called themselves Christians, or who
has said the Creed or Lord's Prayer oftnest, or cried Lord, Lord, or come to
Church, or has held this opinion, or who that: It would make a man's heart ache
to think how Zealous men honor the shadow of Christ, bow at his name,
reverence the Image of the Cross he dyed on, and the Relics and names of the
Saints that dyed for him, yet do utterly neglect the Lord himself, and resist
his spirit, and cannot endure to be governed by him, and hate them that really
love him, and yet believe themselves to be real Christians. For God's sake sirs
do not delude your immortal Souls, as to think your Baptism and your outward
Devotion, and your good meanings as you call them, and your righteous dealing
with men will serve the turn to prove you Christians, Alas! this is but with
Judas to kiss the mouth of Christ.

And indeed to fetch your death from those blessed lips from whence the Saints
did fetch their life, I will show you some surer signs than these.

1. Let me a little inquire into your subjection to Christ: do you remember the
time when you were the servants of Sin and Satan, and led captive at his will,
and all within you was in carnal peace, do you remember when the spirit in the
word came powerfully upon your hearts, and bound Satan and cast him out, and
answered all your carnal wisdom, and brought you out of darkness into light,
and from the power of Satan unto God, Acts 26. chap. 18 verse. Has Christ the
only Sovereignty in your Souls, is his word thy Law which thou dare not pass,
does it bind thy thoughts unto thy tongue, and command all thou have, have thou
laid down all at the feet of Christ, and resigned all to his will, and devoted
allto his dispose and service, do thou daily and spiritually worship him in
private, and in thy Family, and teach thy children and servants to fear the
Lord; I entreat you Sirs, deal truly and faithfully in answering these
questions, for never man was saved by the bare title of a Christian, if you are
not subject to Christ you are not Christians, no more then a picture or a
carcass is a man, and your Salvation will be such as your Christianity is,
Subjection is an undoubted part of thy faith, and Obedience is its fruit. In
short then, do thou make him thy fear, and tremble at his word, and be
willing to do or suffer any thing for his sake, as the Sword, Fire, Nakedness,
Displeasure of friends, Credit or Life, art thou willing to submit to all that
he reveals, do thou say, speak Lord for thy servant hears? Lord what
would thou have me to do? I am ready to do thy will O God, Beloved this is
the frame of every servant of Christ, and this is the acknowledging and
accepting of him for your Lord.

Do thou take him for thy only Savior, and truly believe this history of his
Life and Passion the truth of his Divine and humane nature, his Resurrection,
his Office, and his approaching Judgment; do thou see that all thy supposed
Righteousness is but Vanity and sin, and that thou art not able to make the
least satisfaction to the Law by thy works or sufferings, and if his blood did
not wash thee, and his Righteousness justify thee, thou must certainly be
damned yet and perish for ever; do thou therefore cast thy self into his Arms
and venture thy everlasting state upon him, and trust him with thy Soul, and
fetch all thy help and healing from him, do thou so build upon his promise of
an happiness hereafter, that thou can let all go here, and drink of His cap,
and be Baptized with his Baptism, and lose thy life upon his promise that thou
shall save it, why this is kissing the hand of Christ. Beloved I profess to you
all in the name of the Lord, that it is not your bold and confident affirming
that you love Christ which will serve your turn, when Christ shall judge, he
will search deep and judge according to truth in the inward parts. How many
thousand will perish then as his utter Enemies, that verily thought themselves
his friends. How easily might they now find their mistake would they now
examine themselves, Oh try, try Sirs before God try you, judge your selves
before Christ jugeth you, it would grieve a man's heart that knows what it is to
love Christ, to believe and be subject to him, to see how rare these are in the
world.

Use the 2d. It is time to turn my speech to Exhortation, and oh that you would
encourage me with a Resolution to obey: my business is as a Herald to proclaim
the Lord Jesus your King and Savior, and to know whether you will acknowledge
and take him to be so or not, and to persuade you to kiss the Son least his
wrath be kindled against you: you will say this is a common Errand, I know the
name of Christ is common, the Swearer does swear by it, the Beggar begs by it,
the Charmer puts it into his Charms, and the Jester in his Jests, and many
Papists and ignorant Protestants do mutter it oft-times over their Prayers, but
who trembles at, or triumphs in it, who makes it his fear and joy, and give
up their souls to be governed by Christ? I do hear solemnly proclaim to you
that the Lord Jesus will not be put off with complements, he cares not for your
mere name of Christianity, your Cap or Knee, if your Heart be not set upon him
thou art none of his, you must depend on him alone for Soul and Body, or never
look for mercy at his hands, He is the Author of Eternal salvation to them
(only) that obey him, Hebrews 5 chap. 9 ver.

What say you sirs in answer to my message, what do you resolve upon, shall
Christ be your love, and your Lord or not, will you kiss the Son, or will you
slight him still, methinks you should easily be resolved, and say, Away with
Credit, Plcasure, Profits, away with these bewitching Delights and vanities,
Christ has bought my heart and he shall have it, he is my Lord and I will be
ruled by him. I persuade you not to Opinions or Factions, but to be with all
your heart for Christ, as ever you look Christ should be for you: to love him
as he that has bought you from everlasting wrath, and dyed to save you from
Eternal Burnings, to lay hold of him with most earnest affectionate
Apprehension, as a man that is ready to be drowned would do upon a bough, or
the hand of his friend that would pull him to the shore, to do nothing till
thou have asked counsel at his word, these are the things I exhort you to,
these are things that Christ expects from you: Think of what I say, and weigh
it, if I speak not Truth and Reason reject it and spare not, but if it be, and
thy Conscience tell thee so, take heed then how thou do neglect it or reject
it, least thou be found a fighter against the Spirit of God.

I will draw these considerations only from the Text.

1. Thou art else a Rebel against thy Sovereign Lord, this I gather from the
command in my Text, and the whole Psalm, God has given thee into the hands of
his Son, and made him Lord and King of all, and commanded all to submit to him
and accept of him; who can show such right to rule thee as Christ can do? he is
thy maker, and so is not Satan, he dearly bought thee, so did not the world, 1
Pet. 1 chapter v. 18. Thou wast not Redeemed with Silver and Gold and corruptible
things from your vain conversations. I make this challenge in the behalf of
Christ, let any thing in the world step forth and show a better Title to thee,
to thy heart and to thy life than Christ can show, then let them take thy
heart, but I know thou can not but confess it, yet will thou not yield him
thy Love and chiefest Obedience, out of thy own mouth then art thou condemned
as a wilful Rebel.

2. To deny thy Love and Subjection to Christ is a most barbarous unkindness a
sinner can be guilty of, did he pity thee in thy lost Estate, and take thee up
when thou wast wounded in the way and make thee a Plaster of the blood of his
heart, and is this thy requital did he come down from Heaven to Earth, to seek
thee when thou wast lost, and take upon him all thy Debt, and put himself into
the Prison of the world and flesh, and paid for thy folly, born the wrath of
God which thou must have suffered for ever, and does he not deserve to be
entertained with most affectionate respect,, but with a few cold thoughts
instead of hearty love, and a few formal words instead of Worship, Oh let the
Heavens blush at such ingratitude.

Me thinks you should rather wonder with your selves that ever Christ should
give you leave to love him; and say, Will the Lord eudure such a wretch to kiss
him; will he suffer himself to be embraced by those arms which has been so
often defiled by the imbracements of sin, will he honor me so highly as to be
his Subject and Servant to be guided by such a blessed and perfect Law, and
does require no harder conditions then these for my Salvation: Take then my
Heart O Lord, it is only thine, and oh that it were better, take it and make it
better, the Spear has made a passage to thy heart, O let thy spirit upon me
make a passage to mine. I dare challenge Earth and Hell and all the Enemies of
Christ in both, to show the least hurt that ever he caused to the Soul of a
beleiver, or wrong to the soul of any, and must he have such a stir to do thee
good, must he beseech thee to be happy, and follow thee with entreaties, and
yet art thou like a stock that neither hears nor feels; nay do not thou
murmur against him as if he would do thee a mischief; Ah foolish Sinner it is
sin would hurt thee, and not thy Savior, why do not thou strive against
that, it is the Devil that would destroy thee, yet do not grudge thy
obedience to him, be judge thy self whether this be equal dealing. Sinner I
beseech thee in behalf of thy poor Soul not to renounce thy Savior, till thou
have found a better Master, say as Peter, whither shall we go? Lord thou have
the words of Eternal Life.

2ly. These following considerations are drawn from the aggravation of the
punishment, and all from the words of my Text.

1. God will be angry if you kiss not his Son, his wrath is as a fire, and this
neglect of Christ is the way to kindle it, if thou art not a beleiver thou art
condemned already, but this will bring upon thee a double condemnation: oh what
will the Father say to such unworthy wretches; must I send my Son from my
bosom to suffer for thee, must he groan and bleed, when thou should bleed,
and dye when thou should dye, and can thou not be persuaded to embrace and
obey him, must he have the naked title of thy Lord and Savior, while the
fleshly pleasures and profits have thy heart; what wrath can be too great, and
Hell too hot for such ungrateful wretches, go seize upon him Justice, let my
wrath consume, and hell devour thee, seeing thou have chosen death, take it;
and as thou have rejected Heaven, thou shall never see it, but my wrath shall
abide on thee for ever, John 3. Chap. 36 ver. Woe to thee sinner if this be
once thy sentence, thou had better have Heaven and Earth fall upon thee than
one degree of God's displeasure.

O what a pittyful sight it is to see a man under the wrath of God, and are these
little sparks so intollerably hot what then do you think are the everlasting
flames, beloved hearers, if God had not spoke this, I durst not have spoke it:
the desire of my soul is that you may-not feell it, I hope the foreknowing may
help to prevent it. Let me tell you from God, as sure as Heaven is over your
heads, and the Earth under your feet, except the Son of God be nearer thy heart
and dearer to thy heart than Friends, or goods; or Pleasures or Life, or any
thing in the world, this burning wrath will never be prevented when this wrath
of God is thoroughly kindled, then blessed are they that trust in him, Luke 14.
Matt. 10. 37.

And now what is your resolution, perhaps you have been Enemy to Christ under
the name of Christians, will you be so still? have you not loathed this busy,
diligent serving of him, and hated them that carefully seek him, more than the
vilest Drunkard or Blasphemer, have not his word Service and Sabbath been a
burden to you, crying away with these precise Preachers, they shall not
control us, this precise Scripture shall be no Law to us, and consequently
this Christ shall not rule over us, you may go on as far as Pharo if you will,
but if you be not losers in the latter end God has not spoken by me 1 Kings

Sirs I am loath to leave you till the bargain be made, what say you, are you
willing that Christ shall be your Sovereign? his word your Law, his worship
your Recreations, his merits your Refuge, his glory your end, and himself the
delight of your souls, the Lord Jesus waits for your answer, thou will very
shortly wait on him for thy doom; as ever thou would have him speak life to
thy soul, do thou resolve upon the way of Life, remember that thou art almost
at Death and Judgment, if thou did but see what others suffer for neglecting
of him that now offers thee his grace, what would thou do, when it comes to
that, then thou will cry, away with the world, away Pleasures, nothing can
comfort me but Christ, why then will not you be of the same mind now.

Oh that it might stand with the Will of God that this Sermon might take effect
upon your hearts, and fasten upon your souls, and pierce into your consciences
as an Arrow drawn out of the Quiver of God, it should follow thee home, and
bring thee down on thy Knees in secret, and there lament they case, and make
thee cry out in the bitterness of thy spirit, Lord I am a sinner that has
neglected thee, and have tasted more sweetness in the world than in thy blood,
and taken more delight in my earthly labors and pleasures than in praying and
meditating on thee, and here it should make thee lie in tears and Prayers, and
follow Christ with cries and complaints till he take thee up from the dust, and
assure thee of his pardon, and change thy heart, and close it with his own.

To conclude all with the words of my Text Oh kiss the Son least he be angry
and you perish, blessed are all they that trust in him.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Joshua Conyers at the black raven in duck lane with many
others.
THe Young Man's guide in his way to Heaven, or a cabinet of rich Jewels

2. An Awakening Call to unconverted sinners, or the Jaylors Conversion.

3 Gods Sword against Drunkards, or a Timely warning to Drunkards Swearers, and
blasphemers of Gods holy name the first parr.

4 The great and grievous sin of Pride, Whoredom, and Adultery, Arraigned and
condemned in abundance of examples; the second part,

5 A dreadful warning to all Impenitent sinners, seting sorth the great danger
of making light of Christ and salvation by Mr. Baxten.

6 The Art of Divine contentment in all conditions, a new piece

7 The Travels and Persecutions of our Savior Christ and his 12 Apostles.

8 The fiery Trials of Martyrs that were burnt to death for the Protestant
Religion.

9. Seven and forty examples upon persecutors.


