Metamorphosis Christiana: OR, THE OLD MAN Changed into the NEW. An Occasional
DISCOURSE.

Been vixisse magnum est. Hieron.

He that Converteth a Sinner from the Error of his Way, shall save a Soul from
Death, and shall hide a multitude of Sins.

James ult. ult. LONDON, Printed for James Collins in Essex-street, without
Temple Bar. 1679.

To the much Honored, JOHN BASSET, Of Heanton-Court Esquire, Recorder of the
Town of Barnstable, and Burgess for the same, Colonel of the North-Division,
and one of the Deputy Lieutenants of Devon.
SIR,
I Here present you with a Discourse, which has no other pretense to your
Patronage, but only the good Intention wherewith it is offered: and (Sir) you
may remember, that this has sometimes made a cup of cold water a Present to a
mighty King, acceptable; and preferred the two Mites of the poor Widow, as an
Offering more grateful than much larger Gifts.

Sir, the reason of this Address proceeds not from an Ambition of appearing in
Print, for I have often declaimed against the Scribbling of the Age; nor in
satisfaction to the Importunities of Friends, the usual pretense in the like
cases; nor yet purely in gratitude to those many Favors you have obliged me
withal, the Commonplace and threadbare Complement of Dedications: Sir, I
looked back, and lo the too visible Ruins of our late Contentions! I looked
forward, and saw the face of things tending much to the same way; I thought my
self concerned to move toward the prevention of the growing evil, as knowing
that an ordinary Physician and mean Medicine may overcome a Disease in its
beginnings; which being become chronical and inveterate, will triumph over the
most exquisite Preparations. So that the whole Plot drives at nothing but the
advancement of Peace and Love among Neighbors and Christians; and, Sir, when I
resolved to adventure it abroad, to try men's eyes, and second thoughts as well
as ears, I presently considered that Sphere wherein you stand, that commanding
Influence you have with us, and withal, your own example, the pattern of those
Virtues which you will find (though very imperfectly) described within.
Whereupon I have presumed to prefix your Name to the Front, as the surest
Expedient to make the Doctrine, at least in its first and more private Design,
successful.

Sir, I have no more to add, but this: May you be like your Father in every
thing but shortness of days, is the devout prayer of,

Your most Humble Servant, Nich. Bear.

Metamorphosis Christiana.
Gal. ult.15. In Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision, but a new Creature.


AMong the Beings of the lower World, that which gives Man the Pre-eminence is
his Reason, that divine breath of the Almighty, which impowers him with the
noble Faculties of Understanding and Will. Among Men that which chiefly exalts
some above the rest is Virtue and Grace: there are other pretenses which are
eagerly contended for; the Jew talks much of the Seed of Abraham, one of the
peculiar Darlings of Heaven, upon whose account God cannot but respect his
Offspring, being by no less than a Miracle produced; and to this add by way of
advancement the plea of Circumcision, the great and stable Precept (as they
call it) of their Law, which in their opinion must exalt them above all mankind
beside. The more polished Gentile does not a little vaunt of Athens, the seat
of Learning; and having had his Education there, looks with scorn on the
Inhabitants of any other part of Greece; and amongst them most of all despises
the Scythian to a Proverb Barbarous. The man of Liberty derides him in Chains.
These by the Apostle are noted as the most remarkable pretenses to Priority,
all which he does here refell by an higher and more noble Claim, even the
qualification of the Rent. It Is the not the Lineage of Abraham, nor the loss of
the Foreskin, not thy pretense of Education at the foot of Gamaliel, nor thy
living under the Doctrine of the greatest Sage at Athens; not thy plea of
Birth, nor that of Liberty: there is somewhat that will advance thee much
beyond these, by which thou shall outshine other men, as the Moon does the
lesser Host of Heaven, viz. the new Creation in Christianity, the All in All.

Neither Greek nor Jew, Circumcision nor Uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian,
bond nor free, but Christ is all and in all: and here neither Circumcision
avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a new Creature.

It Is undeniably evident, that the great occasion of this Epistle (as of many
others) was the different Factions between the Jew and the Gentile, advanced by
the false Prophets, and countenanced by the staggering of the true; as is too
notorious, not only in the case of S. Peter here, in chap. 2. ver. 12. but
also of the other Apostles, who (as S. Luke tells us) affirmed the necessity of
Circumcision, as a qualification previous to the preaching and benefit of the
Gospel, until S. Peter was by a Miracle convinced, Acts 10. and the truth by a
Council determined, chap. 15. It grieved S. Paul (as indeed it must a Minister
of God) to see the present Church thus miserably shattered; he thinks all his
endeavors too little to heal those sores, he undertakes to his face the Head
of the College, Gal. 2.13. he not only preaches down this as an Error, but in
confutation writ with his own hand a large Epistle, wherein he sets up this as
his standard, (like the Cross with the Motto of Constantine) promising Victory
here, he prescribes this as the most sovereign Balsam to heal their wounds, as
the best Cement to knit and unite their Affections, -- a new creature.

Scripture is the best Interpreter of it self; who would be beholding to the
scantlings of the Chanel, when he may be admitted to the fullness of the
Fountain? I shall give you therefore the sense of the Text from these parallel
places; Gal. 5.6. Neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision,
but faith which works by love. Where (as the Learned Grotius notes) we are
not to understand this grace single, but in conjunction with others. Likewise
from the 19 verse to the end of the chapter, he gives us an account of the
meaning of the Phrase in Ephesians. 4.23. where he uses these words, Put off
concerning the former conversation the old man, which is corrupt, according to
the deceitful lusts, and be renewed in the spirit of your mind, and that ye put
on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.
Where he further proceeds to a specification of both, in a third Epistle, Col.
3.8. where he expresses himself thus: Put off all these, anger, wrath, malice,
hlasphemy. -- And verse 10. Put on the new man which is renewed in knowledge
after the image of him that created him. -- And verse 12. Put on as the elect
of God bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering, forbearing and forgiving one another. -- And above all put on
charity.

From the whole (waving the present Controversy) three things are to be
considered:

1. Somewhat here implied, which is to be put off, viz. the old man, or old
creature.

2. What is here expressed (and elsewhere more formally commanded to be put on)
the new creature.

3. The privilege and significancy of this in Christianity above any thing
beside; for in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision, but a new Creature.

1. First then we are to consider what is here implied and supposed, and is to
be put off, viz. the old man, which is set forth in Scripture by these phrases,
the body of sin, the law of the members, the works of darkness, the natural
man, the members that are upon earth, and the like; which gives us no small
light to the right Understanding of the first thing. The old man is made up of
the mass of that sin which was the product of Adams transgression.

And here I design not to give you an account of all the particulars; that
would be a task too tedious; but because I find some more principally by the
Apostle recited in the places foregoing, and for the reason following, I shall
glance on these four, Pride, Malice, Anger, Envy.

We are not to look on these as single or common vices; they are chief
Commanders, they have teeming wombs, and like the Trojan Horse, stock the world
with Troops, if not Regiments of other Evils; and hence, hence are the Iliads
of our miseries.

1. Pride in a strict sense is a special sin, as the great Schoolman 22 ae. q.
162.
has noted, in regard it has a proper object, which must specify and
distinguish it; but being considered with respect to its prolifick nature, it
may be fitly called the Regina and Matter. Ib.
Empress and Parent of all sins; though not necessarily so, as is observed by
the same Aquinas out of S. Augustine, sins sometimes receiving their original
from other causes; yea even in its most peculiar respect, it has no less than
four monstrous parts, verse 5. 1. The proud man thinks, that the goodness which
he has is not derivative, but from himself alone. 2. That what benefits he does
enjoy are the products of his own merit. 3. He boasts that he has what he has
not. And 4. Despising all other men he covets alone to have what he does desire.

2. Malice. This has its proper Seat in the Will, and therefore must be
acknowledged to be the Principle of all the depravity of our actions proceeding
thence; this is that poison which corrupts the Fountain, and cannot but make
the Streams unwholesom; the industry, the design, the resolution of sinning,
that sin which bends and sets men up for mischief.

3. The next is Anger, which may be allowed of, if it be kept close to its
proper Object, and within its due bounds, (Be angry, but sin not) yet cannot
but be hugely sinful and destructive, when it has received infection from the
aforesaid Leaven: when like a River it swells beyond its proper Chanel; or like
the overflowings of the Gall, which at once discolours and disaffects the whole
body. This Poison may not unfitly be resembled unto Fire, of good Use in its
right sphere, but when it has exceeded that, threatens nothing below the
certain ruin of our own, if not others Houses. Of this there are many kinds,
Aquin. 22 ae. q. 150.
according to the different Constitutions of men; and no less than seven
Daughters, if we may credit Gregory; though (I think) upon due examination her
Issue will appear to be much more numerous.

4. The last is Envy, which I term the Canker of the Breast, a Consumption got
by the thriving of others; 22 ae. q. 36.
this also is fruitful and parturient of many other Vices.

These I have mentioned as the vital and principal parts of the old man, like
the four Elements to the body natural; and as there can be no composition
without the union of these, so we shall find the other conspiring in a mixture
to make up the constitution of the present sinner.

We are told, that while Julia lived, the Daughter of Caesar and Wife to
Pompey, and Crassus, by whose triple League and Friendship the two other
Generals were kept asunder, as the Ionean and Aegean Seas by the Isthmus of
Corinth; but they are no sooner removed, but the Trumpet sounds to Battle,
which ends in the certain ruin of one, and the destruction of the greatest
Empire that ever the world saw. Thus when men cast off the obligations of
Nature, Friendship, and Religion, and give reins to these, what other Issue can
be expected, but that these wild Steeds (like the Horses of the Sun) set the
world on fire? These open the Floud-gates to all our Contentions and Divisions,
whether public or private. I am bold to assert, that there was never any
disturbance since the world began, wherein one (if not more of these) was not
more immediately concerned in the quarrel. The true origin this of all Wars
between Princes on one side or the other; of lesser Wars, that is to say,
Lawsuits between man and man; the Source of all the Contentions, Divisions,
Factions, Schisms, Heresies, Lying, Slandering, Backbiting, Obloquy, and of a
thousand other Evils. These make our Hearts Cages of unclean Birds, our Actions
virulent, and our Tongues no other than the Firebrands of Hell. Who then but
must conclude for the putting of them off?

For our encouragement in which work we cannot want Arguments which way soever
we cast our Eyes. Look we abroad, and lo what desolation these have made! No
Age, no Empire, no Misery which gives us not sufficient Testimonies of its
Spoils. I will not begin to give you Examples for the proof, lest I should not
easily make an end: and I suppose it needless to travel either far back or
abroad, for that which we may meet with at our own doors. Look we then round
about us, and see what havoc these have made! The old man carries a large and
disorderly Retinue at his heels, cannot be entertained but with great cost and
trouble; and if not shaken off the sooner, will inevitably bankrupt his hosts
in the conclusion. The proud man thinks nothing too much that may conduce to
the keeping up or advancing his Grandeur. The envious and malicious will not be
sparing in any thing that may do hurt to their Enemies; he will be content to
lose one eye, that his Adversary may be bereft of both.

The passionate man puts all at stake for Satisfaction, though the affront were
but a trifle.

See how effectually Divisions and Controversies do weaken; like the Duel of
the Frog and the Mouse in the Epilogue, they drew blood so long of each other,
as that an Enemy has the advantage, and the quarrel ends in the destruction of
both. Listen we to the Complaints of the threadbare Client! you may learn the
state of his Purse by his habit; his countenance does betray the grievance of
his heart; and it is ten to one but that the Suit commenced from one of these.
How many Estates are there round about us, that upon this account have changed
their Names; and many that nod and totter? How melancholic men return from
Westminster Hall, where the Victor is sure to be a Loser? What Slaves men make
themselves to dance attendance, and wait the pleasure of the meanest Officers
of the Law? How vastly like a Snow-ball Passion advances, so that that which in
the beginning was not worth the regarding, within a while becomes the subject
of an irreconcilable feud; so true is that of the Apostle James 3.5. How great
a matter a little fire kindles!

Thus is it destructive without, and upon examination we shall find that it
makes no small disturbance within. The Offspring of the old man may not
unfitly be resembled to the products of the Vipers, which eat their way out
through their Mothers Bowels: or as the Serpent in the Fable, they will requite
our kindness with poison: or as we read in the Gospel, Matthew. 15. his
operations are like those of that unclean spirit there, it oftentimes throws
the possessed into the fire, and into the water, drives them to contrary
inconveniences.

Behold the malicious and envious man, how thin, meager, and pale is he! He
cannot hear of the good of another, but his ears will tingle; he cannot see him
thriving without tears or dimness, he cannot think of it without melancholy.

Behold the angry and passionate, and during the Paroxysm what is he but a
perfect mad man? It makes men look dreadful, according to the observation of
the wise Heathen, Antoninus de seipso, l. 7. sec. 18.
An angry countenance is much against Nature, and is oftentimes the proper
countenance of them that are at the point of death. We must conclude the pain
within, from the disorderly looks without; the violence of the Waves from the
froth and noise which they send forth.

Behold the proud person! and lo every disappointment that he meets withal puts
him upon the Rack, unhinges him from all his other enjoyments, and takes away
the comforts of his life.

To exemplify this by an Instance or two.

Ahab a King, and therefore no ways needing the small portion of Ground, the
native Inheritance of the poor Israelite, yet when he had set his heart upon
it, and had spoken to Naboth about it, and being denied it, and so defeated in
his design: see what a damp is put upon his spirits; so the Text tells us, 1
Kings 21.4. Ahab came into his house heavy and displeased, because of the word
which Naboth the Jesreelite had spoken unto him; and he laid him down upon his
bed, and he turned away his face and would eat no bread. In like sort we find
it in the case of Haman, he is the great and supreme Favorite in the Court of
Ahasuerus, he obtains whatsoever he asks of him; in his passage from his House
to the Palace, he observed the irreverent carriage of a Jew, he did not bow and
cringe as his Highness expected; whereupon he is so much moved as to swear the
destruction of the whole Race; a design inhumanly barbarous and unreasonable,
had the affront been a thousand times greater, but he is resolved; (Pride and
Passion when let loose know no bounds;) he goes on with his purpose; sends
forth an Edict through all parts of the Kingdom, to kill on a certain day all
the Jews, without the least exception or reserve. Here it might have been
expected, that he should have rested satisfied, having obtained for his purpose
a Law which is called unalterable; but it is otherwise; his extraordinary
Advancement, Riches, and Favor of sitting usually at the Kings Table, (seldom
to Subjects vouchsafed) are fruitless and insignificant; he has no Appetite to
the Kings meat; he sits in state as upon thorns, and for no other reason but
because the already condemned Jew remains yet at the Gate alive: for thus it is
recorded, Hester 5.11, etc. And Haman told them of the glory of his riches, and
the multitude of his children, and all the things wherein the King had promoted
him; how he had advanced him above the Princes and Servants of the King. And
Haman said moreover, Yea Hester the Queen let no man come in with the King unto
the banquet which she had prepared, but my self; and tomorrow I am invited unto
her also with the King. Yet all this avails me nothing, as long as I see
Mordecai the Jew sitting at the Kings gate. 'Twere easy to manifest the like
by running through every part of the old man, still carrying grief and malady
where ever he goes; the sinner is subject to heart-burnings and strong
convulsions, the gripings of the Guts, the gnawings of the Liver, which some
have affirmed the Only, all suppose it the Greatest punishment of Hell it
self. Thus (like him in the Comedian) he is his own Tormentor, go he where he
will, betake himself to what he pleases, he carries his Plague along with him.
These Fiends (like the evil Spirit of Saul) are his perpetual Attendants; they
haunt him at his Table, and take away his Stomach; await him at his Bed, and
scare him with Conflicts and Rencounters in his dreams. The fruit of the
forbidden Tree, though it be pleasant to the eye, savours of nothing but Gall
in the concoction; the sin of Gomorrah produces no other fruit but that of
Sodom.

The Remedies which in this case may be prescribed, are so various, as that
it is difficult to put a period to this first part. Consider we the Sensitive
Creatures, and though they are not without their passions, yet they seldom or
never exert them to the disturbance either of themselves or their Societies.
See what a joint harmony there is among the Individuals of every kind: The
Beasts of prey are not at variance among themselves; Antoninus lib. 11. Sect.
16.
the Venomous Creatures spit not poison at each other. Hear the great
Philosopher and Emperor, Neither Bees do it one to another, nor any other
creatures that are naturally sociable. Which in his Opinion proves his
assertion, namely, that we were not born to hurt and annoy one another, the
great design of Malice and Passion. These actually violating the sacred Ties of
Friendship, and disturbing that sweet communion which ought to be among men.
And therefore he goes on, Ibid.
To be angry is not the part of a man, but to be meek and gentle sounds of
Manhood; and concludes, that Anger and Passion proceed from Weakness.

To the same effect does the Scholar of Epictetus exellently reason; Arrian. in
Epict. lib. 1. cap. 28.
Passion does disparage and degrade, turns the Man into a Viper: whose actions
ought not to move thee, rather should thou pity such a one, as we do those
that are blind, deaf, and lame, men under great Imperfections and Deformities.
Should I do well to take notice of the barking of every little Dog as I pass
the streets? Antoninus lib. 7. parag. 19.
to be offended with a blind man for taking the wall of me? or of a deaf man
because he does not hear me? or of an Idiot because I cannot by reason persuade
him? The Ancients allowed not the liberty of Passion, or at least no
extravagancy thereof, to virtuous men; and indeed it implies no less than a
contradiction, that Reason should sit as supreme in that Breast where Anger,
Malice, Pride, and such like bear sway. These are to be handled as Beasts of
great strength and violence, to be reserved in chains, and kept within due
bounds, for, exspatiating they will become destructive. As thou art a Being
endowed with Understanding, thou should be careful to preserve a Calm, as
knowing that Winds and Storms will expose thy Vessel at present to strange
motions and disorders, and to shipwreck in the conclusion. And as the Ship
bound for Tarsis, by reason of the Fugitive was overtaken with a storm, not to
be appeased with any expedients the Mariners could think on, but only by
throwing the rebellious Prophet overboard: So here, as long as the old sinner
sways within, we can expect no Quiet; this must succeed, his being committed to
the deep. This Reason does suggest.

And if it be not fully convincing, have we recourse to the infallible
directions of our Religion!

Hear how the Angel does bespeak the devout Women, He is not here, he is risen:
why seek ye the living among the dead? Upon our admission to Discipleship we
are to forsake the Tombs, and to shake off the condition of filth and
rottenness.

Listen to the Doctrine of our Savior, No man can serve two Masters; for
either he will hate the one and love the other, or else he will hold to the one
and despise the other: he cannot serve God and Mammon. As in Baptism, those
that were to be dipped, upon their return from the Water, did change their
Clothes, and put on clean attire; so must every Christian in a Spiritual Sense.
I make this Comparison the rather because the Learned Grotius does assure us,
that the Phrases of Putting off and Putting on, have reference to the aforesaid
Custom, as also because I find this to be the Subject of our Baptismal Vow, as
in our Church-Catechism is excellently expressed.

That I should renounce the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of
this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh -- that I should keep
God's Holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of my Life.

If then we design to embrace this Religion, and really to be what we profess,
we must not only swear, but procure the destruction of these Disorderly
Passions: the Sinner must be driven out, that the Saint may be brought into
possession: the Old Man must die, that the New Creature may grow and prosper,
which brings me to my second Part.

But a New Creature.
FOr the true meaning of which, let us (as before) consider those parallel
expressions whereby it is set forth in Scripture, sometimes under the notion of
Regeneration, as in our Savior's discourse with Nicodemus; sometimes by the
Phrase of the New Man; elsewhere by the Armor of Light; the whole Armor of
God. The putting on of Christ Jesus, the Fruits of the Spirit, etc.

In short then, this is one of those Scripture-Phrases, Crell. Each. Chris. lib.
2. cap 3. in.
by which Piety in its most comprehensive sense is set forth, for which there
is undeniable Evidence to be produced, because the Spirit in Scripture in the
Description of the New Creature or New Man, in many places mentions those
Duties which we owe to God, our selves, and one another, as parts or effects
thereof.

Now because this comprises the whole of our Religion, it may not be expected
that I should run through every particular, and because I find in the parallel
place, instead of a New Creature, Faith which works by Love. chapter 5.6. and
because our Love to our Brother, is the best Argument and Expression of our
Love toward God; as St. John in his Epistles excellently reasons. And
forasmuch as ( Col. 3.12, 13.) I find some more particularly mentioned: Put on
therefore Bowels of Mercies, Kindness, Humbleness of Mind, Meekness,
Long-suffering, Forbearing, and Forgiving one another, -- if any have a Quarrel
at any; and above all put on Charity. I shall touch at these: laying down this
as a sure Foundation, That the best Evidence we make a Conscience of our Duties
toward God and our selves, that we engage in public Duties out of a true
Principle, and are not wanting in our closest Devotions is, ourrstving in the
due Discharge of those we owe to one another: the si^^ whereof is Bowels of
Mercies.

By which we are to understand no mean or common Affection, no Superficial
Outside-love, but that of the Bottom of the Heart, as appears from the frequent
Use of the Word ( Job 38.36. chapter 5.10. Jer. 3.31.) being put for our Heart, the
Seat of our Love and Affection; so that the Apostle requires here Mercifulness
in its highest and most intense degree, such a Carriage toward our
Fellow Creatures, as is of the Lord in the Parable ( Mat. 18.) to his Servant;
he uses no Methods of extreme rigor, he does not take him by the Throat, and
hale him to Prison, to the ruin of himself, and Family; but being affected
with his Poverty, forgives him the Debt.

Nor such a regardless carriage as the Priest and Levite showed to the robbed
and wounded Way-faring-man; (touched with no pity at the sight of an Object
able to have moved an Heart of Stone.)

But like that of the good Samaritan, who no sooner sees him, but melts toward
him, (...). Luke 10.33. as it clearly appears by what he does for him; binds up
his Wounds, pours Wine and Oil, puts him upon his own Horse, carries him to an
Inn, entertained him during his abode there, and makes Provision for him after
his departure. The most genuine effects of this Virtue.

And, to add one Instance more, like that of the Father, to his Prodigal Son (
Luke 15.20.) he had Compassion on him, the same Word, -- He was affected with
his Misery; his Words Tears, and Poverty constrained him to Pity and Relief;
how lovingly does he receive him! he ran, fell on his Neck, and kissed him; how
nobly does he entertain him! Calls for the best Garment, for a Ring, Shoes, the
Fatted Calf is slain, and there is Feasting, Music, and Dancing.

2. Kindness, whereby I understand that Virtue which does direct us in our
Conversation, a sweetness and pleasantness in our Discourse and Behavior; not
to carry Frowns in our Countenance, not to be bitter in our Words, nor morose
in our Actions; in Company to betray no ill Humor, not to mourn in an House of
Feasting, nor to laugh in one of Mourning; but in things Lawful Civil and
Convenient to be Conformable: this our Humanity as well as our Religion does
require. So that they are much mistaken, who conceive that Christianity does
oblige us to the Sullenness of a Stoic or an Anchorite, to live like Diogenes
under his Tub, or the Hermit in his Cell.

3. Humbleness of Mind; a Virtue this which curbs us in the too eager pursuit
of Honor, directs us to entertain low Thoughts of our selves, and high of
other men. Which practiced, would be of sovereign Use in our Conversation. How
many thousand Disputes are there at this time about Precedencie in the World,
among all Orders and Degrees? Our hearts are naturally apt to swell, and the
Tempter (as of old) does endeavor to advance us to the Pinnacle of the Temple.
The Humor of the Scribes and Pharisees (noted by our Savior Matt. 23.6.) is
Epidemical; We are too apt to love the uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and the chief
Seats in the Synagogues, and greetings in the Markets, and to be called of Men
Rabbi, Rabbi. This very Leaven had sometimes infected the very Apostles
themselves; they disputed who amongst them should be the greatest, each
contending for Supremacy; now as an Antidote, what does Christ prescribe but
this Virtue? and for their Encouragement, in his own example writes them a
Copy, John 13.15.

We ought not to look on our selves and parts through a Telescope, nor to
behold the Deserts of others through a Microscope; but to make use of the
Looking-glass of the Prophet, which sets us out in our proper Colors, tells us
what we were, are and shall be, ( (...)) Earth, Earth, Earth; what we are made
of, what at present we are, and what shortly we shall be reduced unto. Thus let
us cast Dust on our Heads, and then (as has been observed of the Bees) Hi motus
animorum atque haec certa: most if not all our Contentions would vanish.

4. Meekness, a quiet and peaceable Calmness which restrains from Anger and
Revenge, which moderates and puts bounds to just Punishment. A Grace this which
goes in conjunction with Temperance, and though in its formalitie it be none of
the Capital Virtues, yet it disposes to these; one of the great Beatitudes,
Aquin. 22. l. 157. qu.
( Mat. 5.5.) and that which is highly requisite and advantageous for all
Degrees of Men, v.g. the Governor and Great man, that he do not crush those
that are below him; the Equal, that he do not usurp; and the Inferior, that he
behave himself with proportion to his Quality. Of this Virtue there are many
Offices, Properties, and many Rules to be observed; but those I wave, as being
not of this place to examine.

5. Long-suffering; We are not upon every occasion to be suddenly moved, upon
the least distaste forthwith to commence War; with the Disciples, to call
presently for Fire to burn our Enemies, ( Luke 9.57.) but to wait a while with
patience: That may be done anon, which cannot possibly for the present be
effected; in this case we should propose as a Pattern the Lord of the Vineyard,
Luke 13. who for some years withheld the Ax from the Fruitless Tree, and gave
it, in hopes of Improvement, all the Advantages of Husbandry: looking up (which
is the great Design of that Parable) to the wonderful Patience and Forbearance
of the Supreme God, who, Though he be provoked every day, does not instantly
whet his Sword, bend his Bow, and prepare his Arrows within his Quiver. --

Forbearing and Forgiving one another; Offenses will arise; even among
Christians there may be causes of Controversies; but it is very unfit, that such
should behave themselves in their Differences like the Heathen; the Apostle
requires in them those Virtues which make them prone to be reconciled; in order
whereunto, observe what a strong Reason he backs his Exhortation withal.
Forbearing one another and Forgiving one another; my Brother has offended me
now; one time or other, I may, and in all probability shall offend him (for in
many things we offend all) therefore I must be willing and ready to forgive,
that I may be upon occasion forgiven: yea the Forgiveness of his Offense, is in
effect the pardoning of my own; without which I could not in reason expect it.
A weighty Argument this, and frequently by the Apostle urged, Ephesians. 4.12. Gal.
6.1. Brethren, if a Man be overtaken in a Fault, ye which are Spiritual restore
such an one in the Spirit of Meekness, considering thy self lest thou also be
tempted.

I cannot by any means side with them who have deemed all Wars for Christians
unlawful. I have learned, That the Authority of a Prince, the Justice of the
Cause, the Sincerity of the Intention, make even an offensive War beyond all
exception justifiable. Much less can I side with them who suppose that
Christianity does manumise, take men off from all other Law; for which opinion
they produce the Abrogation of the Lex talionis, the standing Law, not only of
the Jews, but all other Nations. -- And the subsequent Words, That ye resist
not Evil; but whosoever shall smite thee on the Right Cheek, turn to him the
other also; and if any man will sue thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat,
let him have thy Cloak also. -- Mat. 5.39. and that Passage of the Apostle, 1.
Cor. 6.1, 7. Dare any of you, having a matter against another, go to Law before
the Unjust? -- Now therefore there is utterly a Fault amongst you, because ye
go to Law one with the other, why do you not rather take wrong? why do you not
suffer your selves to be defrauded? Nay you do wrong and defraud, and that your
Brethren. For there are of great Authority in the Church, who tell us, that the
intent of our Savior, in that part of his Sermon forementioned, was not to tie
up the Hands of the Magistrate, but to take men off from Revenge and private
Retaliation; and that the aforesaid Law is not in every particular abrogated,
appears in many cases; but that more especially of Murder, where Blood is
required for Blood; and that the subsequent Doctrines are not to be understood
literally, 2 Lib. de Ser. Dom. in mont.
is plain (as S. Austin reasons) from the Practice of Christ and his Apostles:
for he did not turn the Left Cheek to him that smote him on the Right, but made
some resistance, John 18.23. and the like we find of St. Paul, Acts 23.3. and
chapter 16.37.

And for answer to the other place, the Apostle (as appears from the whole
Text) does not simply condemn the Law, but the Irregularity in the Use thereof:
he checks the Corinthians for being too forward and hasty to engage in Law, and
for appealing to the Tribunals of Infidels, for the determination of their
Controversies.

Christianity does not require of her Proselytes, that they be easy Fools to
part with their Possessions without the least Resistance. Religion is not
destructive of each Man's Propriety, of which the Law is Judge, or rather the
Rule, without which there would be no living in the World. If this frantic
Position were admitted, most Christians would publicly be reduced to a
condition like (if not worse than) that of the twelve Apostles, be, not only
without Variety of Garments, but want necessary Clothing; without Gold and
Silver, and Money in their Purses. If so, the command of selling all that they
had was needless; and not only some Men of an order, but the whole Religion,
would in a short time become Mendicants. The same Apostle teaches us that the
Law is good, if a Man use it lawfully, 1 Timothy 1.8. and how that is to be done
for a Right understanding of the present Rule, How, When, and Whom we ought to
Forbear and Forgive. In this as its pro per place may be resolved, the Subject
of these four following Conditions.

1. Cond. Christians were not to use the Law with Delight and Study. There are
some, who (like the Salamanders) covet to live in the Fire; are out of their
Element, if they are not themselves fighting, or setting others by the Ears.
Men o'regone with the Itch of Contention, who love the noise of Courts, and
think their time misspent, if some business does not call them to the Assizes;
who deem it an Argument of Generosity to enter the List, and be perpetually
struggling with Enemies. An humor this, very opposite to the peaceable Ties of
Christianity in general, and in particular to the present Direction of
Forbearing and Forgiving one another. A Practice so noxious, as that the Law
does not only brand, but make provision for its punishment, and that in more
Senses than one, viz. such who shall incite, persuade and egg others on to wage
Law: and such likewise, who themselves shall disturb others by frequent and
vexatious Lawsuits, ranking both under the name of Barretors; who without any
wrong may be called the Caterpillars of the Nation.

2. Cond. That Law ought to be used not as the first, but as the last Remedy.
Lawsuits may not unfitly be compared to the Cupping-glasses, Scarifyings, and
Salivations of the Physician, to the Knife and Saw of the Surgeon: means
never used but in desperate Cases, and as the last Remedies. What else is
inculcated by those Heavenly Directions? If it be possible as much as lies in
you, live peaceably with all men, Romans 12.18. Study to be quiet, 1 These. 4.11.
and endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace. Ephesians.
4.3. and Romans 14.19. Heb. 12.14. All which Expressions carry an Elegance in the
Original, requiring our utmost Industry. As in matters of Scandal, so also in
Wrongs, we are to observe that Method by our Savior proposed Mat. 18.15. If
thy Brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee
and him alone; if he shall hear thee thou have gained thy Brother; -- but if he
will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more; -- and if he shall
neglect to hear them, tell it to the Church. -- Upon any wrong we are privately
to reason the Case and demand Redress, if this Expedient do not succeed: in the
next place we are to use the Assistance of a good Friend or two; and when they
cannot prevail, we may lawfully appeal to the Magistrate for Relief. If this
Course were taken (which our Religion directs us to) how many Controversies
would die in their Abortion? how much Charge to our selves, and Trouble to
others would be prevented? what? (says the Apostle) is there not a wise Man
amongst you? Aq. 12. q. 2.
not one that can judge between his Brethren? 1. Cor. 6.5. The Law is founded
upon Reason, Humane Law upon the Law of Nature. Whereupon I conceive it
possible for Men wholly ignorant of the Law in its formalitie, to be able to
decide aright; and if the Case be a proper Case of Law, why may not the Advice
of the Learned therein (the matter on both sides being rightly stated) be as
effectual as their Pleading at the Bar, and the Verdict of twelve Men, that
certainly are not Infallible, that may be either ignorant or resolute? For my
part I know not why these, or such like means being used, most Controversies
among Christians may not with lesser Noise, lesser Charge, and far lesser
Inconvenience be ended at home. If after all these, men will be unreasonable,
such deserve to be delivered over to the Law to be severely scourged.

3. Cond. Lawsuits are not to be commenced about Trifles. It Is not to be
conceived amidst Societies, where Estates are contiguous, but that there will
be mutual Trespasses: now for such to contend, would be highly unreasonable; if
I am trespassed to day, I may be a Trespasser to morrow. How much then am I
concerned to forbear the Commencing of a Suit, which in the consequence must
fall heavy on my self, and open a Gap to endless Controversies? How much rather
should I have recourse to the present advice of Forbearing and Forgiving one
another, and declare by my Practice, that in my Prayers I am not guilty either
of Hypocrisy or Contradiction? It Is no small Scandal to that Religion, whose
Badge is Love and Peace, to behold its Proselytes like Dogs and Wolves in their
behavior, taking each other by the Throat for a thing of an inconsiderable
value, heaping no small Trouble and Charges to themselves and others; and that
to the advantage of none but the Lawyer. Whoever will be pleased to make the
observation, shall easily discern the great abuse of the Law. In this regard
the occasion too often de Lana Caprina, pedibus ambulando etc. some pitiful
worthless thing, which whether had or lost makes not a farthing odds. Examine
we the ancient Records, and have recourse to the present Practices, and we
shall have very many and undeniable Arguments to confirm us in the present
abuse.

4. Cond. To go to Law in Love, and to design nothing in the Suit but Relief:
this is a necessary though it be a difficult Condition, and as is too apparent
from the general practices of men, seldom or never observed; for no sooner is
an Action brought, but that the Parties Litigant set forth their Flags of
Defiance to each other, -- forgetting they are Christians, yea Men. How many
Cases are there, wherein the Law is made Use of only as a Pretense, a Pandar to
Malice and Envy, an Instrument taken up for no other end, but to accomplish the
ruin of an Adversary. I wish the World would convince me of Falsehood here;
but I fear it is so manifest, as that it will on all hands be granted without
any denial. What Is that which set the Roman Generals by the Ears, but the Pride
of each others Hearts, and their Emulation? -- And we are likewise told, that
an old grudge was the true cause of all those Vexations which befell the
Trojans. -- I leave the Application of these Heathen-passages to you. -- There
must be some Pretense to Justify the Controversy in Court, a Trespass, a
Privilege, a Title. Whereas withdraw the Curtain, and (in all likelihood) you
shall discover an old Sore within: the Furies will appear in their proper
Colors, and where these bear Sway, it is no difficult matter to find out
somewhat that shall set the Wheels a going. If Jezebel be disposed to take away
at once the Life and Vineyard of Naboth, ('it is an easy matter to find a Staff
to beat a Dog,) the Devil will quickly put her into the Road-way, direct her to
proclaim a Fast, and procure Sons of Belial for her purpose. When Men will be
quarrelsome, they shall not want Pretenses. Under this Head, those great Men
are highly to be charged, who depending on their Power, will not do that which
is just, but weary the mean Man out by Law. Such also who design not so much
Satisfaction to themselves in Lawsuits, as Trouble, Charge, and Ruin to their
Adversaries. And such likewise, who use extreme Rigor to Poor and unhappy
Debtors, who have not wherewithal to pay: whereas would men have recourse to
the present Rule (of Forbearing and Forgiving one another) all these would be
abhorred. Did we but consider those many Talents which we owe and cannot
possibly satisfy: how could we deal hardly with those poor Debtors of ours
that owe us a few Farthings. Did we weigh the Quality and Quantity of those
Transgressions which put us deep in Score; which if not blotted out, nothing
but an Eternity of Misery will attend us: How little Reason then have we, to
pursue with Vehemence and Passion those that have offended us? We are here
commanded to Forbear and Forgive, as we hope to be Forgiven.

7. The last Virtue to be put on is Charity. But above all put on Charity. A
Virtue this, more especially required in the New-Man. Which makes the Apostle
with a strict Charge to renew his Exhortation, above all; praeter, super, and
propter omnia, as it is diversely rendered. -- This, to follow the Metaphor of all
Garments, is the most principal, it is as a Girdle which knits all the rest
together. As in Christianity the New Creature is the All in All; so that which
gives Life, Being and Splendour to that, is Charity: the first, the middle and
the last. Here it perfects and compleats, elsewhere it leads the way to other
Graces. As without it, The Tongues of Men and Angels are insignificant; so they
are unable sufficiently to express the Praise of it. In the Determination of
the Schools, it is the very Life of Faith; in St. James his Divinity, an
undeniable Argument of a living Faith; and by our Savior noted as the great
(...) or Badge of Discipleship. John 13.35. A Cardinal Grace, from whence as
from a Fountain, most (if not all the forementioned) flow. For, where there is
a right Christian-Charity, there cannot but be Bowels of Mercies, Kindness,
Humbleness of Mind, Meekness, Long-suffering; the truly Charitable will be
ready to Forbear and Forgive. In brief, this is the Golden-rule, and the
Gospel-law; a sure Friend that will follow us to another World, and render us
acceptable in the Day of Judgment; that will remain when other Graces shall be
done away. I shall speak no more of this, but refer you to 1 Corinthians. 13.

Hitherto have I set before you the Old Man, together with its Spoils; -- the
principal parts of the New Creature, in reference to our duty each to other. I
come now to propose some Arguments, which may prevail to the putting of it on;
my Third Part:

Nothing is so significant as this: For in Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision
avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a New Creature.

Arg. 1. And here in the first place, I think it not unfitting to urge you with
an Argument from Nature. See how every Being puts off its Old, and calls for
New Attire. The Fields by their Fresh Verdure, tell us plainly, that they are
exchanging their Sackcloth, and put on new Apparel: and though Flora by the
Stroke of Winter, as by Age sullyed, had contracted Baldness and Deformity,
within a few days she will shake off the Hagg, and grow young again. Behold the
Trees, they have cast off their old Fruit and Leaves are stripped naked, and
all in order to new Apparel. Consider the Lilies, they are committed to their
Interment, which makes way to a splendid Resurrection; they are withdrawn to
their Attiring Rooms, and will shortly come forth with a glory by far
furpassing that of Kings. Nor is this less visible in the Sensitive Beings. The
Birds of the Air part with their old Plumes, and appear clad with a new Garb;
each betraying, by his chirping Note, Youth and Vigor reassumed with the
Season. The Beasts of the Field in like sort, by their Briskness and Activity,
proclaim to the World no small Alteration. Those who have a long time layen
within their Cells buried, as in a deep Slumber, will now Begin to move and
come to life again. Nay even the Serpent changes his Skin. As then the Pismire
teaches the Sluggard Diligence, so should the Creatures in the present
Contemplation, powerfully inculcated by the Doctrine of the Text. All the
Beings of the lower World, by the Benefit of the Heavenly Influences, and the
unalterable Law of Nature, with the Year are renewed. What then can we do less,
but abandon the Old Man, and make after the New Creature?

Arg. 2. But if this Argument do not prevail, being fiter for an Orator than a
Divine; be pleased in the next place to consider, how that the Church in her
Service, at this New Years Day.
time more especially does direct us hitherto. The Savior of the World was
now, in Conformity to the Law, Circumcised; which being a judicial Right, and
by the people abolished (as no ways advantageous) does notwithstanding in its
particular instance point hitherto. The Epistle Romans 4.8. directs us in the
pursuit of such a Faith as Abraham had, before he received the Seal of the
Covenant. Now this Faith of the great Patriarch worked by Love, which runs
parallel with the expression of the Text. And then, though we are Gentiles, we
have unquestionable Right to Filiation. We are Lawful and True Sons of the
Circumcised Jew, and shall without this Rite, have an undeniable Title to the
Blessing. And the Collect teaches us to pray For the true Circumcision of the
Spirit, the Mortification of our Hearts and Members from all Worldly Lusts, in
order to Obedience and Conformity to Christ's will in every thing; and what is
that, but the New Creature? Religion does not oblige us to the cutting off the
Flesh of our Foreskin; but it necessarily requires that which by this Ceremony
was shaddowed out and typified. We are not with the Pharisees to wash and
furbish the Outside of the Dish and Platter; but to have due regard to the
cleaning of the Heart, the Fountain which makes our Thoughts, Words and Actions
either good or bad. The great Design of Christ in his Gospel was, To redeem us
from all Iniquity, and to purify to himself a peculiar People, Zealous of good
Works, Tit. 2.14. The most demonstrative Argument of our Christianity, is an
Holy Change; and we may conclude, That we are Risen with Christ, if with ardent
Affection we seek those things that are above; if our earthly Members are
mortified: if we have put off the Old Man and put on the New, which after God,
is created in Righteousness and true Holiness.

Arg. 3. An Argument drawn from the very Life and Essence of Christianity.
Without the New Creature, those Prayers which we make are an abomination to the
Lord, our Sabbaths and holy Performances his Soul abhors, our whole Religion
is vain. We may make broad our Phylacteries, Compass the Sea and Land to gain
Proselytes, make a fair Show in the World; but without the qualification of the
Text, we can be no other than the Brats of the Wicked One, who is never more a
Devil, than when he appears in the Form of a Cherubin. Men (says the Prince of
our Salvation) Do not gather Grapes off Thorns, nor Figgs off Thistles. The
Apostle lays down this as a Maxim, 2 Cor. 5.17. He that is in Christ is a new
Creature; and further assures us, Gal. 5.24. That they that are Christ's, have
Crucified the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts.

You see our Profession requires no small Change. The Old Adam must be
renounced, that the New may be entertained; the Flesh swallowed up by the
Spirit; our Senses must be forbidden to entertain Vanity, our Eyes dim-sighted
to irregular Glances, our Feet lame to the Path of Iniquity, our Palates dead
to the draught of alluring Pleasure, our Ears (according to the President of
the wise Ithacan) must be stopped against the Mermaids Songs: Pleasure must not
entice, nor Profit must not entangle us; Delilah must not draw us down to
Timnah, nor Lais put us upon a Journey to Corinth. Achan's Wedge must not be
the Diana, the Idol-Goddess of thy Heart. All Vice in general, and especially
the more leading, are inconsistent to Christian Religion. Thou must take thy
leave of thine unsufferable Ambition: if thou desire to be one of his
Servants who hates, beholds afar off, resists the Proud; but gives Grace
unto the humble: thou must part with the sweet Sin of Revenge; the God whom
thou servest, challenges this as his Prerogative, Numb. 12.18. Vengeance is
mine, and I will repay it. If thou will be a devout Follower of the Great
Galilean, thou must give a Bill of Divorce to Anger, Malice, Envy; -- not be
guilty of foul mouthed Language; but observe the Rule of Yea, Yea, and Nay,
Nay. Thou must turn the left Cheek to him that smites thee on the Right; part
with thy Coat, to him that takes away thy Cloak. And what is a task of far
greater difficulty, Love thine Enemies, Bless them that Curse thee, do good to
them that hate thee, pray for them that despitefully use and persecute thee.
Mat. 5.44. Forgive not only seven, but seventy times seven Trespasses.

These I take not to be Counsels, i. e. Doctrines delivered by way of Advice to
the Sons of Zebedee, those who propose to themselves the Right Hand, and the
Left Hand of Christ in his Kingdom, places of Supremacy in Heaven, as the
Patriots of the Roman Church would persuade us; but formal Precepts, to which
in their right sense all Christians are obliged. Is it not the great Design of
Christ's Sermon on the Mount, and his others, to refine and exalt his
Followers, not only above the Dregs, but the strictest sect among Mankind;
being required to live above the Publicane, and upon the greatest penalty to
exceed the Scribe and Pharisee in Righteousness?

They are the Commands of our General who, not (as the Pharisees) obliges our
Backs to these heavy Burdens, which he would not touch himself; but in this
like Caesar, who was never observed to bid his Soldiers Go, but Come. In his
Practice he leads us the way, and frequently proposes his Example for a Pattern
for our Imitation. -- Be ye Perfect as I am Perfect, -- Holy as I am Holy, --
Learn of me. Trace his Life, and see how eminently those Virtues which he
requires of us, shine forth in him: v. g. His Bowels of Mercy, his Meekness,
Humbleness, Long-suffering. Now he serves, to teach his Disciples
Condescension, anon he washes their Feet, thereby reading them a lively Lecture
of their Comportment eath to other. -- He refuses to be made King; -- He takes
no notice of the many Revilings he met withal; in his Sufferings, he expresses
unparallel Patience; being led as a Sheep to the Slaughter, and as a Lamb dumb
before his Shearers, opened he not his Mouth.

Let us for our Encouragement see how after this Copy the Primitive Converts
did write; upon their admission we shall discover them far different from what
they were (like Abraham in his Journey toward Mesopotamia) Taking leave of
their Country and kindred, and Fathers House; or as the Kings Daughter in the
Psalmist, Psalm. 45.10. Forgetting her own People and her Fathers House. Parting
with all their Carnal Affections.

St. Matthew upon his Call does quit his Office; abhorring nothing more than
his former Trade of living. A Disciple must not be a Publicane.

Zaccheus is no sooner called down from the Sycamore-tree, to be engrafted in
the true Vine; no sooner affected with Christianity; but he publishes it by an
Alteration wonderful; he no sooner receives Christ within his House, but he
resigned the full Possession of his Heart: he testifies his Repentance by that
Restitution which he makes (the surest mark of unfeigned Contrition in the
present Case:) the Sincerity of his Faith, by the measure of his Charity: --
Lord the half of my Goods I give to the Poor; and if I have taken any thing
from any man by false Accusation, I restore him fourfold, Luke 19.8. See
farther how the New Creature shines forth in Mary Magdalen after her
Conversion; we have great reason to suppose the former part of her life
notoriously wicked, from that Hellish Crew which quartered with her: For if one
single Devil create no small Extravagancie where he is: what wickedness shall
not seven Devils united practice? Beside, she is described to be a Sinner, Luke
7.37. i. e. not as some in favor (as they think) to Christianity and its
present Proselyte, upon a great mistake have construed an ordinary Sinner: but
it is with the unanimous consent of Antiquity agreed on, that the expression
denotes her one lewd and unclean; and if not actually such, yet little less
than a Prostitute. And so no sooner are the Devils driven out, but that the
Flesh is subdued, and she becomes quite another thing; she is a constant
Attender on our Savior: whilst her Sister is busied about the Cares of the
World, She has her Eye on the grand Concern, the one thing necessary. She
provides a Box of Ointment costly and odoriferous, against his Funeral: washes
his Feet with her Tears, and wipes them with the Hairs of her Head: She laments
him Crucified, is the first Woman upon Record, who prevented the Dawning of the
day, to enquire after his Resurrection. Though the Apostles forsake him and
fly, she scorns to flinch; is the first Preacher of the Resurrection, and, as
one calls her, Apostolorum Apostola, the Doctress of the Apostles. If after all
this we call to mind the Carriage of the Protomartyr, we have a new motive to
duty. His Conversation was like his Countenance, of which St. Luke Records,
That it did shine like an Angel, Acts 6. ult. He has nothing of the Old Man in
him; he requires the Malice, Cruelty and Envy of his Enemies, with an high Act
of Charity and Zeal; he is praying for them, while they are stoning him: when
they are putting an end to his Mortal Life, he Petitions the Throne of Grace
for their Forgiveness, and consequently their Conversion: And some of his
Persecutors reaped the benefit of his Devotions, It being a received Opinion,
Ecclesia non habuisset Paulum nisi orasset Stephanus; God answering his Prayer
by the Conversion of St. Paul; which affords us another Instance:

What he was before his Conversion, is so plain from his own and St. Lukes
account, as that none can be ignorant of it. He consented to S. Stephens Death;
he breathed out Threatenings and Slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord; to
effect which, he procured of the High Priest a Commission: some he Imprisoned,
others he persecuted to strange Cities. One sufficiently wicked and bloody both
in his Intentions and Actions.

But no sooner is he smitten, and hears a Voice, but that he becomes quite
another Creature; he trembling and astonishing said, Lord what will thou have
me to do? Acts 9.6. The Lion is changed into the Lamb; the bold Persecutor
relents; those very hands which lately were the Instruments of the Slaughter,
are now (like those of Moses) lifted up to God for the Preservation of the
Saints: his Tongue forgetting to Blaspheme, knows no other Language but that of
Canaan: his stubborn Knees are Pliant, bending in their Devotion, as their
proper posture: Behold he prays! Acts 9.11. He is a chosen Vessel to bear
God's Name before the Gentiles and Kings, and Children of Israel: he refuses no
Labors or Difficulties: with boldness he Preaches the Gospel before the
Philosophers and Rulers; for the Testimony whereof, he is as willing to
sacrifice his dearest Blood, as before he thirsted to take it from others. The
Destroyer at length is become the Builder, with no small advantage to the
Church, repairing those Breaches which he in times past made. So he tells us,
He would gladly spend and be spent: he is ready not only to be bound, but also
to suffer for the Name of the Lord Jesus; And come what will come, he is
resolved to preach that Faith which once he did destroy. He is all Bowels and
Love, who before was all Hatred and Malice. It Is this that brings him from one
part of the World to the other; that puts him upon writing his Epistles; and to
his great loss, to desire a longer continuance in this miserable World; yea so
high and towering is the Charity of this great Doctor, as that he gives us an
Instance which has not a second: He could wish himself accursed from Christ
for his Brethren and Kinsmens sake, Romans 9.3.

Nor was the New Creature the Badge of Christianity in its Infancy only; Apol.
1. ad Senate. Romans
upon examination we shall find it to be the Shibboleth in after-Ages: for thus
Justin Martyr tells us, That the Woman who formerly was incontinent, upon her
Conversion became Chaste and Sober. -- And he farther relates, how that
Ptolomeus professing himself a Christian, by Urbitius being condemned: Lucius
another Christian, (...). etc.
openly upbraids the Governor with the unjustness of the Sentence, being
passed on a Man of unblameable Conversation. What Is the reason that he is thus
punished who is no Adulterer, Fornicator, Murderer, Thief, Extortioner? -- And
in his second Apol. 2. ad Antenin.
Apology, he had this passage, We who formerly rejoiced in Adulteries, now
greedily embrace Chastity: we who addicted our selves to Magical Arts, now
wholly devote our selves to God: we who Idolized Riches and Worldly substance,
now have all things in common, distributing to the Indigent: we who did burn
with mutual Hatred and Envy, now are loving, and pray for our Enemies. --

In like sort Tertullian urges the Testimony of an Enemy, Apol.
Pliny the second who in an Epistle to Trajan, has this Passage: that the
Christians, for ought he could perceive, beside their obstinacy in refusing to
sacrifice to the Emperor, had nothing in their Sacred Rites, but that they were
wont to meet before day to sing Praises to Christ and God: forbidding Murder,
Adultery, Deceit, and other Wickedness; -- And further does assure us, that the
Change of the Primitive Christians was so eminently visible, as that their very
Enemies could not choose but confess them to be good Men; they had no fault to
lay to their Charge but this, that thy were Christians. -- Whereas in truth
this (as another has observed) was the Fountain of all their Virtues.
Lactantius.
And when some by reason of their Night-Assemblies, took occasion to accuse
them, as carrying on Designs of Rebellion, Murder, Thievery, Uncleanness: --
He largly purges them from these, asserting them to be the Pillars of their
Age; that they lived up to the great Principle of their Profession, not to
wish, do, think, or speak evil of any. -- That it was not out of want either of
Opportunity or power, that they did not revenge themselves upon their Enemies;
only their Religion does restrain them. -- He dares their Adversaries to find
out among them a Traitor, Robber, Murderer, any notoriously wicked. -- They
are altogether what single, united what divided; they hurt none, they grieve
none; of a sober, chaste, and Godly Carriage; the only innocent persons. --
Their Religion has exalted them to an higher Eminency than ever the most
refined among the Heathens could pretend to. -- Democritus had no other way,
but to pull out his Eyes, that he might not behold Vanity; whereas the Devout
Christian can look on a Beauty without Lusting after her. The Philosophers of
the strictest Sect and greatest Note, have betrayed Pride, Vainglory,
Cowardice, Baseness; of which he gives many Examples; but the Christians are
guilty of none of these. --

In this Argument, as the most irrefragable; the Primitive Writers think that
they have good reason to triumph over their Enemies. Origin con. Cells. lib. 2.
p. 85.
One tells his Adversary (no mean Philosopher as well as Heretic) That the
Doctrine of Christians did Convert the most Vicious Persons from their former
Debaucheries, to the practice of Temperance and all other Virtues.

I conclude this with that Elegant Passage of Lactantius; Lib. 3. Fall. Sap. c.
26.
the power of Philosophy is but impotence in comparison to that of true
Religion; of the former, Nature gets the upper hand; so that the Philosopher
after all his Documents, (like the Dog) returns to his Vomit. This Physic is
not efficacious to a perfect Cure, but he falls of course into a Relapse;
whereas the force of Christian Religion is wonderful; of which there are every
day's Examples: whereupon he makes this Challenge, Bring me the Man that is
Angry, Ill-natured, Stubborn; by a Lecture from Christianity I Will make him as
gentle as a Lamb. Bring me the Man that is pinching and Covetous; I Will make him
truly Liberal, distributing with both his Hands. Bring the Man that is afraid
of Pain and Death: I Will make him so truly Valiant, that he shall not be moved
at the Fire and Faggot; he shall despise even the Bull of Phalaris. Bring me
the Man that is incontinent and gluttonous: I Will make him chaste and sober.
Bring me the Man that is cruel and blood-thirsty: I Will make him merciful. Bring
me an Extortioner, or any other sinner: and in a short time, I Will make the same
person just and innocent. The Washing or Regeneration purifies from all Malice;
and the force of true Religion is such, as that it puts to flight the Old Man.

Now if Christian Religion heretofore wrought in the manners of Men so heavenly
a Change, how much does it concern us who profess the same, to give the World a
Testimony by the like Demonstration, that we are not Whited Sepulchers, as
founding Brass, and tinkling Cymbals: Christians, not only in Show, but in
Truth?

This Argument I have handled more largely, because I look on it as the most
genuine, and substantial of the Text. I pass for your Encouragement to others.

Arg. 4. The living in the practice of the aforesaid Duties shall bespeak us
truly gentile.

I have always been of opinion, that true Gentility carries in it somewhat
more than ordinary. A generous Stream of Virtuous and Heroic Qualities circle
in noble Veins. The Son of Hector betrays Courage in his Cradle; by the Benefit
whereof, upon the Top of the Tower over which he is to be thrown, he can at
once look his Enemies and Death in the Face. Such as are nobly descended, can
(like the Offspring of the Eagle) behold things splendid as their proper
Object, which would dazzle the Eyes of the Dunghilbreed. Whereupon it is obvious
to observe, that even Afflictions cannot alter their Nature; though oppressed,
they will not be overcome; though under straights, they betray still a generous
Soul: they scorn Actions dirty and Sordid. -- To prey upon Flies, to pilfer
and undo them that are below them; in their Carriage full of Courtesy.
Whereas those of the Mushrom Production, betray low and ignoble Spirits, and
(like that Creature in the Fable) by a sordid Port, plainly discover themselves
under the Lion's Skin. Julius Capitolinus tells, that from the Vicious, Dirty,
and Sordid Behavior of Commodus, In Vit. Ant. natum Com. gladiatorem in
principem.
'twas generally concluded, that he was not the Son of Antoninus, but of some
Ruffian Hector. -- There was no Ranter, no Hogherd, no Villain like him. He
that lives not up to the principles of Generosity and Prowess, does plainly
argue himself to degenerate; is the disgrace of his Family, and gives a Blot to
his Escutcheon.

Now will any affirm, that this is gentile, to be o'rewhelmed with Pride and
Cruelty? to take pleasure in the Ruin of our Fellow Creatures? Is it an Act of
Fortitude (like Saul among the Amalekites) to crush those that are not able to
resist us? Is it an Argument of a large Soul (like the Dog in the Manger) to
bite and bark; and prohibit that to others, which to our selves is both
useless and cumbersome?

The King of Beasts spares the Prostrate, will not exercise his Strength where
he meets with no opposition. To destroy a weak, punie and beggarly Enemy, is
not a Victory but Disparagement. We are not born for our selves alone; our
Country, Kindred and Fellow-denisons claim a share. This single Inducement made
many of the Heathens to prefer the Public Good, before their Private Interests.

Believe it Sirs, we shall appear highly gentile by Acts of Love, Mercy, and
Meekness; by giving (as the Roman Emperors were wont upon great Solemnities)
largesses to others; by relieving and maintaining the Poor; by pleading the
Cause of the Fatherless and Widow; by furthering the good of others, and doing
what Service we can in our own Generation. Hither Nature does direct us (if the
great Philosopher were not mistaken) every Being runs out of his way, for the
Preservation of the Universe. -- And if we have recourse to the Sun, Moon and
Stars, the Host of Heaven: Lo, they Dart their Rays, and vouchsafe their
Influencies to all without Exception; to the lowest as well as highest, to the
worst equally with the best of Creatures. If we look above the Heavens, and
consider the Actions of the Supreme; he has no small care of the meanest
Creatures; he is full of Bowels, Patience, Long-suffering; he prosecutes his
Enemies with unparalled acts of Love; and what higher Inducement can be
desired? In this chiefly we shall be like him; bespeak our selves nobly
descended; and if not from some ancient Family, and great House; yet from the
most glorious King and Empirean Palace; and not only in the sense of Aratus,
but a more approved, even that of our Savior: we shall declare our selves his
Offspring, Mat. 5.44. -- That ye may be the Children of your Father which is
in Heaven: for he makes his Sun to rise on the Evil, and on the Good; and
sends Rain on the Just and on the Unjust.

Arg. 5. Such Acts as these; as they bespeak us truly gentile, so are they
highly obliging. The Sun by its warmth and gentle Rays, gains from the
Traveller that Coat which the blustering Wind fastened closer to him. Much more
is to be accomplished by Kindness, than by all the methods of Severity. It Is
confessed, Tyrants may compel and make their Vassals pliant; by extreme rigor
I may bring many to my beck, but I cannot keep them there. This is a Method to
treat a Slave withal, one who has shaken off all Humanity. This may render thee
terrible; but at the same time thou shall not be without daily Fears and
Trepidations. Like the brute beasts, they will be serviceable no longer than
they are under the Yoke; being released they will rebel, and upon the first
occasion become thy greatest Enemies. Whereupon we find the severest Tyrants to
have lived most miserable lives; their own fears at least equal if not greater
than those of their Slaves; they fancy Poison mixed with their Meat and Drink;
they sleep not without Jealousies; and as we read of Dionysius in Cicero: they
choose rather to singe their Beards, than trust a Barber.

Whereas the Cords of Love are easy, pleasant and strong. Men take delight to
be caught in these, and to be led where you please. The best allowable and most
lasting Philtre to command the Affections of Men, is a sweet and virtuous
Carriage: be kind and obliging to those that are round about thee; and their
good Wishes, Presents and Services are at thy Devotion. 'Twas by such Acts as
these, that Caesar arrived to that height he did; he was always kind and
liberal to his Soldiers, sharing with them in all Dangers and Straights; upon
every occasion dividing among them the Spoils of their Enemies, and sometimes
the Treasure even of Rome. He knocked off the Shackles which those before him
had put on; easing many of their severe Impositions. In his Carriage toward his
Enemies, full of Pity and Forgiveness; the former made his Troops more
numerous every day than other; the latter still lessened his Adversaries: all
made way to the Motto of veni, vidi, vici: Decad. 1. Lib. 5.
Entitled him to a universal Conquest. It Is a brave Passage which the Historian
Livie has observed of Camillus the Roman General, when he sat before the Town
of the Falisci, closely besieging it; a certain Pedagogue, to whom was
committed the Care and Management of the chief Youth of the Place; comes to the
Besieger, brings with him his Scholars; and withal tells him, that they were
the beloved Sons of his Enemies within; and therefore if he pleased to take
them, the City upon their account, would be forced to surrender suddenly: the
Politics to the present end must be acknowledged effectual; but they are too
base for the Noble Roman to stoop unto; whereupon in detestation of the
Councellor and Advice, he commands the Rennegado-Traytor to be stripped naked,
and each Youth with a Rod in his hand to whip the treacherous Villain back
again into the Town; thereby declaring to his Enemies, that he scorned Victory
by so base a means.

Now see the event: this high Passage took so mightily with those within, as
that they presently yielded up the City and themselves to Camillus; making it
the matter of their Choice to be under the Government of so brave a Man. His
Love makes way where his Sword cannot; and when Arms are ineffectual, Mercy
gains the Town.

Arg. 6. This gets us Repute among our Enemies; we are taught that it is the
Glory of a Man to pass by an Offense. The Noble Philosopher and Emperor who
lived (if any) suitable to his Doctrine, Capitolin. in Vita
and found the benefit of it himself; having gained upon the Affections of all
( unice amabant says the Historian) Tells us that Love and Meekness are things
unconquerable: for how shall even the most fierce and malicious be able to hold
on against thee, if thou shall still continue meek and loving to him? And even
at that time when he shall do thee wrong, thou shall be well disposed toward
him? And what is this, but the very Doctrine of the Scripture, which directs us
to the Practice of Virtue and Goodness, as the surest Expedient to overcome
Evil. Romans 12.20. If thine Enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him
Drink: for in so doing, thou shall heap Coals of Fire on his Head.

Arg. 7. Such Acts as these shall exalt thee in the World. Thou can not
propose to thy self a better Fortress to thy Castle; 'twill set it above, or at
least make it sufficient Proof against all Storms; whilst the Habitation of the
Proud is Slippery. The Cedar dwindles into a Shrub; his Greatness ends in
Shame; suddenly do they perish, and come to a fearful end. That man is the
Glory of his Age, in whom Mercy and Truth meet together. Righteousness and
Peace go hand in hand; Sueton. in Tito.
and upon a much better account than that Emperor to whom 'twas given, deserve
the Title of Amor and Deliciae humanae generis, the Darling and Delight of
Mankind.

It Is observable, when the Prophet describes the Man that fears the Lord; he
chooses to do it by those Virtues which he does exert toward Man, Psalm. 112.
He is Gracious and full of Compassion, Righteous, v. 4. he is one that lends;
v. 5. he is known by his Acts of Charity; he disperseth and gives to the Poor.
-- Now for your Encouragement be pleased to add to these former, one
Observation more, viz. how many and great Blessings wait on this man. 1. His
Seed shall be mighty upon Earth. 2. Wealth and Riches shall be in his House,
and his Righteousness endures for ever. 3. To him there arises Light in
Darkness. 4. He shall not be moved for ever, but had in everlasting
Remembrance. 5. He shall not be afraid of Evil Tidings, his Heart is
established. 6. He shall see his desire upon his Enemies; and to their no small
grief, his House shall be exalted with Honor. --

Are there, or can there be greater temporal Blessings than these, the beloved
Objects of all? What would the Proud man give for Honor? The Angry, Envious
and Malicious, that they might have their purpose upon their Enemies? But these
by Their Mediums are not to be obtained. The Devil, though he be very prodigal
in his Promises, is very sparing in his Performance; he does deceive the
Senses, and delude the Expectations of his Servants. The Kingdoms of the World,
and the Glory of them, in the conclusion prove Golden Mountains, Chimaera's.
The Sinner instead of Honor meets with Disgrace; when he thinks he has
obtained his purpose, he clasps a Shadow; has no other Fruit of all his Toil,
but what the Apostle has noted, Romans 6. ult. Death. Whereas, if the Word of God
be true, the forementioned Blessings shall attend the Righteous Man: Those that
live in the Practice of these Virtues shall be exalted in the World like so
many Cities upon Hills, for as the same Prophet has elsewhere noted, Psalm.
37.6. It Is Righteousness that makes men shine as the Light, and just Dealing as
the Noonday.

Arg. 8. This shall entitle us to the Prayers and Services of those that are
round about us. The Centurion though a Gentile, by his Acts of Piety and
Munificence, had so endeared the Jews unto him, as that upon every occasion
they are his humble Servants, Luke 7. one of his Attendants is sick, and they
make to the Physician, beseeching him that he would heal him, being the Servant
of a Worthy Man, who loved their Nation, and built them a Synagogue. Where
there is any Humanity our Love and Kindness will be requited: The Poor at our
Doors which we have fed and clad, will be our Solicitors to the Throne of
Grace. The Widow and Fatherless whose Cause we have pleaded. -- Those Friends
whom we have reconciled -- forborne: -- been any ways beneficial to; will be the
Heralds of our Praise, and study occasions to do us good. And who knows how
beneficial the Prayers and Services of such may be to us? God may gratify them
in their Requests for us, when we cannot prevail for our selves: For 'twas the
Centurions Faith, that induced our Savior to heal his Servant; Mat. 8.13. And
the Faith of others is recorded the occasion of the Cure of the Paralytical,
Mat. 9.2. Thus also Potipher fares the better for Joseph's sake, Genesis 39.5. And
when we resign our Tabernacles to Dust, our Funerals shall be like that of St.
Stephen, attended with the Lamentations of Devout Men: or, as we read of
Dorcas, Acts 9.36.39. Those whom she relieved appeared in her Livery, they
proclaimed abroad her Charity, and dropped Tears upon her Hearse. The like
Threnodies we have often heard. -- Alas he was a good Man! beneficial and
advantageous in his Generation; the Fatherless, the Poor, the Oppressed, the
Widow, the Labourer -- will find him wanting: It had been happy for us had he
continued longer here.

Such Acts as these shall perfume thy Grave, and perpetuate thy Memory.

Arg. 9. An happy Passage out of this World, is the main end of our Life; our
last Enemy is terrible, and the Dominions of Darkness are full of stench:
wherefore our greatest Endeavor should be to take away the sting of the one,
and sweeten the other. To these ends, some put far from them the Evil Day. The
Epicure uses the Charm of a (...) -- And the rich man spares no Cost in the
preservatives which either Art or Nature can afford: whereas there is no such
Expedient as the living in the discharge of the aforesaid Virtues. This will
make the stroke of Death pleasant, and render thy Sepulcher (like that of the
Arimathean prepared for our Savior) full of Spices: St. Chrysostom.
For thus one of the Ancients tells us, The Righteous Man, when he beholds
Death a coming, which he always looked on as present, is not surprised or
troubled as other Men, entertains it not as an Enemy, but as a Friend. If upon
thy Summons thou can say with Hezekiah; Lord, I have walked before thee in
Truth, and with a perfect Heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight,
Isa. 38.3. Thou have reason to conclude with David, I will lay me down in Peace
and take my rest; -- wherefore my Heart was glad, my Glory rejoiced, my Flesh
shall also rest in Hope. I have, according to my ability, done good in my
Generation; I have exercised my Bowels and Love upon occasion: and where I have
been deficient, I have and do beg with Humility and Contrition, Pardon: I have
a good Conscience, and a Gracious God; I trust in his Promises, and hope for
Mercy in the time of need. And forasmuch as Men cannot be immortal in their
Persons here, they covet to be so in their Memories: which they are willing to
purchase at any rate. Whereupon one leaps into the Mouth of Aetna, that he
might be talked of in after-Ages. Another sets the famous Temple of Diana at
Ephesus on Fire, thereby to raise him an Immortal Pile. 'Twas this that drove
the Carthaginian in his difficult and dangerous Attempts over the Pyrenaean
Mountains, that he might be the Subject of future Discourse. Upon this account
great men build them desolate Places, costly Vaults and Monuments -- but all
these bear no Proportion to the present Expedient, Epitaphs within a while will
not be legible; and the most durable Monuments will moulder into Dust; whereas
Virtue and Grace are perpetual. Do Good in thy Generation, and thou shall leave
living Monuments of thy Praise behind. -- If thou do well men will speak good
of thee: -- and elsewhere, the Righteous shall be had in Everlasting
Remembrance. Men will tell it their Children, they theirs, and so by Tradition
shall it be delivered from Age to Age. The Love of Mary, the good Works of
Dorcas, the Charity of Cornelius, shall be coequal with the World.

But if there should be no Records of thy Acts of Love and Mercy here below,
know for thy Encouragement, that the great God of Heaven keeps a Register, and
all these are noted in his Book, before whose Tribunal thou must shortly
appear. If then thou expectest Bowels, Meekness, Forgiveness, Mercy, be willing
to show it to thy Brethren now; this is Religion, this the new Creature.

In order to the putting on of which, before I proceed to the Application I
shall propose one Expedient, which is not so properly Mine as Solomon's, viz.
to discarde the Talebearer, then all Strife shall cease, Prove. 26.20.

There are a sort of People far more obnoxious than the Frogs of Egypt, who to
our no small Disturbance croak in most of our Houses, a sort which the Law has
marked and ranked with murderers, Levit. 19.16. Which the Wise man has more
than once warned us of, Prove. 11.13. and 18.8. when the Prophet gives a
Catalogue of the crying Sins of Jerusalem, he specifies this in the first
Place, in thee are men that carry Tales to shed Blood. Ezekiel. 22.9.

A Smooth-tongu'd Generation to the Life, by the Prophet David upon his woeful
Experience described, Psalm. 55.22. The Words of his Mouth were softer than
Butter, having War in his Heart; his Words were smoother than Oil, and yet be
they very Swords. The best resemblance that I can make of them, is to Pedlars,
who are well instructed in the Art of Canting, of magnifying their Ware; who
come to us full laden, carry from, and bring somewhat to us, and in conclusion
impose upon us. (...) Jansenius.
A fraudulent, deceitful, double-tongu'd, yea triple-tongu'd Parasite, as he is
diversely set out; one who will cut your Throat with a Feather; and, like the
Crocodile, when he designs Destruction, Weeps; the Devil's Seed-man of his
Tares; Judas revived: For it is generally agreed on, that the 55. Psalm. wherein
David sets the Flatterers of his days out, Is Typical and Prophetical of this
Traitor; who with Hail Master, and the Complement of a Kiss: will for far less
than the sum of thirty pieces, deliver his dearest Friend into the Hands of
his Enemies.

It Is not to be conceived what mischief is done in the World by this kind of
Cattle; of all Enemies the worst; the grand Disturbers of our Quiet. No Wounds,
no Stabbs like his; he strikes when we do not imagine, but lie most open to his
Stroke. What he hears at one House, he relates to the next, but with Addition,
which carries Gun-pouder in it; and if he can meet with no Tale, he has a
pregnant Fancy, and can invent as many as he lists None can boast of so
universal a Conquest as this wheedling Sycophant; when he pleases, he can make
Disturbance in greater, as well as lesser Societies; he can divide Houses,
Parishes, Kingdoms, not only from each other, but among themselves; at Will,
break off all Leagues, disturb Friendship and Peace; set the Father against the
Son, and the Son against the Father; the Daughter against the Mother; the
Brother against the Brother. -- And, when the Bill of Moses cannot, effectually
divide those who are one Flesh.

Let us see the mischief in a few Examples: Sampson the great terror of his
Enemies, who with the Jaw Bone of an Ass (that which first came to hand) slew
as many of his Enemies as he pleased; who carried away the Gates of the City on
his Shoulders, still returned Conqueror: -- falls at last by Treachery. His
Bosome-Friend betrays him into the Hands of the Philistines; and by this, as
the only means, the great Champion of Israel became the Object of their Scorn
and Derision.

Of those twenty three Wounds which Caesar received in the Senate, there was
none which went so near his Heart, as that of his Son. Many Deaths in one! to
fall by his Son, who ought to have died for him! to fall by an Instrument of
his own making!

Not much unlike to this, is the Case of David. The Man after God's own Heart
was not free from these; he had many Enemies, it is true; but none so
pernicious, as those of his own House: as yet a Shepherd, he lays the Lion and
the Bear prostrate, with no other Weapon but a Sling, and a few Stones. The Man
of Gath as an easy Victim falls before him. Saul with all his malicious
Contrivances is not able to do him hurt; but when his Son shall rebel, and his
chief Councellor revolt; his Spirits begin to sink; a fluctus decumanus, a
tenth wave this, which threatens inevitable Destruction, ushers in a deluge of
Tears, makes his Couch to swim, and his Bed to overflow. Hear him in his own
Expression: It is not an open Enemy that has done me this Dishonor: for then
I could have born it; neither was it mine Adversary that did magnify himself
against me: for then peradventure I should have hid my self from him: but it
was even thou my Companion, my Guide, and my familiar Friend; We took sweet
Counsel together, and walked in the House of God as Friends.

And to add one Instance more; we are told that Troy stood it out valiantly
against ten years Siege; the great Counselors and Captains of Greece, with all
their Attempts could prevail nothing; till at last they make Use of a wheedling
Flatterer: -- who under the pretense of Love and Service does effect their
Ruin: delivers them over unto the Sword, and turns their City into a Field.

They are such Creatures as these, that threaten our Troys; the Instruments
that disturb our Peace and Quiet: If we entertain them, they will give us fair
words; but these sooner or later, will go into the Bowels of the Belly, if the
Doctrine of the wise man be true Prove. 18.8. But on the contrary, the
discountenancing, the removing of them, by the Blessing of God, will be the
Means of putting off the Wolf, and putting on the Man, yea the Christian: In so
doing, we shall consult our own Happiness, be in the right Path to true Love,
and bespeak our selves what our Profession requires us. To this effect is the
Doctrine of the wisest of Men (loc. cit.) Where there is no Wood the Fire goes
out: So where there is no Talebearer, the Strife cease. I shall close this,
with that excellent Passage of the Son of Syrack, Ecclus. 28.13. etc. Abhor the
Murderer and double-tongu'd: for such have destroyed many that were at Peace.
the Double-tongue has disquieted many, and driven them from Nation to Nation;
strong Cities has it broken down, and overthrown the Houses of great Men: the
Strength of the People has it brought down, and been the decay of mighty
Nations. The Double-tongue has cast out many Virtuous Women, and robbed them
of their Labors. Who so hearkeneth unto it, shall never find rest, and never
dwell quietly.

Conclusion.
ANd now I am come to the Conclusion: The Advice of Constantine to the Fathers
Assembled in the Council of Nice, presently strikes into my Mind; Advice worthy
to be given with an Iron Pen and Lead in a Rock for ever; as Job in another
case speaks.

The Bishops from every quarter of the World Convened, Ruf. lib 1. cap. 2.
Theodosius lib. 1. cap. 11.
bring their several Complaints along with them; represent their Grievances,
offer their Libels, and make their Appeals to the Emperor; as if the
Disturbance, rather than the Peace of the Church had been the Design of their
Meeting. The good Emperor, not a little grieved thereat, takes the Libels,
seals them up, and holding them up in his Arms, pathetically desires them to
lay aside all their private Animosities, and with one Heart, to endeavor the
Establishment and Unity of the Church: committing withal, the respective Libels
to the Fire; to the end, that neither they themselves, nor their Posterity,
should to their Scandal understand their Contentions. It pleased Almighty God,
that his Counsel was so well followed, as that their Debates were Calm; all the
whole Assembly (six only excepted) unanimously agreeing in Condemnation of the
Heretic and Heresy, and the Faith of one Substance.

In this large Convention, we will suppose it no difficult matter to find out a
parallel to the first part of this Narration. O that it might be happy in the
like Success and Conclusion! We are here met together, not in a School, but an
Oratorie; not a place of Disputation, but a House of Prayer; not to settle the
Faith, that is done to our Hands, but to make profession of the Faith
established: Our Libellings, Heart-burnings and Dissentions, are by so much the
more intolerable and unreasonable. In Disputes, Heats may arise; we find the
most Calm and Holy men Here to have exceeded due Bounds; betraying frequently
more Passion than Reason. -- In our Divine Assemblies, and more Divine Worship,
there ought to be none of these: We are here met in the Presence of the Most
High God, to receive Instruction, to offer up our Prayer and Praises to Him. --
All those Services require clean Hearts, and pure Hands. The Scholars of
Pythagoras (as Plutarch reports) after all their Bickerings and hot Contests,
-- in the close of the day had their Reconciliations, still parting lovingly
and Friendly. We are the professed Disciples of a Great Master; O let not these
Hearts rise in judgment against us; let us remember, that this in an especial
manner among the Golden Doctrines of our Savior is recommended: Let not the
Sun go down upon your Wrath. Wherefore condemn we from this moment, our Libels
(as our good Emperor here, and the Primitive Converts did their Conjuring
Books) to the Flames. Let us forget our unhappy Differences, and remember our
old Grudges no more; in the Dialect of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. ult. Let all
Bitterness and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and Evil-speaking be put away
from you; with all Malice; and be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted,
forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

The Judicious Hooker tells us, that the four first great Heresies, Eccles.
Pol. lib. 5. para. 54.
were by four general Councils in four words determined. I have and do propose
unto you one word, which if well applied, is of so sovereign a Balm, as to
heal, not only ours, but all the wounds of Christendom; and that is Charity.
Above all put on Charity. By this we shall cover our own and others Sins,
overlook Failings and Imperfections; conquer Difficulties; and desire nothing
but God to all. The Evangelists relate, that the Crucifiers of our Savior cast
Lots for his Garments; but St. John more particularly mentions the cause that
induced them thereunto, John 19.23. Now his Coat was without Seam, Woven from
the Top throughout, they said therefore among themselves, let us not rent it,
but cast Lots for it, whose it shall be.

Whereupon one of the Ancients has an elegant Observation: The Merciless and
Cruel Hang-men of Pilate, did not dare to attempt the rending of Christ's
seamless Coat: and will thou dis-member the Church, which is One; divide
Charity, which is God himself? He that blows the Coals of Contention, promotes
or makes a disturbance in Christian Society, does not only lacerate Christ's
seamless Garment; but tear in pieces his Body, rend his Spouse; argues himself
guilty of Barbarity beyond Comparison greater than the former.

Abraham, Genesis 13.8. urges an Argument for the reconciling all Differences
between him and Lot, and their respective Attendants, from that near Relation
in which they stood. Let there be no strife I pray thee between me and thee,
and between thy Herdsmen, and my Herds-men: for we are Brethren. If there be
any weight in this (as we have great reason to believe) I am sure it comes home
to us with Improvement.

We proceeded out of one common Stock, and so are Brethren. At the Font, we
engaged in the same Baptismal Vow and Promise, and so are Brethren. We met in
this Holy place, professing the same Faith, and practicing the same Duties, and
so are Brethren: our Houses and Estates join to each other; we make up one
Society, and so are Brethren. Therefore though our Herds-men for want of
Breeding and Education quarrel, let there be no strife between Us. O let us
provoke one another to Love! and if there be any Contention, let it be, who
shall exceed in Acts of Kindness; the only Emulation justifiable. Let us
imitate the Ancients, who (as St. Luke tells us) were of one accord, of one
Heart, and one Soul, Acts 2.44, and 4.32. Let us put off the Old Man, and put
on the New; as the Elect of God, Holy and Beloved Bowels of Mercies, Kindness,
Humbleness of Mind, Meekness, Long-suffering, Forbearing one another and
Forgiving one another; and above all, put on Charity.

For Christ's sake: -- For the Gospels sake: -- For our Souls sake -- For our
Brethren and Companions sake -- For the sake of our own present temporal
Welfare and Quiet: Let us become New Creatures. So shall we find the two
excellent Properties of the Psalmist, Psalm. 133. meeting and conspiring in our
Felicity: The Goodness and Pleasantness of our Unity, to the general benefit of
all. Like the Dew of Hermon which fell upon the Hill of Sion, and that sacred
Ointment which was poured out on the Head of Aaron to the Advantage of his
Beard, and the Skirts of his Clothing. So shall we be able to give Laws and
Presidents to the lesser Villages round about us. So shall our Sons grow up as
the young Plants, and our Daughters as the polished Corners of the Temple; our
Garners shall be full and plenteous of all manner of Store; our Sheep shall
bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our Streets; our Oxen shall be
strong to labor; there shall be no decay, no leading into Captivity, and no
complaining in our Streets. So shall we grow sweetly old in Love; live an
Heaven upon Earth here, and be quietly translated to that Kingdom, where the
other Graces cease, Charity still continues.

It remains, that with bended Knees and contrite Hearts, we all join in
Prayer: Beseeching that God, Who makes men to be of one mind in an House, yea,
who makes Wars to cease in all the World; who breaks the Bow, snappeth the
Spear, and burns the Chariot in the Fire: That he would be graciously pleased
to put an end to all our unhappy Divisions; to beat our Swords into
Plow-shares, and our Spears into Pruning Hooks: That he would be pleased to
give us one Heart, to put a new Spirit within us, to take away the Stony Heart
out of our Flesh, and to give us an Heart of Flesh, that we may walk in his
Statutes and keep his Ordinances. That we may be of one Mind, live in Peace; so
shall the God of Love and Peace be with us.

FINIS.
Books newly Printed for James Collins in Essex-Street without Temple Bar.
THE Reward of Diligence. By Lewis Sharp. 8o. The Confinement; an Ingenious
Poem. 8o. A Letter from a Protestant Gentleman to a Lady revolted to the Church
of Rome. 12o. A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of Mrs. Dorothy St. John's. By
Antony Hornick Minister of the Savoy. Popery, or the Principles and Positions
approved by the Church of Rome, when really believed and practiced, are very
dangerous to All. And to Protestant Kings and Supreme Powers, more especially
pernicious; and inconsistent with that Loyalty which by the Law of Nature and
Scripture are due to Supreme Powers: In a Letter to a Person of Quality. By
Thomas Lord Bishop of Lincoln. Quarto. A Discourse of Truth. By the late
Reverend Dr. Rust Lord Bishop of Down and Connor. To which is added, The Way
to Eternal Happiness. By Joseph Glanvil Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.
12o.

