A Winding Sheet FOR POPERY.

By RICHARD BAXTER, CATHOLIC.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Nevil Simmons, Book-sellar in
Kederminster, Anno Dom. 1657.

A winding sheet for Popery. BY Richard Baxter, Catholic.
AMong all the sects that have troubled the Church of Christ, there is none
that have heapt up such a multitude of errors, and made such a vexatious stir
for them in the world, by subtilty, importunity, flames and bloodshed, as the
Papists have done. Where they dare do it, they cruelly torment, and bloodily
murder those that are not of their erroneous mind: Yea, its part of their
Religion to force all Christian Princes to destroy us; and if they will not, to
absolve their subjects from their allegiance, and deliver up their Countries to
a Papist that will destroy us. For this is the Decree of one of their undoubted
Councils, Later. sub Innoc. 3. Can. 3. And where they cannot or dare not do
this, they are busy day and night to deceive; turning themselves into the
shape of various Sects, and creeping in among both rich and poor, but specially
insinuating into Rulers and Commanders, that may do them the greatest service
when they are seduced. And their ordinary way is to seek first to unsettle men,
and make them doubt of their former profession, and bring them into dislike
with their Teachers, and so to win them over to themselves. To which end, their
common cry is, that we are of a new Religion, that we are Heretics, that we
are a small Party, and divided all to pieces among our selves, and that we are
but lost in wandering and confusion, and all because we have left the Church of
Rome, which is the true Catholic Apostolic Church, and which all our
forefathers lived and dyed in, and which is the Center and Head of unity, and
the only judge of controversies, for want of whose infallible decision, every
man interpreting Scriptures as he please, and being a Pope to himself, we are
so many men, so many minds, and all out of the way, and shall never be right
till we return to the Pope. Here Is a fair and plausible tale, that may catch
the simple, that know not what the Church or Religion is, and may shake those
that never built upon the Rock. Like the words of the Harlot, Prove. 2.15. to
20. and 5.3. to 15. and 7. and 9.15, 16. To call passengers that go right on
their ways; who so is simple, let him turn in hither.] And 22.14. The mouth of
strange women is a deep pit; he that is abborred of the Lord shall fall
therein.] For my part, I think he that would not fain know the truth if he
could, when it is so lovely, and his salvation lies at the slake, is worse
then a mad man: And if I could find that Popery is the way of God, I can boldly
say, I would quickly own it, whatever it cost me, (by the help of grace.) But
having searched into their writings and courses many a year, I am more and more
confident, that for us to turn to Popery, is to turn from the will of God, from
truth to error, from the way of the Churches unity, to a sect, from safety to
exceeding dangere, and from the way of duty to the way of sin. And of this I am
now to give you my reasons: wherein I will promise you as before the Lord to
whom I am even going to give an account, that I will not speak against my
confcience, nor write any thing but what I would write, if this were the last
day I had to live, as for ought I know, it may be; nor will I charge any thing
on them falsely, but undertake before any man breathing, to prove out of their
own writings or doings, that it is theirs; though they dare not own it all to
the ignorant.

Reason 1. Popery is a way of notorious Schism, and therefore not the way of
God. Papists are a very sect: most destructive to the unity of the Catholic
Church, of any sect that I know of in the world. They delude the simple, that
take their words, by telling them that they are the Catholic Church, and that
the Christian world is of their minds, when the far greater part of the
Christians in the world are strangers or enemies to Popery. The Christians of
Athiopia and other parts of Africa, with all the Greeks, and the rest in Asia,
and the Protestants and others in Europe, that disown them, are far more then
the Papists. And it is not long ago since they were but a few, in comparison of
the rest of the Christian world: and long after the Apostles days, they were
not known upon the face of the earth. When they were at the highest, they never
had near one half of the Christian world, under their government. And yet they
must needs be the whole Catholic Church: When a part of the Church, will needs
be the whole, they make themselves a sect. They tell us of the smallness of our
Church, and the greatness of theirs; but I must profess that the Church of Rome
is not big enough for me to be a member of. The true Catholic Church
consists of all the Christians in the world; of which the Papists are but a
sorry corrupted part. That Church that pretends to be Catholic and the
whole, and yet excludes the far greater and better part of Christians, is too
narrow for me. As the Anabaptists say, They are the Church; and other sects
say, They are the Church; so the Papists say, They are the Church: and a
defiled piece would swallow up the whole. As if the bramble should be taken for
all the wood; and the Oak and the Cedar must be no part: Or the Oven or the
Chimney must be all the house; or every Cabin would be the ship; or a dirty
village would be the whole Commonwealth. Its well for the Papists if they
prove a part of the universal Church; for I am sure they are Schismatical in
pretending to be the whole.

Reason 2. In this Schismatical pretense, the Papists are notoriously
Sacrilegious, and would rob Christ of the greatest part of his flock, and
dismember the far greatest part of his body, that they may be taken to be the
whole. Has it cost Christ so dear to purchase a peculiar people to himself?
Tilus 2.14. Has he purchased his Church with his own blood, Acts 20. and now
shall the sons of men presume to rob him of the greatest part? Is his flock so
little in all, and will these presumptuous Sectaries make it less? If you
divide the world into thirty parts, according to the judgment of the best
Geographers, nineteen of them are Heathens, and six are Mahometans, and but
five are Christians taking in all sorts: and yet the Papists that are not near
half of these five, would unchurch all the rest; as if they envyed Christ the
fruit of his bloodshed. How would their King of Spain take it, if they should
proclaim that the far greater half of his Dominions is none of his? If Christ
be so tender of every particular sheep in his flock, that he laid down his life
for them, and knows them by name, and none shall take them out of his hand, and
he that touches them does touch the apple of his eye, John 10.3, 15, 27, 28.
Zech. 2.8. how then will he take it at the Papists hands that would rob him of
the greatest part? But blessed be God that judges not as they.

Reason 3. Herein also they are guilty of most inhumane and unreasonable
cruelty; in presuming to damn the far greatest part of the Church of Christ. If
you are so straightly charged as to a particular man, [Judge not that you be
not judged,] Mat. 7.1, 2. And so sharply taken up, Romans 14.4. [Who art thou
that judge another man's servant? to his own master he stands or falls;]
What then are they like to hear that will judge to damnation the most and the
best of the Church of God? Perhaps the ignorant of them may say, that All of
them are not so uncharitable; this is but some. I answer, If thou be not of
this mind, thou art not a Papist; For this is essential to that which they call
the Romm Catholic Faith, to believe that the Catholic Church is only those
that are subject to the Pope as the Vicar of Christ, and Governor of the whole;
and that out of this Church, thus headed by the Pope, there is no salvation.
This is the soul of Popery: even as we believe that out of the true Universal
Church that is headed by Christ only, there is no salyation. And me thinks, if
thou have but the heart of a man, much more of a Christian in thy breast, thou
should not easily believe so bloody uncharitable a Doctrine, as that all the
Christian world are damned save your selves. Do thou believe this at thy
heart? If not, thou art not of the Roman faith: And if thou do, thou have
little Christian Chanty, and thy deceivers have almost taught thee to cast away
the reason and the bowels of a man.

Reason 4. And, what a Proud and arrogant way is this? for a defiled piece of
^he Catholic Church to say, We are the whole? As they in Isa. 65.5. [Which
say, Stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I am holyer then thou.] To
say, [ You are all damned Heretics save we, and we only are the Church: such
horrible Pride does not animate the Church and Cause of Christ.

Reason 5. And all this is done by them, against the very tenor of the Gospel;
and Covenant of Christ; as if it were not enough for them to contradict the
Scripture in smaller matters, unless they gainsay the very Promise of life, and
the Charter of the Saints, and the foundation of our hopes. For it is the scope
of this Gospel, that Whosoever believes in Christ shall not perish, but have
everlasting life, John 3.15, 16, 18. and 1.12. John 17.20, 21, 22, 24. Acts
8.37. and 13.39. and 16.31. Romans 3.22. and 4.11, 24. and 10.9. Gal. 3.22. 2
These. 1.10. John 16.27. and 20.29. Heb. 4.3. Mar. 16.16. Acts 5.14. John 3.36.
and 5.24. and 6.35, 40, 47. and 7.38. and 11.25, 26. and 12.46. Acts 10.43.
Romans 3.26. and 9.33. 1 Pet. 2.6. 1 John 5.1, 5, 10. John 14.21. 1 John. 4.7. An
hundred texts might easily be cited, where God does make the most peremptory
promises, that all that believe in Christ, and love him, and hope in him, shall
be saved. And yet as if it were in defiance of the Gospel, the Papists make it
an Article of their Faith, that no man shall be saved that becomes not a
subject of the Pope of Rome. Let him believe in Christ, and love Christ, and
hope in Christ never so much; let him believe in the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, yet can he not be saved, if he believe not in the Pope. No grace will
save him; no degree of holiness will save him, that believes not in the Pope:
or at least, none have saving Grace, that believe not in him. Wonderful! that
it should be possible for Christians, for men to be thus besotted? what must
become of all those Christians that live many thousand miles from him, and
scarce ever heard of his name, and know not whether he be a man or a woman, or
whether there be such a place as Rome in the world? Must they therefore be all
damned, as being out of the Church? Why then would not Christ have once
mentioned to us this Article of our Faith? Why would he never put it in the
Scripture, [He that obeys not the Pope or Roman Church, shall be damned?] Why
was it never in the Churches Creed, [I believe in the Pope, or Church of Rome]
as well as, [I believe the Holy Catholic Church?]

Reason 6. Moreover the Papists cause is plainly carnal, being all resolved
into a carnal interest, and maintained by it. The main question between us, is,
Whether the Pope must govern all the Christian world, and all persons must obey
him upon pain of damnation? And what is this but to exalt a worm, and lay the
Kingdom of Christ upon his shoulders? If the question were, Whether we should
be Holy or profane? obey Christ or disobey him? we would be ashamed to be
behind them? But when all this stir is to set up one City to be the Mistress of
the world, and one man to be the head of the Church, and this without Christ
and against him; what can we think, but that Ambition makes this Lucifer mad?

Reason 7. Moreover, the way of Popery is against Christianity, and shakes the
very foundation of it, and tempts the world to infidelity, by building their
faith upon an uncertain ground, yea on a ground that is certainly false. For
according to the Papists, we cannot know the Christian Doctrine to be true, nor
Scripture to be the Word of God, but on the authority of the Pope or Church?
And its as clear as the light, that no man can know that the Pope or Roman
Church has any such authority, till they know the Doctrine of Christ to be
true, by which they claim it (nor then neither) Who can tell that the Pope or
Church of Rome is to be credited, more then any other Church or person, till he
find some such thing in the Word of God? (which is not there.) And if they do
find it there, they cannot believe it, because they receive it not on the
authority of the Church. So that if you will be a Papist, you must hold that
the Doctrine of Faith is not to be received, but on the authority of the Roman
Church; and yet that the authority of the Roman Church cannot be known but by
the Doctrine of Faith (as some say) Or else we must stay till they prove it by
Miracles, as the Apostles did (as others say.)

Reason 8. Moreover, this Cause and this Church is a novelty and late
invention; a thing unknown to the Primitive Church; and therefore it cannot be
of God. And yet they are so shameless, as to call their opinions, the old
Religion, and to persuade the simple that we are an upstart generation, and
that our Church is but of two or three hundred years standing, because we have
forsaken the Roman novelties, and are turned back to the Primitive Antiquity,
For our parts, we say, and say again, Let him be the scorn of the Churches,
that believes any Catholic Church, that is less then sixteen hundred years of
continuance! And, Let him be counted a man of no Religion, that is of a
Religion that is less then sixteen hundred years old: And what can he expect,
but to be accursed of God, that believes any Gospel of less then sixteen
hundred years continuance, Gal. 1.8, 9. Let us go to the Gospel, the Records of
Antiquity, and see there whether our Religion or their opinion be the elder:
and let the oldest carry it without contradiction. Where find you that
Jerusalem, Corinth, Galatia, Philippi, and all, or any Church in the world, was
then commanded to obey the Church of Rome? or that ever she was called the
Mistress of all Churches, or the Universal Church. Then Rome was but a
particular Church like the rest, and now forsooth it is become the Mistress,
and Catholic Church, without obedience to which there is no salvation, (if the
Pope must save us.) Where read you that any Apostle did direct men to receive
the Christian Faith upon the Credit of the Church of Rome? Or, When did Paul,
or Barnabas, or any Preacher tell the people, [ You must believe in Peter, or
in the Church of Rome, before you can believe in Christ;] Or, [You must believe
the Christian Doctrine on the Credit of the Church;] Or, [That Church is made
the judge of all Controversies.] O how many Sermons have we of the Apostles and
the Fathers, for many hundred years after, and never such a word in them? How
many Nations and souls converted, and never such an argument used with them?
How many controversies hotly debated, and never such a remedy propounded. The
Romish Dominion was then unknown.

Reason 9. Moreover, their Profession is much made up of mere contradictions,
and the subjects of the Pope are sworn to these contradictions (at least those
in Orders:) By the Trent Confession, they are to swear that [They will never
take and interpret Scripture, but according to the unanimous consent of the
Fathers.] And yet they swear in the same Oath to many particulars which the
Fathers were against, and many which they never unanimously consented in: They
either know not what the Fathers hold, or else they know that there is but a
small part of the Scripture, or at least far from all, that the Fathers do
interpret with unanimous consent. And there is not one of an hundred or a
thousand of them, that knows what the Fathers do unanimously consent in, and
what not; their volumns being so many and so great, and time so short, and most
so idle, or necessarily diverted. In abundance of Texts the Fathers differ
among themselves: And here the swearers do bind themselves never to interpret
those Scriptures at all, till a Messenger from heaven shall tell them what the
Fathers are agreed on since their death. They are sworn also to embrace the
sense of their Church: whereas the Fathers and their Church do frequently
disagree: They are sworn to [all things delivered, defined, and declared by the
Canons, and Occumenical Councils, and this without doubting;] O strong faith!
when even men's faith in Christ himself is often mixed with such doubting, that we
must pray, [Lord increase our Faith; I believe, help my unbelief.] Yea, there
is not one of a multitude of them that knows what all these Canons or Councils
do contain. Yea, when these Canons and Councils do frequently contradict each
other; and yet they are sworn to believe them all: The Council at Constance
decree that a General Council is above the Pope, and the Council of Basil did
second them; but the Council of the Laterane under Julius 2. and Leo 10. decree
that the Pope is above a General Council. The Council of Trent does add to the
Canon of Scripture, contrary to the Council of Laodicea, and Carthage 3. and
the Papists at this day go contrary to the current judgment of the Church, in
adding the Apocryphal Books to the Canon. Abundance more of their
contradictions may be shown.

Reason 10. Moreover, Popery is an uncertain Profession, both for the
foundation, and the matter of it, the sense and the perfection. No man can
fully tell what it is, or when he has it, and when he has it not. For the
foundation of it, their Councils and Nations are yet disagreed, whether the
Pope or General Council be the chief, and which must be followed when they
disagree: and which is the infallible Judge of Controversies. And for the
matter, how few in the world can tell what is in all the Canons, and Councils,
and Fathers, and what is their sense: and abundance other uncertainties I have
fully manifested in my Book against Popery, Disp. 2. and 3. And for the very
Articles of Faith, I have there showed that they are still to them uncertain,
whether they have yet all or not: because that the Pope may make those to be
points of faith, as to the people, that were not so before; and so he may
increase them, who knows how much? Every time that the Pope determines a
Controversy, he makes us a new Article of faith: As he lately did against the
Jansenians: And how many hundred controversies are yet to be determined, and
consequently so many Articles to be added.

Reason 11. Moreover, Popery is a humane Faith; and not a Divine: It leads us
but to man, and bottometh us on man: and therefore leaves us short of God.
They must first believe the Christian Doctrine and truth of Scripture, on the
authority of the Pope or Church; and then they must take the meaning of every
word of Scripture upon the credit of the Roman Church, and Fathers. So that the
very upshot of all their Religion, is, They believe the Scripture to be the
Word of God, and Christ to be the Son of God, because the Church of Rome does
tell them so? And how know they that this Church is Infallible? Because they
say so themselves, or because the Scripture says they are infallible, (but who
knows where.) But which is the infallible Church of Rome? The Pope, says one:
A Council says another: A Council confirmed by a Pope, says a third. And how
knows the world that these are the acts of the Pope, and that he confirmed the
Council? Because such a Cardinal, or our Parish Priest, or a Jesuit says so.
And here it is that the people are left.

Reason 12. Popery fets up a Head for the Universal Church that cannot possibly
govern it, and a Center for the Church, in which it cannot possibly unite: And
so it is but a titular Head, and a name and shadow, good for nothing but to
divide and vex the servants of God; but the Uniting and Ruling of them, which
is so much pretended to, is a flat impossibility. It is not morally possible to
bring all the Christian world, to be of the Popish opinion herein, it being a
point that is so void of cogent evidence from Scripture and Reason, that they
are both against it. It is naturally impossible for the Pope of Rome to be the
faithful Governor of all the world, if they would consent. How many years must
they be traveling or sailing to Rome from the Antipodes or other remote parts
of the earth? Most of them that had causes of Appeal to the Pope, would either
be drowned at Sea, or destroyed by enemies in the passages, or spent with
travel or Navigation, or wasted with age through the length of their journey:
And when they come to him, how insufficient would the poor man be, to decide
all their matters? How many thousand would be waiting every hour at his
Holiness doors? when he has leisure but for a few. How long would it be from
the beginning of a controversy to the end, by that time these poor men had
traveled back again so many thousand miles? And when all the Princes of a
great part of the world, are usually in wars; will they give their subjects
leave to travail so far? and that where the Prince is an enemy to Christianity,
as the Turk is? Or would the Princes that he is in war with, give leave to his
subjects, to pass through their Dominions? Let us see first how well an
Universal Monarch would rule the world by Civil Government, (though yet that is
more easy) before a spiritual Monarch be set up.

Reason 13. And worst of all, this false pretended Head and Center of the
Churches Unity, does make our Concord Impossible till this Head be taken down.
The Papists are the greatest hinderers of the Unity and Concord of Christians,
I am confidently persuaded in all the world! And yet all this mischief is done
to the Church under the pretense of Unity and Concord. What if a subject should
set up himself in Ireland or Scotland, and say, The Prince is absent, and I am
his Deputy, and all are Rebels that unite not in me? Could there be a greater
hinderer of Unity then this man? For all that submit to him are Rebels, and
all that do not he will endeavor to oppress: So is it with the Pope. If we
unite in him, we hazard a breaking off from Christ; at least, it is such a sin,
that the Christian world will never venture on: and if we refuse it, the
Papists proclaim us Heretics, and will have no Peace with us. So that the
Church will never have Concord, till this false Head be taken off, and Christ
only be our Head.

Reason 14. Moreover, the Papists are at such difference among themselves, that
its little encouragement to us to join with them. They differ in many hundred
points, as the writings of the Schoolmen, the Thomists, and Scotists, and
Ockamists, the Dominicans, Franciscans, and Jesuits, and other divisions among
them do declare. If you say, This is not in points of faith. I answer, 1. That
is as pleases the Pope or Roman Church, who may make them points of faith at
pleasure. 2. The reason why the Pope determines them not, is much because his
Disciples are disagreed about them. 3. They differ in their great fundamental
it self, even the seat of Supremacy and Infallibility, one part telling us it
is the Pope, and the other that it is a General Council. This one difference
surmounteth all the differences of the Reformed Churches, if they were set
togther. Forsooth, we cannot be Christians, nor know the Scriptures to be the
Word of God, but on the Authority of the Church: And when we come to know what
the Church is, in Spain and Italy its one thing, and in France another.

Reason 15. Moreover, the way of Popery is a way of mere delusion, and vain
ostentation. They advance the Pope to be the final Judge of Controversies (or a
General Council, as others) and when they have done, they are never the nearer
an end of them. He sees many hundred Controversies among them, and dare not
speak a word to determine them. The Church of Rome is the true expounder of the
Scriptures: and yet many hundred differences are known to be among their own
Expositors, and many hundred Texts that the people understand not, and yet this
Oracle will not speak; this Judge is as dumb as a fish, and leaves us all in as
much doubt, and ignorance, and contention, as if we had no Judge? So that all
the importunity in the world cannot open his mouth: And yet he learnedly
inveighs against the Protestants that have no Judge of Controversies. What is
it to make fools of men if this be not?

Reason 16. And what a cafe do the Papists put the Universal Church into, when
our faith and the decision of our doubts must depend upon such a man as
abundance of their Popes have been? Many of their own writers call them no
better, then Apostates, Heretics, Murderers, Adulterers, Sodomites, Conjurers,
and such were the Heads of the Catholic Church, a long time together. I know
the silly people are told by their liars, that all this is lies: But let them
put it to the trial if they dare, whether I will not as fully prove it out of
their own writings, as that ever King William was alive in England? And are
condemned Heretics, and devilish Murderers and Adulterers likely to be the
infallible Judges of all Controversies?

Reason 17. And many a time they have two, and there, and sometune four Popes
at once, so that no man knew which was the Pope. And when Eugenius was deposed
by a General Council, yet he continued in by force, and from him is the
succession: And yet are these Saint Peter's successors?

Reason 18. Moreover, Popery is a way of darkness: They fly the light, like
Bats and Owls; and therefore it cannot be of God. Their public prayers and
praises of God are performed in a tongue which the people understand not. Their
writers call it the Original of all Heresies to translate the Scriptures into a
known tongue. And now they are forced at last to do it themselves; they
dissuade the common people from the reading of it. Yea they suffer no man to
read such a translated Bible, but by a License from the Ordinary, which any man
may know is not ordinarily granted, in their own Dominions. Many a man have
they burnt to ashes, for reading the Bible in a known tongue. And how much they
befriend the peoples ignorance in many other ways, their writings and sad
experience tell us.

Reason 19. Yea, their profession is contrary to the light: They presume to
contradict the very Word of God: Paul has written a whole Chapter, 1 Cor. 14.
against public praying or prophesying in an unknown tongue: And yet they will
use it, and make the silly people believe, that Paul means no such matter as
he speaks. How many and many times, is the worshipping use of Images forbidden;
And yet they will use them, say God what he will? How plainly has Christ
instituted the Lords Supper in both kinds, and how often is it recited; and they
confess it was so used by the ancient Church, for many an hundred years. And
yet they will presume to alter all, and to forbid the Cup, even because they
will do it. Abundance of such instances may be given of their contradicting
Scriptures.

Reason 20. Yea, Popery fights with sense and reason, and would make men not
only mad, but senseless. For upon pain of damnation, we must believe that the
Bread in the Sacrament is no Bread, and that the Wine is no Wine: My eyes, and
my taste, and my feeling tell me that it is Bread and Wine, and if I know not
Bread and Wine when I see it, and touch it, and taste it, then I must be mad or
senseless: And then how can I tell that I know any thing at all. And yet must I
be here burnt at the stake, and hereafter burnt in Hell for ever, if Papists be
my Judges, unless I will believe that the substance of the Bread and Wine is
turned into the substance of the body and blood of Christ, and that there is
now the color, and smell, and taste, and quantity of Bread and Wine, without
Bread and Wine. The color which I see, and the taste which I relish, are the
color and taste, Of what? Of nothing. Nor of Bread and Wine. For now there is
no such thing. Not of the Body and Blood of Christ; for that they deny, and
well they may. So that if I know bread and wine when I see, and feel, and taste
them; then do I know that Popery is a deceit: And if I do not, then I know
nothing. For if sense deceive us, all deceives us. Moreover it is against the
knowledge and experience of our own hearts. Popery tells you that none are
saved or have Charity but Papists, because forsooth they are all out of the
Church. Here then is an Argument which Christians have in their breasts, that
all the Papists on earth cannot answer. Look what degree of assurance you have,
that you have Charity or any special Grace, and so much assurance you have that
Popery is a mere cheer, which would persuade you that none have Charity but
Papists. If any stand not to this censure, he is no Papist. For if a Protestant
may have Charity, and be saved, then the Church of Rome is not the whole
Catholic Church. Yea if you know any Protestant on earth that you are
persuaded is a true Christian; you must needs be as much persuaded that Popery
is false. In the mean time remember this to their credit, that by their own
confession never did a godly honest man turn Papist; nor can they desire any
such to turn. So that every man that has saving grace, is sure.

Reason 21. Popery does too much befriend ungodliness, to be the way of God. It
is fitted to build up the Kingdom of darkness. 1. How it befriendeth Ignorance,
and fights against the means of Knowledge, I have touched before. 2. They make
people believe that many of their sins are but venial, and properly no sins,
against no Law, and do not so much as deserve damnation; and therefore they
need no Savior, nor pardon of that punishment. 3. Concupiscence which
inclines men to all actual sin, they tell them is no sin in the Baptized, but
before it is. 4. Their very frame and course of devotion is so formal, that a
man would wonder that rational men could approve of it. Such a multitude of
ceremonies and histrionical actions and inventions of men, do they think to
serve God with, that one would think they could not make themselves believe
that the most wise and holy God will regard them. See my Book against Popery,
page 162, 163. It is against the nature of a spiritual man, to think such a
service suitable to God, which is liker a Stage Play or a Morrice-dance. But
the Mass bites not; the profane are well enough pleased with this. We find the
worse our people are, the proner are they to such formalities.

Reason 22. And indeed the issue of their way, does frighten me from it. I find
none of ours so prone to turn to them as the most ungodly. I hope well of many
among them, but I never had the happiness to meet with a heavenly experienced
Christian, that would speak feelingly of the work of the Spirit upon their
souls, among them all. And almost all that ever I was acquainted with, were
exceeding ignorant. Many of them of no Religion at all; not knowing who Christ
is, nor very little that a Christian should know: And many of those few that
are among us, are of scandalous, careless lives: and few have any better then a
formal wordy kind of Religiousness; to say so many prayers, and observe such
hours and days, and the like. Look among the common sort of the Papists, and
impartially compare their Churches with ours, and see whether there be any
comparison to be made in the holiness of the professors! At Rome it self, the
seat of his Holiness, they have large revenues to the Church for the licensing
or permitting of whore-houses.

Reason 23. And I confess I see not how they can be excused from Idolatry in
worshipping the creature with a Divine worship. They first call the consecrated
Bread, the very flesh of Christ it self, and their Lord God; and then they
worship it as God, and carry it abroad in procession to that end, and command
all to worship it with Divine worship on pain of Damnation. To pass by their
praying to Saints and Angels, and the Idolatrous expressions that many of their
writers do use of the Virgin Mary, and their setting one Saint or other to
almost all the offices in the world, and filling the world with most ridiculous
lying stories in their Legends, even to the reproach and dishonor of
Christianity it self.

Reason 24. And it is not likely their way should be of God, which must be
carried on by such ungodly means as it is. O the cruelty that they have
exercised in the world; the streams of precious blood that they have shed; the
bone-fires that they have made of holy persons, when they had first persuaded
the world that they were the servants of the Devil; and continue to slander and
blaspheme them when they are dead! And when we discover to the people the most
palpable of their misdoings, they make them believe that all that we say are
lies. If their cause were Gods, it needed not such supports as these.

Reason 25. And their Doctrine leads not to settle the soul in a durable
well-grounded peace: for they lead men so much to their own works, and make so
light of pardon and reconciliation by the blood of Christ; and lead men so much
to ceremonies, and deny them assurance of Justification or Salvation, when they
have done all, and then design them to the flames of Purgatory when they die,
(unless the Pone will be so charitable as to ease them) that there is little
settled Peace of Conscience to be hoped for that way.

Reason 26. And though their errors are so many and so great, that most
Protestants take the Pope to be the Antichrist, yet are they so arrogant as to
pretend to Perfection, as the Quakers do: Yea to a double perfection: Not only
to be perfect without any sin (but venial, which is none) but also to be
perfect by works of supererogation, and better then ever God Commanded them to
be.

Reason 27. And to make all remediless, their Church is said to be Infallible;
and so we must never hope that they should repent of any error that ever they
incurr; for then they should give away their Infallibility. So that there is no
other cure for them, but by ceasing to be Papists; as there is no Peace to be
expected from them to the Church, but by the deposing their pretended Universal
Head, the Roman Pope.

Reason 28. And to make all desperate, and open the door to other errors, they
have added all the Apocryphal Books to the Canon of the Holy Scriptures,
contrary to the Council of Laodicea, and the consent of many ages of the
ancient Church, as Doctor Cousin has fully showed, and Dr. Reynolds, and many
others before him.

Reason 29. Yea they have added Tradition it self, to be received [with equal
pious affection, and reverence] with the holy Scriptures. Council. Trident.
Sess. 2. And this Tradition must remain unknown to others, and unproved, and we
must take their words for it, when they have thus equalled it with the Word of
God, corrupting thus the fountain of faith.

Reason 30. And when the Pope has done this mischief to the world, they say,
that no power on earth can judge him. Though General Councils have deposed
many, and Bellarmine confesses in the case of Marcellinus, that they may
declare an Infidel Pope to be out of the Church, and that the Church may bear
arms against the Pope when he would oppress it, and in Schisms may see that the
Church be provided; yet for all this none may judge the Pope; Reconcile these
if you can. But herein they are disagreed among themselves.

In this one sheet of paper I have not room to mention their many other errors,
nor to annex the proofs of all these charges. But I offer my self to make them
good to the face of any Papist living.

And now I leave it, to the judgment of those that are not willing to be
deceived, Whether the Roman or the Reformed be the truer Catholic, and which
of them is liker to be saved, and in the safer way. I doubt not but this Paper
will be answered by some body: Its a bad Cause indeed that a man of learning
can say nothing in: But if the silly people will be satisfied that its
answered, without understanding any thing in the answer that should satisfy a
reasonable man, let them even be deceived, seeing they choose deceit, and let
them take what they get by it.

July 25. 1657.
FINIS.

