A Seasonable Warning AND WORD OF Advice to all Papists, BUT Most especially to
those of the Kingdom OF FRANCE; FOR Them to turn from their Idolatry, and
gross Superstition, and speedily to Repent, and have to meet the Lord by
amendment of Life, least he come on them, and smite them unawares.

Which is good Counsel from a Friend to your souls, and a Lover of that which
would make for your eternal welfare. CHARLES BAILY.

LONDON; Printed in the Year, 1663.

A Seasonable Word IN Love to all PAPISTS, who are scattered on the face of the
Earth, and especially to those of the Kingdom of FRANCE.
OH ye Priests of the Nation, my controversy is against you, says the Lord
God of Heaven and Earth, my fury is kindled against you, which you shall never
be able to quench, says the Allmighty; your Idolatry is a noisomness unto me,
and your prayers are an abomination in my ears; your Crosses and your
Crucifixes, shall not be able to hide you from my terrible irresistible
Judgments, which is nigh to be powered forth upon you, except you repent:
Repent before the Decree be sealed against you; ye make the people drunk with
your abominable Idolatry, says the Lord God, therefore will I make you drunk
with my fury, which shall be powered forth upon you, which you shall in no wise
escape: weeping and howling shall be heard amongst you, because you have made
the Innocent to weep, says the Lord: Your strong security shall become as
rotten sticks before me; And while ye shall cry peace peace, sudden
destruction shall come upon you: the fire of my jealousy is already kindled in
your borders, which shall never be put out, until it has consumed you root
and branch, says God Allmighty; whose power has set bounds to the Sea, and
says to the proud waves thereof, Hitherto shall ye go, and no further; who
will also bind and limit your power, so that it shall not pass the determined
counsel of my God: Though you kick against him, and say in your hearts, Who is
the Lord that we should obey him? Know ye, he is the same as ever he was, in
Might, in Power, in Glory, in Majesty, in Dominion, and in Dread; who will make
all Nations to tremble before him, and will render to every man according to
his works; an hypocrite shall have a hypocrites portion, for he shall not be
able to hide from his dreadful presence; nor a false god shall not be a cover
for them, says the Lord; who will roar out of his holy habitation; and for his
own names sake will he arise, yea like a man of war, and none shall be able to
stand before him in Judgment; an Idolater shall have an Idolaters portion;
money, nor favor, shall not be able to plead the cause of any, says the Lord,
but nakedly shall every one be judged and receive according to the deeds done
in the body, whether they are good or evil; an Hireling Priest, shall have an
hirelings portion; an unbeliever, an unbelievers portion; and a deceiver, a
deceivers portion; the liar, a liars portion; they shall all be cast into the
Lake, says the Lord God, where there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth
for ever. The mighty and terrible day of Gods vengeance is come, Therefore
Awake, Awake ye people, awake and consider what you are a doing; will an Idol
save you? or an Image deliver you? says the Lord; surely nay, the Image and
the Image-maker shall perish; the Idol and the Idolater shall have their reward
together; In vain shall ye cry, when ye would be heard, seeing ye refuse to
hear when I call upon you, says the Allmighty: Your prayers to Mary, John and
James, and to the rest of your imagined Saints, shall stand you in no stead at
all; but on the contrary, shall add to your condemnation, seeing you have
chosen to your selves other Advocates and Mediators, then my Son whom I have
given for a Covenant of Light to all Nations, that he might be your Salvation
to the ends of the Earth. Hear, and give ear, ye dull and uncircumcised in
heart and ears: Is there any other name given under Heaven for Salvation but
His? He is the Light of the world, and he enlightneth every one that comes
into the world, which Light shines into every one of your Consciences,
checking and reproving every one of you for sin and evil, though never so
secret or private; can any forgive when by this Light you are condemned? Surely
nay, seeing it is my true and Faithful Witness in every one of you, which
judges righteously between me and you, without respect of persons, says the
Lord; drunkard it condemns thee for thy drunkenness; liar it condems thee for
thy lying; swearer for thy swearing; glutton for thy gluttony; and whatsoever
is sin or evil it condemns in you, whether pride, presumption, hypocrisy, or
covetousness which is idolatry; it condemns the evil, and justifies the good;
therefore shall ye be left without excuse in the day of Judgment; though ye
may buy pardons of men, yet will not I pardon you, says the Lord God, Except
you repent.

This, from the Lord is a Warning to you all; therefore while you have time
prize it, least the day of your visitation pass over your heads unawares, and
you be left to perish for ever: Mark the Word ever, and lay it to heart before
it be too late; therefore be you warned whilst love and mercy is stretched out
toward you, Priest and People, Kings, Potentates and Rulers, from the least to
the greatest; for if you refuse and reject this tender visitation of love, the
dreadful sword of Judgment shall bring you down, says the Lord; for the Lord
is risen to rule and reign over all Nations, and none shall be able to stand
before him; though the Priest preach for hire, and the Judges judge for reward,
and both take counsel against the innocent, and so between Head and Tail, the
whole Body is bound down under oppression, yet a day of restoration is coming,
and the yoke of oppression and the burden thereof, shall be taken off from the
necks of the poor and needy, that they may look toward me, says the Lord, who
will assuredly plead the cause of the afflicted, and deliver him from the hands
of him which is too strong for him. These things will the Lord do for his own
names sake, that he might be known amongst the sons of men, for he has been
more a stranger amongst them, (though he has created them) then the Ox is to
the Owner, or the Ass to his Masters Crib; many have professed him in name,
but in nature are wholly degenerated from him, there is more than cause enough
in this unrighteous generation, for the righteous to be grieved, and his soul
daily vexed to behold the wicked conversation of the Inhabitants of the Earth,
and none more than they who go under the name of Christians, from the head to
the foot of them; and all this chiefly happens from that cursed Harlot Rome,
for all Nations professing the name of Christianity, has been made drunk with
the Cup of her fornication, which they have deeply drank off; the one part of
which are called Papists, who are stark drunk with worshipping of Images, and
observing of days and times, and men, and are so horribly bewitched, as to
give money for pardons for sins, as may evidently be seen in Rome, and all the
Popes Dominions, but chiefly in Italy, where they may have Indulgences for as
little, or as much as they will, and some Indulgences perpetual, As I have seen
written in Greek Characters over an Idols-House door, belonging to Rome: And
through such witchcraft and wickedness as this is, the people are strengthened
in their sins, and glory therein. Oh! the Holy Spirit of the Lord is grieved
with these things, who has said, I will arise, and ease me of my Adversaries.
And this is the fruits of that place which the people blasphemously call The
Holy City, which abounds as much in open whoredom, and more in Idolatry,
than any City upon the face of the whole Earth; yea, whoredom is tolerated
without any manner of Contradiction at all; and every Idoll-Masse-House is a
shelter for murder, and if any murderer get but into one of them, the Priests
are by a Law bound to be a shelter unto them; this, and such like is the fruits
of that place, which people so much admire, so that many leave their own Native
Country to see it, and when they are come thither, they are carried to admire
a great Image of Brass, which they say is the Image of Saint Peter, and in
honor to it fall down on their knees, and kiss its feet, which shows they are
ignorant of the Image which Peter bare, (who was a Son of God) and of the
Apostles Doctrine, who said, Little Children keep your selves from Idols; what
agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? For ye are the Temple of the
living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I
will be their God, and they shall be my People, John 5.21. 1 Cor. 2.16. and
Levit. 26.12. Wherefore I say unto you People, Come out from amongst these
things, for God will cut off the names of the Idols out of the Land, Zech.
13.2. and the makers of Idols shall go into confusion; therefore cease from
these pilgrimages, which tend but to the worshipping of Idols; and many under a
pretense of this, go up and down the Country begging, until some of them are
ready to starve, and others steal, where they can get an opportunity, and all
under the name of the Holy Cause: And they who perform this pilgrimage, are the
most strict of them; after they have prayed to Images, and bowed to stocks and
stones, bring away a few Beads and Images, and it may be kiss the Popes foot,
whom they say is Peter's Successor, who was the Temple of God, and could not bow
to an Idol, as he does; therefore being measured by the line of true Judgment,
he will be found to be the Temple and Successor of the Devil, else he would
not bow to Idols, and teach others so to do, which shows nothing else but the
Succession of the Man of Sin, even the Antichrist, for all his actings are
absolutely against Christ, and the holy Apostles, and Prophets of God, for they
sought not the honor and riches of this world, not the greatness thereof, but
in all things sought to be humbled, that God alone might be exalted and
honored over all; for Christ said, How can ye believe whilst ye seek honor
one of another? And said this of himself, He received not honor from man, John
5.5, 41, 44. And they which did receive honor one of another, were so far from
being Christ's Disciples, of Peter's Successors, that it plainly appears that
they were not Believers, because they sought not the honor which comes from
God only; for when they sought to make Christ an earthly King, who sought his
Fathers glory in all things, he therefore denied the earthly honors which men
would have put upon him, and hid himself from them. And Peter, when Cornelius
fell down before him, Peter took him up, saying, Stand up, I my self also am a
man, Act. 10.26. So did the Angel forbid John, bidding him worship God, though
he was one of them who kept the Commandments of God: Christ Jesus, and all who
followed him, forsook all earthly possessions, and were so far from being
honored of men, that they were hated, persecuted, reviled, and shamefully
entreated of men: But the Pope when he was Elected, though in worldly pomp
before, yet enters into greater, and is honored and worshipped by men, and
causes others to be persecuted, imprisoned, and put to death; witness one of
the dear Servants of the Lord, called by name John Luff, who came to Rome as he
was moved of the Lord, with his dear Brother John Parrot, who only desiring to
speak with the Pope, were taken Prisoners; from whence the said John Luff was
taken and hanged secretly; and to cover this same wicked murder, they said, He
starved himself to death; but this their secret murder they could not hide from
the All-seeing eye, who revealed their secret murder unto me, and commanded me
to fast for a witness against them; which I did in their own Prisonhouse, or
Hospital of Madmen, where they held me in Chains for no other cause, but for
tendering my body for my Brother, as I was commanded of the Lord; they having
detained him about three years Prisoner, in which time his sufferings are hard
to be uttered with the tongue of man; neither could it hardly enter into the
hearts of men, if it were to be told unto them; for I believe from Adams day,
of all the sufferings of the holy men of God, the like could hardly be
paralel'd, the whippings, buffetings and bruises, which he received amongst
them; yet I believe the daily grief of his righteous soul, was more than all
his outward sufferings; and all this plainly makes them to appear, not to be
Christ-like, but wholly against him, for his. Spirit is the Spirit of
meekness, love, forbearance, peace, long-suffering and forgiveness; for he
teaches to forgive enemies, and to pray for them; yea, even for them that
would shamefully entreat us; in this the Pope plainly appears not to be
Christ-like, but contrary unto him, and so Antichrist, and against Christ, who
said, Bless and curse not; but the Pope curses those which will not be
subject unto him: and Christ said, He came not to destroy men's lives, but to
save them; and also said, Swear not at all; but the Pope ingages men to swear,
to fight and destroy men, so long as they live; witness the Knights of Malta,
who are also forbidden to marry, which Paul said, was a Doctrine of Devils; and
in this also he plainly appears to be absolutely against Christ, who had not
whereon to lay his head in this world; but the Pope is not contented to have
several houses for himself to dwell in, but inricheth all his posterity,
purchasing to one of his kindred a Prince-ship; and by this it appears, he
has not forsaken all, but covets all, or as much as in him lies to have:
Christ when he rode was contented with an Ass, but the Pope when he goes
forth, though but a mile or two, is carried by men, and notwithstanding has
several Horses to attend upon him, and a Coach with six pompered Horses to tend
upon him empty, which is a horrid shame for any single eye to behold in such a
one, who takes upon him the name of Christ's Vicar upon Earth: did he do it
only in the name of an Earthly Prince, his abomination would not be altogether
so great; but this shows him to be in the way of the vain Heathen, and not a
man of God, nor God-like in these actions; for Paul when he was called of God
into his holy Ministry, he immediately obeyed the Heavenly voice, and went and
preached the Gospel, and not go and shut himself up in great possessions, and
there give forth Indulgences for pardons for sins; but on the contrary declared
the terrors of the Lord against all sin, and said, Such as men sowed, such
should they reap; if they sowed to the flesh, they should of the flesh reap
corruption, but if they sowed to the Spirit, they should reap life everlasting;
And also said, That the wages of sin is death: So that this was far from giving
pardons for sins, as the Pope does. Christ says, The Heathen exercise Lordship
one over another, but with you it shall not be so; speaking to those who had
truly forsaken all to follow him: He that will be greatest among you, let him
be servant to all; for he that exalts himself shall be abased, and he that
abaseth himself shall be exalted, says Christ, who said, Learn of me, for I am
meek and lowly in heart. But with the Pope, and in his Dominion there is
Lording and exercising Lordship one over another, striving who shall be
greatest amongst them, as may be seen in the Ecclesiastical Courts in Rome, and
elsewhere; where they are suing and striving for honor; and by this they show,
they are wholly degenerated from the holy life of Christ, and his righteous
Commands, who was a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief, who sought not
his own glory, but the glory of him that sent him, who was in travels, and
tumults, in revilings and reproaches, giving his back to the smiter, and his
cheeks to him which plucked off the hair; when he was reviled, reviled not
again, when he was persecuted he entreated, and rendered not evil for evil, but
sought the good of all, and bore the contradiction of sinners. This was his
holy life and example, in the days of his flesh, even in that body which was
prepared him to do the will of his Father in, leaving all, his holy examples to
follow. And now let the Pope and all his Adherents be measured by these fruits,
they will be found wholly contrary, and against him; for instead of being
acquainted with grief, they cause others to be grieved, and shut themselves up
in the fattest possessions, and they are fatned themselves, as for the day of
slaughter, sporting themselves with Wine and Music, destroying and devouring
the fat of the Creation; this is apparent to every single eye: And the Pope
instead of bearing the contradiction of sinners, is one with them, and
tollerates them in it, and suffers none to come to speak with him, without
using a deal of flattering and deceit; and when they do obtain the liberty,
must fall down and worship before him, and commonly kiss his toe, which is a
horrible and detestable thing in the sight of God; and instead of being
persecuted, causes all to be persecuted within his Dominion, that will not bow
to these his wicked practices. And instead of submitting his body to do the
will of God, he pompers it daily, Dives-like, whilst the poor fatherless and
widow is oppressed; one need not go far to prove this, for it may be seen all
over his Dominion, in the open streets. Christ says, Freely ye have received,
freely give; For his Ministry is a free Ministry; but the Popes is altogether
contrary, for there is naught to be had of his Ministers, but what the people
must give money for; yea, when they have given money all the days of their
life, they must give money to be prayed for after they are dead: Ages and
Generations cannot parallel this horrible cheat, which they through deceit and
hypocrisy deceive the hearts of the simple with; not an Age (I say) since the
Apostasy can show the like. And thus it is, the people are spending their money
for that which is not bread, and their labor for that which profits not,
ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, as plainly
appears; for if they had come to the knowledge of the truth, the truth would
have made them free, as says Christ, who preached no such thing as Purgatory,
neither did he tell people, they must give money for Masses to be said for them
after they were dead, to be had out from thence, as the Popes doctrine
teaches: So this is not with, but against Christ, and so Antichrist, for says
Christ, Whosoever is not with me, is against me; and the tree is known by its
fruit; and this is a mark for evermore, for by their fruits we know them;
though they may put on Sheeps clothing, yet inwardly they are ravening Wolvs,
alienated from the Spirit of truth, which would lead into all truth; and being
from it erred, are given over to believe lies, that they might be damned, and
so run greedily on in the way of destruction; and having lost the key of true
knowledge, have run on in the fleshly knowledge and wisdom, which is earthly,
sensual, and devilish, and in it are at enmity against God; for that wisdom
never knew him, but on the contrary ever persecuted them which did, it being
the Seed of the Bondwoman, which persecuted the Seed of the freewoman, from
righteous Abel unto this day, enmity being put between the two Seeds for ever;
and each Seed is manifestly known by its fruits; the one gendereth to sin,
bondage, and corruption; and the other keeps the Commandments of God; the one a
Persecutor and Murderer, and the other a Sufferer: So here one may see the Pope
and all his Adherents, as in a glass, what seed and lineage they are of, even
by these their fruits, which to their faces testifies what Generation they are
of; witness their Inquisition, and places of tortures which they have; so that
if any seem to arise or stir among them, and declare any thing which is not
altogether suitable to their lusts, then presently to the Inquisition with
them, away with them, they are Heretics, and deserve not to live, and so
imprison, and shut them up, and it is much if ever they come out, except by
their cruel usage they be made to conform to their Wills; this is evident
amongst them, insomuch that many of them have been kept many years, and not
been told the cause why; for if they have but a Jealousy of a man, he shall
hardly escape their hands: And now what they have to be spoken against, let the
moderate Reader seriously consider, if there be any thing else but abominable
Idolatry in all their Worship, even such Idolatry, as all the Heathen of old
never exceeded: As for Example, in Rome, which is the Fountain from whence all
this abomination springs, they pourtray the likeness of an Old Man upon a Wall,
and they call him the Image of God the Father, with a Cross before him, with
the Portraicture of a dead man upon it, and the likeness of a Pigeon on the top
of it, and this in their Imaginations they call the Father, Son, and Spirit;
And this being openly tolerated in Rome, the bordering Nations are made stark
drunk with the same abominations and Idolatry: So that if one in love and in
pity to their souls, speak to reclaim them from their gross darkness, they are
ready to tear them in pieces, though it be plainly manifest, that they are of
those who have changed the Glory of the Incorruptible God, into Images made
like unto Corruptible men; wherefore God has given them up to uncleanness,
through their lost and corrupt hearts, who have changed the Truth of God into a
lie, and do worship the Image which themselves have made, more than the
Creator, who is God blessed for ever. This is such gross darkness as was in
Egypt, even such as might be felt: And in God there is no ancientness of days,
who is a Spirit, infinite, and eternal, who created all things by the Word of
his power, and upholdeth all things thereby, unto this day. To whom will ye
liken me? says the Lord, Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my Footstool;
has not my hand made all these things? all things being created in and by the
Word of his Power, which is Christ Jesus, for so is his Name, who was glorified
by his Father before the World began, and is the express Image of his Father,
whose likeness cannot be made by the hands of men; therefore it is horrible
Idolatry for you to make the Image of a dead man, and say it is the Image of
Christ, and so bewitch the minds of people with those false conceptions and
imaginations; woe be to them by whom these things are wrought and upheld, for
the Vengeance and Indignation of the Lord God is kindled against them, for they
are the unreasonable Taskmasters of Egypt, who keep the Seed in bondage and
slavery, so that the people cannot come to the knowledge of the true God, that
him only they might serve, honor and obey in all things, who is the only King,
Judge, and Lawgiver of his people, who shows mercy unto all who come unto him
in his Sons Name; for there is no other Name given under Heaven for Salvation,
but his: And all who are in the praying to Saints, are in the wicked Idolatry,
and do forsake the Fountain of living mercy, and have hewed to your selves
Cisterns, which will hold no Water: For the true Voice says, Come unto me all
ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest: And says the
Prophet, All you which are a thirst come, and you which have no money, come buy
and eat, yea, come buy Wine and Milk without money and without price. Why do ye
lay out your money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that which
satisfies not? Hear, and eat that which is good, and let your souls delight
themselves in fatness. Incline your ear, and come unto me, hear, and your souls
shall live: And I will establish with you my everlasting Covenant, even the
sure mercies of David: Behold, I have given him for a Witness to the people.
This is all free, even the free gift of God, Who has so loved the World, that
he has given his only begotten Son into the World, that all through him might
believe; for whosoever believes in him, shall not abide in darkness, but shall
have the Light of life; who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life; who has
enlightened every one who comes into the World with his true Light; and they
which turn to the Light wherewith Christ has enlightened them, they come to
Christ, who is the free Gift of God. This likes not the Pope and his Ministers;
for they make the people pay tenths of all their increase, besides Money for
Beads, Crosses, and Crucifixes, and Money for pardon for sins, and for Masses
to be said for them while they are alive, and after they are dead, and Money
for Christening of Children, as they call it, and Money for Marrying, and all
that they do; which thing shows plainly, that his Ministers are not like the
Ministers of the Gospel, for that was and is a free Ministry, and the Ministers
thereof ministers forth freely, as they have received, and are moved of God
freely thereunto. So the Pope is not with Christ, but against him in all his
actions; for Tithes were only due to Levi, and that from his Brethren; yet they
were not Levi's, but the Lords, and was to be put into the storehouses for to
relieve the widow, the fatherless, and the stranger: but how the Pope and his
Adherents does this, let the wise in heart judge; who devour the Tenths and
much more upon their lusts, as the Nations may witness against them; which
plainly shows, they are neither of the Tribe of Levi, nor of the Flock of
Christ: And the Apostle, who was a Minister of the Gospel, speaking of Levi,
said, That Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change of the
Law; for the Priesthood being changed, it is evident that the Law is disanulled
which took them; so that this paying of Tithes, is but a usurpation of those
which crope in (in this dark night of Apostasy) which Christ foretold us of,
saying, The Night would come, wherein no man could work: And Paul saw this
coming in, For I know this, says he, that after my departure shall grievous
Wolves enter in among you, not sparing the Flock: And such did come in, who
taught things they ought not for filthy lucres sake. The Pope and his Adherents
will plainly appear to be of that stock, and spring from that cursed Root and
Spirit, as his and their fruits will plainly manifest; for they who forsook the
right way did run on in the way of Balaam, for gifts and rewards; but they have
far exceeded all their Ancestors, and will not be content with a gift and
reward, but rob and take by force, where they cannot have it otherwise, so far
as their power reaches: And this running out of the way and commandment of
God, is the cause why they profit not the people at all, though they creep into
houses and lead silly women captive, laden with sin and diverse lusts; and
though they are ever learning, (of their Teachers) yet come not to the
knowledge of the Truth, which would make them free from sin and lust, and bring
into that life which was before a lie was. And this is not the fruit of the
Popes Ministers, for the furthest they bring people to, is to bring them to be
zealous to pray to a dead stock or stone, which they make like unto men and
women, and tell them it is the likeness or representation of God and Christ,
and the Virgin Mary, St. John, St. Peter, and the like; and the Mystery of
iniquity has so wrought amongst them, that though they manifestly prostrate
themselves before them, yet they say it is not to them, which is darkness
unheard of in Generations past: And they are not content to commit this
abominable Idolatry themselves, but would constrain all others to do the like;
as witness the Protestants in this Nation, who are constrained to shun and
avoid the way, when one of these their Gods is carried about, else the people
are ready to stone them, if they do not put off their Hats, or bow unto them:
These things are cause of sadness to the hearts of the righteous to consider;
therefore God will overturn it, and cast it into the pit of confusion, from
whence it sprang, even from Mystery Babylon, where the Whore sits, who has
made all Nations about her drunk with the Cup of her fornication, which has
been forced upon people, by the power of the Beast, through the Enchantments of
the false Prophets; but their torment is near and hastneth apace to come upon
them, for the Whore and painted Harlot which rides upon the Beast, and the
false Prophets which attend her, shall be taken and cast into the lake, which
burns with fire and brimstone for ever: These are true and faithful sayings,
which shall shortly come to pass, and blessed shall all they be in that day
which have not received the mark of the Beast in their hands, nor in their
foreheads, for they only shall live and reign for ever with him, whose right
it is to reign over all Nations; and for his sake will God overturn, overturn,
overturn, until his holy will be accomplished; and the Nations shall never see
peace more until that day, for the mystery of iniquity has fully wrought, and
he that has let shall be taken out of the way in this the day of Gods
Allmighty power, in which he will thresh the Mountains to dust, and will honor
his Saints, so that they shall have power to bind Kings in Chains, and Nobles
in Fetters of Iron, who also will turn the wisdom of the wise backwards, and
will make the Diviners mad, and turn the counsels of their Achitophels into
foolishness. In this day the churl shall no more be called liberal, neither
shall he that does wickedly, be called good; light shall not be put for
darkness, nor darkness for light, without a manifest Woe and Judgment upon him
which does it, says the Lord God Allmighty, who has been as a stranger
amongst the sons of men, as though he had not created them, yea, more a
stranger and unknown unto the chiefest of men, than the Ox is to his Owner, or
the Ass to his Masters Crib. It does even pierce my heart to consider the
woeful degeneration of mankind, who was created in the Image of his Creator,
and whilst he remained in that holy Image, nothing but righteousness was
wrought by him, and he enjoyed the peace of God in him, and in this state there
was no oppression; but through disobedience he was driven from his maker by
giving ear to another Teacher, by which means he was lead unto lust and
uncleanness, and to commit it with greediness, yea to drink up iniquity as the
Ox drinks up water; so as he naturally did at first obey the will of his
Creator, by which means he was wholly a Servant unto God, bringing forth the
works of righteousness and holiness; so through disobedience, he became a
Servant to Satan bringing forth nothing but sin and corruption, even to the
grieving of his Creator; so that it repented him, that he had made man; yet he
bore their iniquity until the measure thereof was full, and then swept them
away with the flood of his wrath; and from that day has born and forborne the
iniquity of many People and Nations, until this your time, even until the
filling up of the largest measure of iniquity, that ever yet was known, so that
righteousness is not to be found in the earth, nor in the Inhabitants thereof;
therefore as sure as the righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth destroyed the old
world with the flood of his wrath, so will he this by fire, which is already
kindled in the Nations, though at present they perceive it not, but it shall
overtake them unawares: Therefore this is sent as a warning unto this Nation of
France, that they may take warning thereby, and repent, least they be consumed
by the flame and fire of Gods wrath and indignation, which is ready to break
forth upon them.

And now ye people of this Nation, seriously consider (high and low, rich and
poor, bond and free, male and female) what ye are a doing, and with the light
of Christ Jesus wherewith he has enlightened you, search whose works ye are a
doing, and who it is you obey, and whose command you have for the things you
do, whether from God or from men; for assuredly according to the Traditions of
men, God cannot be worshipped nor served, for God is a Spirit; And the true
Worshippers worship him in Spirit and Truth, and by such only is he worshipped;
therefore cease from all your Taskmasters which lay heavy burdens upon you,
telling you that you must pray to the Virgin Mary, and to the Saints, saying
ten Prayers to her, and one to God, showing that they exalt her in their
Imaginations above God; besides this is clear against the Doctrine of Christ,
who bid them ask in his name, for says he, Whatsoever ye ask my Father in my
Name, it shall be given you. (Mark that) and take good notice of it, for he is
the only Mediator between God and man, 1 Timothy 2.5. For there is one Mediator
between God and man, the man Christ Jesus; for he is the Mediator of a better
Covenant than that which stood in outward meats and observations, which is
established upon better promises; and for this cause he is the Mediator of the
New Testament, that by means of death for the redemption of the transgressions
that were under the first Testament, that they which are called might enjoy the
promise of eternal Inheritance: Therefore people are to come to Jesus the
Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks
better things than that of Abel; therefore see that ye refuse not him that
speaks from Heaven, who says, What ye ask my Father in my Name, it shall be
given you; therefore cease from asking in any other name: Search and read, and
be no longer deceived, for God is come to look for fruit in the earth, and
every tree which is not found bearing fruit to God, shall be cut down, and cast
into the fire. Read the Parable of the Figtree, and lay it to heart before it
be too late, and cease from your Taskmasters which tell you a house of stone is
a Church, contrary to the Scripture which says the Church is in God, the
ground and pillar of truth; you may see in this they also deceive you, 1 Thessalonians.
1.1. For in the true Church, nothing that defiles can enter; but in yours,
drunkards, liars, and all manner of unclean persons may enter. Thus you are
deceived by the lying and lightness of your Teachers, who through covetous
practices make Merchandise of your souls; for were you truly instituted, you
would come to know, that the Saints bodies are the Temple of the Holy Ghost,
and their bodies was not for fornication (which is openly tolerated amongst
you,) but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body; therefore you are ignorant
of this Doctrine of Paul, who said, Know ye not that your bodies are the
Members of Christ; for if you were not ignorant thereof, you would be afraid to
make them the members of an Harlot, For who is joined to an Harlot is one body,
for two (says he) shall be one flesh. Therefore repent and return to God, and
then you will come to witness your bodies the Temples of the Holy Ghost, which
God will put in you, and you shall no more be your own, for through repentance
you will come to know that ye are bought with a price, and so will come to
glorify God in your bodies and spirits, which then will be Gods, as you come
to the blood of cleansing, as the Saints of old did, and so did witness God to
live and walk in them, which was a true Christians state, for they were led by
the Spirit of God, and so became the Sons of God; but if any come amongst you
now, and say they have the Spirit of God in them, ye make a mock at them, and
say they are mad, and so are ready to stone them, though the true Christians
did witness the same, else they could not have been Christians, For it is the
life of Christ in the Creature which makes him a Christian, through which he
comes to witness the promise of God to be fulfilled, which the Prophet Joel
prophesied of, saying, Thus shall it come to pass, afterward, that I will
pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall
prophecy, your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions;
And also upon your servants and handmaids in those days, will I pour out my
Spirit. Therefore I in the Spirit do declare unto you my Country men, this
acceptable day, that you may turn from your sins and find mercy, that the
pouring out of the Spirit ye may come to witness amongst you, which will lead
you into all truth, and from your deceitful Teachers, so will you come to know
the spirit of prophecy, as the Saints of old did, who were truly sanctified
through the blood of the Lamb; for says Paul unto them, You may all prophecy
one by one; which was the true Churches order.

And again, Your Priests tells you, you must look for teaching from them, but
the Covenant of God is, That all his people shall be taught of him; For this
shall be the Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel: After these
days (says the Lord) I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in
their hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my People, and they
shall no more teach every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying,
know the Lord, for they shall all know me from the least to the greatest of
them, says the Lord, For I will forgive their iniquities, and I will remember
their sins no more. And all the children of the Covenant come to witness this
which is their great peace, for they that come to witness the Anointing, need
not man's teaching; but if this you should come to witness, your Priests should
soon be discovered, which is the cause they every way hold you in bondage and
blindness, being Ministers thereof themselves, as manifestly appears by
their fruits, for were they Ministers of light, they would bring people to the
light, and so to the true knowledge of God, for God is light, says the
Apostle; God is light, says he, and in him is no darkness at all; and if we
walk in the light, as he is in the light, then have we fellowship one with
another. Mark, the Saints fellowship was in the light; therefore he that says
He knows God, and walks in darkness, is a liar; for he that comes to the
light, comes to know the teachings of God, which the everlasting Ministry
brings into. So here People you may measure your Priests by the Scriptures of
truth.

And again, Your Priests tell you, you must give money to pray for those which
are dead, which is an invention of the Devil, the deceiver, from whence that
deceit sprung, to make you believe there is a place called Purgatory, to be
purged in, after you are dead, which thing is only taught for filthy lucres
sake; for the Scriptures no where speak of a Purgatory for men to be purged in
after they are dead, but on the contrary it says, As the Tree falls, so it
lies, for such as a man sows, such shall he reap; therefore the true Ministry
was for to bring people to the Spirit of God, that so their sowing might be to
the Spirit, the fruits of which is life everlasting. So here they were brought
off from the works of the flesh, by the virtue of the blood of Christ Jesus,
and came to be cleansed from all sin, for says Paul, When you were servants of
sin, you were free from righteousness, Romans 6.20. (Mark) They were made free
from sin; so here was no need of a Purgatory to be purged from sin after death,
being made free from sin while in the body, as Adam was, and as true Christians
were, who followed Christ through the regeneration, even to the witnessing of
the new birth, which sinueth not, as says the Scriptures, He that is born of
God sins not, neither can he, because his seed remains in him: And as we
know that God is righteous, so we know that he that does righteousness is born
of him; and so this is the Christians boldness in the day of Judgment, that as
he is, so are they in this present world; so according to Christ's words, they
come to be perfect, even as their Father which is in Heaven is perfect. And
this is a true Christians life, to be like Christ, to live in him as he does in
the Father; such only are Christians, who witness Christ in them, as the
Father is in him; for, people read and consider, as you prize the salvation of
your precious souls, For the soul that sins, shall dye, as says the
Prophet. Likewise your Priests tell you, you must honor and invoke the Saints
that are dead, and get pieces of their bones to carry about you, and such
vanity as this do they feed you with, for says Christ, The flesh profits
nothing, but the Spirit quickneth. This he spoke to them who were looking at
his flesh outwardly; but did you once come to the Spirit, which only profits,
you would come to know the will of God fulfilled in you, which is your
sanctification, and then you will be ashamed to make relics of one another
clothes, flesh or bones, but will come to know the true Sanctification to be in
and by the Word, which is Christ; for so Christ prayed, Sanctify them by thy
word, thy word is truth; and they who come to know the truth, come to know the
word in them, which sanctifies them through soul and body; and this word David
knew right well, and the virtue thereof, who said, Thy word have I hid in my
mouth, that I might not sin against thee. And if you once come to the knowledge
and power of his word, it will keep you also from sinning against God, which is
the true sanctified state; and this is no new Doctrine, for Moses the true
Servant of the Lord preached the same to the children of Israel, saying, The
word is nigh you, even in your mouths and in your hearts: (Mark) the word was
nigh them, even in them; and this was the word of faith the Apostle Paul
preached; he that comes to the word of faith, comes to that which purifies and
makes clean; and here the sanctification comes to be witnessed in the
particular, by which means the perfect unity comes to be known and enjoyed with
the Saints, with Christ in God; so here will be no need to invoke one another,
but all will be asked in the name of Christ the power of God, which power will
infallibly be heard and answered of God, For whatsoever ye shall ask of the
Father in my name, it shall be given you, says Christ Jesus, who is the true
Teacher and Shepherd of the soul, even of all that come unto him, who will
teach them how to pray, and to whom, even God the Judge of all: And by this you
may sufficiently prove your Pope and Priests Doctrine, to be none of Christ's,
but contrary to him, which is Antichrist. You are also forbidden by them meats
and marriage, which the Apostle said was a Doctrine of Devils, speaking lies in
hypocrisy unto you, having their Consciences seared with an hot Iron, for they
forbid you that which God has created to be received with thanksgiving of them
which believe and know the truth; for every Creature of God is good, if it be
received with thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by the Word of God and Prayer,
1 Timothy 3.4, 5. For unto the pure, all things are pure; For they that come to
the purifying, come to know all things pure unto them; but to the impure,
nothing is pure, their minds and consciences being defiled; (therefore men
knowing this) but who comes to the true hope which purifies even as Christ is
pure, which is a purifying throughout in soul and body in this life, yea, and
gives Dominion over Sin, Hell, Death and the Devil; and he that witnesses this
hope in him, needs not a Purgatory to purge him after he is dead, for he comes
to be purified as Christ is pure, as also says the Scripture. This is the true
Christian hope, whereby he comes to be-purified and made clean, as also knowing
that God has created all things for them that fear him; but to the impure (as
I have said) nothing is pure unto them; though they may lie and say they fast
when they only forbear one sort of meat, and eat another, which will but add
to their condemnation; and their Priests which does teach them to lie, will not
be able to deliver them, but the Teachers and the Teached shall perish
together, except they repent, for the Lake is prepared for the liar; for is it
not damnable lying and hypocrisy for men to say they fast, when they only
forbear one sort of meat, and eat another? Is not fish flesh? Does not the
Apostle call it so? And in this your pretended fast, you drink Wine, and feast
your selves without fear, whilst some have hardly bread to eat. These things
are an abomination unto the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, for his wrath you
shall surely feel for this hypocrisy, except you repent; though you say you
hope to be saved, that shall stand you in no stead in the dreadful day of
vengeance which is very nigh you, For the hypocrites hope shall perish, as
says the Scripture; and though some of you who are more zealously given than
others, may fast and hang down your heads like a Bulrush for a day,
Pharisee-like, and give alms to be seen of men, which is as though you offered
up Swines blood, or as the cutting off of a Dogs neck, it being in that nature
which crucifies the Just in your selves, even that which would lead you (out of
observation of days and times) up to God, which was before time was; and
until you come to take diligent heed to this just principle of God in your
selves, which condemns for all hypocrisy, sin and deceit, (profess what you
will, it will stand you in no stead, ye though you should give all your goods
to the poor, and your bodies to be burnt, it will avail you nothing) for it
leads all who diligently follow it, to do to all men, as they would others
should do unto them, which is the true Christian life, in which only all works
are accepted with God, for it is the fulfilling the Law and the Prophets; for
the Law was added because of transgression, and until there be a fulfilling of
it in you, ye are under the curse, profess what you will: Some may say this is
an hard saying, who can bear it? Did not Christ Redeem us from under the curse
of the Law? and was not he made manifest for that end? I answer, to this end
was the Son of God made manifest in the flesh, to condemn sin in the flesh,
that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, and all who come to
know the teachings of God in the Spirit, know him to fulfill the Law, not to
abolish or destroy it, in as much as it is righteous, and lays hold on
nothing but the transgressor to condemnation; therefore says Paul, The
Ministration of condemnation was glorious in its time; and this all the Saints
and holy men of God did witness, Christ the righteousness of God manifest in
them, who did all their works in them, and for them, and by which all boasting
was excluded, because It is not of him that wills, nor him that runs, but
in God that shows mercy; the strength of the Creature being to stand still,
bearing his daily cross, and thereby is made subject unto him who is able to
save to the utmost all who come unto him in and through Christ, the Door,
Power, and Wisdom of God, who is the Light of the World: Therefore Salvation
is not of works, but of grace, which is freely tendered to all mankind upon the
face of the whole earth; for the grace of God that brings Salvation has
appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts,
we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world; looking
for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearance of the great God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works,
Tit. 2.11, 14. Therefore were your Priests truly in the knowledge of God and
his Mysteries, they would bring you to the knowledge of the Mystery that has
been hid from Ages, which without controversy is great, to wit, God Manifest
in the flesh, which was Christ in the Saints, the Hope of glory; and were you
rightly instructed, you would come to know the riches of the glory of this
Mystery, Col. 1.27. for it would be your glory also, for it was the Saints hope
of their glory, which hope will perfectly save you, and cleanse you from sin
and evil, and thereby purify you as Christ is pure; for this is the only and
true hope, which anchors and stays the soul: And if you once come to this, then
their Trade is spoiled; but they are as ignorant of it as you your selves: but
the true Ministers of the New Covenant preached nothing but what themselves
were witnesses of; therefore says John, That which was from the beginning,
which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, and looked upon, and our
hands have handled of the Word of life, that they did declare to the people,
that the people might come to have fellowship with them, and their fellowship
was with the Father and with his Son, because their living and walking was in
the Light, as God was in the Light, 1 John And this is the end of the true
Ministers ministry, who were Ministers of the Spirit, and not of the Letter,
neither did they boast of other men's sayings made ready to their hands, as your
Priests do, for what they pray, preach, and speak unto you, are other men's
works, yea, the greatest part of your worship, which is the Mass, and the
rest; thus they make merchandise of your for dishonest gain, made, and put in
by the will of men, and by the will of men are upholden, and guarded by a Law
that none must speak against their open abominations: but the day of the Lord
has overtaken them as a thief in the night, and their works of darkness must,
and will be brought to light, let them fence themselves never so wisely, and
dig as deep as Hell for Counsel; yea, the day is come, and though they should
exceed all their forefathers in burning and persecution, it would but add to
their torment, for the Sword of the Lord is drawn, and will never be sheathed
until it has cut them up root and branch, yea, the cup of Gods fury is filled
even to the brim, and they must drink the dregs thereof; though they be made
and upholden by men, yet of a truth men shall not be able to save them; for let
them daub and flatter never so much, to make them a wall or shelter, the wall
which is daubed and the daubers shall fall together: This of a truth, is the
determination, will, and counsel of the most high God; though briars and thorns
do set themselves against him in battle, all shall be in vain, for the breath
of his mouth shall burn and consume them for ever; for he of a truth is arisen,
before whom all Nations are as the drop of a bucket, and as the small dust of
the balance. Behold he takes the Isles as a very little thing, yea all
Nations before him are as nothing, and they are counted to him less than
nothing, and vanity: He measures the waters in the hollow of his hand, and
meets out the Heavens with a span, and comprehends the dust of the earth in
a measure, and weighs the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance. I
say, even he whose presence fills Heaven and Earth, is risen to plead the cause
of the Innocent, the poor and the needy, and to make way for the meek, that
they only may reign over the works of his hands, in his Son, who must, and
shall reign over all for ever; and this will he perfect for his own names sake,
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it; therefore it is a vain thing for men to
cloth themselves some in one habit, and some in another; and one says he is
of such an Order, and another says he is of such an Order, whilst they are
all in the order of sin and uncleanness, the root thereof stands firm and
untouched within them, though they disguise themselves like so many Anticks in
several shapes, more like men of unmodest deportment, than like men fearing
God, which does in no wise consist in such like disguised habits, but in a
clean heart; for The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, which leads
to the true understanding of the use of all the creatures of God, and how to
use them in decency and true order, and in the moderation, for which end they
were created and made, even to serve man, and man his Creator, in fear, with a
clean heart and pure mind; but man being degenerated from this holy life, gets
into habits and meats by diversities, and calls some holyer than other, though
in the beginning they were all created good, as it is written, Every creature
of God is good, and nothing to be refused. But these men get into several
habits, and call them holy, as though the wool that came from the sheeps back
availed any thing: and thus the Pharisees were in days past, in outward
observations of days and things, and went in long robes, esteeming one thing
holyer than another, for which Christ rebuked them, saying, Whether is it
greater, the gift or the Altar which sanctifies the Gift? And likewise in
those days being ignorant of that which sanctifies and makes clean, by which
all things comes to be sanctified to the Creature, whether meat, drink or
apparel, through the use of which only they should have had regard to the
Giver, who regards not, nor respects the person of any man, much less the
clothing, or meats, or drinks, which desileth not the man; but of all Nations
He that fears God, and works righteousness, is accepted of him, as says
the Scripture: But these things the Apostles saw was crept in amongst many in
their days, as Touch not, taste not, handle not, which thing had a fair show,
but it was but willworship, and voluntary humility, and nothing to the edifying
of the body, and so by degrees has crope in more and more, as the dark night
of apostasy came in, which time Christ Jesus said would come, wherein no man
could work. And also the Apostle saw before his decease (as I said before) even
such a falling away in his time, that he said, All Asia was turned from him.
Likewise Peter, John, and Jude speak of it; for John in his Revelation, saw all
the world wandering after the Beast, and none could buy or sell, but those who
received the mark of the Beast; yea such will be the misery of the sons of men,
who are wandering after him, saying, Who is able to make war with him? And the
Harlot rides upon the Beast clothed with Scarlet, with the Cup full of
abomination and filthiness in her hand, which has made all Nations drunk. Let
him which has wisdom, read and understand, and consider whether the Pope and
Cardinals in Rome, does not wear her Livery without and within, yea or nay; are
they not built upon blood, and to this very day are thirsting after it? if not,
what means their Inquisitions, and secret places of murder? yet they themselves
will show and tell of the place they call by the name of Amphiatar, where they
say the Christians were put in in former times to be destroyed with wild
Beasts, though the same they themselves do at this very day, even to those who
have the least desire after the Lord, by which they come to misturst the
Idolatrous way they are in; and if this be perceived amongst them, then
presently he or she is termed under the name of an Heritick, and then to the
Inquisition with them, where the wild bruit Beasts set about them to devour
them, though at first they may flatter and fawn upon them like a Dog, and if
they see they cannot prevail with them that way, it is much if ever they escape
their devouring hands; and this is not unknown to many: but the Lord God of
Heaven and Earth is risen to make inquisition for the blood of the slain, and
it is not the Inquisition which shall be able to conceal it from him, for he
will rip it open, and lay it desolate for ever, so that it shall become a hiss
and a byword by all the passers by, for it shall be made like their Amphiatar
for ever, open and free, and Gods eternal Glory and Truth shall freely be
declared in it, with free consent every way; and this will the Lord work for
his own Gloryes sake, and none can prevent the Lords purpose, which he has
determined, for all the world has wandered after the Beast, and has given
their glory and honor unto him; I say notwithstanding all this, the Lord will
raise up to himself an holy seed, which shall make war with him, and overcome
him; his chosen ones have already read the number of his name, which is the
number of a man, and all that rise up and join in war with the Beast against
them, woe, woe will be to them for ever. The Angels of the Lord are going forth
with Commission from the God of Heaven, to curse the Earth because of the
abominations of the Inhabitants thereof. Therefore O ye people, be awakened and
warned, and seriously consider what you are a doing, for of a truth woe and
vengeance will be powered out upon you in an unresistable manner, except ye
repent speedily; therefore as one who is a follower of the Lamb through
tribulations, do I warn you (in obedience to my King and Lawgiver) to kiss
the Son least he be angry, that ye may obtain mercy in this day of love and
visitation to the sons of men; for the Lord has certainly determined to reap
the earth of all corruption, which abounds and superaboundeth therein; the
harvest is fully ripe, and long has the Lord born and forborne, and his
righteous Spirit has long been oppressed, even as a Cart is pressed, which is
laden with sheaves; therefore will he plead with all flesh with the sword and
with fire, which none shall be able to withstand; therefore be ye warned that
your souls may live.

And though many of them make vows in their own wills, to abstain from meats
and women, this shall stand them in no stead, for in words they say they will
do this and that, but being out of Gods will, lust burns in their hearts, they
not being come to that which would subdue the evil in themselves,; and these
are they which the Apostle speaks of, They promise others liberty, whilst they
themselves are the servants of corruption; for of what a man is overcome, by
the same he is brought in bondage, 2 Pet. 2.19. for at best, they say they are
of such a Saints Order, which will avail them nothing, they not being
sanctified themselves, were it so that Saints were of several Orders and Life's,
but that is an absolute lie, and a false conception; and this is only to blind
the minds of the simple-hearted, thereby to get the more several Inheritances,
and fat possessions to themselves, by going in several habits, and going under
several denominations, by which policy and deceit, (where they have been most
believed and received) they have got the fattest and best possessions, and
notwithstanding go a begging, and a roving up and down, and take and receive
from them who have great families to maintain, which thing is grievous to be
born in the Land; but God will judge for this hypocrisy and deceit, and ease
the Land of this oppression, of a Truth, and their lies and feignedness shall
be laid open to every eye; for the Saints were not of many Orders, but of one
only true Order, which was truth in the Inward parts, which is the root and
ground of Religion, in which they did not shut up themselves in houses, and
live in idleness, and eat the bread thereof, which the poor labors hard for,
and purchases by the sweat of their brows, and with it these men under a
pretense of holiness feed themselves without fear; and this is not the order of
Saints, but of belly-gods, for the Apostle writing unto the Saints, says, He
that will not work, let him not eat, He being an Example unto them; though he
labored in the Gospel above many, yea, and the care of all the Churches were
upon him, yet notwithstanding his own hands ministered to his necessities, which
is a witness against the idle drones of this Generation, which you take for
your Confessors, and they pretend to have power to absolve you from your sins,
and are not cleansed from their own. Therefore hear and consider all people,
who are thus kept in blindness and ignorance, there is nothing but the pure
Holy Spirit of God, which is able, or can forgive sins, for to it only is the
power committed, and not unto you who live in sins: And therefore be awakened
out of this horrid delusion; for Christ Jesus said to his Apostles, Whose sins
ye remit, they are remitted; they received also a Commission from God to preach
the Gospel, which none can do without the gift of the Holy Ghost, which is only
able to forgive, save and destroy; for though it was said to Peter, Thou art
Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, this was not spoken unto him
as he was a fleshly man, but as he had the revelation of the Holy pure Spirit
of God, upon which the Church is built, for the Church is in God, who is the
only ground and pillar of truth, against which the Gates of Hell can never
prevail, though they prevailed against Peter after them words were spoken unto
him, so far as that he denied his Master; so here, you that are not stark drunk
and poisoned with this conception, that the Incorruptible Church of God (which
is only built with living stones, elect and precious, Christ Jesus being the
chief corner stone) is built upon a man, which is corrupt, for it is evident
Peter is dead, and some of you say you have his bones amongst you, which shows
their foundation to be decayed, had it been upon his person, which never could
be, but upon his spirit, by which he made that good confession, That Christ was
the Son of God, which none can truly do without, nor call him Lord. Therefore
Pope, Cardinals, Monks, Jesuits and Friars of all sorts come forth and
vindicate your selves, and show your Commission for what you do, and from whom
you had it, for from Peter, nor from Christ, you are never able to show you had
it, neither are you able to vindicate your Doctrine and Practice, no further
then your Inquisition Law, and Prison will reach; all which weapons will fail
you in the terrible day of vengeance, which is coming upon your heads; for as
you have made the Inhabitants of the earth drink deep of the Cup of Mystery
Babylons Harlots, you likewise shall be made to drink deep of the Cup of Gods
vengeance, even the dregs thereof shall be wrung out to you, and your
nakedness shall be laid open for every eye to behold it. And this is the word
of the Lord God to you all, which can never be recalled, nor pass away
unfulfilled upon your heads: Therefore Oh ye Inhabitants of the Earth, have,
have and repent, least ye partake of her plagues; for if ye endeavor, and
strive to uphold her, ye shall of a truth partake of her Judgments.

Again, I say be ye warned before it be too late, and turn to the Lord by true
repentance, by forsaking and fasting from sin, which if you do, there is rich
mercy in store for you, and plenteous redemption in Christ Jesus, who is the
Light of the world, who has enlightened every one that comes into the world
with his true Light, which reproves for sin and evil in the inward parts; and
if you believe in it, and follow it, and give up wholly to be guided by it* you
will become children of the Light, and have an Inheritance with the Saints in
the Light; for the same which condemns you for sin, would also purify and
cleanse you from all sin, for it is the blood of the Covenant which is
plentifully shed for lost and undone man; and until this be witnessed, even a
purifying, washing and cleansing from sin, there is no forgiveness; for because
of transgression, the Law was added; this is the truth of God unto you all
sent, amongst you to no other end but that you might be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the truth, which would make you free, and lead you out of the
deceit of the deceiver, as to be no longer deceived by him. For seriously
consider, what have you from them whom you spend your time and substance about,
but the sight of a company of Images, which they make you make Idols of, by
prostrating your selves before them, which is absolutely against the righteous
Law of God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth? see the Scripture, Exodus 20. And
thus you are fed as long as you feed them, and put in their mouths; but if you
ever come to cease from feeding their inordinate desires, they will soon
prepare war against you, though they have given you the name of Christians by
sprinkling a little water upon you when you were children, and knew not what
they did, and this for filthy lucres sake; they fed you with the name of
Christians, but are wholly out of the nature themselves; for the true nature
and life of a Christian is pure, peaceable, and easy to be entreated, not
rendering evil for evil, but always overcoming evil with good, doing unto all
men, as they would all men should do unto them; which nature they manifestly
show they are out of, By their fruits (which is the Mark,) Christ said, ye
shall know them: For it is very evident that none of them will be put into
Prison for any thing pertaining to Religion, but they will cause others to be
imprisoned, which thing Christians never did, for their weapons were not
carnal, but spiritual, and mighty through God, to the pulling down of the
strong holds of the kingdom of the man of sin; neither did they wrestle with
flesh and blood, but with Principalities and Powers, and spiritual wickedness
in High places, which captivate the creature. This was the Christians warfare,
which the Pope and all his Adherents are out of, who swear men to destroy
Creatures as long as they live, contrary to Christ, who came not to destroy
men's lives, but to save them, who says, Swear not at all; but the Pope as I
said contrary to this, swears men to destroy creatures as long as they live,
and to make away with flesh and blood with carnal weapons; But they who smite
with the sword, shall be smitten with the sword; and as they have loved blood,
blood shall they have to drink; and so much the more, because they have done it
under the pretense of Religion, and of the defending of the true Church and
Faith, which needs not a carnal weapon to defend it; for the true Church is
in God, therefore the gates of Hell cannot prevail against it, let them be open
never so wide; and likewise the true Faith of Gods Elect, gives victory over
Sin, Hell, Death and the Grave, and needs not a Defendor, but is able to
defend it self, and conquer all the powers of darkness which arises up
against it; so it plainly appears they have not the true Faith and Church,
which must have a carnal weapon to defend it; and it being so, is the cause
they cannot defend themselves without an outward power to uphold them, and if
once that fail them, their kingdom would soon have an end, and the true
Christians kingdom shall flourish and prosper, for their kingdom and dominion
is invisible and without end, being redeemed out of Kingdoms, Tongues and
Nations, to follow the Lamb through many tribulations, to enter into the
everlasting Kingdom of their Father which is without end; so this is the true
Christians life, state and warfare to suffer persecution, pray for enemies, and
to do good to them which hate them, and ever ready to lay down his life for his
vilest enemies, and freely forgive, as he desires God his Father to forgive
him, and out of this life I testify there is no salvation; therefore read and
consider, a name will never save you without the nature, and this nature you
can never witness except you follow Christ Jesus through the Regeneration; for
until the new birth come to be witnessed, and the new creature known, that is
renewed according to the likeness of him that created him; for neither
Circumcision avails, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature; there is but
those two bare rule in man, even Cain and Abel, the one a Murderer, the other a
sufferer, for which cause the sacrifice of the one was accepted, and not the
other, though they both offered of the good, yet Cain not being in the good,
was not accepted, neither is any in that nature unto this day accepted, for the
Sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord; therefore says Christ,
Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, you shall in no wife enter into the Kingdom of God, Math. 5.20.
Mark that, and consider what their righteousness stood in, even in the same
that yours does to this day, even in meats and drinks, and in the observation
of days and times, new Moons and Sabbaths, and stand praying in the streets,
as I have seen some of you do, and that before Images: Therefore cease from
those dead works that you may come to worship and serve the living God in
spirit and truth, for such only he seeks to worship him. And again, Christ
says, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.
which is certain and true: So all people upon the face of the whole earth may
prove themselves by it, whether they be in the Kingdom, yea or nay, for no
unclean thing can enter there, because it is the holy habitation of the
glorious God of all power.

So be no longer deceived by the deceivers, but search, try, and prove your
selves, If Christ be not in you, ye are Reprobates, 2 Cor. 13.1. Profess what
you will, dross and reprobate silver shall ye be called, except ye repent, and
cease from this grievous Idolatry and Will Worship, Priests and People, without
respect of persons. Therefore whilst you have a little time prize and lay it to
heart before it be too late, for your Idolatry much exceeds that of the
Scribes and Pharisees, much less your righteousness: Therefore lay it to heart
before things which belong to your eternal peace be hid from your eyes, and you
be left to perish eternally. Consider, it is a dreadful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God; and if you slight this the day of your visitation, ye
shall in no wise escape them, but shall feel them in dreadful vengeance and
judgment, which will be too heavy for you to bear; and in the day which is nigh
at hand, you shall cry to the rocks and mountains to fall upon you, to cover
you from the wrath of him who has long born with you like a Lamb, checking and
reproving you for evil by his pure light in your Consciences, which if ye
refuse to hear and obey, you will feel him also as a Lion, before whom you
shall never be able to flee, but by his dreadful wrath will you be consumed;
and all they who have executed judgment without mercy, shall have the same
rendered into their own bosoms, for God is no respecter of persons. And
dreadful is that day which is dawning over your heads, wherein the hearts of
every one shall be made manifest, and accordingly shall they receive at the
hand of the Lord, and not according to names, habits, or titles. These are true
and faithful sayings which shall shortly come to pass; therefore blessed is he
which is found waiting, that he may not be found eating and drinking with the
drunken, nor smiting his fellow servant, for an account must every one give of
their talents: Woe will be to the slothful and unfaithful servant when his Lord
shall reckon with him; for every one of you have received a talent and gift
from God to improve, and every particular of you shall be called to an account
for it, how you have made use of the Lords money: Read the portion of him who
hid his Lords money in the earth, Math. 25.30. for it will assuredly be yours
if ye do the like, even to be cast into utter darkness, where shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth. If any shall say, have I a talent given me to improve,
seeing I was never told so by any of my Teachers, which have been many a one,
upon whom I have bestowed a great part of my substance? yea, thou have a talent
given thee of God, yet I do believe not any of the Teachers or Hireling Priests
could tell thee or any so; but of a truth, a talent both thee and all men have,
which is given them of God to improve, which talent is the Light wherewith
Christ has enlightened all men, which Light shines in the Consciences of all
men, and testifies against all the deeds of darkness, Joh. 1. This is the
grace of God unto salvation, which has appeared unto all men, which taught the
Saints to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly and
righteously in this present evil world; which is the true improvement of it,
and to that end it is given; and because it is given and has appeared to all
men, therefore shall all men be left without excuse in the day of account, and
to plead ignorance will stand you in no stead in that day: Christ Jesus says
The Kingdom of Heaven is within you, speaking unto the Scribes and Pharisees,
yet they were not in the Kingdom, for if they had, they would not have
crucified the Lord of glory. But this is a Mystery to this dark Generation; for
Christ compared the Kingdom of Heaven unto a grain of Mustard Seed; and also
unto a little leaven which a Woman took and hid in Meal, and it leavened the
whole lump; therefore blessed and happy will they be, who come to know this
leaven in themselves, that so they may be leavened into its own holy pure
nature, for the seed of the Kingdom is in every one, though every one be not
in it, yet it is there as a grain of Mustard seed, yet where it takes root and
grows, it becomes the biggest amongst all the plants, and so covers the whole
earth in man. Read the Parable and consider, how the sower went forth to sow;
he sowed upon all sorts of ground, but it was only the good ground where it
prospered and took root downward, and brough forth fruit upward, some thirty,
some sixty, and some an hundred fold; this is the true increase of the talent
and gift of God; let him that reads understand that his soul may live, for
until this be read, felt, and understood, profess what you will, the soul
lies in death and misery; therefore ye must diligently search and seek this
seed in the field, which is in the World in you, where this precious Pearl
lies hid, that ye may be as the wise Merchant-man, who sold all to purchase
it, so must ye if it ever comes to be yours, yea, you must dig deep to find it,
for it lies under all the mountains of sin, oppressed like a Cart which is
laden with sheaves in you, for the field is in you though wide, for the field
is in the World which is in your hearts, and when the precious seed is grown,
watch and wait least the birds of the air bereave you of it, or else the enemy
sow his evil seed in your ground, and so choke the good seed and plant of God,
so that it cannot grow nor prosper; for Friends, it is truly so, that straight
is the way which leads to life, and few there be that find it, but broad is
the way that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat,
for it is the way of sin, but the other holiness and purity, without which no
man shall see the Lord, as the Scripture says, for it is the only thing which
shall stand in stead in the day of account: but woe will be unto them which
then are, or shall be found covered, and not with the Holy Spirit of God; all
other coverings will be to short to cover or save them from the dreadful woe
and vengeance which is ready to come upon the inhabitants of the earth; for the
Lord has determined to bring Judgment upon the earth, that the inhabitants
thereof may learn righteousness, for it is not to be found amongst men, but
every one is seeking his own way, seeking and striving to exalt his own horn by
oppression and deceit; but the Lord will rebuke many because of these things,
for oppression shall cease amongst men, and the oppressor shall surely be
trodden under foot, and the meek of the earth shall have the dominion for
evermore, which is the mind and purpose of the Lord of heaven and earth,
therefore it shall surely come to pass, and woe will be to them who do arise
to oppose the Lord in this most glorious work, for they shall be beaten to
powder, for the potsherds may strive with potsherds, yet in vain will it be to
strive against the Lord, and his Holy Anointed, who is come and coming to take
the Kingdom, whose right it is for ever and ever, for all the Kingdoms of the
World shall become the Kingdoms of the glorious Son of God: Therefore oh! ye
inhabitants of the earth prepare to meet the Lord, and be ye warned that ye
join not with the power of the oppressor, whom God is purposing to overturn,
and chain down for ever, least you perish with him. This from the Lord God of
heaven and earth is a warning to you all, that ye may be warned and left
without excuse, when the day shall come upon you which is already dawned, and
hastens apace to shine in its glory, whereby all the works of darkness shall
be discovered, and made manifest, though never so secretly hid, as has been
already said. It is high time for you to awake out of the deep sleep of
ignorance, which you have been cast into by the Magicians of Egypt, who have
long kept your poor souls in spiritual bondage and slavery through their deceit
and lies, for their own profit and lucre, of which they strive to cast a mist
before your eyes, telling you of the body of Christ, and instead of which they
make you worship the works of your own hands, which will and do perish with
the using, which the body of Christ can never do inasmuch as it is
incorruptible, neither did or could see corruption; yet notwithstanding, your
Priests have so far bewitched you, as that you your selves commonly confess,
that though they be never so wicked, yet in the speaking of so many words, they
make the corruptible bread the very body of Christ; and ye are so far enchanted
with this lie, insomuch that if all within your Dominions do not fall down
before this piece of bread and worship, you are ready to murder them; by which
means your fruits show you are in the spirit of murder and envy, envying those
which will not own your lie and blasphemy, calling earthly bread the Lords
body, which is held in and by the hands of corruptible men, as you your selves
are ready to say; the Lords soul abhors these things, for they are an
abominable abomination before him: Consider and lay it to heart, can the words
that proceed out of the mouth of a sinful man make any thing incorruptible? nay
they cannot, seeing it is evident that out of one fountain salt water and sweet
cannot be had, neither can a bad tree bring forth good fruit, as says Christ,
neither can your deceivable Priests, who thus deceive you, do any such thing
as they tell you of, neither have they any place in the holy Scripture which
speaks of any such practices as those which they deceive you with, that is,
that men should take a piece of bread, and say such and such words over it,
that then it should become the body of Christ, and that men should fall down
and prostrate themselves before it; nay they cannot cause bread to be converted
into the body of Christ, neither can they convert the body of Christ into
bread, let them speak what, or as many words as they can over it: And thus they
keep you in bondage as much as in them lies, least you should search and find
out their deceit, and also from the reading of the Scriptures, least their
wickedness should be manifestly discovered, though Christ says, Search the
Scriptures for they testify of me; but the Pope and his Priests forbid you to
read them, which shows that they are not of his mind, who would that all
should come to the knowledge of the truth and be saved, and not to keep people
in darkness; for in the Scriptures it is recorded that the Bereans were more
noble than others, because that after they had heard the truth declared they
went home and searched the Scriptures to see whether those things were so, or
no, yea or nay, you may see they were commended for so doing, and not
forbidden, as your Priests do; and the Apostles did bid try all things, and
hold fast that which is good, which is far from forbidding any trial in, and
for truth; many of your own regular Priests will say themselves, that they are
forbidden to dispute: You may easily be kept in blindness and darkness, when
many of your own teachers themselves are not permitted to vindicate their own
practices and works which they make you thus adore.

Surely it is high time for you to ponder your ways, for if you will wilfully
continue to follow your blind guides, who dare not appear openly to vindicate
their own way, as manifestly appears, ye will utterly fall into the pit of
utter darkness, both you and them together, out of which there is no recovery.
I my self have been a Prisoner in Bourg de Ault, for speaking to a couple of
Priests, desiring them that I might have the liberty either in public Market
place, or some other convenient place, where the people might hear, and I
should prove what I said to them to be the truth of God; but seeing they denied
me that Christian liberty, this I publish amongst you; the truth of what here
is written, I proffered to seal with my life, for I did proffer them my body to
do with it what they had power; the same I desired of the Judge which had me in
examination, yet it would not be granted me, yea, the two said Priests did take
two oaths against me, yet would not stay for to hear me speak, but hasted away,
though desired, and some of the people did expect it; and this proves their
works to be the works of darkness, and not of the light, for he which does
good comes to the light, that his works might be made manifest, that they are
wrought in God; but they whose works are wrought in the dark hate the light,
neither will they come to the light, because their deeds are evil. So that by
their fruits we know them, as Christ said, who is the bread of life, which is
invisible, and nourishes the invisible Soul, this is the true bread which came
down from Heaven, and whosoever feeds thereon shall never dye, and except you
come to eat of this his flesh, and drink of his blood ye have no life in you,
for it is incorruptible: And though he took bread and brake it to his disciples
the night before he was offered up, and said, Take, eat, this is my body, he
did not really give them his body, though he bid them break bread in
remembrance of him until he came; Mark, they were but to do it until he
came, which showed plainly the natural bread was not him, even whilst it was in
his own hand, but a figure of him, for as it was distributed amongst them, so
was his life; and that they were to do in remembrance until his holy life
descended upon them again, which they did witness not many days after at
Jerusalem, and they had not need of any thing to put them in mind of him, for
he lived and reigned really in them, and the Apostle Paul said, it showed the
Lords death until he came, which saying was a glorious truth of God, for it
brought them out of all visibles, showing that the invisible light was to reign
in them, for he reproved many of them who had gotten so into the breaking of
bread, that they eat and drank until they were drunk, 1 Cor. which the Lords
body would not have done, yet their bread and wine had as much virtue in it as
yours can have: But of these things we who are called Quakers, we would bring
your teachers to open trial, to see whether it has more virtue in it after
consecration as ye call it, then before the Priest has spoken some of the
words of Christ over the bread, for it is not unknown that the Devil did take
the words of Scripture to tempt the Son of God with, therefore his children may
in like manner speak them, and deceive the sons of men with them: So that if
they have any virtue in them, let them come forth in like manner, as has been
proposed unto them, (to wit) if their bread after consecration, has more
virtue in it then other bread has, let them show it by the trial of it, by
putting it with other bread, and we and they shall see to the keeping of it,
and if the one do not corrupt as well as the other, then it will appear there
is more virtue in it; but on the contrary, if they both corrupt, then may ye
see your teachers to be Deceivers, and that ye are fed with a lie, for the body
of Christ cannot corrupt, neither did it ever see corruption in that nature,
for it is incorruptible and spiritual. Truly people this concerns you much to
look into, seeing you are thus taught and deluded, for the Soul which sins
shall dye, and it will be a folly for any one of you for to say in the dreadful
day of account, Our Fathers have eaten sour grapes, and our teeth are set on
edge; pleading antiquity will not serve your turns, though I know God has
forborne you in these abominable abominations and Idolatry, even worshipping of
pieces of Bread, Stocks, and Stones, the one you say is the very body of
Christ, and the other his likeness, and all a lie, and has and will be
reproved and made manifest, and will get further to the utter overthrow of it
all, for the likeness of Christ can no more be made by any, no more then bread
natural can be converted into his body by any, seeing he is the express Image
of his Father, and never bare any other, But say you generally it puts us in
mind, which plainly shows that ye are of those who forget God; David said, The
wicked should be turned into Hell, and all who forget God.

Consider you who say you must have a dead Image to put you in mind of the
living Christ, and also this shows that ye have not the mind of Christ, as
the Christians had. Friends, in this the day of trial you are found bare, naked
and miserable; therefore be warned, that you may all come to the Light, which
is the door, the way, the truth and the life, and no man can come to the
Father, but by him, (even Christ Jesus) who is the Light of the world, which
enlightneth every man that comes into the world, who is the only door and way
to God, and whosoever goes about to enter any other way, but by the Light, the
same is a thief and a robber, as says Christ, who is the Covenant of God to
all mankind upon the face of the whole earth; and to this end came he into the
world, that through him all might believe, and whosoever does, out of his belly
shall flow a River of living water, which is beyond all Naturals, which can
alone be seen, handled, and tasted by the Spiritual; and whosoever comes to be
sensible of its pure streams, will for ever delight to drink thereof, there
being satisfaction therein only, which my soul knows right well, therefore am
I drawn forth in the same, wherewith the Lord has loved me, to invite many
that they may eat and drink that which my Father has provided for many, even
for those who are strangers and straglers in the highways and hedges, for a
banquet has my God prepared, and has, and is sending out his Servants to
invite and bid many, but many already have made their excuses, by which means
they are not found worthy: Therefore ye which are straglers, come away, even ye
who are as much strangers as any; fear not, faint not, ye shall have your penny
as well as those who labored in the heat of the day: I say, come away, a feast
of fat things is prepared for you, even a goodly heritage which flows with
Milk and Honey, there is large possessions therein my friends for you, and if
ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat of the good thereof; yea, In my
Fathers house are many Mansions, and if it were not so, I should not say it;
but as my soul has richly fed thereof, so I would all should come away, and
partake with me of the same; I am truly filled with love, ever as a vessel
which is filled with new Wine, even to all the whole (...) of God, and would if
it were possible persuade all the Sons of men to come away, for the Bride has
made her self ready, and the Marriage-Chamber is prepared, And the voice of the
Spirit says come, yea all that will, come freely; see therefore that you have
your Lamps trimmed, all to the Light, that ye may not be of the number of the
foolish Virgins, and so miss your entrance into the Marriage-Chamber, for
though the door may be freely opened, yet it will not be always, therefore
Blessed are they who are found watching, that when the cry of the Bridegroom
comes they may enter, for they shall enjoy the joy of their Lord, and there
will be no more cause of weeping, because the Bridegroom will be always with
them, but they which are foolish, shall be shut out among the Dogs and
Sorcerers; therefore be ye warned, that ye may be partakers of peace, rest, and
joy for evermore, and think not any thing too dear to part from, for the price
of the Mark of the High Calling, which is in Christ Jesus, that is set before
you; for says Christ, Whosoever shall forsake father and mother, wife or
children, house or land, for my sake, shall receive an hundred fold in this
world, and in the world to come life everlasting. And truly friends, I tell you
by true experience, that the sufferings of this world is not to be compared to
the joy which is and shall be revealed in us; and though many may speak evil of
you, and revile you, because ye run not into the same excess of riot as before,
heed it not, if you receive Christ ye shall have power to become the Sons of
God, which will be greater riches than ye can loose in this world, being made
witnesses of the birth which is not of man, nor by man, but of God: I say this
will bear you over all the reproaches of the wicked one, and this state you
will come to know, by taking up the daily Cross, and following of Christ, for
he that will be his Disciple must so do in reallity and in truth, which Cross
is not a piece of Wood or Stone, neither will you need any such thing to put
you in mind of God, or Christ, but the Cross ye will witness to be the power of
God unto salvation, if you believe; for Paul said, God forbid that he should
glory in any thing, but the Cross of Christ, whereby he was crucified unto the
world, and the world unto him; so as you come to witness the true Cross, and
to bear it daily, you will come to witness the same thing, without which, all
your profession will be vain; so as you come to dwell, abide, and walk here,
you will come to know what the true Baptism of Christ Jesus is, which is the
Fire and the Holy Ghost, without which you cannot witness the body of sin put
off, and except you do witness this, ye are far from Christ's life, which makes
a true Christian, for it is not only the washing away of the filth of the
flesh, but the answer of a good Conscience toward God: And this is the only
Baptism which must be witnessed by all, before they come to a Christians life,
for the Apostle Paul said, There was but one Baptism, which is the Baptism of
the Spirit, for John said, He was to decrease, but Christ was to increase; for
his Baptism was but a figure of the true Baptism, for Christ came through all
Figures having the Substance and the Life in himself; so they who come to this
only true Baptism, which is only needful to salvation, they come to receive
the gift of the Holy Ghost, for they who knew no other but John's Baptism, they
knew not whether there was a Holy Ghost or no; therefore it is said concerning
Apollo, That he only knew John's Baptism, and that Priscilla and Aquilla
ministered unto him, and instructed him in the way of God more perfectly:
Therefore be ye instructed in this matter, and be ye no longer deceived with a
name and shadow, but come to the substance, that your souls may live for ever,
so will blessing and mercy follow you all your days, and happy shall you be in
the end thereof; though men may persecute and revile you, matter it not, for so
they did to Christ Jesus, and the Holy Prophets before you, and remember The
Servant is not greater than his Lord, And the Saints of old, who wandered up and
down clothed with skins, and wandered up and down in dens and holes of the
earth, of whom the world was not worthy. I say all who desire eternal life,
take them for an example, in sufferings, and patience, and your names will be
written in the Book of Life with them, even amongst those who are sanctified,
who loved not their lives unto the death; by which means they came to be
crowned with immortal Glory, even to live and reign with the Lamb upon Mount
Sion for ever, which is not to be compared with all the treasures of Egypt, the
Gold of Ophir, or Onix stones. And it being so that nothing avails any but a
new creature, What do you think will all your Crosses avail you, with your
Beads and Relics of dead men and women's bones, with your Processioning and
counterfeit Fasts, Pardons for sins from the Pope, and the like stuff, as your
vain repetition of other men's words in your prayers, and giving your means to
build great Monasteries for men to be kept up a fatting, like so many Swine,
living idly upon the Creation of God, and likewise women, who are as wanton
as Beasts, kept and fed there? I say what will all these avail you and them?
but add to your condemnation, seeing the ground and root of the old man stands
whole in you, in which nature all your works is not accepted with God, who is a
Spirit, and must be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth, and such only he
seeks to worship him. So it is no more at Jerusalem, or at this, or that
place or house, where God is worshipped, neither does he dwell in Temples made
with hands, for he has no need of these things, nor yet served with corrupt
men's hands; and for bearing witness unto this, Steven was stoned, whose name
ye adore, but he is a witness against you and your practices herein, for
whilst you are observing the things before named, you are but in the nature
which stoned him for witnessing the end of all outward Ceremonies, even of
those which were true Figures and Types of the Substance which was to come; and
if them things were witnessed against, as being unprofitable, the Substance
being come, which was Christ, may not yours much more be witnessed against, as
being wholly unprofitable, which never were commanded, nor types of any thing,
but of the mystery of iniquity, being things of your own inventing, through
which you are wholly lead from the knowledge of God, being mere vanities and
inventions of men's hands? so as you sow to your selves vanity, you will have
nothing else to reap in the end; for the true Christians came to witness their
bodies to be the Temples of God, through the Spirit which dwelt in them, which
was the new creature, which only avails; for says God, I will be in them,
and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people: This is
Gods Covenant with his people, which Covenant stands only with the New
Creature. And again, says he, Unto this man will I have regard, unto him who
is of an humble and a contrite spirit, and trembles at my word. And until you
come to witness this state, God Allmighty has no regard, as to accept any
thing at your hands; therefore prize the new birth, and seek vigilantly after
it, that ye might have acceptance with God, and have an entrance into his holy
Kingdom, for no unclean thing can enter therein; therefore there is a
necessity of putting off the old man with his deeds, that a new may be
witnessed, who after God is created in righteousness and true holiness; and
where this comes to be witnessed, the mind is renewed, and all old things are
passed away, and all things become new, which is the only and alone blessed
state, and this only avails, and stands instead in the day of trial, when
the hearts of all shall be made manifest, and the secrets of all judged by
Jesus Christ, according to the everlasting Gospel of life, truth and power; for
God has verily appointed a day wherein he will surely judge the world, though
many say and think that he delayeth his coming, not considering that his
long-suffering and forbearance should lead them to repentance; but of a truth
he is not slack, as some men count slackness concerning his coming, though many
say or think he delayeth, but his day shall overtake them as a thief in the
night, even in a time when they look not for him. Remember the old world, they
were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, but the just man
preached repentance unto them, until the overflowing stroke of Gods wrath
swept them away; and also just Lot, whose righteous soul was daily grieved with
the unrighteous conversation of the wicked Sodomites, who would not be warned,
but when they were told of the evil which came upon them, they slighted the
message, and sought evilly to entreat the Messengers; therefore God made them
examples for Generations to come, yea even to this Generation, whose measure of
iniquity surpasses theirs; and do you think God will spare you any more than
he did them? nay, he will not, for God bore until they had filled up the
measure of their iniquity, as he does yours now, whose measure abounds more
than any that ever yet went before you, in lust, pride and envy, deceitfulness,
idleness, and fullness of bread, which were the sins of Sodom, which crucified
the Just, even as you do this day, daily and hourly, for it is in spiritual
Sodom and Egypt, where the Lord of glory is crucified; Let him that reads
understand; you need not a Stock or a Stone to put you in mind, or the Image of
a dead man to put you in mind how the Just suffered sixteen hundred years ago,
if ye rightly considered; for it is your wicked conversation which crucifieth
him amongst you, so that ye are as truly guilty of his blood, as the Jews were,
though you keep them in oppression. And these my words ye shall eternally
witness if ever you come to a true conversion and fear of God, for such shall
come to see him whom they have pierced, and mourn over him as a man mourns
over his only begotten son, as says the Prophet. Therefore I declare unto you
all, there is not a man but is, or has been guilty of the blood of the Son of
God, for he is the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World, and The whole
world lies in wickedness, as also says the Apostle; and it is the wickedness
which slays the Lamb, as it is written, The just suffers by the unjust:
Therefore repent that ye may find mercy, or else his blood will be too heavy
for you to bear; and it will not justify you to call him Lord, Lord, while the
Devil reigns as Lord in you; neither to call God Father, while your works
testify openly to your faces, that you are of your father the Devil, whose
works ye do; for if ye were the children of God, ye would do the works of God,
which are all righteous, holy, and true; but that birth ye never yet knew, for
they who are born of God sins not, as says the Scripture. And your praying
to Mary will not serve your turns, for it is only those who do the will of the
Father which are accepted of him, for says Christ Jesus, He that does the will
of my Father, the same is my Mother, Sister, and Brother: Mark that, and
consider what your invoking the Saints with vain Repetitions will avail you,
but only add to your condemnation, for Christ says, for every idle word a man
shall give an account at the day of Judgment; for though ye could say in that
dreadful day, Lord, we have prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have we
cast out Devils, yet consider the answer, Depart from me ye cursed workers of
iniquity, I know you not; the Lake is prepared for all such; therefore
consider: I was sick, and ye visited me not; naked, and ye clothed me not; I
was an hungry, and ye gave me no bread; and if the portion of such be so
dreadful, what will yours be who have cast into prison? even woe and vengeance
for evermore. Therefore beware what you do, and consider, the true Christians
never imprisoned any, which may be a warning and an example unto you to follow,
that you may no further become guilty of the blood of the innocent, for God
will assuredly try you with these things: Therefore a warning from the God of
love is this unto you, which if ye reject, dreadful will be the end thereof;
therefore in time consider: This word is often in my heart toward you, that
you may lay it to heart and consider, for it is because of sin the Land
mourns, and because of sin wrath has ever come upon the sons of men, and
think not that ye shall be exempted more then others, seeing your abomination
exceeds all the forepast Generations; for God spared the old inhabitants of
the Land of Canaan no longer, then till the measure of their iniquity was
filled up: And by it do you take warning, and turn to the Lord by true
repentance, least the Angel of his wrath smite you, which he is sending forth,
whose sword is already drawn to smite the inhabitants of the earth: Therefore
except ye turn to God speedily, and bring forth fruits meet for repentance and
amendment of life, the Sword shall be sheathed in your bowels, for God
respects not the manner nor the person of any man, nation or people, but all
in the particular shall receive according as they have done, whether good or
evil, if they slight the day of their visitation which is freely tendered unto
them, which is Gods endless mercy and goodness, after so long forbearance with
them; therefore beware least this love be turned to your condemnation, by
reason of the hardness of your hearts, and there be no place found for
repentance, though with Esau you may seek it with tears, for he had a
birthright, but he sold it for a mess of pottage, a thing of naught; so before
you is life and death set, good and evil, choose you whether one or other; I
shall be clear of your blood if ye perish, who have truly warned you, as I was
moved of the Lord, even to you people of this nation, of what sort or degree
soever, and ye shall one day remember, though at present ye may slight it, and
count it as idle talk, yet ye are warned in an acceptable time, and in a day of
salvation, if so be ye accept it. And also your observing of days and times
will not excuse you, as I have already said, for the Apostle said he was afraid
of those which were in those things, least he had bestowed labor in vain upon
them; for his labor was to bring people out of the observation of days and
times, up to him who was before time was, who is God over all blessed for
evermore: And they who are not come hither, are in the beggarly Elements and
Rudiments which fades away, for, says Paul, Let no man judge you in meats, or
drinks, or new Moons, or the Sabbath days, which things are but shadows of
good things to come; mark how far the Pope and his Ministers are from this
doctrine, who commands days and times to be observed, which are neither
Types nor Shadows of things to come, nor of any thing promised, but are their
own inventions; so that ye are taught for doctrine the Commandments of men, and
for the peoples Fear toward God, is taught the Traditions of men: Therefore
cease in time from them, for wrath is kindled against them and their works, who
thus lead the people in gross ignorance, even to have as many Advocates as
there are days in the year. And your days and times ye observe, were never
commanded of God, nor his Servants, yea, the very day you call the Sabbath, is
not the day which was commanded the Jews, they being witnesses against you in
that thing, for it was the seventh day that was commanded, but it is the first
day they put you upon to keep, and instead of keeping it holy, according to the
Commandment, it is commonly kept the prophanest of all the rest, except your
other days dedicated to dead men and women, as the Heathen do to the Sun and
Moon, for in the ground there is no difference between you in this particular;
and your keeping these days, as you pretend at best, is in honor to such and
such Saints, but ye are a shame to Saints, and the very name of Christians is
evil spoken of through such means, for which cause the Lord will assuredly
plead with you, if ye repent not, for the day which all Saints are in, is
perfect, pure, holy peace and rest, of which the Land of Canaan was a true
Type, for says the Apostle, He that believes is entered into rest, and has
ceased from his own works, as God did from his, which Rest is Christ the
Savior of the soul, and whosoever comes to enter in will witness my words; and
out of him there is nothing but grief and vexation of spirit; for in me, says
Christ, ye shall have peace, but in the World trouble: Peace is the true Rest,
so where it reigns in the heart the true rest and Sabbath is known, and not
until then can an holy day be witnessed. Oh come all to the Light which
reproves for sin in the Conscience, so will you come to Christ, who is the
only way and path of peace to all who believe; but to the disobedient he is
condemnation: And this ye shall witness whether ye will hear or forbear, for it
is the word of the Lord God to you, for if your hearts condemn you, ye cannot
have confidence toward God, for God is greater; but if your hearts be turned
to the Light, they come to be purified, and then the peace of God which passes
all understanding will reign there, so will you come to have confidence toward
God, as says the Scripture; for if the heart be smitten, it is because of
transgression; and says my God, There is no peace to the wicked, but woe and
torment shall follow them for ever, though they may seek to avoid it, through
the cursed delusion of the blind Priests, by giving them money for pardons,
when ye have committed murder or some wicked act, and are judged in your
selves, for by the Light of Christ Jesus in your Consciences are you judged; I
say, to think to get ease ye run to the covetous, corrupt wicked men, and
confess to them, giving them money for pardons for sins, and money for saying
of Masses, and the like; but know ye assuredly that the Lord God will not
pardon you; except ye come to confess and forsake your sins, ye will never find
mercy at the tribunal seat of the righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, neither
you, nor your Confessors; therefore cease from them, least you and them perish
together, which will assuredly come to pass if ye continue in your
stubbornness and gainsaying: Remember the dreadful end of Dathan, Abiram, and
of Corah, who perished in their gainsaying, least you come to the same end,
which is unrecoverable for evermore: Let the word ever sink down into your
hearts, so may you remember the endless time of torments, which is prepared for
the Devil and his Angels, even the man of sin, who was a Liar from the
beginning: And do but try his Ministers by this, and try if they preach not up
sin as long as life lasts, and say that man cannot be free therefrom, nor put
off the body of sin while in this life, by which means they strengthen the
hands of the wicked, so that they cannot turn from their wickedness, by
preaching up their Masters Kingdom for term of life, which thing accomplished,
the Devil knows he has them sure enough, because it was the sin unto death
which the Apostle said should not be prayed for.

So people, Consider the miserable captivity and bondage you are in, spending
all the days of your lives in being taught by these Deceivers, and in the end
you must die in your sins, which is a deplorable state, for the Wages of sin is
death, and as the Tree falls so it lies, says the Scripture, and every one
shall receive according to the deeds done in the body, for his servants ye are
to whom ye obey, whether of sin unto death, or of righteousness unto eternal
life: So read and consider, and be no longer deceived; God will not be mocked,
Such as you sow, such shall ye reap, and money cannot buy you an immortal
possession, neither can corruption purchase incorruption, as your wicked
leaders make you in effect to believe.

Thus has the mystery of Iniquity, and the man of sin fully wrought and
revealed, who by all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness deceived the Nations,
one after this manner, and another after that manner, but his subtle wiles
has wrought the deepest amongst men under the name of Christians, that thereby
he might the easier deceive the hearts of the simple, who have any desire in
them after the true and living God, and for these his instruments in this work,
he has imposed the most subtle and craftiest men in all generations since the
power of his working, thereby the more to amaze the people, in saying, are not
these the learned men? are not these the Orthodox men? and if these do not
know, how should we know, who are illiterate and unlearned every way, and by
this his deceiveable working has he possessed the hearts of the people with a
lie, for the wisdom of the wise men of this world know not the things of God,
neither can the natural man discern the things of the Spirit, for they are
spiritually discerned; therefore says the Apostle, Ye see your Calling,
Brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many
noble are called; for God has chosen the foolish things of the world, to
confound the wise; God has chosen the weak things of the world, to confound
the mighty; and base things of the world, and things which are despised has
God chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are,
that no flesh might glory in his presence; but of him are ye in Christ Jesus,
who of God has made him unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption, that according as it is written, he that glories let him glory in
the Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 26-31. yea, and God takes the wise in their own craft, and
turns the wisdom of the wise backward, because the foolishness of God is
wiser then men, and the wisdom of man is foolishness with God; and Christ
Jesus also says, I thank thee Father, that thou have hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes and sucklings: Mark, God
has even revealed his secrets unto babes and sucklings, in which God does
perfect his praises, and this is marvelous in the eyes of many: And also the
Apostle James says, God has chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, and
heirs of the Kingdom. Friends, this is far from the Romish Doctrine, who exalt
learning above the Spirit of God, in whom is the candle of wisdom, and in
saying this I do them no wrong, for it appears evidently every way; do they
not make use of a sort of men, which they call Jesuits and Monks? whom they
esteem the most, to go to and fro abroad in the Nations, and by their subtilty
any way exalt their own horn, through which means much blood has been shed,
and grievous disorders amongst many has been; their fruits and effects will be
witness enough for these things: This is far from the example of Christ Jesus,
who made choice of simple poor Fishermen to send forth in his work, even such
who knew not the letter, as says the Scriptures; and the wisdom of the Jews
in those days, had the simple hearted (who believed) in derision, esteemed
them accursed because they knew not the Law, and asked if any of the Rulers did
believe, for ye may see preaching of Christ was esteemed a thing very much
below them, yet through the foolishness of this preaching, (as it was accounted
of by the wisdom of man,) it pleased the Lord to save many, for the Cross of
Christ was preached, which to the Jews was a stumbling block, and to the Greeks
foolishness, who sought after wisdom in those days, but to every one that
believed, it was the power of God unto salvation, as has been said, for he
that will be truly wise unto salvation, must truly become a fool, (as says the
Apostle) that he may be made wise; and says Christ, Except ye be converted,
and become as little children, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of God: And
this was witnessed by Paul, who according to the learning and wisdom of this
world, surpassed many in his generation, (who was brought up at the feet of
Gamaliel,) yet accounted it but dung and dross, that he might win Christ,
though according to the flesh he might glory above many. Where is the wise?
where is the disputer? has not God appointed the the foolish things to
confound them? yea verily, and shall for ever. The little stone which is cut
out of the mountain without hands (which is spoken of in Daniel,) shall become
a great mountain, and cover the whole earth, and blessed are they who shall
fall upon it that they may be broken, for if it fall upon them it will grind
them to powder be they never so mighty, or never so learned, and never so
prudent, they shall never be able to stand before him. Therefore all people,
submit, and come under the banner of his love, which is stretched forth over
your heads, for if you do not, you must come under his iron rod, which will
dash you to pieces, for reign over all he must for ever and evermore, though
Gog and Magog set themselves in battle against him, yea, no weapon formed
against him shall prosper, for their great grength shall be turned into
confusion for ever; the Lord God of Heaven and Earth has determined it, whose
will and purpose none shall be able to prevent: though the Heathen may rage,
and the people imagine a vain thing, yet all shall be in vain, for God will set
his Son upon his holy hill of Sion, to reign over all for ever, whose right
alone it is, and for his sake he will rebuke Kings: Therefore blessed shall
they be who resist not his glorious coming; though Satan may have power a while
to kill some of his followers, and cast others into prison, to the end that the
hearts of many be tried and made manifest, yet it shall be but for a season,
and the righteous their testimonies shall crown them for ever in the sight of
all their enemies; and this glorious work shall not be carried on by sword nor
spear, but by my Spirit, says the Lord, (that no flesh might glory in his
presence) even with the Sword of the Spirit that proceeds out of the mouth of
the Lamb shall his enemies be overcome, and put to flight, and in his glorious
power shall one chase a thousand, and ten shall put Nations to flight; a people
has the Lord already raised and sanctified for this work, before whom the
uncircumcised shall never be able to stand against them in battle: the Lord
has made them his battle-Ax, to cut up the root of corruption, and destroy it
for ever, that the glorious plant of incorruption may take root and grow, and
spread over the whole earth for ever, to the praise and glory of the Eternal
God of all glory, to whom all praise, honor, and glory belongs, from all
things, whether things above, or in the earth beneath, who will defend and make
known his Tabernacle amongst the sons of men, and his name shall be dreadful in
the earth, For he will establish Judges as at the first, and Counselors as at
the beginning, which shall not judge for rewards, but in righteousness will
they judge, without respect of persons in the earth; and until this be
accomplished there shall be no peace in the earth, nor The will of God cannot
be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven; though your Priests bid you say them
words as Christ bid those who had forsaken all to follow him, the which state
ye never yet came to witness, as you and your Priests fruits make manifest,
and bid you say that which they could never witness themselves, which will be
their great condemnation, for none can call God Father, but they who are born
of him, and such only forgives enemies, as God forgives them, and not in word
only, but in deed and in truth; and whosoever says, Father forgive us, as we
forgive them which trespass against us, are in a woeful condition, being in the
contrary nature, biting and devouring one another; the Priests suing the
People, and the People suing the Priests at Law, and thus suing one another,
what forgiveness can you expect from God, who desires this, that ye may be
forgiven, as you forgive others? the holy will of God is far from being done in
you, as it is in Heaven, who are fighters one with another, though ye call one
another Christians, and the like; thus you ask a thing to your own confusion
for ever.

Oh be ye awakened and consider these things, and repent, for of a truth just
judgments will overtake you early, unawares, and all your talk of prayer will
stand you in no stead, though you may say them your selves, or get others to
say them for you, as you are instructed in Rome, as may be seen in a Book
called Raris Sario, or Lacorene daela madonae, which is the common Book for the
lay Peoples instructions in matter and manner of their Worship; was there ever
such abominable abomination as this, that a man may have another to do or say
his task of Prayer, and it shall be all one as though he had done it himself?
does not this make it plainly appear that they are Ministers of darkness, and
know not the Spirit which makes intercession for us, and knows our wants?
Does not the Apostle say, He will pray with the Spirit, and with Understanding;
and again, Pray always, and in every thing give thanks, yea, Pray always
without ceasing. And you are ignorant of this pure spirit of prayer and
supplication, which is the promise of the Lord God unto his people, insomuch
that you must have a certain task of prayers, and that they may be said by any
other, and as well accepted as though you had said them your selves, and in
truth it is so, for neither of them both is accepted of God; this is such gross
darkness as might be felt, and truly your taskmasters are more wicked than
ever any in Egypt were, and are more unexcusable, inasmuch as they profess and
pretend to be Christians; think you that God accepts these your vain
Repetitions and Oblations? nay, they are a stink unto him, and an abomination
unto him for ever; for it is only the sacrifices and prayers of a broken heart
which God accepts, even they who have clean hands, and pure hearts, only
such he accepts, and such he will in no wise despise, but takes daily care
of them, knowing their daily wants and what they stand in need of before they
ask, and does also answer their requests, because the Spirit makes
intercession for them, in, and with sighs and groans that cannot be uttered.
The decree came forth at the beginning of Samuels supplications, and was
answered while he was yet speaking; many at this day witness the same thing,
Glory be unto the Lord for ever, who has powered forth according to his promise
the true spirit of grace and supplication upon many, in and through which they
are accepted of him in prayer; but there are such the Apostle James speaks of,
which ask and receive not, because they ask amiss, even to spend it upon their
lust; and such is your prayers, as plainly appears, for ye have no answer
from God, for after ye have done all your task to the utmost, which is laid
upon you, yet must have Indulgences from men, and Pardons from men, which if
you had answer from God and forgiveness, these things would appear unto you
abominable and detestable; for after all your Pardons, you must give money to
your Priest to be prayed for after you are dead, which shows you have not yet
received the remission of your sins in this life, in and through Christ Jesus,
who says, Whatsoever ye ask in my name, it shall be given, whose Ministers
preached remission of sins in this life, through the man Christ Jesus, and
said, His blood cleansed from all unrighteousness, even theirs who did
confess their sins and forsake them: And Peter says, Ye are not redeemed with
corruptible things (from your vain conversation) as Gold, or Silver, but by the
blood of the Lamb. (Mark) here the Saints did witness redemption from sin in
this life, for then was it that the Apostle did write unto them, and such did
not need a Purgatory to be purged in after they were dead, neither did there
need money to be given for them upon any such account, to get them out quickly
from thence, as though prayers which are purchased by money could any way
pacify God, or withold the just judgment of God which is due for sin:
Surely (as says the Prophet) they that seek after lying vanities, forsake
their own mercies; for it would have hardly entered into the heart of any man
that such things should be believed, for were it not that men were given over
to believe a lie that they might be damned, because they do not like to retain
God in their knowledge, nor take heed to that of God which is manifest in them,
which if they did, they would soon come out of this horrible deceit, into the
true knowledge of his eternal power and Godhead, for God would manifest it
unto them.

Oh People! seriously consider, and read the Scriptures, and see if you can
read a word of Purgatory, or that if ever men gave money to be prayed for after
they were dead, or that if any sought to give money to men for pardons for
sins, or whether any of the Apostles and Disciples of Christ did appoint people
a set manner of prayer, one part to such a Saint, and another part to the
Virgin Mary, and the like: Surely, if you are not wilfully bent to be enemies
to God, and your own souls, and resolved to perish, you would certainly look
unto these things, and be no longer deceived, for the arm of Gods everlasting
love is stretched out toward you, to draw you out of these miserable
delusions, and his voice calls unto you; therefore whilst it is called to
day, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation; for if ye do, ye will
surely perish eternally, which is the Word of the Lord unto you all, whose
bowels of pity and mercy is unto you; therefore repent, repent that ye may meet
and receive the mercy, and be accepted of the Lord, for truly his pure Spirit
has long been grieved with you, and has been oppressed, even as a Cart is
laden with sheaves, with your iniquities; therefore be warned, and repent.

And from whence come all the abominable abominations and delusions, but from
the painted Harlot that rides upon the Beast, clothed with Scarlet, with the
Cup of fornication in her hand, by which you are made drunk, as not to discern
her devilish witchcraft which she deceives you with, to the end that she may
uphold her own pride, lust, and wickedness, painting and decking her self like
Jezabel her mother, out of whose womb she came, seeking and hunting continually
after the Servants and Prophets of the true and living God to destroy them,
while she feeds many hundred false ones at her Table, fed like so many
pompered Beasts at the Stall of the Staller, which she maintains to minister to
her Idols and Images, from which they can have no answer in the day of trial,
as it appears plainly, and will upon further trial; therefore woe will be
unto them which join with her to uphold her, for they shall perish utterly with
her for ever; and though she has pretended to forgive many, yet God will not
forgive her; but as she loves blood, she shall have blood to drink, yea, a
double portion in her own bowels shall be rendered unto her, for the evil which
she has done to others, The mouth of the Lord has spoken it, and the Dogs
shall eat her flesh, and none shall be able to deliver her out of the hand of
the Allmighty, who has determined her destruction, and sealed the decree
against her; and many has the Lord already mounted in the Chariots of Israel
to go forth against her, yea chosen men of valor and strength, whose hearts
shall not pity, nor their hands spare, until the purpose of the Allmighty be
accomplished upon her, and their Bow shall abide in strength in battle, and
none shall be able to deliver her out of their hands. And People, look not for
peace, look not for peace so long as her witchcrafts remains amongst you,
though you may desire it, yet surely it will be in vain, for the consummate
decree is gone forth against all her abominations; therefore as you love your
immortal souls, and desire the salvation thereof, join not with her, but join
unto the Lord, so will you be blessed and happy for evermore; surely were you
sensible of the abominations of Romes City, you would fear and be ashamed to
call it a Holy City, where all manner of impiety is nourished, viz: pride,
whoredom, murder, and the most openly of any place in the world: This
testimony is faithful and true concerning it; under pretense of keeping of
Hospitals for the poor, there is tolleration for Play Houses, where all manner
of wickedness is committed, and those must pay great sums of money to the Pope
under pretense of hospitality. Oh unheard of wickedness! where did ever any of
the Saints, or holy men of God countenance any such things? is not this an open
sign they are not of God? did not the Apostle say, Above all things keep your
selves from fornication? and is not fornication tolerated by a Law? did he not
also say, Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths? and are not
Comedies and Stage Plays nothing else but such like wickedness? and yea,
thither do resort the chiefest of the Clergymen, Cardinals, and the like; and
do ye think God beholds not these things? yea verily, and his fury is kindled
hot against it: And in their open Marketplaces there is Conjuring,
Pupit-Playes, and the like, to amaze and draw the minds of people after vanity;
is this the fruits of an holy City? nay, its the fruits of Hell. Do not
Cardinals (out of which they make Popes, from whom come your chiefest Pardons
for sins) go up and down in such pride and pomp, as is not usual amongst the
Princes of this world, with great trains of men after them and before them
bare-headed, and their Gowns held up before them; was this the practice of the
Saints? Search and see, and be no longer deceived with lying vanities, by
forsaking your own mercies. In the Scripture is recorded of Elders to oversee
the Churches, which signifies properly Bishops, which whosoever desires,
desires a good Office, even to be an Elder in the Church, and Assembly of Gods
people, but such were to be grave sober men, not given to filthy lucre, nor
wine, the husband of one wife, and of good report, that he might be a good
example to others. But the title and name of a Cardinal, who brought them in,
let the wise in heart judge; for Cardinal signifies properly Supreme, as your
own Catechism teaches, which is against Christ's Doctrine, who said, He that
would be greatest amongst them, let him be servant unto all. So People come to
the Light of Christ in you, and with it Try all things, and hold fast that
which is good; And if any preach any other Doctrine than this which has been
preached, let him be accursed, says the Apostle, yea though themselves or an
Angel from Heaven. So whosoever keeps up Superiority in the Church of God,
preaches another Doctrine, for they were all Brethren.

And again, In Rome there is men they call Bishops, but they differ from them
whom the Apostle speaks of, let him which reads judge, who ride up and down
in round Caps, and green Ribbons, such as fools use to wear, and in great pomp,
far from examples of sobriety, and patterns of holiness to others, but on the
contrary, examples of folly and vanity; and instead of being husbands to one
wife, marriage is forbidden amongst them, which is a Doctrine of Devils, which
the Spirit did speak expressly should come; and how these men govern their
families, may be clearly seen by tollerating of whoredom in such an open
manner, But whoremongers God will judge, and all who tolerate and uphold them
shall in no wise be clear thereof, for they are not ignorant that the Scripture
says, That the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness,
and unrighteousness of men; and notwithstanding, are not only wicked and
ungodly themselves, but tolerate and take pleasure in them which commit all
iniquity with greediness: And this is the apparent fruits of that ye call The
Holy City, where the Whore sits at the Chapel door, to be hired of men: Oh
cursed abomination! that such a place should be called A Holy City; but this
painting wherewith this impudent Harlot is painted shall decay, and all Nations
shall see her shame, and the true Holy City shall be made manifest unto the
sons of men, let down from Heaven as a Bride adorned for her Husband, into
which nothing that works an abomination or a lie can enter, though the Gates
thereof are never shut, but stand open day and night, in which they shall not
need the light of the Sun, nor the Moon to give them light who walk therein,
but the Lamb shall be the light thereof, and they shall reign for ever and
ever. But in Rome they must have wax Candles to give them light at noonday,
and all manner of abominable works are committed therein, even as Sodom and the
Inhabitants of Gomorrah, whose measure of iniquity never exceeded them. This is
not written from a spirit of envy or malice, but from a simple heart, being
truly moved of the Lord thereunto, that the simple may come to understand and
consider what they are a doing, and repent and turn to the Lord to worship him
in Spirit and in Truth, for such only he has regard unto, and they who refuse
such a visitation of love, he will surely smite with a Curse, which they will
in no wise escape: Therefore whilst you have time prize it, before it be too
late, for the Lord waits to be gracious unto you.

Oh thou Nation of France! though thine iniquities has surpassed many, yet the
Lord stands at the door of your hearts and knocks, and if any open to him in
this the day of his love, he will come in and sup with him, and make his abode
there, so will you become a holy habitation, and Temple for the Lord to dwell
and abide in, so ye will not need to go to Rome to fetch pieces of dead men's
bones, nor Pardons, as murderers and all manner of unclean persons do, which
she receives and harbors as good Christians, and will give them Pardons as
many as they will; and thus is the hands of the wicked strengthened under the
name of Peter's Successor, who was a true witness against all sin and
uncleanness whatsoever, who did not settle himself in an earthly possession,
for he was not his own, but the Lords, who said unto him, When thou wast young
thou girdedst thy self and went whither thou would, but now thou art old,
another shall gird thee, and thou shall go whither thou would not; which is
far from the Popes example, just as light is from darkness.

Oh ye Inhabitants of the Earth! my bowels, my bowels yearneth toward you and
your captivated state, my soul pityeth to see how the shadow of death has
overshadowed you, by which means you are kept in sore captivity and bondage;
but the Lord God of my life has compassion on you, and if you do not wilfully
count your selves unworthy of his tender compassion, by refusing his love, he
will rend the Vail from off your hearts, and will cause the Light of the
glorious Gospel to shine therein, which will give you the light and knowledge
of himself, in the face of Jesus Christ, that ye may know that glory, honor,
and praise belongs only unto him, and not unto man, from whom ye are to
cease, for his breath is in his nostrils, and is nothing to be accounted of;
and make not flesh your arm, least instead of a blessing, the everlasting
curse, shame, and confusion come upon your heads for ever: Therefore give up
your selves unto the Lord in obeying his Light in all things, that you may come
to witness a sanctified state even in Soul, Body and Spirit, that holy, pure,
and undefiled Temples your bodies may be for the Lord to take delight to dwell
and walk therein, which is the end of all Ministrations Types and Shaddows, for
this ends them all, even to witness the Immanuel, which is by Interpretation
God with us, or in us; and this is the mystery which has been hid from Ages
and Generations, even Christ in his people, the hope of their glory. So read,
and the Lord give you understanding to know the things which belongs to your
peace and everlasting rest, which if you turn to the Light of Christ Jesus in
you, they shall not be hid from your eyes; for as it is written, The light of
the righteous shines more and more until it comes to a perfect day. So if you
turn to the righteous Light which condemns you for sin, then a perfect and
true discovery of all things will be made manifest unto you, but if you hate
the Light, and bring not your deeds unto it, ye will be as the wicked that walk
in darkness, and know not at what they stumble; so be wise lest this saying
come justly upon your heads, as it is written, The wonderers shall perish, for
God is working a work-in these days, which ye cannot believe, though it be
told you. A warning from the Lord God of Heaven and Earth is this day unto you
all, whose day is sprung from on high, and has visited the sons of men, for he
delights not in the destruction of any of you, but rather desires that you
should turn from your sins and live, for our God is a God of mercy and
judgment; therefore if you turn unto him by true repentance, and forsake your
sins, which is the only true repentance, never to be repented of, in which you
will come to witness judgment and mercy to meet together, and righteousness
and peace will embrace each other in you, which is the only happy and blessed
state, which never can be known or witnessed but by the death of the man of
sin, for that nature can never come to have peace, but horror and judgment for
evermore. These are words of love and truth unto you all, in and through a true
lover of all your immortal souls, who is ready to sacrifice his life for his
vilest enemies, even for those who revile, persecute, and imprison him, as he
is at this day for the testimony of a good Conscience, who cannot bow to an
Idol, nor an Idol-maker, but bears witness against them all, as the Lambs
followers ever did in all Ages and Generations, from righteous Abel unto this
day, who was a true Sufferer in innocence, and therein finished his course, as
a true and faithful example for all as should follow after, it being the seed
of the Bondwoman, which persecuted the seed of the Freewoman, which kept the
Commandments of God, though it never persecuted any, but loves all, even the
whole Creation of God without respect of persons, for this cause has it
suffered by the hands of unreasonable men, even in seeking for to reclaim them
from the evil of their ways, that they might not perish therein, (for it is
the love and desire of God toward the Inhabitants of the Earth) and in this
work many have been imprisoned, stocked, stoned and put to death, all which
they have born like Lambs, as the Lamb was their Example, Who was as a Lamb led
to the slaughter, and as a Sheep before the Shearers is dumb, so he opened not
his mouth. This is the true Christian, and Lambs life, Who is able to declare
his Generation? And such is every one that is born of the Spirit, even as the
wind that blows where it lists, and men hear the sound thereof, but knows
not whence it comes, nor whither it goes. And this is the cause why all those
that are born of the Spirit, are hated and despised of men, and a wonder unto
them, even because they know not the birth which is of God, which is undefiled
and incorruptible, because this life is hid with Christ in God, being
translated as Enoch was, whose life the sons of men could not see because they
looked upon him with that eye which counted Christ Jesus but a natural man,
even the son of a Carpenter, and the like; and indeed it is the furthest the
natural eye can see, though never so much endued with earthly wisdom and
knowledge; for amongst the wisest in that time, and in all Ages, whether
Scribes, Doctors, and Learned men, Christ was judged to be the son of Joseph,
and of earthly kindred and parentage; therefore beware how you judge of these
things ye sons of men, for though the spiritual man judges all things, yet he
himself can be judged of no man. This is the naked truth of God unto you all,
that ye may be warned to take heed what you do, and what spirit you join unto,
and with what, and in what ye judge, least you judge with that spirit that is
to be judged, and so fall the deeper into condemnation, and so heap coals of
fire upon your own heads against the day of wrath. Remember it is Judge not
least ye be judged, for all judgment is committed unto the Son, and only in
him, in whom he lives, and is made manifest, can any judgment be aright
concerning the things of God; and to the true knowledge of this righteous
judgment, did the true Christians come unto; for the Apostle Paul said unto
them, Know ye not that we shall judge Angels? which could never be, without the
judgment of the Son of Righteousness, who lived and reigned in them. And this
did he speak unto them, when he reproved them for going to Law one with
another, and that before the unjust; Why (says he) do ye not rather suffer
wrong? which words stands a witness against the Pope, and all his Adherents,
which in Rome it self these things almost daily may be seen, even amongst
themselves, suing one another for Curates places, and striving for titles of
honor; these things are well known to the Inhabitants of Rome, for it is
evidently known, and manifest among them, and the heads being thus corrupted,
the whole body cannot but be all infected with the same disease, suing and
haling one another before Judgement-Seats, which the Apostle said, was verily a
fault amongst them which so did; and by this unchristian-like means, is there
swearing and forswearing amongst them, which is out of the Doctrine of Christ
Jesus, who says, Swear not at all, but let your yea be yea, and your nay be
nay in all your communications, for whatsoever is more than these comes of
evil: So ye may see how ye have been taught and led in blindness, and all
under the name of Christianity, but wholly out of the life thereof, for says
Christ, If any man take thy cloak, forbid him not to take thy coat also; and if
any smite thee on the one cheek, turn to him the other also: But how these
things are observed amongst you, let the Light of Christ Jesus judge; a true
Christians life is to bear all things, and not to overcome evil with evil,
but on the contrary, overcome evil with good; and he which does thus, that man
shall be blessed in his deed, and may in truth call Christ Lord, for he
observes the things which he says; but they who follow the Romish practices,
shall be numbered among the Unbelievers, for the Apostle exhorts not only to
be Hearers of the Word, but Doers also, For it shall be more tolerable in the
day of Judgment for Sodom and Gomorrah, than for those who know the will of
God, and do it not; for if one speak unto you in the spirit of meekness and
love, exhorting you to repentance, and telling you the end of the wicked; we
know that say you, thou tellest us nothing but what we know already; I say the
greater is your condemnation, yea, it will go better with the Indians in
America, than with you in the day of trial, than for many of you, for whom my
soul has, and does mourn, who are setting up lies, crying The Catholic, the
Apostolic Church and Roman. You are its true of the Romish Religion, but the
Apostolic you are far from, for ye are not like them any way in any one thing,
yet in the name ye boast, and count none Christians but those who are
conformable to the Romish abominations, which is hard to be uttered, it is so
abominable and wicked, as has been showed in many things, yea they are grown
so hard in their abominable Imaginations, that it is common for them to make
the picture of a woman with a child in her lap playing with a Dog, and say it
is the picture of Christ, yea with a child on the ground, and its arms about
the dogs neck, and say the same of it.

Oh unheard of darkness and wickedness is this! and these things may be
commonly seen as one passes along the streets, and is not a secret thing; this
is the fruits of your ancient Religion, and truly it is so ancient as the man
of sin, as appears by the fruits thereof; for if one speak but against an
Image, though it be expressly forbidden of the Lord, yet you are ready to tear
him in pieces for it, which neither is, nor never was the Life or Spirit of a
Christian; but through such doings as these, the very name of a Christian is an
Abomination amongst many, even to Turk and Jew, even in cheating and cozening,
swearing and lying, and open Abominations, which causes them to blaspheme the
name of Christ; therefore will the unresistable vengeance of God come
irresistably upon you suddenly, except you repent, and plead no longer
antiquity for your Religion, seeing it is but of sin and uncleanness, in which
you openly live, as all the heathen and profane ever did, yea grosser Idolatry
is not to be found amongst the sons of men, than is in the Territories and
Dominions of Rome this day; though ye seek to paint your selves over with the
name of God, ye do but show the more to every one that is not wilfully blind
that ye are of Mystery Babylon, the Mother of Harlots, (Mark that) whose
children are such as hold the truth in unrighteousness, and have changed the
glory of the incorruptible God as much as in you lies, though his glory cannot
be changed into flesh, but you have perverted his true worship into a lie, and
make Images, and prostrate your selves before them, and yet say it is not
Idolatry; this is mystery Babylon, which is now made manifest, Glory, Honor
and Praise be to the Lord God for ever, and let all the faithful say Amen; for
the secrets of the Whore is laid open with her Abominations, and the place of
her torment is prepared for her, who has thus made the Nations drunk with the
Cup of her fornication, out of which the Kings of the earth have been made
drunk; and not only have compelled the people of their Nations, but others,
which thing will be heavy in the end, if they repent not before it be too late,
for God is a righteous Judge, who will render to every one according to their
works, without respect of persons, time or places.

Therefore be wise O ye Kings, be instructed O ye Judges of the Earth, and
serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling in your Generation, and
beware of persecuting of any people, for that will unthrone you, if ye meddle
with the Throne of God, which is the Consciences of men and women: Therefore
let it suffice you, that your sword be turned against the evil-doer in the
Land, so will you be a praise to them that do well, and blessed will you be of
the Lord if ye put this in effect, to wit, to suppress and expel Idolatry,
lying, swearing, drunkenness, and whoredom in the Land where ye are Rulers,
but if ye suffer those things to abound as they do this day in this Nation,
then know assuredly, as the Lord God lives, who has created the Heavens and
the Earth, ye shall be expelled, and those who shall be found more worthy than
you, shall be exalted in your stead, though the Lord may take them from the
Sheepfold, as he did David; and think not to stand because of your greatness
and strength, or by the multitude of an host: Remember Nebuchadnezzar whom the
Lord humbled unto the dust, and made him to know that the Most High rules and
reigns in the Kingdoms of men.

Therefore ye Rulers of this Nation, to you do I speak in particular, I say
hear and give ear, and the words of my mouth shall be the words of truth and
life unto you, if ye receive them; but if ye slight and reject them, and will
have none of the counsel of the Allmighty, which through me is proffered freely
unto you, that ye may be warned from the evil which is to come, then know
assuredly that blackness and darkness shall be your portion and habitation
for ever, and Gods dreadful face you shall never see but in judgment:
therefore I say give over, for the Lord is raising to himself a Seed and People
in this Nation, which shall serve him with fear and trembling, and has
purposed to establish them in peace and righteousness in this Land, that
living examples they may be unto all the Inhabitants about them; and this has
the Lord determined to do in thee O France: Therefore as I said, ye Judges,
Rulers, Officers, Counselors, and King, be ye warned as from the Lord, that ye
touch them not though you may have many false accusations against them and
reports, as people not fitting to live upon the earth, as the innocent was in
all Ages, so reported to be, as people being destructive to Law, Rulers, and
Government, and the like, and enemies to the King, Oh let this word be turned
against these false Accusers, and beware of touching the Innocent, for for
their sakes the Lord will rebuke Kings, and he is the same as ever he was: And
this is a true and faithful warning and prophecy which shall shortly come to
pass, that when it come you may not be ignorant thereof, and be left without
excuse. Remember Nineveh, who at the preaching of Jonas repented; and do ye
take warning in time; Consider and lay it to heart, and look through the
Nations ye Rulers thereof, and weigh the thing seriously in your secret parts,
whether Nineveh or any other Nation could abound more in abomination than this
Nation, or that the city of Sodom, or the inhabitants of Gomorrah, was more in
lust, pride, and fullness of bread then Paris surely is; nay, the like was
hardly to be found, or paraleld in all generations for pride, hypocrisy, lust,
deceit, and murder, and whatsoever is evil: Therefore I say again, Be ye
warned, and take diligent heed that ye persecute not any whom the Lord is
raising up amongst you, bringing and sending amongst you, to bear witness
unto, or against any thing, even against the grievous Idolatry and whoredom
which abounds amongst you, and in all the Land; and if ye instead of
receiving their testimonies, persecute and imprison them, or do them any harm,
better it were that a millstone were put about your necks, and that ye were cast
into the midst of the Sea, for the Lord will avenge their innocent causes, and
utterly overturn their oppressors, and will rebuke Kings for their sakes, yea,
Potentates, Armies, Judges, and Rulers, as he has done already in the Land of
England; and he who is mightier then the mightiest is on their parts, and will
rebuke and tear in pieces their adversaries, for the Lord has long born the
iniquities of this Nation, and his righteous Spirit has long been grieved, and
he has looked down out of his holy habitation amongst you, and beholds your
state, and sees that none of you so much as consider the cause of the needy
and oppressed, so as to ease their burdens, but every one of you striving to
maintain his own lust by cruelty, fraud, and oppression, the like is not to be
found in any Nation; but the Lord will break the bonds of oppression, and the
oppressed shall go free, and be set at liberty to Gods endless praise for
ever.

The mighty and terrible day of the Lord God is come and is at hand, wherein
the hearts of all shall be made manifest, and accordingly shall every one be
judged; therefore I say again and again, be ye warned how ye touch or meddle
with any who shall turn to the Lord in this the day of his eternal power, for
they will be such as will in the power and love be made to deny all deceit and
flattery, which abounds amongst you, and if for so doing you cause them to
suffer, wrath shall be your portion and augmented amongst you, even upon your
own heads, for the Lord has purposed that his own seed shall be set at liberty
to live and reign over all deceit and deceivable works for ever, and this will
he do to the utter confusion of all who shall oppose him.

And thou seed of the most high God in this nation, lift up thy head for thy
Redeemer draws near to deliver thee, though thou lie low in the deeps, yet
will his own arm make way for thee to come forth, (as it did in the days of
old,) he will rend the vail of Egyptian darkness, and dismount the charriots
of thy fierce persecutors, so as they shall never be able to overtake thee,
yea, he will divide the waters of the Egyptian Sea, and cause thee to go
through as on dry land, in which thy enemies shall be overwhelmed for ever and
ever; yea the waves of his wrath shall cover their heads, and they shall be
drowned in the bottomless deeps of utter confusion in thy sight, and a song of
praises shall be put into thy mouth, even as the song of Moses, thou tender
lamb, and thou shall bear away the spoil of thine enemies; and though after all
this thine incounters may be many ere thou obtain the promised land, yet fear
not thou worm, the Lord God Almighty takes thy part, who will be with thee in
the fire, and in the water; my soul has partaken with thee of thy pangs, and
thy bruises, and fore oppressions, and to this day do I suffer with thee, and
have true experience of thy Redeemer that lives and surely will deliver thee;
though thou lie in the deepest deeps, and no eye pitieth thee or has
compassion on thee, though thou art as a silly worm trodden under foot of every
one, though thy enemies make long furrows over thy back, yet be thou comforted,
thy God has vowed thy deliverance, and it hastneth apace, thy possession is
prepared in a goodly heritage, for in a pleasant Land shall thy lot be: Though
Esau may seek thy precious life, and Ishmael mock thee, and the sons of Anack
set themselves against thee, yea and Balaam seek enchantments against thee, and
Moab tempt and strive to lay a stumbling block before thee, and the sons of the
mighty, even the sons of Anack possess thy land, and seek to keep thee out by
their mighty strength, yea though all Nations should join in one to prevent the
decree of the Father, yet shall it be all in vain, for thy Redeemer lives,
even the mighty God, who is the Holy One of Israel, who will grind them to
powder: Oh thou afflicted worm! thine enemies are many, and that my soul
knows right well; therefore am I made willing to take a part with thee,
knowing that also thy deliverer is mightier then the mightiest of them, before
whom all Nations are but as the drop of a bucket, or as stubble; therefore none
shall be able to prevent his purpose concerning thy deliverance thou innocent
one, and beloved of thy God, to whom all his promises are Yea and Amen, who
has promised and vowed thy deliverance, though it be to the destruction of all
flesh, and woe, woe will be unto them who shall arise up against thee to hinder
thy passage into the land of rest: The Lord has bowed down his ear from his
holy habitation unto the cry of thine oppressions, and his bowels are moved
with compassion for thee, and as thou have been a long sufferer in the earth,
so shall thou have dominion over all even in thy God, for he will rend the vail
of Egyptian darkness, so shall many come to see and desire thy beauty, and
desire after thy presence, even as a spouse desires the presence of her
bridegroom after her first espousall; yea, unto thee oh Seed shall the
gathering of the Nations be, and the Kings of the Earth shall bring their glory
and honor unto thee, and Crowned shall thou be with the Dominion of thy God
for evermore; the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, and will hasten the day of
thy Redemption; though through envy thou have been sold into Egypt, and
esteemed as a Bond-slave, and put under in the dungeon, because thou can not
consent unto the abominations, and unto the love of men, yet thy God shall
raise thee over all, to reign in dreadful dominion for ever, and thine enemies
shall be made to come bending unto thee, yea even the sons of those who had
thee in derision, shall be laid low at thy feet: Thou greatly Beloved and
begotten of my Father, thy beauty has overcome my heart, I am one with thee in
the deepest of afflictions, and so am made willing to suffer with thee, until
thou art by the outstretched Arm and mighty Power of thy God, raised up to
possess the Gates of thine enemies; the only bough thou art, whose branches
shall run over, yea, a double portion has my God for thee in store; though at
present thy visage is more marred than the face of any man, so that the sons of
men can see no beauty in thee, that they should desire thee, yet when the
measure of thy sufferings is up, the splendour of thy beauty shall pierce
through and amaze the hearts of many, for it shall shine as the Stars of the
Firmament, so that only thy life shall be desired in the whole earth, and thou
shall be the only desired of all Nations; because thou have been the only
rejected, therefore thou shall over all reign for evermore. Oh thou Holy One,
though thou have not had whereon to lay thine head amongst the Kingdoms of
men, yet it is thy right only to reign; therefore shall overturnings,
overturnings be, until thou art raised and have taken the Dominions of the
whole earth, for to that end wast thou brought forth out of the bosom of thy
father; thou art the Stone which the builders have rejected, but thou shall
become the head of the Corner, and all who do rise up against thee, shall fall,
because no weapons formed against thee shall prosper, and every tongue which
rises up against thee, thou shall condemn; this is thy heritage because of the
righteousness of thy God; a Sword and Bow is prepared for thee to go forth to
battle, and thou shall sheath it in the flesh of Kings and mighty men of the
earth, for thou art the Battle-Ax of the Lord, and with thee will he beat
Nations to powder; therefore blessed shall he be that shall join unto thee in
this the day of thy controversy with the Sons of men, for if they receive thee
not, but stand against thee, then shall thou grind them to powder: And because
of this, woe, woe unto the hypocrite, woe unto the swearer, who unto the liar, woe
unto the Adulterer, yea, woe unto the inhabitants of the earth, who shall join
with the Dragon in war against thee, thou shall command the holy Angels of the
Father, which shall attend on thee continually, to bind and to cast into the
pit of utter darkness for evermore, out of which there shall be no redemption.

Therefore be ye warned O ye Kings, Judges, and Rulers of this Nation and
people, not to meddle in this matter, for as sure as the Lord God lives, who
has created the Heavens and the Earth, these things shall surely come to pass;
and it will be a folly for you to take counsel of the Sorcerers, Enchanters,
and Deviners, for no such thing shall be able to prevail against the holy
anointed one of the Lord, but as I have said, through the holy Spirit of the
Lord (if ye fall not upon him) ye will surely be ground to powder; and though
his coming may be contrary to the expectation of all flesh, marvel not at it,
for it was ever so, that the Princes of the world never knew him, though never
so wise, for if they had, they would never have crucified him: And remember
what was written by the Prophet concerning the way of God, who had it from the
mouth of the Lord, saying, My ways are not your ways, nor my thoughts your
thoughts; but as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are my ways higher
than yours, and my thoughts higher than your thoughts, says the Lord of Hosts:
Therefore marvel not at the coming and establishing of his only begotten Son in
this Nation, as he has purposed in all Nations, I say, marvel not though it be
to the destruction and overturning of all outward glory: Therefore if any in
whom he is witnessed to live and reign, be caused and compelled to come before
you, and they cannot bow unto you wit Hat or Knee, as all manner of flatterers
and dissemblers do, be ye warned even from the Lord God of life, that ye touch
not nor hurt them for these things, for if ye do, know assuredly that God
Almighty will avenge their Cause evidently amongst you who shall thus do, for
God is jealous of his honor, and he will not give it unto another; and so
beware that ye respect not the persons of any in judgment, lest the Lord rebuke
you for it, and everlasting shame and reproach come upon your heads for ever;
for He which respects persons (says the Apostle) commits sin, and is
convinced by the Law for a Transgressor; mark that, the righteous Law
convinces him for a transgressour, which says, Thou shall not respect persons
in judgment; they being such who held not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Lord of Glory (who respects not persons) they having their Lord and
Master for an example, who respected not the person of any man, and said, How
can ye believe, who seek honor one of another, and seek not the honor which
comes from God only? So they who seek the honor, and they who give it are all
one, even unbelievers and transgressors; for so faith the wise man also, It is
not good to have respect to persons, for for a piece of bread such an one will
offend: And the thing is evident amongst you from the Priests and people who
have men's persons in admiration, because of advantage; search and see whether
any of these things be not so, yea or nay, with the pure Light of Christ Jesus,
which shines in all your Consciences, which reproves for sin, and will make
all the works of darkness manifest unto you, as you diligently heed it, and
follow it, and love it; while you have the Light, walk in the Light, that you
may be children of the Light, least it be taken from you, and given to them
which are faithful: Therefore I warn and advise you in the everlasting bowels
of love, not to slight, but prize the day of your visitation, for the
dayspring from on high has visited you, as I have already said; therefore
whilst yet a time and day is in your hand improve it, that the blessing of the
most high God may be upon you and your posterity for ever, but if you harden
your hearts, and reject this counsel and warning of love, which is freely
tendered unto you, then do ye hear the word of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth
unto you, who will not be mocked; thus says the Lord, If you harden your
hearts against me, my unresistible vengeance shall come upon your life, as the
unresistible Waves of the Sea when moved with a tempestuous wind, which shall
even devour and swallow you up at once, and none shall be able to deliver you
out of my hands, my fury shall come forth against you like a mighty wind; that
none knows from whence it arises, which shall scatter, break and tear you to
pieces. This is the Word of the Lord unto you all, who is righteous in mercy
and judgment, and unto them that fear my name, says the Lord, and embrace my
counsel, even to you shall the Sun of righteousness arise with healing under
his wings, and ye shall go forth, and grow as Calves of the stall; but the
proud and those who do wickedly shall be as stubble which is cast into the Oven
fully dried: And this is the determined counsel of the Most High concerning all
the Nations of the Earth, which are respecting of persons.

Therefore be thou warned, O thou Nation of France, to whom. I have been sent
and set as a Sign, that thou may find mercy after thy long provocation and
estrangement from God, and that thou may with a ready mind and willing heart
submit to the Kingdom of his Son, which he has determined to establish in the
midst of thee, and that thou may submit unto his Government, for to know him
by his Name, whose Name is The Mighty God, the Prince of Peace, upon whose
shoulder the Government is (...) which all Nations (either by constraint or
willingly) shall submit unto, even the true Immanuel, God with man, whose
Scepter is freely held forth, that thou Nation of France, with all Nations,
might come under it, which if thou do, thine inhabitants shall be blessed,
but if thou refusest, instead of blessing, that which is tendered unto you
shall be turned into a curse for ever.

By a true Servant of the living God, who suffers imprisonment in Bourg de Ault
near Deppt, known by the Name of Charles Baily.
Given forth in the Year 1661.
FINIS.

