BE MERRY AND WISE, OR A Seasonable Word TO THE NATION.

SHOWING The Cause, the Growth, the State, and the Cure of our present
Distempers.

March. 14. 1659 LONDON, Printed March 13. in the year, 1660. 1659

A Seasonable Word, etc.
I Do not write out of an itch of Scribbling, or to support a Faction my Duty
bids me write. -- Nor do I love Hard words, or Many Plain, and Few, suit all
Capacities and Leasures. I would be Read by all, and Understood by all: for my
Business extends to all. -- Not to spend time in Complement, or Apology; The
Reader's Wisdom, or the Authors Weakness, is not the Question. The Nation is
in Distress, and every honest English man must lend his hand to save it. Nay,
That must be done Quickly too, and Vigorously; Delay is Mortal. Can any thing
be more Ridiculous, then to stand Formalizing, in a Case, where it is impossible
to be too early, or too Zealous. The event of things takes up our thoughts,
more then the Reason of them; what News, more than what Remedy: As if it
concerned us rather to know, whose Fools and Slaves we shall be next, than to
be such no longer. That which completes the wonder, and the Oversight, is, That
the Miseries we suffer, were before hand, as easily, to be Foreseen and
Prevented, as they are now to be Felt: and we are only to look Backward, to
take a perfect measure of the Future; so obvious, and formal is the Method,
that leads to our Destruction. If we are not in Love with Beggary, and Sondage;
let us at last bethink our selves of Freedom, and from a due Enquiry into the
Rise, the Growth, and present State of our Calamities, learn to be wise, and
Happy, for the time to come.

It may be observed, that since Churchmen dabled in Politiques, and Statesmen
in Divinity, Law and Religion have been still subjected to the Sword: and in
effect, those same Excursions, and Adulterate mixtures, are but the workings of
a Party already in motion toward that end. He that designs a Change of
Government, must begin by imposing a Delusion upon the People: and whatsoever
is Necessary to his Purpose, must be Accommodate to their Humor. -- The
Pulpet, by false Glosses, and Puzzling distinctions, under the doctrine of
Conditionate Obedience, sugg^sting Liberty, cousens the Multitude into a
Rebellion. Oaths and Covenants, are but like Jugglers knots, Fast, or Loose, as
the Priest pleases -- The weaker sort being thus prepared, and poisoned, by a
Seditious Clergy; it is then the Statesman's part to push those Mutinous
Inclinations into Action: and to divide the Cause betwixt Consc^ence, and
Property, the better to involve all Interests in the Quarrel. -- Under the
Masque of Piety, and Publiquenesse of Spirit; of Holy men, and Patriots; the
Crafty cheat the Simple; engaging by those specious pretenses, the Rash,
mis-judging people, (with good Intentions; but wanting Care and Skill) in
Sacrilege, and Treason.

This was the very Root, and this has been the process of our Evils. Under the
Notion of God's glory, the Safety, and the Honor of the King: -- the
Fundamental Laws, and Freedoms of the people: -- the Privilege of Parliaments,
etc. the Kingdom was gulled into a Compliance with an Ambitious, and
Schismatical Faction. The main Pretense, was the Assertion of the Subjects
Legal Rights, against the grand Prerogative; and That, -- directed only to the
Limitation of an Intended, Arbitrary Power: -- the Regulation of such and such
Misgovernments, etc. -- and all this -- Saving their Allegiance to His Sacred
Majesty; whose Person, Crown, and Dignity, they had so often, and so deeply
sworn to maintain. -- This was a Bait so Popular, it could not fail of drawing
in a Party; and That produced a war, -- The Formal Story of the Quarrel, is
little to my Purpose: the Logique of it, Less, -- How, by the same Authority
of Text, and Law, both King and People, could be Justified, one against the
other; I meddle not. Let it suffice; that after 6. years Conflict, -- a vast
profusion of Blood, and Treasure, -- The King, a Prisoner, -- and his whole
party scattered, and disarmed, the Commons found themselves disposed to end our
Troubles; and passed a vote to Treat with his Majesty in order to a settlement.
This met with little opposition, except from those, who having Gorged
themselves already upon the public ruin, were not yet satisfied, without
their Sovereigns Blood; -- The death of Monarchy it self; -- and the subjecting
of a Tame, and Slavish People, to a Conventicle of Regicides. There were not
many of so deep a Tincture; but what these few could not effect by number, they
did by Force. For, upon the 6th. of December. 1648. Sir Hardresse Waller, Pride,
and Hewson, -- Seized, and imprisoned 41. of the Commons House; -- Clapped
Guards upon all passes leading to it; -- Some 160. more, were given in upon a
List to those that kept the Door, with an express direction from several
Leading Members to oppose their entrance; -- a matter of 40. more withdrew, for
fear of violence. Their Crime was only the carrying of a Vote for Peace already
mentioned) the day before. This Action was so Enormous, that the very
Contrivers of it, were ashamed to own it: transferring that upon the
Army Officers, which was done by their own appointment. They passed however a
Formal disallowance of the violence, and ordered their discharge; which yet the
Officers refused (upon a Combination now most evident) -- Observe this,

That, which in 48. they told us was an Act of the Army Officers, in 59. they
call a Judgment of Parliament; and they justify and continue that very
seclusion, by a Vote of Jan. 5.59. -- Which they themselves Condemned and
Discharged by several Orders in Dec. 48. The Particulars of these Transactions,
are excellently delivered by Mr. Prynne, (the Honor of the age) in his true
and perfect Narrative, as also, in the Declaration of the true state of the
Secluded Members, and in the History of Independency, (two other choice pieces)

Return we now, to the great Test of the Spirits, and Designs of the several
Parties, and Members of the House, and from that Judgment, and Discrimination
of Persons, and Humors, we may learn seasonably to provide against
After-claps. This Blow brake the House of Commons into Three Pieces. One Party,
-- adhered to the Vote, -- opposed the Violence; -- Declared against it, --
Claimed from time to time, their own and the Peoples Rights, -- Pleaded the
Covenant, and their Declarations, and stood it out. The Second sort, was not so
well prepared for Martyrdom; a kind of Barnacle, neither Fish, nor Flesh. This
was a Party, that Flew off at first, but soon retracted; -- Hearded again, and
went along for Company; my Charity persuades me well, of diverse of them, and
that they mixed, rather in hopes to moderate the Rest, then in Design to
strengthen them: A Party rather Weak, and Passive, than Malicious. But nothing
can excuse those sons of Belial, the perjured Remnant; no, nor express them --
Beside their Oaths and Covenant, they have above an hundred times, in Printed
Declarations, renounced the very Thought of what they since have executed. Read
the Exact Collections, We are (say they) so far from altering the Fundamental
Constitution, and Government of this Kingdom, by King, Lords, and Commons, That
we have only desired, that with the consent of the King, such Powers may be
settled in the Two Houses, without which, we can have no Assurance, etc. These
are the very words of their Declaration, April 17. 1646. published by the House
of Commons, alone, toward the end of the war, and most remarquably entitled,
-- A Declaration of their True Intentions, concerning the Ancient Government of
the Nation, and securing the People against all Arbitrary Government. -- (Let
this Q^otation serve for All, lest I exceed my Limits. Nor to insist upon
things known, and public. -- How faithfully these People have managed their
Original Trust, -- how strictly they have kept their Oaths and Promises, -- how
tenderly they have observed the Laws, and asserted our Freedoms; -- how Poor
they have made themselves, to make us Rich; -- how Graciously they have assumed
the Leg^slat^ve power; and then, how modestly they have exercis^d it: -- In
fine; -- How Free, and happily we lived under their Government; till Oliver
played Rex among them, and threw them out by a Trick of their own Teaching.
This was in April 1653. It were worth the while, to enquire into the good they
did us, during that 6 years Session, but that I leave to Needham. Nor shall I
far examine the Protectors Reign; -- by whose advice; -- by what assistance; --
or by what Laws he Ruled? -- how many of our late Republicans forgate
themselves, and swear Allegiance, to a single Person. How many things like
Parliaments, he dispersed, (for the Army has gotten a Jadish Trick, and will
hardly leave it) -- It is enough; at last, he Dyed. Dyed, -- in Despite of
Priests, and Poets; Goodwin, and Waller: the former telling him from Heaven,
that he should escape that Fit, the Other telling us, -- (so needlessely.) --

His Highness, having other things to think on, left his successor doubtful,
till (as they say) His Secretary, (Then, one of Ours, now) with Goodwin, (His
Prophetique Confessor) Swore his son Richard into the Protectorship. But he
(Good Gentleman) did not much hurt; but peaceably resigned to Fleetwood, and
Disborough; (not a word of Sir Henry Vane, for he desires to be private) and
They, quite at a Loss, for want of Brains and Courage, called in the Fag-end
of the old House, to their assistance: So that those Members, which Dived, in
April 53. came up again, upon the 7th. of May, 59. and acted as impetuously as
ever: Till they were, once again unseated, by the Army; the 13. of October. last,
and then, the Committee of Wallingford house was invested with the Supreme
Authority: ('It Is but a slippery Title, that of the Sword) This Change, gave
General Monk occasion to show his Charity to his Native Country; by whose
Generosity, and Conduct, the Honest and Suffering Party was relieved, and the
Phanatique Army, dispersed, without Blood. Hereupon, the Souldjery tacked about
once again; -- Lamented their Back slidings; and on the 26th. of December.
following, the Good-Old-Cause men, re-enthron'd themselves: more eager now,
than formerly, against the Readmission of the secluded Members. This
barbarous, and Arbitrary proceeding, put the whole Nation upon a necessity of
procuring a Free and Full Representative: to which end, they proposed Modestly,
and Fairly, the Restoring of the Excluded Members, and filling up the House; or
else, the Liberty of a New and Legal choice. For bringing Letters to this
purpose, Sir Robert Pie, and Major Fincher were imprisoned. This was an
Insolence too gross, to do much Mischief, but to themselves. Are these the
men, (the People cried) that put the King to death, only upon pretense of a
Design, to erect and uphold in himself, an unlimited, and Tyrannical power, to
Rule according to his w^ll and to overthrow the Rights, and Liberties of the
People; Yea, to take away, and make void the Foundations thereof, and of all
redress, and Remedy of Mis-Government, which by the Fundamental constitutions
o^ this Kingdom, were rese ved on the Peoples behalf, in the Right and power of
FREQUEN^ AND SUCCESSIVE PARLIAMENTS? (these are the words of the charge) --
That which was Treason in our Lawful Prince, how coms it to be Law, now with
these Fellows? They took away the Kings life, for but Intending, the very thing
they Act; and we are to be Hanged, for Asking only That, they swear they Fought
for. No; -- they are a Pack of Cheats; they Murdered Him, that they might Rule
themselves. The Plot was grown so Rank, the Commune-People smelt it; and
without more ado, associated, to free themselves, from an Infamous, and
perpetual Bondage. Witness that Union, in their Declarations, both of Demand,
and Resolution; against the Equity whereof, no man has hitherto pretended the
least Objection. -- The Supreme Trifle; perceiving, an Universal Application to
the General, in his Passage; and all, speaking the same Sense; Finding withal,
that his Excellence suspended, till he might hear Both Parties; and Conscious
to themselves, of no Imaginable Reason to oppose; Beside: -- Seeing themselves
Declined, and Hated; -- Nay, and Endangered, by a Peremptory Agreement of the
Nation; -- They did, at last, most graciously descend to promise us a f^ll
Representative; but no Secluded Members, to be admitted, nor, in effect, any
other then Phanatiques.

His Excellency, well weighing, what was Reasoned, pro and con: made way for
the Return of the Secluded Members. This Justice, brake the neck of a Design,
just then on Foot. This is the short on it, -- the People were to be held at
Gaze, in expectation of a further satisfaction; till those Troops which the
Backside had ordered to that purpose, should have sersed all the considerable
Persons of the Kingdom. Nay, they were impudent enough, to tempt the General
himself into a Complication with them: But he was too discreet, not to
distinguish where to observe, and where to leave them. In fine, That
providence, which stills the raging of the Sea, and the madness of the People,
has put a check to their Impetuous, and Brutish Fury.

Next to our Gratitude to Heaven, let us have a Care, not to be wanting in point
of prudence to our Selves. Nothing undoes us but Security. We see, who are our
Friends, and who our Enemies; whom we may trust, and whom we must not. We have
paid dear for our Experience, and, sure, we have a Title to the Benefit of it.
We must look Back, and learn, from Thence, the manage of the Future.

It is a tedious while, this Nation has been tossed betwixt two Factions; One
in the Army, the Other in the Counsel Both, well enough Agreed to destroy Us,
but Jealous still, One of the Other, as Don says of Ignatius, concerning his
Competitor in Hell, He was content he should be damned, but loath he should
govern. That Is all the Quarrel: the Vizor of Religion, is thrown aside long
since. The Conventicle cheats the Souldjour This day; and he falls upon the
Rump, the next. In short, they do (...) ^^her, at the Public Charge; they may
snarle where they please, but they bite none but Us, and at the worst forgive
their Fellow-Theeves for robbing Honest men. This has been their practice near
these dozen years. Are we not yet convinced, that it is impossible it should be
otherwise, while the same people Govern us, with the same Aim, and Bound up by
no other Laws, than their Own Wills? I do not press any Resistance, now; but,
certainly, a Readiness to protect Honester men, in Case of an Attempt, were
not amiss. We see, how dirtily they have used the General, and how unworthily
their Instruments have labored the Army into a direct Tumult; And all this, in
order to a New Violence upon the House. We see, what Juggling is used in the
MILITIA: as foysting in false Lists, to cast the strength of the Nation into
the hands of mean, and Factious Persons. What Industry, to hold us still
unsettled. by throwing in Impertinent, and dangerous Scruples, to divert (at the
Fairest) if not disturb the long desired Peace we pray for. -- He that has
either Honor in his Blood, or Honesty in his Heart, is reproached with a King
in his Belly. -- Then, for the Qualifications, these goodly Squires would have
thrust upon us, are they not pleasant? One Man of Forty shall be allowed to
Vote, or sit, and the other 39. must call That a Free-Parliament, and swear, it
Represents the People. -- We are not so Blind yet, nor so Forgetful, as not to
see, and know, some Foxes, and some Asses, in the Medly; All are not Saints we
call so. -- We do remember, who they were that ruled in 48. and we are
sensible, what they would do still, if they had Power. -- We know, who brought
in, who; but the Market's raised; our Heads will not off now at Fifty shillings
a Hundred, as formerly. In fine, let the General, the secluded Members, and the
Honest Souldjers, live long, happily, and beloved; and let the Rest take their
Fortune. I could only wish his Excellency had been a little civiller to Mr.
Milton; for, just as he had finished his Model of a Commonwealth, directing in
these very terms, the Choice men not addicted to a Single Person, or House of
Lords, and the work is done. In come the secluded Members, and spoil his
Project. To this admirable discovery, he subjoyns a suitable Proposition, in
favor of the late sitting Members, and this is it; having premised the
Abilities and Honesty, desirable in Ministers of State, he recommends the
Rumpers to us as so Qualified; advises us to Quit that fond Opinion of
success^ve Parliaments; and suffer the Persons then in Power, to perpetuate
themselves under the name of a Grand, or General Counsel, and to rule us, and
our Heirs for ever. -- It were great pirty these Gentlemen should lose their
Longings: One word, and I have done. We live in daily Expectation of Writs for
another Session, if they leave us as free, as they found us, it is well: if not,
it is but to turn the Tables, and try their menage of a Losing Game.

FINIS.

