A True and Faithful WARNING Sounded forth through a true Prophet of the Lord
unto all the Inhabitants of the EARTH, But more particularly to ENGLAND, and
most especially to her Cities London, Bristol, and Winchester, whose
visitations are almost over as has been made known to him whose bowels yerns
for the restoration of all backsliders known.

By Name CHARLES BAYLEY.

London, Printed in the year, 1663.

These words are unto all the inhabitants of the earth, high and low, rich and
poor, bond and free, the word of the Lord God unto you all.
OH the day the mighty, the terrible, the notable day of the Lord God of all
power might and vengeance is come and coming upon and over you all, in which
all ye workers of iniquity, weeping, howling and bitter lamentation will be
heard amongst you except ye turn from your naughtiness with speed by amendment
of life, or else sad and deplorable will everlastingly be your state and
condition, if once the Lamb become a Lion amongst ye.

Therefore this warning from the Lord God, of love and life is sent unto you
with a cry for you to arise and repent, and kiss the Son (his light in you)
which long has stroven with you to turn you from the evil of your ways, but
if you still persist and go on in the evil of your ways in hardheartedness,
and pride, cruelty, and oppression, then God even the everlasting God will
consume and destroy you from off the earth.

For thus has the Lord God spoken, and thus shall it shortly come to pass, all
ye wicked workers of iniquity shall be turned into the bottomless pit, there to
be tormented with the Devil and his Angels world without end. And an evil doer
shall not dwell nor remain in the Land; wherefore be ye awakened and stirred up
out of your fleshly security both Priest and people, Rulers and Judges, Kings
and Potentates. God even the mighty God will plead with you all as with one man
in the valley of Jehosaphat, which will be a valley or vale of woeful misery
unto you all who are found playing and sporting your selves in the day time,
even in this the day of God which has already overtaken you as a thief in the
night and deep slumber of security, God will thunder amongst you, God will
roar, God will rent, God will tear and divide you in pieces, and not a shread
of you shall be found or left upon the earth unconsumed and undestroyed.

Therefore amend, amend, repent with have and speed, the day will be sudden,
fierce and very furious and terrible unto the wicked, hard-hearted, and
rebellious in the Land, oh weeping and howling will be heard in the Land, and
deep sorrow shall encompass and surround you as a woman in travel, and none
shall be able to deliver you from the hand of the dreadful God of vengeance,
and though your Priests, Sorcerers and wicked wise men, have limited him above
the skies, yet ye shall assuredly find and know that he has long been beneath
you all, bearing and forbearing all your evil, sins and iniquities; therefore
will he arise ascend and descend upon you, and his dreadful fury and fire shall
encompass you round, so that you shall not in any wise be able to fly or escape
the dreadful stroke of irresistible vengeance and stroke of Justice which is
already streatched forth over your heads.

Yet the Scepter and Banner of his love shall come before him, and if ye bow
thereto happy and blessed will ye for ever be, notwithstanding all your sins
and rebellion against him, but if ye refuse and reject the loving kindness and
mercies of the most high, and will not that the Son of his love rule and reign
over you, the rod of his anger shall bring you down without any to help or pity
you, and this is the word of the Lord God to you all.

O ye foolish and ungodly ones, how long, how long shall it be ere you come to
learn and understand wisdom, and to let understanding and prudence be your
Mother, seeing that folly has conceived you, and the womb of iniquity has
brought you forth, even you whose Father has been a cruel Tyrant in the earth,
and has oppressed the true one, and Son of God, for whom and by whom all
things were made to the end that he alone might judge, rule and reign over them
as the only Prince, King and Lawgiver.

But oh look look about you and seriously read see and consider who it is that
rules over and amongst you, is not the Government upon the shoulder of the
beast and not upon the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world, for
are you not all in sin and uncleanness, by which means the Lambs Rule, Kingdom
and reign is not known amongst you for Satan's bondslaves ye are, and he is your
King and Lawgiver; by which means the poor is not eased but grievously bowed
down and oppressed by you.

The Lamb shall break his yoke and bring down all oppressors from their seats,
he it is must have the sole Rule and Dominion in and over all Nations, fence
your selves as wisely as you can, your Kingdom of deceit and falsehood is near
an end, and truth, peace and righteousness shall over People and Nations be
spread, and he that will not bow unto it, shall be bowed down and brought under
with the Devil the power of the oppossor and the man of sin, who has long sat
in the seat of God, therefore shall he be disthroned and all that seek to
uphold him, therefore it lies upon you to consider in time what you are joined
to, and what ye uphold, for if it be the power of the divelish Beast, then must
ye perish with him, but if ye join unto the power of the holy Lamb, then
blessed and happy for ever: And this from God is sent amongst you all.

Charles Bayley.

O The whirlewind of the Lord God is coming over the Nation and Nations!
Famine, Plagues, Pestilence, and the sword of Gods unresistible vengeance, is
near at the door, to break in furiously upon all the workers of iniquity:
vengeance, woe, and bitter calamity, is entering swiftly into England, which
will light upon all thy unrepenting Inhabitants: wherefore awake, awake; O all
ye proud lustful ones, to meet the Lord God: arise and come under his Banner
speedily, or else his unquenchable anger shall surely and suddenly bring you
down.

O Sodom, Sodom! look to thy dwelling place, and see if it be not upon the
mountains of sin and polution; and ye Inhabitants of Gomorah! though thy
cituation be as it were upon the Rocks of security, yet the Lord God of a truth
will certainly bring thee down.

Woe, woe unto thee! thou Land of Kder, and inhabitants of the Deserts; the wild
beasts of the Forest shall suddenly be let loose upon you, to pray upon and
devour you. Therefore thus says the Lord God unto all the Inhabitants of the
earth; fly, fly for your lives, and he that is on the house top, let him not
descend to save the goods, neither let him that is in the field seek to hide
and save that which he has at home: for the coming of the Son of man is at
hand, to reward every one according as his works shall be.

Wherefore look about thee, O thou inhabitants and City of London, and consider
your works, according to which your reward shall be; O is not pride and
hypocrisy abounding and super-abounding in and amongst you (cheating, lying,
covetousness and deceit; drunkenness, whoredom, swearing and forswearing;) O
consider this! least wrath, woe and misery (without intermission) everlastingly
rest upon you.

O thou Egypt! and ye Egyptian dogs, Sorcerers, Inchanters, and Magicians,
what can ye expect in this the great, terrable day of the Lord God which is a
coming over your heads; even upon you who have by your stubbornness and
heard-heartedness sought every way to keep the seed of God in bondage, and
would not let it go for your corrupted ends sake.

O thus says the Lord God unto you; your ends shall shortly end, but your woe,
misery and torment, shall never end. Ye are of the cursed seed of Ham, the
mocker, scorner, and derider (of the righteous and just one;) and will not that
he shall reign over ye: Therefore servants to the least of servants shall ye be
for ever unto ye. And this is the word of the Lord God all.

O weep and howl! ye whores and whore-mongers, ye Idol Priests, and Idolaters;
ye wicked, light, wanton, and profane ones, who are patching and painting your
selves Jezable-like, cloth, cloth ye with sackcloath, and cover ye with
ashes, and let the repentings of Ninive be seen and heard amongst you, or else
as Kner, as the Lord God lives (whose Throne and Dominion is an everlasting
Dominion) his wrathful vengeance will suddenly come upon you and over-take you
unawares, oh ye that are a sleep in the flesh! and dust of fleshly security,
Gods controversy is against you, in as much as ye have sought your selves,
your ease, pleasure, and profit, and not the Lord God, therefore shall nothing
avail and profit ye, which ye have gathered upon heaps unto your selves, Gods
wrath, Gods unresistable vengeance will suddenly scatter all from you and you
from it, and there shall be none found to help you, because you have put your
trust and confidence in the arm of flesh.

O the disolation which is coming upon you! neither tongue nor pen can write or
demonstrate it unto you; oh ye Babylonish Merchants! weeping and woeful
lamentation is a coming upon you, and all the inhabitants of the earth shall
hate, utterly loath, and abominate your Merchandise: and they shall surely
curse your dwelling places, when they shall see and behold with open face the
sad and deplorable condition ye have halled and lead them into. O what will you
be able to say and do (ye blind guides!) that have thus deceived the nations,
when that into the ditch and pit of everlasting destruction ye all come to be
cast; surely your Logic and your Rethorick, will not be able to hide and save
you in the day, when ye shall be called to an account for what ye have done: oh
ye Babilonish builders! who have thus built up people in sin lust, envy, and
uncleanness, see, see and look about you, what the fruits of your pretended
ministry has been, this many ages and generations past, was ever the
inhabitants of the earth fuller of cruelty then now? surely nay, nay, therefore
God will recompense you the flatterers and daubers of them, according to the
fruits and effect of your doings.

And now you the daubed, what can ye also expect from the hand of the righteous
Judge? Even you who have taken delight for to be cried peace, peace unto, while
the wicked one has had the chief rule and reign in you: O you foolish and
unwise ones, did not God in all ages and generations past, cause all Nations
and people for to reap according to their ploughing? reaping that which they
have sowed; and it being so, what can or may ye expect to reap, but the fruit
of your doings, ye have sowed to the flesh, therefore of the flesh and produce
thereof ye may expect to reap nothing but corruption, and not only so, but
your wages for it: And who may say, how that the Lord is not, or will not be
very righteous in all these his ways, which are equal altogether

And o thou seed of the most high God, lift up, lift up, lift up thy head, for
it is for thy sake, thou beautiful and beloved one, that these overturnings are
to be, to the end that thou, even thou the meek and lowly one, may be raised
and lifted up over all the mountains of sin and uncleanness, under which thou
have lain and were hid from the eyes of all living, though no eye has pitied
thee, yet behold thy God has pitied thee, and his bowels yearneth for thee: oh
what shall I say of thee! Who is like unto thee? thou speckled one, thou fair
one, O come away, come away, and take to thy self thy Dominion, and be thou
exalted in thy father David's Throne; thou have already inamored the hearts and
souls of many through the beauty, power and spendor of thy rising: And having
tasted of thy love, therefore they say, and cry, uncessantly, unto thy father;
that rest the nations might never have nor enjoy more, (until thou in the
beauty of holiness over all the world and whole earth art exalted;) ah thou
shall assuredly leaven all nations, that love thee unfaignedly, with thy love,
and with thy beauty.

Therefore says the souls of the upright, arise and be thou awakened thou hand
and arm of the mighty high God, stretch forth, strecth forth thy self, in the
might of thy strength, and in it do thou travel, travel on, to the wasting and
making bare all the glory and fashions of men, that thy seed, thy opressed one,
(as it has been bowed down and pressed and opressed, under all, as the alone
sufferer, in the earth,) may rule and reign as the only King, Judge, and
Priest, and Lawgiver (in and over all Nations of the earth) Amen, Amen.

O thou beloved one! who art the only beloved of thy father, the Isles shall
rejoice in thee, and all Nations shall rejoice in thy glory and prosperity; for
this, even this is the Answer, the righteous receive daily and continually
concerning thee; thou shall rule, thou shall reign, thou shall have the sole
rule and dominion of all Kingdoms, kindreds, tongues, and Nations; for thou
have purchased it with thy dearest blood and life; therefore there is none
found worthy besides thee; and all rule and Reign, and Principalities, and
Authority, shall be subdued and brought under and subjected unto thee for ever
and ever: and this is the oath and decree of God concerning thee, which can
never be altered.

Wherefore blessed, blessed and happy without end shall be those who submit and
bend unto thee. Glory, glory and honor, shall possess their dwelling places,
and with joy and delight shall they run their race, for out of thee a blessing
shall not be found, and of thy glory the whole earth shall abound.

Thou tender Lamb, thou shall be the only King, the whole Earth shall thy
praises sing, what shall I say, thou art the only joys which the whole Earth
has annoyed; but in thy God thou shall saved be, and of all Nations some shall
glorify thee.

This is a Warning of Repentance to the Inhabitants of VVenchister.
O All flesh, earth, and selfeshness, be awakened! for God of a truth has
bowed the heavens, and is come down, and has already drawn and furbished his
sword, which is keenly whet, over your heads, and is and shall never be
sheathed, until it has hewed and brought your glory down, and your honor into
the dust, into shame and confusion: O the misery and anguish, which is coming
upon your Inhabitants and resting place, none is able to declare it unto ye,
though warned ye may be by many to fly by true and unfaigned repentance, the
sore, grevious, and uneresistable stroke of Judgment, which from the righteous
God and Judge of all is a coming upon ye,

Whirle-winde, Earthquakes, shakings, and overturnings, is at hand, even such
that has not been since the beginning of the creation and works of God (which
are much polluted and defiled in and by the lust and inordinate affections of
you who are the sons and daughters of the earthly fallen Adam.

Oh all ye Inhabitants of the Earth! seriously consider your state and standing
and what fruits ye are bringing forth, now the Lord of the Harvest is coming
amongst you, to look for fruit; what is he like to find and to reap amongst
ye? but pride, hypocrisy, and deceit, malice and envy, glutony, drunkenness,
and fullness of bread, cruelty, fraud, cheating and opressing one another: And
these and such like is the evident, and manifest fruit of your doings.

Therefore Priest, Ruler, and people, look, look about you, least the rod of
Gods vengeance smite you at once, in the dreadful fury, for the God of heaven
is highly displeased and provoked unto anger by you, insomuch that if you do
not speedily take timely warning, ye will overpass the time by tempting and
provoking the holy righteous God of love, until there will be no remedy, and
repentance will come to be hid from your eyes.

For consider this, O all ye people! high and low, rich and poor, do ye think
it shall be always so as it is now, that the oppressor shall always have
rule in the Land? nay surely, nay as sure as the God of heaven lives, it shall
not be so, for the oppressor shall shortly be brought under, and the oppressed
shall be set at liberty, the poor and the meek of the earth shall be exalted,
and the high and lofty shall be brought down, and his grievous yoke shall be
taken off the neck of the innocent, and he shall be everlastingly beyoaked
himself therewith, this has the Lord spoken, and this will he shortly work and
bring to pass, for his own glorious name sake, which shall over all Nations be
beautified and honored, and every knee shall be made to bow thereto, and every
tongue shall confess to its righteousness for ever and ever, and this is the
infallible Word and Truth of God unto you all who dwell upon the earth:

Therefore I say have, have to meet the Lord, who is coming in his Saints, to
judge all that dwell upon the earth, with equity; mercy and judgment shall be
laid to the Line, and righteousness to the Plummet, then what will ye do and
answer for your selves (ye howling Idol Priests, who make the innocent to groan
with heaving, and under the grievous wight of your oppressions which ye through
covetousness, and for filthy lucre sake lay upon them all, which ye will not in
no wise touch with one of your little fingers, except it be to devour the gain,
the oppression of your ungodly lusts;) and accordingly shall ye have recompense
from God, and be rewarded at the hand of his righteousness, whom ye altogether
are ignorant of, and never shall know him but in dreadful judgment, except ye
cease and amend with speed.

And alas! ye high minded proud lofty ones; what can ye also expect? but
tribulation and anguish to come forth and to be revealed from heaven against
you God has of old spoken it, and now the time is even at hand for the
fulfilling of it; and such as ye have and do still sow, such shall your reward
be, and this in the truth of God will be sealed upon your heads for ever, if ye
are found in an unrepenting state, slighting and rejecting Gods holy Law and
light in you, through which your souls should be converted unto God, without
which eternal condemnation will assuredly be the sentence of God the Judge of
all against you.

Therefore, woe, woe will be unto you tithe-mongers; woe, woe will be unto you
you proud profane ones, Gods wrath and controversy is with you: and all you
swearers, drunkards, and liars, and whoremongers; the controversy of God is
against ye all, and the Kingdom of God ye shall never inherit nor possess; but
amongst the Dogs, and Sorserers and unclean beasts, shall ye be cast for ever
and ever.

O weeping and howling shall fill your habitation, and instead of safety, rest,
and peace, everlasting calamity shall be the reward of your work.

O ye generation of Serpents and Vipers! how can ye escape the fire and
torments of Hell, seeing that ye take pleasure in unrighteousness and hate
reproof, and to be reformed in your hearts, the Besome of the Almighty shall
sweep and rid you out of the Land, and the seed of the righteous shall inherit
the same for ever.

The whirlewind of the Lord is coming upon you, and it shall shake and root up
every evil corrupted tree, and the fire of God shall burn and consume them, so
that their standing and growing place shall no more be found in the earth, and
the plant of Gods renown shall over all Nations be spread, and there shall not
be any room for another.

CHA. BAYLEY.

THE END

