Behold a Cry! Or, a TRUE RELATION OF THE Inhumane and Violent OUTRAGES of
diverse Soldiers, Constables, and others, practiced upon many of the Lord's
People, commonly (though falsely) called Anabaptists, at their several Meetings
in and about London.

Together With the Violence offered some of them in Newgate, (where they are
now Prisoners) by the Fellons in the same place.

The Earth was filled with Violence, Genesis 6.11.

The Lord loves the Righteous, but the Wicked and him that loves Violence his
Soul hates. Psalm. 11.5.

As a roaring Lion and a ranging Bear, so is a wicked Ruler over the people,
Prove. 28.15.

The Prince that wants understanding is also a great Oppressor, Prove. 28.16.

A man that does Violence to the Blood of any person, shall flee to the Pit,
let no man stay him, Prove. 28.17.

London, Printed in the Year, 1662.

Behold a Cry! OR, A true RELATION of the Inhumane and Violent Outrages of
diverse Soldiers, Constables, and others, practiced upon many of the Lord's
People, commonly (though falsely) called Anabaptists, at their several Meetings,
in and about London, etc.
THe sundry and diverse Abuses that has been offered time after time, to the
freeborn People of England, contrary to Magna Charta, and the Petition of
Right, and all the known Laws of the Land, the Declaration and Proclamation of
the King that now is, we cannot suppose the Nation wholly ignorant of; but how
inhumanly they have been used, and with what violence Soldiers and others have
proceeded in several places where they have in the fear of the Lord been
assembled, their usual manner being to come with Soldiers, which commonly were
most of them rude Youths, or Mercinary men, of the ruder and viler sort, and
they with their Muskets, and some with their Swords drawn, to the affrighting
of Women and Children, breaking and spoiling of their Goods; doing violence to
their persons, by pulling, halling, and beating some of them, the which they
may not understand: Now that all, both Magistrates and People may be rightly
informed, the mouth of Falsehood and Scandal stoped, and such Abuses redressed,
we shall in particular give a brief hint of some of them, as follows.

In June 1661. there came diverse rude Soldiers, Wicked, Swearing, and
Debauched persons, to the Meeting House in Brick-Lane near White-Chappel, and
laid hands on several men, to the number of more than twenty, who, in a
peaceable manner, demanded of them their Warrant for their so doing, but they
would not show them any; which, one William Caswel seeing, he said (or to this
purpose) That if they had a Warrant he would obey it, but if they had none,
they should carry him, for he would not go: With that they beat him with their
Hangers about the Head, and pulled him along by force, and sometime taking him
up between three or four of them, and then leting him fall with violence into
the Dirt, pulling by great force his Stomach and Breast against the Railes,
insomuch that with blows, and falls, he is deprived of health to this day: And
when (because the King in his Proclamation, bearing date January 17. 1660.
declared, That if any should be so hardy, as to seize the Persons of any
without Warrant, etc. that then they should be left open to the Law to be
proceeded against, and receive according to their Demerit:) there was several
of the Actors of this Tragedy arrested, and Suit, being according to Law,
commenced against them, and the persons abused, intending to go on; they were
suddenly surprised, and prevented by John Robinson, who granted a Warrant, to
seize the Body of Thomas Hull and the above said William Caswel; the said
Thomas Hull being taken in the street, by virtue of the aforesaid Warrant, and
carried before John Robinson, who in a fury demanded, how he durst arrest his
Soldiers? and would not take bail, but sent him to Newgate, and one with him,
who only came along with his Friend, the said Thomas Hull, and desired to bail
him: Where they both lay about ten or twelve days before they could be bailed,
and were held bound from Sessions to Sessions, for a long time after, before
they could be discharged; So little was the Kings Proclamation regarded by John
Robinson.

Secondly, on the 20th. of October, 1661. there came a parcel of the aforesaid
rude Soldiers to the Meeting at Brick-Lane, and took away one that was then
Preaching: Some there desired them to show their Warrant for their so doing;
one Lieutennant Wilton showed his Commission as he was an Officer, which being
read, he said, that was sufficient; one answering, said, that was not
sufficient, he ought to have a particular Warrant, with the name of the Person
seized, expressed in it; and under the Hand and Seal of some one Justice or
more; one Ensign Spike, answered, If that were not sufficient, it was
sufficient Sir John Robinson, as he called him, bad them by word of mouth do
what they did; to which was answered, That a verbal Order from him or any other
Justice else, was not according to Law in such a Case; neither did the Law
entitle them to be Executioners of it; but if they had a Warrant, as they had
none, it ought to be directed to some Peace-Officer, and not to them: yet
notwithstanding they carried him away to the Tower, before John Robinson, who
sent him to Newgate, pretending and inserting great matters in his Mittimus;
where he lay thirty Weeks without any thing laid to his Charge, and then they
released him.

Thirdly, on the third day of November 1661. they came again in the like manner
to the aforesaid place, in as rude a manner as before, and with as little a
show or face of Law, they seized him that was preaching (as one was at that
time) and when they had taken him down, they took away three more, two of which
were sitting at the Table, whom they carried before John Robinson, who
committed them all to New-Prison, inserting in their Mittimus, things of an
high nature; as their speaking of treasonable Words, and the like, who, when
some questioned the Legallity of their seizure, he, John Robinson, replied,
with some Indignation, That he sent them to do what they did; as if his Verbal
Command were sufficient to justify their illegal Proceedings. And at Sessions
following, there was one of them removed in time of Sessions, only by John
Robinsons Warrant from New-Prison to Newgate; in order as he said to his
Trial, which he could never attain to have, nor any thing laid to his charge,
though he often called for it in the face of the Court; but had no notice taken
of him, nor never returned in the Callender; yet was he kept in Newgate twelve
weeks unjustly; till he was fetched out by a Person in authority. He suffered
in all near 18 Weeks Imprisonment; and the rest of his Fellows suffered 28
Weeks Imprisonment, and then were released, nothing being laid to their Charge.

Fourthly, the 25 of May, 1662. at a Meeting in Shacksbies-Walk, near Wapping
Wall, where some People were peaceably met, there came Soldiers in a hostile
manner with Swords and Muskets, pulling and halling some of them, and the Man
that was Preaching they pulled violently down from the place where he stood,
though it was his own hired House; and such was their rage notwithstanding he
was their Prisoner, because he continued speaking, they cried shoot him, before
he had any Trial or was found worthy or not worthy of Death; and such was their
violence, that a Child belonging unto the Family, about a Year and a quarter
old, was so affrighted and awakened out of its sleep, as it lay in the Cradle,
with which fright it fell sick and never recovered its sickness, but died three
days after; and whether they were the Cause of its Death or no, is left to the
Lord to determine at the last day. They carried two of the said Meeting before
John Robinson, who committed them to Newgate, were they still remain, nothing
being laid to their Charge.

Fifthly, On the same 25th. day of May, the Soldiers came to Beech-Lane, to a
Meeting there, with their Swords drawn, pulling and halling of them violently,
and two of them they carried in the morning to Newgate, where they were kept,
and never had before any Magistrate to be heard, nor accused by any till the
Quarter Sessions, which was a Month or five Weeks after.

Sixthly, On the first day of June, 1662. they came to the aforesaid
Beech-Lane, with their Swords drawn as before, the Ensign came in with his
Sword drawn, holding of it over the head of him that was Preaching, pulling
them violently down the Stairs, carrying them to Paul's Yard, and from thence to
Richard Brown, who committed them to Newgate.

Seventhly, On the same first day of June, 1662. the Soldiers came to Brick
Lane aforesaid, in like violent manner, with Swords and Muskets, and forced him
that was speaking, down, with great outrage, and carried ten of the men before
John Robinson, who after his wonted manner committed them to New-Prison; this
was in the Morning, and in the Afternoon they came again with far greater
violence, broke the Pulpit all to pieces, they left not a whole piece of Wood,
and carried eight more to the Tower before John Robinson, who committed them to
New-Prison also: But not to omit an Act worthy the observing, John Robinson as
he came (near night) by the Watch-house at Brick-Lane End, where the valiant
Soldiers were keeping Guard, they told him what they had done, how they had
broken the Pulpit: He (John Robinson) answered, It was well done; and gave the
Soldiers a piece of Gold as a Reward for their good Service.

Eighthly, On the eighth of June, 1662. the Soldiers came again to Brick-Lane,
Exercising their wonted Violence and Tumultuous behavior; they carried away
seven men before John Robinson, who committed them to New-Prison, where they
yet remain. On the same eighth day of June, the Soldiers came to the Meeting
in Beech-Lane, manifesting their fury and rage; they took away only him that
was Preaching, and carried him before Richard Brown; when the man was before
him, amongst the rest of his learned discourse, he told him, he should teach
him a new Trade (meaning, as we suppose, that he would send him to Bridewel)
and have the skin from his Back: He committed him to Newgate.

Ninthly, On the fifteenth of June, 1662. the Soldiers came again to
Brick-Lane, in such manner as they were wont, they took six men and carried
them to John Robinson, who committed them to Newgate. And on the same day they
came to the Meeting at Beech-Lane, and violently set upon them with drawn
Swords, pulling of them out of their Meeting place with great rage; The place
they stood to Preach in, they brake it down with such fury, that they broke
their Muskets: They struck several persons to their detriment in point of
health. After which, they took two men more, carried them to Paul's Yard, and
from thence to Newgate, where they were kept while Sessions, not being at all
committed or had before any Magistrate, and at Sessions returned to Newgate,
nothing being laid to their Charge; where they still remain.

On the same fifteenth of June, 1662. the Soldiers came with great fury and
rage, with their Swords drawn, to the Meeting at Petty-France, where they very
inhumanely wounded a Boy almost to death; it was doubtful whether he would
recover it: They took away him that Preached, and carried him to Newgate, and
never had him before any Magistrate, where he remained till Sessions, and from
thence was returned to Newgate again, where he yet remains.

Tenthly, On the 29th. of June, Soldiers came to Petty-France, full of Rage
and Violence, with their Swords drawn; they wounded some, and struck others,
broke down the Gallery, and made much Spoil: This was in the Morning. In the
Afternoon the Soldiers came to Baick-Lane practicing their wonted Cruelty, by
pulling, ^alling, and beating them, and took several, had them before John
Robinson, who committed them to New-Prison.

Eleventhly, On the 6th. of the Month called July, the Soldiers came like
Beasts of prey to Brick-Lane, where they shut the Door and kept in all that
were there, and with great violence they brake the Forms before their faces,
they left not one Form whole, taking the Legs and hurling them against the
Glass Windows, pulling and halling many, not regarding Sex, Childhood, nor Old
Age; they took six men, had them before John Robinson, who committed them to
New-Bridewell: In the morning following, they were by the Keepers of Bridewell
called to beat Hemp, which they refusing to do, were put into New-Prison to the
rest of their fellow Sufferers, where they still are.

Twelfthly, On the 27th. of the same Month, the Soldiers came to Brick-Lane
aforesaid, with a multitude of rude people, as Butchers out of White-Chappel,
Bailiffs-followers, Boys, and such like unruly and debauched fellows, with a
Constable, like themselves who (as we heard) told John Robinson, That he could
not overcome them, nor break the Meeting at Brick-Lane. John Robinson answered
(as was said) That then he should let in the multitude upon them, and let them
tear their Clothes from their backs; or Words to that purpose; which may very
well be judged to be true, for the abovesaid ungodly wretches, Soldiers, and
Constables, after they had beat, pulled and halled them, in a very inhumane
manner, themselves set the great gates wide open; The Constable, named Bartlet,
a Cook, and Brown the Marshal, a wicked lewd fellow calling the rude multitude
in, marched down before them, saying to them, Do your Work boys, which they
did, for they beat the Women and Maids, broke the Forms, the Glass Windows, and
the Door making such spoil and havoc as was seldom heard of; sparing none no
not Women big with Child; This Brown the Marshal being asked, Why he beat the
Women? he said, Who saw me? who will swear it? And with those words fell more
violently upon the Women, some whereof were with Child, striking of them with
his fists such blows that made them reel. Again a Maid had her Bible snatched
away, she laboring to get it again, was struck over the Eye, that it was black
a long time after. Then the Soldiers too six men and a Woman, and carried them
to John Robinson, who notwithstanding committed them all to New-Prison.

Many other Cruel and inhumane actions, they have committed at other times, and
in other places, which is hear omitted, which no doubt but the Lord has taken
notice of; and will one day recompense it upon the heads of them that were the
Actors in it: Now that these things are contrary to Law, I think that we need
not spend Time and wast Paper to prove the Law alowing no such Violence, but on
the contrary, forbids and punishes it; but we are content to wait until the
Lord shall arise to plead our Cause.

Thirteenthly, On the third day of the Month called August, 1662. when the
Prisoners in Newgate, called Baptists, were in their Chamber seeking the Lord,
and speaking to one another, that they might, as their Duty is, provoke one
another to Love and good Works, Heb. 10. about four of the Clock in the
afternoon, the Thieves, as House-Breakers, Pick-Pockets, Highway-Men, came with
violence into our Room, one took up a Bible from the Table and threw it down to
the ground, asking, what we did there? struck one in the Face with his Fist,
and he with the rest fell upon us, drew their Knifes, and endeavored to Stab
some of us; but the Lord was pleased to deliver us from their Cruelty, for we
took courage to defend our selves, and escaped their Bloody hands; and on the
same day, the like Violence, as we were informed, was offered to those Brethren
in the White-Lyon, Southwark, by the Fellons there; and on the first of June,
so called, 62. which was upon the first day of the Week, after we were brought
to Prison, some of the Keepers did come up to us, and charge us that we should
not Pray, nor Preach, for if we did, they had order to put us into the Hole,
and that they must do it: And though that was not executed, yet the Fellons did
come violently upon us no our Room, and did beat some of us, and threaten us
all, saying, they would now order us well enough, for they had Commission so to
do.

Will not the Stones in the street cry out (if we should hold our peace)
against these Wicked, Filthy, and Ungodly Proceedings of these Wicked men? and
is it not the more to be lamented, that such things should be practiced in a
Nation, who profess themselves to be Christians, and the only true Church
separated from Rome? and yet they follow Romes steps in Persecuting the
Righteous, and all them of different Persuasions from them, and that they do in
such a way and manner by Violence, Cruelty, Spoil, and Blood shed, that Rome
it self can hardly exceed them; and the very Heathen would be ashamed of them,
their own Laws they make no Rule, they spare not to violate them, though they
cry up Obedience to the King, and call such Rebels as dare not violate their
Consciences by obeying the King to disobey God, and Jesus Christ, King of
Kings, and of Nations, the only Lawgiver; yet they themselves regard not the
Kings Commands, they put in Execution their own Wills, no man (in Power)
controuling them, as if every Wicked man, and profane Blasphemous Person, were
left to do in Persecuting of the Godly, whatsoever seems good in his own
eyes; and as though there were no King in England; as if the Lord's People were
appointed to be murdered and slaughtred by them, their Houses rifled, and yet
these say they are Christians; their Ministers tell them so, and encourage them
in their wicked Ways, their filthy profane and lewd doings, and tell them
that others be Heretics, Schismatics, Seperates, Phanaticks, and what not?
and so set on the Wicked like a company of greedy Dogs upon harmless Sheep, who
run upon them with open Mouth, as if they would devour all at once, and make a
full end quickly.

Oh horrible! can these men be the Ministers of Christ? and such the Members of
Christ, that use such violence to their Neighbors that the Law of God nor of
Nations will not in the least justify them in, is it not a certain token of
Perdition to them? Phil. 1.28. may they not in their Actions read themselves
Sons of Perdition, the hated of God? For the Lord tries the Righteous, but the
Wicked and him that loves Violence his Soul hates, Psalm 11.5. and yet they
say, they are the true Church, their Ministers say so, and therefore all must
be conformable to them and their ways, or else Persecute them, Banish them,
Hang them, they are not worthy to live, they cannot use them bad enough. But if
there were but one Gamaliel amongst them, he would say, Refrain from these men,
and let them alone; for if this Counsel, or this Work be of men, it will come
to naught, but if it be of God, you cannot overthrow it, least happily ye be
found even to fight against God, Acts 5.38, 39. or were there any as rational
as the Heathen, they would not violate their own Laws, for they mightily stood
upon it, and were very exact and careful to maintain them, and all those
Privileges that did acrew to any by them; for when they bound Paul, and would
have scourged him, Paul said, Is it lawful for you to scourge a Roman, and
uncondemned? When the Centurion heard that, he went and told the chief Captain,
saying, Take heed what thou do, for this man is a Roman, etc. then
straightway they departed from him that should have examined him (or as the
Margent reads it, tortured him) and the chief Captain was afraid after he knew
that he was a Roman, and because he had bound him, Acts 22.25, 26, and 27,
verse. They were so just in their Proceedings, though Heathens, that they would
punish Injustice in any, therefore the chief Captain was afraid, knowing what
was done to Paul, was done contrary to Law; but here in a Christian Nation, as
they say they are, we are beaten, wounded, pulled and halled, our Goods spoiled
and broken, and we freeborn English men and uncondemned, and no notice taken
of it; the chief Captains, John Robinson, and Richard Brown are not afraid, but
rather countenance than reprove the Violence that is offered at this day; and
is it not much to be lamented, that such wicked and ungodly Assemblies, as
Stage-Plaies, Popit-Plaies, Bear-Baitings, Prizes, going about the streets with
Drums, their Swords drawn, drawing many lewd Persons after them to their
ungodly Sports and profane Pastimes, Morrisdancing, setting up May-Poles, and
meeting to Dance about them, dancing for Garlands in many Streets, Revellings,
Whitson-Ales, and the like, by which Youth is nourished and hardened in Vice
and Vanity, many times to the utter ruin both of Body and Soul; by the means of
which wicked profane Meetings, and Assemblings, Blasphemy, Swearing, Cursing,
Quarrelling, Drunkenness, Adultery, Contempt of God, his Word and true Worship,
is ushered in; many Families impovishered, and Wifes and Children sit at home
with hungry Bellies; and that which may not be forgotten, the Curses and
Judgments of God hangs over this poor Nation, and are threatened against it for
these their ungodly deeds, and all this is suffered, none making any attempt to
suppress them; but in such Meetings appointed for the Service and Worship of
God, where his Word is purely taught, his Ordinances administered rightly
according to the Primitive Institution, and his People in the name and fear of
Christ assembled, whom they can charge with nothing but in the matters of God,
they are incontinently taken and abused, thrown into Prison, there kept amongst
common Fellons, who are desperately bent to harm them, did not the Lord protect
and keep his poor People, as though God were like unto them, to delight more in
Maygames and Stage Plays, etc. than in the solemn Assemblies of his People:
Oh! England, England, What will thou do when the Lord enters into a
controversy with thee, thou City of London, to whom God has showed so many
Mercies, to whom God has given such Means, and such plenty of the Means of
Grace; what Nation has had such Means as England? And what City has God
showered down such Floods of Mercy and Grace upon, as he has upon London, and
yet how has England and London required the Lord? what have been the fruit of
that rich mercy of the Gospel, that thou have had? will God accept of Violence,
Tumults, Bloodshed, Swearing, Cursing, as Dam'um, Sink'um, and many such
Execrations, fearful belching forth of Blasphemies, provoking him to his very
face, by daring him to destroy them, and confound them; think thou oh
England, that God accepts of Bear-baitings, Tavern-huntings, drinking Healths,
while they wallow in the filth and mire of their uncleanness; no no, these
things are an abomination to the pure and holy God, and these things will
hasten his Wrath, and bring down his Fury upon thee, if thou repent not, and
break off these crying Sins by Righteousness.

But to return, what shall we say, can this be a Christian Nation? can any man
that has his eyes in his head, see any Christianity, or any likeness of Christ
amongst them? did he ever give them any such example, as to persecute any for
Conscience? has not he left this charge with his Ministers, by the Apostle
Paul, saying, The Servant of God must not strive, but be gentle to all men, apt
to teach, Patient, in Meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them Repentance, to the acknowledgement of the Truth, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. and again he must be one that holds fast the faithful Word, as
he has been taught, that he may be able by sound Doctrine, both to exhort and
convince the Gainsayers, Titus 1.9. Timothy and Titus, to whom this Word was
writ, were Bishops, and we have some men that say they are Bishops now, but
were they such as Christ would own to be such, then would they be gentle, and
not strive, yea they would be gentle to all men, although they were Heretics,
(as they say we are) and though it should be granted, we oppose our selves
against the truth, yet is it their duty in meekness to instruct us, and not to
ruinate us; and if they say we are Gainsayers, then ought they by sound
Doctrine to Convince us, and not by such inhumane and violent dealings think to
Proselyte us, for that is not the Way of God but of the Devil, Rev. 2.10. and
therefore had they the Truth as they have not, they would be willing to take
the course the Apostle directs to.

Were they Bishops as they say they are, but are not, they would be willing to
come forth by sound Doctrine, and Scripture-authority, to convince us that they
are Bishops, and that Christ the Head of the Church, has called, chosen, and
appointed them to be Lord-Bishops, Archbishops, or Bishops, and that their
ways of Worship are agreeable to the mind of Christ contained in the
Scriptures: Their sprinkling Babes, their Common Prayer, their Holy Garments
(as they say they are) as Lawn-sleeves, Tippets, Caps, Surplices, with many
more Vestments; Their Organs, and other Wind-Musick which they use, with
Singing-Men and Boys, and many more such like things; then shall we submit to
it, and acknowledge we have been mistaken and missed: But if they will use no
other Arguments than such down right Blows as we now have, they will never
convince us that they are the Ministers of Christ, or their ways the good Old
Way we should walk in: For was it ever known that Peter and Paul Cudgeled
people into the way of the Gospel? Can it be imagined that they Convinced and
Converted any by imprisoning them, or any such like way? Nay on the contrary,
they themselves were Persecuted, Imprisoned, Scourged, and commanded not to
Preach any more in the name of Jesus; Yet would they not forbear, because it
was better to obey God rather than man. And truly though it may not be
universally true, that every one that is persecuted is therefore a good
Christian, yet this is most certain and universally true, that they that do
persecute any for Conscience or Religion, are at the best but bad Christians;
for those that are in the true Faith and Fear of the most High, that worship
the Lord in Spirit and in Truth, are by Jesus Christ said to be his sheep; now
we know that sheep are of such a nature that they will not destroy, no nor harm
others, but are as Christ says, sent forth amongst Wolves, which are of a
quite contrary nature, Beasts of prey, and very ravenous: Such differences
there are between the Persecuted, and the Persecutors, the true Church and the
false: For the people of the Lord were grievously persecuted in most Ages, it
was given to them to suffer for Christ's sake: And they that would live godly in
Christ Jesus, suffered Persecution, as says the Scriptures. But we never heard
of any of them, to wit the true Churches of Christ, or his true and faithful
Ministers, that did ever Persecute any for Conscience, or took that course to
convince Gainsayers; but they labored night and day in the Word, approving
themselves by sound Doctrine to every man's Conscience, that so they might be
profitable to the Souls of Men, and finish the Ministry that they had received
of the Lord; they counted not their Lives dear unto them, but exposed
themselves to Hunger, Nakedness, and to an innumerable company of Sufferings,
and never were Lords and Rulers of Nations, neither were they called of men
Rabby.

The truth is, except our Consciences be Convinced by the Scripture and sound
Reason, that we are in the Wrong, and the Bishops, so called, in the Right, it
is not beating and halling of us to Prison, and spoiling of our Goods, nor
greater matters than all that will do it: For though it may be thought by some
rebellion, and by some others imprudence to keep up our Meetings when we are
forbid, yet such is our respect to the Law of God, and Christ our Lord who died
for us, that we cannot but obey him rather then men: and indeed do esteem our
Meetings, and the Ordinances of God more dear to us, than our Estates,
Relations, nay than our very Lives, what ever may be thought of us, or how ever
we may be presented by any; Neither do we doubt but that the Lord who is our
Light and Salvation, and the strength of our Life, will enable us to endure the
Cross, and despise the Shame, what ever it be that may he inflicted on us; for
this we know, that the Captain of our Salvation, Jesus, to whom we look, went
before us in suffering, and if they persecuted the green tree, much more will
they persecute the dry, and if they called the Master of the house Beelzebub,
how much more shall they call them of his household, Mat. 10.25. And if they
said of him, [Christ] He has a Devil, and is mad, why hear ye him? much more
will they say of his followers, they are Phanaticks. What our Lord went before
us in, he in his rich and free Love has made us willing for to follow after,
and doubt not but he will give us more strength, and make us yet more willing
to suffer for his sake, what Tribulations soever we may meet with, having a
good Conscience, (and that is to us a continual feast) void of offenses toward
God and toward them: knowing they cannot justly accuse us of any thing that we
have done, without it be that we are faithful and constant to what we know of
Christ, and will not submit to any thing that is of humane Invention, and
contrary to the Light of our Consciences; and in this we can rejoice, and be
exceeding glad, because great is our reward in Heaven, it being a choice favor
from the Lord, who accounts us worthy to suffer shame for his Name; and
though we may suffer more than yet we have done, yet this we know, that God
will at length arise and plead our Cause, and judge between Us and our
Persecutors. Then let such take heed, the Lord will one day avenge his Elect,
that cry day and night unto him, though he bear long with them; I tell you,
says Christ, he will avenge them speedily, Luke 18.7, 8. For the day of
vengeance is in his heart, and the Year of his Redeemed will come, and though
there be none to help, nor none to uphold, yet his own Arm shall bring
Salvation, Isa. 53.4, 5. Let the Lords people therefore Labor to be found in a
patient waiting for the coming of Christ, He that shall come will come and will
not tarry; and then he will give a reward to every one according to their
works, with whom there is no respect of Persons in judgment; whose is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, now and for ever, Amen.

POSTSCRIPT.
WE would not be understood by any, that we send out this Cry because we are
wearied with what we have suffered, or afraid of what we may further suffer;
but that we might show to the World that our Sufferings are altogether contrary
to Law and Humanity it self: For did they no more than were Law, we should be
silent, and willing with much rejoicing to endure and suffer it in that blessed
Cause of the Gospel, which we are not ashamed of, nor of the Testimony of the
Lord Jesus, for whom we are willing to suffer the loss of all things, esteeming
it a very choice Mercy that the Lord should accept of such poor nothing and
unworthy Creatures as we are, to bear a testimony for him, against Idolatry and
Profaneness.

THE END.

