THE Righteous Evidence, Witnessing the TRVTH.

BEING An account of the Sickness, and Deathbed Expressions, of Mr. William
Bedlow: Who Deceased at Bristol,the 20 th. of August, 1680.

With his Attestations which he left in Writing, for the good of this Nation,
concerning the Late Damnable PLOT, Contrived by the PAPISTS.

With his Two Last PRAYERS.

LONDON, Printed for Phillip Brooksby, at the Golden-Ball, near the Hospital
gate, in West-Smithfield. 1680.

Mr. Bedlow's Attestations Which he left in Writing, a little before his Death.
MY desire of securing truth from the Outrages of ill men, especially when the
public is concerned, have prevall'd with to give a short Account of the
Sickness and Death of Captain Bedlow.

On Monday the 9 th. of this Instant, he came very ill from London, having the
Headache, and an extreme Looseness most part of that Day; the next Day after he
came home, he was seized with a most violent Vomiting, and Looseness;
Physicians were sent for, who attended him three days, but his Distemper
increasing, on Thursday Two other Physicians were joined in Consultation about
him: his Disease still grew upon him, and he being very Apprehensive that it
would issue in his Death, and understanding that the Lord Chief Justice North
would be there to hold the Assized the 16 th. Instant, expressed a very great
desire to speak with his Lordship, for discharging of his conscience, in
deposing somewhat which he had not before disclosed; with which his Lordship
being made acquainted, was pleased that night at his request to go to him;
before whom he did by many repeated ass verations, upon the words of a dying
man, declare, That in all the great business of the Plot, he spoke nothing
against any Person upon Oath, or otherwise by way of Accusation, but what was
true; and only complained that he had been too Timorous, and rather lessened
his evidence in some particulars.

After some short time, the Company were desired to withdraw: and none being
left with him but the Lord Chief Justice, Capt. Bedlows Wife, and the Judges
Clerk, My Lord gave she said Mr. Bedlow his Oath, and his Clerk took a pretty
long Deposition in Writing, the Contents whereof are yet Secret: only thus far
we know he made Oath, That whatsoever he had declared to the King and Council,
and Secret Committee, and at the several Trials upon Oath, were all true, upon
the words of (...) dying man. He told the Judge he expected no Crown of
Martyrdom for Lying, as the Papists (...)id, but what he said sincerely true,
as he was shortly to appear before the great Jehovah, the maker of all flesh,
where he should stand with a clear conscience as to all matters of the Plot,
wherein he had given Evidence. He said moreover to the Judge: My Lord, some
will not believe the Plot, or pretend it at least. My Lord, I speak the more,
because I know not but that I may dye this night. He very often said to my Lord
Chief Justice with great earnestness, My Lord! I pity the King! I pity the
King! His Life is in danger! they will Poison, or cut him off! they are going
toward it! they are carrying on the Plot! the Papist^ will Kill him! When my
Lord was going away, he called him back again, took him by the hand, and begged
him to present his most Humble Duty to the King, and to tell him he was his
most Loyal and Dutiful Subject, and to beseech Him to take care of himself.

Tuesday the 17 th. of August, toward the Evening, he appeared worse than he
had been all his Sickness before; some about him asking him several questions
about his Deposition he replied, He was a very weak man, and would talk no more
of Temporal things.

Wednesday he had a severe Fit, through the violence of which* he spoke not for
the space of 14 hours, or thereabouts. Thursdayin the Evening his Speech
returned to him, and he took some Refreshment, and asked those about him what
day of the Month it was? and what hour of the day exactly? One standing by,
asked him if he were satisfied in his Conscience as to what he had swarn and
assed in the public business he had been involved in? His answer was, That as
he hoped for Salvation, all that he had sworn about the Plot was just and true,
and that he had rather omitted, than augmented any thing he had given in
Evidence. This ^e spoke the night before he dyed, and after he had been in a
Trance several hours.

Friday the 20 th. of August Instant, his speech failed him again, and returned
no more: and about Two of the Clock that Afternoon he Expired.

Yesterday being Sunday, after he had been publicly exposed in
Merchant-Taylors Hall, in this City, to the view of all Spectators, his Corpse
was carried thence about Six of the Clock in the Evening, and Burried in the
Mayors Chapel, called the Gaunts: the Funeral was attended with a very
numerous company of Citizens, both Men and Women. Mr. Mayor, and others of the
best Quality being present, several Gentlemen of the Council, and others
bearing up the Pall. The Church was hung with Black. Mr. Palmer, a Reverend
Divine of the City, Preached the foregoing Sermon at his Funeral, which was
upon these Words, Romans 14. v. 12, 13. So then every one of us shall give an
account of himself to God: Let us not therefore judge one another any more, but
judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in
his brothers way.

There were Escutcheons fixed to the Hearse, with this Inscription in Black
Letters in a Field: Argent. Testimonium quod vivens Exhibuit

A Prayer in his Adversity, and for Mercy.
ALmighty God, which for my ingratitude, and sinful life, have worthily
punished me with affliction and adversity, I most humbly beseech thee, to give
me Grace utterly to detest and abhor my former wretched and sinful life, and
study daily for the amendment of the same; and I am fully persuaded, that this
affliction has not come unto me by casualty, but by thy permission, and
determinate pleasure; and that thou do beat me with this thy rod of
correction, because thou would nurture me, and call me to unfeigned
repentance for my former life, to be more circumspect, of a good life: to
exercise my Faith in thy godly promises, to try me whether I will be patient
and constant in adversity: to make me abhor vain pleasures of this life, and
with fervent and continual desire, long for the life everlasting; therefore I
^eartily pray thee, to strengthen my Faith, Hope, Charity, and meekness, that I
may pa^iently bear this thy fatherly Chastizement. And grant me, that I may
daily increase more and more in love toward thee; for I hope all things shall
happen to be best, whether it be ^rosperity, health, sickness, life or death;
and therefore I wholly submit my self unto thee, and will resign all my will to
thy most godly ^ill and pleasure, hoping that thou will end ^his affliction, to
thy honor and glory, and to ^y most profit, wealth, and everlasting Sal^ation,
through Jesus Christ, my only Savi^ur and Redeemer: Amen.

Confession of his sins, and his Prayer for forgiveness of them.
O Almighty God of Israel, my Soul that is in trouble, and my Spirit that is
vexed, c^y unto thee; hear ^e, O Lord, and have mercy upon me, for I have
sinned against thee, I heartily pray and beseech thee in the bowels of thy
mercy, to look down from Heaven upon me thy poor servant, whose sins be
infinite, and innumerable, most Hanious and insupportable: but as they be
grievous and without number, so is thy mercy more abundant and without end. Thy
mercy is above all thy Works: more able to save, than my sin to Condemn. Thou,
O Christ, art that good Samaritan that pourest the Oil of Grace into our
wounds, thou art the only true Sacrifice and oblation once offered for the Sin
of the whole world. Therefore O swee^ Savior, for the bitter Death and passion
and for the Glory of thy Name, be merciful unto me, and forgive me all my sins
Grant, that as through my wicked life, thou have been dishonored, so through
my Godly Conversation and integrity of life hereafter thou may be ever
Glorified. Forgive me* (O my Savior) all my sins, I most humbly beseech thee,
and keep me ever hereafter from all sins. Grant me the assistance of thy Grace
and Holy Spirit, to direct my ways, and guide my paths, that I may be innocent
from all offenses, and that in all things I may Honor and praise thee;
together with the Heavenly father, and the Holy Spirit, now and for evermore:
Amen.

Finis.

