A WORD OF Information and Advice TOUCHING TITHES, And other the Goods
Appropriate (as yet left) to Churchmen.
Wherein is given a Hint of the Light and Knowledge of God and his Mind touching
these things, as they have been from the Beginning almost till now.
Humbly presented by R. B. of N. W. to the Governors of this Commonwealth*
1. OBserving what ado there is in the Land as touching these things, I have
also judged it meet to give my advice, for the Peace sake and good of men: That
I might make out my mind in brief, I would first give notice according to the
testimony of the Scripture of Truth, that there are in the world now, as there
were heretofore, these three ranks or degrees of men; the first were and are
such that live wholly alienated from the light and true knowledge of God, being
in continual, open, and manifest rebellion, in heart, thought, and life against
him; such were the most of the Gentiles heretofore, and there be not a few of
the like spirit found among the people that yet profess the Name of Christ now,
yea the multitude of all Lands are such: these people have, as open and professed
Rebels, or like highway thieves, taken all they ever can lay hands on, and
together with themselves bestow all upon their lusts, which are indeed the
alone gods they serve, which were noted among the Heathen under the names
either of Mars, as the god of some, or Bacchus the god of others, or Venus the
god or goddess of others etc. All which, and their mind, the Apostle
comprehends in that saying, Their god is their belly, their glory is their
shame, they mind (and nothing else but) earthly things.

2. Wherefore in the second place, it being now in a manner fully in the heart
of man, that as for the most holy, high, and blessed God (who is also himself
the God of Gods, the fountain and first rise of all good) he had indeed
forsaken the Earth, and left man to take his pastime here, and to do his own
will, and what liked him best, every one following the imagination of his own
heart, it pleased God for a remembrance of himself, in all ages to reserve a
people, which he has always made ready, and prepared for himself in the
furnace of affliction, as he did the remnant of the house of Israel in Egypt,
these are the second sort of people, that in their affliction, through the
power and indwelling, and clear opening of the Grace of God unto them therein,
are made willing to become tributary to God; these, that he might bind them
fast to himself, according as they were capable, he made with them some
Agreement or Covenant, thereby preserving them in some way and degree of
subjection to, and acknowledgment of him, as their liege Lord and King, whose
they, and all that they had, by right, the highest right of all, was; only
because of their weakness, and unwillingness, wholly and in all points to give
up themselves to be altogether at the dispose of this their supreme Sovereign,
King, and Lord; he humbled himself, and condescended for a while and season to
take of them only some remembrances, as some part of their time, as one day in
seven, instead of the whole, and so some part of their Corn, Wine, and Oil, and
all that they had, and did put their hands unto: of these he took by
Commandment only the Tithes and Offerings, yet of these things he took so great
a share, that he seemed indeed to oppress them more then any other people were,
that they might be thought to have more cause to complain for this matter, then
any have upon any the like, or the pretended like to the same now.

3. Of this second sort of people there is in this, and in other Countries,
some, or rather a very great remembrance, whose attainment and condition, were
it in truth, and so far as so it is, is far more excellent then the former, and
ought to be had in esteem above them, even as subjects that acknowledge their
Sovereign Prince, are above those that are in open and professed rebellion
against him; hence it is they are zealous some more according to the Scripture,
and some upon the account as well of Tradition as the Scripture, for neither in
their place ought to be had in contempt, or which to say is better, both having
respect to the Scripture; but some take less, some more example from the Old
Testament, as those we call the Papists, yea and some of the Protestants too,
as the Lutherans beyond the Seas, and the Bishops heretofore in this Land, the
Ancestors of these, since they were not able to go forward to the purity,
holiness, divinity, and self-denial of the New Testament, went back again to
the observations of the Law, I mean to many of them (doubtless of a good mind
in some) who not being able to keep their ground in Grace, or in the Gospel or
new Law, took up their station in the Old, or the things in use, through the
Command of it, though many have since in a great degree been beaten off it, and
are fallen back into the dark Hell and Abyss of Evil, the state of Gentilism,
wherein even Abraham was before he believed: Yet even this Gentilism has for
it a double vail, the one more thick and manifest, as that of the Old Law, the
other being scarce any other then the very Name of Christ and the Gospel.

4. But there are a second sort, which would seem, and indeed in some sort are,
more Reformed, as the followers of Calvin, whom yet many have clouded, he being
far more in the light then those that seem to be so great admirers of him, who
pretend to l t go what the others keep close to, the many usages and
observations of the old Law, and to aspire to, and abide in, the light and
freedom of the New, only here in England, is made a double reserve, the one of
a seventh day Sabbath, the other of Tithes or Tenths, but with this difference,
that they would have the Sabbath, the seventh part of time, consecrate and holy
to God in distinction from the rest of time, which they say is allowed to men
now as common, though the New Testament Sabbath not without a Mystery had its
beginning on the eighth day (which was also the time of circumcision, or the
cutting off the foreskin of the flesh) to signify, as Luther observes, that
that day is of that nature and light, that after it no night shall follow: But
as for that of Tithes, they speak ambiguously, and seem to hold to it rather
upon the account of Custom, and the Law of the Land, then as a right Divine of
necessity to be bowed down to.

5. Now I shall speak my belief, and give my judgment as to both these, which
is this, I like them both in opposition to the first, the state which the
Gentiles were, and yet are in; for it is far better that there be left some
remembrances, of the right, title and interest God has in both the persons of
men, and the times and things men are allowed to the use of, for his glory,
then that all these, through Atheism, Pride, Unbelief, and Covetousness, which
reign and prevail so much all the world over, become wholly obliterate; yea upon
one account I like better of the first of these second sort, viz. those that
take more liberally of the usages and Customs of the Law, both as touching the
observations of days, as having in use not only one day in seven, but days upon
several accounts of Consecration and Remembrance, yea whole weeks and years,
which if they were true in but according to the mind of God in those things, as
they were at first given of him to Moses, and of Moses to the people, were of
admirable use, as a Manuduction or Pedagogie of the People, till the times of
Deliverance should come, through the Revelation of Christ, as it did betide the
former people, the Jews.

6. But they having in these things (of great use in the first Institution)
corrupted themselves, and are become Apostates, as well to the Law as to the
Gospel, there has arose out of them the people we call Protestants, but the
other call them Heretics, or Schismatics, making some further adventure, more
hopefully first in Luther, if we respect the Noise made at this sudden rupture,
though there were at the same time some, or at least one, affording, though
with less observation as to most, a more clear light, and uniform, and of more
use to all Nations, whose testimony has yet been alone (as it were) heard in
silence, this being overlooked, as the Truth in the full extent of it uses in
all ages more or less to be; Comes Calvin, and others of great note with him,
who seemed to build and attain higher then he that first lighted their Candle,
Luther; yet their Superstructure as it proved since, being very specious, had
not, has not enough of the foundation to perpetuate and uphold it, in so much
that it shakes well nigh as much as what was in their account, Babel before,
which they no sooner perceived, but they were fain, as their Successors since
(therein evidently leaving their first Pattern and Example, Luther) to support
themselves the same way did the Hierarchy of Rome before, I mean by the weapons
of this worlds warfare, as Imprisonments, Whippings, yea Burnings of men for a
different belief, in the which all those most excellent men, Calvin, Peter
Martyr, Bucer, yea Beza heretofore appeared, and their Successors since, as we
have seen in England and Scotland allowed, and is manifest in those of the
highest attainment, I mean the Churches of New England, with whom does concur
those in Old, or if not, why are they so silent in so great a matter of
Consequence as this?

7. So that the Sun setting in a sort in a Cloud upon Calvin, but especially
upon those that would be thought his followers* others have of late, especially
in this Land, made yet some adventure further (as we see at this day,) at the
remove of which, all things, both fundamental, superstructural, and
circumstantial, in Religion, are shattered, even quite almost to pieces, that
there is, as the Prophet speaks, scarce so much as a sheard left of this earthy
pitcher, for any to take up a little water to refresh himself therewithal;
upon which opportunity is taken of the profane spirit of worldliness,
wickedness, ignorance and pride, to ruffle and come forth as Nimrod of old, and
those that with him would undertake to build a City and a Tower for themselves,
the top of which should reach Heaven, and affront even God himself, for a
securing of themselves in their lusts and evil: For as whiles there was an
outcry of the Protestants against the Papists, many covetous worldlings, have
well provided for them and theirs after them, with the spoils they took in that
encounter: so the like occasion since have here the Non-Conformists, or rather
those that came in to their aid, taken against their Lords and Task masters,
the Bishops heretofore; so that what was left of the feathers of this so fair
bird, these other birds of prey, have taken every one a part to themselves; in
so much the thing men call the Church, is become as in the day she was first
born, even in a manner a poor, despised and naked nothing, as to outward and
worldly appearance, especially if we consider what is now last of all, in
imitation of them that went before, pursued by all means to be brought to pass,
(i. e.) the taking away the Tithes and Glebe, through pride and covetousness in
a great degree detained of the Clergy, and upon the same account (for the most
part) sought to be revokt of the people.

8. As to these things therefore its manifest, as the Papists have fallen from
the Gospel Ministry and Conversation to that of the Old Law, where they secure
themselves as well as they can, so are we the Protestants here fallen in
appearance (which I desire the Reader to observe) a degree lower, and somewhat
nearer the Earth, having let go our hold even of the Law it self, and the
things and usages in it, and are now become, to the wonder of all the world,
instead of the Church of Christ, a Commonwealth, being fallen from Rome, as
Antichristian, to an imitation (as some would have it) of Rome as Heathen; to
reach which Politicus makes no small ado: This, as the Lord is witness, I speak
not to upbraid or vilify him, much less either the persons or the attainme^t
the persons upholding the present Power have reached unto, but (as having them
in great honor and esteem, and judging with them, and with all my heart
confessing, that I had rather a thousand fold live in a Heathen Commonwealth,
then in or under an Antichristian Church, in which by search will be found the
blood of all that have been slain upon the Earth, I (seeking the glory of God,
and the ancient, and that I say not the only glory and honor of this our
Native Land) would the Government of it should be given up of a ready mind to
him whose right it is, the Lords; neither would I, and for that end I make
continual prayer and supplication to God, our Rulers should manage or meddle
with the Affairs of the Land, but in the Name, and the alone Authority of him,
whose all the Kingdoms of the world are, and who is even now the second time
entering upon his own Inheritance, as the right Heir of all.

9. Here then would be found (in the third place) a view of the third and best
sort of People the whole Earth affords, which in the Scripture phrase are
Christ's, or the Lords true anointed ones, which I for my part, as Luther and
others d^d, judge alone meet to be likened to the third, and most inward part of
the Temple, (was formed of Solomon, according to the Pattern was seen before of
Moses and David on the Mount with God,) which was said to be the place, as
these are the people, most holy: These are those that have ceased from their
own works, even as God did from his, and have naught else now to do, but to
sing Hymns to God in a good and righteous life toward him and men for
evermore; here is found, and had indeed, the restitution of all things, spoken
of by all the holy Prophets that have been ever since the world began; here
they neither marry, or are bound in heart or life to this or that, nor are
given in marriage in that sense to any creature, Angel, man, or thing, but are
as the Angels of God, i. e. For here alone is the Apostles Rule 1 Cor. 7.29.
fulfilled.
whether in wedlock or single life, living wholly holily, purely and chastely to
him that sits upon the Throne, as King and Law giver in their hearts; in one
word, all that herein is, is become most holy, pure, just and good, every thing
is become consecrate, even the very bells and bridles of the Horses, have writ
upon them what was wont only to be on the forehead of the High Priest, Holiness
to the Lord; no man here (as in the Apostles times) calls or accounts any thing
at all his own, it being as much and as truly his neighbors, as his, yea rather
it is alone the Lords, all that is there, and no man enjoys ought but in the
alone right of him; yet all according to the most holy Law of God was given by
Moses, for the true body of Moses is here found in spirit (understanding it of
the people that believe) the true body of Jesus, in whom the whole Law of Moses
has its end, mind, and fulfilling.

10. Now though I for my part believe, that all these late and present
shakings, as well of things heavenly in their nature and kind, as earthly, tend
to this as their proper rest and center; yet I would in this, as declare my
desire, so put to my helping hand, to prevent and stave off, the first sort of
men and people of Gentile heart and conversation, that they lay not, as they
are apt to do their hands on the sacred Signs, Types and Figures in use to them
of the second sort, who answering to the middle part of the Temple, are as yet
under the Law, or letter only of divine things.

11. Wherefore in particular as concerning Tithes, let it be made or put into a
Decree throughout these three Nations, now under and in the dispose of this
Commonwealth, that all the goods heretofore counted separate or sacred, that
are yet left undisposed or sold, be left and reckoned as the right of God, that
is to say, according to their primitive institution under Moses, or donation
since, under several Kings and Princes; by both which it will appear, as John
Wickliff (worthy of honorable esteem and memory, as in all Lands, so especially
in this our English Nation) proves at large, that they are no other then the
free alms of the people, which they were originally willing to allow, as their
acknowledgments of Gods right to all they had, I say, to allow him in those
that he has (as is confessed throughout the Scripture) a more immediate care of,
that is to say, the poor, among which the Levite, as the steward of God in this
behalf, is reckoned, having no other then the Lord for his portion.

12. And let it be added with this clause, that he, what ever he be called in
every Town or Parish, whether Parson, Rector, Vicar, Minister, Priest,
Presbyter, or Lecturer, do not in time to come lay claim to any of these goods
in his own name, but alone in the Name of God, his poor, whose right from men,
by the Authority of the Nation, he is, but without force, to plead and contend
for, according to the ancient and most holy Law of God.

13. And lastly* That here, and from hence, all that are in distress, all that
are in want, the poor, lame, and blind, and all that are necessitous (but none
that are wilfully or wickedly idle, and of evil life) may have some
proportionable support, as out of the Treasury and Storehouses of God in the
Land, confessed to be such by a decree from the chief Powers in it: Upon this I
will be bold to conclude, in the same spirit and mend to this Nation, as
Malachy or the Messenger of God did of old to that of the Jews, Bring ye all
the Tithes into the Storehouse, that there may be meat in my house, and prove
me now herewi^h, says the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open you the windows of
Heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to
receive it. And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he shall not
destroy the fruits of your ground, neither shall your vine cast her fruit
before the time in the field, says the Lord of Hosts. And all Nations shall
call you blessed, for ye shall be a delightsom Land, says the Lord of Hosts.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his Shop at the black
spread Eagle at the West end of Paul's. 1652.


