SORROW upon SORROW: OR, The much Lamented Death of the worthy Mr. Ralph
Venning, BEING A SERMON Preached Upon the Sad Occasion of his Death before his
Burial, From Acts 20.38.

Sorrowing most of all that they should see his Face no more.

By W. Beerman Minister of the Gospel.

And Devout Men carried Steeven to his Burial, And made great Lamentation over
him.

LONDON: Printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle near the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil, 1674.

THE PREFACE to the READER.
Courteous Reader,
WHo ever thou art, to prevent misapprehensions of the Author that Preached
this Sermon, or of the Person that Writ it, when Preached, we must tell thee
that neither of them, by their so doing, designed it for the Press, nor is it
now published for any other profit then thy own, (except the Printers, as the
Labourer for his hire,) and this thou may see by its plain and evening
Dress, in which it first appeared to the World, upon that sorrowful Occasion of
the Death of Worthy Mr. Ralph Venning: I must acknowledge, through the modest
unwillingness of the Author for its Publication, with the want of skill in the
Pens Dexterity, many of its Ornaments, I mean those fine Illustrations then
Delivered may be wanting, but the hearing of it Preached pleased so many, and
abides so habitually on their spirits, as to press for its Printing, which
makes us not doubt, but the Reading will delight many more, it being so
suitable, on so sad an Occasion, as the loss of so Worthy and Eminent a Person
as the Deceased was. We must also tell thee it was deferred the longer from
Printing, in hopes the Author would have been so kind, if not to have Clothed
it in its Pristine state, yet to have helped any unwitting Error in it, but
the Parent is so far from owning this his Issue, that he cannot be prevailed
with (though by several Entreated) to help its lameness, occasioned by the bad
Midwife that now brings it to thy view; therefore is thy favorable, not severe
Censure desired.

If it meet with any such hearts abroad, as it met with in the place where it
was Preached, we are sure there will not want watery Eyes, nor affected Hearts
at such and so great a Dispensation, for if the feet of them that bring glad
tidings are so beautiful, that the holy Spirit by way of Admiration says, How
beautiful are the feet of them that bring glad Tidings of the Gospel of Peace.
On the contrary, must it not then be matter of great Lamentation, when the
footsteps of such are taken away. Its eminently known while he lived, he
labored, and with the good Be, almost, if not altogether, ended his labors
with his life. For while Preaching at Joyners Hall on the Lords day in the
Afternoon, March 1. 1673. he was taken ill, and after that, never more able to
Preach, but Departed this life, and did to the last stand by, putting on (as he
had exhorted others to do) the whole Armor of God, that thereby they might, as
he did, resist the Wiles of the Devil, thus hoping as this that is Published
will not be chargable in the buying, so it will be pleasant in the Reading; If
any advantage be to the Reader, let God have the Glory, which is all that ever
is aimed at by the Publishers, who heartily subscribes themselves thy Souls
servants for Christ's sake.

D. L. R. T.


A SERMON Preached on the Sad Occasion of the much Lamented Death of the Worthy
Mr. Ralph Venning before his Burial.
Upon Acts 20.38. Sorrowing most of all for the words which he spoke, That they
should see his Face no more.


WHen first I was desired by that Worthy Person, that used to stand in this
place to Preach here, I intended to speak from another Text, but Providence
having since altered his State, that Preached Blessedness to you, by calling
him into Blessedness, I have now therefore pircn'd upon this Text, Sorrowing
most of all, that they should see his Face no more.

(...) the better part of this Chapter you have the Declaration of two things;
First, You have declared the carriage of the Apostle Paul, that was, he
Preached while he was at the Church of Ephesus. Secondly, You have declared the
Character of the Church of Ephesus, when they were parting with this blessed
Preacher, in the words that I have read, and the verse before, or the two last
verses, and it was full of love, and manifested in three things;

1. They fell upon his Neck and kissed him, that is the close of the 37. verse.

2. They accompanied him unto the Ship, when he was to Launch into the Ocean:
They went with him as far as they could, as some of them it may be will to the
very edge of Eternity.

3. They showed to him their Love, by their Weeping, and sorrowing at Parting:
They cannot part with dry eyes. Hence you may take notice of three things,

1. The Universality or Generality of them, it was not one or two of Paul's
hearers, it was not many, or most, but all of them; And they all wept, Men and
Women, Old and Young, or as the Dutch read it, There was a Weeping among them
all.

2. You have the Degree of their Sorrow mentioned, and I may say of it, as its
said of the Mourning in Zech. 12.10.11, 12. They shall Mourn for him, as one
that Mourns for his only Son; In that day there shall be great Mourning, as
the Mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon, and the Land shall Mourn
every family apart. And 2 Chronicles. 35.24. All Judah and Jerusalem mourned for
Josiah: There was a great Mourning, and as the verse before my Text says, They
wept sore, or a great sorrowing, or an abundance of Tears came from their eyes
at the parting with this Apostle Saint Paul.

3. You have the particulars set down where their sorrow lay, says the Text,
They sorrowed most of all, especially for this, that they should see his Face
no more. It was not so much that Paul was to go from them, but that they should
see his Face no more. Sorrowing most of all for the words which he spoke, that
they should see his face no more. But you will say, where did Paul speak these
words to them? see the 25. verse. And now behold, I know that ye all, among
whom I have gone Preaching the Kingdom of God, shall see my face no more.
Though I have been Preaching the Kingdom of God to you, and Preaching you to
the Kingdom of God, Yet now you shall see my face no more. From this practice
of this Church, I would lay down this Doctrine, That it is the property and
practice of the Saints and People of God, to be sorrowful and affected at the
final parting with their Pastors and Teachers; This was that that most of all
cut their hearts, That they should see his face no more. If so be then that
such an able Preacher, when by his withdrawing caused them to Cry for him, how
should it be when you shall have him no more. For the Prosecution of this
Doctrine, I shall do these three things, First, I shall prove it. Secondly,
give you the Reasons of it. Thirdly, make Application.

First, for the Proof of it, That it is the Property and Practice of the Saints
and People of God, when the Saints and Servants of God are taken from them, to
be sorrowfully affected to Lament and Mourn for the loss of them.

I shall give you some instances out of the Old and New Testament, 4. or 5. out
of the Old, the first is of the Patriarch Jacob, that Puny-God, that wrestled
and prevailed when he came to die, as you read in Genesis 49. and the last verse,
That he pulled up his feet into the bed, and he is gone: Now see what a Mourning
there was for him in Genesis 50.1. Joseph fell upon his Fathers face and kissed
him, and verse. 3. And the Egyptians mourned for him threescore and ten days;
here was a Mourning for Jacob, and verse. 10. They came to the threshing-floor
of Atad, which is beyond Jordan, and there they Mourned with a great and very
sore Lamentation: and made a mourning for his Father seven days. They carried
his Body to the Land of Promise, and they mourned with a very great and sore
Lamentation, and made a Mourning for his Father seven days: Now mourn that
Jacob is gone, a Man that used to wrestle for your Souls is gone, now mourn. A
second Instance is Moses, that man of God, when he dies, and they see his face
no more: and in Deuteronomy. 32.49, 50. God bids Moses there get up into the Mount
Nebo and die there; God bids Moses go up and die, and you see Moses does it in
Deuteronomy. 34.5. Moses the servant of the Lord died there in the land of Moab,
according to the word of the Lord: and what then? Moses may die if he will, who
will concern themselves for him? see verse. 8. And the Children of Israel wept
for Moses thirty days: there is mourning for Moses, We shall see him no more,
whose Doctrine dropped as the Rain, and whose speech distilled as the Dew, whose
lips dropped honey. A third instance is of the Prophet Samuel, he was an excellent
Teacher; God forbid, says he, that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing
to pray for you, but I will teach you (and he taught) the good and the right
way of the Lord: but now observe, in the 1 Samuel 25.1. what mourning the people
made for him when he died; its said, all the Israelites were gathered together
and lamented him, that is, from all parts of Israel; all sorts of Israel came
together and Lamented for Samuel; we shall never hear his Prayer for us more;
and they lamented for him. A fourth Instance is that of the young Prophet in
the 1 Kings 13. who without doubt in the main was faithful to God, though
seduced out of his way, and out of his Life by an old Prophet, whereby a Lion
was appointed by God to destroy him, but see now how the old Prophet was
affected with it as soon as he hears it, causes the Ass to be sadled, and goes
and brings the Carcass home to the City to Mourn, and to Bury him, and laid him
in his own grave in the 30. verse, and brings all to mourn over him, and
charges his Sons that when he was dead, that they bury him in the same
Sepulcher where the man of God was, and lay his bones besides his bones. 5. One
Instance more in the old Testament is that of the Prophet Elijah, a man that
the Apostle says was subject to the like Passion as we are; This Prophet that
prayed it should rain, and it did; and that prayed it should not rain, and it
did not; This Prophet in 2 Kings 2. tells his Servant, he should see him no
more. In the 12. he cries out, My father, my father, and rent his clothes in
two pieces: that rending of Clothes or garments, signifies sorrow; also as
David did when he heard of the death of Saul, and also repeating it is argument
of sorrow, as David did for Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.17. to the last, and by Absalom,
Oh Absalom my son, my son, my son Absalom. I shall now instance in the
New Testament, it was so with them of Ephesus when they parted with Paul, They
should see his face no more. He had been such a Preacher that they could not
part with him without tears, or with dry eyes; if you look into Acts 20.18. you
see his labor, Ye know that from the first day that I came, after what manner
I have been with you: At all seasons he Preached to them, in season, and out of
season; and he was a faithful Preacher, he did not neglect to declare the whole
Council of God; and he was a courageous Preacher too, he did not care what
became of himself for their good: Now if people loose such a Preacher, so
painful, so laborious, it is no wonder if they mourn, when they shall see his
face no more. A second instance is of Stephen, who was the first Martyr that
ever was in the New Testament; Stephen was the first Gospel-Officer that ever I
read was chosen, he was the best read in Scripture, for Acts 7. he runs over
all the Scripture, and in the 51. verse, he calls them stiff-necked, and
uncircumcised in heart and ears, Ye do always resist the Holy Ghost; now this
Stephen that thus Preached the Scripture to them, they put him to Death, as you
may read in the close of the seventh Chapter of the Acts, but now how was he
buried in cap. 8. verse. 2. Devout men carried Stephen to his Burial, and made
great Lamentation over him. That Stephen that was so powerful a Preacher, and
to Pray for us, We shall see his face no more. The last instance is that of our
Lord Jesus, he is called by Nichodemas, A Teacher sent from God: By Paul in the
Romans, The Minister of the Circumcision: By Matthew, As one having Authority,
and not as the Scribes: Now this blessed Teacher being taken away, you shall
find they were much troubled, Joh. 16.5. he tells them he was going away to him
that sent him, He was going to his Father; In the 6. verse says he, Because I
have said these things to you, sorrow has filled your hearts. Oh Lord Jesus,
what? thou go away, sorrow was in their heart, and sorrow filled their heart
because he was to go away; and when he was dead and buried, you find there was
weeping and mourning; as you may see in Joh. 20.11.13, 15. there was weeping
and mourning, and mourning and weeping, yea, and those that were his
Persecutors, they were sorrowful, Luke 23.48. And all the people that came
together to that sight, beholding the things that were done, smote their
breasts: and in the 27. verse of that Chapter, when Christ was carrying to be
put to Death, there followed him a great multitude of people, and women which
also bewailed and lamented him, There was great lamentation: Oh they could not
part with Jesus Christ without lamenting, That they should see his face no
more. But it will be here objected in the next verse, that Jesus Christ in Luke
23.28. turned to these women that wailed, and wept, and said, Daughters of
Jerusalem, weep not for me, but for your selves: That therefore there ought not
to be weeping, or lamenting for the departure of any eminent Saint, seeing he
forbids it for himself; It argues indeed we should not weep for them, but for
the want of them, which is ours. Christ bids not by his forbiding weeping upon
his account, but not to weep on his account, as if he had said, Don't weep for
me, as for my suffering, or upon my account, but for your selves, and your own
children: there are dreadfuler things coming upon you then these; Blessed are
the barren that bare not: don't weep for me may this servant of God say that we
are speaking of at present, Don't weep for me, I am gone from way to way, from
triumph to triumph; but it is for the people of God to be heartily affected
when the worlds Teachers are taken from them: but you may say, Why should it be
thus? I will show you in five particulars, why you and them should be greatly
affected with this dreadful providence of God that has lately befallen. First,
because the death of such men possibly is for your sakes, for your sakes they
had lived longer had it not been for others: and if it be so, then we had need
to bedew their Hearse with tears, I Will give you a threefold meaning. First, it
is possible in our service that he lost his life, for it may be, that in the
painful laboring for the saving of our souls, he lost his life, and will you
not lament? Secondly, we may occasion the Death of godly Preachers thus,
wounding their Spirits, grieving their Hearts, that we profit no more: if that
be true in the 1 These. 3.8. where the Apostle says, For now we live if ye
stand fast in the Lord: Then it is beloved, if ye Apostatize ye kill our
hearts. Thirdly, possibly we may occasion the Death of Godly Preachers by the
non-improving of his Ministry. Sirs, God sends his Ambassadors, and we give
them not the hearing, or but the hearing, and if our unprofitableness and
non-improving shall occasion this, shall we not mourn and lament that we should
be the cause of their death. Secondly, why should those that are hearers be
deeply affected at the final departure of holy Ministers. I answer, This arises
from the love that is between them: there is a mutual love between a faithful
Preacher and a sincere Hearer: Now beloved, you shall observe two things to
attend this assertion of love, according to the Nature and Degree of it. 1.
Where there is Love, there is delight of, and enjoyment. And secondly, where
there is love, there is mourning in the absence of it, in the 3 John 29. says
our Savior, He that has the Bride, is the Bridegroom; but the friend of the
Bridegroom which stands and hears him, rejoices greatly, because of the
Bridegrooms voice: so on the contrary, when he is taken from them, there cannot
be but great mourning in the 37. Genesis 3. Its said that Israel loved Joseph more
then all his Children, and therefore when News came to Jacob that Joseph was
not: oh! says Jacob v. 35. I will go down into the Grave unto my Son mourning.
So David lamented for Absolon, oh Absolon my son, my son Absolon; and David
lamented exceedingly for Jonathan in that 1 Kings. I am distressed for thee my
Brother Jonathan; if you love your Preachers so as its said of them that could
pull out their eyes for them while living, you will even weep out your eyes for
them now dead. Thirdly, no wonder that the Children of God are under so much
sorrow when Preachers are taken from them, for now they are under the Execution
of Divine threatening: as the giving of faithful Teachers is the loving kindness
of God, so taking them away, is of a great threatening in Isa. There is a
promise, That I give you the water of affliction, yet your eyes shall see your
Teachers, and you shall not be driven into Corners. Now see Isa. 3.1. There it
is a threatening, I will break the whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of
water. In Jer. 3.15. There is a promise, I will give you Pastors according to
my own heart. It signify great Love, and is a fulfilling of a great Promise
when God gives them Pastors according to his own heart. Now, as it is a Promise
to give them so it is a threatening when God takes them away* In Jer. 22.22. see
how dreadful a threatening is, says the Prophet, The wind shall eat up thy
Pastors, surely then shall thou be ashamed, and confounded for all thy
wickedness. Fourthly, well may we mourn, when God removes our faithful able
Teachers from us, for we are like enough, soon after their departure from us,
to corrupt our selves: I remember in Exodus 32.7. God speaks to Moses when he
was in the Mount, God get thee down, for this people which thou broughtest out
of Egypt, have corrupted themselves: God tells Moses you have been here with me
in the Mount 40. days; It is time for you to be gone, get thee down, the people
have turned out of the way; no sooner are you turned from the people, but they
turn their backs upon me. Deuteronomy. 31.27. Moses speaks to Israel, I know thy
Rebellion, and thy stiff-neck: behold while I am yet alive with you this day,
ye have been Rebellious against the Lord, and how much more after my Death: as
if Moses, as the Minister should say to this Congregation, I have had much a do
to keep you a live, what will you do after my death; for in the 29. verse,
says Moses, I know that after my Death ye will utterly corrupt your selves,
and turn aside from the way which I have commanded you, and evil will befall
you in your latter days, because you will do evil in the sight of the Lord. In
2 Chronicles. 24.2. Its said, all the time that Jehoiada lived, Joash followed the
Lord, but when he died, Joash turned to Idolatry, as you have it in the 18.
verse of that Chapter, And they left the house of the Lord God of their
Fathers, and served Groves and Idols. While the light is, we walk well, but
when the light is taken away, then we fall and slip. Fifthly, why should the
Servants and Saints of God be so much affected when God takes away faithful
Teachers from them, because when they go, evil comes; if so be Sampson lays his
hold upon the Pillars, the house will fall; but when Death comes to lay hold on
the Preacher, what will the House do? I know, says Paul, after my departure
Wolves will come. In Luke 23.29, 30. says our Savior, The days are coming, in
which they shall say, Blessed are the Barren, and the Wombs that never Bare,
and the Paps which never gave Suck. Absolute dreadful destruction was coming
when Christ was going; I could tell you of a thing that I have looked upon as a
piece of a Prophecy, it was Printed and Writ ten years before the Fire of
London, and it was this, London look to it, what Heaven's a doing,
Thy Flames are coming when thy Lots are going.
The Rabbis say, that when the great Luminaries are Eclipsed, it abodes evil
to the World: what shall stop when they go? assure you here is Eclipsed a great
Luminary in this World; as soon as Noah got into the Ark, the Flood came there;
as soon as Lot got out of Sodom, Fire and Brimstone came down from Heaven and
destroyed it. When I consider who is gone, and who are going, I dread. What
became of Prague when Jerome was dead: what became of Jermany when Luther was
dead: and what will become of England when such as these are dead.

APPLICATION.
I now come to Application. If this be true, that it ought to be the Practice,
and is the Property of the Saints, and the People of God to bewail the final
departure of their Preachers and Teachers. Then I infer this, that where God
continues faithful Teachers, where God restores such faithful Teachers, or
where God sends such faithful Teachers, it is cause of great Joy. Secondly, is
it so sore an Affliction to loose and finally to part with a powerful Preacher,
then beloved we should exceedingly stir up our selves to deprecate these evils,
that is, to pray to God to prevent such evils as this is: I remember Jabez in 1 Chronicles. 4.10. calls on God, Oh that thou would bless me indeed, and enlarge my
Coast, and that thy hand might be with me, and that thou would keep me from
evil, that it may not grieve me, and the Lord grant him that which he
requested: We should go to God and say, Lord don't take these and these from
us, that will be a very great evil to us, surely if God has taught us to pray,
That the Lord of the Harvest should send Laborers into his Harvest, then we
have cause to pray that such should not be taken out. Thirdly, if it be of
concern for those to mourn that are the People of God, then this serves to
reprove two sorts of hearers. 1. It reproves them, who when faithful Teachers
are taken away, it glads their hearts; aye say they, would they were all there;
The Saints they mourn because they shall see their faces no more; and you are
nothing more glad then that you shall see their faces no more: These are like
them in Judges 16.23. That gathered themselves together to offer a great
Sacrifice unto Dagon their God, and to rejoice for that our Enemy is delivered
into our hand: And in Rev. 9.10. And they of the People and Nation, and
Kindred, and Tongues, shall see their dead Bodies, and they that dwell upon the
Earth, shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to
another. O Sirs, I send you away with this, and much good it may do you if it
can, you that thus send gifts, and rejoice when such Teachers go; you go the
way to Hell, and none says, whither go you. Secondly, they are to be Reproved
too, though not so much as these; they are to be Reproved, I say also, that are
not affected at all at the Death of faithful Teachers: there is such a one
dead, alas say some, I never heard he was sick: what disease did he Die of, how
long was he Sick? how has he left his Family? and such things as these; and
that he was a good Preacher, but no Tears at all; They are like the Gadeurens
of old that liked not to part with a Hogg as with a Savior: They are like them
in Zach. 11.9. who said, That that dies, let it die; and that that is cut off,
let it be cut off. If such a man be sick, let him be sick; if he die, let him
die: Come, come, if you had learnt any good by his Ministry, you could not have
parted with him so loosly. Let me call upon this Congregation this Evening,
that we would be in the Eph^sians Practice; they Mourned when Paul was going,
and they should see his face no more: Your Preacher is gone, And you shall see
his face no more. I would I could raise you to their height of Mourning; it is
said of Scipio, that when he was gone out of the City, the wall of the City
were fallen; so I may say of London, thy walls are fallen: Truly Beloved, I
could, when I see what God has done, and is a doing, I could cry out, Come out
for your walls are fallen. I shall only propose three things, 1. This is not a
single blow, this lot of the Servant of God, taken from this people, is not a
single blow; it is not the first Minister that God has taken away, nor is it
like to be the last; we may say Joseph is not, nor Simion is not, and Benjamin
is gone also. I have observed how many God has taken since a black
Bartholomew; that since men has taken away their livelyhoods, God took away
their lives; how could you think that he, he that Preached blessedness so
little while since, should be so soon gone to blessedness. Secondly, consider
this blow, a Saint, yea, a Minister, one of the many, one that excelled most,
an able Minister of the New Testament, a workman that need not be ashamed:
Beloved, whose ears was not taken with his Language? that one that but once
heard him, but must come again.

He begat you in Christ Jesus, though none of his own, but Christ's; and you may
get one to succeed him, but not to exceed him, but I desire that man to tell me
where.

Beloved, I find the Death of Christ, to differ from the death of the Saints,
in Joh. 16.7. for says our Savior, It is expedient for you that I go away,
for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you, but if I depart, I
will send him unto you: It was well for Christ to go from us, because we should
have the Comforter still, but it is not so with us when Ministers part, Paul
says not, Its good for you that I go, though it be best for me; Let us pray
then to God that has taken away a Moses, to send us a Joshua; and if he take a
Joshua to send us a Caleb, and if he takes away a Caleb to send us an Eli, and
if an Eli go, we may have a Samuel; Let us pray the Prayer of Moses, in Numb.
27.16, 17. Let the Lord, the God of the Spirits of all flesh, set a man over
the Congregation, which may go out before them, and which may go in before
them, and which may lead them out, and which may bring them in, that the
Congregation of the Lord be not as the Sheep which have no Shepherd. Let us
Pray, that God would be pleased to send some to go in and out before us. Amen.

FINIS.

