A TRUE RELATION OF THE LIFE and DEATH OF Sarah Beckwith, Daughter of Marmaduke
and Elizabeth Beckwith, of Audbrough near Massham in Yorkshire; Who in about
the Twentieth Year of her Age departed this Life, the 24th. day of the 9th.
Month, 1691.

Witnessing the fulfilling of God 's ancient promise that in the latter Days he
would power forth his Spirit upon his Servants and Handmaids.

and out of the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings he would show forth his praise.

^lessed are the Dead that dies in the Lord, yea, says the Spirit, for they
rest from their labors, and their works follow them, Rev. 14.13.

Printed in the Year, 1692.

The Relation of HANNAH BECKWITH, Touching the exercise of her dear S^^^^
before and in the time of her sickness* And the lord, delivered by her a little
before her Death (...) as could be well remembered; With a Te^^^^ony concerning
her.
I Being very often with my ever dear and wellbeloved Sist^^, i^ the ^^me of
her sickness, and being truly sensiable of the wonderful dealings of the Lord
with her, and of his unspeakable Love to her, in her great exercise to her
great comfort; I called to mind, yea, it came fresh into my remembrance, what a
tender frame of spirit she had been off, even from her Childhood, which I saw
the Lord had not forgot, but had that regard unto it, as to reward the same
into her bosom manyfold, and I cannot forbear in the first place, in short, to
make mention thereof, in order to what I have to say ^oncerning her exercise in
the time of her sickness, before the Tabernacle was laid down.

She was endued with an understanding from her childhood, and in the years of
her Youth beyond the most of her equals of her age: Sober and Grave in her
deportment nor adicted ^o light and needless words nor such communication as
corrupts good manners, but most appeared amongst us her Sisters, and the rest
of the Family, as one who had set a watch before her Spirit, that she might not
offend the Lord, nor be of evil example amongst Us; s^^ was pitiful, and
therein courtious and kind to all that stood in need, she was tenderly obedient
to her Parents, and affectionate kind to us her Sisters, and in the latter
years of her Age* she was given much to a retiredness, and though careful in
the things of this World; yet as one that used the world as not using it: And
as o^^ sincerely devoted to serve the Lord, and the Kingdom which has no end,
and the righteousness thereof: Not doubting but (as the Lord saw meet) other
thin^^ would be added, she w^^ observed often in the evening when her wor^ was
much over, to walk into the Fields, and a^ her return often appeared to have
had a tende^ exercise upon her spirit in brokenness, and when her sickness and
weakness of body begun to gro^ upon her, and her exercise before the Lord as to
another world, did enlarge in her, she got little rest or sleep, for many
nights together, yet he^ understanding was kept clear, and her memory sound,
which she often said was a great mercy to her, and praised God for it.

And on the 19th. day of the 9th. Month, 1691 She being sorly troubled with
shortness of breat^ we did not expect according to outward appearance, she
should have lived over that nigh^ and she also told us, she questioned whether
(...) might live till morning or no; But in pleas^ the Lord to give her some
ease, and she being in Bed, desired us to raise her up, and so we having done
so she began to speak of the dealings of the Lord with her, and of the many
temptations that the wicked one labored to ensnare withal, of which she said
she had been sensible: She desired us that were young in years to prize our
time, not knowing how few days we had to live; for said she, I did not think my
time had been so near an end: Said again many were the temptations of the
enemy, and more especially ^o Youth, by presenting length of days, and
persuading them that its soon enough for them to trouble themselves with such a
concern, ^or said she, so would he have persuaded me, and many ways was I so
tempted by him, which caused my exercise to be such, as I was nearly brought to
despair, And then said she, I sought the Lord night and day, when no Eye saw,
no Ears heard, but the Lord alone, who heard my call, and caused a cry to run
through me, that he had good will for me, and the Lord after gave me some
comfortable assurance of my salvation: But the enemy has been very busy,
says she, and has surely huried me since I begun with this illness; She said
it was hard to live in this World and not sin against the Lord, and said also,
if it might be well with her, it were better for her to dye then to live: And
with great ^erveney of Spirit she besought the Lord to spare her, saying, Lord
add one other day to me that I may seek thee, and that I man feel thee, and O
Lord, give me full assurance of my salvation before I depart hence: Many times
saying, O Lord, let not my distempou^ overcome my sense till I come to a full
Enjoyment of thee, and O Lord, I pray thee let not my desires cease, till thou
answer the desires o^ my heart, and let nothing quench my thirst, but thy love:
And so she continued in suplication to the Lord for a considerable time: And
the Lord was pleased to answer her desires to the glading of her heart, and
causeing her Cup to overflow: So that living praises, and Heavenly melodious
sounds run through her to the God of her salvation; and so she continued in a
swee^ and heavenly frame, many times saying, O tha^ I had breath to praise the
Lord, O that I ha^ breath to praise his Name; and at many time^ she gave good
and tender advice to Us, her Sisters desireing us to love and fear the Lord
above all, and to keep in the Truth; saying, O press after it, to feel the
working of it in your own hearts; And when you are in it, keep in it, and under
the government of it, and heed not to deck your selves, but be meet and low,
saying, None ought to pride themselves in any Induements, neither in Beauty not
in any other thing, because it was not their^ but the Lords, who gave it them,
and can tak^ it away when he pleases, saying, what is all now to me; tenderly
advising us not to let any thing in this World steal away our minds. She also
spoke of the state of many, and said, there are many that were grown careless,
and was gotten into liberty, and such were ill examples to those that were
coming up; and said there are many that comes to Meetings, and professes the
Truth, that knows but little what Truth is; and said also, it did not consist
only in comeing to Meetings, and wearing plain apparel and the like, unless
they came to feel the workings of truth in their own hearts, for said she, all
such outward appearances will stand in no stead, without the love of God be
inwardly felt, and enjoyed; for said she, it is an easy thing to come to
Meetings, and some are ready to think that doing so, and behaveing themselves
soberly before this or the other person is sufficient: But said she, the Lord
sees at all times, and he will have no such mockery; but said she, I bless God,
I have not been guilty of seeming what I was not: But O how did her love run
forth to those who were faithful, saying they were near and dear to her, and
much desired the company of such as feared the Lord, and loved the Truth, and
walked therein: She wonderfully praised the love and mercies of the Lord to
her; saying, it is not for my deserts, for I had nothing to engage the Lord
with, but it is his free love to me: She often desired the Lord to give her a
little ease, that she might have a more full enjoyment of him, and indeed she
was so much born up over her weakness, that at many times she felt little or no
pain that we could diserne, but with a mi^d^^ and cheareful countinance, would
say, I am well every way but for want of breath; and the Lord can raise me up
if he see it good form, and if not, I am content, I do believe which way so
ever it be, it will be for my good. And she speaking of the way of truth, said
it was a straight and narrow way, and not to be kept in, without a daily watch,
(and said it is this days bread and not that which was fed of yesterday that
will satisfy) for there are many by paths, but as Job says; said she. There
is a path which no fool knows, which the ^olterous eye has not seen, the
Lions whelp has not trodden it, nor the fierce Lion passed by it. But said she,
although a strait way, yet it is a pleasant path, and delightsome: Oh said the
here is peace in abundance, it is so sweet I could delight always to enjoy it,
and to live therein, the Gold of Opher is not worthy to be compared to it; And
thus continued she in a sweet frame of Spirit, her mind being wholly taken up
with heavenly thoughts, saying Lord give me fully to drink of the well of
water, that is within the Gate, for thou have ravished my heart, and I am
overcome with thy love. Oh I long, I long; O Lord open thou the windows of
heaven, and power in of thy blessings into my soul, until there be not room
enough to receive, that I may bless and praise thy name and that I may ever
swim in the Ocion and streams of thy love and living praise to the Lord, with
mellodious sounds abundantly sprung from her, She did also often advise those
that were with her to keep out of passion, saying, Oh have a care of passion,
it hinders the prosperity of the work of God, and there is no extreme in the
Truth, ah it is of a meek and an heavenly quality; That afternoon before she
dyed she desired the Lord to spare her another half day if it was his will,
that she might enjoy him, and that she might praise him, and said I have known
Christ to be my leader, and my teacher shall be no more removed into a corner,
for mine eyes have seen my teacher, and mine ears has heard a voice saving,
this is the way walk in it she after desired the Lord to give her an easy
passage, and that night she desired that none but Friends might sit up with
her, her love being abundantly large to them. And some of us going to bed,
having wanted our rest she tenderly took her leave of us, and said if she were
worse, some should call, and taking me by the hand said, dear Sister thou have
been near and dear to me and careful of me the Lord requite thee; and be near
to thee when thou comes to lie on thy dying bed, and so near the Morning her
distemper growing upon her she said I am as sensiable as any of you and I am
well content to dye saying I have no doubt of my Salvation forever, I am going
to dear Robert Lodge, with many more sweet expressions, which could not well be
remembered, nor perfectly heard, her voice being very low, she was very
sensiable to the last so far as we could observe and spoke to within a very
little time wherein she drew her last breath, saying Lord take me away, Lord
take me away, and presently after she quietly and comfortably passed away, out
of this world, to live for ever in the World which has no end.

She was a dear Sister to me a faithful comfortable companion, and help in the
Lord and hard it was to me freely to part with her, if it, had been the Lords
will that we might a little longer have enjoyed each other in the body, to have
been each others help, and cause of joy, but being so fully satisfied that the
love and blessings of the Lord was upon her I was more willing to give her up
to him who gives and takes away and can do no less but bless and praised (...)
his holy name and return all glory and honor to him, who is everlastingly
worthy, blessed for ever and for evermore.

And it is the servent desire of my heart that we who are left behind may so
live to God and walk in the ever blessed Truth which she testified to, to her
latter end, that we may be made partakers of that rest peace and joy. Which
undoubtedly she is already entered into.

Hannah Beckwith.
Written the 11. of the 10th. Month, 169^.
A Few words in Testimony concerning the Life and Death of Sarah Beckwith,
Daughter of Marmaduke and Elizabeth Beckwith, etc. Who Departed this Life the
24th. 9th. Month, 1691.
SHe was of my familiar acquaintance from a Child for I lived diverse years
during her Childhood in her fathers house, she was born of beliveing parents,
and under their eye and care educated in the way and profession of truth, which
God Almighty in blessing does regard: and I am well satisfied that in her own
soul she was a real lover of truth from a Child, for she was diligent in
comeing to Meetings, and when there very retired in her mind, not making a show
above what she realy was, but even as Mary did hid up things in her heart, on
the Eight day of the above said Month she wa^ visited with the Sickness, she
dyed of: in the time whereof she several times sent for me, and the first t^me
I went, she said to me, Grace I am glad to see thee, thou have been often near
to me in remembrance and love, and being in a sweet and tender frame of spirit,
began to devulge her secrets to me, signifying that for about three quarters of
a year last, she had sought the Lord with her heart, both night and day, and
perticularized diverse times and places, wherein the Lord had very comfortably
broken in upon her, and filled her heart with his love, that deeply engaged her
to praise his Name; and I being sent for the night hefore she dyed, she said,
Lord give me breath to praise thy Name withal: And several Friends being
about her, she said, Lord comfort us together this Night, and blessed be his
Name, he graciously answered the desires of her soul, and made us partakers of
his unspeakable kindness together, to the overcoming of us, the remembrance of
which visitation, has been often refreshing to me, even as marrow to my bones:
For the Lord broke in upon her and a stream from the living fountain, Issued
forth unto her, and comfortably we were made partakers with her of the water of
Life, and the liveing food which nourishes the soul up in God to eternal life:
And many were the wholesome expressions of advice which she gave to us all; And
then turned her a side to me, and said you give me no council, whereunto I
answered, dear Sarah, thou wants not a Counceller, we are willing to hear and
receive council from thee, She answered and said it is written your eyes shall
see you Teacher, and your ears shall hear a voice, saying, this is the way
walk in it: And she further added, it is a pleasant way, and after diverse
other comfortable expressions, which came from her, she signifying to us that
she had full assurance of the salvation of her soul: Her three Sisters being
before her, she advised them to seek the Lord, while he was to be found, and
said he was found of them that sought, him and I am well satisfied she spoke
what she, knew, and bare testimony what she witnessed: Blessed be the Lord for
ever, who gave her the knowledge of himself in the face of Jesus Christ, and
out of the mouth of a Babe did she show his praise, even him whom the World
knows not, nor can they praise his Name and such was the sweet and heavenly
frame, that she was that night exercised in; That I was made to say in my soul,
better is the day of Death to those who dye in the Lord and lays down their
heads in peace with him, then the day of their birth; and very near her
departure out of this World, she said I am going to dear Robert Lodge, and you
must follow, (and rest with us that loves the Lord and his heavenly appearance)
and she growing very weak in body, yet strong in the Lord, being filled with
love and spiritual blessings, yet her Voice low, and some few of her last
words could not be understood, quietly like a Lamb without spot, she departed
this Life, the day and year above written.

And the 29th. of the same Month, as I was sitting in our own house at my
employment an unspeakable weight fell upon my spirit, and remained with me a
considerable time which occasioned a cry to run through me: Lord what is the
matter, and immediately these words run through my life, Although Sarah Beckwith
be dead, yet her Memorial shall live, and be serviceable to this generation,
and to generations, that are yet to come. And so to the God of all our mercies
who filled the soul of this Innocent, tender stripling, Abraham's Daughter,
with his heavenly appearances, and devine blessings be everlasting praise and
glory for ever.

Grace Bins,

COncerning my dear Companion Sarah Beckwith, this testimony I have to bear, I
having had the knowledge of her for many years and being much with her in the
time of her sickness, and also present when she departed this life and being an
eye and ear witness of the love and great goodness of the Lord liveingly
testified of to us from her own mouth upon her dying bed according to the
dispensation of the grace of god given me I am bold to say, that she dye not as
fool dies, that fear not the Lord, for her heart was set to serve and fear
him, and it was her earnest desire, and advice to those that were Young in
years to prise their time and to seek the way of the Lord, for she gave
testimony of it, to be a pleasant way; And said she was come to witness it so
to be, and my desire is that we that are yet in this Tabernacle, may from a
grounded experience, be brought to testify the same, and this is my belief
concerning her that she is entered into everlasting rest: Oh the heavenly
expressions Which came from her in the time of her sickness, and the weakness
she was under, which I hope never will be forgotten by us, but remain within
us, in our rememberance; She begged of the Lord that he would add to her time
in this World, until she had a full assurance of her salvation, which he did
graciously answer, for she signified to us that she did not doubt of it, and
she desired the Lord with much fervency of Spirit that he would give her breath
to praise his Name; And the Lord heard, and answered from his Holy place, for
he did not only give her breath, but a Mouth also to praise him, Oh! the
Heavenly power that she was filled with and carried on in that devine and sweet
refreshing frame of spirit, that it was of unspeakable comfort and refreshment
to the standers by, and great satisfaction to those she was outwardly related
to and near, and dear unto them every way, she was from a Child Zealously
affected with the truth and the society of Gods faithful people, and her heart
was Inclined after ^he best things, and she with Mary Chose the better part
which shall never be taken from her and the Lord filled her with his power, and
opened her mouth in Wisdom to speak of the M^stry; of the knowledge of the
devine and best things, to the tendering of our hearts and to our refreshment,
^he being my Intimate companion having had much society wit^ her I have known
her often bowed down with many more for the loss of dear Robert Lodge, being a
nea^ Neighbor to her and often in Company with him I have seen her broken into
tears in Remembrance of him. And when she lay upon her dying bed she much
desired the Company of friends, but more especially those, that were come to
witness in a larger measure, the dealings of the Lord with them, both in
judgment and mercy, it wa^ great satisfaction and comfort to her to have those
with her, she breathed to the Lord for our sakes that were young in years, that
we might be preserved, in the righteous path of holiness: I was truly glad
that it was my lot to be with her and I do prise it as a mercy to me Which I
desire while I live I may not forget but answer the kindness of God to me
therein, as that which may do me good. I am fully satisfied, that she has laid
down her head in peace with God, and is gone to her desired Haven of rest for
ever, where there is joy that has no end. And my hearts desire is, that we
that are young in years, may prise o^^ time in this World ^^d may be preserved
^om the evil thereof. That we may fear the Lord while we live, and so run our
race, that at the closure of our days, we may lay down our heads in peace, when
time in this world unto us shall be no more.

Katherine Savill.

I Hearing that my dearly beloved Friend Sarah Beckwith, My familiar and of
great acquaintance we being both of one and the same Meeting, became greatly
exercised with sickness, It was much upon me to go visit to her, though one of
the least of the flock of God I looked on my self to be: yet I having certain
knowledge and sense upon my spirit; that Innocent Lamb (though as but a Child
in years) had an unspeakable love to the truth, and breathings in her soul for
the prosperity of it I could not be satisfied till I gave up my self to go In
the love of God which I felt abounding in me toward her; And when I came near
the place I can truly say, that the free and opened springs of life, did
abundantly flow forth upon me, and when I came into the room where she was, I
found her very Weak as to the outward, yet strong In the Lord as to the Inner
man and in an heavenly frame of spirit to my great refreshment, I saw it was
the great desire of her heart to have friends to Truth in company with her, and
in the time of my being there she was so raised up by the power of the Lord to
bear testimony to the truth, in the authority and life thereof that we that
were with her did believe that sometimes she felt no sickness o^ pa^n upon her,
and as (I with other Friends,) was standing by her at the bed side: the power
of the Lord Sprung up in her and she opened he^ mouth and said, O prise the
truth, O prise the truth, long for it, O long for it, and when you have
received it, hold it fast let it not go. And she desired friends, especially
those that were young to prise their time, and to keep in their minds to God,
and value truth above all, and the eternal divine power that did accompany her
when she delivered those words did so tender and break my heart, that I went
out of the room a little to ease my spirit, and when I came in again I found
her in the same frame of spirit mentioning our dear deceased Friend Robert
Lodge, and in the like heavenly exercise she continued in a sound
understanding, so far as we could apprehend even unto the very last moment of
her time in this world: and I am fully satisfied, that to himself God almighty
has taken her soul, to live and abide wi^h him world without end: and I fully
believe that through Gods help, that Remembrance of her and the sweet
expressions de^^vered by her, in the power of the Lord will remain with me, for
my advantage in the Lord, while I have a day to live that glory may be g ven to
the great God, who is worthy for ever and for evermore.

Alice Edge.

Katherine Winns, Testimony concerning Sarah Beckwith, With a few words of
advice to young Friends.

THe dealings of the Lord, are Worthy to be kept in remembrance, and his tender
mercies, and loving kindness to his servants and handmaids, in this our day
and age to be left upon record, to future ages: In which I am concerned
according to my measure, In this my testimony, touching a young Maid Sarah
Beckwith, I being an eye and ear witness, with several others of the
exercises she was under and of the testimony she bore, through the mavelous
and and heavenly power of the Lord upon her dying bed, oh the sweet,
expressions that came from her, and the heavenly acknowledgements of the great
love of God unto her, which was great comfort and sweet refreshment to those
that were about her liveing praises to our God for ever, who is thus pleased to
condescend to the weak capacitys of his handmaids and graciously (...) appear
out of the mouths of babes and sucklings to perfect his praise. I cannot well
go by the giveing a little hint of her behavior from her Childhood, so far as
it comes within the compass of my knowledge for I knew her well the having been
tabled with me, she was a Child of a sound and solid wit, yet very quick,
active and nimble about the year 1680 she being near Eleaven years of age, I
was taken prisoner for the truth and she removed to her fathers house but
shortly after she desired to see me, and to stay some time with me, though she
thought I had been keept in a dark hole without light, yet that did not
discourage her and accordingly she came to me of, which I was exceeding glad,
and truly comforted for there was no woman in the Goal, but me and she became
as my fellow prisoner, and companion, I took great notice and could not but
admire that our close confinement did not trouble her and often since have had
it in my mind considering her activity, that she should so willingly leave her
companions yea her fathers house (where satisfaction as to the outward every
way might have been fully offered and given her) and to take her self to such a
solitary way of liveing with me in that Goal, which she did with cheerfulness
during the time of her fathers pleasure and has often said since that she
thought she could willingly have lived with us all her days, and after it
pleased the Lord to visit her with very great weakness, through all which he
wounderfully preserved her memory, though her afliction was great, and in his
own good time wounderfully raised her up again, contrary to the expectation of
most, and as she grew in strength, she grew in the inward knowledge of the
dealings of the Lord, with her, as to her inner man and in inward feeling of
his tender mercys to her and loveing kindness which constrained her sometimes
in secret and alone to sound forth liveing praises to him, when she thought no
eye saw her nor ear heard her but the Lord: she was very deligent in comeing
to meetings and very watchful I was she in the time thereof, I knew not that
ever I saw a droosy or a careless mind appear in her and if at any time in any
thing, she had exceeded the solid truth, it was her Heavenly Fathers pleasure
to follow her with gentle chastise meant, in token of his love to her, for it is
certain that whom he loves he chastens, and this brought a true fear upon her
and sorrow appeared in her, for offending the Lord, though she thought, that
none had perceived it, yet it was clearly observed by her Mother and in
bowedness of spirit she continued, before the Lord, till is was his pleasure to
remitt, and bring her into favor with him again, where was the centure of her
soul and the safe dwelling place. And in the year 1691. being near 21. years
old she was again visited with a distemper of sickness very like to remove her
out of this world and as it grew upon her, her Zeal for the Lord increased,
manifested largely by the many sweet and heavenly expressions that proceeded
from her, some of which put (...) upon Record by her dear Sister^, I heard she
desired to see me, and I went to visit her, and stayed with her Four days, she
being unwilling that I should leave her whilst she lived here, in which time
she opened her mind to me, and gave me account of the Lords dealings with her,
and of his tender Mercyes to her, of which I was right glad, and comforted
therewith; Her love was wonderfully drawn forth to Friends, often making
mention of dear Robert Lodge, and others, who are in the body whom she greatly
desired to see, and many weighty truths proceeded from her, and an Heavenly
concern was upon her, for the good of all friends in general bemoaning the
states of those who had received the truth in the beginning in the fresh love of
it, and were grown careless having lost their first love, and taken liberty to
act things contrary to truth, and those are evil examples, (said she) to those
that are young. And others there are who have a more outward appearance, and
reckons themselves esteemed of yet if they live not in the truth and in the
enjoyment of the love of God, it makes no matter the esteem of others will
stand them in no stead. And she said there was man's righteousness, and the
righteousness of God, but man's righteousness must be rent often; and man covered
with the righteousness of Christ Jesus, who says I, wisdom leads in the way of
righteousness, and in the midst of the path of Judgment, teaching those that
loves me to inherit the substance, and she desired that none might in the sight
of good things sit down, short of the possession thereof, she greatly desired
that ancient Friends might remember the visitation of the love of God unto
their souls, in the days of their Youth, and answer the end of their
visitation, and take heed that they feel his love to them as in the beginning;
And said she, some comes amongst Friends and profess Truth, yet walk not
answereable there unto, but minds the decking of themselves outwardly, more
then the innocence of Truth inwardly, and this will not serve them, or do them
any good, and others may get plain apparel, and come to Meetings, and appear
what they are not, the Lord (said she) remove such Mockerys: She often desired
Friends to love the truth, and to take heed, of loving any thing above the
truth, and she often desired Friends to take heed of passion, for that hinders
the work of the Lord, and to take heed of contention and and strife, envy, and
wrath, for said she, that never works the righteousness of God, but agravates
and stirs up a wrong mind; But in a meek quiet and gentle spirit speak one
unto another: and so you will overcome evil, even with the good: Much good
council and wholesome advice was given by her, but little is remembered in
comparison, considering how much did proceed from her, and said she; Oh they
are happy that fears the Lord, and obeys him, and lives in his truth, and
she often expressed the pretiousness of the love of God; And often said, how
sweet it is, there is no thing to be compared with it, nor had in esteem in
comparison of it; I could delight always to feel, and to live in the Enjoyment
of it: And when she spoke of Heavenly things, it was with great reverance and
comely deportement: For though she was a Maid of a notable Beauty, and comely
countenance, yet much did she differ and far exceed when the Lord did open in
her, and brake forth through her, yea, she was lovely indeed, and appeared as a
Bride arrayed in royal Robes ready to meet her Husband and Bridegroom of her
soul; And the night before her departure She called to her dear Sisters and
tenderly saluted them, and gave sweet counsel and wholesome advice to them,
and took her leave of them, worthy to be well observed and followed by them,
and all her Fathers family, and even by all that heard her, or may hear
thereof, and of her happy and comfortable end, and peaceable departure out of
the World; Even all both Young and Old, especially Young people, for whom she
was greatly concerned; often pitying them, saying they were liable to many
temptations, often desireing their preservation in the Truth often repeating
these words in the truth and not above it, but under its government, ordered by
it, and on this wise was she exercised in the power of the eternal God wherein
she sweetly finished, her course and undoubtedly is at rest with the Lord where
her joy is full, and will continue to her world without end.

And it is upon me in the Name of the Lord, to advise all where these
testimonys and records may come, that are young in years to take heed, that you
fleight not the day of your visitation nor squander away, your precious time in
vain pleasure and delights of this world, not knowing how short your time may
be in it, and how soon the thread of your life may be cut: Oh that you would be
prevailed with, and stirred up in your minds, and encouraged to seek the Lord
whilst he may be found, and call upon him whilst he is near, and take that good
advice left upon record, to Remember your Creator in the days of your youth,
and bear Christ's, Yoke in your tender years, and the Chastisments of the Lord,
and his righteouss Judgments love: which allways are mixed with mercy, and
Sion, is redeemed through judgment and her converts through righteousness, and
five not the Cross of Christ Jesus, but take it up daily, and let it crucify
all your vain desires and youthful lusts of the flesh; an^ let no uncomely or
untruth like attire come upon you no wild or wanton behavior, or fool^ talking
or jesting which are not convenie^^ appear in you, but let your gravity and
moderation appear unto all, and let your words be few and savoury, such as may
minister grace (...) the hearer, and do not think your professi^^ truth, or
being Children of believeing Parent^ will serve you or Entitle you to the
Kingdom of God, for in sin you are born who are in the transgression and by
nature the Children (...) wrath, as well as others, and Esau the first b^^
obtained not the Blessing, nor can Ishmael it heir with Isaac Sarahs Son, nor
can what the Almighty has done for you Fathers or others in the work of
Regeneration and Redemption give you a right to their Spiritual inheritance
though you have a subtle enemy, perhaps w^^ seek to persuade you, that you
have good Parents, and your education is in the Truth, and you need not be so
circumspect, you are b^^ young, and that there is time enough for you^ trouble
your selves, or your minds with thing of Divine nature, and that there are many
may live well and dye well, and yet short of you^ profe^sion; but believe him
not, he is a lie from the beginning, be not deceived God w^ not be mocked, such
as you sow, such will yo^ reap, for there is need for you to feell Christ
Jesus for your selves, in your own bosom working redemption for you, and
clensing aw^^ your sin, for it is said; Though Israel be many as ^e Sands on
the Sea shore, yet it is but a remnant ^hereof that shall be saved, and though
many were ^alled, yet are they but few that are chosen: And ^ou are sure to
dye, and you know not whether ^ooner or later; and it is also upon Record, As
^he Tree falls so it lies; As Death leaves Judgment finds, and no unclean
thing can enter the Kingdom; and if the righteous scarvely be saved, where
shall the ungodly and sinners appear: And therefore, dear hearts endeavor, and
that right early, to work out your salvation with fear and trembling, strive to
make your Calling and Ellection sure, that when your Earthly Tabernacle is
desolved, you may have a building with God, an house not made with hands
eternal in the heavens, and keep on your spiritual progress in the straight
way of self denial; I well remember, that in my young years before I came
amongst Friends, I was one that was not adicted to many evils, as some were but
in a Zeal for righteouness beyond many of my equals I read much and thereby
gained a great knowledge of the Scripture, literally, and therefore thought my
self more secure, and safer then others and was puffed up therewith and
gloryed, therein but when it pleased the almighty, to open the eye of my
understanding, I saw it was nothing but Egypts glory, and my own righteousness
which was but as filthy rags, and menstrous clothes, and my knowledge to be
consumed and I to become a fool, that might be wise; then I waxed weary of
Egyp^ glory, and refused to be a Child to Pharoah'^ Daughter; choosing rather to
suffer affliction^ with the People of God, then to enjoy the pleasure of sin
for a season, and all things beca^^ to me as dross and dung in comparison of
(...) excellency of the glory that was opened in t^^ veiw of my mind: But when
I turned my bac^ of Egypt. and set my face Sion ward and traveling thither Oh
the many weary stepps (...) trod, and the many solitary tears I shed, a^^ the
many sighs and groans I uttered, for wanto^ full assurance of my salvation, Oh
the man^ buffetting of the enemy my soul met with, and the Combets I under went
and the many Baits an^ snares that were laid for me, and the ma^^ temptations
that did attend me many ways made me sometimes in sorrow say, shall not surely
one day fall by the hand of t^^ enemy, for Satan desired to have me, an^ to
winnow me as wheat, but the voice of my Savior said in me, I have prayed for
thee that thy faith fail not, and the Lord give me a little comfort, yea a
little hope; though it was but as a lightning that shined in a dark place: And
the Lord helped me with a little help in a a needful time, and appeared in my
soul, though but as a warfairing man, that turned in for a night, and made not
his abode in me, yet this was my e^^^^ragement, and the com^^t of a little
r^mnant that traveled with me ^^rough the ex^rcise the Lord brought us into
^^ilst he was known as refiners fire, and as the ^llers, ^ope washing away the
filth of the daugh^^s of Sion refineing their dross and taking ^^ay their
Tinn, that they might be as pure ^^d, seven times tried in the fire, to come
forth ^^re and clean.

And therefore Dear hearts resign freely into ^^e hands of the liveing God, and
bear his in^^gnation, because you have sinned against him ^^d say with that
good man of old, though thou ^ll me yet will I trust in thee, and despise not
the ^^stiseing of the Lord: And faint not when you ^^e rebuked of him, and
submitt willingly to ^^e stroke of his hand, that he way square you, ^^en as
hewn stones; Ellect and precious fit (...) lie in his Building; and that by
your faith^^llness and obediance, you may become as ^^llers in his House; and
take heed of the spirit (...) this World, and do not intermix with it, for you
do, it will draw you from your spiri^^all travel, and give you liberty to take
delight (...) the vain pleasures therein, and let loose your ^esires after the
honor and riches thereof: But ^onsider the lot of him that coveted the wedge
(...) Goldand the Babilonish Garment, and de^^re you above all a portion of the
Spirit of the lord, for some may covet Riches and honor, and may attain to it,
yet it is an uncertain gai^ and if enjoyed is attended with trouble an^
discontent, and on a sudden fade away an^ come to an end, but set your
affections on heavenly things, and with the wise Merchant ma^^ dig for the
pearl that is of great price, and pa^^ with all for the purchase of it, so will
you ha^^ heavenly treasure in your earthly vessels, where the M^th corrupts
not, nor the Thief break^^ thro^gh to steal, and that is certain and fades
(...) away; and in the enjoyment of it is the tru^ comfort, and great delight,
though I am not against an honest care, and right endeavors fo^^ needful
things relateing to this life, but do encourage it, for in my youth I had my
share, (...) the outward concerns of this world and I sough^ the Lord with
tears to help me with counse^^ and assistance in the Managment thereof, ye^
with supplications was I powerd forth before him in that Concern, and the Lord
assisted me^ to my often refreshment, yet a voice I hear^ within me saying,
first and principally, seek the kingdom of heaven and the righteousness thereof
and other things shall be added unto th^^ then I saw that the earthly things
were to b^ kept in their place and the heavenly things have the first and
supreme place in me and livei^^ praises to his Name for ever, who never said
t^ the house of ^acob, seek my face in vain, for he (...) found of them that
seek him; for as I sought hi^ I found him whom my soul loved; And as I ask^ in
his Name, I received his embraces, and ^^e soliceing streams of his love and
as I knock^^ in the pure faith, it was opened to me, to ^now in measure the
mysteries of his heavenly ^ingdom, and to partake of Spiritual pleasure, ^^d
Heavenly felicity, beyond what ever I ^^ought upon or could have expected, and
of ^^e earthly things I had no want, and though (...) pleased the Lord, in the
morning of the day, and in the young and tender years, of a rem^ant, for a
little season, to give us the bread of adversity, and the water of affliction,
and exercise us in the strait and narrow way wherein he ^^eads us; even through
many trials and great ^ribulations, yet did he in his due time give us ^he
songs of deliverance, and put high pra^ses ^n our mouths, and we could often
say in secret, ^his ways was ways of pleasantness, and his paths, paths of
peace, yea he gave us mirth for mourning, beauty for ashes, and the Oil of joy
and gladness, for the spirit of heaviness* But I would not be tedious nor too
long vary from my testimony touching this young woman of whom I was speaking,
for I can truly say she was dear to me all along, and in her exercise I
Sympothysed with her, and also in ^her care and travel for the sake of others,
she saw the narrowness of truths way and often said, it was a strait and narrow
way and that too few walked therein, but said she, there are many paths that
leads to destruction and too many treads therein, she desired us that were to
remai^ in the body after she was gone to her rest to advise Friends to keep to
the innocent truth to grow up therein. And I not knowing how soon I may be
dissolved, I have a little inlarge^ beyond what I at the first did think upon,
and have as my duty to God, made some little mention of my own travells and
something of wha^ by true experience, I have learned both of the difficulties
and pleasures in truth's way if happly it might be an Incouragment to the
honest hearted and a caution to the outminded: Much I could write which is
before meat this time but I shall forbear to add much more at this time and
rest your Friend, with my love to you all my dear Friend, where this may come
with fervent desires for you that you may all have an eye to the right door
where entrance into life is and keep in the footsteps of the flocks his
companions, to the Word of whose grace I do recommend you, that in your hearts
to which you will do well if you take heed, for if obeyed it will teach you,
and lead you into all, truth and will be unto you as a cloud by day, and as a
pillar of fire by night, and if you move in the motion of it, it will be your
safe conduct, through your pilgrimage and the time of your sojorning here, and
will rightly order your (...) steps, in the truth and gird you up in your
graduall groath therein, from strength to strength and from one degree of grace
unto another, as dear Children of your heavenly father, delighting in all
things that ma^y honor him, and serveing him in true fear, you will die in his
favor, as this Innocent damsel did, who was a faithful witness for truth in
her day, and for righteousness and bore a liveing testimony for the Lord on her
dying bed. And it is the earnest desire of my heart, that the Lord, may
preserve me and all that truly loves and fear him, both young and old to the
end of our days, in a sensible feeling of the continuance of his love and life
unto us, and in a true Enjoyment of his living presence amongst us, and that in
his true love we may be daily concerned for the prosperity of his truth, and
the good of our own souls as this Innocent Lamb and handmaid of the Lord our
welbeloved was, for whom we cannot sorrow as those without hope, being well
satisfied of her salvation, and do believe she is now entered into everlasting
rest: And peace where no temptation can reach her nor disturbance of the enemy
can disquiet her, but in the presence of her beloved to sing praises for ever:
for very often was it her desire (and she often said) Oh that I had breath to
praise the Lord, and he is praise worthy says my soul, O that his own work^
may praise, him in Young and Old to whom all praises does belong and freely is
ascribed now henceforth and for ever.

Katherine Winn.

THe foregoing Relation and the Testimonys born concerning our Daughter Sarah
Beckwith, to the truth thereof, or can testify having been an eye and ear
witness of the exercises she passed through and of the Dealings of the Lord
with her in his great mercy and kindness upon her dying bed and how the Lord
raised her up, by his Mighty power to declare thereof. To the great refreshment
and satisfaction of all abo^^ her at that time. The understanding she was
endued with, and the Mouth and Wisdom God gave her, therewith to testify for
him and h^^ blessed truth was admired of us, and gave us cause often to s^y,
Who would not but fear the Lord, who gives wisdom to the simple, and a good
understanding to those that fear his powerful name, Who casts down the mighty
from of their seats and exaltes those that are of a low degree. Blessed be his
holy name for evermore, And touching her death we are well satisfied, that she
dyed well, in peace with God and is at rest with him. And though our loss be
great in parting with her, yet Greater is her gain in the world which has ^o
end.

And although it is not our desire to have our Child any way set forth; but as
it may stand with the praise of God, and that the honor of that Truth she
testified to, and had her Conversation in: Nor to have our Names made mention
off therein, further then to witness to the Testimonies borne concerning her,
and that the Lord may be glorified thereby. Yet, in the fervent desiers that
the good Council and advice given by her, both to Young and Old, made mention
of herein. May be cordially closed with, we are concerned in this wise in the
name of the Lord to advise all, to give all diligence to make their Calling and
Election sure That they may be prepared and ready to meet the Lord when ever he
shall call, as undoubtedly this Innocent Lamb was, who had run well in the time
of her pilgramage here, and fought the good fight of faith to the finishing of
her course to her joy and to the obtaining the Crown and the Inheritance which
has no end. We could not be wholly silent, but in our Duty to God and in
honor to truth she received and lived in, make Mention of and bear Record to
Gods wounderfull appearance in his love and tender mercy to his people In this
our age and day, witnessed by this his Servant and Handmaide, Who has so
marvellously appeared in her, and showed himself in so Large a measure to her,
and given her the knowledge of the riches of the world to come, and in such
zeal and fervency of spirit to declare thereof to others. That all may be
encouraged to seek the Lord right early, while he may be found, and call upon
him while he is near and not neglect the day of their visitation, Nor spend
their pre^ious time about things which are below ^hile the one thing needful
is not ^ade Choice of. But in the Way that God has cast up for his people, we
may ^ll walk in. And in the race set before ^s we may so run as that we may
obtain, and enjoy that heavenly inheritance, which is laid up for all those
that love ^he Lord Jesus Christ, and his heavenly ^ppearance, that God alone
may have ^raise who is everlastingly worthy blessed ^or ever and for evermore.

Marmaduke Beckwith. and Elizabeth Beckwith.



