Truth made manifest: OR, The Dead Man's Testimony to the Living.

BEING A Compendium of the Last Sayings, Dying Speeches, Sentences, and
Expressions, of Captain William Bedlow; That pattern of Love to his Country.

Who Deceased at Bristol, the 20th. of August, 1680. Convincing all, both
Deluded Protestants, and wilfully-Blinded Papists, of the Realty of that late
Horrid PLOT; with his Endeared Caution both to his King and Country, showing
the Eminent danger that still Threatens.

With a Sermon made upon this Text, Preached at his Funeral by a Reverend
Divine, Mr. THOMAS PALMER.

Romans Chap. 14. Ver. 12, 13. ^o then every one of us shall give an account of
himself to God: Let us not therefore judge one another any more, but judge this
rather, That no man put a Stumbling Block, or an occasion to fall in his
Brothers way.

Printed for P. Brooksby, in VVest-Smithfield. 1680. 112 October

The Righteous Evidence, Witnessing the TRUTH.
Romans Chap. 14. Ver. 12, 13. So then every one of us shall give an account of
himself to God:

Let us not therefore judge one another any more, but judge this rather, That
no man put a Stumbling Block, or an occasion to fall in his Brothers way.


BY this Text it plainly appears, that judgment alone belongs unto God, that
is, The judgment of the pure immortal Soul; and that whosoever undertakes to
lay any censure there, whether right or wrong, audaciously presumes to Rob the
Almighty of his Prerogative; and not only so, but arrogates to himself what
does not in the least appertain unto any Mortal to Intermeddle with; for every
one of us must give a particular account for himself, before the great Tribunal
of the God of all the Earth, who is the descerner of all hearts, and thoughts,
who ^rys like the Refiner, and only knows the Dross from the purest Gold: He
who is clothed with Righteousness, whose eyes run to and fro in the earth, who
knows all Bosom-thoughts, and can pry into the deepest secrets of the Soul: he
it is alon^ to whom judgment belongs, who has proclaimed himself a God sloe to
Anger, of long patience and forbearance, therefore most fit to be our judge,
whom neither Interest nor passion can any way obliege to swerve, either to the
right hand or to the left; yet infinite to pardon all that will confess their
faults, and in time come unto him; nay, so good, that he has freely promised,
That whenever a sinner turns away from his wickedness and forsakes his sin,
his Soul shall Live; and that by so doing he shall save his Soul alive, which
our Savior well notes in the Parable of the Prodigal, who after he had taken
his portion of Goods, and as it was in disobedience to his Fathers Will,
departed into a far Country, where long he lived Riotous, and ran into all
Excess till his large store was spent, and then was forced to feed on Husks,
pinched with Poverty and Hunger, quite forsaken of his Luxurious Companions,
who like the Swallows, only sing to our Morning wakes, and bask themselves in
the Sun beams of our prosperity, but when the Winter storms come on, soon
vanish, I say, he being quite forsaken, and finding all good things departed
from him, began to reflect upon his former folly, and then had thoughts, and
not till then, of returning to his Father. So fares it often with poor Sinners
here on earth, who after a long course in Sin, at last look back and view their
dreadful paths they carelessly have trod, and then bethink them whether they are
hurrying, to what a fatal place those broad paved ways do ^end, which
consideration mixed with the thoughts of vast Eternity, often causes them to
bemoan themselves, and stop their full Carrier, laying hold of Sacred promises,
to stop them from falling unto the deep Gulf of Everlasting Woe; such ^s our
blessed Savior freely pronounces to the worst of men, excepting none, but is
wil^ing that all should be saved: Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden and
I will give you ^est. And again, Whosoever comes unto me, I will in no wise
cast him off: Nay, the Triumph is greater in Heaven for one sinner Converted,
then for Ninety and nine Just ^ersons that need no Repentance. So that ^eeing
it is the Almighty's pleasure who made ^s out of the dust, and can with the
breath of his Nostrils, turn us into the same to save us from misery: why shall
any one presume to judge ^is Brother, when Heaven has expressly com^anded to the
contrary? saying, Judge not, least thou be Judged: For sure it is, no man nor
Angel has that power given into his hands, no, it is the sole Prerogative of our
wise Creator: or say they had, which cannot be possible: how can they give
rightful judgment who can go no farther then the outward actions? for it is
certain none but God can see into our thoughts nor pry into the Cabinets of our
Souls, to draw from thence an Indictment against us, and charge us with
unbosomed Sin: And again, those that look fair on the outside, and are gilded
over with a specious gloss of good and pious Deeds, may lodge black Hypocrisy
within, and cloak all their actions with the same, thereby to deceive the
world: so like the fruit that grows about the Lake where wicked Sodom once
stood, they may shine bright and bear a Golden Rhine, which being broke,
incloses naught but Ashes and Cinders, to delude those that imagine them,
before they are Plucked, most pleasant and delicious.

So then, every one of us shall give an account of himself to God: Let us not
therefore Judge one another any more, but judge this rather, that no man put a
Stumbling Block, or an occasion to fall in his Brothers way. The meaning of the
words, That every man shall give an account of himself to God: Is,

That he shall appear before the Judgment seat of God, to answer for all his
deeds done in the flesh, whither they be good, or whither they be evil; not
that God needs any account to be given of any person, for sure it is he knows
the secrets of all hearts, nor that he will take the account of any person as
himself shall state it, though as many Devines hold, that then the Conscience
of Man is so Powerful, that nothing can be hid or has been done, but what it
will reveal and lay open as Noonday: Nay, suppose it did not, yet he that
keeps the record of each particular action, nay of our very thought and
privatest Immagination, could soon unreveal all, for Behold (as the Prophet
says) his Fan is in his Hand to divide and sift the Chaff from the wheat: Nor
can there be any Darkness in him who is the fountain of Eternal Light, and
never dwells but in Light unapproachable: He it is that is the only discerner
of the heart: Let us not therefore Judge one another any more; which is the
second thing to be considered; That is, let not any censure a man by his former
actions, for at the last moment God is All-sufficient, and can pardon to the
utmost: but rather, as it is in Job 32.3. Lay thy finger upon thy Mouth, hold
thy peace, and commit it to God, who shall Judge the world in Righteousness and
Truth, by that Man Jesus, whom he has ordained: For he that thinks himself
to be something when he is nothing, deceives himself, Gal. 6.3. And again, The
Lord preserves the lowly, and gives Grace to the Humble, Psalm. 34.17. 1 Pet.
5.5. Therefore let none judge what God shall think fit to do, for Man's Wisdom
in such cases, is but foolishness, and in such as presume to do it, show their
Malicious Spirit, though to no purpose, and show what they would do were it in
their Powers, which may justly turn Almighty Vengeance on themselves for such
High Affronts, and Divine Wrath may burn implacable against all Uncharitable
Wretches. who by so doing, deny the Authority of holy Writ, for there the
blessed Apostle commands us to be in Charity with all men, and as God is so
Charitable and Meerciful, that he Created no man to Destruction, but is willing
that all should come unto him. Why then should we that are but Dust, presume to
Judge one another? Amongst Protestants it should be a thing most detestable,
though Papists hold it as part of their Faith, that they know whether men shall
go to Heaven or Hell when they depart this Life, which opinion, their
Cannonizing several for Saints does confirm: and ascribing others Purgatory f^r
their Mansion, whilst those that cannot pay their passage, are confined to the
lowest Hell: These are their gross Errors and Absurdities, these are the
Stumbling Blocks they lay for many thousands to fall at, and ^ew that
acknowledge the Roman-Catholique Faith escape: These are the Blind that lead
^he Blind, till both full into the Ditch: for ^s the Prophet David says, Psalm.
62.12. God rewards every man according to his works: Therefore it is not as
men will, ^ut as God pleases, and all his deeds are ^pright and Just, and his
Will is his Law, ^ot being confined or Circumscribed to Limmits or Bounds, but
Infinite both in Wis^om and Justice, which brings me to the ^hird part of the
Text: But judge this rather, that no Man put a Stumbling Block: That is, that
no man by making false Interpretations or Comments, upon the Lives and ways of
men, and should thereby give ^hers couse to doubt their own state there^y, so
to Terrify them, as to make them ^^spair of Gods mercies, and with Cain
^^nclude, Their Sins are too great to be forgiven: when the precious Blood of
t^^ Lamb slain from the foundation of the world is of force sufficient to purge
away the vile Polutions of the most Notorious Sinner and by laying hold upon
his mercies (...) Prayer and sincere Repentance, pardon wi^^ be found, even at
the last moment of Life But I say not this because I would have any one deferr
their repentance till they ar^ just going to be pushed off into the Wid^ Abiss
of Eternity, for that is it the power of Hell, our cruel and Immortal foes,
would have us do: but I say, it is not impossib^^ we may then find mercy, nay,
I believ^ many thousands have, who now are singin^ loud Hosannah, to the God of
mercy.

Another Stumbling Block that the Enviou^ have laid to overthrow the Weak, is,
T^^ point out to them the most strict and sever^ Comm^s that the Scripture
enjoins, an^ putting on them more dreadful Interpret^tions then the Sense it
self will bear, telling that if they do not observe those Rules (too strict for
Mortal Man) they must In^e^^bly perish, that without such due Observances there
is no Salvation to be purchased which often staggers their Faith and puts them
to a stand, who seeing that they cannot g^^ forwards, oftentimes let go their
hold an^ fall into a foul Relapse, which by a steadfast laying hold on the
Merits of our Great Redeemer, who was once offered up a Sacrifice for us all
might be prevented, for we by Faith are made his Brethren and Fellow Heirs:
then sure it is, he will not deny us his Aid in ought, if we implore it,
especially with unfeigned hearts and Lips, by Prayer and Supplication; for he
has commanded us to ask and it shall be given, to Knock and it shall be opened
unto us, which can be by no other means then what is said in Eccles. 35.17. The
Prayers of the Humble shall pierce the Clouds, and will not depart until the
highest regard it. Prayer and Meditation being the only Armor against all the
fiery Darts of Satan, for as it is said Mat. 19.4. Humble thy self as a little
Child: and when God sees thee lie low at his Footstool, he will raise thee up
and Exalt thee above thy Fellows; that is, he will pour his Grace into thy
heart, and make it fit to bring forth Seed of Everlasting Life: for as St.
Chrisostom observes, he always flies from the Proud and Lofty, but with the
Lowly and Meek delights to dwell, for unto such his Grace is freely bestowed,
nor do they fear what man can do unto them, since they have built on a sure
Foundation, a Rock that will never decay, no Powers of Death or Hell are able
to remove it, for like to Jacobs Ladder, its top reaches to Heaven, and from
thence benign Influenced, descends as the Dew of Hermon, to refresh their
Souls, and to make them stand against all Temptations, prepared always for the
Bride-Grooms coming: they fear not the going out of their well-furnished
Lamps, but smile on the Ghastly King of Terror, and with the Holy Apostle
falling into Rapture, and cry, O Death where is thy Sting? O Grave where is thy
Victory? For after Death they are far happier then whilst they Live: yet these
are they the world often passes their Censure on, because they once were
disobedient to the Laws of God, which is a strong Argument they doubt the
All Sufficiency of an Infinite being, and that his mercies are not greater then
our Sins, imagining with Judas, He is not able to forgive, or at the least, he
will not: when Holy Scripture makes mention of many pious men who had led Evil
Courses, and Lived Wickedly, till they saw their Follies, and then returned
from their Evil ways, by the assistance of Divine Grace. For Note, That Man
barely of himself, has not the power to do Good, though Popish Superstitions
blind the Ignorant with Merrits, persuading their Proselites, that leave is
gained thereby, and that they may depend on that for Salvation, only adding to
them, to believe as their Church does, though they know not many times
themselves what she believes, (...) what she does preofess, by reason so many
Traditions of Men's making, have been lately ^hrust in, under the pretense of
the POPES Infallibility, the which are laid as so many Stumbling Blocks, or to
come home to my Text, as occasions to fall in his Brothers ^ay: That is, to lay
any thing in his way ^n purpose for him to fall over, or to impose upon him
things that does confound his Reason, and stagger his Capacity, as Rome ^gain
holds in her Power of Transubstan^iation, which is that the Priest has power ^y
mumbling over a few Formal Prayers, ^o turn a Wafer made of Wheat Flour, unto
the Corporal Body of our Blessed Lord: ^ay, and they go on farther, to averr
it is ^he same Body that once was Nailed to the Cross, and that by the same
power, Wine ^uch as is usually drank in Taverns, is ^urned into the self same
Blood that once was shed for the Redemption of the World. With these, and such
like Fables, they have ^ong deceived the Nations. This I mention the rather,
because this our deceased Brother was once subject to the same Delusions, till
Heaven opened his Eyes, by giving him Wisdom from above, to discern their vain
and Foolish ways, and in abhorrance to their Black and Hellish Crimes, to break
the Chain of Superstition, and get loose from those Bloody Philitians, who
endeavored to Sacrifice three Kingdoms, and commit murders and Rapins, under a
pretended Zeal for to Propagate Religion, which is quite contrary to Holy rules
laid down in Scripture for our Learning: for all the Apostles of Ald fought
only with the Sword of the Spirit, and not the Sword of Persecution: and our
Savior himself commanded Peter to put up his Sword, though drawn in his
behalf, saying, Those that smite with the Sword, shall perish with the Sword:
which Scripture has partly been fulfilled since the beginning of this late
Hellish Plot: For by the Sword of Justice several of the Black Conspirators
have justly fell, for contriving their Dire Projects against the best of Kings,
which no doubt had took effect to the utter Ruin of himself and People, had not
Heavens providence prevented it by timely raising up such faithful discoverers,
as removed the Stumbling Blocks they had laid in all our ways, amongst which,
this departed Gentleman, Mr. William Bedlow, was not the least (...) Loyalty
and free discovery, to break the ^ockatrice's Egg, that Hell and Rome had ^^ng
sat Brooding on, and laid their Horrid ^urthers and secret Villainies quite open
to ^^e world, and encouraged by that power which ^^st Inspired him to Reveal
the Dark Designs the Scarlet Beast, that long time has De^^ived the Nations: He
staggered not, but as faithful Witness, to the last affirmed his ^estimony to
be Just and True, nor could be ^^ken neither with Bribes nor Threats, scorn^^g
the former with disdain, and smiling at the ^^tter, as knowing that Heaven
would defend ^^m from their snarling rage, till his appointed ^^me was come: At
which he made a Pious ^^d Christian-like end, repenting him of no^^^ng more,
then of having spent so much of (...) days in Romish Superstitions, and
Idol^^ry, yet Praying for his Foes, wishing that ^od would turn their hearts,
that they might their Errors, and repent the Evil they ended, not only to him,
but against the King (...) Kingdom: And so Commending his Spi^^^ into the Hands
of his Eternal Redeemer, (...) Great God of Souls, and Everlasting ^^ince of
Life, he yielded up the Ghost, and (...) no doubt is happy, let the Papists
^nsure as they please by his former actions: the thoughts of which, made me
choose purposely this Text, to let them understand tha^ it is the Repentance,
though late, will find acceptance with God; and that he wh^ came into the
Vineyard at the Elevent^ Hour of the day, received as much as h^ who had born
the Heat. And thus much man suffice for this occasion.

Now to the God of all Glory and Power be Honor, praise, Might, Majesty, an^
Dominion, henceforth and for evermore.

Blessed are the Dead which Dye in the Lord, they rest from their Labors, an^
their Works do follow them.

FINIS.

