A Brief RELATION OF The taking of Bridgewater by the Parliaments Forces under
the command of Sir Tho: Fairfax; and therein, all the Lord Gorings Train, 36.
pieces of Ordnance, 2000. prisoners, 800. horse, with great store of Oxen.

Sent in a Letter to the Committee of both Kingdoms.

Together with A Letter concerning the delivering up of Pontefract Castle by
Treaty to the use of the Parliament, with all the things therein.

Also, hopes of reducing Scarbrough by treaty.

Sent to the Honorable, William Lenthall Esquire Speaker to the House of COMMONS.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That these Letters be forthwith printed
and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edw. Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons:
July 25. 1645.

From Master Samuel Bedford, Scout-Master to the Committee of both Kingdoms.
Honored Sir,
AFter the General had taken this side of the Town, we Summoned the Town, they
altogether refused, and fired that part of the Town we had taken. The General
Summoned it again, and told them they should march away, or else if they would
yield on some further condition; they denied, said they would stand it out to
the last man: The General perceived their fury, sent to them that he would
give leave for all the women and children to come out of the Town: The
Governor returned thanks, sent his wife and many Ladies out; then our men shot
wilde-fire into the Town and fired it; whereupon, the Governor sent out to the
General to Parley: Our General refused, only he would be merciful and spare
their lives; whereupon they yielded themselves Prisoners: There was all the
Lord Gorings train, 36. Pieces of Ordnance, 2000. Prisoners at the least, 800.
Horse, and great store of Oxen.

July 23. four in the morning.
To the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons.
SIR,
WE thought fit the last week to Summon Pontefract Castle, which caused the
enemy to desire a Treaty; whereupon we appointed Col: Wastell, Col: Copley,
Col: Overton, and Col: Bright, or any three of them to Treat; and this day it
is agreed, that the Castle shall be delivered up to the use of the Parliament,
to morrow at eight of the Clock in the morning, with all the things therein,
save that the Officers are allowed to carry away what is properly their own, so
that it exceed not what a Cloth-bag will contain; and the Soldiers to March to
Newark with 200. Muskets, and 200. Pikes. We consented to so good conditions,
because the Plague is very hot in the Country, and especially in that Town, of
which some of our Soldiers are dead. We are also in Treaty with Scarbrough,
which we hope shortly will be Reduced. Thus much we thought fit to give you
notice of, desiring the House may be acquainted therewith: From

York the 20. of July, 1645. Your very affectionate Friends and humble
Servants, Fran. Pierrepont, Wilfrid Lawson, Henry Cholmley.


Iulii 24. 1645.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That these Letters concerning
the taking of Bridgewater and Pontefract Castle, be forthwith Printed and
Published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


