The Worst Enemy Conquered.

A Brief Discourse On the Methods and Motives to pursue A Victory Over those
Habits of SIN, Which War against the SOUL.

Delivered, on June 6th. School. the Day for Election of Officers, in the
ARTILERY-Company, at Boston.

By Mr. JOSEPH BELCHER, Pastor of the Church in Dedham.

Nunquam Bella Bonis, nunquam certamina desunt;
Et quocum certet, Men's pia semper habet.
BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND.

Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John All School.

The Worst Enemy Conquered.
1 COR. IX. 26, 27. -- So fight I, not as one that beats the air: But I keep
under my body, and bring it into subjection: --


ONE of the most lively similitudes under which the life of a Believer is
expressed and set forth, is that of a warfare, which is a life not of ease and
idleness, but attended with many hazzards, and hardships, and which every
Christian must endeavous to endure as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ. As a
Soldier converses with many dangers and difficulties, and dwells as it were
continually in the very Territories of Death, and the Grave; so the life of a
Christian is so full either of visible or invisible difficulties, temptations,
and dangerous assaults, with which he must enter the lists, and is exposed to
encounter; as that he may be said daily to pass the Pikes, and for to carr y
his Soul ^ontinually in his hand. The Devil the Captain general and commander
of the black Regiment of Hell, is restless in his attempts; like him (who
whether conquered or did conquer) was never quiet: if so be either by himself
or his instruments, he may swallow us up, and utterly destroy us. The World,
the men of it; some of these are the Militia and Auxiliaries of Satan, Enemies
to the truth, and therefore continually opposing, both it, and its professors:
and as for the things of the world, the honors, pleasures and profits of it,
these have their snares, and stratagems. And as by the flatteries and
allurements of these, the Devil would fain have overcome our Lord Jesus Christ,
the Captain Himself: So also by the same, would he fain over come those that
are his followers, and who have listed themselves under that Captain. But
besides the many foreign, a Christian has many inbred and domestic
adversaries; We have enemies of our own house: there are not only the
temptations of the Devil, the oppositions of the world, which we have to
conflict with; but there are also the lusts of the flesh. The holiest man that
ever trod upon the face of the earth, (except the Son of Man, that Man Christ
Jesus, who was not a mere man, but the eternal Son of God, and God manifest in
the flesh) except him, that best of Men, that ever blessed the earth with their
residence upon it, have had flesh lusting in them, unto sin; and sometimes
leading them into Captivity, and making them bond slaves for a season: and this
enemy is more frequent and constant in his assaults and bickerings, than a
Christians other enemies. If his foreign or external enemies, do at any time
stand still, Sin, that treacherous inmate and cursed adversary, will rarely
give him any truce or respit at all. If there be a cessation (for a time) of
the former, he can scarce pass an hour without many fights and skirmages with
the latter. As therefore a good Soldier must not spare so much as one enemy,
when he has such a command and commission given him: so a Christian must not
spare so much as any one iniquity or lust; his orders from his great Commander
and Lawgiver are so: but he must endeavor the suppressing, beating down and
conquering the same. And how strong and strenuous the Apostle Paul was (who
frequently speaks of himself as a Soldier, not only as he was a Minister of
the Gospel, but also as he was a Christian: I say how strong and strenuous he
was,) as in his Spiritual warfare in general, so in particular in beating down
his internal Enemies; Sin and Lust: we shall see if we reflect a little upon
the latter part of the Chapter before us, and particularly the words that have
been read unto you. The Apostle having in the former part of the Chapter, been
declaring his liberty in reference to Marriage; as also his requiring of
Maintenance of them among whom he had been laboring in the work of the
Ministry: and yet how he had abridg'd himself, and forborne to use the same,
that so he might not be over-burden-some to them; nor hinder the progress and
success of the Gospel among them: he does in the latter part of the Chapter,
particularly at the 24 v. endeavor to press his former discourse, by telling
them the difficulties of getting to Heaven, and also the obligation they lay
under to run in that race, and to contend in that warfare, that would bring
them thereto. The method chosen by the Apostle to do this in, is borrowing an
Elegant similitude from some of those Games the Romans and Corinthians were
wont to divert and exercise themselves in. There were several sorts of Games
celebrated, as the Pythean, the Neemean, the Olympic and the Isthmean Games:
the latter of which was most proper to Greece. And in which Games there were
wont to be Running and Wrestling, and Riding, and other feats of Activity; by
which the Apostle does endeavor to set forth the difficulty that there is in,
and the labor that must be exercised by those that would strive and fight in,
the way to Heaven. And that he might further prevail with them so to Run, as to
win the prize, so to Fight the good fight, as to obtain the crown; he sets
before them the examples not only of other runners and wrestlers, who were wont
to be careful and painful, in dieting and ordering themselves before, and
straining and putting themselves forth to the utmost in their race and combat
(though the crown and garland for which they strove, was mean and inconsiderable,
(yea nothing) compared with that, which the Apostle with those to whom he
spoke, labored and contended for; the former being a corruptible, the latter a
crown that is incorruptible) I say, the Apostle does not only set before them
the examples of those Gamesters, to press them to their duty: But he also
proposes to them his own example, telling them what he himself did, and also
would do. Like the valiant Commander, who does not say to his Soldiers (in an
arduous and difficult encounter) Ite illuc, go forth thither, as if they were
to go forth upon Service, and he tarry behind in his Tent; but Venite huc, come
ye hither, follow me, you shall go no further, than I will venture my own life.
The Apostle knew full well, that those that are indisposed and uninclined to
duty; if those that dictate duty to them, and exhort them to the performance of
it, are slothful and negligent in duty themselves, (I say) he knew full well,
how that those that are uninclined and indisposed to duty, might be ready to
allege the old proverb, Physician, heal thy self: Thou that teach another,
teach thou not thy self. To anticipate therefore, and prevent every thing of
this nature, and to draw them to be active, industrious and very diligent in
their Spiritual warfare, he tells them, he ran in the same Spiritual race with
them, contended in the same Spiritual warfare, that he was their fellow
Soldier; and gave them no other advice than he himself practiced: and would
only have them follow Himself, as Gideon said to his army, Judge. 7.17. Look on
me and do likewise, as I do so shall ye do.

In the words of our Text, we have the Apostle asserting and declaring, how he
fought, and behaved himself, in his Spiritual warfare; and this the Apostle
lays down,

1. Negatively. So fight I, as one not beating the air. 2. Positively. But I
keep under my body, and bring it into subjection. Where we have,


1. The object, or enemy that he encountered or combated with: in those words,
My Body. 2. The act, or manner how he managed himself toward that object, or
enemy; and this is expressed by two terms. (1.) I keep under my body. (2.) I
bring it into subjection.


So Fight I, not as one that beats the Air, but I keep under my body. He
fought but it was not as one that beats the air. He did not act like a young
Fencer, making only a flourish, and beating only the air; but he fought in good
earnest, and beat his adversaries, (The Enemies of his Salvation.)

My Body.] Body is not to be taken here, so much in a Physical, as in a Moral
sense. We are not to understand by his body, only the Apostles fleshly part,
that part of him which consisted of flesh and bones (which, body, is put in
Scripture sometimes to signify) but by his body we are to understand, besides
his outward man, his Sin; that which the Apostle else where calls, the body of
Sin. Romans 6.6. And the body of death, Romans 7.24. The old man. The flesh, with
its affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24. Those carnal lusts and affections, which
warred against the peace of his Soul. These, he maintained a war with, and
endeavored to keep under, and bring into subjection.

I keep under.] The Greek word [UPOPIAZO] which is here rendered keep under,
signifyes to Seize, to lay hold of, to grasp, and to gripe, as a man would his
adversary, and one with whom he contends for the Mastery: and not only so, but
to beat, knock, thump and pound, as Wrestlers and Champions were wont anciently
to do. And as some think the term is borrowed from those Runners and
Wrestlers, who were wont to contend in the aforementioned Games, and who were
wont to beat and pound one another till they were black and blew, and of a gore
blood; and forced to acknowledge themselves, vanquished and overcome.

I bring it into subjection.] The Greek word [DOULAGAGEO] which is here rendered
to bring into subjection, is sometime used, for a leading Captive; and most
properly signifyes, to bring under Command, in Servitutem redigere; to make one
a Servant. Thus the Apostle tells us, how he acted in his Spiritual warfare;
and in telling us what he did, he tells us what we ought to do. If we would be
Spiritual Fighters, as all the Saints in their several Generations have been:
and if we consider what the Apostle lays down here affirmatively, ( viz. the
keeping under his body, and bringing it into subjection, as some do) as the
means by which he came to be more than such a fighter, as only beats the air;
as the means by which he came not to loose his labor in his Spiritual warfare:
There seems to result this plain truth, which we shall briefly (by Divine
assistance) insist upon from the words, viz.

DOCTRINE.
That those that would fight to purpose, in the Spiritual War, must endeavor
to keep under their Body of Sin, and bring it into Subjection.

Or thus,

Those, and only those, do fight to purpose in the Spiritual War, who do
endeavor to keep under, and bring in Subjection, all those carnal lusts and
affections whsch they have warring in them.

In the brief speaking to this Doctrine, we shall attend only these three
things. (1.) We shall endeavor to speak something of the nature of the duty:
viz. the keeping under the body of Sin, and bringing it into subjection. (2.)
We shall endeavor to show how this keeping under this body of Sin and bringing
it into Subjection, is necessary in order to the fighting to purpose, in the
Spiritual War. (3.) We shall conclude with some brief Application.

cast off its Service, and are resolved to live in perpetual Hostility with it.

Conclusion 3. As when a man lists himself under the banner of Christ, he
breaks his league and correspondence with Sin, and proclaims a War with it; so
he has had a mortal wound given to the habit of it by the Spirit of God. When
a man voluntarily offers himself to the Service of Christ, upon his
proclamation and call, (I say) when a man is brought effectually to answer that
call; as he renounces his correspondence with sin, and enters upon a War with
it* so, there is by the Spirit of God, a deadly blow given to the old man, our
habit of sin. However in a man's natural estate he is under the dominion of sin.
Yet when Grace comes into a man, the Spirit of God which is stronger than that
strong man armed, comes upon him, overcomes him, and takes from him his armor
wherein he trusted. Every one that does indeed actually belong to the Lord
Jesus Christ, is freed from the reigning power and dominion of sin: that is
accomplished in him, Romans 6.12, 14. That sin has not dominion over him: and
sin shall not reign in his mortal body, that he should obey it in the lusts
thereof. The Spirit of God has spoiled sin of its power and dominion, and
given it its Deaths wound. An unregenerate man's heart is Sins Territory: Sin is
in such a man's heart as in its Throne, before the Spirit comes, but when that
comes, and by that the nature is changed and renewed; Sin is cast out of its
Throne, and condemned to die.

Conclusion 4. Though a mortal wound be given by the Spirit of God to the habit
of Sin, when a man Lists himself under the banner of Christ, yet Sin is not
then quite overcome and destroyed in a man: However Grace does really subdue
Sin, yet it does not wholly destroy Sin. Though it does really purify a man's
nature, yet in this life it does not quite perfect his nature. A Christian must
not expect to experience a state of perfection here in this life: No, that
estate is reserved till he comes to experience a state of Glory. The best of
men in this life have a double nature in them, as we may see of man in general,
that he consists of Body and Soul; so we may say of every Godly Man (in a
Theological sense) that he has both Flesh and Spirit, Corruption as well as
Grace. Though Sin be beat out of its strong holds, yet it has betaken it self
to its inward Castle, where it will remain and have a being in us, as long as
we shall have a being here in this world. This Canaanite will dwell in the
Land, nor can the Children of God drive it out of this City. God does with us,
in respect of Sin, (our inward Enemy) as the Psalmist prayed against his
outward Enemies, Psalm. 59.11. Slay them not, scatter them by thy power, and
bring them down, O Lord our Shield. Thus does the Lord do in respect of Sin,
and Corruption in his Saints here in this World; those enemies are brought down
from that power and dignity, in which they were wont to be, but they are nor
wholly slain. They are surrounded, are taken, arraigned, a Sentence of death is
past upon them, and they are dead in Law, but yet they have their lives
lengthened out for a season during our bodily life, nor can we till the death
of the Body, expect perfectly to be freed from the body of death. The wise man
proclaims a Challenge to all the world, to enter the Lists with him upon this
account, Prove. 20.9. Who can say, I have made mine heart clean? And though
there may be some of mankind, that may falsely and presumptuously say that
they have; yet none can truly and safely say that they have: For if we say we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us: 1 John 1.8

Conclusion 5. Sin not being thus quite overcome and destroyed; it follows that
every man, who has listed himself under the banner of Christ, has a diversity
of principles in him, between which there can be no amity and friendship, but
on the other hand a continual warring. The principles, Sin and Grace, Flesh and
Spirit are diametrically opposite one unto another, are the greatest contraries
in the whole world, as contrary as light and darkness, as life and death, as
good and evil, as Heaven and Hell. And being so opposite and contrary, they
cannot be dormant, and latitant in the Soul, but must needs be up in arms,
endeavoring to vanquish and expel each other. These two principles are (as it
were) the company of two armies, Cant. 6.13. They lie intrencht and engaged one
against the other. As long as a man keeps his league with sin and serves that,
he feels nothing at all of this: While the strong man armed keeps the Palace,
his goods are in peace. Luke 11.21. A^ long as Israel is subject to the
Egyptians, and does their drudgery, all is well, there is no stir; but when once
they shake off that Servitude, and set out for Canaan, then they are pursued
with all the forces and powers imaginable, to be brought back to their former
bondage. Especially therefore upon a man's first choosing of the Lord Jesus
Christ for the Captain of his Salvation, is this onsett high; and not only
then, but when we have made considerable proficiency, and have obtained much
victory over Sin: Yea, those that have arrived to the highest Seize are
not free from this combat within, but like Rebekah, have twins, struggling in
their wombs; the Flesh and the Spirit, like the twins in her womb, do war and
strive one with another. The law in the members wars against the law in the
mind. Romans 7.23. the fleshly lusts war against the Soul. 1 Pet. 2.11. and the
Soul also wars against them. Gal. 5.17. The Flesh lusts against the Spirit,
and the Spirit against the Flesh, and these two are contrary one to the other.

Conclusion 6. This keeping under the Body of Sin, and bringing it into
subjection, consists in such a warring with Sin, as to endeavor its death and
destruction: and the subjecting all our faculties and members to the Service of
God and Christ. We must endeavor the death and destruction of sin in this
sense; there must be a Resistance unto blood striving against Sin, Heb. 11.4.
Sin will have it pleas to be spared and saved alive, and we may be willing to
deal gently with it, as David gave charge concerning Absalom: this Prisoner of
War will cry for quarter when the life of it is in danger, and will speak us
fair, and make seemingly great propositions. Some sins will promise us profit
and worldly gain, if we will not slay them; as those ten men said to Ishmael,
Jer. 41.8. Slay us not, for we have treasures in the field: Others will promise
us promotions, and worldly honor, as Baalak said to Balaam, Am I not able
indeed to promote thee unto Honor: Others will promise us pleasures and
delights, if they may be spared and indulged: Others will plead they are little
ones, and therefore will desire they may escape: yea, and others will plead
they are our Relations and our Kindred; flesh of our flesh, and bone of our
bones, and no man ever yet hated his own flesh; but we must stop our ears
against all their most cursed charms, and endeavor to do by every Sin, as
Joab by Absalom, thrust it through the heart. 2 Samuel 18.14. Both small and
great must be dealt with after this manner: The great ones, the Champions, the
Goliahs, that come out of the Camp of these Enemies, these Philistines, must be
fought with and killed, and the little ones must be also dashed against the
stones. This slaughter must be like that which Saul was commanded to effect
against the Amalekites: 1 Samuel 15.3. all sorts both young and old must be put
to the Sword, and not so much as one Agag must be spared alive. And as there is
in the duty we are speaking of, an endeavoring the death and destruction of
Sin, so an endeavoring to subject all our faculties and members, to the
Service of Christ: every thought we must endeavor to bring into obedience of
Christ, 2 Cor. 10 5. Our members, not only the parts of our Bodies, but the
faculties of our Souls also, these must not be yielded as Instruments of
unrighteousness unto Sin: but yielded as instruments of righteousness unto God,
Romans 6.13. we must not any longer live the rest of our time, to the lusts of
men but to the will of God, as it is expressed, 1 Pet. 4.2. Our bodies, i. e. our
whole man I conceive, a part is put for the whole man. Romans 12.1. Our whole man
must be presented a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God: and when we do
sincerely endeavor this, viz. the death and destruction of Sin, and the
improving the whole man for the Service of God; though in many things we may
fail, and sometimes by our indwelling enemy, be put to the worst, yet if this
be our bent, inclination, sincere desire and endeavor, it will be accepted of
God, and we shall be accounted by him, as such as do keep under the Body of
Sin, and bring it into subjection. And thus of the first thing proposed to be
spoken to; we pass to the second.

Secondly, We shall endeavor to show, how this keeping under the Body of Sin
is necessary in order to the Fighting to purpose in the Spiritual War; and
here, if we lay these two or three considerations together, it will
sufficiently appear.

1. Every one that fights to purpose in this Spiritual War, has given up
himself to Christ, he has Listed himself under him, he is engaged to fight
under his Command and Conduct; he is to march and follow him in the Spiritual
Warfare. Christ is their Captain, and they are his Soldiers; God has given
Christ to be a witness to the people, a Leader and Commander to the people.
Isa, 55.4. A Leader to go before them as their Prince and Captain, and a
Commander to give them Laws and Rules for their obedience. And every one that
is indeed engaged in this Spiritual War, have Listed themselves under the Lord
Jesus Christ, to follow him as their Leader, and to observe his Laws and Rules
as their great Commander, and are willing to follow him whithersoever he goes,
and to subscribe all the Articles and Terms that he shall propose unto them.

2. Hence every such man is under the greatest obligation to endeavor the
keeping under the Body of Sin, and bringing it into subjection. This is the
Command of Christ; yea this was the very end of the Death of Christ: rather
than Sin should not die, Christ himself became obedient unto Death. Now our
very Baptism does oblige us unto this, to fight against Sin to the very death
of it. If that be Sacramentum Militare, then every one that has taken that
Oath, that has received that Press Money, and yet is in friendship with Sin,
and does not endeavor the death and destruction thereof, he is Proditor
Militiae, a Flyer from his Colors, and Runs into the Enemies Camp. But when we
grow up, and actually give up our selves unto the Lord Jesus Christ, if we are
sincere in our engaging our selves to Serve him; though we are not free from
the assaults of Sin, yet we resist it steadfastly; yea, we have in some measure
and degree mortified and subdued it; it is an inseparable Character of those
that are Christ's, Gal. 5.24. That they have Crucified the flesh with the
affections and lusts.

3. The Body of Sin if it be not kept under, and brought into subjection, will
hinder from a faithful Serving of Christ: Fleshly L^sts are pernicious Enemies.
Well might he say,

Inimicorum Nequissimum Carnem meam.
His Flesh was the worst Enemy in the world.


This Enemy is always present with us, it incamps in us, round about us, and
does most easily beset us, Heb. 12.1. It lies in ambush behind, and in the
midst of all our lawful affairs and employments. Yea, it frequently starts out
upon us, and surprizeth us in our best duties and performances; when we would
do good this is present with us to impede and hinder us, Rom 7.21. It is
adjacent and always at hand to oppose and hinder us in all our intercourse and
correspondence with Heaven. So that unless we resist steadfastly, and endeavor
to bring it under, it will Captivate us, Imprison us, and lay such weights and
fetters upon us, by reason of which we shall be utterly unable, to walk at
liberty and seek Gods Precepts. Psalm. 119.45.

4. A man is exposed to all the assaults of Satan and other Enemies, as long as
he does not endeavor to keep under the Body of sin, and bring it into
subjection. In vain do we pretend to maintain a War with Enemies abroad, if so
be we are at peace with them at home; we lie open like a prey to our enemies
without, if we do not see to it, that we keep under those that are within. The
wise man tells us, Prove. 25.28. That he that has no rule over his own Spirit,
is like a City that is broken down and without walls; That man whose Spirit, i.
e. his passions and unruly affections, been't kept under, and brought into
order, that man is like Hazor, which had neither Gates, nor Bars to keep
enemies out. Jer. 49.31. He lies open to all the assaults and temptations of
the Devil and the World; innumerable are the dangers and mischiefs that such an
one is exposed to. And since Sin let alone does so expose us; it concerns us to
endeavor our own safety and security, to do what in us lies to obviate the
danger, which by it we are obnoxious unto, and that by using all good means
that it may be kept under, and subdued in us.

5. There can be no obtaining a Crown of Glory (which is the Reward through
Grace of fighting to purpose in this Spiritual War) unless there be an
endeavoring to keep under the Body of Sin, and bring it in subjection. Only
those will be found to have fought to purpose, who shall obtain the Crown. The
Apostle exhorts Timothy, 1 Timothy 6.12. Fight the good fight of Faith, lay hold
of Eternal Life, get a good title to that, then do we fight the good fight to
purpose; and hence the same Apostle, speaks concerning himself, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
I have fought a good fight, Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness. And only those shall have this Crown, as a gracious reward of
their fighting the good fight, who have maintained a War with Sin, and have
endeavored the death and destruction of that. It Is most certain, there are but
two sorts of men in the world, there are no Neutrals, no middle state: Every
man is either under the Rule and Government of the Lord Jesus Christ, or else
he is under the command of the Devil his greatest enemy, he has either Listed
himself under Christ's banner, or else he is a Soldier in the Devils Regiment.
He therefore that willingly serves his lusts, and is in friendship with them;
yea, that does not endeavor the death and destruction of them, is an enemy to
Christ, refuses his Service: and shall such an one ever share in the glorious
Reward, which they have conferred upon them who are faithful? No, in stead of
the reward of a friend, such an one shall have the punishment of an enemy. Luke
19.27. Those my Enemies that would not that I should rule over them, bring them
hither, and slay them before me. This is all the Crown they shall experience:
And therefore,

6. Those that do not endeavor to keep under the Body of Sin, and bring it
into subjection, shall most certainly perish and be destroyed. If we do not
endeavor to keep under our body of Sin, and bring it into subjection, it will
in a sense destroy us here in this world; for it not being subdued, will grow
outrageous and foil us before God, Angels and men: it will bring us into
Scandals, and expose us to open shame. How many has it served thus, who have
indeed belonged unto the Lord Jesus Christ? when they have let sin alone, and
have discontinued the exercise of the Mortification of it: we may see it in
David, Solomon and others: this enemy has cast down many wounded, yea many
strong men in this sense have been sl^in by it. But that which is the dreadful
consequent and effect of not keeping under the body of sin, and bringing it
into subjection, is the perdition and destruction that it exposes to in the
world to come. This War with sin, will terminate in nothing short of the death
of one of the parties engaged in it. If we are not the death of our Lusts and
Corruptions, they will most certainly be the death of us, of our Souls: if we
are conquered by them, and brought into subjection to them, we shall have no
other stipend and pay for our Service, but Death. Romans 6.23. Our great Captain
will not spare any man that spares any of his Sins. God has appointed every
Lust to death, they are all men of death by his appointment; and whosoever
spares them, or lets them go, his life must go for theirs. As it was said to
him, 1 King. 20.42. Because thou have let go out of thine hand a man whom I
appointed to utter destruction, therefore shall thy life go for his life: we
must therefore vanquish by endeavoring the subjection of sin, or else we shall
be overcome by that, and must dye our selves. So that laying these things
together, it is very evident and clear, that those that would fight to purpose
in this Spiritual War, must endeavor to keep under and bring into subjection,
all those carnal lusts and affections, which they have warring in them. And
thus of the two first things proposed briefly to be touched upon: We come to
the third and last, which is the

APPLICATION. USE of Encouragement.
Let every one that would fight to purpose in the Spiritual War, endeavor to
keep under their Body of Sin, and bring it into subjection. If so be we had no
Lusts warring in us and against us, there would be no need of such an
Exhortation; but since we have, a necessity lies upon us to suffer it and
attend it, and Woe unto us if we don't. We read concerning Moses, Exodus 2.11,
12. That when he spied an Egyptian smiting an Hebrew, one of his brethren, he
slew the Egyptian. There are if I may term them so, Egyptian Lusts within us,
which ever and anon smite our Souls, which are nearer friends to us than a
Brother: they are our darlings, our all; when ever therefore we espy these
cruel Taskmasters, (they would be so) smiting our Spiritual part, we must
encounter them, and endeavor to slay them. To animate and encourage us hereto,
I shall lay down but two particulars, unto which I shall subjoyn two or three
words by way of Direction, and so conclude.

Motive. 1. This combat after a while, you may hope, will not be Irksome and
tedious, but pleasant and delightful. Sinners that are overcome and led Captive
by their Lusts, they count that Captivity their greatest Satisfaction, and most
pleasant life, they like their Service, love their Master, and are unwilling to
go out free; they think they must change Naomi for Marah, and therefore when
called upon hereto, are ready to say with the Olive tree and Fig Tree, Judge.
9.9, 11. Should I leave my fatness, should I forsake my sweetness and good
fruit? should I leave the pleasures that I enjoy in walking in the way of mine
heart, and the sight of my own eyes, to Mourn, to Fast, to live a strict life
of Mortification? this they cannot tell how to comply with. Well, but give me
leave to tell you, as to this warfare, you are under a mistake: You are not
called to quit your pleasures, only to change the objects of them, and that
every way for your profit and advantage; to leave those that are low and base
for them that are high and noble, sensual delights, for spiritual delights, the
satisfactions of Swine, for those of Angels; and therefore if pleasures and
delights will charm you, or have any influence upon you, I will assure you,
that here in this Warfare you may enjoy those that are rational and Heavenly,
whereas as long as you continue slaves to your Lusts, you may enjoy only those
that are base and filthy delights of a Beast, yea, of a Devil. Believe it, you
will find one hour spent in prayer, mourning for sin, and secret Communion with
God, better than many spent in the service of Sin; and those lusts that Sinners
are wont to indulge themselves in; so that though the beginning of this
incountring the Body of Sin may be hard, it will be easy after a while, and at
length, very pleasant.

Motive. 2. The Victory is certain, and also most signal and glorious. This is
that which encourages a Soldier to be Valiant, the hope of Victory; and this
is the privilege of the Christian Soldier, that he shall most certainly have
Victory. He is not left at uncertainty, to the chance of War, wherein the
Victory in Battle, is not always to the strong: but a Christian may know and be
assured, that he shall overcome and obtain the Victory. The issue of the War is
revealed, and made known to us by Christ in his word: as Sin, Satan, Death and
Hell, could not conquer our Lord Jesus Christ, the Captain himself, so neither
shall any of them be able to conquer his Soldiers. A Christian may sometimes
be foiled, and seem to be beaten back, but yet he shall recover himself again;
though he fall yet he shall rise again: It may be said of him, as of Gad, Genesis
49.19 Though a Troop may overcome him, yet he shall overcome at last. And as
this Victory is most certain, so it is most signal and glorious, the Victory it
self is most signal and glorious, and so is the Reward of it. The Victory it
self is so, it is a greater conquest than to be Conqueror of the World; for some
that have been Conquerors of the World, have yet been taken Captives by their
own lusts and affections, Prove. 16.32. He that is slow to anger is better than
the mighty, and he that rules his Spirit, than he that takes a City: he that
rules his Spirit is better and more victorious and more glorious. This is the
noblest and most signal victory, and the Reward also is most signal and
glorious, it being no less than a Crown, not of silver or gold, but of Eternal
Life; if we through the grace and assistances of the Spirit, do kill and put to
death the deeds of the Body, we shall live eternally. Romans 8.13. Let then the
consideration hereof encourage us to our Duty. For Direction take a few
particulars briefly.

Direction 1. Begin with this enemy betimes; crush it in the first motions of
it, it is easiest overcoming at the first. Warriors are wont to set upon their
enemies, where they find them feeblest; so we should set upon sin before it get
head, and if we do, before it get too much hold upon our faculties, or break
forth by outward acts, we may more easily subdue it, and hold it under, as a
slave and vassal. These Lions, we may more easily conquer and tame if we set
upon them while they are Whelps, whereas if we let them grow up as in a little
time they will, to be salvage beasts, we shall find them very formidable, if
not unconquerable. As soon therefore as we find this enemy to rebel, and to
begin to War, let us rise up in Arms against it, and endeavor by force of the
same, to quell it and bring it into subjection.

Direction. 2. Hold no parley with this Enemy; it is so treacherous as that we
had need awe our selves with a fear of being ensnared by it, and therefore must
avoid all occasions of it. Keep out of the way of its temptations. Its
excellent advice, Prove. 4.14, 15. Enter not into the path of the wicked* and go
not in the way of evil men, avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass
away. This enemy will say to us as Jael to Sisera, Turn in, Turn in to me, fear
not; but if we do hearken to its Solicitations, it has a Nail to strike into
our Temples, and be the death of us. It will take us as Joab did Abner by the
beard, as if it would embrace us; but if we take no heed, it will smite us
under the fifth Rib, and shed out our bowels to the earth. It will come and
kiss us as Judas did our Savior, when as with him, it has been plotting
nothing less than the betraying us into our enemies hand: we must therefore
hold no parley with it, nor come any nearer than needs must to any of its
quarters. Nor will it be cast upon us in the day of Judgment, as a piece of
Cowardice, thus to retreat from our enemy, but will be reckoned our greatest
valor and courage: It is the truest Magnanimity and most Heroic valor, in
our Spiritual warfare, to be afraid of the least iniquity, Happy is the man
that thus fears always.

Direction. 3. Cut off all the provisions and supplies of Sin; this is the
Apostles advice, Romans 13.14. To make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the
lusts thereof. If we would ever subdue our Lusts, and be the death of them, we
must cut off all the provision, which has a tendency to support them and keep
them alive. It is counted excellent policy in War, to leave as little provision
as may be in the Enemies way. It Is best to burn it, and destroy it, though it
be in our own Country, if otherwise, it will have a tendency to relieve and
support our enemies. Thus must we endeavor to weaken the force of Sin, even
this way; we must set a guard over our affections, and inferior appetites; lay
every thing under bonds, that we are in suspicion, will take part with the
enemy: Endeavor the utter consumption of whatsoever would be like provision to
our Lusts, to support them and keep them alive. We must endeavor to starve our
Lusts, and if we afford them no sustenance, but endeavor to deprive them of
every thing of that nature, we may hope that they cannot hold out long, but
must surrender, and acknowledge themselves conquered.

Direction 4. Improve all the weapons that the Christian Armor will afford
you. This armor consists of several pieces. We have a list of them. Fph. 6.13,
14. And we must not content our selves with one or two pieces of this armor,
but we must put on the whole armor of God. Especially of all the pieces of
armor; we must see to it, not to forget the Sword of the Spirit, which is the
word of God; of this Sword, we may truly say as David did of Goliahs, there is
none like it. It is a two edged Sword, to cut the Nerves and Sinews of Sin
asunder. And Pray always: this is not only a part of our Christian armor, but
it is that which helps us, by which we are enabled to make a right improvement
of all the rest: this is ne^essary all along through the whole of our encounter
with the body of sin. We must therefore endeavor to manage this without
ceasing, we must be continually lifting up our hearts and eyes to God; and when
ever an army of Temptations does assault us, say with Jehosaphat 2 Chorn.
20.12. O our God we have no might against this great Company that comes
against us, neither know we what to do, but our eyes are unto thee. This is the
way to fetch Christ into the field, and battle, for our help, and then we may
be sure of defense and protection, yea, of Victory and Conquest.

Direction 5. In the Combat with Sin, aim principally at the General of those
Enemies: I mean your beloved darling Iniquity; plant your main Artilery against
that, that's the Goliath of these Philistines; a man's darling Sin is a captain
sin: that bears the authority in the Soul, and his other sins are under it as
Soldiers; it saying to one, Go, and it gos, and to another, Come, and it
comes; a man's other Sins are subservient unto this. This is the sin that is so
much tended and waited on: Now if we would keep under those enemies and bring
them into subjection, we must endeavor primarily and principally to destroy
this principal of them; as it was said to them, 1 King. 22.31. Fight neither
with small nor great, save only with the King of Israel. So say I, sight
neither against small nor great Sins comparatively, but against this kingly,
this master enemy; bind this strong man, and you will easily take the house.
Slay but this Champion, and the rest will flee, as we read of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 17.51. When they saw that their Champion was dead, they fled.

Direction 6. When you think you have attained any Victory or Conquest over
Sin, take heed of Security. Though the Enemy may be quiet, yet fear least he
should not be quite routed; therefore be always upon your watch, ready to
withstand a fresh assault: Let every day be a day for the training and
exercising of all your graces; have them always in Battle array: See that they
be continually in a Military posture, and set an exact guard upon your hearts,
that so when ever your affections move or stir unseasonably or disorderly, they
may be made to stand, not let to pass, till we know from whence they come, and
whither they tend; did we do so, in what excellent order might we have, and
keep our Souls?

Direction 7. Do what you do in this Combat, not in your own, but in the
strength of your Great Commander. If ever we would storm and beat down the
strong holds that are within us, it must be by the concurrence of Divine Grace;
the Weapons of our warfare are mighty through God, 2 Cor. 10.4. we come to be
more than conquerors through him that loved us, Romans 8.37. This Enemy will
fling us down as fast as we can rise, if we encounter it in our own strength;
if therefore we would beat it down, we must say when we Encounter it, as David
to the Philistin, 1 Samuel 17.45. I come unto thee in the name of the Lord of
Hosts, the God of the Armies of Israel, whom thou have defied. Asa, when he had
a vast Army of Two Hundred and Fourscore Thousand, Mighty men of Valor, to
fight with the Ethiopians, he prays and trusts to God as if he had not one man.
2 Chronicles. 15.11. Help us O Lord our God, for we Rest on thee, and in thy Name do
we go against this multitude. So must we say when assaulted with Sin, Help us O
Lord our God, for we have no power against the same, but do rest on thee; God
is able to make us stand against Sin; Through him we may do valiantly: Psalm.
60.12. he is the Lord, strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in Battle, Psalm.
24.8. Though the archers may sorely grieve us, and shoot at us, yet he can make
our Bow to abide in strength, and the arms of our hands may be made strong by
the Hands of the mighty God of Jacob, Genesis 49.23, 24.

Direction 8. In the strength of your great Captain, endeavor to persevere and
hold out to the end. The Crown is at the end of the Warfare, it is not wont to
be given till the Victory is gained, the promise is not to him that begins, but
to him that overcomes. Our Lord Jesus Christ our great Captain, went forth
conquering to conquer; and however we may pretend to be his Soldiers, yet we
shall never obtain the Crown, unless we endeavor in our measure to imitate him
in this regard. O then let us all endeavor to be faithful to the death, that
so we may receive the Crown of life; and it is but a little while, that we have
thus to engage and combat with sin! if we are faithful in the Service, and
hold out, e're long we shall have done fighting, and shall come to triumphing;
We shall put off our armor, and put on a victorious Crown. The Great Lord of
Hosts, under whose Banner we fight, within a little time will remove our
Quarters, he will draw us off from the Army Militant, here upon earth, to the
blessed and triumphant in Heaven Then we shall be out of Gunshot, shall never
be any more annoyed, molested, or disturbed with the body of sin, but shall be
perfectly freed from it, made perfect in Holiness, and shall for ever be giving
thanks and singing the praises of that God, who gives us the Victory, through
our LORD JESUS CHRIST. Amen.

FINIS.

