BEDLAM Broke loose, A Reveiw of that Boisterous Uproar, whereby the Lives of
the Right Honorable DIGBY LORD GERARD and his Mother, were eminently
Endangered, June 1677.

Praeteriti dulce est Meminisse periculi.

London, Printed 1677.

BEDLAM broke loose, etc.
OF all Wild Beasts, Heaven defend us from the Rabble Rampant! Africa has not a
Monster so outragiously Cruel, as This with the Many-Heads and no Brains. Next
the mischief of their Hands, there is nothing more to be dreaded than the
Venom of their Tongues; for when they have committed their Savage Exploits,
they Bruit abroad Slanders to varnish over their Insolence, and pretend
Reasons for their Phrensies.

The Entertainment which the Noble Digby Lord Gerard met with in the City of
London last Whitsontide, was so far remote from common Civility, much more, the
Respect due to a person of his QUALITY and MERIT, that Indians would have
Blussht at those Barbarities, which an Ungovernable crew of Heathen-Christians
Acted, without either Remorse, or (what is more to be lamented) Punishment from
Justice; yet have they since made as hold with his Lordships Honor, as then
with his Person; and by spurious Reports (begot in close Adulteries between
Lying Tongues, and Itching Ears) endeavor to cast the Odium of that Frantic
Tumult upon those that were only passively concerned, and (to the grand hazard
of their Lives) causlesly Assaulted.

For Rectifying such false and scandalous rumors raised by Malice, and
swallowed by Ignorance; it is become necessary to give the world the true Rise,
Progress, and Up-shot of that riotous Hubbub, the memory whereof I could
otherwise wish might remain as obscure as its Original Authors, that our Age
might be free from the scandal, and Posterity from the Ill-precedent of such a
popular exorbitance.

The Lord GERARD being but in the fifteenth year of his Age, ever Piously and
harmlesly Educated, the natural sweetness of his Temper, and acquired
Accomplishments from Liberal Studies and virtuous principles, rendering his
deportment not only Inoffensive, but most generously obliging to the meanest
persons. Going with his Mother and others in the Whitson holy days 1677. (soon
after his first coming to Town) to see new Bedlam (yet not out of curiosity,
but on Extraordinary occasion) coming near to the Gate, desired a woman that
there obstructed the passage, by the name of GOOD WOMAN to stand by, that he
might speak with the Porter of the House.

'Twas sure his Lordships excellent Goodnature oversway'd his Judgment to
bestow that improper Appellation upon her, for had he but considered the rules
of Physiognomy he might have read the virtues of all the three Furies, with a
Landscape of Bridewel and Newgate to boot, in the disorderly Hieroglyphics of
her wretched countenance; whether not being used to be called so, and conscious
how little she deserved the Title, made her take it for an Affront, or that the
fumes of her indigested Ale and Brandy at that unlucky minute, caused an
insurrection of Choler in her Pericranium, I cannot precisely determine, this
is most certain, that only that mistake, or the mere presumption of speaking to
her, without further provocation, was resented as so heinous an offense by her
High and mighty Gammarship, that it had like to have cost my Lord his life; For
forthwith looking steadfastly and grimly upon him, like the Devil over Lincoln,
or a Witch reading ones Fortune, she rudely told him he must not come in there;
and instead of a reason, at the same instant, gave him such a blow on the nose
and eyes with her Clownish fist, as he was almost suffocated with his own
blood, which superlative violence was seconded by a Brawny Porter, a fellow
composed of NOISE and Rudeness, whom for fashion-sake she calls Husband that
durst do no other than engage in the unknown quarrel of his imperious
Bed-Cockatrice; and that their divellish paws might keep time to some Hellish
Music, she called the Noble young Gentleman a thousand times ROGUE, and other
abusive Names; but he was made incapable of returning her thanks in her
Billinsgate Complements (had he been versed in them) or any other Language; and
had not the Divine Providence Protected him, had there by these insolent and
bloody Savages lost his innocent Life, as he did much of the Beauty of that
face which few can Equal.

For this strapping Virago, and her Mate, and two men more of their Raskally
Companions, like so many Irish Mastives, laid hold on him all at once: Four to
one and he but a Child,, was I confess some small odds, but put that to the
score of their valor; As likewise their plucking him barbarously by the Hair,
which I am sure was contrary to Magna Charta and all the Fundamental Laws of
the Bear-Garden it self -- But Raillery apart -- for they did not Jest, Having
given him many desperate blows, they endeavored to thrust him backwards down
the stairs with an intent (no doubt) to Murder him upon the place: whilst he
was thus held down by the Hair, having no other way to defend himself, and make
them draw back (the crowd keeping off his Footmen and Pages) he drew his little
sword, which the Porter too intent upon this Divelish design of gratifying his
Raging Baggage, heedlesly met with, and thereby Razed the skin of his belly;
but one might lawfully swear there was no Christian blood spilt.

However an Outcry is raised, and immediately a mighty rout of men and women,
possessed (had it been possible) with something worse than themselves, hurry
about my Lord, endeavoring with fresh Attaques of violent fury to take away
his Noble Life; and though he made no resistance but calmly offered to
surrender himself to the next, or any Magistrate; yet they Hale him from one
place to another, still persued by the impetuous clamours of this worthy
Apple-woman, who began all the mischief; and now Haloo'd on the yelping Rabble
as often as she could get within Tongue-shot, discharging her Mouth Grenades of
Oaths and Curses, crying, let him come out i will tear him to pieces, etc. at
last being put into his own Coach to go before a Justice, an impudent Shomaker
broke the glasses, and he and another flung Brick-batts into the Coach, but for
that my Lord can forgive them from a glorious precedent that patiently suffered
the same and worse indignities; some of their elder Brethren threw the like
into the Coach of St. Charles their KING, whom they Martyred; Thus now this
blustering Hewson with many others of the same cast -- cried -- Kill him, kill
him, knock him oath head, pull him to pieces, dash out his brains, and many
other modes of Execution, more than Sicilian Tyrants ever invented, was he
presently doomed to, by these Peerless and lawless judges; who to show that
they were in bad earnest, made such severe blows into the Coach, that a
Gentleman in it with my Lord wore the Marks a good while after on his Arms; The
Bedlamites within were a sober discreet Tribe in comparison of these without;
to appease their rage no Remonstrances of reason could be heard, neither
Beauty, (which has disarmed Conquerors in the heat of battle) nor Eloquence
(that has calmed the wildest Tumults) nor Youth (which usually engages pity)
nor Obliging condescentions (which are wont to soften the most obdurate and
insensed, to terms of moderation) could here prevail; The Tears of an innocent
affrighted Lady, the Prayers of an indulgent Mother, (desiring only common
justice for her endangerd Son) were slighted; nay all Authority contemned and
abused, for the very Constables and Officers that guarded my Lord, stood in
need of a Guard for themselves, being threatened to be torn to pieces, for
endeavoring to keep the Peace, and restrain them from Murdering him; So that
my Lord was forced to quit his Coach, and to avoid being Assassinated by these
Ruffians, make a Sanctuary of the Counter, where through Gods mercy, his life
was saved, though the Rout was so set upon mischief, that they broke, and began
to untile the place to get at him, threatening to pull it down, which in all
likelihood they had accomplished, had not the Sheriff Sir. Thomas Stamp (the
only great officer that could be found) been sent for to quell them; who were
grown to such a Head that the Lady GERARD has seriously professed she thinks
she should (if not been killed by their actual violence) have dyed with the
just apprehension of her sons danger, had it not been for the generous and
Christian charity of four persons of Quality, two valiant Brothers, and two as
worthy obliging Ladies, their near Relations, mere strangers to her Honor, who
yet Rescued and assisted her and my Lord, and left them not till safe and out
of danker, Nor can she forget with Gratitude to acgnowledge the civilities of a
worthy Citizen and his virtuous wife, who secured and entertained them in his
house to the hazard of having it pulled down over his head by the Bedlamiz'd
multitude.

To give an exact account of that motley crew is impossible, it comprehended
more sorts of Beasts than Noah's Ark, and as many Sects of No-Religion as
Presbytery ever spawned; many of them pretended themselves London Prentices
famous for offering to demolish Bawdy-houses, out of a politic design i will
warrant you, to be Bribed with money to spend in them, For in earnest we may
guess they had rather pull down all the Nobility and Gentry, than one of those;
elce it is strange, not only the Lord Gerard and his Mother too, should not by
their will be suffered to live, but that another Noble Lady coming in her Coach
occasionally to Bedlam whilst this godly work was carrying on, should be no
less sawcily affronted by a pestilent corporation of this Rabble, crying out --
Tear her to pieces, knock out her brains, This is the Bitch his Mother, etc.
breaking her Coach, and hurting several with her; The first time I dare affirm
either that Honorable Lady, or the Lady Gerard ever received such usage or
Language; yet would I not charge this Rudeness on the Apprentices of London in
general, as hoping that the better sort of them as they are more generously
descended, so they scorn to mix with such a mischievous Rascally Rout; but in
all Tumults there are a parcel of Beggarly Filching Vermin that assume their
names, and under that pretense Ravage at their pleasures, and commit the most
nefarious Crimes.

But now it is high time to see how the Porter does; Life you know is sweet, and
had it not been for the Cordial drinking of Ale and smoking Tobacco, our man
of Carriage might possibly have miscarryed; for that night his Surgeon took a
Corporal oath in spite of his Soul, that his wound was mortal; and indeed, To
a Bruit that had neither Brains, nor Heart, the Likeliest Inlett of Death was
in the Paunch; yet the man of Art never dressed it, for fear of making too
speedy a Cure; and the very next day made a civil Affidavit, that he was in no
danger; whence we may conclude, that he heald him and his own Conscience both
by Sympathy; But notwithstanding in the vulgar Creed he has been mortally
wounded, dead, and buried, yet he is since curs d into a Resurrection by living
again (though in a perpetual Purgatory) with that she-Fiend before mentioned,
to whom he durst not but return, dwelling at this instant near Newgate, a
place as fit as any I know for him; nor is his name less suitable, for he calls
himself J. NOISE, and all the Neighborhood can witness that his spouse
(whether the Ceremony ever passed between them or not) may yet very justly lay
claim to that Name as well as he.

And now one would think the Hurricane were pretty well laid, but I should be
unjust to the Shomakers excellent grace of perseverance, if I omit his Lasting
valor and Christian charity, who several days after (when one might have
hoped the Fermentation of his cholerique blood had been somewhat abated) very
gravely declared -- That it was a world of pity my Lord Gerards brains had not
been knocked out; and some of this godly crew have threatened to have another
bout with him, if ever he come into the City. Yet if we enquire into the worthy
reasons of their spite, they have never been able to allege the least shadow
of pretense; their greatest Plea being, That they knew not that he was a Lord;
nor is it like they should, unless set on, as the manner of their Attempt
induces many judicious persons to believe they were; hour it is not imaginable,
they would have paid any Respect to that QUALITY, who by this very excuse do as
bad as acknowledge, that they count all below it at least, though never so much
their Betters, fit objects of their Abuses; In a word, all circumstances
considered, this Honorable Child being, though of English and Loyal Parents,
an absolute stranger to the Town, and one that none of them ever lost by, but
some on the contrary gained, (the common measures both of their Love and
Religion) It Was as grand and Fanatical an insolence (bateing but the
bloodyfreaks of the Fifth Monarch-men) as ever was acted since the Restoration
of our sacred King; who (as he is never wanting in Acts of Goodness and Justice
even to the meanest of his Subjects) was graciously pleased on the first humble
Address to deliver this oppressed young Gentleman, by giving orders to the
Magistrates, but 'twas so long before any of them could be found, that Ten
thousand Lives might have been lost, if not within the Pale of God's especial
Protection, and had not his Creator blessed him with an Excellent Constitution,
the hard and different usage from that of all his Life, which he received as
well by the Cold as Bruises he had suffered, without application of any remedy,
not being allowed to go to his Lodging, was enough to put a period to his Life
they so much thirsted after, no body knows why.

Yet must it be acknowledged, that my Lord was very civily and Hospitably
treated at that worthy Gentleman Sr. William Turner's house, but was not
dismissed till next day, and then not without City Bail, to appear at the next
Sessions of the Peace at Guild Hall, where he was discharged; And though there
was all done, that could be there, and perhaps more than can be justified
against this Noble Innocent, yet I know not how, nor why it happened, that
there was not the least Prosecution admitted, or notice taken of any of those
insolent Rioters, that so barbarously injured him, and notoriously broke the
Peace, in affront of Law, and to the scandal of that City heretofore for Civil
Government renowned throughout Europe.

FINIS.

