THE Grounds and Foundation OF Natural Religion, DISCOVERED, IN THE Principal
BRANCHES of it, in Opposition to the Prevailing NOTIONS of the Modern Scepticks
and Latitudinarians.

WITH An INTRODUCTION concerning the Necessity of REVEALED RELIGION.

By Tho. Beconsall, B. D. and Fellow of Brasenose College, in Oxford.

LONDON: Printed by W.O. for George West, Bookseller, in Oxford. MDCXCVIII.

TO THE READER.
IT was not without some Reluctance that I determined with myself to commit my
Thoughts upon the following Subject, to the Public. I Am sensible a new Author
is like a strange Bird, strayed from his Company; and consequently not only
liable to be peck'd at by the whole Flight of Critics, but exposed to their
most exquisite Cruelties, rather than Wit or Judgment. Indeed the first
Adventures of this kind will receive Advantages from few, even among the
Learned Order; since the softest, the gravest Censures are, That the World is
already too full of Books, that rather serve to distract our Thoughts, than
inform our Judgments, or improve our Knowledge: That the Press is the Parent of
more Impertinences, or crude and empty Notions than useful Truths; and
consequently, serve to detain an unadvised Reader upon the Surface, whilst a
few, well-chosen Authors, would let him into the Marrow and Quintessence of
Learning. These are indeed unquestionable Truths; and perhaps this Adventure
may serve to confirm 'em. But this is not all; for it is observable some Men of
Figure and Station, on every turn, discover their Aversions by their Wishes:
They could heartily wish that the present Disputes or Controversies might fall,
having no Prospect of any good Effects or Advantages by 'em. I must confess
these are Admonitions that should be attended to with Caution, to prevent any
Man from being overhasty in Commencing Author. But yet if we consider the
Industry, Insolence, and Boldness of our Adversaries, the open Attacks of some
Authors, and the Artificial Insinuations of Others; And in a word, the united
Zeal of these Persons to Unhinge and Demolish, without Proposing the least
Model to succeed their Ruins; I can see no reason why those that are Advocates
for Truth, and Guardians of an Established Church, should suffer Controversy
to fall, by allowing them to empty their Gall and Filth without Opposition or
Control. It Is very certain, that the Notions, now so current and industriously
propagated, are the whole Stock or Cargo of Infidelity and Irreligion, of
Error, Prejudice, or Disgust, that have been hatched and nursed in private for
a whole Age together, and are now vented by the Liberty of the Press; and
therefore those that discountenance the Assailment of such pernicious
Adversaries seem to establish a new and unheard of Indulgence, which no one,
but Criminals, must have the least Benefit of. It Is well known, the Conceits of
Error, and Boldness of Irreligion are such, That the most crude and frothy
Performance, not replied to, must pass for Unanswerable. And this gives Credit
and Authority to the Industry of an Adversary in propagating his Notions; and
by this means, the weakest and most uncouth Suggestions are by tract of Time
rivetted in an injudicious Reader, when an early Reply had caused 'em to be
rejected with Scorn and Contempt. From these Considerations, the Labors and
Endeavors of the Members of our Church, may be sufficiently vindicated; and, I
hope, in some measure lay a Foundation for an Apology to my present Undertaking.

I have here endeavored to represent the Foundation and Mesures of Natural
Religion: being an Expedient not only to induce a Sense of Religion, but to
prepare the Mind for an Assent to Revealed Religion, the Complement and
Perfection of it. I Am sensible there are several eminent Hands have been
engaged on the Subject; but having few of the prevailing Principles of this Age
to contend with, they have not fallen in with my main Design, which was to
calculate a Scheme of Natural Religion in Opposition to 'em.

I thought myself obliged to Animadvert on some Authors, not only where they
seem to overturn the fundamantal Principles of Morality, but where they have
advanced Arguments or Insinuations that carry a manifest Tendency that way.
This Design, I presume, will easily obtain a favorable Construction; since
it is well known, That an artificial Insinuation, or a pernicious Argument
advanced by a Side-wind, carries a more fatal Influence than bold and
peremptory Positions and Assertions. I must confess, the Author of the Essay of
Humane Understanding, discovers such a reserved Way of Writing in all his
Performances, that, I Am persuaded, he Designs more than he as yet thinks it
seasonable to Express: And therefore I have used him with more Freedom, to
oblige him to place some Assertions in a better Light, and express his Meaning
more fully, if not his Intentions. I have differed in my Opinion from two
excellent Discourses; Conference with a Theist. Part 2.

The Certainty and Necessity of Religion in General.


but, I hope, my Reader will find nothing but a Difference in Opinion,
determined by a Thread of Argument. Besides, it is in Matters that do not affect
the main Design of either of the Discourses, that stand firm and unshaken,
established upon the clearest Arguments and Conclusions. Thus much I thought
myself obliged to Remark; because I never intended to Detract from the
Character these Authors have justly merited, or lessen the Reputation or Esteem
of such useful Performances.

And now give me leave to conclude with a few Periods, with reference to myself
and the following Discourse: I have here delivered my Thoughts formed in the
midst of a great many Avocations. I have acted with all imaginable Sincerity in
the pursuit of Truth, and resigned up my Judgment to nothing but that Light, or
those Notices which were gained by the fairest and most direct Methods of
Information. I Am as yet persuaded I have represented every thing according to
the precise Lines of Truth; but if I have any where miscarried, I can safely
declare it is without Design, as much as without Prejudice against any I have
opposed. My great Aim was not only to recover discarded Notions, but a Sense of
Religion; by establishing it upon its true Foundations; not only to silence
Infidelity, but to remove that Skepticism, those Doubts and Hesitations that
prevail concerning the most important Points of Natural Religion. But these are
Effects too great to be accomplished without the Concurrence of Heavenly
Influences. We may Wish and Pray for 'em, but we must commit the Success of 'em
to the FATHER of Grace and Mercy. There must be some more than ordinary
Effusions of Grace to engage Men in the Use and Exercise of those Means, which
God has established for the Discovery of the Divine Will; something to take off
the Contempt of those Ordinances which God has appointed for the Attainment of
this End; something that will Correct those unjust, but prevailing Prejudices,
against an Order of Men, established by God in his Church; whereby they are
rendered as despicable for want of Honesty as Sense. This is the Work of Heaven.
God is able as well as faithful to accomplish it in his own good time.

If the following Papers fall into the Hands of Men of these Sentiments, I can
assure them they will find nothing of the Imaginary Arts or Mystery of
Priestcraft, nothing of any designing Leader, nothing peculiar to the wary
Guardians of Creeds and Profitable Inventions, so often hinted by the late
Author of the Reasonableness of Christianity. But if any thing offers itself,
that cannot well be digested, I shall freely embrace a fair and pertinent
Answer, and endeavor to make such Returns as, I hope, may, at last, beget full
Convicton on both sides.

THE CONTENTS OF The Introduction.
OF the State of Man before the Fall,. 1. Of Original Corruption, the Nature,
Rise and Propagation of it,. 2. The Necessity of Revelation asserted, with
respect to our Seize in Knowledge,. 3, 4. From the Defects of Natural
Religion,. 5. In reference to Practice,. 6. From the Necessity of a Mediator,.
7. The Deists Objection answered,. 8.
THE CONTENTS of the BOOK.
A Law of Nature antecedent to Revelation, Chap. 1. Proved from Scripture,. 1.
That Man naturaly Thinks and Reasons,. 2. That Man Thinks and Reasons in a
fixed determinate Way,. 3. The Subject Matter of Laws of Nature discoverable by
Natural Reason,. 4. The Divine Authority of Laws of Nature discoverable by
Natural Reason,. 5. Proved from the Divine Attributes and Perfections,. 5. From
the Ends and Designs of Created Beings,. 6. From those natural Rewards and
Punishments that flow from 'em,. 7. From Scripture,. 8. Objections answered,
Chap. 2. Of the true Origin of Error,. 1, 2. Of the Argument of Universal
Consent, the Nature, Validity, and Extent of it, Chap. 3. Reflections on what
Mr. Lock has offered against it,. 1. Reflections on some Passages in the
Conference with a Theist, Chap. 4. Of the Distinction of Laws of Nature from
Positive or Written Laws, Chap. 5. Where the Nature of 'em is more fully
represented,. 1. Reflections on Mr. Lock 's Arguments against Innate Ideas, or
Practical Principles, and the Controversy determined, Chap. 6. Of the
different Degrees of the Evidence of Laws of Nature, Chap. 7. Of the Foundation
of God's Right of Dominion, and our Duty of Allegiance as a Lawgiver, Chap. 8.
A Right of Obliging distinguished from a Power of Obliging,. 1. A Right of
Obliging does not consist in a Power of Contributing to our Happiness or
Misery,. 2. All Right of Dominion derives from God,. 3. God's Right of Dominion
primarily founded in his creative and preserving Power,. 4. Objections
answered,. 5. The Certainty of Rewards and Punishments, Chap. 9. That God has a
Right to Reward and Punish,. 1. The Certainty proved from the general End and
Intention of all Lawgivers,. 2. From the Nature of God's Laws, and Man to whom
they are given,. 3. And the Nature of God that gave them,. 4. Of the Original
of a Parental Duty, Love and Affection, and Filial Reverence and Duty, Chap.
10. The Affection of Brutes toward their own Offspring not the Work of
Reason, but of certain Animal Sensations,. 1. The Springs of Paternal
Affection, ib. Filial Reverence and Duty founded in the Act of Generation as
well as Preserving Power,. 2. Founded in the same Principles with Paternal
Affection,. 3. A Paternal Power originally includes a Kingly Power,. 4.
Reflections on some Passages in Mr. Lock 's Essay of Humane Understanding, and
a Treatise of Government; in 2 Parts, Chap. 11. The Power of a Mother, no
Objection against the Civil Jurisdiction of the Paternal Power,. 2. The
Commanding Power of the Parent not Temporary,. 3. Maturity did not place the
Sons of Adam in an unlimited State of Freedom,. 4. Natural Freedom not
inconsistent with Civil Government, ib. The Absurdities against this Author's
Hypothesis represented,. 5, 6. Natural Allegiance asserted,. 6. No Body of Men
since the Creation, regularly, and de jure, in a State of Nature, such as this
Author supposes. Of the Nature of Moral Good and Evil, Chap. 12. The
Subject Matter and formal Reasons of Moral Good,. 1, 2. Of the true Measures of
Moral Goodness, Chap. 13. Pleasure, whether of Body or Mind, not the Measure of
Moral Goodness,. 1. The Conformity of Actions to the Ends of Society, not the
Measure of moral Goodness,. 3. Conformity of Actions to a Law abstracting from
the Intrinsic Rectitude of it, not the Measure of Moral Goodness,. 3. The
original Frame, Ends, and Interests of our Beings, the true Measure of Moral
Goodness,. 4. Of the eternal and unalterable Distinctions of Moral Goodness,
Chap. 14. Reflections on Mr. Lock 's Law of Fashion, Chap. 15. His Design not
barely to enumerate Moral Ideas,. 1. No Necessity for assigning a Law of
Fashion,. 2. The true Notion of Virtue and Vice by him Misrepresented,. 3. Of
the Nature of Conscience in general, Chap. 16. Reflections on Mr. Lock 's
Description of Conscience, Chap. 17. Of the Foundation and Authority of
Conscience, in the Original O Economy of it, Chap. 18. The Truth and Certainty
of Natural Conscience, demonstrated against the Latitudinarian, and Unbeliever,
Chap. 19. The Uneasiness of Mind under Sickness, or the Approaches of Death,
resolved into the Gripes and Convulsions of Conscience, Chap. 20. Of the
Evidence of future Rewards and Punishments from the Presages of Natural
Conscience, Chap. 21. How far Conscience shall be a Measure of the Divine
Justice, in the Distribution of Future Punishments, Chap. 22. Some further
Remarks on Mr. Lock 's Notions on this Argument,. 2. The Conclusion.
THE INTRODUCTION, Concerning the Necessity of REVELATION.
IT may perhaps seem a very improper Entertainment to the Christian World, to
establish a Line of Duty from the Records of the Book of Nature, when we enjoy
a more sure Word of Prophecy, or Form of sound Doctrine, which is able to make
us wise unto Salvation, or to delineate the Features of Moral Good and Evil,
when Life and Immortality are brought to light through the Gospel; or, in a
word, to dwell on the Infant-principles of Religion, when we may go on unto
Perfection. But certainly the Spirit and Temper peculiar to the Age we live in,
is abundantly sufficient to suggest an Apology: Are we not professedly Attacked
as to the Truth and Authority of Revelation, and the Whole of Religion resolved
into a Set of Moral Rules and Maxims? And though others as yet cannot Discard all
Revealed Truths, yet they act as if they were Advocates for the Cause; whilst
they allow no other Rise, or Original to Moral Rules and Maxims, than Custom,
Education and a few unaccountable Traditions. These (are Men's Proceedings
which) seem to be embarked in the same Design, viz. The Subversion of all
Religion. Our holy Religion is by this means stripped of its most convincing
Arguments for its Truth and Divinity, its Intrinsic Goodness and Purity; by an
Appeal to the Precepts of Natural Religion. The Believer must grant, That if
Custom, Education and an unaccountable Tradition give Birth to all the
prevailing Principles of Morality, the Argument of the Intrinsic Purity of any
Religious Precepts will fall to the ground: and when the Deist has beat him
from this Fortress, he will easily persuade him that all the rest is Cheat and
Imposture. The Believer having then thus far resigned his Notions of Morality,
will now come into Play, and do an equal Piece of Service to the Deist and
himself too, by making both Converts to Atheism and Irreligion: For when the
Morality and Religion of Mankind is wholly to be resolved into Custom,
Education, and the Mode and Habits of Ancestors, and Contradictions in
Principles of Morality produced as a Confirmation of the Notion, what can more
effectually subvert the eternal Distinctions of Good and Evil, and as a
Consequent of it introduce and establish a Law of Fashion, as the only Measure,
and Standard of Virtue? I will not positively fix these Designs on all those
that have espoused the Notion: It Is sufficient to my present Business that it
carries a manifest Tendency toward the Promotion of 'em, or that it gives a
Foundation to the Impious and Profane to establish their lewd Schems of
Infidelity.

It cannot therefore be unseasonable, to assert the Divine Authority, and
Original of Natural Religion; and that too not only by way of Vindication of
such an important Truth, but as it serves the Cause of Christianity against the
Attempts of Deists and Unbelievers. These are Conclusions so natural and
obvious, that I Am persuaded the natural Tendency of the Doctrine, with an
undisturbed Toleration, will too fatally demonstrate the Power and Efficacy of
'em.

But yet, whilst we endeavor to obviate one growing Error, it ought to be
considered, whether such Endeavors do not prepare the way for introducing, and
confirming another more dang'rously pernicious: For if God has established a
Law of Nature, antecedent to Revelation, as an indispensable Rule of Duty, and
Action to Mankind, and enabled 'em to discover and embrace it as such; the
Deist will conclude there can be no Necessity for a Revealed Religion; and
consequently resolve it into a Contrivance of some Designing Men, an Artificial
System of certain Creed-makers, (as a late Author has Uncharacterized a certain
Order of Men) to secure an Empire, as well as Maintenance from the silly
Populace. I must confess this is the great Goliath, the Champion-argument which
Infidelity has recourse to, to assail the Faith of the Living God, once
delivered to the Saints. But certainly this is a lewd Attempt, for Men to think
to Demonstrate against a plain Matter of Fact, by putting their Adversaries
upon demonstrating the Necessity of such a Matter of Fact. This is to advance
our own shallow Understandings above the Sphere of Infinite Wisdom, and Reason,
since we are resolved not only to pronounce the most solemn Transactions of
Providence useless, but reject the Truth and Certainty of 'em, because a
biased Judgment is resolved not to account for the Ends and Designs of 'em.
But certainly, the Reasons and Necessity of things are sufficiently asserted,
by resolving 'em into the Decrees and Proceedings of infinite Wisdom. If
Revealed Religion is not from God, the Unbeliever has an easier Task to detect
the Forgery. If the Believer contends for a Divine Original, why should it not
be tried upon its proper Evidence? I mean as all matters of Fact are. But I am
persuaded the Apprehensions of a certain Defeat, oblige the Infidel to decline
this Challenge: For it is well known, the most avowed Enemies to Revelation,
even Julian himself, could never dispute the Evidences of Christian Truth; I
mean the Performance of Miracles. However, since the modern Unbeliever seems to
plume himself in the Successes of this Argument, I shall for once allow the
Objection, and venture the whole Merits of the Cause in demonstrating the
Expediency and Necessity of Divine Revelation.

. 1st. Now, in order to this, it will be requisite to make a short Survey of
the Original State and Condition of Mankind, both before and after the Fall;
for by this means we may make a more exact Estimate of the Capacities, and
Seize of Mankind in matters of Knowledge, as well as Practice.

It will readily be granted, That as God originally established a Line of Duty
in the very Frame of our Natures, so He undoubtedly created us with Faculties,
to enable us to discern, or comprehend every Part, or Branch of it. It Is true,
Laws of Nature were never presented to the View of the Mind, by an Angelic sort
of Intuition, without Ideas passing through the Animal part: But yet Reason will
oblige us to conclude, That the Glory of an Almighty Creator, and the Express
Image of his Person, came forth of his Hands pure and spotless: All his Powers,
Faculties and Appetites, were correct and regular: Those native Passions and
Propensions, which are now too often the Parents of Disorder and Confusion,
were, no doubt, originally constant Attendants, and faithful Handmaids to the
Powers of Reason: That Love and Zeal, that Complacency and Delight, which are
now fatally chained to sensual Enjoyments, were originally engaged and devoted
to the Entertainments, and Exercises of a spiritual, rational Mind. Our
chiefest Flights of Zeal and Love, were, no doubt, directed on the Improvement
of Knowledge, and the Disquisition of Truth. And certainly here is a solid
Foundation for Truth: For here are not only native Passions and Propensions,
which serve as Springs to engage the Mind in the closest Researches after
Truth; but the whole Frame of the animal Part, being thus correct, the Images
of Things must needs be presented to the View of the Mind in their native
Shapes, and Proportions, without the least Paint or Disguise; and consequently
the Mind could act and display herself in the largest Train of Deductions,
without the least Trippings, or Miscarriages. So that Man, in his Original
Frame, was enabled to lay in a wonderful Stock of substantial Knowledge, and
make a clear Discovery of the full Line of Duty.

But besides, it is highly consonant to Reason to imagine, as the Great Creator
of the World had adorned his Image and Representative with all desirable
Perfections, so he had not only entitled, but invested him with special Favors
and Blessings, as well Spiritual, as Temporal: For we must not suppose, that
the placing him in Paradise, only implies an actual Fruition of the whole
Circle of Temporal Felicities; but the Dispensation of such Spiritual
Blessings, and Favors, as are suitable to Human Nature, whilst it rested on
this side Heaven, and was not immediately instated in the Beatific Vision.
Whilst Man retained his primitive Innocence, he was no doubt a very choice
Favorite in the Eyes of his Maker, and consequently we must conclude that he
enjoyed constant Communications, and Intercourses with him. For Paradise may
justly be presumed to be a kind of Terrestrial State of Vision; and therefore
God no doubt discovered himself in frequent Adumbrations of his Divine
Presence, and vouchsafed several special Revelations, and his Divine Succors.

These may perhaps be thought unnecessary Dispensations in a State of unspotted
Innocence and Integrity. But, certainly, though Man in his original Frame was
endued with a Sufficiency of Power to Decypher the Line of Duty, as well as
Propensions, and Dispositions to observe, and walk up to it; yet such gracious
Communications were in some measure necessary, to maintain a deep Sense of the
Majesty, and Authority of our Maker, and consequently a deep Sense of Duty, and
Obedience; to maintain a deep Sense of the Goodness and Purity of God, and
consequently possess the Mind with an incessant Desire to act in Conformity to
his most sacred Will.

Again, necessary they were to arm those native Powers, and Propensions with
double Force and Activity; to unite and fix 'em on their proper Object, the
Glory and Perfections of their Maker, the Pursuit of Truth and Divine
Knowledge; and consequently to engage a Perseverance in the Line of Duty, with
the utmost Constancy and Resolution.

These were, nodoubt, the surprising Felicities of Paradise. And they are such,
as almost placed him out of the possibility of a Miscarriage, had he not, in
some unguarded Minute, fell in with a subtle indefatigable Impostor. For
without some such Misfortune he could not have failed in retaining a perpetual
Sense of Duty and Obedience, and persevering in it, any more than in a
discovery of the full Line of Duty.

. 2. But now Experience, as well as Reason, too fatally assure us, there is a
powerful, and almost irresistible Bias on the Animal Part, that bears an older
Date than Custom or Education can pretend to give; a Bias that discovers itself
in the first Efforts of Infancy; a Bias that can never be perfectly regulated,
or corrected even by the most exquisite Arts of Education: When the Powers of
Nature seem to exist as it were in sieri, folded up in Impotency and
Imperfection, and consequently (one would think) liable to be molded at
Pleasure; yet we find this Bias endu'd, as it were, with a Gygantick Strength,
able to resist the most powerful Antidotes, obstinate under Commands, and
untractable under Counsels or Persuasives. In a word, it has introduced an
internal Rupture in the whole Frame of Man, renders him a kind of unnatural
Production, acted by two opposite Principles, contending for two different Ends
and Interests, and agreeable to the sacred Language, it has raised an intestine
and eternal War, for its a Law in our Members warring against the Law of our
Mind, Romans 7.23. So that Man is certainly sunk in his original Frame, and
lapsed into a State of Corruption and Degeneracy: This is Truth so clear, and
unquestionable, that the most discerning Heathens have given Testimony to the
Substance of it: They all found it wove in with their Natures, and discovering
itself, not only in inward Motions, and Propensions, but mixing itself in their
most exalted Actions. It Is true, they were perplexed in accounting for its
Original, yet they all saw it in its Effects and Consequences. Their Opinions
were various; however, I shall mention the chief of 'em: Plutarch charges the
Stoics with ascribing Evil as well as Good to God's Providence, and arraigns
it as the height of Absurdities. [See his Tract Adversus Stoicos,] P. 1065. Ed.
Par. 1624.
(...). If this were true, why should they be more concerned to dispense Good
rather than Evil; or how is it possible that Evil should be hateful to 'em?
This indeed was an Opinion extremely gross, and consequently rejected by the
most discerning Sages. However Gellius, pursuant to this, delivers it as the
Opinion of Chrysippus: [This is the very Opinion which Plutarch ingeniously
exposes, Ib.] That Vice sprang from Virtue, (...). Dum virtus hominibus per
consilium naturae gignitur, vitia ibidem per affinitatem contraria nata sunt.
But the most general Opinion was, That Good and Evil proceeded from two
distinct Principles. Hence Plutarch gives it as a most ancient Tradition,
recited by Divines, and Lawgivers, and transmitted to Poets and Philosophers;
(...) whose Authority is not to be traced: That there was not one only Supreme
Governing Principle, (...); And from the Eternal Mixture of Good and Evil, as
well as the Imperfection and Allay of Good, concludes, We are acted by two
contrary Principles, the one conducting, or tolling us on, in a true and direct
Path, and the other haling us back again, (...). Nay, he further argues, If
nothing can exist without a Cause, and Good cannot be the Cause of Evil, there
must be a peculiar Principle of Evil, as well as Good, (...). De Iside and
Osyride. Page 369.

But further, not to dwell too long upon Authorities, it is well known, it was
an ancient Doctrine among the Heathens, to ascribe the Origin of Evil, to
certain malevolent Spirits, called Demons, or Manes; that could exercise a
Power over the Minds, as well as Bodies of Men, and dispose and incline them to
evil Actions. Plutarch, in this very Treatise, gives a full Account of the
Notion, and the Nature of 'em; nay, he delivers it as the Doctrine of Plato,
Pythagoras, Zenocrates, and Chrysippus, following that of the Ancient Divines,
(...). Ib. p. 360. The Opinion of Zenocrates is very remarkable, who attributes
Obsceneness, Irreligion and other Evils to certain powerful malevolent Spirits,
inhabiting the Region of the Air, that take Delight in such Things, (...). It Is
well known, the Romans constantly ascribed the Regimen of their Actions, to
their proper Genius, assigning two to every particular Person. These did not
only attend 'em from their Birth, and suggest Things to the Mind, but
contributed to the forming their very Constitutions. Indeed, it is highly
probable, these were Traditions transmitted from the Greeks to the Romans, and
from the Egyptians to the Greeks, and all founded in the History of the Fall of
Man. And truly, Hierocles, agreeably to his other Divine Flights, describes the
Degeneracy of Mankind in such a lively manner, as if he had taken it from the
revealed Canon. In the first place, he describes Man in his Original
Composition, to be Pure and Vncorrupt, in both Parts of him, and the express
Image of his Maker. (...). [ Hier. Comment. in Pythag. Carm. p. 17. Ed. Land.
1673.] After this, in his Comment on the Nature and Frame of Man, with respect
to the Rise, or Origin, of Good and Evil, he represents, with what a powerful
Impulse we are carried into Evil, and pronounces it to be the Effect of a
wilful Apostasy and Revolt from God, and his Society: Even a Society which we
once enjoyed in pure Light, (...); whereby an invincible Propension to the
Things of this World is contracted. He confirms the Notion by the Doctrine of
Plato, and Empedocles: The whole Discourse is excellent, from Page 252, to p.
272. The Substance of it is collected by the Learned Bishop of Worcester, and
applied to the present Argument, with exquisite Force and Accuracy; and
therefore supersedes the necessity of another Citation. [See Orig. Sac. Lib. 3.
Cap. 3.]

From all this, it is indisputably evident, the Learned Heathen World were
highly sensible of a State of Degeneracy; and though the greatest part were in
the Dark as to its Rise or Original, yet some of the most Curious had preserved
something of the Footsteps of it: However, they were all highly sensible of its
dismal Effects and Mischiefs.

But now Revealed Religion has abundantly unfolded this Mystery, by assuring
us, that a Native Depravity was contracted through the Transgression of of our
First Parents. I know the Deist, Socinian, and the Author of the Reasonableness
of Christianity, look upon this Doctrine to be a piece of Cant, or Jargon:
formed by the Priests, those wary Guardians of their own Creeds, and profitable
Inventions, as this Author has it. But as for the Deist, the general Sense of
Mankind, and the Doctrines of Philosophers, are considerable Arguments to
render the revealed Accounts of it highly probable: And therefore, unless he
were able to disprove the Truth, and Authority, of Revelation, on the same Foot
that we overturn any other forged History, I Am persuaded unbiassed Reason will
pronounce his Notions, impudent Calumnies, or Detractions. As for the Author's
of the Reasonableness of Christianity, endeavoring to undermine the Corruption
of Human Nature upon Adam's Transgression, ( See p. 6.) he might have
considered, that it was always the prevailing Doctrine of the Christian Church.
That it is made an Article of the Established Church of England; of which he
would persuade the World he is a sound and Orthodox Member, and to which Article
he has actually submitted. And though the Word of God has no where in express
Terms told us that this natural Depravity is the Seeds of Adam's Transgression,
yet there are sufficient Authorities of Scripture, whence we may infer it, by a
clear and convincing Consequence. We can prove, that the Descendents of Adam
were undoubtedly affected in the same manner with that of their Parent, and
both by a Spiritual as well as a Temporal Death; I mean such a Death, at least,
as in the Language of Scripture implies a disabling of the Faculties of the
Mind, as well as a Dissolution of the Animal and Spiritual Principles. In a
word, it may fairly be inferred, that, that carnal Principles, that (...), that
prevails in the whole Offspring of Adam, whereby we are, as it were, sold
under Sin, or that reigning Law in our Members, that brings us into Captivity
to the Law of Sin, so that when we would do Good, Evil is present with us; is
the Effect of Adam's Transgression. The Body of this Death was undoubtedly
derived thorough his Loins, on all his Descendents; and the Seeds and
Principles of a higher Death were certainly transmitted, even though eternal
Death were not formally imputed by making him the Representative of Mankind,
since these Seeds and Principles, in the Language of the Apostle, would at
least work in our Members to bring forth Fruit unto Death, Rom, 7. v. 5.

I know the great Artifice, to which our Adversaries have recourse, to blast
the Credit of this Doctrine, is, either to oppose it to the Justice of God, or
Harangue upon the Impossibilities of it: Because God has not clearly revealed,
and we cannot fully comprehend how such a Depravity is contracted, much less
propagated. But, certainly, it was never the Business, or Design of Revelation,
to communicate the Manner of the Divine Transactions, no more than to Authorize
us to reject 'em, because we cannot comprehend the manner of 'em. It was never
a Rule of Revelation, to make our own Faculties of Perception, in comprehending
the Nature of Things, or in reconciling 'em to the scanty Notions we have
conceived of another Revealed Truth, the Standard, Test or Measure of Faith.
And therefore, to reject the clearest Evidence of Original Corruption, because
we cannot comprehend how it is contracted, or because the Notions of Infinite
Justice, though formed by our selves (as we think) must suffer by it, is Base,
and Unwarrantable. But however, that our Adversaries may want the Advantage of
this Pretense, I mean, that Original Corruption can no way be accounted for, I
shall attempt something to demonstrate how it may be Contracted, and
Transmitted.

And first, This will easily be accounted for, from the Nature of Original
Corruption: It Is already concluded, That Original Corruption consists in the
Exorbitance of the Animal Part, or acts as a Law in our Members, warring
against the Law of our Minds, contending for an opposite Interest to the Laws
of right Reason, or the true Interests of Human Nature. Now, that this
Irregularity may be the Effect of Adam's Transgression, there are two or three
Circumstances that render it more highly probable:

For first, Though the Violation of a positive Law, contains but a simple Act of
his Obedience, yet it certainly implies a horrid Violence committed upon all
the Powers of Human Nature: When the Tempter displayed his Wiles, and formed
his deluding Perswasives, it certainly threw the unwary Offender into the
greatest Agonies and Convulsions: It must raze those convincing Apprehensions
of the Majesty and Authority of God; it must suppress the Dread of Divine
Punishments; it must break through all the Guards, and Powers of Conscience, and
Fences of Duty; it must alienate the whole Frame of the Soul, take off those
Desires, and Propensions, that engaged us in the Observance of God's Commands,
and those Satisfactions that result from the Observance of 'em. In a word, it
must extinguish all the Powers of Divine Love, suppress those Flights of Zeal
in exercising the Mind, and Thoughts in Divine Contemplations, the Glories and
Perfections of our Maker; and in pursuing such Things as will render us
remarkably like him: So that this Grand Act of Disobedience, must contain a
Complication of impious Debates and Resolutions, before it was committed: For
certainly the Powers of Nature being so exquisitely fitted for an Obediential
Temper, and the Soul so deeply possessed with a Sense of the uninterrupted
Favors and Bounties of God, flowing from his frequent Intercourses, and
Communications; the Devil must play his Temptations a considerable time, before
he could promise himself success. The Passions and Propensions of Human Nature,
must not only be taken off from serving their great Creator, but turned a quite
contrary way; they must be strongly disposed in gratifying the Lust of the Eye,
the Lust of the Flesh, and Pride of Life. And now, who cannot discern the
Growth, or Production, of carnal Exorbitances, and consequently the
Establishment of Original Corruption? It Is concluded, that this single Act of
Disobedience, was carried on by a Complication of evil Principles; insomuch,
that it seems to have the same Foundation, that in other Cases serves to
establish a confirmed Habit; and consequently, it must have the same Efficacy
in fixing vicious Propensions, that is attributed to vicious Habits. But now
the Contagion of vicious Actions is too fatally confirmed by Experience and
Observation, to be disputed in Theory; every Act prepares the way for a
Repetition; but a confirmed Habit lays a Bias like a Second Nature; a Bias,
that in the Sacred Language, is as incapable of being removed, as the most
subtle Productions of Nature: Can the Ethiopian change his Skin, or the
Leopard his Spots? It Is manifest therefore, that the Disobedience of our first
Parent, introduced an Internal Corruption, by way of Natural Efficacy, not by
way of Divine Punishment.

But further, this cannot be well disputed, if we take in two other
considerable Circumstances that attended the Fall; which in reality were proper
Punishments; I mean a total Exclusion from Paradise, and consequently from the
special Intercourses of the Divine Presence; and the Curse that fell on the
Products of Nature; we must conclude, that the Defection of our first Parents,
introduced a perpetual, and almost invincible Corruption.

And first, If we all assert, what with good Reason has been already evinced,
that those sensible Adumbrations of the Divine Presence, as well as frequent
Intercourses with our Maker, were needful, to preserve a Sense of Duty, as well
as Perseverance in it; How fatally must the Exclusion from the Divine Presence
expose our first Parents to the Dominion of those Lusts, which their
Disobedience had newly engendered? But then, when they are not only driven from
the Presence of the Lord, but condemned to eat their Bread in the Sweat of
their Brows, and converse with little, but Thorns and Brambles, and the tedious
Methods of Husbandry, how strangely must their Mind and Thoughts be chained to
Earth, and the insolent Demands of the Animal Appetite? So that, when all these
things are fairly laid together, I can attribute nothing less to the
Disobedience of our first Parents, than what the Word of God ascribes to a
State of Nature, to wit, the Lustings of the Flesh against the Spirit, and the
Law of the Members warring against the Law of the Mind, and bringing 'em into
Captivity unto the Law of Sin and Death. If the Propagation of such a fatal
Contagion cannot well be accounted for in the Descendents of our first Parents,
I Am abundantly convinced it must unavoidably establish itself in the Frame of
their Constitutions. But truly, there is no Color of Reason offers it self, why
such a powerful Bias, or Contagion, unless suspended by an overruling Power,
should not be transmitted by the common Laws of Generation.

Indeed, when we consider how much our Animal Appetites, and Propensions that
are engendered by Habit, depend on the Disposition of the Blood, and Animal
Spirits, insomuch that they often new Model the Natural Constitution; I cannot
conceive, why a general Contagion of this Nature may not be propagated, as well
as particular Features, Complexions, or Constitutions? I will readily grant,
that some peculiar Turns in Nature, may alter the Frame of particular
Constitutions, and dispose a Person to some peculiar Vices more powerfully than
others; but I Am persuaded, a change can never be effected by any, but one that
has the Sovereign Disposal of the Powers of Nature, that weighs the Mountains
in Scales, and the Hills in a Balance, can prevent all vicious Propensions
from being transmitted from the Parent, or their proper Offspring.

And thus, I hope, I have in some measure given a Rationale of an Original
Corruption, that represents an unavoidable necessity of sinning and provoking
God in all our Actions. (See Reasonableness of Christianity, p. 5.) And yet it
is consistent with the infinite Justice of God. I have enlarged more fully on
the Subject, because it will lay a Foundation to represent the Expediency, or
Necessity of Revelation.

3. And first, Having already concluded, that Man, in his present State and
Condition, is acted by two opposite Principles, involved in two opposite
Interests, and each contending for Government, and Dominion; it may easily be
discerned how our Seize in Knowledge are affected; whereby Revelation
will become highly necessary.

Now, certainly, the Re-searches of Reason, in such a divided State, can never
be elaborate, and correct: For first, it cannot be denied, but the Avenues of
Reason, take their Rise from the Animal Part; and consequently, all the
Materials of Reason must make their passage this way. Nay, further, the Animal
Appetites, and Passions, are the immediate Springs, and Movers of Reason; and
therefore, since it is concluded that the Bias of the Animal Part is so
formidably strong and powerful, we cannot imagine, but Matters will be so
ordered as to prevent any considerable Disquisitions. For by this means the
Ideas of things will not only be often disguised, and presented in a salse
Light, or Dress, but the Importunities of the Carnal Part will not suffer the
Mind to dwell upon any Object, that does not comport with its Interest; they
will not suffer her to place it in the Scales, and try its Worth and Value, by
any solid Debates and Counsels; and consequently, Miscarriages will arise, for
want of due Application, and Attention of Mind.

Now certainly, since this is the true State of Things, we must place the
Acquest of Knowledge under the greatest Difficulties: It will not only
embarrass and perplex every Thought and Working of the Mind, but cut short the
Scheme of all our Enquiries; and therefore though the Fundamental Lines of Duty
may discover themselves to Human View, or Perception, we cannot think to launch
forth into the Deep, and make a certain Discovery of those consequential
Duties, that are absolutely necessary to the Conduct of Human Life. The common
Necessities of Human Nature, will introduce the Knowledge of the principal
Lineaments, and Proportions of Duty; but we can never descend to a Discovery of
some other considerable Parts, and Circumstances, that make up the Complement
of Duty. In a word, frequent Retirements, and solemn Exercitations of Thinking
may engage such an application of Mind, as will enable her to work off the
substantial Parts of the Line of Duty; but without these Arts and Methods, and
without Time, and Leisure, a Man may spin out a thoughtless Life; or, at least,
the Mind will be weighed down by Animal Propensions, and employ it self in
nothing but laying in Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts of it.

And, now can any Man pronounce Revelation unnecessary? What, though Providence
has not yet left the World or rather the World reduced it self to such dismal
Circumstances, but that with close Researches, and unwearied Vigilance, they
may calculate the main Lines of Duty; yet it cannot be denied, but we carry a
kind of Ignis fatuus within, that will be apt to lead a great part of Mankind
into Bogs, and a thousand Miscarriages; and therefore we cannot think it
unnecessary to be secured from such fatal Hazards, and Difficulties by having a
Digest of Laws laid before us, that remain as an unquestionable Standard of
Duty. What though the common Exigencies and Necessities of Nature, the Frame and
Condition of our Beings, by the Light of natural Reason will direct us to the
Groundwork of Morality and natural Religion, it can be no Argument, that the
Light of natural Reason can enable us to raise the Superstructure; that is,
either to accommodate those Laws we can discover, to the Cases and Instances of
humane Life, so as to reduce 'em to Practice; at least so as to answer the true
Ends and Intentions of Living; or to discover other Laws that are the
Consequences of prime Laws of Nature, and indispensably necessary to the
Conduct of Humane Life, to the disposing us for that State of Happiness, for
which God has originally designed us, much less to render our Services truly
acceptable to God. Certainly if we reflect on those inextricable Clogs,
Obstructions and Encumbrances, wherewith corrupted Nature appears to be
encompassed; we must pronounce it impossible, that the Powers of natural Reason
should carry us thus far: It Is certain, though natural Reason may present most of
the Fundamental Laws of Nature in a rough Draught; yet nothing but Revelation
is able to give 'em their finishing Strokes, and their proper Graces and
Perfections, and display 'em in their Consequences Appendages and Deductions; I
mean such as are absolutely necessary to the Ends and Purposes of living well,
and attaining to a State of Happiness: And therefore if natural Reason cannot
pretend to furnish us in these Cases, she must subscribe to the Necessity of
Revelation.

Indeed, I am persuaded natural Reason, by a constant Habit of Thinking, and a
solemn Attention and Application of Mind, may make very lucky Conjectures, very
ample Discoveries, at least upon probable Evidences, and Convictions in very
important Truths: But God knows, as the Frame of Man now stands, we must
attribute such mighty Performances to a Work of Time, to the Labors, and
Observations of Ages; they can only be the Product of a few working Brains,
that by a peculiar Genius have sequestered themselves from secular Affairs, and
consecrated their Thoughts to the Observations of Humane Nature; and yet the
Whole at last amounts no higher than a few general Maxims, or Positions formed
from a happy Conjunction of their own Thoughts, and the Observations of their
Ancestors; and these often clash and interfere with those of their Brethren,
and consequently can carry no higher Authority or Character than Learned
Conjectures: And now since Reason and Experience demonstrate, as well as
dictate the Truth of these things, a revealed Canon seems to be absolutely
necessary for the Conduct of Mankind or the Attainment of that Happiness, which
the Light of natural Reason in a State of Innocence, would have otherwise
secured. A Revealed Canon was necessary, to silence the immortal Disputes of
the Learned, as well as inform the Illiterate, at an easy Expense of Time and
Thought. A Revealed Canon was necessary to give the most elaborate Discoveries
of Reason, the Authority of Laws, in as much as it was necessary they should be
ushered into the World with the highest Credentials of Divinity, and
established upon competent and express Rewards and Punishments.

But to conclude this Argument, Notwithstanding the utmost Seize of Human
Reason, I can see nothing to supersede the Necessity of Revelation, but what
will as effectually set aside the Necessity of Human Laws, and Civil
Government. It Is certain, That Laws of Nature, discoverable by natural Reason,
answer the general Ends and Intentions of Civil Government, and describe the
great Lines of Right and Wrong, Justice and Equity; they assert the Rights of
Property, as well as the Obligations of private Compacts: If therefore these
general Notices be not sufficient for the Conduct of Human Life, even in
secular Affairs; we cannot imagine, that the Discoveries of Natural Reason
should reach the whole Line of Duty, with respect to God, Ourselves, and
Neighbor. In a word, since after the highest Pretenses to a natural Light, it
was necessary to constitute Civil Governments, and entrust Men of Thought and
Parts to work off a Body of Laws, for the Conduct of Mankind in temporary
Concerns, by the nicest Consults, Debates, and Observations; how much more
necessary is it to receive a Digest of Laws from an Infalible, and Unerring
Hand to secure an Eternal, as well as Temporal Happiness?

. 4. Thus far we have advanced the Necessity of Revelation, in order to the
Discovery of the Line of Duty; but there is something more behind to improve
the Argument: For it is certain, we have hitherto represented the fairest Part
of the Landscape of Human Nature; I mean as it lies in a degenerate State: It Is
certain, it is not only clogged with those native Encrumbrances, and Propensions
derived from the Loins of our Ancestors, that weigh down the Activity of the
Mind, but we are all unfortunately brought forth in Impotence; and consequently
are forced to suck in the Superstition and Absurdities, as well as Impieties of
our Parents, of the present, as well as past Ages. These must unavoidably grow
up together with our Reason, and improve with the Strength and Vigor of our
Bodies; so that when we arrive to the Use of Reason, we have not only native
powerful Propensions, but as violent Prejudices to grapple with.

In the first Age of the World, where Men enjoyed the Instructions of our first
Parent, the Laws of Good and Evil, Virtue and Vice, were clear and legible; the
Stream was pure and untainted, when it just issued forth from the Fountain; but
by length of Tract, it gathered Filth and Mud; for every Age was a
Common-shore, to transmit all its Vices and Irregularities.

This was the case of the old World, as it is of a great part of this, at this
day; of miserable Indians, as well as hardened Antediluvians; the Imaginations
of whose Hearts by this means were to do evil continually, and their
Understandings being past feeling, were incurably darkened.

Now certainly, when Men happen to be born under such an unfortunate Climate,
where instead of living, they seem to be buried in an invincible State of
Ignorance; how is it possible they can ever be reduced to a Sense of Duty, or
act like Men, or Reasoning Beings, till they are enlightened by the convincing
Beams of Revelation? Whilst their Minds are enclosed in this State of Egyptian
Darkness, no Wonder if in the Sacred Language they should grope or seek after
the Lord, if happily they might feel him ought, and find him, though he be not
far from every one of us; and certainly, if the Case of some poor Wretches in
the World was so desperate, that they might easily miss the Discovery of a
Lawgiver, it is impossible they should form a Body of Laws, as an indispensable
Rule of Action. Who can therefore dispute the Necessity of a Revealed
Dispensation, when Mankind is reduced to such forlorn and dismal Circumstances,
any more than suppress and disown the surprising Graces, and Mercies of it?

. 5. Bur further, we may demonstrate the Necessity of Revelation from certain
Defects in Natural Religion, that are only to be supplied by Revelation; and by
this means we shall confirm and strengthen the preceding Arguments. And first
the Necessity of Revelation discovers it self in the Notion and Worship of a
GOD: It Is well known, though the Consideration of our own Frame, and of those
things without us, may by the Light of natural Reason induce the Belief of a
God; and, at least give us an imperfect Idea of his excellent Nature, yet
certainly the latter is not to be attained but by Men of Thought and
Observation. The unthinking Vulgar are ready to resemble the Godhead by Gold or
Silver, or Stone graven by Art, and Man's Device. But after the nicest
Discoveries, that natural Reason can pretend to, we can no where find the
Godhead represented in its true Graces and Perfections, but in the Book of
Revelation. Again, though Natural Reason must dictate, that God is to be
worshipped; yet to calculate the precise Way, and Manner of it, seems to exceed
the Sphere of its Activity: To worship God in a spiritual Manner by Prayer and
Thanksgiving, seems extremely reasonable, because highly consonant to his
blessed Nature; but yet had Revelation been silent, Reason, that is so much
immersed in Sense, and sensible Objects, would never have carried us much above
the gross, and scandalous Ways, and Rites of Heathen Worship. The whole World
in these Cases lay in Ignorance and Superstition; and therefore the Purity and
Honor of God seems to induce a kind of Necessity, or Obligation on him, to
make a Reform by a revealed Dispensation: It Is his Prerogative to determine
what Worship his Creatures shall pay him; and the actual Determination of it,
is the Business of Revelation.

Again, The Necessity of Revelation is abundantly expressed in the Enforcements
of Divine Laws: For though natural Reason might inform us, that Rewards and
Punishments are the inseparable Consequents of the Observance, or Violation of
Laws; yet it can never pretend to state the Nature, or Measure of 'em; and yet
this seems absolutely necessary to a due Enforcement of Laws, to secure an
Obedience agreeable to the general Intention of 'em. It Is the Prerogative of
every Lawgiver to assign proper Rewards and Punishments; and if the Supreme
Lawgiver of Mankind has not done it in a State of Nature, it is highly
necessary he should do it under a State of Revelation.

Lastly, I would fain know, whether natural Reason can make a complete, and
convincing Discovery of the History of the Creation, or that of the Fall, and
the dismal Consequences of it; of the Order of Spirits, and particularly of the
Malevolence of the wicked One and his Associates; of the Nature of the Soul,
and its Immortality; and of the Nature and Certainty of a Future State: These
are certainly Things of the highest Importance in the Affairs of Religion; and
though natural Reason, and a nice Thread of Thought might advance a great many
noble Speculations; yet we find the Learned discoursing of some of 'em, as a
kind of happy Presages, rather than established Truths. Nescio quomodo inhaeret
in mentibus quasi Saeculorum quoddam Augurium futurorum. [Sic. Tusc. Quaest.
Lib. 1. Tit. 4. p. 350.] And certainly nothing, besides the special
Communications of Heaven, could settle such weighty Points of Philosophy: These
alone were only able to silence the Eternal Disputes, and Distractions of the
Heathen Schools. The World viewed 'em but through a Glass darkly; but Revelation
presents 'em Face to Face. The World in these Cases was like the Men of Sodom,
struck with Blindness, and groping for the Door; the Key of Knowledge. They are
the Beams of Christianity, that are only powerful enough at once to melt off
the Scales, and convey a full Ray of Light into the Soul: It Is a Peculiar of
the Christian Institution, to display the Nature, and Certainty of a future,
and exceeding Recompense of Reward, and bring Life and Immortality to Light
through the Gospel. It Is another Peculiar, to present Mankind with a true
Landscape of 'emselves, and the Miseries of their former Condition; to display
the indefatigable Attacks of the Prince of the Power of the Air, the Spirit
that works powerfully in the Children of Disobedience, and the true Methods
of fencing against him: Are not these Discoveries of the highest Importance?
Are they not indispensably necessary to render us Favorites of Heaven, to
secure Peace and Safety in this World, and to conduct us to the Regions of
Happiness in another? If these things are so, to dispute the Necessity of
Revelation, is a greater Argument of the Iniquity of our Will, than Judgments,
since it is not want of Evidence or Conviction, but the weight of Baseness and
Ingratitude, that obliges us to reproach and quarrel with our Great Creator for
his inestimable Mercies.

. But further, another Argument of the Necessity of Revelation will arise from
the Mischiefs, which the Fall has brought on Mankind, in reference to Practice.
Indeed here an Original Corruption does sufficiently signalize it self; here it
discovers its Strength and Authority in a very remarkable manner. For it is the
general Complaint of Mankind, that the Animal Propensions weigh down the Soul
to that degree, that she is not able to pursue those Duties which she plainly
discovers to be such. The most exalted Heathen Moralists, the most improved
Asceticks always confessed their Impotence in Matters of Practice; they freely
acknowledged that their Actions fell infinitely short of their Informations, or
the Line of Duty. The Orator has long since observed, That the wisest Sages
among the Greeks, as well as Latins, could discourse and write upon Virtue
after a magnificent Manner, though they shamefully miscarried, where it was to be
reduced to Practice: Quibus cum facere non-possent, loqui tamen and scribere
honest and magnifice licebat. [Cic. Orat. pro. Coelio, p. 448. Ed. Land.] So
that it was not the Knavery of Priests, in filling the Heads of their People
with false Notions of the Deity, and their Worship with foolish Rites; or in
excluding Reason from having any thing to do with Religion, that obstructed the
Progress of Virtue, as a late Author on every turn has suggested, [See
Reasonableness of Christianity, p. 257, 264.] but the Corruptions of Human
Nature, that rendered the best Rules and Instructions almost useless. But now,
since Mankind seems to be placed under moral Impossibilities of acting pursuant
to the Lines of Duty; it is absolutely necessary such Provisions should be made,
as might put them into a Condition to bring their Actions in some Measure up to
the Line of Duty.

And, certainly, nothing less can secure so great a Work than a written Code,
and those Methods Providence has contrived to enforce the Observance of it. By
this means their Time and Thoughts will not be engrossed in deep Researches
after the Line of Duty; and consequently a competent Share of both may be
reserved in advancing Arts and Methods to enforce the Practice of it. By this
means the World enjoys a standing Order of Men, by Divine Appointment, whose
Office is not only to preserve the Line of Duty entire and incorrupt; but to
press and inculcate the Observance of it by all the Methods of Persuasion. By
this means the Overtures of spiritual Succors are ascertained, to facilitate
the Practice of Virtue; and certainly, where such unmerited Acts of Grace are
conferred, God may well be allowed to publish his own Canon, and require a
suitable Obedience to it, especially when the doing it is another Act of Grace,
and unspeakable Condescension.

. 7. But to proceed; the most convincing Argument, to represent the Necessity
of Revelation, derives from the Necessity of a Mediator. It Is abundantly
concluded, That the whole World lies in Wickedness; we certainly carry the
Seeds and Principles of Sin about us, that will bring forth Fruit unto Death:
or, A Law in our Members warring against the Law of our Minds, and bringing us
into Captivity, unto the Law of Sin.

This is not a piece of Spiritual Cant, invented by any Designing Leaders of an
Vnthinking Herd; we have traced it in it is Original; for by one Man Sin entered
into the World, and Death by Sin. And though the Sin of this one Man may not be
allowed to be the formal Sin of the whole World; yet the Seeds and Principles
of Sin, engendered by this Sin of one Man, and propagated in him through the
World, cannot be denied. In this Sense, at least, Death passed upon all, for
that all have sinned. In this Sense, all have sinned, and come short of the
Glory of God. In this Sense, the whole Race of Mankind were by Nature the
Children of Wrath. The Vengeance of Sin did undoubtedly hang over our Heads, in
a State of Nature; and consequently Deliverance and Safety can only be expected
in a State of Revelation. For, nothing but God, who is rich in Mercy, for the
great Love wherewith he has loved us, even when we were dead in our Sins, has
quickened us together with Christ; by this Grace we are Saved.

Natural Reason will inform us, That the Wages of Sin is Death; for since every
Sinner lies at the Foot of Infinite Mercy, the Methods of Redemption are lodged
in the Hands of God, to be established as he shall think fit to reveal himself.
If God intends a Redemption, infinitely more valuable than that Death which he
might have exacted in every Man's Person, he may rightfully pitch upon his own
Methods, and establish his own Laws of Redemption. The Wisdom and Purity of his
own blessed Nature would induce him to contrive a Redemption suitable to the
Nature of the Punishment, as well as Crime. He therefore resolved upon a
Substitute, or Mediator, and required Death for Death, Blood for Blood, even
the Blood of the Immaculate Lamb of God, a Sacrifice not only negatively Pure,
but of infinite inherent Worth and Value.

It was therefore absolutely necessary, God should communicate himself by some
special Revelations. The Condition of Mankind was such, that they must be
eternally miserable, without some special Communications, and Intercourses with
their Maker; and it was an Act of infinite Grace and Mercy, that God was
pleased to make his Proposals to his Offspring. This, certainly, introduces a
fresh Covenant between God and Man: God was obliged to signify all his
Proposals of Grace and Mercy, or the Riches of his Love, and consequently it
was not only extremely fit, but necessary, that he should give us an entire
Body of Laws, established on express Sanctions; and that these should remain as
inviolable Conditions on our part, to oblige him to make good all his Overtures
and Dispensations. Thus the necessity of Revelation is established upon a Train
of Causes, and issues forth of the certain Frame and Posture of Human Affairs
and Exigencies. Though Natural Reason could instruct us in the Line of Duty, and
we acted with Ingenuity and Abilities to regulate our Lives conformable to it;
yet, in as much as we have been Sinners, nothing less than a new Covenant
established in a Mediator, can entitle us to the Favor of God, or that
Happiness to which we were originally created. Let the Deist then ridicule the
revealed Dispensations of his Maker, as long as he pleases, there is nothing, as
yet, revealed, but what is wonderfully accommodated to the State and Condition
of Human Nature; nothing but what a Mind, that is not grown lewd, and wanton
with Lust, will acknowledge to be the Effect of Necessity, as well as infinite
Bounty; and he that disputes it, I Am persuaded, is embarked in the same Design
with the Psalmist's Fool, That has said in his Heart, There is no God.

. 8. I hope I have in some measure removed this mighty Objection; and,
certainly, nothing remains, but a short Return to the Absurdity, which our
Adversaries would throw upon us: If Revelation, say they, were necessary, God
must be obliged to have published it to the whole Race of Mankind. I Am
persuaded, there is no Necessity for Thought, or Art, to expose, or uncover the
Nakedness of this Objection. It Is abundantly concluded, That Man is the
Harbinger to his own Misery; and consequently it is an Act of Grace in God to
send Overtures of Deliverance. If he is the Sovereign Lord of Grace, as well in
respect of the Time, as the Measure and Extent of it; there is no Injustice in
confining it, either as to Time or Place: It Is sufficient that he has taken
competent Methods for publishing his own Dispensations, wherever he obliges
Mankind to the Conditions of it. Upon the whole then, Revelation is necessary,
and yet this Necessity does by no means interfere with a Law of Nature
antecedent to it.

The Reader is desired to make the following Amendments:
ADD and, line 23. p. 4. them, read Revelation, p. 6. l. 9. the r. this, p. 18.
l. 18. add an after and, p. 25. l. 16. omit of, p. 28. l. 12. omit if, p. 29.
l. 25. to r. of, p. 38. l. 4. add if, p. 39. l. 28. add en to graved, p. 43. l.
12. we r. he, p. 46. l. 12. Rev. r. Lev. p. 48. l. 19. of r. for, l. 22. ib.
add there are after and, p. 58. l. 25. add only after not, p. 89. l. 11.
Conscientiaa r. Conscientia, p. 92. dictate r. dictates, p. 114. l. 19.
Intrusion r. Invasion, p. 135. l. 7. add any after away, p. 136. l. 9. omit is,
p. 140. l. 9. add as after well, p. 140. l. 28. from r. the, p. 151. l. 26. yet
r. yes, p. 161. l. 19. omit though, p. 169. l. 22. add his before Offspring, p.
180. l. 1. Portion r. Notion, p. 185. l. 2. Natures r. Nature, p. 242. l. 8.
omit 28, p. 254.

In the Preface stand r. stands.

In the Introduction, omit Men, p. 2. l. 8. omit his, p. 8. l, 23. (...) r.
(...), for (...) r. (...), for (...) r. (...), for (...) r. (...), p. 11. (...)
r. (...), for (...) r. (...), for (...) r. (...), p. 12. (...) r. (...), for
(...) r. (...), for (...) r. (...), p. 13. Agreeably r. agreeable, p. 14. l. 8.
Author's r. Author, p. 16. l. 11. Principles r. Principle, p. 17. l. 8. omit to
after and, submitted r. subscribed, p. 16. l. 20, 21. or r. and l. 5. omit
more, l. 13. His Obedience r. Disobedience, l. 16. p. 19. Omit all after we, p.
22. l. 9. Or r. on, p. 24. l. 10. They r. Men, p. 27. l. 9. Sic r. Cic, p. 36.
l. 25. Weight r. height, p. 38. l. 4. Omit the after of, p. 44. l. 20.

THE Grounds and Foundation OF Natural Religion, ASSERTED.
CHAP. I. A Law of Nature antecedent to Revelation.
AND first for the Divine Authority of a Law of Nature antecedent to
Revelation, I shall appeal to the Voice of Scripture, as an Argument to those
that own the Truth and Divinity of it. For when the Gentiles, which have not
the Law, do by Nature the Things contained in the Law, these having not the
Law, are a Law unto themselves; which show the Work of the Law written in their
Hearts, their Conscience also bearing Witness, and their Thoughts, the mean
while, accusing, or else excusing one another, Romans 2.15, 16. It Is manifest
when our Apostle tells us of a Gentile Law engraven on the Heart, here is a Law
distinguished from a Law of Revelation: For the Gentiles having not the Law,
(no doubt the revealed Law of God, and particularly the Jewish Law) are a Law
unto themselves. It was not a Law that rested on Patriarchal Revelations, or a
Law given by Inspiration, but a Law engraven on the Heart, peculiar to
Heathens, or Men in a pure State of Nature; and consequently no revealed Law.
For by virtue of it, they did by Nature (not Grace) the things contained in the
Law; that is, upon the Evidence and Convictions of Natural Reason, not on the
Authority of any external Revelations. For whilst the Gentiles did by Nature
the things contained in the Law, they show the Work of the Law written in their
Hearts; that is, they had a Rule of Action, implanted in the very Frame and
Constitution of their Natures, which answered to all the Designs and Intentions
of a Law, or rather carried in it all the Properties, as well as Force, and
Efficacy of a Law: For the Work and Business of a Law, is to prescribe between
Good and Evil, Just and Unjust; to direct us in the precise Line of Duty, and
enforce the Observance of it by suitable Rewards and Punishments; and if the
Gentiles have this by Nature, they are in a strict and proper Sense a Law unto
themselves, even without the concurrence of Revelation. Indeed the Apostle
elegantly represents the Force, and Authority, as well as Sanction of the Law,
when he tells us, that Conscience gives testimony to this Law, (...), and, as
it were, confirms, and ratifies it as a Law, or Rule of Action, which answers
to the first Office of Conscience, by the Learned called (...). The Sanction
follows from the second Office of Conscience, called (...), which consists in
the Application of our Actions to the Rule, and passing Sentence upon ourselves
for it; and their Thoughts mean while accusing, or excusing one another. From
the words it is manifest there is a Law of Nature, or a Rule of Action given by
God, by which he, at least, originally designed to govern Mankind antecedent to
all positive Laws, whether Divine or Humane.

Nay, it is not only a Law designed for Man in his original Frame, but a Law
that maintains its Force and Authority, even in the lapsed State of Mankind.
For it is manifest, the Apostle speaks of the Gentiles as they then lay (and all
the World too) in a depraved corrupted State. They were undoubtedly under a
Law, though without any revealed Law, and that too, under the highest force and
efficacy of it: For the Apostle expressly determines the case, For as many (of
the Gentile World) as have sinned without Law, shall also perish without Law.
v. 12.

However, thus far it is indisputably evident, that the Heathen World was under
a Law, or an Indispensable Rule of Action, or Duty, and we are abundantly
assured, that it was distinct from any revealed Law; since Scripture in other
places expressly fixes the Duties of Natural Religion, in an evidence that
results from the Works of Providence, the Dictates of Natural Reason, not in
any revealed Traditions. Thus St. Paul, and his Associate, speaking of the
Gentile State, Nevertheless he left not himself without Witness, (no doubt
sufficient to instruct them in their Duty) in that he did good, and gave us
Rain from Heaven, and fruitful Seasons, filling our Hearts with Food and
Gladness, Acts 14. v. 17. And again, The Wrath of Heaven is revealed against
all ungodliness; because that which may be known of God is manifest in them,
for God has showed it unto them. For the invisible things of him from the
Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are
made. Romans 1.18, 19, 20. I know the learned Dr. Hammond appropriates this
latter Passage to the Gnostics, but against the whole current of Commentators:
And indeed the Context, both before and after, carries such peculiar Characters
in it, as renders it absurd to fix it upon any but the Heathen World. If so,
it is evident they are the things that are made, and Rain and fruitful Seasons,
that are Witnesses, and show forth to us, that which may be known of God, or
the lines of Natural Religion.

So that the Works of Nature and Providence are our Instructors, not the Voice
of Revelation. Here Is not the least Hint of any Traditional Conveyances, the
Works of Nature carry an Evidence in them; but they are the Reflections of
Natural Reason upon them, that draw the Conclusion and form a Duty from them;
so that whatever Difficulties, or Impossibilities some Men may suggest from the
Imperfections, and Weaknesses of Natural Reason in decyphering a Law of Nature,
it is evident, the Sacred Oracles have given it no other Foundation or Original.
And this is Conviction sufficient to silence all other Arguments in those that
subscribe to the Truth and Divinity of them.

And for those that reject it, I shall, pursuant to the Mind of our Apostle,
endeavor to prove a Law of Nature, implanted in the Minds of Men, as Rational
Beings, and consequently, originally designed, as a perpetual Standard and
Measure of their Actions.

This I shall endeavor to perform, 1st, By proving, that Man is naturally a
Thinking, Reasoning Being. 2dly, That Man naturally Thinks and Reasons in a
fixed determinate way. 3dly, That by the exercise of Reason, and the condition
of his Nature, he can discern the Subject Matter of the Laws of Nature. And
4thly, That he discovers it as the Subject Matter of a true and proper Law,
established on a competent Authority, by discerning and receiving it as the
Command of God.

. 2. And 1st, That Man is by Nature a Thinking, Reasoning Being.

Indeed, that an Order of Rational Creatures, can of 'emselves exert the Powers
of Reason, seems to be a Proposition, that carries its own Evidence in the
Terms of it. And to imagine a Creation of Rational Powers and Faculties, and
that too ascribed to an infinitely wise Creator, and yet deny an inherent Power
of exerting 'emselves, seems to reflect the highest Folly and Disgrace upon the
Contrivance. For it either represents Infinite Power and Wisdom, displaying
'emselves, as we say, in vain, or to no purpose, or laboring under the
greatest Imperfections. It represents the great Exemplar of a Creative Power,
to be little else than a senseless, unactive sort of Machin, whose Efforts
entirely depend on foreign Impulses; and the express Image and Representative
of a glorious Creator, in one sense, to be of a baser Alloy than the unthinking
Brutes that perish: Since these, in their original Frame, were made to exert
those Powers and Faculties God thought fit to impart to 'em. But Man must by no
means act like himself, or display any of his Natural Powers and Faculties,
unless he has the good Fortune to be Born under the Influence of a skilful
Tutor, and a polished Education. But certainly this is a Conjecture void of any
shadow of Reason. For whosoever considers the Activity of the Souls of Men, (a
Truth I think of universal allowance and approbation) cannot imagine, that Men,
even in this State, should not be capable of perceiving, discerning, comparing,
or thinking at all. But that we may proceed with greater Clearness in these
Matters, let us endeavor to strip Mankind of all the Embelishments of
Education, and turn 'em into the pure Garb of Nature; and thereupon let us, for
once, suppose a Set of Men sprung up like Mushrooms in an instant, and placed
in an unpeopled Island in their full growth and vigor. Some, perhaps, in this
case, are so fond of attributing the whole Product of Humane Knowledge to the
Business of Education, that they would deny them the Power of exerting one
Faculty peculiar to a Rational Being without it. But certainly this is a Notion
highly improbable, if we consider, that the great Reason why our Infant State
discovers such faint Glimpses of Thought or Reason, is not so much from any
native Obstructions in the Mind, or an Indisposition of her Faculties, in
receiving and forming Idea's, but from unknown Indispositions of the Animal
Part. For the Souls of Men being to act through Flesh and Blood, or Material
Vehicles, no wonder if they do not exert 'emselves till these are thoroughly
fixed and settled, that is, before they arrive at a due state of Maturity, or a
suitable Disposition or Temperament: And therefore were Men to enter upon the
World under an exact Disposition of the Animal Part, it is highly probable the
Faculties of the Rational Part would exert 'emselves with wonderful vigor and
expedition. Indeed it must be confessed, that Idea's will be collected, and
Principles settled at a much slower rate, where they are only gained by a Man's
single Observation and Experience, than where the Instructions of Parents and
Tutors contribute to the Improvement. By this Means the Observations and
Seize of past Ages are presented in an established Method and Order, and
added to our own Experience, and consequently the growth of Idea's will be more
quick, clear, and lasting. But yet when the Organs of Sense are rightly fixed
and disposed, and the Mind lies under no real Encumbrances or Eclipses, it is
ridiculous to imagine, that it cannot exert itself by its own native Light and
Activity, in all its Powers and Faculties: and we may as well affirm, that a
Man would not walk or perform any other indifferent Actions, as a sensitive
Creature, without Instruction; as affirm, that he could not think and exert all
the Powers of Reason, without special Inspiration, Revelation, or Instruction.
It Is visible there are certain Springs or Movements implanted in the Frame of
Nature, that serve to put all Native Powers and Faculties into their proper
Motions: And therefore we must conclude, that a Rational Soul, or a Soul framed
for Reason, must act agreeably to its original Frame, and discover itself in
all the Functions of Thought and Reason. It Is certain, the great Law of
Self-preservation, a quick and piercing Sense of Pleasure and Pain, and the
incessant Desires of Ease and Happiness, which, strictly speaking, are rather
Natural Instincts implanted in all Sensitive Beings, than Laws peculiar to Free
Agents, will serve as forcible Springs to every Native Power or Faculty, and
furnish 'em with suitable Objects, as well as prompt 'em to exert upon 'em; and
consequently if Rational Faculties in their Original Frame are fitted for
Thought and Reason, they will by an Intrinsic Impulse exert in all the Parts
and Offices of 'em. And therefore, to have recourse to the Instance already
given, we may justly conclude, that mere Salvages would not only fall to
Thinking, but after a few Interviews, form Signs, and Words, and Language,
apply 'emselves to the settling of all the Instruments of Reason and Knowledge.
I Am persuaded, few will deny, that Man by his Natural Powers could form Words
and Language, and Words necessarily suppose Idea's and Thoughts. To conclude
this Argument then, As Man, by a Law of his Creator, is peculiarly fitted with
Organs for Speech and Language, so is he endued with Faculties of Reason; and
since he is capable of exerting the one in all its Designs and Functions, we may
justly allow him the same Abilities in exerting the other; and, in one word, it
derogates from the Wisdom of God, to endue a Creature with Noble Powers and
Faculties, and not put him into a condition to exert 'em. Therefore we may
conclude, that as Man, by a native Endowment, can see, and hear, and speak, he
can likewise think and reason, which is the First General proposed in order to
establish a Law of Nature.

. 3. I proceed to the Second, which is to prove, That we think and reason in a
fixed and determinate way. And certainly this is a Truth so clear and evident,
that it does not admit of any color of dispute: For otherwise I cannot
conceive why we may not question the Perception of the Senses, as well as that
of the Mind. The outward Senses, in most Cases, are a kind of Perspectives to
the Mind: and the Mind must certainly receive its Notices from the Impressions
which outward Objects make upon them; and if Objects make an Impression upon
the outward Senses suitable to the Nature of 'em, they must do the same upon
the Mind too. So that the first Act of the Mind, that of Perception, must
necessarily be regular, and unalterable; for it is a Faculty of receiving the
Impressions of outward Objects, and of framing Idea's suitable to the nature of
'em; insomuch that where the Object is rightly applied and attended to, the
Idea is as certain and unalterable, as Colors to the Eye, or Heat and Cold to
the Touch. But now, as the Powers of Perception are certain and unalterable, so
are the Powers of Reason; at least in the original frame of 'em.

For Reason, being nothing but the comparing of two or more Idea's to gain a
third, or form certain Conclusions and Deductions from 'em; as long as the
Perception is regular and correct, Reason must be so too; especially where
there is a due Application of the Object or Idea, and attention of Mind too.
Indeed that the Reason of Mankind is fixed and certain, or acts in a true and
regular Sphere, is evident from a Complication of Arguments.

As 1st, It cannot be imagined why Reason should not be established upon
certain Rules and Measures, as well as all other Powers of the Creation; and
it is a manifest Reproach cast upon the Author of Nature to allow, that the Laws
and Appetites of the Vegetative and Animal Part of the World should be fixed
and regular, and that the Powers and Faculties of the Rational Part of the
Creation a random kind of Ordinance, altogether precarious and uncertain. But
then, whosoever allows God to be the Author of our Beings, God to be the
Standard of Wisdom and Reason, and the Reason of Mankind to be an immediate
Transcript of it, must conclude, that Reason is established upon fixed Measures
and Principles. For God is unalterable in all his Measures and Workings; his
Wisdom and Reason is uniform and invariable, consistent with it self; and that
Reason he has imparted to any of his Creatures, and consequently the Reason of
Mankind must correspond with all this in a lower degree or proportion. So that
where all Impediments are removed, where Idea's or Objects are presented to the
View of the Mind, and the Mind closely attends to 'em, the Appearance of Things
must be the same everywhere; I mean in every Intelligent Being. The Reason of
one Man must be the Reason of every Man, and the Reason of Men must be the
Reason of God and Angels too. This, perhaps, would be allowed to be an
unquestionable Truth, had Man retained the Primitive Luster and Perfection of
all his Intellectual Faculties; or were not false Idea's suggested, and true
ones disguised by the Corruptions and Exorbitances of the Animal Part. But
certainly this does not destroy but perplex the Workings of Reason; it
discovers the Imperfections and Difficulties, not the Uncertainty of Reason;
the Mind is by this means often called off, and deprived of that Application
and Attention, which is indispensably required in the Disquisition of Things,
and particularly in the Discovery as well as Observance of all Laws. But when
these are secured, I mean when there is a due Application and Attention
maintained, Reason will be the same in a depraved and degenerate State, as it
was in a State of Innocence. Indeed I Am persuaded the true. Reason why Man
under a degenerate State is so much affected in his Intellectuals, is the
Violence and Exorbitance of the Animal Appetites, whereby the Mind is called
off from deliberating the true Nature of Things, and consequently determins in
conformity to 'em upon any plausible Suggestions and Appearances; or if she has
conceived true Idea's, yet they are in a great measure suppressed and stifled
by the Impulses of Lust, and she carried away by the powerful Overtures of a
present Pleasure. But I do not find, that the Mind in this State is absolutely
disabled from discerning the true Nature of Things or Actions. The Sallies of
the Animal Part are not always so powerful, but there are certain Minutes or
Intervals wherein she may attend to, and deliberate upon peculiar Objects; and
consequently compare and form just Conclusions, according to the Measures of
right Reason: So that we may, without Derogation to any State of Grace, affirm,
That we are not under absolute Impossibilities in Decyphering the Line of Duty
by strict Reasonings, though we may be destitute of Native Strength, to
maintain an Uniform or Steady Practice. Thus much the Christian Institutions
warrant and confirm, when the Heathen World is concluded under Actual Sin, and
as many as have sinned without Law, are doomed to perish without Law. For no
one will be damned for Impossibilities. But after all, should we allow, that
the Economy of Reason, in this lapsed State, is very much shaken and
dissolved; so that all our Reasonings are very precarious and uncertain; yet we
cannot but conclude, that it was originally established upon fixed Rules and
Principles; and consequently, that we were formed by an Intrinsic Power and
Efficacy, to exert every Faculty in such a manner, as would enable us to answer
all those Ends and Designs that God has laid upon us as Men and Reasonable
Creatures. And this is sufficient to expose the Assertion of our Adversaries,
that will have all our Notices enter the Soul, as it were, by Chance, that is,
by Revealed Tradition, Education, or Instruction. It Is manifest they do not
reject our Seize of this kind upon the Argument of Native Depravities,
but upon the Argument of Native Imperfections: In as much as the Soul, being
Rasa Tabula, is equally prepared to receive contradictory Impressions; and
consequently its Native Powers and Faculties imply nothing but a Capacity to
receive the Informations or Instructions of others. Upon the whole then, since
it is concluded, that the original Economy of Reason is even (in a lapsed
State) only veiled and sullied, not wholly defaced; we may still affirm, that
the Soul retains a Faculty of Thinking and Reasoning in an established way:
Insomuch, that when Objects are fairly presented to the Mind, and the Mind
dwells and deliberates upon 'em, she will still be determined according to the
Nature, Properties, and Agreement or Disagreement of the things 'emselves. And
therefore we are thus far advanced toward a Law of Nature, that we are acted
by a Principle which serves to steer and direct us in the disquisition of the
Subject Matter of a Law or Rule of Action, and that too such a Rule as serves
as a Law, not only to particular Persons, but to the whole Species. For since
it is concluded, that Man is acted by a Principle that naturally Thinks,
Perceives, and Reasons, and this Thought, Reason, and Perception is founded
upon uniform Measures and Principles, it must prescribe in common to the whole
Species, as well as particular Persons.

. 4. The next Inquiry is the Subject Matter of the Law of Nature, how this
arises, and is discovered to us so as to form a Law upon it: And 1st, To state
the Matter with greater clearness, give me leave to have recourse to the
Instance already assigned, that of Savages, placed in the World without the
Bias of Education or Instruction upon 'em. It Is already concluded, that Men,
even in this pure State of Nature, are Thinking, Reasoning Beings; and it may
reasonably be imagined, that the great Law of Self-preservation, or an
incessant Desire of Ease and Happiness, will be the Spring and Movement to
their first Thoughts and Reasonings. This, as has been already observed, is
rather a Natural Instinct, implanted in all Sensitive Beings, than a Law given
to free Agents. For every Individual, that is capable of Pleasure or Pain, is
violently disposed to secure his own Preservation; and therefore those Beings
that are endowed with Rational Powers and Faculties, and can Think, Deliberate,
and Examine the Nature of Things, will certainly turn the Mind upon 'emselves,
and engage their first Thoughts in surveying the Nature and Condition of their
Beings. For without some knowledge of this kind, it is impossible they should
apply themselves to the true methods of Self-preservation. And hence, no doubt,
arises the Subject Matter of the Law of Nature. For certainly all those Laws,
which have justly obtained the Name or Character of Laws of Nature, are formed
from the Consideration of Ourselves, or which is the same thing, from the
Consideration of the Nature and Circumstances of our Beings, compared with
those things that are without us. That this is not a groundless Conjecture, the
Rule of Social Virtues established by our Blessed Savior, and advanced by the
best Moralists, sufficiently attests: Whatsoever you would that Men should do
unto you, do you that also unto them. Here Is a manifest Appeal to ourselves;
and consequently implies a strict survey of our Nature, and the relation we
stand in to other Beings, as well as of our own Wants and Necessities. And
certainly, whosoever turns his Mind and Thoughts upon himself, and considers
his own Frame and Original, his Dependences and Methods of Subsistence, will
presently furnish himself with Matter enough to make up the Laws of both
Tables; those we owe to God, and those we owe to Men. A little Thought will
instruct us, that we were formed by some first Cause, who must be infinite in
all his Attributes and Perfections: And as little Thought and Observation, that
this first Cause implanted certain Passions in our Natures; such as Love and
Hatred, Hope and Fear, and all the intermediate ones; such as Admiration,
Tenderness and Compassion, as well as Anger, Aversion and Fury; and
consequently we must conclude, that the Author of Nature has adapted them to
peculiar Objects, and appointed 'em to special Ends and Purposes. And from
hence we have a clear view of those Duties we owe to God; such as Love,
Worship, Fear, Reverence, Trust and Dependence: For the consideration of a
Creator, and our dependence on him as Creatures, will instruct us, that we are
to devote the chiefest of those Powers, Faculties, or Passions he has implanted
in us, to his Service and Honor. Again, for the Laws of the Second Table, the
consideration of the methods of our Subsistence will instruct us, that we are
in a great measure maintained by foreign Aids and Succors, that we subsist
upon the Art and Blessings of Labor, as well as Nature; and these are to be
carried on by Creatures that can Reason, Think, and Project as we do: And this
will prompt us to Society, and engage us to apply ourselves to those Creatures
that most resemble ourselves, and are most capable of serving or administering
outward Goods and Blessings to us. The necessary methods of Subsistence, and
the condition of our Natures will presently instruct us in the Rights of
Property; and consequently give us a view of the Necessity of Promises,
Compacts or Engagements, and our indispensable Obligations to maintain and
execute 'em. And from all these Notices results the Law of universal Justice.
We cannot kill nor assault the Persons of our Neighbors, because it is a
wounding or stabbing our selves; since it cuts off that Circulation of
Blessings we live by. We cannot spoil or plunder the Goods of our Neighbor,
because that affects us in the same manner as that of Murder. To proceed,
hence result the Laws of universal Love, Tenderness and Compassion: For we find
these Passions implanted in the Frame of our very Natures; And where can we
think to fix and exert them better, than on those that contribute to our
Subsistence? This naturally begets a Sense of Benefits, and those of Love and
Compassion. In a word, Self-preservation suggests Self-love, and a Tenderness,
and Kindness toward ourselves; and consequently it will exercise the very same
Affections to the benefit of others. For since Love, Tenderness, and
Compassion, are the most powerful Engagements to link others to our Interest,
and our Interest and Welfare rests upon the Welfare of others; to be kind,
compassionate and loving to others, is to be so to ourselves. These are Laws
recorded in such legible Characters, that the Subject Matter of 'em has
discovered itself to mere Savages, that sprung up like Mushrooms, though there
were no such Relation as Husband and Wife, Parent or Children, or in a word,
were no way allied or dependent but by the common Condition and Principles of
Humanity. Here needs no long Train of Thoughts, Consequences and Deductions,
whereby the Mind under the highest Improvements is often bewildred, overset and
confounded. The common Necessities of our Natures and the condition of our
Beings, forcibly direct us to the discovery; a single Inference will give us a
full view: So that were the Mind left to her own native Exercitations, before
she had contracted a Bias from Example, or a vicious Education, they must
unavoidably appear in some of her first and earliest Reasonings. Indeed I will
not affirm, that every one in this case could discover the Subject Matter of
the prime Laws of Nature, in that Train of Thought, or from those very Topics
and Arguments that are here projected. It Is sufficient if they are natural and
obvious, and carry an Evidence suitable to what they are applied and are
designed to prove. There may a thousand Arguments suggest the same thing, and
therefore it is not material which way we come by it. That which is most
considerable is, that it appears the Subject Matter of the Laws of Nature, lies
upon the Surface, and offers itself to the first Dawnings of Reason: It is as
fixed and certain as the first workings of Reason (for both result from the
established Frame or Nature of Things) and is mixed with the prime Ends and
Interests of our Beings; and we must first change the Course of Nature, and new
model the Creator as well as the Creature, and give new Faculties, new
Passions, and new Beings, before the Matter of the Laws of Nature can be
changed. Thus we have advanced a considerable way in the Proof of a Law of
Nature; since it appears we are acted by a uniforn Principle within, that is
able to furnish us with the Subject Matter of Laws or Rules of Action.

. 5. But now, since the Subject Matter of Laws is fixed and determined, the last
Requisite to give any thing the Character of a Law, is to establish it upon a
competent Authority, whereby the Counsels and Dictates of Reason are advanced
into indispensable Rules of Action. It Is certain Reason is the sovereign
Principle of the Man; and consequently if she pleases, may pass an Obligation
upon all her own Decrees, as far as concerns the particular Person, where she
presides. But she cannot pass an Obligation upon other Persons, without some
binding Authority, that presides over her and them too; and consequently cannot
establish a Law of Nature, which carries an Obligation, that extends to the
whole Species; this supposes an Authority superior to that of particular
Persons. Again, the natural Conveniences, and Inconveniences of things may
engage us to embrace and pursue particular Dictates of Reason; but these
Dictates of Reason may not be a binding, and indispensable Rule of Action; so
as to render us criminal in case we do not pursue, and embrace them; which is
the Purport, and Business of all Laws. And therefore, before these Dictates of
Reason are to be received as true and proper Laws; we must prove, that they are
imposed by a competent Authority, an Authority that has a Right to impose a
Rule of Action upon us; an Authority that has a Right to impose the Dictates of
Reason as a Rule of Action, and that this Authority has actually imposed 'em as
Laws, and consequently, the Non-observance of 'em must bring Guilt and
Punishment upon us. These are all Positions that must appear in the workings of
Natural Reason, before any Dictates of Reason can pass for Laws of Nature. Now
this will abundantly appear by placing the Authority of Laws of Nature in the
Author of Nature; for though that which we call Reason or Conscience, is the
Lawgiver, that immediately prescribes, determines, and fixes the Obligation of
our Actions; yet this is but a delegated Authority, derived from the Author of
Nature, the very Author of Reason and Conscience, and our very Beings too. So
that Reason acts by the Authority of a Vicegerent, but the Original Sovereignty
derives from God, or the Author of Nature. Natural Reason and Conscience is but
a Lawgiver, like Moses that delivered the Law to the People; but the original
Authority is seated within the Cloud of Glory, and the Divine Nature; whose
Face no Mortal can behold, and live: That there is a God, and an Author of
Nature, the consideration of ourselves will abundantly evince; and the Right of
God's Authority in imposing Laws, and particularly in assigning Reason and
Conscience a power of giving Laws, cannot be disputed. For he that gave us our
Being, may rightfully assign the Laws of our Being. Therefore we sufficiently
prove the Authority of Laws of Nature, if we can prove that God, as our
Creator, has appointed certain Dictates of Reason for an indispensable Rule of
Action to Mankind. And certainly this is a Position almost Self-evident; for it
follows from the bare Allowance and Consideration of the Author of Nature. If
Natural Reason assures us that God made us, and not we ourselves, we must
conclude, that we have the Strokes and Lineaments of Infinite Wisdom set forth
in us. For, the Works of Nature and Providence, are no less an effect of
Infinite Wisdom, than Power: For in Wisdom has he made them all. And if it was
Infinite Wisdom that induced a Creator to give us such a peculiar Model,
whereby we are distinguished from the rest of his Creatures, the same Infinite
Wisdom must intend we should act and govern ourselves by it. The Intention of
the Lawgiver is as much expressed by reasonable Creatures, acting upon
Dictates of Reason, as by the Powers and Tendences of Inanimate Beings pursuing
the Course and Order of Nature. He has given Laws to the Waves of the Sea,
that they may not pass; and to the Sun that knows his going down, Psalm. 104.
v. 18, 19. And shall not Man, the Glory of his Maker, and the proper Subject of
a free and valuable Obedience, be obliged by the Laws of his Creation; and make
that the Rule of Action, which Infinite Wisdom has made the Mark or
Characteristick of his Being; whereby he is distinguished from the inferior
Classes of the Creation, as well as Evidences of his Creator's Honor and
Glory? In a word, since God perpetually acts by the Dictates of Infinite Wisdom
and Goodness, his own Institutions or Ordinances are an indisputable Evidence
of his most sacred Will and Pleasure; and the Laws of all his Creatures are as
amply recorded in that Frame and Constitution he has given 'em, (being all as
much bound to act by 'em) as if he had recorded 'em on Tables of Stone. For
it is a Record engraved on Nature, and consequently will be preserved as long as
Nature has a Being. These are Notices that offer 'emselves to the first
Dawnings of Reason, or, at least, flow in upon an Assent to this fundamental
Truth, that we are the Product or Workmanship of an All-wise and Almighty
Creator.

. 6. But further, the Authority of Laws of Nature is evident from the Ends and
Designs of Created Nature.

And 1st, As Natural Reason instructs us, That there is a wise and intelligent
Author of Nature, even the Author of that very Faculty we call Reason, which
suggests thus much to us; we must conclude, that he neither gave Being to that
nor any thing else, without annexing some special Ends and Designs to it. If
therefore, to pursue the Dictates of reasonable Creatures, can only secure
those Ends for which we were created reasonable Creatures, the Dictates of
Reason must carry the Authority and Obligation of Laws in 'em: But now should
we pronounce one special End of Man's Creation to be the Manifestation of his
Honor and Glory, and particularly the Exemplification of his Wisdom and Power;
it is manifest the only way to answer this Design, is to exert those surprising
Faculties God has bestowed.

Again, If God did create Man a reasonable Being to make him capable of
Happiness, and put him into a condition of attaining it; It Is certain he
designed him for Happiness by implanting such incessant Desires after it; and
its certain there is no way of attaining Happiness, but by pursuing the strict
Dictates of Reason. Happiness can consist in nothing but the perfection of our
Natures, or in a resemblance of their primitive Model, and the great Original
they represent: And it is Reason alone, and a course of Action advanced upon it,
that can exhibit this Happiness in its true Lineaments and Proportions.

In a Word, Were Happiness carried no further than the welfare of the Animal
Part; It Is certain, that Temperance, that Friendship, that Generosity, and that
Justice, which Natural Reason, from the very frame and condition of our
Natures, suggests and prescribes, are the only Instruments for securing it;
therefore we must conclude, since an All-wise and Almighty Creator could not
act Blindfold; since he assigned every Order of Creatures peculiar Ends, and
established a general End from all of 'em; and since an Allwise Creator must be
concerned to have those Ends answered, which he has assigned; Reason must be a
Rule and a Standard of Action in all Reasonable Creatures; without which the
Ends and Designs of Reasonable Creatures cannot be attained. And thus we have
the Intention of the Lawgiver evinced from the Ends and Designs of reasonable
Creatures.

. 7. There is one Argument more that proves the Obligation and Authority of
Laws of Nature, and certain Dictates of Reason to be such; and that is, From
the consideration of Rewards and Punishments that flow from 'em.

It Is well known that Rewards and Punishments are an inseparable Appendage of a
Law, and where we are not only directed by a lawful Authority, that this or
that thing is to be done, but Rewards are annexed to the doing of it, and
Punishments to the omission of it, or at least doing the contrary, there the
Authority is expressed and represented; and consequently the thing directed is
proposed as a Law or Rule of Action. But now it is already concluded, that those
Dictates of Reason which necessarily arise from the Frame and Condition of our
Natures, carry inseparable Rewards in 'em, and the Violation of 'em entails
inseparable Mischiefs or Punishments upon us; and therefore such Dictates of
Reason do as evidently declare the Intention of the Lawgiver, and the
Obligation of Laws, as if we were told it by an audible Voice from Heaven: And
thus we have asserted the Authority of Laws of Nature, being the last Requisite
assigned for the Proof of 'em. And, truly, there are so many Arguments suggest
it, that we may as well deny that we can Think by Nature, as be ignorant of the
Authority of Laws of Nature.

. 8. But, after all that has been said concerning the Authority of Laws of
Nature, some perhaps will imagine that the Arguments already suggested, are
rather the Improvements of Reason, under a State of Revelation, and the
Discipline of a civilized Education, than the Discoveries of Reason, in a pure
State of Nature. I must confess, it is difficult to distinguish the pure
Efforts of Natural Reason from those Improvements she receives from Revelation,
and a polished Education; but certainly we may appeal to Revelation itself, for
the Authority of Laws of Nature, and particularly that the Dictates of Natural
Reason are to be the Measure and Standard of our Actions. For, first,
Conscience we know is the Result and Decree of Reason; and this is advanced to
such an absolute Sovereignty in the Christian Institution, that we cannot
reject the Instructions of an erroneous Conscience, without entailing Sin and
Guilt upon us. For even to Heathens and Unbelievers, Whatsoever is not of Faith
is Sin; and certainly it amounts to a Demonstration, That if God has given no
other Rule to Reasonable Beings, but Reason to act by, we must conclude, that
Reason must be the Standard of Action; and consequently every one is under an
Indispensable Obligation of pursuing it, unless we can imagine we are not to
exert Actions peculiar to our Nature, or that God has not as industriously
distinguished the Actions of Men from those of Brutes, as their Souls and Shape
too. In a word, whosoever owns the Truth and Authority of the Christian
Institutions, must discern the Truth and Authority of Laws of Nature; for he
may plainly read both in the great End and Design of Christianity; for the
whole Economy of Grace consists in restoring the Economy of Nature, and
renewing that Image of our Minds, in which we were created; or which is the
same thing, in the Apostle's Language, In being renewed in Knowledge after the
Image of him that created him, Col. 3.10. In a word, Christianity is the
putting on the New Man, which, after God, is created in Righteousness and true
Holiness; and the putting on the New Man, is the putting on the first Man that
was formed after the Image of God, in Righteousness and true Holiness;
therefore we must conclude, that Model which God impressed on our Nature was
designed to be a Law, and a Rule, or Standard to our Actions, and consequently
the Powers of Natural Reason, would have thought it to be a Law, had Revelation
never interposed in the Matter. Thus we have proved, that there is a Law of
Nature, even in all the Circumstances and Formalities of a Law; it is a Law
distinct from the Law of Revelation, since it arises, and is discovered to us
by pure Dint of Natural Reason; it is a true and proper Law, for it contains the
Matter and Form of a proper Law, the Subject Matter is fixed and determined. It
has the Form of a Law, because it determines what is to be done, and that too
upon a just and competent Authority, and when all this is granted, it gives us
the Sanctions of a Law, I mean Rewards and Punishments. For if Reason dictates
certain indispensable Rules of Action, from the Authority, Will and Pleasure of
a Sovereign Creator, Reason must, besides those natural Rewards and Punishments
that accompany the Observance of such Rules, at least acknowledge, That the
Non-observance of 'em, must bring Guilt and Punishment upon us. And therefore I
see nothing wanting (notwithstanding Mr. Hobbs's Notions of a Law) to give it
the Title and Denomination of a proper Law. For it is as much, Vox imperantis,
and as truly promulg'd, as if it had been recorded in Writing, or engraved on
Tables of Brass.

CHAP. II. Objections Answered.
IT now only remains, that something be offered to take off the Force of those
Objections, that are advanced against this Hypothesis, of a Law of Nature
exclusive of Revelation. The Sum of which is, in a few words, this:

Whatsoever has been hitherto attributed to the Powers of Natural Reason, seems
to exist no where but in the Imaginations of Speculative Men. For not only the
Lives and Opinions of Heathen Nations, but of the most eminent Moralists and
Philosophers have overturned the Scheme, and passed off the Stage of the World
under the Conduct of quite opposite Notions. This is an Objection that will
fall in with other parts of this Discourse, and consequently will require
something of a Return under each respective Head; but that I may lay a
Foundation for a clear and distinct Answer, I shall take liberty to make a few
Remarks upon the Origin of Error.

. 1. And, first, it is a very unquestionable Truth, that the Errors of Mankind
are originally founded in vicious Habits or Immoralities; or to speak in other
Terms, the Seeds of this kind of Corruption are certainly lodged in the
Propensions and Habits of the Animal Part. For that which has such an Ascendent
over us, to command us to Act in favor of it, will infallibly influence our
Judgments. This is so obvious, that in wilful Enormities, I mean such as were
first committed against the Convictions of the Mind, the Power of Animal
Propensions, Assiduity of Practice, and a kind of Natural Intimacy or
Familiarity resulting from it, has at last engaged Reason itself to appear as
an Advocate for it; and very often it makes such elaborate Researches for
Arguments to support the Cause, that at last it declares for the Justice and
Innocence of it, and asserts it upon Principle and inward Conviction. I am
persuaded, and can without breach of Charity or Justice, affirm, That the
Growth of the foulest Heresies in the Christian World is to be placed in this
Original. Men have so long given the full Reins to Pride, Ambition,
Covetousness, or other vicious Lusts and Propensions, that they have called in
their whole Stock of Parts and Learning, and made Converts to their Judgments
to support them, or revenge their Disappointments.

And now, upon this Bottom, we may silence all Objections brought from the
absurd, and Heterodox Opinions of certain Moralists and Philosophers. For, it is
highly probable, they were at first but exquisite Apologies to Patronize
importunate Passions and confirmed Practices; and consequently can be no real
Prejudices to a Law of Nature. Indeed, the impure Doctrine of the Gnostics may
be as well admitted a just Plea against the Truth and Purity of Christianity,
and the Evidences for both, as some few lewd Doctrines of Philosophers against
the Certainty of a Law of Nature, upon the Evidences of Natural Reason.

. 2. But, to enlarge a little on this part of the Objection, it is well known
that the foulest and most absurd Opinions, charged on particular Philosophers,
are by others recorded as an eternal Mark of Infamy and Reproach due to 'em;
and consequently they are by no means a just Balance to the substantial
Reasonings of others, in deciphering Laws of Nature. We might add to all this,
how unjust a Measure the Practices of Mankind is of their real Notices of Moral
Good, an Argument too fatally demonstrated under a Christian Dispensation; and
consequently though the Generality of Philosophers lived in Opposition to Laws of
Nature, and some few taught contrary to 'em, yet it is no just Consequence to
place Laws of Nature above the Researches of Natural Reason. I am persuaded
some of the Instances presented in a late Conference See Conference with a
Theist, Part 2. p. 56, to p. 64.
, do not fall under the Character of prime Laws of Nature; and consequently do
not reach the Author's Design. It Is very well known, Plato's Model for Peopling
his Commonwealth was not by a Community of Women, without Limitations from the
Civil Power. But for the precise Limitations in this matter, as well as the
manner of Worshipping God, whether by Sacrifices and corporeal Representations,
I presume, it is the business of Revealed Religion to fix and determine. As for
his Instance of Masculine Venery, Zeno, and his Followers pronounced it
indifferent; I presume it was a previous Practice that had made it appear so.
And yet St. Paul speaks of some of these unnatural Whoredoms as things scarce
named among the Gentiles, 1 Cor. 5.1. But it were highly to be wished that some
Nations in the Confines of Christendom, had wholly escaped the Contagion; so
that if such vile Practices in a State of Nature may be an Argument against
Laws of Nature antecedent to Revelation, it will be of Force against written
Revelations: Since Laws of Nature founded in the Dictates of natural Reason,
may be as easily violated as any written Law. Certainly such avowed Practices
may with greater force of Reason be allowed against a Law that pretends to no
higher Authority than Revelation, or supported by Tradition. Lastly, As for the
Grecian Piece of Cruelty, in exposing Children to the Mercy of Beasts, and
Travelers, without remorse, I presume the Practice was not frequent, because
it must be the Concern and Interest of every Government to suppress it. But
it is well known, the Christian World is not wholly freed from such Monsters,
who I am afraid are acted by no other Dread but what the Apprehensions of a
Discovery, and the Penalties of the Law extort from them. However, this is an
Instance so absolutely repugnant to the common Bowels of Humanity, that it as
effectually disproves those Earnings which natural Instinct discovers in the
whole Order of Brutes toward their own Offspring, as that natural Reason
discovers the same Earnings to be a point of Duty to Mankind. In one word, the
Cruelties of Heathens is no more an Argument that natural Reason does not teach
the contrary, than the Barbarity of some particular Christians an Argument,
that Christianity does not exhort to Bowels of Compassion, and a Parental Care
toward their own Offspring.

But to return: A second Cause of Error is certain Prejudices or Prepossessions
imprinted on the Mind by Example and Education. The Cause and Origin of Error
already given presents us with the Propensions and Bias of Humane Nature, and
consequently how liable the World is to be overspread with Error. At least
Matter of Fact informs us how wide the Actions of Men deviate from the Line of
Duty, so that it may truly be said of the Heathen World, That the Imaginations
of their Hearts is to do Evil continually. Certainly then, where a Contagion
extends itself not only to the Judgments, but Practices of Mankind; and not
only corrupt Principles, but vicious Examples prevail in Parents, Guardians and
Tutors, the Minds of their Descendents will be deeply impregnated with
pernicious Prejudices and Prepossessions. They are implanted among the first
and earliest Impressions, even before the Powers of Reason exert themselves.
This, I am confident, is the Case of the uncultivated Regions of Mankind: And
certainly, when Reason comes to exert it self under such a fatal Bias, no
wonder if she often falls into very gross Miscarriages. And yet this is the
inevitable Portion of Mankind, that are brought forth in a State of Impotence,
as well in Mind as Body; and can hardly arrive to any Growth in Reason, before
they arrive to a Maturity in Body. But now, these things being laid together,
and admitted; it is very unjust to reject the Divine Economy of Laws of Nature
antecedent to Revelation, because the unavoidable Prepossessions of some Men
have carried them besides the Mark, so as to contradict the general Lines of
Duty: For, it is apparent, were Men to enter the World in the Strength and Power
of Reason, without the Clog and Encumbrance of antecedent Prepossessions (as in
the Instance already given, See Chap. 1. Sect. 2.) It Is impossible but the
Fundamental Line of Duty must present it self to the first workings of Reason;
and the prime Laws of Nature would be as legible to the Eye of the Mind, as
they would be to the outward Senses, when graved on Tables of Stone. But now,
as the Case stands, I mean with regard to a degenerate State; the Objections
before us prove no more than the Miscarriages of Reason, but do not overturn
that Frame or Model which God has established. So that Reason in her Enquiries
after a Law of Nature, appears to be placed under great Difficulties; but yet
Laws of Nature may, for all this, be the Product, and Workings of natural
Reason.

CHAP. III. Of the Argument of Universal Consent.
HAving now, in some measure, Answered what I proposed; which was to prove a
Law of Nature antecedent to Revelation, and rescued the Hypothesis from the
Objections that threatened it; before I dismiss this Argument, I shall offer
something in reference to what a late Author has advanced against the Argument
of Universal Consent, under color of exploding innate Ideas, or practical
Principles; but will serve as well against a Law of Nature.

. 1. And first, it is very observable, This Gentleman has industriously amassed
together all the Filth and Offscouring of a reprobate Mind, and a defiled
Conscience, and of a People that seemed to be abandoned by God; and
consequently nursed up in a universal Impiety. He has sent us to all the Creeks
and Corners of Barbarity under the Verge of Heaven, to see Rapes, Murders, and
the vilest Incests practiced, with universal Approbation and Allowance; yea,
rather with an Opinion of Virtue and Merit; to see whole Nations or Tribes of
Men living without God in the World, without any Footsteps of Worship, or so
much as a Name for God. [Lock 's Humane Understanding, B. 1. Cap. 3.. 9.] And
upon all this concludes, That there is scarce that Principle of Morality to be
named, or Rule of Virtue to be thought on, (those only excepted that are
absolutely necessary to hold Society together, which commonly too are neglected
betwixt distinct Societies) which is not somewhere or other slighted, and
condemned by the general Fashion of whole Societies of Men, governed by
practical Opinions, and Rules of living quite opposite to others.. 10. And the
Argument drawn from all this, is levelled against universal Consent, and innate
Principles: [For thus the Author,. 9. Where then are those innate Principles of
Justice, Piety, Gratitude, Equity, Chastity; or where is that universal Consent
that assures us there are such inbred Rules?] And certainly the Argument
carries the same Force against a Law of Nature, and the eternal Distinctions of
Good and Evil: For may not the Latitudinarian in Triumph demand, Where is that
universal Consent, that assures us there are Laws of Nature, or indispensable
established Rules of Morality? Nay, to have recourse to his Methods of Arguing,
since contrary practical Principles are asserted by whole Nations as the avowed
Rules of Living; since Remorse in some attends the vilest Enormities, whilst
others think they merit by 'em; may not we expostulate, Where are those natural
Measures of Right and Wrong, those natural Distinctions of Good and Evil? See.
9, 10, 11. Certainly these are Deductions as strong and cogent, as those
against innate Principles: I am sure they will pass for such in the Judgment of
some Men that caress Mr. Lock 's Doctrine concerning Innate Ideas, since he is
not content to explode all innate practical Principles, but assigns no other
Foundation or Original, besides Custom, Education, the Superstition of a Nurse,
or the Authority of an Old Woman. See. 22, 23, 26. This Author, in a Letter to
the Learned Bishop of Worcester, observes, That the Foundation of all Religion,
and genuine Morality, being established in the Belief of a God, no Arguments
that are made use of to work the Persuasion of a God, should be invalidated,
page 113, 114. And, certainly Reason should have obliged him, to have used the
same Caution, not only in invalidating Arguments that are advanced to prove a
Law of Nature, the true ground of Morality; but in advancing Arguments that do
not more directly destroy the Doctrine of innate Ideas, than a Law of Nature.
It Is true, were the Doctrine of innate Ideas, or practical Principles no way to
be disproved, but by exposing the Conceit of universal Consent, the Method had
been very pardonable; but this Author confesses, that were the Argument
admitted, it proves no Idea or Principle to be innate, B. 1. Cap. 2.. 3. And
therefore I am afraid he was acted by no good Design, to muster up all his
Forces against an Argument that does him no Disservice, especially when his
Methods of attacking it, are more fatal against the whole Body of Morality. But
to make some Returns to these Harangues, I shall not now consider how far
practical Principles may be said to be innate, this will fall in its proper
place; but I think we have no reason to cashier the Argument of universal
Consent, which if there is any such thing, must be a considerable Evidence of a
Law of Nature, and the irreconcilable Distinctions of Good and Evil. And first,
I think Mr. Lock needed not to have sent us to Africa and the Indies, to the
most rude and uncultivated Parts of the World, to explode the Doctrine of an
universal Consent, as to Chastity, Humanity, and other moral Virtues. For the
sacred Canon, if he will allow it to be Authentic, would have furnished him
with national Enormities that were as much the Fashion of their Countries and
the approved Rules of Living, as any he has produced. Did not the seven Nations
practice the vilest Incests, was it not a piece of Devotion to sacrifice there
Offspring to Moloch, See Rev. 18. Ezekiel. 23. and in a word, to practice a
thousand Abominations? As for particular Nations that had not so much as a Name
of God (if in reality there were any such) I think they were not more
remarkable, than those that had not God in all their Thoughts. And when the
vilest Immoralities are produced with a national Esteem and Approbation, I
think they are not worse than those St. Paul has charged the Heathen World
with, in more places than one, who being past Feeling, have given themselves
over to Lasciviousness, to work all Uncleanness with greediness. [See Ephesians. 4.
v. 18, 19. Romans 1. v. 20, 25.] and yet I think there can be no just Authority
against an Universal Consent, as to Laws of Nature, or Practical Principles. If
this were so, Universal Consent may be as well rejected in the Proof of
Rational Faculties, or at least in the Establishment of Reason and Truth upon
any certain Foundation; and consequently they are to be resolved into mere
Chance or Fortune: for the Contradictions (recorded by St. Paul) to the plain
Rules of Morality, are as absolute Contradictions to the Allowance or
Supposition of Rational Faculties, and the natural Frame and Foundation of
Reason, as they are to Laws of Nature, or the natural Features of Good and
Evil. The Mistake, I think, is obvious from a very few Considerations, though God
has implanted Faculties of Reason, which, if rightly exercised and applied,
will discern Things as they really are, and pronounce certain Matters or
Things, indispensable Rules of Action: Yet, since there is a fatal Bias on our
Natures, and these Faculties do not Act necessarily, nor are Things always duly
presented to their View, nor do they yield a due Attention to 'em; Notions may
be impressed, that may almost overturn the very Frame of Nature, or destroy the
natural Appearances of Good and Evil, Vice and Virtue; and therefore Men may by
the Bias of Education, Custom, and irregular Appetites, come to espouse the
most horrid Impieties, for Heroic Virtues; may practice the grossest
Enormities, not only with Approbation, but an Opinion of Merit. I Am sure
Christianity supposes little less, when we are assured of Seared Consciences;
when the Mind, or Understandings, as well as Consciences, may be defiled, Tit.
1.3. when the Understanding may be darkened (to that degree) as to be past
Feeling, and to give us up to work all Uncleanness with greediness. And in a
word, when we are instructed that Men may be abandoned by God, and consequently
may be given up to walk in the Vanity of their Minds, to vile Affections, and
to work all Uncleanness. This may be the Case of private Persons, and of
public Societies too; and no doubt it is the Case of the miserable Indians at
this Day, as it was once of the Seven Nations. And when such invincible
Ignorance and Impiety has overspread a Land, and is become an established Rule
of Life to Parents, Governors and Tutors, it must (without some distinguishing
Overtures of Grace) be entailed and transmitted to Posterity. But yet for all
this the Argument of Universal Consent, as to Laws of Nature and established
Rules of Morality, cannot justly be Arrained, we may as well question Man to be
a Reasonable Creature, at least on the Authority of Universal Consent, because
there are some Fools and Idiots; or a Creature of Symetry and Proportion,
because there are some Monsters in the World; as argue against an Universal
Consent, because the Barbarity of some Nations contradict it. It Is true, Mr.
Lock endeavors to take off the force of the Argument, since he seems to call
the Judgment of other Nations, that have preserved the great Lines of Laws of
Nature, the private Persuasions of a Party; whilst we esteem 'em the only
Dictates of Right Reason, B. 1. Cap. 3.. 20. But I hope those vile Practices he
has transcribed from those that only retain the Figure of Men, are not to pass
for the Dictates of Right Reason, nor they the Men of Right Reason: And
consequently their Votes or Opinions are not to be received against that
Universal Consent we contend for, for certainly, when we appeal to Universal
Consent, we cannot be supposed to appeal to Monsters, Apostates, Reprobates or
Devils; and yet there may be whole Nations that will fall under one of these
Characters. Again, It Is possible that natural Powers and Faculties may be so
far abused, as to lose their native Vigor and Activity; so that Men may live
in a State of Inconsideration and Thoughtlessness, and become as Ignorant and
Careless of every Thing, but what the Example and Custom of their Country
suggests, as the unthinking Brute that perishes. And this may be the case of
Tribes of Men as well as private Persons, and no doubt is the case of the
uncultivated Negro's; and therefore it would be highly absurd to take in their
Judgments and Opinions, to make up that Universal Consent we contend for.

. 2. Upon the whole then, when we have recourse to Universal Consent, for the
Proof of a Law of Nature, it only implies an Appeal to those Nations or People,
that in the Judgment of improved Reason, have passed under the Character of
Polished or Civilized; or that have been justly supposed in some measure to
have exerted those Powers and Faculties in Thought and Observation, which God
has implanted in the original Frame and Constitution of Mankind. And certainly
we have always had the joint Consent of such Nations, for most of those Rules
and Precepts, which, in the strictest Sense, are esteemed Laws of Nature: I Am
sure they have signified or declared it in the most unquestionable Way or
Manner; Inasmuch as they have been selected for the general Subject of civil
Laws, and the Practice of 'em enforced by certain civil Penalties or Sanctions.
And certainly this is the strongest Argument or Presumption for Laws of Nature
that may be, since we cannot imagine, why distinct Nations and Societies of
Men, established upon different Maxims and Rules of Policy, as well as Models
of Government, should conspire in the Subject Matter of so many Laws; unless
they were by the Light of Reason discoverable to Mankind, as indispensable
Rules of Action. And thus I hope I have satisfied the Demands of all reasonable
Enquirers, in proving a Law of Nature antecedent to Revelation, or positive
Humane Laws.

CHAP. IV. Reflections on some Passages in the Conference with a Theist, Part 2.
. 1. HAving in some measure drawn the Line, and laid the Foundation of natural
Religion, or Laws of Nature antecedent to Revelation, I cannot but discover my
Dissatisfactions with the Opinion of a late Author, that places the Whole of
natural Religion in the Authority of Revelation, that will allow it no other
Original but Revelation, and no other Means of Conveyance and Preservation, but
Oral Tradition. [See Conference with a Theist, Part 2. Page 32. 36.] Indeed
this seems to be a Notion advanced without well considering the Nature,
Probability, or Consequences of it. For first, the manner of its Conveyance by
Oral Tradition (which this Author was forced to admit of) seems to expose it as
a groundless Conjecture. I know he endeavors to remove the Force of this
Argument, by telling us, That the Duties that pass under the Characters of Laws
of Nature, are so natural to the Understanding, so easy to be embraced by it,
and upon Proposal seem so to be extremely Useful to Mankind, that they must be
assented to, and can never be mistaken or forgot, p. 36. And consequently there
was not the least necessity of any written Records. But certainly this is a
Confession, which if well considered, should have directed him to the very
Notion he labors to expose. For if Laws of Nature are so natural and obvious
to the Understanding that they must be assented to, he might very well have
allowed that their extreme Usefulness to Mankind would have prompted and
enabled Reason to have made the Discovery, without borrowing the whole from
Revelation: Certainly, if Reason, by its own intrinsic Light and Activity,
could not go thus far, he must suppose the Souls of Men, though God's express
Image and Representative, to be the most imperfect, impotent Parts of the
Creation. But then that Laws of Nature are not so easily assented to, or can
never be mistaken or forgot, I should have thought his own Remarks upon the
Lives and Doctrines of Philosophers, and in a word, on the Manners and Notions
of the Heathen World, had been a sufficient Confutation. Most of these, we must
suppose, received something from his imaginary Line of Tradition, and therefore
since he has made 'em so basely to pervert the Rules of it, he might have
justly concluded that Providence, who knew well what was in Man, must have
judged it necessary to have inculcated Laws of Nature, either by frequent
Visions, or committed them to Writing, as well as the other parts of his
revealed Will. And therefore his own Objection seems to stand good against him,
on his own Principles: That Tradition is not so proper a means to convey
Morality by to Mankind, because of its liableness to Corruption, and that it
would have been more sensibly vitiated than we find it is, had it descended by
this Method. And truly the Objection carries force in it, for were Humane
Reason so desperately Impotent, as the Picture he seems to have presented the
World with, represents; I cannot conceive what Service a few blind Oral
Traditions would have done to preserve the least Footsteps of Morality. But to
examine the Truth of the Conjecture, under the Instance he has given, that of
the Indian. Indeed it is very notorious the Regions of the Indian World are
reduced to the lowest Ebb of Humanity, and lodged under the grossest Cloud of
Ignorance, there being not much left but Humane Shape to introduce a Thinking
Mind to believe they are endued with Humane Souls. But as for those small
Remains of Morality, were they to submit to a strict Examination, I Am
persuaded, we should hardly find them Resolving 'em into the Advice or Commands
of their Fathers and Grandfathers, or pretending a Succession from the great
Parent of Mankind, Adam. This is certainly an Account as unknown and unthought
of, as native Inscriptions, or a Rationale founded in a large train of
Consequences. But yet though it is ridiculous to imagine that such illiterate
Mortals should resolve every Term or Notion into its Simple Ideas, (especially
such as a late Author has projected) yet I do not question, but they would
offer at something from the Intrinsic Nature of the things themselves, that
would determine and engage their Choices; something that would in some measure
bespeak them Men, and Reasonable Creatures. I will grant that Opinion as well
as Practice may be often established upon Custom and public Example, without
accounting for the Nature, or Reason of the Things themselves. But then Custom
conducts us to some Original that is not very remote, where we may find it
established on the highest Convictions and Evidences of Reason; and it may be
no less than what are sufficient to establish a Law of Nature. But it seems
highly absurd, that the whole Body of Laws of Nature, or the indispensable
Rules of Action to Mankind, should rest upon no other Foundation, but a few
Instructions delivered to our First Parents; and these transmitted through all
the Periods of Time, and all the Revolutions of States, and Kingdoms into all
the Corners of the Earth, upon the volutary Reports of those that lived before
us. As for the Case of the poor Indians, I Am abundantly satisfied, they are so
little sensible of any Conveyance of this Nature, and such insuperable
Obstructions against the Success, or Preservation of it; that they might, on
this account, justly plead invincible Ignorance to every Law of Nature, and
consequently free 'emselves from that severe Sentence of Perishing without Law,
because they really Sinned without the least Apprehension, or Conscience of a
Law. Thus far as to the Improbability of the Conveyance by Oral Tradition.

. 2. I shall, in the second place, offer something, as to the Truth of the
Position, that Laws of Nature take their Rise from Revelation.

And first, I think it manifestly contradicts the revealed Canon. And for this,
I shall refer this Reverend Author to the Arguments I have advanced from
Scripture, and particularly to the Passage he has cited, and my Explication
pursuant to the whole Body of Commentators, and the best Modern Divines upon
it. Indeed, he would make the World believe, he has taken off the Force of it,
and established his own Notion by a parallel Text of Scripture: And these
Words, which I command thee this Day, shall be in thine Heart, and thou shall
Teach them diligently to thy Children, etc. Deuteronomy. 6. v. 6, 7. Whereas, it is
manifest, the holy Spirit speaks of Laws Revealed and Recorded, and the writing
in the Heart implies nothing but a treasuring 'em up in the Mind, a Commitment
of them to the Memory; and, in a Word, nothing but what the blessed Mother of
our Lord did on another Occasion, when she laid up his heavenly Sayings in her
Heart. It expresses a Duty incumbent upon us to commit the Laws of God to our
Minds and Consciences, to rivet 'em in our Hearts and Affections, so to
Meditate upon them, that we may perform and keep them, and instruct others in
them. But the Epistle to the Romans expresses a quite different thing. It
expresses a Law distinct from a Revealed Law, and fixes the Distinction in the
different manner of Promulgation, on the Tables of the Heart; so that if it is
not done by native Inscriptions, it must by natural Powers and Faculties. But
further, the Canon of Scripture does not only pronounce this Notion false and
groundless, but, I presume, it has been in some measure demonstrated to be so.
For, if Man is originally endued with such Faculties, as by a native Activity
can exert 'emselves in the Discovery of Laws of Nature, there can be no
Foundation for erecting an uncertain Scheme of Oral Tradition.

. 3. But to proceed to the Consequences of this Position.

And first, It Is very well known, the Patrons of this Notion directly overturn
the received Distinctions of Natural, from Revealed Religion, and Natural from
Positive Laws. The Distinction was always founded in the different Origin of
these Laws. The latter being given by special Revelation, but the former
discovered by the Workings of Natural Reason. But now both must derive from
Revelation; and consequently there can be no other Distinction, but what may be
among written Revealed Laws: in as much as one Revealed Law or Precept, in its
Intrinsic Nature, may be better adapted to the View and Perception of Humane
Understanding than others; or at least no other Distinction, but what lies
between Oral, and Written Traditions.

But to conclude this Argument, This Notion seems to shake or overturn the
eternal Distinctions of Moral Good and Evil, founded in the very Frame and
Nature of Things, together with the Economy of Natural Conscience. For, it is
manifest, it weakens the Authority of Natural Religion, by placing such
important Laws and Precepts upon the slender Credit of Oral Traditions. Indeed
there are so many Difficulties and Improbabilities in transmitting a Body of
Laws, through all Parts of the Habitable World, by Oral Traditions, as are
sufficient to ruin the Credit of the Hypothesis; and when this is done, the
Latudinarian has the greatest Advantage given him, to resolve the Whole of
Natural Religion into Custom and Education: These are Considerations so obvious
and clear, as might have given an early Check to the Notion, unless more cogent
Arguments and Authorities had discovered themselves, than have been hitherto
produced. However, now, I presume, they may obtain their due Effect, and though
they have been offered with a great deal of Freedom, yet I hope this will not
obstruct their Admission, where they carry an Evidence sufficient to make way
for it.

CHAP. V. Of the Distinction of Laws of Nature from Positive, or Written Laws,
and whether they are Innate.
. 1. I Proceed, in the next place, to fix the Distinction of Laws of Nature,
from Positive, or Written Laws, and consider whether they are Innate or no.

And first, The Distinction of Laws of Nature from Laws which, in the strictest
Sense, pass under the Name of Revealed, is clearly visible. For in Laws of
Nature, as well the Subject matter, as the Authority of the Law, or the Mind,
and Intention of the Lawgiver upon it, are discoverable by the Powers and
Faculties of Natural Reason. Whereas, in Revealed Laws, (I mean such as in the
highest Sense are styled Revealed) both the Subject Matter, and Intention of
the Lawgiver, entirely depend on the express Will and Pleasure of God. If
there is any Difficulty then, it will consist in fixing the precise Distinction
between them, and Human Laws. For its certain both are to be esteemed the
Deductions and Decrees of Right Reason. But, I think, they are chiefly to be
distinguished from the Subject Matter of them. It Is indeed the Work of Natural
Reason to discover, and fix the Subject Matter of these Laws; but the
Subject Matter of Laws of Nature is often vastly different from that of Civil
Laws: For the Subject Matter of Laws of Nature arising from the original Frame
and Condition of our Natures, and for the most part immediately conducing to
our very Beings or Subsistence, rather than Well-being or civil Happiness, it
seems to carry a natural and intrinsic Goodness; and consequently an
irresistible Force and Efficacy in it, abstracting from the Authority, or
Injunctions of a Lawgiver. But now the Subject Matter of Civil Laws being
chiefly the Circumstantials, or Instruments of the improved Happiness, of
particular Societies; and calculated for the particular Genius and Tempers of
Men under different Climates, as well as the particular Turns and Periods of
Kingdoms and Governments; it often carries no Intrinsic Goodness in it, but is
justly to be ranked among Things indifferent; till the Pleasure and Authority
of the Lawgiver passes upon it. Again, the Subject Matter of Civil Laws, is
extremely variable; whereas that of Laws of Nature seems to be perpetual and
unalterable. For since the Subject Matter of Laws of Nature results from the
primitive Frame and Order of created Nature, or indeed, from the original Frame
of Humane Nature, as it stands encompassed with common Wants and Necessities;
it must necessarily be adapted to the whole Offspring of Mankind, and
consequently be as perpetual as universal. But now the Subject Matter of Humane
Laws being only the Circumstantials of civil Happiness, advanced as a fit and
proper Instrument to attain it in particular Communities and Societies of Men,
it must needs be precarious and changeable; it is often calculated for
particular Events and Emergencies, and consequently is as various as the
different Aspects, or Revolutions of Kingdoms. It Is an Instrument often
advanced for a particular, and temporary End and Design, and it is well known
there may be Twenty Instruments of equal force to attain it; and consequently
the Subject Matter of Humane Laws is often no otherwise fixed and determined,
than by the arbitrary Decree or Sentence of the Lawgiver. But further, in
order to establish a true Distinction of Laws of Nature from positive Humane
Laws; let us consider what it is that seems to give 'em the Denomination of
Laws of Nature, and represents 'em as Innate Rules, or Principles.

And First, since it is concluded, that they result, or take their rise from
the very Frame and Constitution of created Nature, (insomuch, that God having
established the Frame and Order of Things, these Laws, without any positive
Command, must follow upon it; and consequently in one Act seems to have
established both) they may be justly esteemed Laws of Nature. And this may be
one principal Reason why they carry the appearance of Innate Principles, and in
the sacred Canon are represented to us as such. In this Sense, I Am sure, they
are sufficiently distinguished from Humane Laws, since they are so far from
taking their rise in the Frame and Constitution of Nature, that they are, at
best, but remote Deductions from Laws of Nature, or rather certain temporary
Rules and Provisions of Reason advanced upon particular Emergencies in
conformity to Laws of Nature, or, at least, an arbitrary enforcement of Laws of
Nature by positive Rewards and Punishments. But further, that which in reality
gives them the appearance of Innate Principles and the denomination of Laws of
Nature, is the evidence and perspicuity of 'em. For since it is concluded, that
Laws of Nature result from the very Frame and Order of Nature, from that state
and condition of Things wherein we were born, and whereby we subsist; they must
undoubtedly discover 'emselves to the Minds of Men, even though they were lodged
in the most simple and unimproved State of Nature. For as long as we allow
Mankind to be Thinking Reasoning Beings, the desire of Self-preservation will
direct 'em to those Laws, without the observance of which they can hardly
pretend to subsist, much less be happy. In a word, they are Laws of Nature,
because they are Impressions that are stamped on the Mind, from the most
importunate cravings and exigencies of Nature; and they carry the appearance of
Innate Principles, because they are certainly some of the first Suggestions
that accompany a Mind after its arrived to a State of Thinking, and left to
consult the Safety and Preservation of the whole Man: I say they are certainly
some of the first Suggestions that would naturally offer 'emselves to the Minds
of Men. For though Mankind is brought forth in Impotence, and their Mind
cultivated by Education, as their Bodies are cherished by Food and Raiment,
till they arrive to a competent Strength and Vigor, and consequently Names, and
Words, and Ideas of the most trite Objects of Sense are instilled by the
Instructions of Nurses and Parents, yet could we suppose Men turned out into
the World in a State of Maturity, without the Bias of Education upon 'em, I do
not question but the very Frame and Condition of their Beings, together with
the Desire of Self-preservation, would give 'em a speedy View of those Laws,
which, for this Reason, are justly styled Laws of Nature. Again, they are Laws
of Nature; because they immediately fall in with some peculiar Propensions;
wrought off with the original Frame and Constitution of our Natures. It Is
visible there are certain Instincts, or Impulses in Nature, which seem to exert
'emselves upon particular Actions, that cannot well be resolved into the
elaborate Workings of Reason, for they seem to have engaged the Passions by a
kind of influential Impulse before the Action can well be scanned by any
deliberate Reasonings; and certainly nothing strikes the Passions sooner, than
those Actions that are prescribed by Laws of Nature. Thus the receipt of
Benefits creates a speedy exultation; the cherishing of our own Offspring
leaves a vigorous Complacency, and the most grateful Applauses and
Satisfactions. And truly these are Things that have discovered 'emselves so
early, where Nature has not been new molded by contrary Habits, or Education,
that I do not question but they have given a Foundation to pronounce Laws of
Nature, natural Instincts, or Innate Doctrines, or Principles. To conclude this
Argument, Another distinguishing Characteristick of Laws of Nature from Civil
Laws, arises from the exercise of Reason in the discovery of 'em. It Is on all
hands allowed, that Reason is the immediate Directory in Civil Laws, as well as
Laws of Nature. But yet Reason acts in a very different manner. For the
Foundation of Laws of Nature being the common exigencies, necessities, or
condition of Mankind, as Men, or such an Order of Beings; Reason can easily fix
such Rules as will extend to the whole Species, so as to carry a binding
Authority over 'em. But the Foundation of Civil Laws being only some particular
Emergencies to be considered with regard to some particular Circumstances of
Time, Place, Persons and the like; Reason cannot determine any thing absolutely,
or six a general Rule, or, indeed, declare what is fit and convenient in every
Community; and consequently Civil Laws can only be the Deductions of Reason in
Civil Governors, with regard to the State and Condition of their People, or
Government where they preside.

CHAP. VI. Reflections on Mr. Lock 's Arguments against Innate Ideas, or
Practical Principles; and the true Controversy determined.
. 1. HAving thus assigned the principal Characteristicks of Laws of Nature, we
may in a few Words determine, whether there be any practical Principles, which
are truly Innate: But before I shall conclude any thing, I shall take liberty
to make some few Returns to the Arguments of a late Author on this Subject. [
Mr. Lock's Essay concerning Human Understanding.] And first, concerning
Universal Consent. It Is indisputably evident, that Universal Consent does not
prove any Ideas, or practical Principles to be Innate. Because an Universal
Consent may prevail, partly from that Self-evidence, that naturally results
from particular Things, or Actions, when presented to the Minds of Men; and
partly from the Frame and Condition of Human Nature; whereby we are forcibly
prompted to the disquisition of 'em. But yet we are not willing wholly to
discard the Argument; because though Universal Consent may not prove the Doctrine
of Innate Ideas; yet it is certainly a considerable Argument of a Law of Nature.
And though the Author of this Essay has done all he could to ruin the Credit and
Authority of it, yet I hope I have proved there is such a thing as Universal
Consent, established upon a very firm and clear Foundation. But further, the
remaining Arguments of this Author are chiefly advanced against Innate Ideas,
but they appear with equal force against Innate practical Principles. And
therefore I shall remark a little on that which he seems to fix the greatest
weight on; and that is, a Necessity of Perception, even in a State of Infancy;
for to him it seems a Contradiction, or hardly intelligible, that Truths should
be imprinted on the Soul which it perceives or understands not. Sect. 5. p. 5.
See page 13. Sect. 27. But certainly he cannot mean a Necessity of actual
Perception. For the Finite Nature of a Human Mind, will not in the same Instant
suffer many Objects to be received under an actual View; and common experience
informs us, that a great many Impressions, or Ideas, are lodged in the Memory,
without being revived it may be for a succession of Years. And truly I can see
no reason, why native Inscriptions may not remain without being actually
attended to, as well as written Laws, or acquired Ideas. It Is well known, those
that contend for Innate Ideas, or Principles, do not think they discover
'emselves without the Exercise of our natural Powers and Faculties; and some of
those external Means and Instruments that are necessary to acquired Knowledge.

In a word, they always suppose a due Attention and Application of Mind, even
to the Exercise of Reflection. And truly since acquired Impressions, that are
laid up in the Memory, are scarce ever revived, but by an accidental Occurrence
of some present Object; these native Inscriptions (if any such) may not be
perceived till their respective Objects are presented to the Mind, to exert its
Powers and Faculties upon. Something like this our Exercitations on written
Laws seem to resemble, when we never apprehend the full Force and Purport of a
Law, till some special Case or Instance offers itself to induce an Application.
And thus the want of Perception in Infants may be fairly accounted for; as well
as from the infant Indispositions of the Animal part: For the Organs being (for
ought we know) at first not so well fitted to convey the Images of outward
Objects, and consequently fix any Impressions, or establish any clear
Perceptions, no wonder if native Inscriptions lie dormant. This Author allows,
there is a time when a Human Soul begins to Think, or exercise any of its
natural Powers and Faculties; and native Inscriptions cannot occur, or be
perceived before we begin to Think; yea, rather if they are to be revived by
the Exercise of the Mind, upon outward Things or Objects that are peculiar to
'em; we can scarce expect 'em among our infant Thoughts, or mental
Exercitations, as long as we are so constantly entertained by the Inventions of
Nurses and Parents. Thus far there seems to be no necessity for discarding
innate Ideas or practical Principles; and consequently, if it appears that the
Doctrine serves any real Purposes of Religion, I see nothing advanced by this
Author that demonstrates the Absurdity of it.

. 2. But yet for all this, if it be allowed that Probabilities may determine
our Judgments in this Matter, the Doctrine of Innate Ideas, is rather to be
rejected than retained. It Is abundantly concluded, That Man is under an
established Method of attaining the right knowledge of Good and Evil; the Frame
and Order of Things within and without, with the exercise of his own Faculties
upon 'em, will present him with a Scheme of Moral Duty, and a true Measure of
Action; and that too as clearly as if it was impressed on the Mind, with the
first Lineaments of its Being: And therefore there seems to be no visible
Necessity for having Recourse to Innate Ideas, or Inscriptions. And certainly,
if Innate Ideas are serviceable to Mankind, they must be so in order to supply
the Defects of Reason, and consequently, they seem to be exempt from the
Disquisitions of Reason. For if Innate Ideas are to be examined and judged on
by the Workings of Reason, Reason itself, (I mean the Decrees and Deductions of
it,) will answer all the Ends and Designs of a reasonable Being as effectually,
as if a Digest of Laws were originally recorded on the Mind. If this be true,
as I think it is, in some measure, demonstrated to be, the Doctrine of Innate
Principles must be laid aside, since we cannot conceive that a wise Creator
should establish any Ordinance, without some special Ends and Uses annexed to
it, I mean such, as are not served any other way. If it be said, that Reason
exercises no Jurisdiction in this Affair; then, I Am afraid, Innate Inscriptions
will rather endamage than advance Religion and Morality. For then every one
will be apt to obtrude his own Fancies, and wild Suggestions, for native
Inscriptions; and consequently, Mankind must be exposed to all the
Extravagancies of Enthusiasm, in the Economy of Nature, as well as that of
Grace; so that whatsoever any one has the boldness to affirm, or fancy to be
written on the Heart, must immediately pass an Obligation on all Men's Actions;
and the Finger of God shall be pleaded to the Subversion of the common
Principles of Morality, as the Spirit of God has been to the Subversion of the
Peace and Unity of the Church. When all things then are thus fairly laid
together, we may with greater appearance of Reason, conclude, That our Ideas
and Principles are acquired, as well as the more remote Deductions of Science,
and that it is their intimate Agreement with the Ends and Interests, or common
Frame and Necessity of our Nature, that gives 'em the appearance of native
Impressions. In a word, then, though the sacred Language seems to favor the
Notion, yet it may be justly resolved into Metaphor, or Figure, and import no
more than an Allusion to the general Custom of promulging Laws in Tables, or
Writing. Inasmuch as God has originally endued us with Powers and Faculties to
discover a Rule of Action, and Law to Govern ourselves by, in the common
Exigences of Human Nature, as clearly as if he had Engraven it on Tables of
Stone.

CHAP. VII. Of the different Degrees of the Evidence of Laws of Nature.
IT will easily be granted, that Laws of Nature carry a different Evidence, in
proportion to the Subject Matter of 'em, and the several Workings of Reason, in
the Disquisition of 'em. Some Laws discover 'emselves by a single Consequence,
or a short train of Consequences, whilst others rest upon an Evidence, that is
wrought by several Gradations, or a large Series of Consequences or Deductions.
The primary Laws of Nature are those which represent the principal Duties we
owe to God, or those which concern our own Persons, or the Persons of our
Neighbors. For those that arise from our own, or our Neighbors Property, are
certainly more elaborate and remote. I shall illustrate these Observations by a
single Instance in each of 'em.

And first, To Reverence and Worship the Supreme Being, which we call God, is
certainly a Fundamental Law of Nature; because it necessarily arises from that
Relation we bear to God. For the most obvious Notion of a God, and a bare
Assent to this single Proposition, that God is our Creator, and we his
Creatures, from whom all that we have, or belongs to us, is immediately
derived, must by a direct and immediate Consequence demonstrate, that we are
obliged to empty our Souls before him in the most solemn Acts of Homage and
Reverence. Indeed, as for the manner of Divine Worship, though Natural Reason, by
a train of Arguments, might determine it, so as to be some way acceptable to
God; yet to establish it in Perfection, is certainly the business of Revealed
Religion: But that God is to be Worshipped, is a Duty lodged in the most simple
Workings of Reason. Again, That God has enjoined Temperance, as a Duty, arises
not only from the prime and most obvious Ends of our Being, but from the
Doctrine of Self-preservation, and the necessary Methods of Subsistence; so
that allowing the clear Dictates of Reason, in the Mind of our great Creator,
to be a Rule of Duty, a single Inference will demonstrate Temperance to be a
Duty. Again, as to those Laws which concern the Person of our Neighbors; such
I mean as prohibit Murder, or other Violations of their Persons, it is visible,
the Consideration of the Methods of our Subsistence, whereby we are
necessitated to rely on the Succors of our Fellow Creatures, will instruct us
that God did not allow us to assassinate and destroy 'em; the very Suggestions
of Self-preservation will oblige us to make the Conclusion. Again, the
Consideration of being Fellow Creatures, and a peculiar of a Sovereign Creator,
and as such under his immediate Conduct and Disposal, will instruct us, that we
have no right to their Lives, without a special Commission from him.

Lastly, The early Discoveries which we find in ourselves, of Love, Tenderness,
and Compassion, and the Earnings which are implanted toward our own Flesh and
Blood, will direct us that God intended we should place a certain Measure of
these native Passions and Propensions on those that are descended from us, or
are compounded of the same Ingredients, and formed in the same Mould; and
consequently he could never authorize us to commit Violence or Cruelties on
their Persons; so absurd is the Hypothesis of the Leviathan, that projects a
State of Nature to be an absolute State of War. But to proceed to the last
Instance, that of outward Goods and Possessions, which engages the principal
Laws and Measures of Justice. Thus to Steal, is, no doubt, a Violation of
natural Justice, and consequently a Violation of a Law of Nature; but yet this
rests on the Force and Authority of a Law antecedent to it, I mean that of
Property; and consequently it implies several Conclusions or Deductions, before
we discover the Authority or Obligation of it. Thus to detain or invade a
Neighbor's Property, contrary to Compact, is certainly an Act of Violence done
to a Law of Nature; but yet it demands a Proof of the Obligations of Compact or
voluntary Promises, as well as of the Authority of Property, before the Law can
be decyphered. It cannot be denied but these are Laws of Nature, because
natural Reason, by close Researches and regular Conclusions, may discover their
Obligations. I Am sure it can be no Objection, that they result from voluntary
Intercourses and Transactions among Mankind, I mean Compacts or Bargains; for
the Necessities of Nature, dictating such Transactions, is a sufficient
Indication of their Divine Authority and Obligation; and consequently, whatever
immediately Results from 'em, must obtain the same Authority and Obligation, as
well as Character: But yet, it is manifest, when Laws of Nature are to be
supported by a Train of Consequences, the Evidence is not so direct and
convincing; because in these Cases the Mind is more fatally exposed to
Miscarriages. Upon the whole then it appears, that Laws of Nature rest upon
very different Degrees of Evidence. And now thus much being agreed and
concluded, it may by these Measures be more exactly discerned which are to be
esteemed Laws of Nature, and which not so; which Fundamental, or de primo
Dictamine Naturae, and which not so; and consequently, the Necessity of forming
a complete Scheme of Laws of Nature, seems to be wholly superseeded.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Foundation of God's Right of Dominion, and our Duty of
Allegiance as a Lawgiver.
. 1. HAving asserted the Authority of Laws of Nature, by fixing it in the
Author of Nature, it naturally directs me to enquire into the Original and
Foundation of those Obligations we owe to God, or how we are obliged to the
Observance of his Laws. But before I proceed to a direct Determination of this
Matter, I shall make some Returns to what I find in a late excellent Discourse,
concerning the Power and Right of Obliging, and particularly as applied to God.
He labors to prove that the Right and Power of Obliging is the same,
especially with respect to God; and therefore after a great many Arguments
concludes, From all which it follows that wherever there is a Right of
Obliging, and where there is an absolute uncontrollable Power of Obliging,
there is for that very reason a Right also, [See The Certainty and Necessity of
Religion in general, Page 100.] Whether these Assertions are true or no will
appear by and by.

First, I cannot but Premise, that Right and Power happening to accompany each
other in the Exercise of 'em, no more than Heat and Light in the Sun, is no
Argument that they are not two distinct things, conceived under two distinct
Ideas or Notions.

Secondly, Though a Right and Power of Obliging, are both eternally invested in
God, yet it is no more an Argument that they imply the same thing, than that the
Attributes of Infinite Power and Justice are the same. Nay, further, though a
Right of Obliging may by a Train of Consequences follow from a Power of
Obliging, or on the contrary, a Power of Obliging from a Right of Obliging; yet
it is no more an Argument of their Identity, than that a rational Soul and
Thought are the same, because a rational Soul implies a Power of Thinking. And,
therefore, though an absolute uncontrollable Power may infer a Right of Obliging,
so that for that very Reason there may be a Right of Obliging, yet they may be
as distinct as Power and Truth. But to consider both in their received and
established Ideas or Notions. Now certainly, were we to appeal not only to the
best Moralists, but to the common Sense of Mankind, they would unanimously
concur in two different Descriptions. And I Am persuaded they differ as much as
a Raparee or Tyrant, from a lawful Prince; as much as doing a thing Rightfully,
or upon a just Authority, and doing a thing by Violence. For Violence argues a
Power of Punishing, as well as a rightful Execution of Punishment; both indeed
attain the same end, that is, engage an Obedience, but upon different Measures
and Principles. A Power of Obliging, in the strict Notion of it, is only
concerned for securing an Obedience, without considering the Justice or
Injustice of the Action; but a Right of Obliging implies an Obedience
established on a just Authority or Foundation; if there be any such thing as
Justice distinct from Power.

In a word, A Right of Obliging implies the Title of a Superior to Obedience,
and consequently, a Title to enforce it by suitable Rewards and Punishments;
but a Power of Obliging neither implies a Title to the one nor other. Thus an
Usurper may have as absolute a Command of Rewards and Punishments, to oblige or
secure an Obedience, as the most rightful Sovereign; yet he certainly wants an
Authority to enforce an Obedience, by the Weight and Terror of Punishment; and
if he does enforce it, he exercises Power, but not Right.

Again, A rightful Sovereign may retain a Title to an Obedience, and to the
Exercise of Rewards and Punishments to enforce it, but he may want a Power to
exert his Right, as in the Case of Rebellion or general Defection. The Notion
is clear and indisputable, when applied to the civil Power on Earth, and it
carries the same Evidence and Force in it, when applied to the absolute
independent Power of Heaven: For though Power and Right, by reason of the
infinite Perfections of the Divine Nature, are Inseparable in God, and in Man
not so; yet the Ideas, or Notions of Right and Power, whether in God or Men,
are formed upon the same Measures and Principles; yea, as much as the Notions
of Justice, Reason, or Purity, allowing Infinity and Perfection in God, which
cannot be given to Men.

. 2. Having thus far asserted the Distinction of a Right of Obliging from a
Power of Obliging, I shall proceed a little further, and consider whether the
Right of Obliging, as a true and proper Lawgiver, consists in nothing else but
in a Power of contributing to our Happiness or Misery, by special Rewards or
Punishments. Thus much seems to be asserted in the Discourse already cited; for
we are told, That no one has a Right or Power of Obliging another to act such a
particular Way he prescribes, any further than he has a Power of contributing
to the Happiness or Misery of that Being he so Prescribes to, -- and that God
can no otherwise induce an Obligation upon Men to Obey him, than by making 'em
know that he has it in his Power, to render them Happy or Miserable, Page 95.

But certainly, that a Right of Obliging, as a Lawgiver, does not consist in a
Power of Rewarding and Punishing, is evident from uncontrollable Arguments.

As first, It cannot be denied but an Equal, that can challenge no Right of
Dominion over us, may, upon some special Circumstances, be invested with such a
Power of Rewarding and Punishing, as to engage us to Pursue and Embrace what he
dictates to us; and yet such a Power does not give him any Right of Dominion
over us, or induce an Obligation of obeying him as a proper Superior. A Friend
may propose Rewards to determine us to any particular Way in Matters of Counsel
or Interest, and yet not induce a binding Authority upon us, like that of a
Law. A Friend or Neighbor may, by Rewards or Favors, be empowered to
contribute so highly to our Happiness, as to induce not only Obligations of
Gratitude, but the Exercise of other social Virtues, and yet they do not
establish a Right of Sovereign Authority upon us.

In a word, A Robber, Usurper, Assassin, or the Devil himself may have it in
his Power to inflict such Punishments as will determine any Man to Act as he
prescribes, and yet this Power gives no Right or Title to our Obedience, no
more than a Right to inflict those Punishments that will enforce it. It will
easily be granted, that a Power of Punishing or Rewarding, and consequently of
contributing to our Happiness or Misery, are the only proper Motives of a
rational Obedience, but I cannot conceive how they can be the Ground of
Obedience that is due to a Superior. For nothing can be the Ground of
Obedience, but such a Dependence as entitles a Being to impose things upon us
by way of Precept or Command, and authorizes him to inflict Punishments when
his Commands are not fufilled or executed, so that the Ground or Obligation of
Obedience, due to Laws, is antecedent to a Power of Rewarding or Punishing;
since it must not give Right to a Power of imposing Precepts or Commands; but
to a Power of inflicting Punishments. Indeed the Miscarriages of this Notion,
seem to arise by not distinguishing the Ground of Obedience, from its proper
Motives. I will easily grant, that few would be persuaded to yield an Obedience
to Commands, that are disagreeable to any thing about 'em, were there no Power
of contributing to their Happiness or Misery, by Rewards or Punishments; and
therefore nothing can more effectually engage an actual Obedience, with the
Dissolute and Irreligious, than a Power of contributing to their Happiness or
Misery, by Rewards or Punishments; but I cannot think that a bare Power of
dispensing Rewards or Punishments, can represent the Right of Obedience, or in
the Language of this Author, the Right of Obliging another; no more than the
Right of Dispensing those Rewards or Punishments we have in our Power. This is
an Assertion that carries so much Evidence in it, that it holds every way: For
were any Subject placed in such Circumstances, that neither Rewards nor
Punishments were left to oblige him to yield an Obedience, yet he may for all
this, acknowledge his Superior's Right to his Obedience. Thus in the Case of a
general Defection, though the Rightful Sovereign is divested of a Power of
Rewarding and Punishing, the Rebels enjoying an absolute Possession of both;
yet their Ambition, Revenge, or Success may not carry 'em to such a pitch of
Insolence, but they may still be forced secretly to own their Sovereign's Right
to their Allegiance, as well as Right to that Power of dispensing Rewards and
Punishments, which they have wrested from him, and particularly a Right of
Punishment due to their unnatural Defection.

Again, I question not but the very Devils in Hell, though they know and feel the
irreversible Sentence passed against 'em, and consequently have no Motive left
to engage their Obedience, are forced to recognize their Fealty, or acknowledge
God's Right of Dominion over them, in obliging 'em to serve and obey him; and
his Right in passing that very Sentence they actually suffer for not obeying
him. For in this Sense they certainly believe and tremble, insomuch that their
very Belief seems to be an Instrument to enhance their Misery.

To conclude this Argument, I can freely grant, that there cannot be a Right of
Obliging without a Right of Rewarding or Punishing, because (as has already
been observed) the Right of Rewarding or Punishing is founded in a Right of
Obliging; but there may be a Power of Rewarding and Punishing, without a Right
of Rewarding, much less of Obliging. In one word, the recognizing a Right of
Obliging, or a Title to Obedience, is only an Assent of the Mind to a
particular Truth; and though the Power of Rewarding or Punishing are the only
proper Arguments to secure an Obedience, yet I hope there may be other Reasons
or Arguments to engage this Assent besides the Power of Rewarding or Punishing,
or of contributing to our Happiness.

. 3. Having thus offered my Reasons why I Dissent from this Author, before I
determine wherein the Right of Obliging consists, I shall offer something
against Mr. Hobbs's Notion. He, indeed, carries the thing somewhat higher, for
he peremptorily affirms, That the Right of God's Sovereign Authority over
Mankind, rests merely upon his irresistible Power; a sola potentia
irresistibili, De Cive, cap. 14, 15. And to confirm the Notion, he further
affirms, That one Man might have challenged a Right over the whole Offspring of
Mankind, had he been endued with a Sufficiency of Power to have resisted the
united Force of his Fellow Creatures, or, at least, protected them and himself.
Mansisset igitur ipsi jus dominii in caeteros omnes propter potentiae excessum
qua and se and illos conservare potuisset. Pursuant to this, he tells us. 7.
That our Obligations of Obedience are founded in our native Impotence and Fear,
a metu sive Imbecillitatis propriae (respectu Divinae potentia) conscientiae. I
must confess, there seems to be a near Affinity between this and the Notion
already excepted against, though this seems to be carried much further, and more
palpably beyond the Mark. For that admits a Power of Rewarding, as well as
Punishing, and consequently includes an Obedience mixed with Love as well as
Fear; but this fixes all upon the Power of Punishing, and consequently places
all upon Fear, or some Glympses of Hope, without any foundation for Love.
Indeed this is a Notion which deserves rather Contempt and Scorn than a formal
Reply. For it levels us with the unthinking Brutes that perish, by making Fear,
and that too the most servile part of it, a fear of Punishment, the only Spring
of Human Actions. This, we see, is the Sovereign Principle of his Religion, as
well as Politics, but it has been more than once learnedly confuted, as
concerned in the latter; and it is so absurd as applied to the former, that it
scarce deserves the least Notice, much less a Confutation. I shall therefore
dismiss this Notion with a few Observations.

First, It Is observable, that the Arguments brought to support it, are directed
to prove the proper Motive of our Obedience; not God's Right and Sovereignty to
it; or, in other terms, to enforce an Obedience, not to represent the Right or
Duty of Obedience.

Secondly, It is observable, that Arguments suggested against the last Notion,
must carry an equal Force against this. But, in a word, I think no considering
Person can discern any Consequence between a bare Power of punishing a Set of
Men, and a Right of imposing Laws and demanding Obedience to 'em; and if it is
false in a finite Power, it must be so in infinite; for there is no difference
besides original and delegated, infinite and limited, neither of which alter
the nature of Things, Notions or Consequences; so that infinite Power in
punishing as such, or, as it barely implies, an infinite Power or Ability to
punish, no more gives the Idea or Denomination of a Right of punishing (much
less a Right of imposing Laws) than a finite delegated Power does.

. 4. It remains, that I endeavor to represent, wherein the precise Nature of a
rightful Dominion, Obligation, or Obedience, with respect to God and his Laws,
consists. And I shall enlarge something more freely upon it, because all
delegated Right of Dominion and Obedience entirely depends upon it. Thus if we
suppose civil Government founded in Compact, the Right of Dominion and
Obedience must rest upon the Authority of Compacts, as it is a Law of Nature,
and an indispensable Duty to Observe and keep 'em; but the observance of 'em
cannot be an indispensable Duty, but by some Right and Authority, lodged in the
Author of Nature, that pronounces 'em such. Thus if civil Government takes its
Rise from a Paternal Right, Conquest, Immemorial Prescription, or Possession,
the Right of Dominion or Obedience invested in the civil Power, must rest on
the Authority of some Divine Law, either natural or revealed, ratifying or
confirming their Claims or Titles; and the Authority of this Law must rest on
some Right which God challenges to impose such a Law; so that the Authority of
every sort of rightful earthly Power is founded in a Divine Right, in virtue of
which, it is styled the Ordinance of God; since all their Right of Dominion, or
Authority, derives from a Supereminent Right in God. Now this is an absolute
Demonstration of the Absurdity of the Hobbists Notion, that Matters of Religion
receive their Obligation from the State or civil Power, and consequently induce
an absolute Obedience: This puts an eternal Silence to the Dispute, Whether we
are to yield an Obedience to the Laws of the State before the Laws of God, or
whether the Laws of the State are to be obeyed against the Laws of God? For
certainly, since God is the Fountain of all Power and Authority, the Duties of
Religion are ultimately determined by God, as well as receive their Obligation
from God; so that the civil Power, that derives all Authority from God, can
only exert a Power in matters of Religion, where God has not interposed, or
placed it in other hands; but it is the greatest Absurdity in Nature to pretend
a supereminent Power to that of God, when the whole any Man can pretend to
immediately derives from God.

But to return: First then, the true Original of God's Right of Dominion, or
Right of Obliging us, undoubtedly results from his creative and preserving
Power. That that Being, which by an absolute independent Power gives Being to
another, has a Right to give Laws, or fix the Measures and Rules of his Being,
seems to be a Maxim that carries a kind of Self-evidence in it; I Am sure it is
the very Argument advanced in the Sacred Canon, Romans 9.20, 21. Nay, but O Man,
who art thou that reply against God? shall the thing formed say to him that
formed it, why have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter power over the Clay,
of the same lump to make one Vessel unto Honor, and another unto Dishonor? It Is
well known, the Design of the Argument is to represent a supereminent Right in
God, even such as might justly authorize him to assign those Allotments to
Mankind, which his infinite Goodness would never suffer him to execute, and
consequently it must demonstrate a Right of giving Laws to those Creatures to
whom he gave a Being. But to pursue the Argument upon the Reasons of it, It Is
on all Hands allowed, that a Right of Dominion is founded in Property, and the
more absolute the Property is, the more unquestionable is the Right of
Dominion. That Property is the Foundation of Obedience, or a Right of Obliging,
both in respect of God and Men, this Author freely owns in another place, page
126. And yet he labors to wave it in the place before us, as will appear more
fully by and by. His Concessions are these, All the Reasons and Grounds of our
Obedience to Men, and of their Right of Obliging us, are Power, Goodness and
Property -- But God has all these Titles to our Obedience in the highest degree
possible, for by giving us our entire Being, and every thing that belongs to
our Nature, it is plain, that he has a greater Property in us by this Act of
Creation or Production, than can accrue to any Man by Conquest, Purchase,
Covenant, or any other way whereby Men come to have a Propriety in one another.
I think the Argument is carried so full and clear, that it seems not capable of
an Improvement. It Is certain there is no Property so absolute as that which
results from a creative preserving Power. For Creation makes the Property
absolute, independent and unborrowed; every Spring and Movement, every Power or
Faculty, every Interest or Happiness, either actually possessed, or capable of
being enjoyed, is an absolute Property of a Creator; for all that is within or
without us when he first set us forth into the World, was originally wrapped
up, and in time issued forth of his infinite Power and Wisdom; the whole Stock
of Materials came out from him, and when it is all returned back, he has but his
own. And is it not lawful to do what one will with his own? Subordinate
Proprietors indeed may be limited, as to the exercise, or use of what they have
a Propriety in, but an absolute independent Proprietor is to account to no one.
We may therefore, in the Language of our Savior, expostulate, who shall give
unto him that which is thus his own? Luke 16.12. Again, a preserving Power,
especially such as is peculiar to God, seems to advance, or at least
corroborate the Propriety he challenges in us. As our Beings took their rise
from another, and were formed by the Hands of an Almighty Creator, we are by a
necessity of Nature, or the origiginal Frame and Condition of our Nature,
Beings perpetually dependent, so that Reason, as well as Revelation, instructs
us, that in him we live, move, and have our Beings. He did not form and bespeak
us into Being, and after the finishing Stroke, put us wholly out of his Hands
with an intrinsic Power of Self-subsistence; but the same Power concurs to
continue our Beings, that was required to form us into Being, for every Breath
of Life, even our very Soul, and that Reason which seems to give us Authority
to act for ourselves, nay, the whole Cargo of Happiness, and every Span and
Minute of it, perpetually hangs on the preserving Power of a mighty Creator. So
that we may Expostulate in the Language of an Apostle, What have thou that thou
did not receive? 1 Cor. 4.7. Especially since we have received nothing but
what carries appearance of having not received it, in as much as it still rests
on the preserving Power of the Donor. Now what can establish a Right of
Dominion, or a Right of Obliging, if a Property so absolute, so independent, so
inseparable, and so peculiar as this will not do it? Not only the
uncontroverted Notions of Mankind, but the first Workings of Reason will
subscribe to it. Can Reason disown that Right by which it moves, and acts, and
subsists? Nay, to advance a little further, this Gentleman, in another place,
ingenuously confesses, that there are certain natural Propensions or
Dispositions in the Soul, that close in with particular Actions, before Reason
can well exert it self, p. 122. And certainly the present Notion of a Right of
Dominion, founded in a creative, preserving Power, will be immediately embraced
by the same original Propensions; for I Am persuaded, could the Mind feel the
Idea of such a Power upon her in an Instant, there would such an inward
Impulse, like a natural Instinct, arise, that must discover a tacit tremendous
kind of Assent to a Right of Fealty and Allegiance, before Reason could draw
forth into a shread of Arguments to induce it. Indeed, the Title to a Right of
Dominion is so indisputable, that Reason cannot suggest any thing that can
pretend to limit the exercise of it, besides God's own immense and unchangable
Attributes and Perfections. And therefore, though I will not dispute the Power of
God, whether he could give his Creatures such Laws as must make 'em eternally
miserable, (for did his Power extend thus far, his infinite Wisdom, Purity and
Goodness, must suspend the exercise of it) otherwise if these could admit of
it, I can see nothing that we can have recourse to, either as our own, or from
others, that could give Right or Foundation to dispute the Authority of 'em.
The Nature and Tendency of 'em, might very well obstruct the Observance of 'em;
but still there would be no real Foundation, exclusive of the Goodness and
Purity of God, to cancel the Authority of 'em. However these may be Niceties,
and therefore it is by no means material to adjust or settle 'em. It Is
abundantly sufficient, that a creative, preserving Power, is an ample
Foundation to establish a Right of Dominion and Obligations of Obedience, with
respect to those Laws which God at any time has enjoined us, or his infinite
Purity, Goodness, or Wisdom shall suffer him to enjoin us. For as long as his
blessed Attributes and Perfections regulate the divine Decrees, there can be no
Laws imposed, but what directly tend to the Happiness and welfare of his
Creatures.

. 5. But further, we may consider the creative Power of God, as in reality it
is, an incomparable Blessing or Benefit. For we cannot imagine, but an act of
Creation was an effect of infinite Wisdom and Goodness as well as Power. I Am
sure the distinguishing Marks of Favor God has placed on Man, beyond the other
parts of the Creation, in stamping him with his own Image, and framing him for
a Life and Action like himself, abundantly demonstrate that infinite Goodness,
conspired with infinite Power, in his first Production. It cannot then be
denied, but a Fund of Benefits was raised in the first Principles of his Being:
And certainly the first Notices of Reason instruct us, that Benefits imply an
Obligation to Duty, and a Right in the Benefactor to challenge it; and
therefore unless God, after he had given us a Being, had done any thing to
cancel that Interest which the Blessings of our Creation gave him in us, he has
a Right to our Obedience, without the addition of new Favors or Rewards; and
consequently a Power of contributing further to our Happiness, by dispensing
fresh Rewards, cannot be required to establish a Right of Obliging. But I must
freely confess, that the receipt of Benefits only induces an Obligation to make
suitable Returns for what is received; when this is done, the Obligation
ceases, and consequently it cannot infer such general Obligations of Obedience
as are implied in a legislative Power, or a Power of imposing Laws. It Is true,
where there is a continued Succession of Benefits, and where the very Laws
'emselves bring in new Benefits, it must needs perpetuate our Obligations, and
render 'em as universal as those that arise from a legislative Power. And this
being the true Case between God and us, I mean in respect of his Laws, a Right
of Duty and Obedience may be founded in that Fund of Benefits he has heaped on
us. But yet this is a further Demonstration, that the true and fundamental
Right of Dominion and Obedience flows from God's creative Power, whereby he
has made us, and not we ourselves. And that this Argument of Benefits, and all
others, concenter with, if not derive from it. In a word, this establishes
such an unquestionable Right of Dominion and Obedience, that were there no
other to support it, it is alone sufficient to give the great Creator of the
World a Right to Govern Mankind by Laws, and enforce the Observance of 'em by
suitable Rewards and Punishments.

. 6. It now remains, that I consider what is said by this Author, in Opposition
to God's Right of Sovereignty from his creative Power: His Words are these, It
is not his great and supereminent Power in creating Men, and giving them Being,
which is solely in itself the Ground and Foundation of his Title to their
Obedience. His Argument is, -- For was Misery the certain unalterable Condition
of their Being without End or Decrease, how could the Author of their Being be
imagined to oblige 'em to obey his Commands? Now before I give a direct Answer,
I cannot but remark that it seems to be disingenuous or unfair to argue upon
important Matters, by Suppositions that contradict the thing in Fact, that
never were in Fact, and that involve a Complication of Absurdities that they
ever should be so; such I take to be the Creation of Man to an unalterable
State of Misery without a Possibility of an End or Decrease; for this Way of
arguing often serves to confound rather than illustrate or discover Truth. But
2dly, An Instance ought to have been assigned against the binding Authority of
a creative Power, that implies a Power in God of contributing to our Happiness
or Misery; otherwise it concludes nothing against a creative Power as it is now
established, no more than it advances his own Hypothesis. But if Man is created
to an infinite and irreversible State of Misery, then God has no longer a Power
in this Case of contributing to his Happiness or Misery, and consequently can
be no Argument against a Right of Dominion founded in a creative Power, that
admits of infinite Rewards as well as Punishments. 3dly, The Instance given,
seems to discard Man from being the proper Subject of a Law: For it is in vain
to give Laws to a Being that is irreversible and infinitely happy or miserable,
since Laws in this Case can turn to no manner of End or Improvement; we may as
well suppose a Man infinitely, and irreversibly happy, and this implies
infinite Perfection, I mean as much as a finite Nature is capable of, and then
God will not only be disabled from adding to his Happiness by new Rewards, but
new Laws. 4thly. The Force of this Instance only extends to determine the
Motives, not the Right of Obedience; or, in a word, what will engage us
actually to obey, not wherein the Right or Duty of Obedience is fixed; and
therefore though Rewards and Punishments are the true and proper Motives to
secure a rational Obedience, yet the Right of Obedience may rest upon a
distinct Foundation. Now I have a President before me, I may at least with
leave of this Author suppose something out of the Way as well as he, to prove
the truth of the Assertion; suppose a Man created to infinite and irreversible
Happiness, though God has no longer a Power of contributing or adding to his
Happiness, yet I hope this Author in this Case will not deny God's Right of
Sovereignty, and Dominion over him, as his Creature. In one word, I have
proved, That the Devils in Hell are or will be in a State of irreversible and
infinite Misery, and though for this Reason they can be acted with no
Inclinations of Obedience, yet they must still believe, or acknowledge the
Sovereignty of their Creator, and tremble.

I presume I have now in some Measure fixed the Foundation of God's Sovereignty
and Dominion over us; and though I have used some Liberty in rejecting the
Opinions of others, yet I hope I may fairly account for it. For the Notions I
have contended for, are founded on things, that fall in with the established
Sentiments of Mankind; such as are properly founded in a creative preserving
Power, and consequently they must command a Submission, and Obedience upon the
clearest Convictions of Reason; and as long as the Arguments suggested are
cogent and satisfactory, it is not Prudence to leave the common Road, and put
things of Moment and Importance upon an Issue that it may be wants Evidence; or
at least contradicts some received Truths or Notions. But now an Enquiry of
this Nature has been made, I cannot dismiss the Argument without adoring our
Great and Good God, Creator and Sovereign, For who is like unto the Lord our
God, who dwells on High, and yet humbles Himself to behold the things that
are in Heaven and in the Earth, Psalm 113. ver. 5, 6. Though God is invested with
such an absolute Sovereignty over the Sons of Men, yet he has graciously
condescended to consider their Infirmities, Wants and Necessities. It Is already
concluded, that the Laws he originally gave to Mankind are adapted to the great
Ends and Interests of our Nature; they are not only contrived to preserve its
Frame from Violence and Ruin, but to advance and secure that Happiness its
capable of receiving: They are contrived not so much to represent the Authority
of an absolute Creator, as to establish the Happiness of his Creatures;
whatever Right of Dominion God may challenge to impose those Laws he has given
us, it is manifest they carry their own Arguments of Obedience along with 'em.
He has not bound us with the Cords of Fear, but Love; indeed they have the
highest Overtures of Love to recommend 'em; Love not only for the exceeding
Recompense of Reward that is annexed to the observance of 'em, but Love that is
contained in the very Frame of 'em, even Love as dear and valuable to us, as
the Love of Ourselves, and our own Happiness, since they are the direct and
immediate Instruments of Happiness; so that were God destitute of a Right of
imposing Laws, or even a Power of contributing further to our Happiness by
fresh Rewards, the Nature and Tendency of those Laws he has actually imposed
(if not obstructed by very debauched Propensions,) is sufficient to secure an
Obedience to him.

CHAP. IX. Of the Certainty of Rewards and Punishments under a State of Nature.
. 1. INdeed I have already touched upon this Argument, in the Disquisition of a
Law of Nature; but in order to the establishing a Scheme of Natural Religion, I
think myself obliged to enlarge a little further upon it. And first, I shall
not Appeal to the Argument of Natural Conscience, warranted by Revelation
itself; in as much as it contains an Absolving or Condemning Faculty in it, and
consequently must be acted with a Sense of Rewards and Punishments, the
immediate Spring or Appendage of such Powers or Faculties. This will be
considered on another Subject. To proceed then, It Is already concluded, That
the Dictates of Natural Reason are true and proper Laws established in a
rightful and competent Authority; that is, in one word, they are the Commands
of a Sovereign Power and Authority over the whole Offspring of Mankind. And
it is already concluded, that Rewards and Punishments (I mean such as are lodged
in the Hands of the Legislator, not the natural Effects of the Action, arising
from the Observation or Violation of the Law) are, at least, the necessary
Appendages or Concomitants of a Law. I will not run into the nice and tedious
Disputes of the Schools, and examine whether Rewards and Punishments are so
much of the Nature or Essence of a Law, that it loses the denomination of a Law
without them: This must be allowed by those, that place the Obligation of a Law
purely in a Power of Rewarding or Punishing. But this has been disputed
already, and therefore I Am inclined to the Negative. But however it cannot be
denied, but Rewards are an inseparable Property of a Law, adding Perfection to
it, and a Prerogative peculiar to every Legislator. For certainly no one can be
a rightful Legislator, without a Right to despense Rewards and Punishments:
They declare and signify a binding Authority, and no one can pass for a
rightful Legislator, without a Right to oblige or require Obedience. Herein a
Law distinguishes it self from Counsel or Exhortation. Again, they contribute
to the Perfection of a Law, since the Ends and Intentions of it cannot be
secured without 'em.

This is absolutely necessary, where the Persons that yield an Obedience, are
acted by contrary Dispositions and Propensions; and consequently they may
justly be esteemed inseparable Properties of a Law. I will not dispute the
Power or Prerogative of Heaven, whether God could not rightfully enjoin a Law
without annexing suitable Rewards and Punishments; but whosoever compares the
Laws he has enjoined with the Propensions of Human Nature, will be apt to
impeach his infinite Wisdom for not annexing suitable Rewards as well as
Punishments, since without 'em it is morally impossible to enforce the
Observance of such Laws. Indeed Rewards and Punishments are so much a Property
of a Law, that God thought fit to usher the first positive Law he gave to
Mankind into the World, by annexing 'em to it; In the Day that thou eatest
thereof thou shall surely die, Genesis 2.17. As if he intended to imprint a Sense
of Rewards and Punishments in the Original Idea of a Law. In a word, they are
so much the Property of a Law, that wherever there is the Face of Government,
and Laws enacted, Rewards and Punishments are esteemed the unquestionable
Prerogatives of the legislative Power. The whole Offspring of Mankind that
were ever under the Conduct of a Law, are acted with such a deep Sense of 'em,
that a Right of Punishment is never disputed, though the Penalty is not expressly
annexed. Thus far then at least we are advanced; unless we can deny a Sovereign
Creator a Right of exercising a legislative Power, we must allow him a Right of
executing Punishments upon the Violation of his Laws, as well as a Power of
rewarding the Observance of them.

. 2. But now the Certainty of Divine Punishments, as well as Rewards, pursuing
all his Laws, even Laws of Nature, is evinced from indisputable Authorities.
Few will be forward to dispute the Certainty of Rewards, and therefore I shall
consider it purely with respect to Punishments: And 1st, That God will dispense
certain Punishments upon the Violation of any Law of Nature, follows from the
general Ends and Intentions of all Lawgivers; especially the Supreme Divine
Lawgiver, that gave Being to every Soul, that is capable of receiving a Law,
as well as Laws to govern them by. Now no Lawgiver can ever give Laws to
others, without designing, for some special Ends and Purposes, to have them
executed, and observed: Without this it is absurd, for a Lawgiver to engage in
enacting Laws, or trouble his Subjects with the Burden that arises from the
Imposition of them. In a word, it is to act in vain, or to no purpose; an
Imputation that cannot without Horror, and Blasphemy be charged upon God, who
is always governed by the unchangeable Dictate of infinite Wisdom. Therefore
since we must conclude, that the Sovereign Lord of all the World, is acted with
the deepest concern to have his Laws executed, since Punishment is the best
Expedient to enforce the Execution of 'em, and since Punishment is due upon the
Violation of 'em, it must follow that Punishment will attend the Violation of
'em.

. 3. But 2dly, The Certainty of Punishment discovers itself from the Nature of
these Laws, with relation to those Beings to whom they are given. Now it is
already concluded, That Laws of Nature arise from the established Frame and
Condition of our Beings, and Concenter with the prime Ends and Interests of
'em. The Observance of Laws of Nature bring natural Rewards along with 'em,
sufficient to recommend 'em to the Choices of reasoning Beings; and the
Violation of 'em implies a Renuntiation, not only of the common Rules of
Prudence, but Self-preservation, the necessary Instinct of sensitive unthinking
Beings. And therefore when Laws of Nature are violated, there seems no Room or
Foundation left to excite or work upon infinite Mercy: Indeed, did God act like
an Egyptian Task-master, and not only require Brick without Straw, but continue
the Tail upon the greatest Sweat and Drudgery, merely to exert an absolute
Sovereignty and Dominion, he might sometimes be melted into Compassion, when a
poor Vassal happens to fall short of the Line of Duty; but now the Violation of
them, implies the highest Aggravations of Folly, and resolved Iniquity; and
therefore we cannot imagine that any thing can induce an infinitely wise
Creator to suspend any Punishments he can justly execute.

. 4. But 3dly, Let us consider the Nature of the Command, with respect to God
that gave them. Now certainly, since it is concluded, That Laws of Nature, or
Dictates of Nature take their Rise from the Author of Nature, they are not only
established according to the original Frame of created Nature; but according to
the infinite Purity and Holiness of God: They are the express Image of his
Person, and the Brightness of that infinite Mind, with whom there is no Shadow
of Darkness or Impurity. On this Account the Violation of Laws of Nature, is
not only an Affront committed against the Majesty and Sovereign Authority of
God; but a gross Aspersion upon his infinite Purity and Holiness; and
consequently it must engage him in the deepest Resentments: So that Punishment
is now no more an Act of Sovereignty, but an Act of Justice, to wipe off the
Dirt that is by this means cast upon his infinite Purity: If He Is of purer Eyes
than to behold, much less to cohabit with Iniquity, certainly he must be armed
with the highest Resentments, even such as will answer the Character he has
given of himself, for our God is a consuming Fire. And therefore though his
infinite Love and Mercy, might sometimes engage him to remit the Punishment
that is due to the Violation of a known Law, yet his infinite Justice will not
suffer him, till he has satisfied the Demands of his infinite Purity and
Holiness. In one word, whosoever seriously surveys the Actions of the Almighty,
will plainly discover how directly all his Laws result from the whole Circle of
his Divine Attributes; and therefore it is a senseless Project to set up his
Mercy against his Justice, Purity and Goodness, and thereupon promise our
selves an Exemption from Punishment: It Is evident therefore that Laws of
Nature, as well as all other Laws are guarded with Punishments suitable to the
Nature of 'em. And if God is not concerned to vindicate his Authority, he will
certainly be concerned to vindicate his infinite Purity and Goodness; and
therefore we may conclude though Hand join in Hand, the Disobedient shall not go
unpunished. I will not pretend to fix a Standard of Punishment for Offenses
committed against Laws of Nature, I mean with respect to the Nature, Degrees or
Continuance of them; for though there are a great many Arguments that might
suggest very considerable Discoveries in these matters; yet I think they were
in a great measure Secrets lodged in the Hands of God, till he thought fit to
reveal himself in Cases of this Nature, this being the proper Business of
Revelation: It Is sufficient to Believers and Christians, that he has now done
it beyond all dispute or cavil. Again, I will not pretend to conclude every
particular Soul that acts against Laws of Nature under the Vengeance of Heaven:
Punishment no doubt will be proportioned according to the means of Information,
and there may be certain Cases in a State of Nature, where invincible Ignorance
may be a Plea at the Bar of Justice to particular Persons; but yet the Actions
of Men are intricate, and Humane Knowledge shallow, and of a narrow compass;
and therefore we must leave these as Secrets to the Discerner of Spirits, and
that Candle of the Lord, I mean every Man's particular Conscience. It Is
sufficient that the Violations of Laws of Nature antecedent to Revelation,
render Mankind obnoxious to Punishments, and that all the Reason in the World
instructs us, God will infallibly inflict them. And therefore it is the Concern
of Mankind, either to live in the Observance of 'em, or to appear with a more
substantial Defense than I can think of, lest they bring themselves into an
irreversible State of Condemnation.

CHAP. X. Of the Original of Parental Duty, Love, and Affection; and filial
Reverence, and Duty.
. 1. IT was not my Design to descend to Particulars, no more than to present
the World with an exact List or Catalogue of Laws of Nature. Several Attempts
of this kind have been made by eminent and learned Hands, some with great
Success, and to all imaginable Satisfaction. It Is sufficient if I have in some
Measure prepared a Key that will unlock the Cabinet; and so far let us into the
Book of Nature, that we may by the Workings of natural Reason discover the
great Lines of Laws of Nature, and judge which are to be ranked into the
number, and which esteemed positive. But since the whole Hypothesis is advanced
without any regard to relative Characters, and consequently the Original and
Obligation of relative Duties are not so directly measured by it; I shall take
the Liberty of enquiring into those which God in his Providence has made so
important in the Affairs of Men, I mean those between Parents and Children. And
first of a parental Love and Affection: Indeed this is a Passion so deeply
impressed on the Frame of the Soul, that it powerfully discovers itself through
all the Parts of the Animal World. To love our own Offspring, seems to be the
Effects of a natural Instinct or Propension, that as violently exerts itself,
as the Spark that flies upwards. The Moral Vertuoso's of the present Age are
here shamefully foiled, in projecting their Scheme: For though they may labor to
stifle the Evidences of other Laws, that bespeak them to be the pure Workings
of Nature; the Testimony which the sensitive Order of Creatures bears to this
of natural Affection, renders their Attempts wholly unsuccessful. It might have
been replied, That a parental Affection expressed in the Care of their own
Offspring, is only a fashionable Employment, set on foot to perpetuate their
own Names and Memories; but when the lower Order of Creatures, that want
Faculties to form any such foresighted Projections, discover an equal Share of
Concern, Industry and Compassion; they as well as we must conclude that it is
the Effect of some peculiar Propensions, wove in with the Frame and
Constitution of our Beings. Indeed the Fondness, Vigilance, Labor and
Industry, that unthinking Brutes exercise toward there own Offspring, cannot
be resolved into any thing, but a powerful Sympathy and Earning which God has
implanted in them, as they bear their own Image and Representations, or rather
as they are the Effects of their own most intimate Powers and Faculties, and
carry their own Principles of Life, Blood, and Spirits in 'em; or, in a word,
as they imply the most sensible Expansion and Propagation of their own Natures.

And here I cannot well forbear a short Digression. If it be enquired how these
inward Motions are excited, I think it may be safely replied, Not by Reason, or
a formal Inference; for no Inference can be made even from particular Objects,
but by the help of abstract Ideas, or general Notions, or Maxims, and a Power
of comparing and distinguishing two or more things together: Thus, Suppose a
Lioness by Reason were to conclude that this, and not another, to wit, a
second, third, or fourth Whelp is her own Offspring; she must compare the
Offspring in certain Lineaments and Features, or other sensible Qualities, with
the Idea she had before conceived; she must compare this with the Idea she has
of those she rejects; and after a strict Agreement with the former, and a
palpable Disagreement with the latter, she cannot come to a rational Assent
without some abstracted Ideas of Identity and Diversity, or without the help of
two general Maxims, that where the present Object exactly agrees with the Idea
before conceived, it is the same, and where the present Object differs from the
Idea, which another particular Object yields, it cannot be the same but
another. This is the Analysis of the most simple Reasoning, and of a narrower
compass too, than some of Mr. Lock's Complex Ideas, and therefore I cannot but
wonder how he, upon his Definition of Reason, can assign Reason to Brutes,
especially when he denies them a Power of abstracting, or compounding, or
forming Complex Ideas and allows them a Power of comparing only in a very
inferior Degree. See Essay B. 2. Cap. 11. and B. 4. Cap. 17.

But to return, It Is visible these inward Motions of Tenderness and Compassion
are excited by the Emanation of certain Particles peculiar to the Offspring of
each respective Kind or Order of Brutes, chiefly affecting the Sense of
Smelling. And hence the silly Brute exercises the same Fondness toward her
Sister's Offspring; nay, even toward one of another Order, in case the
difference in Form, Smell, Shape or Proportion is not too notorious. Hence, we
may presume, the Affection dwindles and wears off, as these Particles that
accompanied the Offspring from the Womb, decay in Power and Efficacy; and
consequently that by a Law of Providence they retain 'em, till they are capable
of providing for their own Subsistence. From all this it is indisputably
evident, that a parental Affection is implanted in the very Frame and
Constitution of Unthinking Brutes. And therefore, since Providence has
instituted the same Laws and Methods for bringing Mankind into the World, with
those he has assigned to Brutes, we must conclude that he has created 'em with
the same original Propensions; and as he has given 'em nobler Powers and
Faculties, as Springs and Movements to every Action, so we must conclude that
these Propensions in Men are set on Work after a different manner from those in
Brutes. They are not acted by pure Sensations, but by the Powers of Reason
added to 'em; for when a Child is represented to the Mind to be the most lively
Exertion of our vital Powers and Faculties, to be Bone of our Bone, and Flesh
of our Flesh, the first Assent to such an Idea, must actuate these native
Propensions into all the Offices of Love, Care and Tenderness. These are but
the natural Sallies of that Affection which we were created with toward
ourselves; for no one as yet ever hated his own Flesh, but nourishes and
cherishes it. So that a parental Affection is so much a Law of Nature, that
the first Suggestions of Reason excite to the exercise of it. A single
Conclusion commands an Assent to the Duty, and at the same time kindles or
actuates the Affections into a Practice suitable to it. Indeed it is a Law that
so apparently results from the Frame of Humane Nature, that it carries the
Appearance of being Innate; and, in one word, for Man to love and cherish his
Offspring, is certainly the Result of an innate Propension; but the exercise
of it from the consideration of the close Affinity it bears to his own Flesh
and Blood, is a Work of Reason. This seems to be a Law truly written in our
Hearts, for if we ever think or reason upon the Subject, Nature will command a
practical Assent to it. Indeed Reason does not more carefully dictate the Law
than Nature; both within and without conspire to enforce the Practice of it;
for if the first Workings of Reason powerfully excite a paternal Affection, I Am
sure the primitive Impotence in which Providence has decreed Mankind to be
brought forth, loudly instructs us we should exert it in the most affectionate
Methods of Preservation.

In a word, A parental Care and Affection is so clearly pointed out as a Duty,
even by the Dictates of Natural Reason, that the perpetual Reproaches, which
the Care and Conduct of senseless Brutes throw upon the Neglect of it, are (one
would think) Punishment or Motive sufficient to enforce the Observance of it.
And therefore where such natural Bowels of Compassion are wanting, it is an
infallible Indication that the Mind is desperately sunk in Barbarity. And now
let the Latitudinarian endeavor to overturn this Branch of a Law of Nature, by
trumping up some unnatural Cruelties among the Greeks, yet I think it rests
upon an unshaken Foundation; and therefore before he Rejects it upon such a
slender Suggestion, let him consider that there are some few Monsters among
Brutes, that instead of Preserving, destroy their own Offspring. And as there
are some among this Order, so God may, to make known the Power of his Name,
suffer some Monsters among Men, without injuring a Law, that is established
with so much Evidence and Solemnity.

. 2. I proceed in the second place, to consider the Foundation and Original of
filial Reverence and Duty.

And first, I think a parental Care and Tenderness, in fencing us from Cold and
Nakedness, and giving us a liberal Education, when, without the first, we must
have perished in our own Impotence, is sufficient, if once applied to the Mind,
and attended to, to dictate the highest Tokens of Reverence, if not Duty. A
sense of such inestimable Benefits upon the first Convictions of Reason, are
sufficient to induce an Obligation to make suitable Returns to 'em, and I think
nothing less than that Honor and Reverence that expresses itself in a
conscientious Submission to all just and equitable Commands. I mean such as
pass for the Consequences of Laws of Nature, or are fairly consistent with 'em.
But this seems to carry us no further than the Kindness of a signal Benefactor
indispensably obliges us to; whereas a Parent implies something more
considerable than the Notion of a Benefactor can suggest, and therefore Reason
seems to dictate that God has raised a more strict and absolute Foundation of
Obedience; and certainly the Obedience which is paid toward a Parent, is
naturally acted with such a reverential Awe and Deference, as argues a kind of
Authority and Dominion, and consequently contains something more in it than a
Sense of Benefits. And truly our great Creator has sufficiently discovered the
thing, since he seems to have raised an Obedience from the same Title, upon
which his Right of Obedience is established; a creating as well as preserving
Power. For since he has decreed to make Parents the great Instruments of our
Production and Existence, as well as Preservation, we must conclude, that he
intended to establish an Obedience upon it. It Is abundantly concluded, that as
God is, by the Powers of Natural Reason, represented to us to be the great
Fountain of our Being and Preservation, a Sense of Duty and Obedience, as well
as a Right of Obedience, as powerfully results from it, as Light from the Sun.

And since Parents, by a Divine Decree, are honored with the same Characters
in as eminent a manner as is consistent with the Nature of a Creature or
Substitute; and are Created with strong and invincible Propensions, as well as
Laws and Obligations, to answer the Intentions of them, Reason will oblige us
to conclude, that God has thereby induced Obligations of a subordinate
Obedience, that is, in all those Cases wherein he has not expressly interposed
by a Law of Nature, or Revelation. Indeed this seems to be an Expedient to
establish and confirm that supreme Right of Obedience which his creative
preserving Power challenges over us; and in a word, his appointing our
Production in a strict Imitation of his Methods of Creation, is an Argument of
his Intentions to establish an unquestionable Right of Dominion in both Cases:
Since the same Motives instruct us to acknowledge a supereminent Right of
Dominion in our Common Parent, and a subordinate one in our Natural.

. 3. But further, it is already concluded, That the Offices of Parental Duty are
enforced upon the strongest Propensions, as well as Obligations, even an
invincible Concern for our own Flesh and Blood; and where the Concern is
reciprocal, we cannot imagine but it serves to establish a Right of Duty and
Obedience, as well as enforce it. But now as the great Creator of the World
thought it necessary to represent and enforce the Duty of Parents by certain
indeleble Propensions, so Reason will instruct us, that he has constituted
Propensions as powerful in Children, upon which he intended to establish a
Sense of Duty, as well as enforce an Obedience. Indeed where the Duties are
equally binding, of the same moment and importance, and an equal Intention to
maintain and enforce 'em, we cannot imagine but our wise Lawgiver would make
the same Provisions to see his Designs and Intentions answered. And truly the
Duties of both turn upon the same Foundation, a passionate Affection to our own
Flesh and Blood. For the Concern we entertain for it in ourselves, will
naturally convey itself to those that are but one remove from us. This is so
apparent, that it is justly to be esteemed a main Foundation of the common
Bowels of Humanity, and those Social Offices we exercise as Men toward one
another.

But to return; It Is visible, the Alliance is equal on both hands, and
consequently we may justly presume, that the Propensions of Duty and Reverence
are as strong on the Child's part, that receives a Being and Subsistence, as
the Propensions of Care and Compassion on the Parents that ministers both. The
Maxim holds this way, no one as yet ever hated his own Flesh. From all this
it is evident, since God has implanted such deep and powerful Propensions, we
must conclude, that the bare Proposal of a Parent to the Mind, so as to
apprehend the true force and purport of the Term, will naturally command these
Propensions into the highest Instances of Duty and Obedience, as well as Awe
and Reverence: This is a Duty so legible in the Frame and Constitution of our
Beings, that Nature, by the help of a single Conclusion at the same time,
dictates and enforces it: And I Am persuaded, were not the Frame of the Soul, in
this as well as other Cases, miserably perverted by vicious Habits, or
Dispositions, contracted through Education, or Example, it is impossible but she
must rest under a perpetual Sense and Apprehension of it.

And now let some Men Harangue upon the Act of Generation as liberally and
contemptibly as they please, we have all the Reason in the World to believe,
that God has made it one Ground of an eternal and indispensable Duty. I Am sure
he that subscribes to the Truth and Divinity of the Sacred Oracles, must own it
as such, since we find it expressly assigned as an Argument of the Duty: Hearken
unto thy Father that begat thee, Prove. 23. ver. 22. But then when we consider,
that we did not only take our Rise from the Loins of a Parent, but drew all our
Blessings through his Care and Inspection, and that God, by a special Decree,
enjoined it upon 'em as an indispensable Duty, it is an evident Confirmation of
the fundamental Title, that of Generation, and an unquestionable Argument, that
God intended to induce indispensable Obligations of Obedience upon it. And
truly he that considers and allows God's Right of Dominion to be founded in his
creative preserving Power, must allow a subordinate Right of Dominion in him
whom he has made the immediate Instrument and Substitute for displaying the
Glory and Wonders of it.

Thus far, I presume, it is abundantly evident, that the Obligations of Filial
Duty and Obedience rest upon an unquestionable Foundation. That which remains,
is to consider the Extent of 'em; and this will best be performed by applying
'em to the first Parent of Mankind, from whom the Notion will present itself as
it lies in its original Model. And certainly we may, in the first place,
affirm, That Filial Duty and Obedience does not barely consist in any external
Ceremonies, or Instances, of Respect, nor even those that terminate in
Obligations to succor and relieve a Parent under Want or Distress; but it
extends to the Regulation of our Lives and Actions by Commands and Laws in all
the Parts and Instances of Human Life.

. 4. From what has already been offered, I think it may, with force of Reason,
be affirmed, That the first Parent of Mankind is, by God, invested with a
Sovereign Power over his Offspring to prescribe Laws for the Conduct of their
Lives and Actions, in all Cases and Emergencies pursuant to the Laws of God --
whether natural or revealed, or where God has no way interposed to the
contrary. And pursuant to this, it is an uncontroverted Truth, that the
Patriarchs rightfully exercised the Priestly Function, till God interposed by a
positive Institution, and constituted a standing Order of Men to wait on his
Altar; this is so agreeable to the Divine Will, that though private Persons
cannot preside in the public Worship of God without an Intrusion of the
Priestly Office, yet every Parent by Divine Designation and Appointment is
still a kind of Priest within the District of his own Family: And certainly if
a Paternal or Patriarchal Power originally includes a Priestly Power, I can see
no Reason to dispute the Authority of a Kingly Power. And agreeable to this,
History assures us, that the Kings of Egypt, as well as other Governments,
originally exercised a Sacerdotal as well as Civil Jurisdiction.

But to proceed: The Business, or Design and Authority of the supreme Power, or
in a word, of all those delegated Powers which God has or ever will establish
among Mankind, is to prescribe Laws for the Regulation of our Lives and Actions
in all Cases and Emergences. And if Government and positive Human Laws -- by
the Laws of Nature and the Frame of our Beings are absolutely necessary to the
Conduct of Mankind in a State of Nature, as well as Grace; we have all the
Reason in the World to conclude, that this Power and Authority was originally
lodged in the paternal Power of Adam over his own Offspring. It Is certain, the
Prerogatives of the Supreme Power, do not extend to the wresting away real
Rights and Immunities which the Laws of Nature or Revelation give us; for their
original Institution is to advance the Welfare and Happiness of Mankind, by
securing and enforcing the observance of them; and therefore since it is
indisputably concluded, that an authoritative Power is lodged in the
Fatherhood, there is no Obstruction in the Nature of the Thing, but the
Paternal Power of Adam might extend to the imposing such Laws as are fitted to
answer these Ends and Purposes. Indeed God's making Government necessary, seems
to advance his Paternal Power to all the Rights and Prerogatives of it, unless
he had established it upon another Foundation by some express Law; for God
having created the Offspring of Adam with the strongest Propensions of
Obedience to him as a Father, God having established an Obedience upon the same
Principles upon which he challenges our Obedience, we must conclude, that a
Right of Obedience accrews to Adam as a Father in all those Cases wherein God
has made it necessary for Mankind to be governed by Laws: And since God has
made it necessary for the Offspring of Adam, and in them, the Offspring of
Mankind (even by the highest Necessity, that of Nature and Existence) to live
by Society, and to be governed by Laws in order to the enforcement of the Laws
of God, whether Natural or Revealed, and in them in order to the Security of
the Welfare and Happiness of Mankind, the Paternal Power of Adam must
originally extend to all the Prerogatives of delegated Power, so that by virtue
of his Characters which God brought him into the World under, he is to all
Intents and Purposes God's immediate Vicegerent, unless some positive and
express Law had signified the contrary.

In a word, a Necessity arising from the Frame and Order of Nature, is, in a
State of Nature, the proper Evidence for Divine Designation and Appointment, or
indeed, for any Law of Nature; and therefore since Civil Government is thus far
necessary, Reason will dictate God's Intentions in placing it, that is,
according to the Order of Nature, or where he has placed the principal Marks of
Authority or Supremacy. Indeed the Notion is founded on Arguments so clear and
convincing, that natural Reason dictates an Allegiance, as forcibly from a
Paternal Power as that of Compact, though there were nothing in the Nature of the
former that interferes with the Hypothesis of the latter; for an Allegiance
which derives from Compact, must rest upon the Authority of Compact, whereby it
becomes indispensably binding to all the Ends and Purposes of Civil Government.
And I think natural Reason, upon the received Laws of the Creation, as clearly
fixes an Allegiance in the Paternal Power, as a Law of God and Nature, as it
pronounces the Maintenance of such Compacts, a Law of God or Nature. But then
if upon Matter of Fact, or the revealed Methods of the Creation, there is any
thing repugnant to such a Compact, the Authority of a Paternal Allegiance
cannot be rejected. Now we profess and believe, that Adam was the Father of
Mankind; for even the Woman of whom the rest of his Progeny was to be Born, by
an Omnipotent Power issued forth of him; and since it is concluded, That for
this Reason as well as for the Offices of his Paternal Function, a real
Superiority as well as a Right of Allegiance is derived to him, we must
conclude, that his Offspring could not challenge a Right of Compact any way
derogatory to that Pre-eminence and Superiority which the Laws of God and
Nature had thus placed him in. In a word, it is manifest his Age, his Knowledge
and Experience gave him a civil Pre-eminence over his Offspring, and if we add
this to his Paternal Rights, Reason will force us to acknowledge an
Authoritative Superiority. Here is not a bare Priority in Time, or Place, or
for Order, or external Ceremony; but a Priority, or rather Superiority in Power
and Authority. Now all this loudly exposes the Conceit of an original State of
Equality, without which, there can be no Color or Foundation for an original
Contract. Indeed this is a Conjecture so vain and groundless, that the Divine
Methods in Peopling the World by Descent and not by a Multitude at once, is
sufficient to shake the Credit of it. And certainly nothing but the wild
Supposition which Mr. Hobbs has begged to advance his Hypothesis, is
contradicted by Matter of Fact, (I mean a Multitude of Men, by Divine
Appointment, sprung up like Mushrooms) or an open Renunciation of the History
of the Creation, can assert the Doctrine of a natural Equality. But to consider
the Argument of Compact a little further: It Is certain, Compact is no further
valid, than it is materially, or intrinsically good; and therefore no one can
rightfully enter into Compact, to resign up or cancel any Laws of God or
Nature, or in a word, any further than it is consistent with the true Ends of
Government; and thus far the Necessity of Government (without any Injury to
natural Liberty) seems to place its Power and Authority in the Person in whom
the very Order of Nature, as well some peculiar Marks of Sovereignty, have
apparently fixed it.

CHAP. XI. Reflections on some Passages in Mr. Lock 's Essay of Human
Understanding, and a Treatise of Government. Part 2.
. 1. ANd first, Mr. Lock having fixed the Original of what the World generally
calls Principles, though never so remote from Reason, in the Power of
Education, whereby they are rivetted in the Mind before the Memory begins to
keep a Register of their Actions, he observes, Men from hence conclude, That
those Propositions, of whose Knowledge they can find in 'emselves no Original,
were certainly the Impress of God and Nature upon their Minds, and not taught
them by any one else. This he endeavors to illustrate by the Instance of
Filial Reverence. These (says he) they entertain and submit to, as many do to
their Parents with Veneration; not because it is Natural, nor do Children do
it, where they are not so taught, but because having been always so educated,
and having no Remembrance of the beginning of this Respect, they think it is
natural, Essay B. 1. Cap. 3.. 23.

I will not peremptorily limit the Words to a Sense which they seem to express.
If Mr. Lock, by the Term Natural, intends so as Native Inscriptions are, then I
can readily grant that a Filial Veneration is not in this Sense Natural. But if
he affirms that it is not Natural, as Laws of Nature are (which he seems to do,
when he tells us, that Children would not pay any Veneration, were they not so
taught) then he must pardon me if I cannot join with him in the Notion; for I
hope I have sufficiently proved that Children are naturally endowed with as
strong Propensions of Filial Reverence and Respect, as those in Parents of
Parental Tenderness and Compassion; and that the bare Perception of the Idea or
Term Parent, would naturally Actuate these native Propensions in such a manner,
as to command not only Solemn Reverence and Respect, but Filial Obedience, had
not Education or ill Example suggested something to the contrary. Indeed, I Am
persuaded, a great deal of Filial Reverence and Duty is worn off by those
Devolutions, which the Reasons and Necessities of civil Government have made in
the chiefest Branches of Parental Power; otherwise I question not but a Sense
of the highest Veneration and Duty, would constantly possess the Minds of Men,
as no doubt it did under the first Government, where the Supreme Power was both
Parent and Sovereign.

. 2. But to consider the Positions of another Treatise, I presume, well known
to Mr. Lock.

And first in order to overturn the Parental Power, as it extends to
Government. This Gentleman, as well as Mr. Hobbs (though both in a different Way)
thinks he has gained the Field, by proving, that the Mother is an equal Sharer
in that Power which accrews to a Father as a Parent: He proves it from both
Testaments, particularly Exodus 20.12. and Ephesians. 6.1. and the Remark is, Had but
this one thing been well considered, without looking any deeper into the
Matter, it might perhaps have kept Men from running into those gross Mistakes,
they have made about Parents. Two Treatises of Government, Part 2. Cap. 6.. 52,
53. Now in Answer to this, I will not deny but the Word of God enjoins Duty and
Obedience to both Parents; but he cannot be ignorant but it must be assigned to
the Mother, only in a Subordinate manner; for else I would fain know how with
any color of Truth or Reason he expounds these Passages. Thy Desire shall be
to thine Husband, and he shall rule over thee, Genesis 3.16. Wives submit
yourselves unto your own Husbands, as unto the Lord; for the Husband is the
Head of the Wife, even as Christ is the Head of the Church. Therefore as the
Church is subject unto Christ, so let the Wives be unto their own Husbands in
every thing, Ephesians. 5.22. etc. St. Peter is as large on the same Argument, to
whom I shall refer him, Ephesians. 1.3. So that it is evident the revealed Law gives a
supereminent Power to the Father, even as a Father, as well as a Husband; since
the Wife is to obey in all things, and consequently to give place to his
Authority, in laying his just Command upon his Children.

But further, the natural Frame of Man, not only in respect of Strength and
Vigor of Body, but Courage and Resolution of Mind, seems to give him so much
Superiority and Pre-eminence, as by the Dictates of Natural Reason is
sufficient to establish a supereminent Power and Authority to that of the
Woman: I Am sure the holy Spirit draws the Character not unlike this, when the
Woman is styled The weaker Vessel. But now, in the present Argument, we are to
have recourse to Matter of Fact, by considering the Method God took in the
Production of the Woman; for the Dispute being whether de facto, the Paternal
Power of Adam was Supereminent to that of the Woman; It Is abundantly concluded
if it be made appear from the established Methods of the Creation; and the
Argument is the same in the Original of Government; for this is to be taken
from Matter of Fact, especially as long as it is recorded and transmitted upon
unquestionable Authority; and when once the Original of Government is fixed,
the Succession of Governments will easily be accounted for, without Projecting
an imaginary State of Nature and Equality, and original Compact upon it. It is
not my Business now to draw the Scheme, but if this Author will not be content
without it, he shall have it upon Demand; and therefore it is unpardonable
Arrogance in those that receive the Story of the Creation, to erect a Scheme
without any regard to it, or rather such as is highly inconsistent with the
plain Doctrines of it.

But to return, the Records of the Creation assure us, That the Woman, or
Mother of Mankind, took her Being from the Man; God did not think fit to give
her an Original Independent of the Man, by an immediate Creation from common
Matter, but made her a Debtor to the Man, by forming her of his Flesh and
Blood; and therefore if this is allowed, natural Reason will pronounce it a
Mark of natural Subjection, and consequently assign her no more than a
subordinate Authority. I Am sure the holy Spirit remarks as much, where we are
expressly told, The Head of the Woman is the Man, and that He is the Image and
Glory of God; but the Woman is the Glory of the Man, for the Man is not made of
the Woman, but the Woman of the Man; neither is the Man created for the Woman,
but the Woman for the Man, 1 Cor. 11.3, 7, 8, 9.

But further, If a natural Subjection does not Result from the Laws of
Creation, we may find it established by a Positive Law: For thy Desire shall be
to thy Husband, and he shall Rule over thee, Genesis 3.16. Indeed it deserves our
Notice to observe how this Author labors to droll away the Import of the Text,
by exposing Adam's Monarchy, being in the next Verse, in his own Language,
Condemned to be a Day-labourer for Life, Pa. 1. Cap. 5.. 44, 45. But who sees
not through the Weakness of the Harangue, for after all his Tricks and
Insinuations he is not able to prove that God has not placed the Woman in a
State of Subjection, though it be interpreted as part of her Punishment, and
consequently established a supereminent Power and Authority in Adam, though he
wanted not his Punishment in being condemned to reap the Blessings of this
Life, even of Government itself, in continual Sweat and Labor. Here is not a
supereminent Power established in Compact, but conferred by God himself. Indeed
it is indisputably evident, all those Rights of Dominion that were invested in
Adam, even that which results from his Conjugal Estate, was conferred by God;
for though God was pleased to leave the Conjugal Estate of his Descendents, to be
established upon voluntary Contracts, he thought fit to make his an immediate
Grant as well as the Authority of it. But then, though the entering into a State
of Matrimony now is a pure Compact, yet the Authority that derives upon the
Husband from it, is by no means a piece of Compact; this is established by God
alone in the first Institution of Matrimony, and enforced by After-laws.

The Sum of all is this, The Rights of Parental Jurisdiction considered in the
Nature of the Thing itself, had been in common to our first Parents, had not
God signified the contrary, by giving the Woman a Being from the Man, and
assigning him a supereminent Power by an express Law; and since this is
abundantly evinced, I hope an imaginary State of Equality or Freedom shall not
hinder God from limiting his own Ordinances at Pleasure; and consequently the
Rights of the Paternal Power are indisputably invested in the Fatherhood. Here
is the main Effort of our Adversaries; for the only Artifice to strip the
Fatherhood of all civil Jurisdiction, was to clog the Notion with Absurdities,
by contending for a joint Jurisdiction in the Mother, upon the Foundations of
the Parental Power; and therefore this being set aside, there is nothing left
that is of force to Discard any of those Prerogatives that have hitherto been
assigned.

But to proceed, He tells us that the Parental and Political Power are so
perfectly Distinct and Separate, and Built upon so different Foundations, and
given to so different Ends, that every Subject that is a Father, has as much a
Paternal Power over his Children as the Prince has over his, Ib.. 7. But it is
manifest the Argument is, concerning Paternal and Political Power, as it was in
the original Institution of 'em. And it is already granted, that Paternal and
Political Power, as exercised in the present Governments of the World, are
visibly distinguished; but it cannot be an Argument they were so in their
Original. The present Governments of the World rest upon different Foundations
from what Government did in its Original, and yet it does not follow that their
Foundation was an original Compact from a perfect State of Nature or Equality,
for I defy this Author to prove that there was ever any Body of Men regularly
and de jure in such a State, since the Creation, unless Manumitted by the Civil
Power.

Again, the Exercise of the Paternal Power in private Families, that are the
Descendents of Adam, is vastly different from what it was in the Original; for
God having made Government necessary to the Support of Mankind, it was
absolutely necessary that that part of the Paternal Power, which consists in
Governing by Laws, should devolve from Under-families upon Adam, and
consequently in After-governments it must still remain in the Father of each
respective Government, or in other Terms in the Governing Power. But
notwithstanding all this, the commanding Power and Authority, which has been
abundantly asserted to be in the original Rights of the Paternal Power, by the
Laws of God, and the Reasons of the thing, still remains in private Parents or
Fathers, where the Civil Power has not expressly interposed, or where it is
necessary it should exert itself in the Conduct of Humane Life. But to
demonstrate from eternal Distinction of Paternal from Political Government, he,
in another place, presents us with an Instance of a Stranger's coming into a
Family, who should Kill one of the Patriarch's Children; upon which he allows
the Patriarch a Power to put him to Death, and yet he says it is impossible he
should do it by Virtue of any Paternal Authority, Ib.. 74. Now, for my part,
I Am so far from discerning any Impossibility, that I cannot fathom the
Consequence of the Argument. For certainly unless he would beg the Question, or
pronounce it Impossible, that a Paternal Power should employ a Coercive Power
in it, within the Districts of its Government, over all those that disturb the
Peace of it; why may not the Power of Capital Punishments be attributed to a
Paternal Power, without a Consent or Deputation from those Children that are
the principal Members of it? Though he cannot punish the Stranger as his own
Offspring, yet if a Political Power branches itself from a Paternal Power (as
has been sufficiently proved) I hope no one can deny but there is such Powers
lodged in it as are sufficient to secure the Ends of Government, and
consequently a Coercive Power to Punish any from within or without, that invade
the Peace of it.

But 3dly, To support his own Hypothesis, and avoid the Political Authority of
the Paternal Power, he affirms, That though the Duties of Honor and Respect are
Eternal, yet the commanding Power is Temporary, and ceases with Nonage or
Minority. See 64, 67, 69, etc. That when this Power expires, Children are in as
absolute a State of Freedom as the Father, and that too, not only in respect to
the Father's Authority, but of the Civil Government. This is the Substance of
several Sections, and it is very visible, that his chiefest Arguments are raised
upon Paternal Power, as it is exercised under the established Governments of the
World, which is a Fallacy already detected. But to make some Returns according
to Method and Order. The Duty of Children I Am persuaded, in the full Extent of
it, is of eternal Obligation, where it is not superseeded by a higher Law, that
of Society, upon which account alone (as is already observed) part of it by the
Reason and Necessity of Things devolves upon the Supreme Power. Indeed, if what
has been asserted carries Evidence and Truth in it, the Duty of Children must
be Eternal. It has been abundantly proved, That the Ground or Foundation of
Filial Duty and Obedience is Eternal, viz. That of Generation, and an
unchangeable Affection resulting from it: And if the Ground of Obligation is
eternal, the Duty must be so too.

But to proceed, the Word of God seems express in this Matter; for we are not
only enjoined to Honor, but Obey our Parents. Now it is well known, Obedience
supposes a decretory Power, or commanding Authority; and the Precept not being
given under any Limitations that make it Temporary, I cannot discern by what
Authority this Gentleman pronounces it Temporary. Indeed I cannot imagine how
any one that receives the Holy Scriptures for the Word of God, can safely
pronounce the Duty of Filial Obedience Temporary; for we there find it
established and enforced upon such ample Provisions, that we must believe God
designed to perpetuate the Obligations of it. The time would fail me to collect
all the Passages that manifestly favor this Notion; I shall therefore touch on
a few that are very remarkable.

And first, the Power of Blessing and Cursing exercised by the Patriarchs, is a
considerable Evidence of the Perpetuity of the Duty: It Is well known the
Patriarchs constantly exercised this Power, and their Descendents as
conscienciously acknowledged it.

It was a Sense of this Power, that made Jacob Expostulate before he embraced
his Mother's Expedient: My Father peradvanture will feel me, and I shall be to
him as a Deceiver; and I shall bring a Curse upon me, and not a Blessing, Genesis
27. v. 12. It Is certain the Patriarchs challenged an indisputable Right to
exercise this Power; for though Jacob had obtained the Blessing by an ungenerous
Artifice, or Stratagem, yet Isaac thought himself obliged to confirm it; I have
blessed him, yea, and he shall be blessed, v. 33. A most convincing Argument
truly, that this Right of Blessing and Cursing was founded in a Divine
Original; and certainly there needs nothing more to demonstrate the Divine Will
and Pleasure than the inseparable Effects and Consequences of his Power, since
we find that the Blessings or Curses of Parents as infallibly pursued their
Children as they were dispensed. Thus the Blessing of Isaac attended Jacob, and
the Curses of Noah pursued his Son Canaan: Cursed be Canaan; a Servant of
Servants shall he be unto his Brethren, Genesis 9. v. 25. Now certainly a
Provision of such special Powers can carry no less a Design in it than the
perpetuating of a Filial Reverence and Duty: If God had not designed to
establish an Immortal Power and Authority in the Parent, why should he confer
such distinguishing Marks of Sovereignty and Dominion? Can we imagine, that such
a tremendous Power was exerted purely to secure an Obedience during Minority,
and a ceremonious Reverence afterward exclusive of a commanding Authority? No
certainly, this is a Conjecture, that runs counter to all the Accounts of Time;
for the Obedience of Children in the first Ages of the World was as remarkable
as the Parents Commands after a State of Maturity; and indeed it could proceed
from nothing less than a just Sense of an indeleble Character and Authority, as
well as Power to enforce it.

But further, the Duty and Obedience of Children is so far from being any wise
Temporary, that God has given his own express Promises to perpetuate the
Obligation. St. Paul has long since observed, that, Children obey your Parents,
is the first Commandment with Promise, Ephesians. 6.1, 2. And certainly where the
Sanction is peculiar or extraordinary, the Obligation of the Command must bear
a proportion to it; and where God has discovered himself so eminently
solicitous to enforce the Duty by special Rewards as well as Punishments, we
may conclude he intended to perpetuate it. Thus far the Suffrage of Scripture
seems clear and indisputable: But if all this will not convince, I shall refer
this Author to the Story of Jonadab, the Son of Rechab, out of the very Mouth
of the Prophet: The Command or Prohibition was against drinking of Wine as well
as building of Houses, which seems to be an Abridgment of the Natural Liberties
of Mankind, and consequently if the Commanding Power of Parents ceases with
Nonage, it may very well do so in Cases of this Nature. But instead of this, we
find the Obligation asserted by a Complication of Arguments; Jonadab advances
the Command by virtue of a Parental Power and Authority: Ye shall drink no
Wine, neither ye nor your Sons for ever, that ye may live many Days where ye be
Strangers, Jer. 35. v. 6, 7. The very Commandment with Promise. And the
Rechabites were possessed with as deep a Sense of its Obligation; for when the
Prophet, by the Command of God, tried their Fidelity, the only Argument of
their Noncompliance, was the Command of their Father Jonadab, and the Prospect
of Inheriting the Blessing annexed to the Command, Thus have we obeyed the
Voice of Jonadab our Father, and done all that Jonadab our Father commanded us,
v. 8, 9. But this is not all, for the Obligation of the Command is not only
recognized by Men, even those that were immediately concerned in it, but by God
himself; for he does not only annex the Promise of the Command, to the
Observance of it: Because ye have obeyed the Commandment of Jonadab your
Father, and kept all his Precepts -- Therefore Jonadab, the Son of Rechab,
shall not want a Man to stand before me for ever, v. 18, 19. But expressly
represents that eternal Obedience that is due to his Commands by it; for this
was God's Design in obliging the Prophet to try the Rechabites Constancy and
Perseverance, by setting Cups and Pots full of Wine before them, and commanding
them to Drink; and therefore the Inference is Recorded: Go and tell the Men of
Judah, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, Will ye not receive Instruction to
hearken to my Words? The Words of Jonadab, the Son of Rechab, that he commanded
his Sons are performed; for unto this Day they drink no Wine, but obey their
Father's Commandment: Notwithstanding I have spoken unto you, rising up early,
and speaking, but ye hearkened not unto me, v. 13, 14. And now how can any Man
dispute the Perpetuity of a Commanding Paternal Power. Has not God himself
drawn the Parallel? If his Commanding Power is not Temporary, neither is that
of the Parent. The Nature of the Command might have engaged a powerful Advocate
against it, the Freedoms and Immunities of a reasonable Being, but yet the
Conscience of so just a Superior, bearing so awful a Character as that of a
Father, commands an immediate Submission. Indeed this single Instance
represents it as a Doctrine universally received, and in those Ages undisputed;
and therefore I presume it will be a Task of some difficulty for this Author to
produce a Dispensation, much more a Repeal under the Gospel Economy.

But I proceed to consider the Arguments already advanced to support the
Notion, and I find the main and principal Argument is formed from the Nature,
and Reason of Paternal Authority; for the Author, expressly resolves the
commanding Power into a help to the weakness, and imperfections of their
Nonage, a Discipline necessary to their Education, but when they are once
arrived to the Enfranchisement of the Years of Discretion, the Father's Empire
then ceases. Sect. 65. But let us consider this in the Instance already given,
that of our first Parent. I would demand of this Gentleman, whether after Years
of Discretion, a Discipline of Civil Commands, and Laws, were not absolutely
necessary for the Conduct of our Lives and Actions; yet as necessary as a
commanding Discipline to a Child's Education. If therefore Civil Government
from the beginning was necessary, even for Adult Persons, this Discipline must
be so too; and then let Reason determine whether this commanding Authoritative
Power, or this Discipline of giving Laws, and Commands was not Appropriate to
Adam, in whom God had invested all deligated Power and Authority; and that too
under the higest marks of Sovereignty, and Dominion. I Am persuaded an unbiassed
Person would pronounce such a Title unquestionable, when there is no express
Law that declares the contrary. Again he tells us, The Power which Parents have
over their Children arises from that Duty which is incumbent on them, to take
care of their Offspring during the imperfect State of Childhood. See Sect. 58.
But I am persuaded, I have with good Evidence fixed it on a distinct
Foundation. Parental Duty, indeed, is a substantial Reason, that God should
Establish a Right of Dominion, but it is no Argument that he has Established it
on this Foundation: no, I have proved the contrary. But admit we, that a
Parental Right of Dominion was founded in the Duties of a Parent, yet if
Parental Duty be perpetual, a Parental Right of Dominion must be so too.
Indeed, to give color to this uncouth Notion, he Suggests, that that part of
Parental Duty which consists in Education, ceases when the business of
Education is over, he means when Nonage ceases. Sect. 69. But certainly, if
Instruction, or Commands are at any time necessary, and not superseded by a
higher Power, it is the Indispensible Duty of the Father to enjoin them, and the
Duty of Children to embrace them. I presume Christianity will instruct every
believing Father, that a Child's Age, or Abilities can never exempt him from
giving such Counsels, and Precepts (if he stands in need of them,) as may
induce him to live in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. Upon the whole
then, the Commands of private Parents after Nonage, are for the most part
superseded, by the ample provisions of the Civil Power in all Regular
Governments: and in like manner, the power of Punishments is justly taken away
upon that Interest, or Property, which the Government challenges in all its
Members; but yet if any thing is omitted in the Civil Power necessary to the
Conduct of the Child's Life, I am persuaded the Parent is not only to
administer Counsel, but lay his Commands, and the Child is indispensibly
obliged to yield a Conscientious Obedience, upon a just Deference to the
Parents's Character, and Authority. This is to obey, as unto God and Christ,
and not unto Men. This Author freely confesses, that the Duty of Piety
expressed not only in Acts of Reverence, and Respect, but in supporting, and
defending the Persons of our Parents, is perpetual; and I am persuaded there
can be no Just Reason assigned, why a Reverential Obedience to just and
reasonable Commands is not perpetual too; it is indeed replied, that the former
Results from the Laws of Gratitude, founded in Benefit, so inexpressible, that
the one can never be Cancelled, nor the other Compensated; but I hope, it is
proved they are founded in something besides, that serves to perpetuate an
Obligation; and since a commanding Power has the same Authority and Foundation,
I cannot conceive why an Obedience to the Commands of Parents should not be
perpetual, where God seems to have made such Commands necessary to the Conduct
of Humane Life. Thus far here is no Foundation given for the Suggestion this
Author has made in extending the Gospel Precept to a commanding Power, as if by
virtue of it a Parent should pretend to treat an Adult Son still as a Boy.
Sect. 68. For the necessity of such commands is superseded by the circumstances
of Age, and Personal Abilities; and tho it is reasonable to conclude, that a
Commanding Power remains, yet it ought at all times to be exercised according
to the necessity, and reason of things: In a word, the principal Duties of
Parents, and Children appear from the nature of the things to be in their
Original Institution perpetual, and therefore before this Author had pronounced
them Temporary, he should have considered, whether it was not to make the
Commandments of God of none effect, to support his vain, and groundless
Traditions, such as a State of Freedom, Equality, and original Contract.

. 4. To consider the State of Freedom, which is affirmed to be as absolute as
that of the Father. The only Reason and Argument assigned for this Freedom, is
in his own Language this, The Freedom then of Man, and liberty of Acting
according to his own Will, is grounded on his having Reason, which is able to
instruct him in that Law he is to govern himself by, and make him know how far
he is left to the freedom of his own Will. Sect. 63. Now I am content to put
the Notion on this issue, with a small matter added to it. If Man at a certain
period is endued with a sufficiency of Reason to instruct him in that Law he is
to govern himself by, and make him know how far he is left to the Freedom of
his own Will, and had Ingenuity, and Integrity enough to prosecute it, then I
will grant that he may challenge a Freedom, or Liberty of acting according to
his own Will without being accountable to any one, till his own voluntary
Compact had made him so: But then such a sufficiency as this, must supersede
the necessity of all Civil Government, or positive Laws; Certainly then if Man
after the utmost pretenses to Reason, has not a sufficiency of Reason at all
times to instruct himself in the Line of Duty, no more than Integrity to
adjudge his own Actions conformable to the Line of Duty; we may with very good
Reason conclude, that Maturity of Reason does not cancel the Bonds of Filial
Obedience, or (to have respect to the instance before us,) admit the Children
of Adam to an equal State of Liberty with himself, that is, in his own
Language, To challenge an Executive Power in the Exercise of Laws of Nature as
much as their Father, as well as Prescribe to their own Will, and regulate
their Actions. These are positions that can no way be reconciled with the
necessity of civil Government, under the most improved State of Reason, and
that Dominion which by the Laws of the Creation, God had invested him with; for
God having made Government necessary for the Support of Grown Men, and actually
Invested Adam with a Right of Dominion; Reason must determine without the
breach of Humane Freedom, that the Dominion of Adam, was Originally designed to
extend as far as was necessary to the Regulation, and Conduct of Humane
Actions, as well by Laws, as Counsel. Indeed, the original Mistake is lodged in
the Notion of Civil Government compared with Humane Freedom; as if Humane
Freedom, or Natural Liberty, were, in the very Notion of it, inconsistent with
Government, or as if it were a Breach of Natural Liberty to be placed under the
Conduct of that without which, Man with all his Reason cannot Subsist, much
less be Happy. Now it is visible, though Government implies a Power of imposing,
and enforceing Laws, yet the Original Design of it was the Happiness of Mankind
in the Regulation of their Lives and Actions, according to the Laws of God,
whether Natural, or Revealed. It is true, the Institution of such a Power may
imply an absolute Trust, and whether this Trust is forfeited, and accountable,
when the Original Ends of Government are Violated, is another Question. But it
is Indisputable these are the only true ends of Government. And I think, no one
can affirm, that the direct Methods to Happiness are Breaches of Humane
Freedom, yea rather, they are the only Expedients to preserve it, and therefore
I can see no Rights in the Exercise of Humane Reason, or Freedom founded on it,
to Exempt the Children of Adam from that Civil Jurisdiction that Results from
his Paternal Power. And now I presume there is enough offered to Reject the
pretense of an unlimitted Freedom, I have enlarged more plentifully upon it,
because it is the Foundation of that State of Equality, upon which Compact is
made the first Principle of Civil Government; for this reason I shall offer a
few Arguments more, to represent the Absurdity of it.

. 5. And first, if Children coming to the exercise of Reason are not only
discharged from their Paternal Allegiance, but acquire a State of Freedom equal
to their Father, as this Position directs, Sect. 66. Then the Children of Adam,
had an unquestionable Right to erect a Government over his Head, or at least
upon Noncompliance to Exclude him from the Benefits of it; and in a word, to
drive him forth from his own Territories; since Civil Governments always
challenge a Power to Banish those that refuse to pay Allegiance to them. That
the Children, and Descendants of Adam could act thus, is evident; for as they
were in a State of Freedom, and Equality, they could enter into a Compact at
Pleasure, and consequently Establish a Government upon a Majority against their
Fathers. It Is highly Probable, the Children of our First Parent were acted by
so deep a sense of Duty, as would prevent them from the Executing their
pretended Privilege; but I am persuaded, were a Set of Men under the Influence
of this Author's Principles, placed in a State of Nature under their Natural
Father, the Resentments which the Discipline of their Education might give
them, would easily engage them to bandy together at such a rate, as to Erect a
Government upon his Head; and if they did not call the Old Gentleman to an
account for Maladministration, yet upon Noncompliance, they might think
themselves obliged to withdraw those small remains of Respect, which this
Gentleman has assigned him. However it is manifest, this Position will
Vindicate the Lawfulness of the Project, and therefore it can be no Crime to
apply it to the Father of Mankind, and his immediate Descendants. But now, what
can be more Unnatural than this is? Can Man pretend the least Reverence, or
Respect upon such a Horrid Treason as this? Men may Harangue on the Formalities
of Respect as long as they please, but certainly it is some Pretensions to
Authority that can preserve a Filial Reverence that is truly valuable, that is,
such a Reverence as expresses it self in a cheerful Obedience to all just, and
reasonable Commands.

. 6. But to draw toward a Conclusion, this Notion of Freedom carries another
Absurdity in it as Injurious to the Civil Power, as it is to the Patriarchal,
for in order to assert the Notion this Author is forced to Discard the Notion
of Natural Allegiance, and place every one in a State of Liberty upon their
arrival at Years of Discetion, till they shall Recognize the Governing Power by
an express, or tacit Consent. An express Consent he fixes in Promises, or Oaths
of Allegiance, and a tacit Consent in the Possession or Enjoyment of any part
of the Dominions of any Government, Chap. 8. Sect. 119. Part. 2. And further
adds, that a Tacit Consent only produces a Temporal Allegiance, So that in case
he quits his Possession by Donation, Sale, or otherwise, he is at Liberty to
go, and Incorporate himself in any other Commonwealth, or agree with others to
begin a new one in Vacuis locis in any part of the World they can find Free, or
Unpossessed. Sect. 121. Now certainly these are Positions that cannot well be
consistent with the safety of any Government; for it is manifest, they give a
Latitude for Rebellion, as well as Disertion. For first, The Descendants of the
Liege Subjects of any Government do not yield a Tacit Consent even after they
arrive at Years of Discretion, by Living, and Subsisting upon the Blessings of
it, unless they possess, or enjoy some parts of its Dominions; so that not only
the Adult Children that Live under their Parents without a Settlement, but even
the Poor, or Laboring part of a Nation, or even all that are not the true
Proprietors of Estates, still remain in a State of Nature, unless the
Government has actually required an Oath of Fidelity. If this be true, as the
case now stands in the English Government, where Oaths of Allegiance are only
required but upon Special Occasions, and where pursuant to our Law, in some
cases; he has fixed the term of Nonage at Twenty One, he must necessarily bring
a Majority of Effective Men within a State of Nature? and therefore tho upon
his Principles a Right does not accrue to the Possessions of an Established
Government, yet in case an Established Government does not think fit to treat
them as Men in a State of Nature, or happens to exercise the least shadow of
Rigor, or Severity upon them, they are according to rule (his own I mean) the
proper Executioners of Laws of Nature, and consequently, they have Right of
War, not only against their Common, but Natural Parents. And truly, I do not
see but a Project of this nature might prove extremely successful, for pursuant
to this Learned Hypothesis, a Body of Rich Malcontents that have not entered
into an express Allegiance, have power to sell their real Possessions, and when
this is done, they are to all intents, and purposes in a State of Nature, and
consequently are prepared upon the first Alarm to become Generals to worthy
Mobile, and invade their Neighbors Possessions with Thousands, and ten
Thousands. Oh! Blessed Politics, to be the spawn of One that is called into
the Counsels of a Government, Eats its Bread, and enjoys places of Trust as
well as Profit. I am certain, I have represented the Notion with all imaginable
fairness, and tho the Absurdities that are lodged in it may pass for a
sufficient Confutation, yet I shall offer something further upon it.

And first, it is on all Hands agreed, that Persons, as well as Things, may
become a Property, and Property in the Judgment of the Learned, establishes a
Right of Dominion; Consent at least renders Persons, or free Agents, as much a
Property as necessary Agents. Now the dispute is, whether free Agents may not
become a Property any other way than by Consent. It Is observable, he resolves
the Foundation of Property into Labor, so that whatever is the effect of
Labor and Industry, or has Labor mixed with it, becomes a Property, See Chap.
5. Sect. 27, 45. II. Part. Now it is manifest, not only the Education, and
Subsistence of Miners, but of thousands of Persons that have not expressly
Subscribed to any Government, is carried on by the Labor, Care, and Conduct of
the Government, as well as that of their natural Parents; and therefore Reason
does not suggest any thing to me, why they are not from their very Infancy to
be esteemed a Property of the Government, and consequently a kind of
Allegiance, as it were grows up with them to the Government, as well as to
their Natural Parents. It Is true, it is a Property highly distinct from that in
Brutes, for the one seems to be absolute, whereas the other must be limited,
that is, to Rational Ends, and Purposes. In this Sense, a free Agent may be a
Property of the Supreme Power, as well as that of Terra firma in another. But
now, since the Civil Power challenges a Property, it cannot be otherwise than
by virtue of the Character it self; I mean that of a Governing Power, and
consequently the Property that accrews from it, must Establish a Right of
Obedience pursuant to it. In a word, the Governing Power challenges a Right of
Labor and Assistance, in order to maintain the Strength, and Grandeur of the
Community, and consequently, the Supreme Power must be invested with Authority
to impose Laws for the regulation, and exacting of this Labor, and Industry.
This is a truth so unquestionable, that all Established Governments constantly
challenge such Services as every Home-born Subject is capable of yielding, and
exercise Jurisdiction over them with as full Power, as if they had actually
Subscribed to its Authority. This they esteem an undoubted Prerogative,
notwithstanding any Pretenses to a State of Freedom after Nonage. From all this
it appears, how unjust this Author's Position is in Authorizing all those that
have not entered into an express Allegiance to desert a Government at pleasure;
for if the Laws and Measures of Property advanced by this Author, give the
Supreme Power a Right of Dominion over every Home-born Subject, antecedent to
all Subscriptions, as I think has been abundantly evinced, the Subject cannot
rightfully withdraw himself from his Native Country without Special License
from the Government. I know this is a Question controverted by Grotius,
Pufendorf, and others, and they generally agree, that they cannot rightfully
withdraw Gregatim, because it must destroy the Foundations of Government; but
Pufendorf argues well, that if one particular Person has a right to withdraw; a
Second and Third must have so too, and consequently a multitude, or Body of
Men, either jointly or separately. But however, it is universally allowed, that
Governments may prescribe Laws in this Affair; and certainly, if a Government
can without the express consent of these pretended Freeborn Persons rightfully
bind them by Laws, I think the Government has a Right of Allegiance Antecedent
to Law; for no Government can pretend a Power of binding by Law, especially,
contrary to a Fundamental, Natural Right, where an Antecedent Right of Dominion
is wanting, without Compact, or Consent. This is current Doctrine, at least
with our Author, the Man for Original contract: In a word, the Sum of what has
been hitherto offered by the Learned, is taken from the practices of particular
Governments, rather than from the Nature or Reason of the thing. Indeed it
cannot be denied, but that particular Persons have withdrawn from their Native
Country, but it is to be interpreted by Permission, or Connivance, not by a
Right of Natural Freedom, for there can no just Reason be assigned, why Persons
as well as Things, may not become a property of the Government, or why a
Property is not acquired in both, pursuant to their proper Ends and Uses, by
the same Laws and Measures; so that the Labor and Conduct of the Government in
preserving, and supporting our Persons, may render us a Property of it to all
the true ends and purposes of Government, in a rational way, or manner, as much
as the Occupation or quiet Enjoyment, of any tract of Land render it a branch
of its Dominions. Thus far I question not but the Government has a Right, or
Property, in the Labor and Service of every adult Native, as truly as in the
product of the Ground, or the Riches and Treasures of a Country, and therefore
it is absurd to imagine that any one can rightfully withdraw his Person, much
less his Effects, or Treasure, and commit himself and them to another
Government, whether new or old. As for this Author, he is so highly sensible how
much the number of Subjects contributes to the Trade, Riches, Strength and
Glory of a Nation; that were the question formally put and argued in the
Council of Trade, and his Preferments, as well as Judgment, engaged upon it,
I Am persuaded he would think himself obliged to declare against his former
Sentiments. In one Word, it is evident these are positions, that (without a Law
that enjoins an Universal explicit Allegiance) must render every Government
highly precarious; for if a single Person can challenge a Right of withdrawing,
then may a Second and a Third, and so on to a Body, or Multitude, and by this
Means a Nation may not only be dispeopled at pleasure, and consequently drained
of her Riches and Treasure, but her own natural Subjects may become her most
formidable Enemies.

And now having offered what is sufficient to expose the conceit of natural
Freedom, I think I have abundantly evinced what was before asserted, That there
cannot be a Body of Men, regularly and de jure in such a State of Nature, as
this Author has projected. For though we should allow the first Government to be
formed upon compact from a State of Nature, yet if Subjects are naturally a
property of a Government, it is impossible there should be a Body of Men, in a
perfect State of Nature, without a total dissolution of particular Governments;
for as for the Independent State of Supreme Powers, produced as an Instance by
this Author, he knows very well it proves nothing to his design, or purpose,
that is a body of Men in a State of nature, from which a Government is formed
upon the Force and Authority of a joint compact. 2dly, This Notion of a State
of Freedom being so clearly confuted by that property, which every Government
challenges in all the Subjects of it, as well as every Father in their
Children; I think it adds to the strength of former Arguments in asserting the
Civil Prerogatives of the Paternal Power; as it lay in the original. For Adam
being not only the Great Parent of Mankind, but the sole proprietary of
Offsprings, without any Collateral, much less Superior Power to defaulk from
any of his Prerogatives; if Government by the Laws of Providence was truly
serviceable, or rather necessary, the very Station, as well as Character he
bare, is sufficient to give him a right of Dominion and Sovereignty. And thus
far, I hope I have, in some measure, stated the Foundations of Civil
Government, pursuant to the Established Laws of the Creation; and certainly
when all Arguments and Circumstances are fairly laid together, there is no just
ground or color for Original Compact. Here Is a manifest Power and trust, but
it seems to be the immediate Ordinance and Appointment of God, arising from the
Established Frame and order of Things; Not an Arbitrary Deputation or
Commission, issuing forth of the hands of the People, that were born and formed
for Government, and Educated and nursed up under the Wings of it. I have proved
it from the nature of the Thing, and the Laws of Providence, and were we to
enquire into the Original of Governments upon matter of Fact, we shall find
them invested in the Paternal Power; indeed this Author is forced to confess as
much, and then I think not upon a Tacit consent, or compact, as he would have
it, no, the frame of Nature directs us to another foundation. And now I must
own the Argument has carried me much further than I designed, but I think the
injuries which these Notions offer to the Authority of Civil Governors, as ell
as Masters of Families; will dictate an Apology. I have studiously avoided all
Applications, lest I should give him a Handle to make use of a Common Artifice
against me, by resolving my Resentments into disloyalty, toward our present
Sovereign; but this is an Imputation so unjust, that all that know me are, I
question not, sufficiently prepared to wipe it off: For though I cannot entertain
such an Opinion of Original Contract, as to be forward to place all my Loyalty
upon it, yet I hope there are others as well as my self, can find out
principles that will maintain as true fealty and Allegiance, toward his
present Majesty, as that can suggest, or create.

CHAP. XII. Of the Nature of Moral Good and Evil.
HAving thus laid the Foundations of the Law of Nature, and represented it in
all its Formalities and Appendages, I proceed in the next place to consider the
nature and distinction of Moral Good, and Evil. And first, That we may describe
the nature of Moral Good with greater clearness, it will be requisite to
consider not only the Subject Matter, but the Formal Reasons of it.

. 1. And first, The subject Matter of Moral Good undoubtedly arises from the
natural frame and constitution of Things. As things in their Original Nature
correspond, or agree with the Primitive ends, and Interests of each other, so
they carry in them a Natural, or Physical goodness. Thus in the case of
Temperance; a moderate use of Meats and Drinks, undoubtedly preserves the Mind,
as well as Body in all its ends and uses? and consequently it is no doubt, a
Natural, or Physical good to the whole Man. And this I would call the subject
matter of Moral Good; so that all Moral Good being founded in the Original
Frame and Constitution of things, it always implies a Physical, or Natural Good
in it. But,

. 2. Secondly, For the formal Reasons of Moral Good, I conceive they are
principally two. The first is, whereby it seems to be immediately distinguished
from a Natural Good; and that is as it proceeds from the choices of a free
Agent. And Secondly, As these choices are Regulated, according to the Original
Frame, Nature, and Order of things Thus in the case of Meats and Drinks, an
unthinking Brute may, no doubt, receive such a portion of both, as is exactly
accommodated to the Ends and Interests of such an Animal. But yet, since this
is done purely by a necessary principle, or natural Instinct, it cannot derive
to it self the denomination of a Moral Action; but now when the moderate use of
Meats and Drinks is defined upon a mature consideration of the ends and
Interests of our beings, and we make 'em the measure of our choices, and
embrace 'em as such; the Action obtains a new denomination; for it is certainly
a Moral Action, and consequently a Moral Good, in as much as it moves upon the
measures, and principles of a Natural Good.

It Is certain, every action that is founded in rational Motives and
Convictions, or that rests on certain Faculties which we are empowered to
exert, or not exert in the disquisition of its Nature is to be esteemed a moral
action, because the consequences of it are to be imputed to us. And if our
choices, and determinations are Regulated according to the true nature of the
thing, and the Primitive Ends and Interests of our Beings, it may justly be
esteemed a moral Good; but if we choose, and determine contrary to these
measures and principles, it will undoubtedly, pass under the character of a
moral Evil; so that Moral Good manifestly includes two things, first it must
contain all the principles of a free Action. Secondly, The Springs, and
Principles of Freedom, are to move in conjunction with the natural Frame, and
interests of the things themselves; and consequently, a Moral Good always
presupposes, and includes a Natural Good. I Am sensible here are others that are
not content with this portion of Moral Good, and therefore they add a third
Ingredient, from whence it chiefly takes its denomination. For they define it
to be the Conformity of an Action to a Rule, or Decree of a Lawgiver; and
consequently it includes, first a principle of Freedom; secondly, a Natural
Goodness, or an intrinsic Rectitude of the Action in all its relations; and
thirdly, the binding Authority of a Law that engages us to embrace it from the
Will and Pleasure of a Lawgiver. But now if the Authority of a Lawgiver, be
the true measure of Moral Goodness, it makes a Moral Law, or Duty, and a Moral
Good to be the same thing, whereas a Moral Law or Duty seems to be the
Complement of a Moral Good. The one is a choice of things from their relation,
and consent to Moral ends and purposes; the other, from a binding Authority
superadded to them. In Moral Duties, the Lawgiver is to prescribe in
Conformity to these ends, and the Moral Agent is to choose, and determine
himself by them, in Conformity to the Will, and Authority of the Lawgiver, but
a Moral Good seems to be only the choice of a Natural Good, without considering
it as the Command, or Appointment of a Sovereign Authority. But the
denominations of things are often Arbitrary, and may be extended or lessened,
without any injury to Truth, as long as the Latitude of such denominations is
fixed, and agreed upon; and therefore, we ought not to be concerned at any
Terms of Art, or Modes of Expression, as long as there is an Agreement in the
nature of things.

CHAP. XIII. Of the true measures of Moral Goodness.
. 1. IN order to a further display of the nature of Moral Goodness, it will not
be improper, nor useless to consider the true measure of Moral Goodness. And
first, I think Pleasure, whether of Body or Mind, cannot be any true measure of
Moral Goodness. Thus much the Observations already made on a Vitiated Mind
abundantly evince.

For certainly a Vitiated Mind and Conscience may conceive an undisturbed
Satisfaction, and delight in the foulest Enormities; and yet it is absurd to
pronounce 'em Moral Goods.

For notwithstanding any pleasure of Mind that accompanies them, they are still
to be ranked among Moral Evils. Indeed, I cannot conceive how Pleasure, and
Pain can be the measure of Natural Good; for the Mind may certainly lie under
wrong apprehensions of things, and consequently, conceive a pleasure, and
satisfaction in real Evils: and therefore it seems to be highly improper to
pronounce Pleasure, the true, and only measure of Natural, much more of Moral
Good. No, certainly the true measure of Natural Good is to be taken from the
Original Frame, and Constitution, or ends and interests of things, and the
exact Agreement, or Adapting of them to each other, pursuant to it. When things
are thus adapted, no doubt, but a true pleasure of Mind results from them, for
God has so graciously adapted things to our Welfare and Happiness, and
Established such a strict Harmony, and Agreement between us, and every Natural
Good that concerns us, that there is a powerful Pleasure flows from it, at least
according to the Original Economy, or Frame of things; but yet Pleasure seems
to be a consequent rather than a measure, or constituent Principle of Natural
Good, especially since there may arise this Pleasure of Mind, when the true
ends and interests of things are perverted, witness the case of an Erroneous
Judgment, or Conscience; and therefore I think, a late Author has not well
expressed himself, when he tells us, That things are Good, and Evil, only in
Reference to Pleasure and Pain [ Essay concerning Human Understanding, Cap. 20.
Sect. 2.] or, as he more fully delivers himself in another place, Good and
Evil, are nothing but Pleasure and Pain, or that which occasions, or produces
Pleasure, or Pain in us. Book 2. Cap. 28. Sect. 5.

. 2. Secondly, The conformity of our Actions to a Law abstracting from the
Intrinsic rectitude of the Subject matter of it, cannot be the true measure of
Moral Good. As the forecited Author too apparently suggests, when he tells us,
Moral Good and Evil, is only the conformity or disagreement of our Voluntary
Actions to some Law; whereby Good and Evil, is drawn on us from the Will and
Power of the Lawmakers. Lib. 2. Cap. 28.. 5. If this definition is designed
thus far, certainly the best Argument against such a position is one by this
Author advanced on another Occasion. He Labors to prove, that the foulest
Enormities, have obtained in whole Nations and Societies of Men, upon a Law of
Fashion, Opinion or Reputation; but certainly the conformity of an Action, to
such a Law, can by no Means give it the Character or Denomination of Moral
Good. This must indeed destroy all real Distinction between Good and Evil, and
render the moral endowments of the Mind, as Arbitrary and Precarious as the
outward Dress of the Body. It Is true an Action performed by a voluntary Agent
in Confomity to a Rule, is undoubtedly a Moral Action. But it does not hereby
necessarily become a Moral Good, unless the Rule be good, or the Intrinsic
matter of the Action be so: For without these Limitations it may be as much a
Moral Evil, as if it interfered with an Established Rule. So that I cannot but
dissent from Mr. Lock, when he places the Notion of Moral Good and Evil, in the
conformity or disagreement of a Voluntary Action to a Rule, though it be no more
than a Rule or Law of Fashion. I grant it Establishes the Idea of a Moral
Action; but a Moral Action is either good or bad, and therefore the Idea of
Moral Goodness, cannot rest upon the conformity of an Action to such a Rule,
but on the Intrinsic Goodness of the Action or Rectitude of such a Rule.

. 3. But to proceed; There are others who place the foundation of Moral Good,
in the Conformity of Moral Actions, to our Rational Natures, as fitted for
Society, and consequently proportion the degrees of Moral Good, as they serve
more or less the ends of Society. Indeed it cannot be denied, but that the
Great and Wise God, has given us a being, and Nature not only peculiarly
framed for Society, but to be supported by it; and consequently whatever
accords with the Rational Nature of Man born to Society is undoubtly a Moral
Good; but it is visible Man in his Original Frame, bears a threefold Relation;
to wit, Frame in Relation to God, his own Being, and that of his Neighbors;
from whence arises a threefold Moral Good. Now the Agreement of Actions to our
Rational Natures, as created for Society, may present us with an Idea of those
Moral Goods, that respect our Being in it self, or as it stands supported by
Society, but it cannot give us an Idea of Moral Good, with respect to God our
Creator, and consequently this Notion cannot be an adequate measure of Moral
Goodness.

. 4. Having said thus much Negatively, it remains that we endeavor to State it
in a positive way, or determine what is the true and adequate measure of Moral
Goodness. And first, it is universally allowed that Moral Good implies a
Relation in the Nature of it. It Is a good in respect of something else, and
consequently there must be some fixed Standard, to examine and state the
Proportions it bears to it; and this Standard, may not improperly be called a
measure of Moral Goodness. Again, Moral Good, which we are now concerned with,
respects the Actions of Men; and since the Actions of Men, with respect to a
Threefold Relation, which we bear toward God, our own Beings and our fellow
Creatures, pass under three several Denominations, the measure of Moral Good,
must extend to each of 'em. With Submission, then I presume the proper measure
of Moral Good, must be taken from the Original Frame, Ends and Interests of our
Beings; we are acted by invincible propensions, I mean those of self
preservation and desire of happiness, that will engage us to examine and
consider 'em, and the experiment will furnish us with a measure, to determine
the Goodness of all our actions, in our several intercourses with God, our own
Beings, or our fellow Creatures. It Is certain there can no action be truly
Morally Good but what is conformable to our Original Frame, and the prime Ends
and Interest of our Beings; and what is really thus conformable, is really and
truly Morally Good; and consequently the Frame, Ends, and Interest of our
Being, must be a proper Standard of Moral Goodness. God has been graciously
pleased, to give us a Being like himself, the great exemplar of all Perfection
and Goodness, and he has annexed such Ends and Interests to it, as will lay a
Foundation for Actions, that result from his blessed Nature; so that the whole
line of Moral Duty is by the Laws of our Creation, made to consist in Actions
that are peculiarly consonant to our Natural Frame, in all its Capacities and
Relations. The Features, and Complexion of every duty, are taken from our
selves, and by a Physical Efficiency, add Glory, Strength and Beauty to us; and
therefore nothing can be so true a measure of Moral Goodness, as the pure
Frame, Ends, and Interests of our Beings. As for those that place Moral
Goodness, in the conformity of our Actions to a Law; it is certain that the
Truth and Authority of this Law, where Revelation is wanting, must first be
tried by the Frame, Ends, and Interests of our Beings: Reason can make an
estimate no other way; and consequently all other measures of Moral Goodness,
must at last resolve into this.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Eternal and Unalterable distinctions of Moral Goodness.
FRom what has been laid down and Concluded, it is evident there is an
unalterable distinction between Good and Evil. Now certainly whereinsoever we
fix the Notion of Moral Good, whether it is the embracing of a Natural Good, by
Rational motives and convictions arising from the Intrinsic Nature of the
Thing, the proper Springs of a free Agent; or whether it is in pursuance to the
Will and Authority of a Lawgiver, it is abundantly concluded, the Lines of Moral
Good are fixed and unalterable: For it is manifest that Moral Good, always
includes a Natural Good, and Natural Good is evidently Established in the frame
of Created Nature, and consequently if the frame of Nature is unalterable,
Moral Good must be so too. Nay, we may advance further yet; the great creator
of all things, though in himself the most absolute, and free Agent, yet was
governed by the dictates of his own Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, and
consequently the whole frame of created Nature is Established according to the
model of the divine perfections. If therefore Natural Good necessarily results
from the Natural frame of Things; and their subserviency and agreements with
each other, and Moral Good necessarily includes a Natural Good in it, Moral as
well as Natural Goodness, is as unalterable as the divine Perfections; and
consequently is in the highest sense eternal, and unalterable. From hence we
way observe how monstrously absurd is that position advanced by a set of Men,
who first outlived all Moral Good, before they thought of the Notion, that
there is no distinction between Good and Evil; that all the Impressions of the
Mind, are to be resolved into mere Habits Established in Example, or Education,
and consequently the Good and Evil of all Actions besides that which results
from the Determination of positive Laws, whether Humane or Divine, is nothing
else but a Law of Fashion or Opinion. It Is abundantly concluded, God has given
us a peculiar Frame, and thereby Established certain Ends, and Interests
suitable to it: And consequently what really accords with the true Ends, and
Interests of our Being, is that we call a Natural Good, and what directly
clashes and interseres with them, is a Natural Evil. It Is concluded God has
endued us with powers and faculties that, if duly exerted, will discover to us
the true Frame, Ends and Interests of our Natures, and how all external things
affect 'em, and are more or less Subservient to 'em; and after this he has
endued us with a power, to choose and pursue what is truly Subservient to these
ends. The very frame and condition of our Natures, as they are to be supported
with outward succors and conveniences, and the sense of pleasure and pain
stamped upon our Natures, and the desire of the one, and satisfaction in
enjoying it; and the dread of the other, and the uneasiness in suffering it,
are proper and effectual Springs to set all our natural Powers on work, and fix
'em on their proper Ends and Objects; and all this proves a moral Capacity, to
pursue and embrace that which we call Moral Good, and unless our Natural Powers
and Faculties are regulated by the Laws and Principles of natural Good, it is
impossible the Action should obtain the Character of moral Good. It must be
confessed, that the biass of Animal sensations, or pleasures, is so impetuous
in corrupted nature, that it often hurries us on to the pursuit of every thing
that strikes a present Relish, without considering whether it accords with the
true Ends and Interests of our Beings, at least in that measure or manner we
seek to enjoy them. Again, it is possible the Mind, by force of Habit, as well
as power of Education, and the Fashion of a Country, may be sunk so deep into
Carnality, and so tinged with brutal Enjoyments, as to be not only disabled
from making the least Enquiry into the true Ends and Interests of its Being,
but to receive an undisturbed Satisfaction in the practice of 'em, so that they
may appear as natural as the most regulated Acts of Morality, yet this does by
no means destroy the Foundations of moral Good; for it is nothing else but a
kind of Spiritual Disease, and consequently we may as well say there was
originally no true Foundations for Health, because the Body is overrun with a
Disease, as deny the Foundations of Morality, because our Native Capacities are
habitually Vitiated and Corrupted.

CHAP. XV. Reflections on Mr. Lock 's Law of Fashion.
. 9. HAving offered thus much upon the Nature and Distinction of Moral
Goodness, I cannot dismiss the Argument without bestowing a few Remarks on the
Author of the Essay, concerning Humane Understanding, upon his advancing a Law
of Fashion, or Opinion, among the Rules, or Measures, of Moral Goodness. I
shall not conceal what he has said in Vindication of himself against Mr. Loud,
[ See his Ep. to the Reader Ed. 2.] I was there not laying down Moral Rules,
but showing the Original and Nature of Moral Ideas, and enumerating the Rules
Men make use of in Moral Relations, whether those Rules were true or false. Now
certainly though the principal Design of this Chapter might be what this Author
expresses; yet an Impartial Reader could not have believed but there was a
professed Design too, to represent the true rules, or measures, of Moral Good,
had he not expressly declared the contrary. And for all this, I think a man must
have a great deal of Charity to alter his Belief, notwithstanding this extorted
Declaration. And to justify my Opinion, I shall appeal to that very Section
which he refers to for his Vindication [ Sect. 4. Chap. 28. B. 2.] speaking of
Moral Duties, or Actions, viz. Gratitude, etc. he concludes, It is not enough
to have clear and distinct Ideas of them, and to know what Names belong to such
and such Combinations of Ideas, as make up the complex Idea belonging to such a
Name, we have a further and greater Concernment, and that is to know whether
such Actions so made up are morally Good, or Bad. Now, truly if the great
concernment be to know or discover whether certain Actions are Morally Good or
Bad, the true Nature of Moral Good must be fixed; for if it be not material,
whether the Rule or Measure be true or false; I would fain know what Light we
have given of Moral Good, or how we shall judge whether any particular action
is Morally Good or Bad. Thus far there is a design to six the true measures of
Moral Goodness, and we are the more induced to believe it, because the very
next Section presents us with a professed description of Morally Good and Evil,
pursuant to the description he had before given of Good and Evil. Morally Good
and Evil then is only the Conformity or Disagreement of our Voluntary Actions
to some Law; whereby Good and Evil is drawn upon us, from the Will and Power of
the Lawmakers. Here Is a standing definition of Moral Good and Evil, and this
Author must own that a definition of Things, (such as Good and Evil) is a
discovery of the precise Nature of 'em, as they are in themselves, and
consequently it must imply a discovery of the true measures of Morally Good and
Bad. To proceed then, the Nature of Morally Good and Bad, is here made to
consist in the conformity of Voluntary Actions to some Law, and therefore it is
requisite an Account should be given of the several Rules or Laws of Moral
Goodness, whereby we may view it in its several Species or kinds. This Mr. Lock
performs in the Section immediately following. Of these Moral Rules and Laws to
which Men generally Refer, and by which they judge of the Rectitude or Pravity
of their Actions there, seems to me to be three sorts, with their different
Enforcements or Rewards and Punishments, so that we see he industriously
represents 'em in all the formalities of Laws, and gives 'em their proper and
peculiar Sanctions, that they may obtain the Authority and Character of Laws.
Upon this, he proceeds to establish the several Species of Moral Good; and
having enlarged very much upon the third Species of Moral Good, that of Virtue
and Vice, he gives us to understand his Intentions by the very Title of his
Thirteenth Section. These three Laws are Rules of Moral Good and Evil, and Sect
14. he expressly tells us, That by taking the Rule from the Fashion of the
Country, the Mind has a notion of Moral Goodness or Evil, which is the
conformity, or not conformity, of any action to that Rule. Now what is all
this, but to describe the real Nature of Moral Goodness in its true measures,
as well as kinds. It Is evident, it was the Business of Sect. 5. and the rest
Branches from it by the Laws of method and order; nay, it is expressed in the
very Conclusion, Sect. 14. and therefore we cannot (without robbing Mr. Lock of
the Character he has justly merited of being a Master of Reason) but conclude,
that all this was in pursuance to his Great Concernment, Sect. 4. That is, to
know whether such actions so made up, are morally Good or Bad. But further to
take off all this, Mr. Lock appeals to Sect. 15.20. Whereas the latter only
affirms, that we have a notion of Moral Relation, whether the Rule be true or
false; and this I think no body can deny, but yet I hope I have proved, that
the notion of all Moral Goodness, depends on the truth of the Rule, not on the
conformity of an Action, to a Rule, whether true or false. The former affirms,
that the Idea, or Notion, of Moral Goodness, arises from the conformity of an
Action to one of his three Rules, but I hope, I have proved that they only
represent the Idea of a Moral Action, not of Moral Goodness, which
indispensibly requires the truth and goodness of the Rule. Lastly, in
vindication of himself, he produces his own Authorities for the eternal and
unalterable nature of Virtue, by fixing it in the Will or Commands of God, Book
1. Chap. 3. Sect. 6. and 18. But yet we were at a loss, to know whether he
designed the revealed Will and positive Commands of God, or his Will discovered
by the Light of Reason, had he not told us in a second Edition, That by the
Divine Law, he meant as well a Law promulged by the Light of Reason, as the
voice of Revelation, Book 2. Chap. 28. Sect. 8. If the Commands or Will of God
are only those we receive from Revelation, or the positive Will of God (the
first Edition of this Essay, suggesting nothing to the contrary) then Moral
Good and evil Antecedent to Revelation, is not Eternal and Unalterable, but may
be founded on a Law of fashion, as a true measure of Moral Good; for as this
Author observes, the natural conveniences, and inconveniences of things
themselves, may determine our choices, without making 'em the inviolable Rules
of Practice. See Sect. 6. Book 1. Chap. 3. and Sect. 6.2. Chap. 28. So that
however, his second Thoughts stand affected, I can see nothing in his first, to
induce a belief that he did not intend to state the several measures of Moral
Goodness, and consequently assign a Law of opinion for one of them. I have
hitherto asserted nothing, but from Arguments which Mr. Lock's own Words have
furnished me with; and if I have carried him beyond his Intentions, I Am
persuaded the remarks are justifiable, whilst the old expressions remain to
propagate the Infection, at least in every incautious Reader, that has not
perused his Preface; for certainly, since in the entrance of this Essay, he has
brought the foulest Enormities, under the Character of a Law of Fashion or
Opinion, Book 1. Chap. 3. Sect. 9, 10, 11. he either ought to have cancelled
most of those passages I have cited, or at least expressly declared, that a Law
of Opinion was never to be admitted a measure of Moral Good, unless the Opinion
is exactly consonant to truth, or the nature of things; nor a rule of Action,
but as it corresponds with the Law of Nature, or revealed Religion.

. 2. Having said thus much, give me leave to offer something concerning the
necessity of advancing such a Law. Now certainly, in order to the Description
of Moral Goodness, or the several Branches of it, there is not the least
necessity, for bringing a Law of Fashion into the List. I hope, I may without
Arrogance or Presumption, conclude from what has been already offered, that
Moral Goodness is indisputably founded on the Truth or Goodness of the Rule, or
the intrinsic Goodness of the things themselves; and that neither the
Sentiments or Opinions of Men, nor the Fashion of a Country without these
Requisites, can give 'em so much as the bare Denominations of Moral Goodness;
and therefore that a Law of Fashion, should be advanced as a Rule, to represent
the Nature of Moral Goodness, can never be fairly accounted for. It Is certain
the Law of Nature, or at least the Law of Revelation in conjunction with it, is
the only measure of Moral Goodness: Insomuch, that a Law of Fashion interfering
with one or both of 'em, is not only destitute of every grain of Moral
Goodness, but cannot cancel one grain of sin or guilt, when followed in
opposition to either. This is the case of Duels, or any other fashionable
Enormities; for Laws of Nature, as well as revealed Laws, when duly promulged,
are justly presumed to be the known fundamental Rules of Humane Actions, and
the fashion or public reputation of an Action, can add nothing toward its
innocence. And therefore what necessity is there for inserting a Law of Fashion
among the Rules or Measures of Moral Goodness, unless it were designed to
establish something of Credit or Authority to it; things no sooner suggested,
than embraced in an Age of Liberty; and therefore this Author should no sooner
have mentioned such a Rule, than represented the unwarrantableness of it. In a
word, this Author might have considered, that he had given the grossest
immortalities, the Authority of Laws of Fashion, and consequently, that such
Laws are very unfit representatives of the Ideas of Moral Goodness, certainly
it had been as allowable, and necessary, to have brought an avowed Immorality
into the List, given it the Character and Authority of a Law, and pronounced it
a measure of Virtue, or Moral Rectitude, or Goodness; or at least a Branch of
it. But truly, this is a method that rather confounds, than establishes the
Ideas of Moral Goodness, or instructs us to know whether such Actions so made
up, are morally Good or Bad. Indeed, had he condescended to an old Distinction
of Good and Evil, and pronounced Moral Good or Evil, either apparent or real,
and Virtue and Vice reputed or real, then he had put himself under a necessity
of enlarging very plentifully upon a Law of Fashion, and abundantly freed
himself from Censure and Reflection, especially, upon an express Declaration of
the unwarrantableness of such a Law, when destitute of real intrinsic Goodness
or Innocence; but till this is done, I hope, it is no crime to pronounce Mr.
Lock's Law of Fashion (as it now stands Recorded) both dangerous and
unnecessary.

. 3. But further, besides the danger and frivolousness of the attempt, this
Author seems to have grossly misrepresented the old received Notions of Virtue
and Vice, brought disgrace upon the Ancient Moralists or Philosophers, and
established a Law upon sanctions peculiar to it, that were never esteemed so.
And first, it cannot be denied, but that Custom and Example have always been
very prevailing Arguments, to influence the Judgments, as well as practice of
Mankind, and when Practice is not only universal, but pursued, abetted, and
encouraged by Authority, it will presently be received into the judgments of
Men, as an indisputable Rule of Action, and when it is thus received, it becomes
a Law or Rule of Action, and thus Custom and Example accidentally contribute to
the establishing a Rule, as they gradually new model the Judgment, and serve to
create a real persuasion of the intrinsic goodness of any particular Action;
but yet I can scarce believe that Custom, public Reputation, or the Fashion of
a Country, were ever assigned by the intelligent part of Mankind, for the
measure of the Rectitude of a Rule, much less for a true and proper Rule of
Action; no, an Opinion of the Intrinsic Rectitude of things has been
ingendered by Habit or Custom, and the fashionable practices of an Age, and
then the Action has been pursued and embraced with as much Heat and Eagerness,
as if it were endued with an Intrinsic Goodness, and were to be ranked under
the Title of Moral Goodness. And therefore, this Author, has offered Violence
to the notions of Mankind, and particularly of the Ancient Moralists and
Philosophers, in pronouncing the Fashion of a Country to be a Law, and
founding Virtue and Vice upon it. For first it can be no Law on this Author's
own principles, since it wants a peculiar Sanction to enforce it. It Is well
known, Praise, Honor, or Reputation, is by no means peculiar to a Law of
Fashion, for it is the reward that attends all sorts of Moral Goodness, or a
Collateral Motive contrived by divine designation to enforce the practice of
it. 2dly, Virtue and Vice among the Learned, was never measured by the
Reputation it bears in the World, but by an Intrinsic Moral Rectitude. This I
could evince were it necessary, from the whole tribe of Heathen Moralists, who
always fixed the Notion in its Agreements, with the dictates of right Reason,
and the Original Frame, Ends, and Interests of our Natures. I shall at this
time content my self with some Authorities, from that Learned Moralist he has
cited to support his own Opinion. Thus he agrees to these great Truths in a
Multitude of passages: Virtutis hoc proprium, earum rerum quae secundum Naturam
sunt, habere delectum. Lib. 3. de Fin. Sect. 4. Quaesita enim virtus est, non
quae relinqueret naturam, sed quae tueretur, Ib. Lib. 4.. 15. In homine Summa
omnis Animi est, and in Animo Rationis, ex qua virtus est, quae Rationis
Absolutio definitur. Ib. Lib. 5.. 14. Virtus eadem in homine ac Deo est, -- est
autem Virtus nihil aliud quam perfecta and ad Summum perducta natura; est
igitur homini cum Deo similitudo. Lib. de Leg.. 8. So that Virtue was never
esteemed that precarious Thing this Author has Suggested; the public
Reputation of any Action was never the measure of Virtue, but Right Reason, and
the Frame, Ends and Interests of our Beings, else it is impossible Virtue in
Men, should be the same with Virtue in God, and Men to resemble God in it, as
this Author excellently expresses himself.

From all this it is manifest, that Virtue was rather esteemed the Standard or
Measure of Praise, than Praise of Virtue, and that Honor or Praise, was never
extolled or appealed to, but as it is the Product of Virtue, and a kind of
reward to it. Thus much this Author could not be Ignorant of, when the Moralist
explains the very passage he has cited almost with the same Breath; and makes
it a description of the chiefest Humane Good, that consists in Virtue or is
attained by it. Quod ipsum sit optandum per se, a Virtute profectum vel in ipsa
virtute situm, sua sponte laudabile. Tusc. Quaest. lib. 2.. 20. If this will
not content him, I shall refer him to another passage that speaks out what I
have already asserted, and will instruct him that Virtue is the Measure of
Praise, not Praise of Virtue. Omnis honos, omnis admiratio, omne studium ad
virtutem, and ad eas actiones quae virtuti sunt consentaneae, refertur: Eaque
omnia quae aut ita in animis sunt, aut ita geruntur, uno nomine honesta
dicuntur. Lib. 5 de Fin.. 21. This, if I mistake not, is to define Honor by
Virtue, not Virtue by Honor or Reputation, as Mr. Lock would have it. Upon the
whole then I presume, it appears that this Law of Opinion, has no more
foundation in the received principles of Morality, than there is necessity for
the invention; that it practices as much injustice, upon the ancient Advocates
for Morality, as it discovers Impertinence or Evil design in the Author, and in
a Word, it is so miserably destitute of Solid Argument, or Principle to support
it, that nothing but the fashionable Immoralities of a degenerate Age, can
assert its truth or Authority.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Nature of Conscience in General.
I Shall not much enlarge on the Notion of Conscience, which imports the
knowledge of the Line of Duty, and a directing Power or Faculty, to consider
the Nature of those Actions we are about to execute, by applying 'em to the
Line of Duty. This is a truth so well known, that no one can dispute it, that
allows the use of Reason, or make us creatures that can act by a Law, or are
capable of being Governed by it. The principal enquiry then is concerning
Conscience with respect to past Actions: And first it is a truth, I presume,
universally agreed upon, that Man is endued with a Power of Retaining, and
reflecting on his own actions; The retentive Faculty is abundantly maintained
upon the Power of Memory, and the Power of Reflection is founded in the very
Power of Reason. For to Reflect and Animadvert upon our thoughts, is
undoubtedly an Act of Reason, and Thought. And therefore as Man acts upon
Thought, Deliberation, and Argument, he cannot but be conscious that he thinks,
deliberates, and argues, and consequently that he acts pursuant to it. Indeed,
I presume, to think, deliberate, and Act, and to consider or know that we
think, deliberate, or act thus and thus, are two distinct acts of the Mind; but
whether we think, and deliberate, and reflect upon our Thoughts in the same, or
different Moments, is no way prejudicial to the Doctrine of Consciousness. To
proceed then as we can reflect, so we can animadvert upon the nature of past
Actions; for those very faculties that enable us to deliberate, and judge of
the Nature of an Action, before it is executed, will enable us to pass as
clear, if not much better judgment upon it, after it is over: For then we view
it in all its Aspects, Circumstantials, and Appendages. Now certainly
Conscience contains both these Powers in it; I mean a Power of Recollecting and
a Power of Animadverting on the Nature of our past Actions; for without such
inspecting Powers, it is impossible there can be any such thing as Conscience.
But then that which gives us the principal and formal Notion of Conscience, is
a Power of trying the Nature of our Actions, by some Law or Rule of Action.
Whatever the Nature of Moral Good and Evil may be; I mean whether it consists
in the conformity of our Actions to a Law or Rule, or their disagreement from
it, certain I am the Acts or Powers of Conscience imply the examination of an
Action with reference to a Law or indispensable Rule of Action; whereby it
carries the appearance of a Duty or not a Duty. For Conscience undoubtedly
implies a Condemning and absolving Faculty in it, and these are exercised with
respect to Duty, and Duty arises from the Obligation of a Law: So that
Conscience is undoubtedly the measure of our Actions by a Law. Indeed, this is
so much the formal Notion of Conscience, that it runs through all the instances,
and exercitations of Consciences; for they are no otherwise distinguished than
by the different Laws that Regulate them, as from a Law of Nature, Law of
Revelation, or Civil Polity. But then in order to the passing an Absolution or
Censure on our Actions, and our selves for them by a Rule, there must be a
Power of Acting Conformable to this Law or Rule; for without this, the Action
with its Effects and Consequences, cannot be imputed to us. This is employed in
the very notion of a Law, being a Rule proposed to Rational Creatures that have
a Power to Act, or not Act on Rational Motives, and Convictions; so that
Conscience contains a great many different movements, or workings in it. First,
A Power of Retaining. Secondly, A Power of Animadverting, or Reflecting on past
Actions. Thirdly, A Power of applying, and comparing them with a Law or Rule.
Fourthly. A Power of discerning the Truth, Goodness, or Equity of the Rule,
Fifthly, The Obligation and Authority of it; and Lastly, A Power of ascribing
the Action to our selves, by acknowledging a Power of Acting in Conformity to
this Rule; whereby the Good, or Evil, Guilt or Merit of the Action may be some
way imputed to us. So that Conscience may be justly defined to be the Judgment
we pass upon our own Actions, whether past, or present, as scanned and measured
by a Law, But now, though a Law in general is assigned for the measure of
Conscience, it cannot be imagined that every thing we fancy, or are pleased to
assign for the mark, or scope of our Actions, must pass for the true Law, or
Measure of Conscience. It Is certain, Custom, Education, Example, or the
Reputation of an Action gained by Numbers, and a Loose, Degenerous Age, cannot
be a Law, or Measure of Conscience. No, the Passions, Prejudices, or
By-interests of particular Persons, the Superstitious Fears, Enthusiasm, or
Diabolical Suggestions of too many, may as well challenge the Character of
Laws, as any that have yet been mentioned. But to determine this matter in a
few words. If we enquire into the true measure of Conscience, according to its
Original Frame; it is certain, the Law of God, whether Natural, or Revealed, is
to be esteemed the only proper measure. For none but a Sovereign Creator can be
the Lord of Conscience, all other Powers, and Authorities, being only special
Deputations from him; and that Duty, and Obligation that results from their
Laws, rest upon a Divine Deputation that gives being to their Character, as
well as Authority.

CHAP. XVII. Reflections on Mr. Lock 's Description of Conscience.
THE Nature of Conscience being thus stated, I cannot but reflect a little on
Mr. Lock's Account of Conscience, when he tells us, That it is nothing else but
our own Opinion of our own Actions, and this Opinion sounded in a Persuasion,
however got, as from Education, Company, or the Customs of a Country. See Lib.
1. Chap. 3.. 8. This, to speak the least, I think, is a very loose, and
imperfect Definition of Conscience. And to say, It Is nothing else but an
Opinion however got; seems to Suggest, as if God had Instituted no fixed Rule
of Conscience, but that it is to be resolved into little else but Custom,
Company, and Education. In a word, it is a Description calculated, purely for an
Erroneous Conscience, that has no other Foundation but present Convictions,
whether true or false. I will not deny, but that an erroneous, vitiated
Conscience, is in a large sense, styled Conscience, and that Custom, or
Education may give being to such a Conscience; but then it is in Scripture
distinguished by the Denominations of a weak, or defiled Conscience. I will
grant, that it is a measure of Action to those that labor under it; because,
as God has formed us Reasonable Creatures, we are to Act upon Rational Motives,
and Convictions. He has given us no other measure of Action as Men, and
therefore the present Light, or Convictions we are under, are the immediate
Springs, and Principles of Action: for to Act Blindfold, or without Reason, or
in contradiction to it, must overturn the Frame of our Beings, and the Practice
of all Moral Virtue. But yet God has set a sufficient mark upon an erroneous
Conscience, by charging Sin on the Error, wherever a Man can be charged with
Neglect as to the means of Information. On this Account St. Paul assures us,
that the impure, or those that are under an erroneous Conscience, are Polluted
as well in Mind, as Conscience. Tit. 1, 15. So that an erroneous Conscience
being never a direct Rule, at least not any of God's Forming; nay, being a Rule
occasioned by our selves, that enhances our Guilt, rather than Merit; it is not
but in a very improper and extended Sense to pass under the Denomination of
Conscience, at least, without some distinguishing Characteristick annexed, that
the Divine Economy of Conscience may not suffer by it. I am sure it is
Conscience founded on the true Law, or Rule of Conscience, according to the
Divine Establishment of it, that this Author should have Animadverted on, as a
proof of Innate Ideas, not a Fictitious Conscience: And certainly it is a very
imperfect account of such a Conscience, to affirm, that in the true, and proper
Sense of it, it is nothing but our own Opinion of our own Actions, tho got by
Custom, Company, or Education; certainly the Foundation of Conscience ought not
to have been omitted, which arises from the Conformity of our Actions to the
proper Rule, or Law of Conscience, the Law of God.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Foundation, and Authority of Natural Conscience in the
original Economy of it.
HAving offered thus much concerning the Nature of Conscience, we may easily
represent the Foundation, and Authority of natural Conscience. By Natural
Conscience, I mean a Conscience that exerts it self in a State of Nature
antecedent to a State of Revelation. And certainly there is a Conscience
Established by God upon an unalterable Foundation, even in this State. For it is
already concluded, that Man in his Original Frame is capable of Acting by
certain Established Rules; It Is concluded, that these Rules are discovered to
him, as the special Institution of God, binding them upon him as his proper
Laws, and indispensible Measures of Action; It Is concluded, that God has
Created him with a Power of applying all his Actions to a Rule, and a Power of
Judging whether his Actions accord with, or deviate from this Rule, and a Power
of adjudging himself accountable to God, for the violation of this Rule, and
consequently a necessity of acquitting or condemning himself by this Rule. In a
Word, it is concluded that these Rules are eternal, and unalterable, being
founded in the Original Frame, Ends and Interests of Created Nature; therefore
since these are Truths established upon the clearest Evidence, and Convictions,
there is a natural Conscience resulting from the Frame of our Beings, and
founded upon the most uniform, and unalterable Measures and Principles. It Is
visible God has framed us as exquisitely apprehensive of the violation of the
Line of Duty, and of being accountable to him for it, as sensible of Torment
and Misery; So that the workings of Conscience can never be destroyed; they
will unavoidably break in upon us at one time or other, and fill us with Horror
and Confusion. Though it cannot be denied, but that Habit, and Custom may
engender a false Light, or Sense of Things; and consequently a false
conscience, either by mistaking the Nature, and Composition of our Actions, or
the Rules of 'em; by making a false application, or a false Rule; yet it is
concluded there is a Conscience Established in the Original Frame or Nature of
Things, and though it may for some time be suppressed or stifled, yet we can
never secure it from returning upon us.

CHAP. XIX. The Truth and certainty of Conscience Demonstrated against the
Latitudinarian and Unbeliever.
NOw certainly if what has been already asserted carries force and evidence in
it, there needs nothing more to discover the falsehood, not to say Senseless
Impudence of a prevailing position, That Conscience is nothing else but certain
Superstitious Fears, contracted and rivetted by the Power of Education; for
it is visible the Laws of Conscience are an Institution of God himself, as
certain and unalterable, as the distinctions of Good and Evil; nay as certain
and unalterable, as the Frame, and Order of Nature. It Is true there is one
thing which the Libertine may retreat to, to blast or disparage the Truth and
Reality of Conscience. I mean the inconsistence and contradiction of Erroneous
vitiated Consciences. For since Conscience sometimes as visibly discovers it
self in the espousal and defense of open Immoralities, as the strictest
virtues; and of palpable Falsehoods and Errors, as the clearest Truths; it is
with some color concluded that Conscience is only the Effects of Habit, Custom
and Education, Working the Mind up to certain Superstitious Sentiments and
Opinions. But certainly the mistake is obvious, for this is an Argument that in
reality proves no more, than that the mind is capable of receiving false
Notions of Things, and espousing 'em as real Truths and unquestionable Rules of
Action. If this be admitted there is no necessity for discarding the Divine
Economy or Institution of Natural Conscience, unless we must deny or reject
every Divine Ordinance, because it was not established above the Possibility of
violence, or distortion. It may easily be granted that the Mind or
Understanding may be warped, or molded to the reception of very absurd
Opinions and Notions; there are a great many concurring causes that conspire to
the implanting such habits; there are vicious appetites and propensions that
carry a fatal biass over all our Motions or Actions; there are examples and the
fashion of an Age, which (once falling in with Native vicious propensions) will
turn the Scale against the clearest Arguments and Convictions; so as to enforce
a Practice contrary to received Sentiments and Opinions; and Practice engenders
into habit, and at the same time Establishes a Powerful Familiarity; and
Familiarity takes off the unnaturalness or incongruity of Things, and by tract
of time represents 'em to the Mind, as highly agreeable and innocent; so that
it is possible a cultivated mind may be totally Debauched and Corrupted, that a
pure Conscience may become defiled, and a regulated judgment perverted: The
Force of habit may reconcile contradictions; the exorbitance of Lusts may send
forth such Vapors as will suffocate not only the natural but improved light of
the understanding: But the case of uncultivated Nations is highly convincing,
where enormities become the Subject of Education, and are infused as Rules of
Action from the very first dawnings of Reason. Native lust, and irregular
appetites may do much to cramp and fetter the Mind, or Reason, to that degree
as to suppress all Solemn enquiries into the nature of Things; and consequently
oblige her to determine according to the Suggestions and Impulse of sense; but
when vicious propensions, and parental instructions are mixed and twisted in
with each other, and a People neither see nor hear of any thing but the
depravities of Nature, no wonder if a Judgment or Conscience pursuant to it is
established (at least while Lust keeps the Ascendant) and that too as resolute
and inflexible, as the most pure and regulated Conscience. I must confess it is
a received Maxim among the Schools, that in Actions that are de primo dictamine
naturae, the Conscience cannot err, but is always correct and regular, and on
this account it was pronounced Habitus naturalis and innatus. But I can
discover no just foundation for this assertion, especially since Scripture, as
well as Experience, seems to warrant the contrary; for St. Paul dictates no
less, when he describes the state of the Heathen World, Having the
Understanding darkened, being alienated from the Life of God through the Ignorance
that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart, who being past
feeling have given 'emselves over to work all uncleanness with greediness. But
now after all this, though the Original Laws of Conscience may be thus shamefully
subserted, and a false Conscience frequently erected in the room of that which
God has instituted, yet it is abundantly demonstrated it rests upon immutable
foundations. There Is a Conscience which has neither Custom, nor Education, for
its Creator, but that God that made the Heavens; it is founded in the immutable
counsels of infinite Wisdom, and has the same frame and establishment with
Nature it self. Let the Latitudinarian consider this, and every mouth shall be
stopped. Let him consider, that as it is perfect demonstration that God has
established an unalterable Economy of Conscience, so he will be infinitely
concerned to assert the Power and Authority of it; and though the exorbitance of
his Lusts have bribed his Judgment, and buoyed him up into a Persuasion, that
Conscience is a mere Chimora, or State, or Church-Engine, to reduce the
multitude to a servile Obedience; and, in a word, though the Power and Authority
of this persuasion has carried him on to the most execrable Impieties without
reluctance, or remorse; yet he may assure himself that the Divine Economy of
Conscience will one day be restored, and though want of means of Information
(where there is room for a just Plea of this nature) may silence the loud cries
of it, yet he may assure himself it will exert in proportion to every neglect
of means with all imaginable vigor and fury, upon every unrepenting Sinner,
and then he will find those superstitious empty Fears will prove real
Accusations, to condemn him to an irrevocable state of Misery.

CHAP. XX. The uneasiness of Mind under Sickness, and the approaches of Death,
resolved into the Gripes and Convulsions of Conscience.
HAving thus discovered the primitive Economy of Natural Conscience, it gives
us an opportunity to account for those Insults, those Gripes, and Convulsions
it makes upon the dissolute at the approach of death, or in time of Sickness.
I Am sensible that in endeavoring to assert a despised Notion, that has been
often resolved into a mere dejection of Spirits, an Hypochondriacal flatus, or
certain superstitious unreasonable fears impressed by the force of education.
These are indeed very plausible colors and suggestions, to a mind that is
steeped and impregnated with the over-flowings of Lust. But before this opinion
can obtain credit and admission, the Authors of it are indispensibly obliged to
prove, that God has not Originally established a Conscience upon certain
unalterable measures, and principles. But instead of this, it has already been
sufficiently demonstrated, that Conscience has the same Foundation, and
Original with that of our Beings. It had its Birth, and Authority in the same
Act, that made us reasonable Creatures, and free Agents; and therefore if upon
a review of past Actions; Remonstrances arise by comparing 'em with a Rule that
answers the true Ends and Interests of our Beings, all the reason in the World,
will oblige us to conclude, that they are nothing but the returns of Natural
Conscience. What though a contrary Conscience was Erected, acting upon the
strongest Persuasions, or Convictions, yet it must now be allowed, that it is
founded in Violence, and consequently the Mind is under a possibility of
returning to right notices, and apprehensions. And certainly the present case
affords the highest probabilities for the truth of the supposition. For first
it must be confessed whilst Lust and exorbitant Appetites maintain their
Ground, a biassed Judgment at least cannot escape being chained to their
Interest, but these seem to depend upon the Health and Vigor of the Animal
part. As this is shocked, or enervated, whether through Age or sickness, so these
must decline and suffer Disgrace. And therefore as the hear of Lust expires, so
the Judgment or Understanding will in proportion be discharged from her
Fetters, she will view things with a new aspect, not through the Steams of Lust,
and as it were through a Glass darkly, but Face to Face, and in their naked
Shapes and Features, and consequently our Reflections on past Actions will be
formed upon new Measures and Principles, she will be able to discern the true
Ends and Interests of Humane Nature, and thereupon bring all her Actions to the
Test of this Rule; and this cannot fail to beget new Persuasions and
Convictions, according to the primitive Economy of Conscience; so that it is
not a fit of Melancholy, the effect of depauperated Spirits, no otherwise than
a an expiring Vapor is the cause of Light, which before it obstructed; but the
returns of Natural Conscience acted upon a right Basis, and exerting it self
according to that frame in which it was created. Thus much the Latitudinarian
may discern from the Natural efficacy of Things. But besides all this he may
very well allow this wonderful change, to be in some measure completed, by the
concurrence of supernatural causes. If God upon a long train of unrelenting
impiety, has at last consigned a Man over to irretrievable destruction, I would
fain know why he may not suffer the Devil, or some of his Spiritual Crew, to
display before his Mind a Scheme of his past Actions. No one can question but
that Order of Spirits can converse with Spirits, or make their applications to
a Spiritual Being, and consequently that he can, if permitted, excite such
Motions, and suggest such Ideas, as will revive the most considerable minutes
of our whole Lives, and enable us to bring 'em to a new Test, and view 'em in
their proper Lineaments and proportions; and consequently as they appear to
clash with the Line of Duty, plunge a Soul into the most direful Agonies and
Convulsions. This is but a kind of Anticipation of that future misery, which
I Am confident he will be the Instrument to enhance upon all Reprobate Sinners.
But on the other hand, if the patience and long-suffering of God, extends to
the leading a Soul to repentance, who can dispute the Divine Influences of the
Holy Spirit, in bringing all past Actions to our remembrance. He can discover
such minute circumstances as will recover lost Ideas. He can excite such
Meditations and Thoughts, as will suggest the true Rule of Action, and Line of
Duty, and consequently such as will necessitate the Mind to pass Sentence on
every Action pursuant to it. It Is an Undisputed Truth that the Holy Spirit can
move and excite the Powers of the Soul by a spiritual kind of Converse, as
effectually as the Rhetoric and perswasives of fellow Creatures, that must be
Transmitted by Sounds through material Organs and Vehicles. This is an Assertion
so clear and indisputable, that I can see no reason why those ministering
Spirits, the blessed Angels by the divine Appointment, may not be allowed
capable of maintaining Intercourses of this nature, even with this lower World,
since it only places their Power upon a level with accursed Spirits, who have
on all hands a Power attributed to 'em, of influencing the Souls as well as
Bodies of Men. And certainly God, whose infinite Knowledge and Wisdom enables
him to adapt all his divine Succors to suitable Seasons and Opportunities,
could not exert 'em better, than when the Animal Part is disabled by Age,
Sickness, or other humane Calamities. And certainly its highly agreeable to the
divine Wisdom, when a Change of Mind and Conscience is wrought, to give 'em a
deep sense of their Folly and Error, and consequently to throw 'em into the
severest Agonies and Convulsions, before he raises 'em up by his special
Restoratives, the refreshings of the Lord. And now certainly we have foundation
enough to answer for the Contradictions of Conscience, and at the same time
assert the Divine Economy of it. This is an Hypothesis cannot be disputed in a
state of Revelation: And though in a state of Nature God has not covenanted to
govern Mankind by spiritual Succors, or the Effusions of his Holy Spirit on
the hearts of Men, yet I do not find he has any where bound himself to the
contrary; and its highly probable his infinite Goodness and Wisdom may sometime
incline him to dispense his Favors on this part of his Offspring; and
consequently contribute to the Establishment of Conscience upon its true
foundation, I mean according to the primitive Model and Economy of it.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Evidence of future Rewards, and Punishments from the
Presages of Natural Conscience.
THat Mankind was Originally Formed, and Created under the Conduct of a Law,
and that Rewards, and Punishments are ascertained to the Observance, or
Violation of this Law, has already been proved beyond any just color of
Dispute. That which remains, is to fix the Stage where this great Scene shall
be displayed, and a Formal Distribution Transacted. Now I am persuaded it will
be easily granted, that Rewards, and Punishments cannot well be Executed in
this State of Life. For first, the Established Coercive Powers of this World
can by no means pretend to it; they can determine nothing beyond the Surface,
or External parts of the Action. And these must be handed to them upon the
evidence of Senses, the Authority of Circumstances, and the Veracity of Men,
and Sinners; so that very often, the Innocent is Sentenced to Act his Part in
Sufferings, in the room of the Guilty. By this means, the substantial parts of
the Action lie Dormant, and escape the most subtle Remarks, and Censures of
Mankind; so that there may be a Thousand whited Sepulchers, which indeed appear
beautiful outward, but are within full of dead Men's Bones, and of all
uncleanness. But this is not all, for must we not admit a vast Scroul of
Enormities, that the nicest observations can never pretend to reach, or fathom;
some that are sheltered by Studied Retreats, and Privacies, others by passing
no further than Thought, or Intention, and the inward Workings of the Mind, so
that it is impossible that any thing less than an infinite Power, or a Searcher
of Hearts and Reins, can pretend to state the Deservings of Men, and adjust an
Allotment of Rewards and Punishments in proportion to them. Indeed, an All-wise
Creator, that knows the very Thoughts long before, is abundantly qualified to
finish his Dispensations of this kind, even in this Life. But yet in Crimes
that are Public, and Notorious, we sometimes see the Authors pass off the
Stage of the World without any visible Marks of Divine Vengeance, at least,
such as we may Read from others. It Is true, God may Reward, or Punish by secret
steps or motions, and by a train of Causes; and Events; but yet these are
Methods not so agreeable to the Designs of infinite Wisdom, in Rewarding, or
Punishing in this World, for when they are dispensed at a distance, and after
an invisible manner, they cannot influence the Offender, or the Public,
because, by this means, they cannot well be resolved into the direct, and
immediate causes of them; and consequently, the great design of such
Dispensations is in a great measure lost, or stifled. But now, since it is
concluded, that the Violation of Laws does not only infer a Right of
Punishment, but that Punishment will infallibly follow upon the Violation of
Laws; we may from hence further conclude, that there is another World assigned
by God for a final, and strict Distribution of Rewards, and Punishments. And
certainly, since God is a God of Justice, and has, decreed Punishments, as well
as Rewards; we must conclude, that his last Distributions will be Acted upon
the nicest Rules of Justice, and consequently proportioned according to the
true Intrinsic Nature of every Action, without Prejudice, or Partiality, or
the least Respect of Persons. These are truths that follow in direct, and easy
consequences, from the nature of the things themselves. But then if we allow
the Divine Economy of Conscience, it is impossible we can reject the evidence
of them: That God should Establish a Register of our Actions in the very Frame
of our Natures, is an uncontrollable Argument, that he has Created us to some
solemn Tribunal. Nay further, that God should not only Create us with retentive
Powers and Faculties, whereby we keep a kind of Diary of past Actions, but
implant certain absolving, and condemning Powers upon them, whereby we are
necessarily possessed with Apprehensions of Guilt, and Punishment, or Favor or
Reward. It Is a clear Indication there will be a Tribunal erected, where these
Divine Powers will display, and exert themselves to the utmost pitch of
Activity. The Latitudinarian, may (if he pleases,) bring Disgrace upon them, by
resolving them into Superstitious Fears, and the Biass of Education; but I Am
persuaded, it is unexceptionably proved there is the Finger of God in 'em. And
therefore, we must conclude, that the Powers of Natural Conscience are only a
kind of Vicegerent, or Substitute, that acts for a time by way of Restraint on
the one hand, and Encouragement on the other, but at last, she must give up all
her Reports, and resign to a Supreme Judicature, she must as it were, deliver
up the Kingdom unto God, and appear as a Witness, rather than a Judge. These
are the Natural Consequences, and Original Designs, and Uses of such Divine
Powers, for unless these be admitted, it is impossible we should account for
them, as the Ordinances of an infinitely Wise Creator. But further, that which
most powerfully demonstrates a State of Future Rewards and Punishments, is the
Efforts of Conscience toward the last Periods of Life. That the Powers of
Conscience should awake, and grow Strong and Vigorous, when the Animal Powers
grow Faint and Languid, that her Apprehensions should be clear, and Piercing,
her Resentments Rigid and Severe, and her Exultations full of Joy, and
Consolation, when the powers of Animal Nature are sunk and wasted, and ready to
Expire, is an Infallible Demonstration that we are Acted by a Principle highly
distinct from Matter, from Flesh, and Blood, or Animal Spirits, or in a word, a
Principle that will Live and Act after this Earthy Tabernacle is dissolved.
Indeed, when we consider that the Reflections of a well spent Life discover
themselves at the point of Death, when the Passions of the Animal Part are
sunk, and wasted, in the most grateful Applauses, and substantial
Satisfactions; so that the whole World, and all its Charms and Beauties, appear
flat and empty before it, what can a reasoning Mind conclude but that it is a
Harbinger to some future Rewards. It implies a deep presension of some future
Blessings that shall be conferred upon us by a Sovereign Power, as a Recompense
of that Labor of Love we have entertained for his Name's sake. On the other
hand, when we consider those insupportable Gripes and Convulsions, more bitter
than the Pangs of Death, that are the fatal conclusion of a dissolute,
impenitent Life; when we consider that the Tempest arises and grows loud and
clamorous, in proportion to the decays of Nature, and though that cracks and
groans and sinks, yet this will not be appeased; we must conclude that there
are convictions that, will be carried into another State, and not only torment,
but impeach every impenitent Criminal, before some other Tribunal. Indeed, were
there no certainty of Rewards and Punishments, annexed to the violation or
observance of Laws, or were there an exact distribution made in this World, or
in a Word, were there no real discovery of a divine Economy of Conscience,
then we must think of some other Method to dispel the Vapor. But since these
are proved upon the highest evidences and Demonstrations, we must conclude that
such black presages are the prologue to future Miseries, to certain Allotments,
that will be the Award of some future Reckoning. These are Evidences so clear
and undeniable, that if the Latitudinarian will still persist, I Am confident
his only conviction will be an actual perception of the Fruits of his dissolute
Life, and his Impregnable Infidelity.

CHAP. XXII. How far Conscience shall be a Measure of the Divine Justice, in
the distribution of future Punishments.
NOw since it is abundantly demonstrated that there is a divine Economy of
Conscience, and that it rests on the unalterable measures of moral Goodness, or
the original nature of things themselves, we may with force of reason conclude,
that our past Actions shall be chiefly tried by this Original Standard. It may
indeed be objected, That no other Conscience can be the measure of any Man's
Condemnation but his own, nor upon any Actions than those he was conscious of
when committed. The first part of the Objection is certainly an uncontroverted
truth, for when God puts any man on his Trial upon the Evidence of Conscience,
it must certainly be his own, and not another's Conscience, but yet it is highly
probable our Consciences will not be such as they were when enslaved by vicious
Habits and Dispositions, but reformed according to the divine Occonomy of
Conscience, and consequently the Original Standard of Conscience will become
our own, and appear as Evidence against us. It Is highly evident from what has
already been suggested, that the Consciences of Men in another World will be
fixed on a new bottom. It Is highly probable that all the Minutes of every
Action, together with the Natures and Reasons of the Line of Duty, will be
displayed and presented to the view of the mind; so that there will not be only
a new discovery of lost Idea's, Thoughts and Actions; but of their
incompatibility with the Line of Duty; nay, there will be a discovery of the
Reasons and Original of all Miscarriages; the Mind will plainly discern the
Error and Absurdity of former Convictions; she will confess that the violence
and importunity of Lust, or a habit of Thoughtlesness, or Inconsideration, was
the true and genuine cause of 'em, and consequently the frame and Economy of
Conscience will not only be altered, according to the Intrinsic Nature of
things, and received as every Man's own proper Conscience, but it will discover
Sin and Guilt in the erring Conscience, and charge the mischief of it upon its
proper owner, wherever the Errors appear to be contracted from the neglect of
means of Information. For certainly as God has endued us with Faculties to
instruct us in the Line of Duty, so he has made us capable of attaining it in
that Course and Order which he has established, and consequently of pursuing
and embracing such Means as are truly conducive to the attainment of it; and
therefore when proper Means are instituted or proposed, or, as it were, lie
before us in the common road of Thinking, the Mischiefs, or iniquity of an
Action, by the Laws of Conscience, will be imputed to us, though it was committed
with a persuasion of its Innocence, because the Order of Nature, and the Laws
of Humane Action are as much perverted by acting without the use of established
means, as contrary to inward Convictions; and though the Action in the precise
nature of it is not wilfully wicked, yet the neglect of Means may be justly
esteemed wilful, and consequently the Effects and mischiefs of the Action
justly imputed. I will not deny but there are thousands of miserable Wretches
in the World under such fatal Circumstances, that they seem to be placed out of
the reach of due Means of Information; but to judge precisely of this seems to
be a peculiar of the searcher of Hearts and Reins. However I am persuaded the
common Exigences and Necessities of Humane Nature will instruct Mankind in the
most fundamental Rules of Natural Religion; and yet God will charge nothing
upon us, but where he can convince our Conscience of notorious Neglects; and in
this case it is consonant to the Rules of Justice, that Sentence should be
passed not according to former, but present Convictions. Indeed it can never be
imagined, that the great Judge of all the Earth in his final Awards to Mankind,
will erect a Tribunal that had not its Original from him, I mean from the
Convictions of an erroneous Conscience; and therefore since it is demonstrated
that new Sentiments, and Convictions, will break in upon the Mind, even to the
charging of Guilt upon those Neglects which were the immediate source of false
Convictions, we may justly conclude that the judicial Proceedings of the Great
Day shall be established upon a regulated Conscience; I mean, according to the
Divine Economy of it; and consequently it is not the Plea of former
Convictions, nor want of consciousness when Enormities were committed, that
will be sufficient to exempt any Man from the jurisdiction of it. For these may
be resolved into Personal Neglects, and Personal Neglects are alone sufficient
to derive a Guilt upon us. As for the want of consciousness it is a branch of
the Objection not yet replied to; and therefore I shall make some few Remarks
upon it. And first, it is certain as long as Enormities are committed upon
personal Neglects, as in the case of Drunkenness, it is not necessary the Mind
should be conscious of the whole process, when actually committed. It Is
abundantly sufficient, if upon a representation of Circumstances we shall at
last be forced to own them, or ascribe the Commission of 'em to our selves, for
this will bring us under the dominion of Conscience at the last day. Certainly
we may with as much force of Reason plead an Exemption from the guilt of
Enormities, which through tract of time were wiped off the Table of the Mind, as
deny to account for Enormities, which when committed we were not conscious of,
when it was some former Enormity had disabled us from being conscious of 'em;
whereas it can only be required in both cases that proper, and competent
Methods are contrived to make us conscious at the last day, so as to pronounce
our selves the Authors of 'em; for when this is done, Conscience will determine
as effectually as if our present and past Convictions were consonant to each
other. Upon the whole then it is visible, it is not the present state of any
Man's Conscience, any farther than it accords with the Divine Economy of
Conscience, no more than any present Act of Consciousness, that will be
received for a final measure of the Goodness or Evil of our Actions; and
consequently of a final Condemnation or Deliverance, but Conscience founded on
the express Laws of God, the sole Rule of Duty, and the Agreement or
Disagreement of our Actions with them. I would not be mistaken, as if I
intended to streighten, or fix Limits to the infinite Mercies of God; there is
nothing but his own infinite Purity, Truth, or Justice, can at any time divert
his Mercies; but yet I think it is evident that we shall be judged for our
Actions, as they are in their own Nature, and that too on the Awards of a
rectified Conscience, wherever an erroneous Conscience can be charged with
Guilt. No one can dispute the Guilt of an Erroneous Conscience, where the Error
is propagated through wilful Enormities, or manifest Neglects. Thus far the
sacred Canon is express and clear, when we are told in the case of Error, that
the Mind and Conscience is defiled, Tit. 1.15. And certainly wherever there
is Defilement, there must be Guilt, and wherever there is Guilt there is at
least Punishment due. And I presume it is sufficiently demonstrated that lost
Ideas will be revived, that every Action will appear in its proper Dress, and
consequently the whole Economy of Conscience will be changed. If what has
already been offered be not conclusive, the State of the Wicked after
Condemnation will infer it. Now certainly whoever allows the divine Economy of
Conscience must allow a future Judgment, and if there is a future Judgment, and
Men to be judged by their Consciences, the most Hardened, Unrelenting Sinner,
will be brought to a clear apprehension of the Line of Duty, and by this means
forced to own the Justice of his Sentence; though his Conscience was seered and
past feeling, it shall now recover a double Force, and retain the quickest
apprehension of Things; and Conscience thus enforced, and armed with fresh
Power and Vigor, shall be the eternal Instrument of increasing the Torments of
the damned. Since then Conscience shall be thus regulated in Order to enhance,
and perpetuate their Misery, we may justly conclude that it is Regulation will
commence at the great Tribunal, in Order to ratify the sentence of
Condemnation; and certainly since it must be allowed that Conscience will be an
Instrument of future Condemnation, as well as Misery; we must conclude that it
will be one and the same Conscience, acted by the same Measures and Principles,
and of the same Extent and Latitude, and consequently a Conscience cleared from
all Error and Mistake, Partiality or Connivance; and in a Word, a Conscience
established according to the Divine Economy of it, the Law of God, and the
eternal Measures of Moral Goodness and Duty. This is that Candle of the Lord,
as the Wiseman expresses it, that will display its Light into the deepest
recesses of the Heart, and Search into the inward parts of the Belly, Prove.
20.27. In a Word it will be the inward Voice or Word of God, quick and powerful
and Sharper than any two Edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of
Soul and Spirit, and of the Joints and Marrow, and is a discerner of the
Thoughts, and intents of the Heart. Heb. 4.12.

. 2. From what has been said it may not be improper to make some further
Remarks upon Mr. Lock's Notions of Conscience. It Is observable Mr. Lock makes
Consciousness and Conscience the same, and Conscience to consist in nothing
else, but our own Opinions, of our own Actions; and pursuant to this, he
affirms that in personal Identity which he makes to consist in Consciousness,
is founded all the Right and Justice of Favor, Rewards and Punishment. Book 2.
c. 27.. 18.

But certainly the Conscience that will prevail in the great day, will not be
any Opinions we have entertained of Actions when Committed though taken up at
large: No, we shall then be acted by no other Opinions, but those of a
regulated Conscience, and they shall sit as Judges, even over former Opinions,
that were engendered by Neglect or Carelessness, and nothing but invincible
Ignorance, or sincere Repentance, can deliver us from its Dominion. This is
indisputably evident from the Regulations of Conscience that shall be made
according to the divine Economy of it, whereby our Opinions of past Actions
shall not be measured by former Convictions, but by the conformity of our
Actions to the true Line of Duty, or means of Information. Again, that
consciousness which some Men might be under when Enormities were committed,
cannot be the foundation of future Punishment, but that Consciousness of past
Actions which will arise from a regulated Conscience. For it is concluded that
we may become conscious of Enormities committed, of which we were not
conscious, when committed, and conscious of others by wrong Measures and
Convictions; but it will be that Consciousness, and those Convictions we are
under at the Great Tribunal, and result from a regulated Conscience, that will
be the measure of a final Absolution or Condemnation. And certainly if Mr. Lock
will not suffer his Notions to be guarded by these limitations, he must pardon
me if I cannot comply with 'em, or cannot but esteem 'em dangerous and false.
On this account I cannot suffer an Instance, that seems to interfere with what
is asserted, pass off without a few Remarks. Mr. Lock in order to the
establishing his Notion of Personal Identity, brings in Enormities committed in
Dunkenness of which a Man is not conscious, and places them upon a level with
those committed by a Man in his sleep, making him no more answerable for the
one than the other. He indeed makes the Drunkard in this case obnoxious to the
Civil Laws, for no other reason, but [Because in these cases they cannot
distinguish what is Real from what is Counterfeit, and so the Ignorance in
Drunkenness or Sleep, is not admitted as a Plea.] But in the great Day wherein
the Secrets of all Hearts shall be laid open, it may be reasonable to think, no
one shall be made to Answer for what he knows nothing of, but shall receive his
Doom, his own Conscience accusing or excusing him. See Sect. 22. Book 2. Chap.
27. Here are a great many Passages that look with a very evil Aspect, and
therefore I shall say something to each in their order. And first, I think this
Author has drawn a very unjust Parallel between Crimes committed in Sleep and
Dunkenness. It Is well known that Sleep is a thing entailed on us as a Law, even
a Law established in the frame of our Beings, and commences upon the
necessities of corruptible Nature, and therefore if Mischief accidently
follows, it cannot well be imputed, because it is founded in a Cause or
Principle that is inseparable from Humane Nature, or rather is an Appendage of
the most necessary Powers of it, that set us on a level with Brutes, and
consequently the Actions that flow from it cannot be imputed. But I hope this
Author cannot plead a necessity of Nature for Drunkenness. A quantity of
generous Liquor may sometimes be required for the actuating the Spirits, but
never to intoxicate, unman, or drown the Reason. In a word, Drunkenness argues
a willful neglect in humane Conduct, and as such is an Act of a free Agent, and
consequently the Actions that flow from it, though destitute of Choice or
Deliberation are justly imputed. For in order to the imputing or charging an
Action upon us, it is not necessary that it should proceed from the free
exercise of Reason, or previous Deliberation at the very Moment when Committed.
It is sufficient that it is owing to a Cause that is to be esteemed truly
Deliberate and Wilful. If this were not so, it is impossible any Sin of
Ignorance can be Culpable; a Position so wide from the line of Christian Duty,
that every Heathen Moralist will teach this Author the Absurdity of it. I shall
for once Refer him to Aristotle, because he has culled out the case of
Drunkenness to confirm the Doctrine. He assures us, Ignorance is Punishable
whenever the cause of it can be charged upon us, and for this Reason,
pronounces Crimes committed in Drunkenness, liable to double Punishment. (...).
Ethic. ad Nichom. Lib. 3. Chap, 7.

But to proceed. As for the practice of Civil Governments in punishing Crimes
committed when Disguised by Drink, he has shamefully Misrepresented it, when he
Suggests that the only Reason, is, because they cannot distinguish what is Real
from what is Counterfeit; and so the Ignorance in Drunkenness, or Sleep is not
admitted as a Plea. It Is a known truth, that Civil Judicatures take cognizance
of nothing, but the outward Act, and when this appears, they constantly ascribe
the internal Principles of the Action, Knowledge and Freedom, where the
Criminal is under no Natural Disabilities, so that the Reasons that induce them
to proceed to Censure in cases of this Nature, can be no other, but those which
this excellent Moralist has assigned; for every such Criminal has (...), and is
(...). Though he was not Master of himself, when the Fact was committed, yet he
is Acted by a Principle that made him Master of the cause of it; and
consequently the Government may exercise a Right of Punishment. Again, every
Government pronounces the ignorance of Laws sufficiently Promulged, as well as
ignorance of the Action in respect of the Relation it bears to the Law, an
affected ignorance, and consequently, such as not only renders the Action
criminal, but such as in the Eye of every Government is criminal in its own
Nature; and this is the second Reason assigned for double Punishment, (...). In
a word, it is visible where there is, (...), there the Action may be imputed,
and consequently Criminal; and for this Reason, Governments constantly
pronounce it so; but then when this is wanting, as in the case of downright
Madness, where the Mind rests under a Physical Disability, if Crimes or
Mischiefs, are committed upon it, the Government only enquires into the
Symptoms of Madness, and upon Evidence, Acquits the reputed Criminal; and in
these cases I question not, but the great Judge of all the World will do the
like. But now, I think it is perfect Demonstration, the true Reason why Humane
Laws punish in the case before us, is not because they cannot distinguish
certainly what is Real, what Counterfeit. Thirdly, As for the proceedings of
the great Day, I presume, they may Lawfully move upon those Measures, and
Principles, that Humane Tribunals have recourse to, as their undoubted
prerogative, and tho Enormities committed through Madness, or Sleep, may not be
strictly accounted for; yet I Am persuaded, no Ignorance founded in Drunkenness,
will ever be admitted a plea of Innocence, as is apparently Suggested by this
Author. It Is abundantly concluded, that Conscience will be Regulated according
to the Divine Economy of it; and that it will ascribe to its self, and yield
an Assent to a great many Actions, which the present State of some Men's
Consciences either know nothing of, or at least have caused them to be
pronounced Innocent. And certainly, where the Conscience can be convinced that
such a particular Enormity is to be resolved into wilful neglects, as in the
case of Drunkenness, it will ascribe the Action, and charge a Guilt upon us,
and by this means a Man may be harassed with an Accusing Conscience at the
Great Day, when the Secrets of all Hearts shall be laid oper, for things he at
present knows little of.

The CLOSE.
I Have now performed what was at first designed, and I hope I have laid such a
Platform of Natural Religion, as is consistent with the Doctrines of Revealed
Religion, and the nature and reality of things; and I have been more
particular, that I might obviate not only the Irreligious Notions, and
Positions that obtain in the present Age, but obstruct the growth of New Ones,
by the Artificial, but Pernicious insinuations of the Author, I have so much
Animadverted upon. I have Formed no Designs from the undertaking, but the
advance of Truth, and the Maintenance of a Spirit of Religion, by Establishing
the Foundations of it; and if the performance does in some measure come up to
it, and appears to be drawn according to the main Lines of Truth, I shall be
ready to Vindicate it against the applauded Cavils of those, that I Am afraid
are devoted to tear up the whole of Religion, both Root and Branch. But if
among a great many Truths, I have made some false Steps, some few Errata that
are any wise inconsistent with Truth, or Injurious to any part of Religion, or
Piety, it is without Design, and upon the first Conviction, I shall make
Satisfaction to God, and the World, by a free and ample Retractation.

FINIS.

