AN EXAMINATION Of the chief Points of ANTINOMIANISM, Collected out of some
LECTVRES lately Preached in the Church of Antholines Parish, LONDON: And now
drawn together into a Body, and published for the Benefit of all that love the
holy Truth of God, By Thomas Bedford B. D.

Unto which is annexed, An Examination of a Pamphlet lately published,
Entitled The Compassionate Samaritan, Handling the Power of the Magistrate in
the compulsion of Conscience: By the same Author.

2 TIMOTHY 1. 9. The Law is for the lawless --

2 PET. 2. 1. There shall be false Teachers, who privily shall bring in
damnable Heresies -- And many shall follow their lascivious ways, by reason of
whom the way of Truth shall be evil spoken of --

LONDON: Printed by John Field for Philemon Stephens, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the sign of the gilded Lion in Paul's Churchyard. 1647.

To the Worshipful and much Honored, Mr. John Turner of Hamme in the County of
SURREY, Esquire A Sincere Lover of the Truth, and an earnest Contender for the
Faith which was once delivered to the SAINTS.

T. B.
In testimony of Love and Thankfulness, Dedicates the life of this his weak and
unworthy Labor; Together with the Apprecation of much Health and Happiness.
ERRATA.
PAge 13. line 21. for And read Answ. p. 16. l. 6. for eternal. r. external. p.
31. l. 5. for Yea though it be r. And if it be p. 31. l. 19. for as thereof r.
as there, of p. 40. l. 10. for or is the meaning r. or rather is not the
meaning, p. 41. l. 32. for casually r. causally. p. 42. l. 23. for is that it
r. it is, that. p. 60. l. 13. for so may our r. So may not our. p. 60. l. 15.
for having set r. having set down.

O^^ober ^^, 1646.
I Have to my full satisfaction perused this excellent Dissertation and
Discussion of the chief Antinomian Tenants, and find it to be so solid and
judicious, pious, profitable and seasonable in our distracted Times, and
finally so adorned and sweetened with modesty, gaullass sobriely and Christian
charity that I allow it and approve it well worthy the Printing and Publishing;
not doubting but that it will be very effectual to stablish all in the Truth
who have already embraced it, and to convince (if not persuade) all those who
in simplicity and through mere error of their judgment are contrary minded.

JOHN DOWNAM^.

THE TABLE.
THe Introduction, Page 1. Chap. 1. Touching the Law of Moses, Whether
altogether abolished, so that it is of no use to the Believer now in the time
of the Gospel: Also whether it do not bind Believers to the Duties of Holiness
as well now as it did in the time of the Old Testament, 9. Chap. 2. Touching
the Motives of the Law, Whether these also be abolished; So that to propose the
expectation of reward, as an invitation to good Works, and to deter men from
sin by the fear of punishment, be altogether inconsistent with the Doctrine of
Grace, 18. Chap. 3. A brief Answer to the Arguments of N. D. by him brought to
prove Justification before Faith, i. e. before the act of Believing, 25. Chap.
4. That justification is not transacted all at once, nor any pre-remission of
sin before it be committed, 33. Chap. 5. The way of seeking resolution touching
our Adoption and Justification by signs and marks, viz. The fruits of
Sanctification, whether it be altogether unsatisfactory, 41. Chap. 6. Touching
sin in the Conscience of the Believer; The Doctrine of the Antinomians in this
Point examined and found insufficient to satisfy the Conscience: The right way
of satisfying the Conscience, and of taking away the scruple of sin, set down,
58. The Arguments of the Compassionate Samaritan, touching the Power of the
Magistrate in the compulsion of Conscience, Examined, 73.

The Introduction.
Isaiah 53. 11. By his knowledge shall my Righteous Servant justify many; for
he shall bear their iniquities.
A Farther Explication of what was said v. 10. The pleasure of the Lord shall
prosper in his hand; in the hand of Christ shall the pleasure of the Lord:
Understand this touching the Bruising of the Serpents head, mentioned Genesis 3.
15. consequently that Salvation of mankind: This pleasure of the Lord does
prosper in the hand of Christ; which is seen in this, That by his knowledge he
shall justify many. This is that fruit of the Travel of his Soul, in seeing
whereof He, i. e. Christ (not God the Father, as some very fondly and foolishly
do apply the Text) Christ, I say, shall be satisfied, i. e. shall account
himself well satisfied for all his labor and pains bestowed.

The Passion of Christ, and the Benefit thereof; these two are the subject
matter of this Chapter: The Benefit thereof is partly to others, and partly to
himself: To himself, that is set down ver. 12. To others in some verses
foregoing; The Description whereof takes its rise from the middle of the 9.
Verse, Because he had done no violence, etc. That word Because is a trouble to
Interpreters, how to depend the latter clause of that Verse upon the former.
Vatablus saw, and cuts the knot rather then unties it. I conceive we shall not
wrong the Text, I am sure not the Truth, if we join the former part of the
verse to the 8. and begin a new period in the word Because, thus; v. 9. Because
he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his mouth; yet it pleased
the Lord to bruise him [He has put him to grief] 10. When thou shall make his
soul an offering for sin; Or, When his soul shall make an offering for sin, he
shall see his Seed, etc. q. d. Inasmuch as notwithstanding he was altogether
innocent, yet he did patiently submit himself to bear whatsoever the Lord would
lay upon him for the Expiation of man's sin; that therefore upon his Death he
should receive full satisfaction both in respect of himself and those persons
whose cause he had undertaken. Thus I, but let the learned judge.

In the words of ver. 11. we have a Proposition, and its Confirmation: In the
Proposition, besides the Agent who is by God here termed, a Servant, a
Righteous Servant, we have three things not to be so lightly passed over: 1.
Act, in the word, Shall justify: 2. Object, Many: 3. The Medium, By his
knowledge. Of which somewhat more largely, and yet only in reference to what
just hints the words may give to the Examination of some positions of the
Antinomians; a Sect, and a sort of men lately start up, whom Satan does make
use of to be his Proctors of Profaneness, and the Abbettors of Atheism and
licentious Libertinism. But to the Text.

By his knowledge -- The Medium stands first in the Text, and if you will, let
us first begin with it. By his knowledge -- And what is that? To make way for
Answer, I lay down this, That the pronoun His must be passive, like that in
Psalm. 90. 11. Thy fear, i. e. The fear of thee, to note the object not the
subject, as there of Fear, so here of Knowledge; Scientia sui, By the knowledge
of him, as Pagnin, Vatablus and Tremelius. Farther we cannot go, till first we
enquire what it is to justify.

To justify, in the Text of Scripture, does sometime signify, To endeavor the
justification of a sinner, by acquainting him with the way and mean thereof, as
Dan. 12. 3. Sometime To effect it, by acquitting the party accused from the
Crime and Accusation, which in this work of Justification is still presupposed:
Whether of these two (other I let pass, as not so applicable to this Text)
whether of them, I say, is most proper to the Text, will appear by the
Confirmation when we come unto it. Onwards we make use of it, to enquire
farther into the Medium, what is meant by His knowledge; For answerable to
these two, the word, His knowledge, may import; 1. Medium Revelationis, That
Doctrine by which Christ does reveal the way of Justification. 2. Medium
Operationis, That Grace by which Christ does fit man for the benefit of
Justification.

As Medium Revelationis, so the Conclusion is, The Gospel is that word of Truth
that rightly enformeth us in the way and manner of Justification: The Gospel, i.
e. that part of holy Writ which teaches us the knowledge of Christ, of his
Person, of his Office, the Covenant of Grace, and the condition required: The
Gospel opposed to the Law, q. d. Not by the Law, but by the Gospel and the
Doctrine of Grace, shall Christ propound and acquaint mankind with the way of
gaining their Justification: Not by the Law; Understand this not in general,
as comprehending the writings of the Old Testament; but in special, as
importing the Law of Moses; and this considered as the condition of that
Covenant made with Israel; Not the Law of Moses, but the Gospel of Christ is
the mean of Revelation; acquainting man with the way of obtaining his
Justification. What then? Is this Law of Moses all of it altogether abolished?
Is it of no use and service to the Church of God, to Believers now in the
Constitution of the Church of Christ? Some there be that would have it so,
whose main endeavor is to cast the Doctrine of it out of the Church, and the
care thereof out of the Conscience of the Christian; neither the Precepts
thereof allowed to bind men, nor the Motives thereof to draw men to the Duties
of Holiness: See their Arguments examined, Chap. 1. and 2.

As medium Operationis; and then the Conclusion will be, That Faith in Christ
is the way and mean of Justification; Faith, I say, and not Works: Faith not
unfitly termed the Knowledge of Christ, because this alone is that which does
rightly know Christ, the fullness of his Merits and Graces: None but the
Believer does acknowledge Christ, nay none but he does rightly, fully and
perfectly know him. Faith is both the Daughter and the Mother of this
Knowledge, the knowledge of Christ: The Daughter, for Faith cannot lodge in an
ignorant Soul; The Mother, for it leads on to perfection of knowledge. This
Faith is the mean; by it shall Christ work in the heart of the Believer, and
dispose it for Justification. Not by the works of man's Righteousness, but by
Faith in Christ is man justified: How so? Because it is Medium Recipiens, as
the hand or mouth of the Soul, to receive that Spiritual Food and Physic that
does feed and cure the Soul: It receives Christ and the communion of his
Merits and Graces for the good of the Believer. The Righteousness of Christ is
not unfitly compared to Food and Physic, to a Garment and Plaster, which do
no good but in the way of Application, if not applied, no good by them: These
are received by the hand or by the mouth, and this is the work of Faith; and by
Faith we are said to be justified, as by the hand the Body is fed and clothed,
viz. Instrumentally. Upon this ground we conceive it, That in order of nature,
justification cannot be considered as going before the habit, yea the act of
Faith; but rather, that Faith has the leading hand, and the precedence of
Consideration: St. Peter terms Salvation the end of our Faith, 1 Pet. 1. 9.
By this end means he, only the consequent benefit which follows upon it, or
rather the end intended and aimed at in believing: Does not Saint Paul
prescribe it to the Jailer as a mean to bring about the end? Believe and thou
shall be saved, Acts 16. 31. Does he not show the ground and reason of it, Gal.
2. 16. We knowing that a man is not justified but by Faith in Christ -- even we
have believed, q. d. we have applied our selves to the use of the means that we
might obtain the end: If Faith be as a mean to the end, then is it not to be
considered as following, but as foregoing the benefit of our Justification.
Plausible Arguments are aleaged to overthrow this Truth, but their weight and
worth is more in show then in substance; See them examined, Chap. 3.

In the Act expressing the benefit obtained by Faith, we may not pass by the
Tense of the Verb, but by occasion of it (as Doctor Crisp upon the like
occasion, see his Sermons on Isa. 53. 6.) enquire into the Time, when it is
that this Act is done: The Tense of the Verb is future, He shall justify --
Future it was then, when the Prophet spoke this; Whether future still, is a
Question; Or if not, when it was to be transacted, whether all at once
dispatched: The farther explication whereof, see in Chap. 4.

The Object remains; This is in the word Many:

Not all, but only a number: There be who teach that All shall be saved; a
point well pleasing to flesh and blood: If a man might live as he list, abuse
his Eye and Ear, his Hand and Tongue, yea his Hand and his Heart, his Body and
Soul to the service of Sin and Satan, and yet hope for Salvation by Christ: But
this may not be, it is not All, but Many; All shall not be justified by Christ,
nor saved by him. Not through any defect of the means; the Merit of Christ is
sufficient to save all: The Gospel does call and invite all; and no doubt but
whosoever believes shall be saved: But it comes to pass through the
ill-disposition and negligence of man left to himself, who regards not to
perform the condition required. By the Ordinance of God, in whose hand (as say
our Divines) Christ has left the disposing of his Merit, it is appointed, That
the Merit of Christ shall not be dispensed to mankind, but under a condition;
and without the performance of that condition it is not bestowed upon any: Now
mankind left to themselves are negligent and careless to look to that
condition, and so through their own ill-deserts are excluded from the benefit
of Christ's Death and Passion. So then, it is not All, but only Many.

Q. If not all, How then shall any one know whether his part and portion be in
that Many, or not? Ans. Surely (say we) by the work of Grace in the heart, by
the Spirit of Sanctification, which does always go along with the Spirit of
Adoption, and the work of Justification. This has passed for a Truth, without
any opposition, till of late; The Antinomians cannot away with inherent
Qualifications, No certainty can be gathered from the, say these men: Against
whom, see the Ancient Truth maintained, and the New way convinced of
insufficiency, Chap. 5.

For he shall bear their iniquities.

This is the Confirmation of the Proposition, He shall justify, because He
shall bea -- By bearing iniquities we understand, Suffering the punishment due
to their sin, as a Sacrifice to make an Atonement; to satisfy the Justice of
God, and so to take away the sin of man. Hence then we see that Justification
is transacted by Christ, and he is said to justify many; Not by the way of
Instruction, as say the Socinians, viz. Propounding the Doctrine of the Gospel,
and the Covenant of Grace, in which is contained the way and manner of
Justification: In this sense the Apostles (to say nothing of Moses and the
Prophets) might be said to justify many; inasmuch as they had an eminent
service in publishing the Gospel to the world; but doubtless Christ had no
partners in the Justification of these many: So then, not by the Instruction is
it, but by the way of Acquittance and Absolution.

This is plain; but that is farther to be enquired, How comes sin to trouble
and vex the conscience, if it be taken away? Has Christ born, yea born away
(for so we understand the word bear; he does not only far, but auferre, so
bear them as to bear them away) Has Christ born them away, and are they
brought back again? Here again we must Conflict with these Antinomians; Old
Truths do not please them, they have a New way for this also; the unsufficiency
whereof, together with the right way of satisfying the Conscience, and taking
away the scruple of sin, see fully explicated, Chap. 6.

According to this Method have I finished my Meditations upon this Text of
Scripture, chosen of purpose to examine the Truth or Falsehood of some Points of
Antinomianism: An Enterprise, to which, I confess, I had bound my self by Vow
and Promise made to God in the day of some distress which had befaln me: To the
performance of which Vow, I was engaged, by obtaining at the hand of God the
gracious grant of my desire, which with all thankfulness I do acknowledge, and
by mine experience can witness, That an holy and religious Vow is a ready mean
to obtain of God the gracious grant of our just desires. Holy and Religious I
account that which is framed according to the Rules of Religion: One special
Rule of Religion is, That each Christian in his place and calling do set
himself, with the best of his abilities, to that work which the present times
may show to be most necessary for the advancement of Gods glory.

I in my place of the Ministry, what could I do rather, or more tending to
this end, then to set my self to oppose the present Errors which darken the
Truth of God, and defile the Purity of our holy Profession. This Error of
Antinomianism I chese to deal in, because I conceived it one of the most
dangerous Doctrines that are broached in these days. Satan does never more
harm, then when he is transformed into an Angel of Light: Nor is any Error more
dangerous, then that by which Christian Liberty is used as an occasion to the
Flesh, by which the care and conscience of the Law, the Rule of Holiness, is
weakened and worn away; by which the Soul and Conscience is steeled and stiffned
against the sense and remorse of sin and sinfulness.

In this I have done what I could; If not with strength enough to convince, or
cleerness enough to persuade, yet with a sincere heart, and a desire to do
good, God is my witness: And I bless God, both for his Assistance enabling me
to do what I have done, and also for those blessed opportunities which his
Providence has afforded me to do mine endeavor in the course of my Ministry,
to set forth the Truth of God, and to seek the glory of his Name.

AN EXAMINATION Of the chief Points of ANTINOMIANISM.
CHAP. I. Touching the Law of Moses, Whether altogether abolished, so that it
is of no use to the Believer now in the time of the Gospel: Also whether it do
not bind Believers to the Duties of Holiness as well now as it did in the time
of the Old Testament.
THere is a Generation of men risen up again in this last Age of the Church,
who would gladly banish the Preaching of the Law, and all legal Duties out of
the Church of Christ: The Law (say they) is abolished; the Conscience of the
Christian is not bound to the Law, they are false Teachers who call men to the
practice of the Law, and the Duties therein contained. This Doctrine of theirs
is a word that will eat as does a Canker, till it has fretted out all care of
Holiness and good Works, if not prevented. Let it not then be thought
impertinent (this being the time of their infection) if by examining their
Grounds, and discovering the weakness and unsoundness of them, I seek what
lies in me to prevent the further spreading of this evil.

The Antixomian (this name is given him for that he opposes the Preaching and
pressing of the Law) he I say builds upon these and the like Texts, Romans 6.
14. and 7. 4. and 10. 4. Gal. 3. 10. and 5. 1. whence they argue to this
effect; If Believers be not under the Law, nay if dead to the Law by the body
of Christ, and so delivered from the Law, whereupon Christ is termed the end of
the Law; Then to call them back again to the Law and the dominion thereof, is
to draw them from Christ and from that Liberty which Christ has purchased for
them; whereas the Apostle does charge the Galatians to stand fast in the
Liberty wherewith Christ has made them free, and not to suffer themselves to
be again entangled in the yoke of Bondage: Thus they; as I find by that Book
of To: Town, Entitled, The Assertion of Grace, or A 'Defence of the Doctrine
of free Justification.

For clearing of this, our Divines distinguish; The Law of Moses delivered to
the Church of Israel was partly Moral, partly Ceremonial: Moral, so called,
because it was the Rule of good manners toward God and toward man; And it is to
be considered either in respect of the Substance or the Circumstance: In
respect of the Substance, it is the comprehension of those Duties of Holiness
which God had either imprinted in the heart, or revealed to the ear of Adam and
his Posterity in that Age of the Church which lived before the writing of the
Law. And so it is the Doctrine of Good and Evil; of Good, and so the Rule of an
holy life; of Evil, and so the revealer of Sin and Transgression: This was the
substance of that which we call the Moral Law. The Circumstance of it was, That
it was made the condition of a Covenant for Life and Salvation, and so required
of all them that were under the Covenant, and expected life and salvation by
it; of them I say it required complete and perfect obedience, otherwise no hope
to obtain their expectation: Nay more, it exacted this obedience under a Curse;
so that in case of disobedience, not only shall they fail of Life, but come
under the condemnation of Death; and this was that that proved the ruin of
man. In the constitution of the Church of Israel, the Ceremonial Law was added:
This set down that Form of Worship and Service of God, in the right observation
whereof they might find both Expiation of their Offenses, and Acceptance of
their Obedience. This consisted in many Rites and Ceremonies, Sacrifices and
Ordinances, all limited to the observation of Times when, of Places where, and
of Persons by whom these were to be performed [ex. gr. No Sacrifice might be
offered but upon one Altar; Nor by any person but by one of the Family of
Aaron; No Circumcision but upon the Eighth day; Nor Passover eaten but on the
Fourteenth of the first or second Month, and this no where but at Jerusalem;
Three times a year must every Male appear before the Lord, and every Woman at
her Purification make a journey thither] so that this became a yoke of Bondage
to the Church of Israel, especially in the latter Age thereof, when they of
that Nation were scattered among the Heathen, and lived in places far remote
from the Temple of Jerusalem: This then is the yoke of Moses Law; No hope to
escape the Curse of the Moral Law, but by those expiations prescribed in the
Ceremonial Law: No hope of acceptance in what they endeavored in the way of
Obedience, except they attend upon, and seek it in those services appointed: No
nor those services accepted, but in a most exact observation of all the
circumstances which the Law set down. From this yoke it is which Christ by his
death has freed the Christian: And in this liberty it is that St. Paul would
have have them stand fast, that they be not entangled again in that former yoke
of Bondage.

So then the Ceremonies of Moses Law are quite taken away by Christ, the
Sacrifice of whose Death is become the only expiation for all Transgressions,
and the only way and mean of Acceptance in the performance of all duties
whatsoever; Yea, the Moral part of Moses Law is taken away, in respect of the
circumstance thereof, it is no more the condition of the Covenant for Life and
Death: Not of life, and so Justification may be had without it: Not of death,
and so no fear of Condemnation by it; provided always, that by Faith men lay
hold upon Christ, keep close to him, and walk according to those Rules of
Holiness that he has prescribed; for in so doing we obtain what the Law
promised, Life and Salvation: By him we escape what the Law threatened, Death
and Condemnation: So then, though the Law be taken away in respect of this
Circumstantial use thereof, as a condition; yet not in respect of that
Substantial consideration, viz. as the Doctrine and Direction of Good and Evil:
Nay in this respect it is reassumed and re-established by Christ. In the former
consideration of it, it is that the Apostle says, Romans 10. 4. That Christ is
the end of the Law, i. e. he has done that for man which the Law would but
could not: The Law would bring man to life and salvation; This is the primary
end and intention of it, but the Law could not in respect of man's weakness,
Romans 8. 3. This Christ has done, and so is become the end of the Law, for
Righteousness and Justification to every one that believes. In the same
circumstantial consideration of the Law it is that the Apostle says, Romans 6.
14. Ye are not under the Law; and Romans 7. 4. We are dead to the Law, and so
delivered from it, viz. as it was the condition of the Covenant: And that this
is the meaning of it, is plain by this, That it is set down as a reason to
prove that sin shall not have dominion over us, viz. to bind us to
condemnation in case of defectiveness and failings; Because, says he, ye are
not under the Law but under Grace; not under that condition of full and perfect
Obedience, in which if any defects were found, sin did presently dominier and
threaten death: But under a condition, in which not only sincerity of obedience
is accepted, though it be imperfect, but also help and assistance in doing the
Duties is afforded: So that with much cheerfulness may we strive against the
reign of Sin, and that over-masterful sway which heretofore it had in us and
over us. Yet this does not prove but that still we are under the Doctrine and
Direction of the Law for Duties of Holiness; Yea, those duties which by the
grace of Christ's Spirit we are enabled to perform (for this must be
acknowledged, That though the Law requires many Duties of Holiness and
Sanctification, yet is it only the Spirit of Christ which enableth us to
perform them) these I say are justly termed the Works of the Law, because done
in relation to the Law, though not in the capacity of a condition, as in the
Covenant of Works, yet in the capacity of a Rule and Square of Direction, and a
Duty of Holiness.

Object. They Reply, That St. Paul says, Gal. 3. 10. They that are of the
Works of the Law are under the Curse; So that either the Law is abrogated even
in respect of the Works thereof, or else neither is the Curse abrogated; if
Christians be tied to the Works, they are not freed from the Curse. True, if
they will be of the Works of the Law, they shall be under the Curse: But what
is it to be of the Works of the Law? Is it to take directions from the Law for
our ways and walkings? Is it to yield obedience to the Law? No: It is to seek
Justification and Salvation by the merit of Works done in obedience to the Law:
This is plain to him that reads the former Verses, to be of Faith is to seek
Salvation by the Gospel, i. e. by believing in Christ; and so, To be of the
Works of the Law is to seek salvation by them: Now then, such who will seek
salvation by the Works of the Law, are under the Curse, says St. Paul; Good
reason, because they cannot satisfy the perfection of the Law; And he that
will challenge any thing in the way of Justice, must be content to suffer the
penalty if he come short of the perfection which the Rule requires.

Object. Nay, but say they, The Law is not made for a Righteous man: 1 Timothy 1.
9. consequently belongs not to the Believer who is justified by Faith in
Christ; And, the Believer indeed is justified, but not a righteous man, not in
that sense of the word in which St. Paul does use it in that Text: The
Righteous man is there opposed to the lawless and disobedient, and so must be
understood of one that seeks to conform himself and all his actions to the
Rule of the Law; for such a man the Law is not made: The Law, what is that? The
Rule of the Law? No, but the threatening of the Law, the Curse and Condemnation:
This is not made for the Righteous, and so ought not to be applied against him,
but against the lawless and disobedient, against them that will walk without
Law, and boldly bear themselves in the disobedience of the Law; Against these
is the Law made, and against them are the threatenings and curses of the Law to
be applied: This is the right use of the Law, The which (says St. Paul) is
good if a man use it lawfully, i. e. if he do not abuse it by mis-application.
Now then, though St. Paul says, The Law is not made for a Righteous man; yet
says he not, It is not made for a justified person; Nor does he say, The Law
is of no use for a Righteous man: It is not a Judge to curse and condemn him;
but is it not a Teacher to instruct him, a Counselor to direct him? Is it not
a Guide to conduct him, a Goad to quicken him and put him on if he slacken his
pace in the path of Holiness? Doubtless it is: Was it not useful, yea needful
for Adam in Paradise though a righteous man? So then, I hold it a manifest
truth, That though the Believer by his Justification and Adoption be freed from
the Curse of the Law, yet not from the Counsel and Command of that Law.

Object. It is Replied, That to Justify and Condemn are as proper to the Law
as to Counsel or Command: If the Law may not command sub paena, nor condemn
proculpa, then does it cease to be a Law, nor has it any binding power at all.
I answer, That to justify and condemn are indeed as proper to the Law as to
counsel and command, while the Law stands as a condition of life and
salvation; but in that sense we confess it abrogated, yet is not the binding
power of it ceased; still are we bound to walk in obedience to it, because it
is enjoined as the Commandment of him who has redeemed us from the Curse
thereof: Nay, I add this further, That we are bound to walk by the direction
of the Law, not only ex debito gratitudinis, in the way of thankfulness, but
also ex obligatione peccati, to decline the guilt of sin; Sinful it is in the
justified person to neglect the counsel and command of the Law.

I would gladly ask these men, Whether the justified person be exempt from
sinning, yea or not? I find it charged upon them, That no action of a Believer
after his Justification is sin; and I perceive that they do shift and shuffle
in the business: The Question is not, Whether the sin of the justified person
shall be charged upon him to endanger his salvation, but Whether the act be sin
in him or not; Whether his Justification do bring with it such a charter of
privilege and prerogative as does exempt him from committing sin; I confess
the Text of St. John says, He that is born of God sins not, 1 John 3. 9.
And yet they know that the same Apostle says, If we say that we have no sin we
deceive our selves, 1 John 1. 8. And St. James says, In many things we offend
all, Iam. 3. 2. If all, then the justified also; which is yet more plain by
that of our Savior, who prescribing a Form of Prayer for the Adopted Sons of
God, such who with confidence may call God Father, teaches them to pray for
the pardon of sin, and preservation from sin: Does he teach them to dissemble?
to pray for the pardon of a sin, and yet there is no sin committed; to pray for
the preservation of their souls from Satan's tentation, and yet there is no
danger of being drawn into sin? May we not rather hereupon conclude in the
words of St. John, If we say that we have not sinned, we make him (Christ in
that Form of Prayer) a liar, and his word is not in us: So that upon necessity
that other Text which seems to cross the current of the Scripture, and says
of the Regenerate, That he sins not, must be understood as some do
understand that of Balaam, He has not beheld iniquity in Jacob, Numb. 23. 21.
not of any at all, but of some particular sin. The Text of Balaam (say some)
has particular relation to the sin of Idolatry, from which Israel at that time
was free, though not long after entangled by the counsel of Balaam; And the
Text of St. John has an eye to presumptuous sin, or rather to the sin of total
and final Apostasy, the sin unto death, from which the Regenerate is preserved
by that seed of God which remains in him; from this sin, I grant, he is
preserved, and in this respect he sins not: Not so in respect of other sins;
witness not only the Adultery of David, which displeased the Lord, or the act
of Peter denying his Lord and Master, in which his Faith was next door to
failing, and called for the Prayer of Christ to preserve him: These you will
say were before the Passion of Christ; but witness that faultering of Peter,
and dissimulation of Barnabas, for which St. Paul did openly reprehend them,
Gal. 2. 11.

Well then, if it be granted, That the justified person may sin, yea and does
sin, there must then be a Law of Holiness, which shall bind him to carefulness
in such and such particulars, for where there is no Law there is no
Transgression; nor can any man be concluded a sinner in case of negligence,
where there is no bond of duty. Neither may we rest in this which they will not
stick to grant, The Law of the Spirit: The Law written in the heart. This is
not enough, there must be also another Law written in Tables, and to be read by
the eye, to be heard by the ear: Else how shall it be known to the rest of the
Congregation, whether this man does not swerve from the Law written in the
heart, yea or not: Nay, how shall the believer himself be sure that he does not
swerve from the right way wherein he ought to walk? Even in Paradise God
appointed an Eternal precept of obedience for trial, beside that Law and Light
of Nature which was written in Adams heart. Much more needful is it now. The
Spirit, I grant, is the Justified man's Guide and Teacher: That Unction which
they have received* does teach them all things; But he teaches them by the
Word, by the Word, the written Word of Prophecy, by the Scripture of the Old
Testament and New, by the Law and Testimony; And by it they know that they are
not misguided, because if any of them that peep and matter, that pretend
Visions and Revelations, speak not according to this Word, it is because there
is no Light in them. These men, though they do not plainly speak out their
meaning, yet would have us to understand them, that the Spirit did by
Enthusiasms and Revelations move them and guide them so infallibly, that they
need not the Scripture, nor the instruction of the Ministry: which, what is it
else but to revive and call up again that abomination of the Familists, long
since condemned to Hell, the place of its just desert: Just, I say, for take
away the written Word of God, and then every fancy of a dreaming Elder and
doting Sister, shall be the Rule of men's godly conversations.

Object. A Law may be acknowledged, and a written Law; and yet not the Law of
Moses, not the Moral Law: What then? why the Law of Christ, not the old, but
the new Commandment, the precepts taught by Christ and his Apostles. Well, but
the question is, Whether that the subject matter of this new Commandment and of
the old, be not in both the same? viz. Teaching us to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, to live righteously, godly and soberly in this present world: If
so, Then why should it not be indifferent to allege the precepts of Moses and
the Prophets to prove and press a duty of holiness, as the precept of Christ
and his Apostles, ex. gr. If we be agreed that it is the duty of a justified
person, to honor his Father and Mother, what need we jangle about words, and
quarrel about quotations, whether we press it out of Exodus 20. or from Ephesians. 6.
since both Texts do preach and press the same duty? Is it not the same God who
spoke to the Fathers by the Prophets, and to their Children by Christ and his
Apostles? Nay more, do we not see it, that those Precepts of holiness which by
our blessed Savior and his Apostles are taught in the New Testament, are taken
out of Moses and the Prophets, yea and pressed upon the Conscience by this
reason, Because it is the Law and the Prophets; What can be more plain then
that Text of our Savior, Mat. 7. 12. Whatsoever ye would that men should do
unto you, do ye so unto them, for this is the Law and the Prophets; So Saint
Peter, Be ye holy in all manner of conversation, for it is written, Be ye holy,
for I am holy, 1 Pet. 1. 16. mark that, Because it is written: By it you see
that the Apostle presses a duty by a Text of Scripture fetched from the Law: So
Saint Paul, Ephesians. 6. 1, 2. presses the duty of obedience upon Children, and
proves it to be right, by citing the 5. Commandment of the Moral Law. What
will these men say to that Text of Saint James, Jam. 2. 8. If ye fulfill the
Royal Law ye shall do well: But if ye have respect of persons ye commit sin,
and are convinced of the Law as Transgressors: What, convinced as
Transgressors, and yet not bound to obedience? Is there any Transgression where
no obligation to obedience? And is the Moral Law notwithstanding all this
abolished? Has it none Office in the time of the Gospel? Are we false
Teachers, who in imitation of Christ and his Apostles, do call men to the
practice of these holy duties, which we find contained in the Law? No, we
teach the truth of God, and in the right way of God; Except it be that Christ
and his Apostles were ignorant of the way, or except these men have received a
new Gospel and another dispensation of the grace of God hitherto unknown and
unrevealed.

CHAP. II. Touching the Motives of the Law, whether these also be abolished: So
that to propose the expectation of reward, as an invitation to good works, and
to deter men from sin by the fear of punishment, be altogether inconsistent
with the Doctrine of Grace.
NOt only the precepts of the Law are bequarrelled by those men, but also the
Arguments of persuasion. In doing good-works and living a godly and holy life,
we must not at all look to any Reward from God: But must do good works merely
in reference to Gods Glory and the good of others. Otherwise our service will
be merely mercenary. Grant indeed that we must do good works for these ends:
Grant also, That in the obtaining of these ends there is a full Satisfaction to
a Godly and a Gracious Heart. And yet, why may we not encourage our selves to
cheerfulness in our Obedience, by having an eye to the Recompense of Reward
which God has gromised; Does not the Scripture propound a Reward for our
encouragement; And why does the Scripture propound it, but that we should
believe it, and by believing be put forward to work cheerfully; Is it not set
down as an act of Moses Faith, and a point of his praise, That he had an eye to
the Recompense of Reward, Heb. 11. 25. Does not the same Apostle show this,
That our blessed Savior, by the Joy that was set before Him, did stir up
himself to go on cheerfully to the end of his undertakings, Heb. 12. 2. Nay, is
not this in part acknowledged by Dr. Crisp, he having set down this for a
Doctrine, That the laying of sin upon Christ is the Lords own Act: gives this
reason for it, Because none else could give to Christ a proportionable reward;
And Christ had an eye to some good consideration, and for the proof of this he
cites Heb. 12. 2. And God (says he) to put him on propounds rewards unto
him, etc. Now then if thus it was with Christ, why may it not be lawful for the
Christian to help his weakness, by having an eye to the recompense of reward?
Will they say, that this sevice is mercenary? So they do indeed, but without
any just reason; mercenary service is commonly measured by carthly profits and
preferments; when a man so looks at them, that where there is no hope of such
a reward, he does let fall the duty to which he is called. Self-seeking is then
unlawful and sinful, when Self is the ultimate end of our desire. But he that
in feeking the good of his body and soul serves Christ, i. e. so desires his
own good that he may serve Christ, is acceptable to God and approved of man.

This being so, Why are we blamed for pressing men to holiness, and encouraging
them in it by putting them in mind of that reward which is provided? These men
fly out upon such exhortations: This is not to preach Free Grace, this is to
bring in Popery, and to teach men to hang their Salvation upon their merits, to
expect their reward for their Works sake. No such matter, it is not Popery to
preach the expectation of a reward upon the conscionable performance of duties
enjoined: If it be, surely Christ and his Apostles taught so before us; If we
have not them for our Presidents let us be condemned. For why? does not our
Savior mention that greatness of reward as a Motive to patience in
persecution, Mat. 5. 12. To love our Enemies, Mat. 5. 46. To fast and pray in
secret, Mat. 6. 6. 18. Does our Savior herein teach Popery, or does he cross
the Doctrine of Free grace and Justification without Merits? Does not Saint
Paul tread in the same steps? urging patience in afflictions, 2 Cor. 4. 17.
Perseverance in goodness and godliness, 1 Cor. 15. 58. G^l. 6. 9, 10.
Bountifulness to the poor Saints, 2 Cor. 9. 6. 2 Timothy 6. 19. Confidence in God,
Heb. 10. 35. All these by an Argument drawn from the expectation of that
benefit which should accrue unto them. Does not Saint Peter make use of the
same Motive to press the same duties? See these Texts, 1 Pet. 5. 4. and 2 Pet.
1. 11. and 3. 11.

They Reply, That Divines do grant the reward is to be eyed as an
encouragement; But it is promised to the worker, not to the work: We do not
stumble at this, nor stick upon it, nay we subscribe hereunto; but they add,
It is due for his Faiths sake before he performed any thing: I demand, whether
this do not seem to be against all reason: Due it is to the worker, but yet in
relation to his work; Due unto him for his Faiths sake, but not before he
perform any thing: No, he must work, and then by Faith lay hold upon the
Promise: His Faith ^^^^reth him of the reward, by assuring him that the Promise
belongs to him, and that is two ways: 1. As one in Christ. 2. As one working
and walking as becomes a Christian: He must be in the Vine, and he must bear
Fruit; If either of these be wanting he may fail: If an Heathen did the same
work it would not avail him; The Promise is made to the worker, not to the
work: If any Christian do neglect this work, he cannot expect this reward. The
Promise is to the worker, yet in relation ^o his work. Deny this, and you deny
the diversity of mansions and different degrees of Glory whereof out Divines do
speak, out of these Texts, Dan. 12. 2. Joh. 14. 2. 1 Cor. 15. 41. I cannot
tell, but I think I am not far wide in my conjecture: These men do make so much
of their Faith, as if that alone might do all both in Justification and
Sanctification: And as by Faith they must lay hold upon Christ's Righteousness
for justification, so to save themselves a labor of working out their salvation
by duties of holiness, they will by Faith also lay claim to the Holiness of
Christ for their sanctification: And so the sanct fication of a Christian,
shall be nothing else but the Imputation of Christ's Holiness to him, not any
quality at all infused into him, or inherent in him. And if so, what shall be
the meaning of these Texts, Be ye holy in all manner of conversation: Be ye
perfect, as your Heavenly Father is perfect: Grow in grace: Work out your
salvation: Add to your Faith virtue, to virtue knowledge, etc. Note that Text,
I beseech you, Saint Peter does not lay all the load upon Faith; Nor so urge
it, as if it alone might do all: No, but he would have all virtues and fruits
of the Spirit joined with it.

These men do quarrel us for pressing good works, as if with the Papists we did
teach men to seek life and Salvation by their works: But I fear their drift is
to banish out of the Church all care of Holy duties, all care of Repentance and
new Obedience. Did they press these at all, we should the less scruple at the
motives; though there is no reason, why we should cast a way such motives, as
the Scripture has appointed for that purpose; why should we think our selves
wiser herein then God, or better acquainted with our own strength then he? as
if we could walk without that stuff which he has provided for us. But we can
not find them reaching any necessity of these duties at all. And for their
Disciples, we find some of them casting away all care of duties, yea and
disputing against them: No conscience made of Sanctifying the Lords day in
public: No care of family duties in private: plain neglect, yea opposition of
days and times of Easting and Humiliation: No necessity of Repentance and
sorrow son Sin. And certainly where there is so little respect had to the
Duties of Piety, it may well be doubted there is not overmuch care of Justice
and Honesty.

Now for that other motive of the Law, viz. Threatening of danger in case of
negligence and disobedience: They say, Since all do grant, that the curse of
the Law is abrogated, why should Christians be terrified with it; Is not this
to call them back to the yoke of Bondage? Surely no, Except they will say that
Christ and his Apostles did so: we walk in their steps, so that either they
must acquit us or condemn them. See for this that of our Savior, Mat. 5. 25.
29. and Mat. 6. 15. and 7. 1. Does it not appear by these Texts, that our
Savior has renewed the penalty of the Law to make men cautelous and
conscientious in their duties: Do not the Apostles tread in the same steps?
Other Arguments, I grant, are more frequent, yet otherwhiles we find them
propounding the danger of Sin: See these Texts, Romans 6. 23. and 8. 13. and 13.
2. 2 Cor. 3, 17. and 6, 9. and 9. 16. and 11. 29. 2 Cor. 5. 11. Gal. 5. 21. and
6. 8. Ephesians. 5. 6. Col. 3. 8. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 6. James 5. 1. 2 Peter 2. and 3. And
what shall we say; Do the Apostles in these Texts call men back again to the
yoke of Bondage?

Two Reasons are alleged against the use of those Comminations: 1. Christians
need them not. 2. They need not fear them. That they need them not, they
endeavor to prove by this reason; Because (say they) Believers are of an
ingenuous disposition, and led by a free Spirit: The Spirit of Christ does
sweetly incline the Heart to love God and Man; yea by Faith bringing love is
man enlarged and prepared to the Duties of the Law: Nor need he be tied and
bound to it as a Bear to the stake. I answer, That what is here said is right,
if rightly understood: Only remember, that this is a state of perfection to
which the Holy heart aspireth indeed, yet hardly attaineth. And therefore there
is still need of the Law and the Motives thereof to excite and stir up our
over-slothful and sluggish minds: The Spirit of Christ, I grant, does execute
the office of the Law, whether considered as the Rule, or the Principle of well
doing; the Spirit is both Principle and Rule: but by reason of that rebellion
which is in the flesh, there is use of the Law and of the terror thereof: the
Spirit does make use of them to shake off that sluggishness that is in us. As
he does teach, so does he incline the Heart: Teach he does, not only by inward
Motions and Suggestions, but also by external Precepts and Instructions: so
does he incline and discipline the heart by external motives, no less then
inward motions: external motives I say, viz. the Promises and Threatenings of
the Law.

Object. Is not this to call for an outward Authority to incline the Heart to
that which it has none affection nor inclination?

Sol. Nothing less: It is indeed to call for an outward authority or Argument
to quicken the Soul unto that unto which though by Grace it has an inward
affection, yet by reason of the powerful relliques of Corruption, that inward
affection is not strong enough to prevail without some outward helps; we know
that a Crutch does no harm to the weak and feeble, nor do we account of
Christians moved by fear to be as a Bear tied to a stake: We know that they
have in them an ingenuous and free Spirit by which they are led, but we know
that there is in them also the Body of Sin still dwelling; the Lusts whereof
are violent and must be kept under by the Law: We fear to let the Christian
loose too soon, least like Heirs that come to their Estate before they be wise,
they squander it away and spoil all: we know that they have the Spirit of Faith
which works by love: But we know also that the same Spirit works by Fear;
Love and Fear are as the weights and plummets of the Soul: Love is indeed the
sweetest and most potent, but it is not for beginners and Babes in Christ;
These like Schoolboys must otherwhiles be frighted into their Duty: were there
no flesh in believers, fear might be laid aside, while there is Flesh in them,
there is use of fear: If not, why is it part of the promise in the New
Covenant, Ier. 32. 40. I will put my Fear into their Hearts.

They grant, That the Law does not lose his Dominion till the Grace of God do
challenge us to it self, that it may reveal Righteousness in us: very good (say
I) but add this, That the Law does not lose his Dominion wholly, till the
Grace of God has revealed Righteousness in us, i. e. till it has set up the
reign of Grace and subdued corruption, which is the daily endeavor of the
Spirit, but much retarded by the flesh, nor will it be perfected till this life
be changed. It is not denied, but while the Spirit of Love is active fear may
stand aside: But we know, that when the Heart is taken up with the pleasures of
Sin, as too often it is, the Spirit of God must use the whip of the Law to
fetch it off again: otherwise it is hardly reclaimed. Nor do we deny, but that
according to their Doctrine and Definition of a true Believer, there is no
liberty set up nor given to the Flesh: But we say, it is a Doctrine and
Difinition not fitted to the state of a Christian in this life: To walk by
Love, is the Duty of a Christian, not the Definition: This motive and mean
which they prescribe, viz. The Love of Christ, is potent and prevalent to lead
men on in Holiness, if it meet with an Heart rightly fitted and qualified: But
it is not for the common temper of Christians, as Saint Paul said of the Law,
It was too weak, Romans 8. 3. Not in it self, but in respect of man's impotency:
So say we of this love, the only motive by which these men would have
Christians dealt withal; It is strong in it self, but not strong enough to
over bear the power and prevalency of Corruption still remaining: Needs must we
call in the help of this fear, the fear of danger that may come by Sin to keep
men, even the best of Christians from daring to meddle with it.

Well, But to what end should these threatenings be used, since Christians need
not fear them: How so? Because, by virtue of their justification they are
delivered from the curse of the Law: To this I might answer, That their
Justification does not free them from the Rod. What was said of the Seed of
David, is true also of the Seed of Christ the Son of David; If they break my
Statutes and keep not my Commandments, then will I visit their Transgression
with the Rod, and their Iniquity with stripes, Psalm. 89. 31. They may, and do
smart for their sins, as appears by the grievous complaints of diverse holy
men of God, Psalm. 77. and 88. 15. Now then, if they be liable to smart and
suffer for their sin, may they not be threatened and put in fear thereof, that
fear may make them watchful and careful? Not for sin (say these men) does the
Believer smart and suffer, but from sin, i. e. In the way of prevention, not in
the way of punishment: A fond and a foolish position, contrary to the Text of
Scripture, which directly says, For this cause many among you are weak and
sick, and some are fallen a sleep, 1 Cor. 11. 30. contrary to reason: Why does
one Christian smart rather then another? Has he in him more seeds of sin then
another? contrary to experience: What Father does correct his child for a
fault not yet committed? And whose conscience does not tell him, that his sin
has procured these things to himself? Even Job is at it, I have sinned, what
shall I do unto thee, Job. 7. 20.

I might add, That if their justification does exempt them from being cast
into Hell, yet does it not exempt them from having an Hell cast into them, even
the very flames and fl^shes of that fire and brimstone, for a time cast into
their souls, to drink up their spirits, and dry up the moisture of their vital
parts, as the experience of diverse holy Saints of God does testify.

But this I urge finally, That notwithstanding their justification, they are
not exempted from the fear of Hell it self. Justification does only free them
from this fear, while they walk worthy of it; But suppose them sinning against
the Law of holiness, suppose them stepping aside from Christ, and wandering into
the way of sin, they cannot be free from the fear of death: The Apostle says,
If ye live after the flesh ye shall dye, nor does he make any exception of the
justified person. So that if you can suppose a justified person sinning (as no
doubt but he may, otherwise in vain had S. Paul to them of whom he had said, 1.
Cor. 6. 11. Ye are justified, recommended this exhortation, verse 18. Flee
Fornication) if you can suppose him sinning, I will conclude him thereby in
danger of death, and till he repent and return to Christ, that he may gain the
pardon of this sin also, he cannot be out of the fear of death. Nay more, if
you can suppose him sinning, and dying in his sin without repentance for that
sin, I will conclude him in the state of death and condemnation, or else Saint
Paul was deceived; He says, If ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye, Romans 8.
13. and again, He that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption,
Gal. 6. 8. If you will exempt him from all possibility of sinning, and from all
possibility of living after the flesh; Then I grant, he need not fear death and
Hell: But if such only be true Believers, I suppose you must go out of the
World to seek for your true Believers.

Consequently, since it cannot justly and truly be said, either that Believers
need not the threats of the Law, or that they need not fear them, it is fit
that they should hear them, and have them pressed upon the conscience: The
threats, I say, and therefore much more the precepts and duties of the Moral
Law. This we teach, and thus we practice, For by Faith we do not make void the
Law, nay we do establish it, says the Apostle, Romans 3. 31. Our Faith in Christ
does give us an interest in the Promise of life and salvation: But our
Conformity to Christ in holiness, and the daily growth and increase thereof, is
that which does by degrees fit and fashion us for it. Well therefore says the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having therefore these promises, let us cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the
fear of God.

CHAP. III. A brief Answer to the Arguments of H. D. by him brought to prove
Justification before Faith, i. e. before the act of Believing.
Arg. 1. INfants are justified, yet do they not believe, Romans 10. 17.
therefore, some are justified before they believe.

Answ. This Instance of Infants is not to the point in hand, as not in the case
of Apostasy, and falling from Grace, maintained by the Arminians: See Suffrag.
Theolog. Magn. Brit. in Artic. 5.
So neither in this point of Justification before Faith, maintained by the
Antinomians; For why, That Just fication which is in question, consists in
the Remission of actual Transgressions: Not so that which Infants receive in
their Infancy; They are as yet guilty of no more, but Original Sin: And it is
enough for them that the guilt of that is removed: of Actual Sin they shall
then receive the Remission, when they stand in need of it, and are fitted for
it.

Objection. But whatsoever Infants do receive, they receive it without Faith.

Sol. Hic aqua haeret. And Divines do not all agree in expediting themselves:
Some do not stick to affirm, That Infants have Faith; I grant it is an hard
matter to prove the Negative, viz. That Infants have not Faith. That Text of
Romans 10. 17. Faith comes by Hearing, is not fully to the purpose; If Hearing
be restrained to the Ear, then all that are born deaf are excluded; if extended
to any way of acquainting man with the will of God, even by the workings of the
Spirit, who shall exclude Infants? As hard a matter it is to prove that Infants
have Faith, especially if Faith be defined by knowledge, persuasion or
confidence. It is said of John Baptist, that he was filled with the holy Ghost:
This shows that Infants are capable of the Spirit, but it does not thereupon
follow that they do believe; Because, though in its actings the Spirit depend
not upon the faculties of the soul, and their fitness, yet does it not usually
prevent them: Nor be the actings of Grace ordinarily found, but where Age has
added some perfection to the Abilities of Nature. All that can be said in this
point is this, That Infants do receive together with their Justification, the
principle of Faith, viz. The Spirit of Faith, as he is called, 2 Cor. 4. 13.
This is that which some do call The Seed of Faith, or Seminal Faith (nor can
the term be refused, since it is grounded on the phrase of Scripture, 1 Pet. 1.
23. and John 3. 9.) And so it may be said, that Infants have Faith (as they
have Reason) in Actu primo, though not in Actu secundo, in the seed, though not
in the flower; And this is enough to make them capable of that Justification
which they receive in their infancy; consequently, though they have it without,
and before actual Faith: yet not before Seminal Faith, not before the seed, the
root, the Spirit of Faith.

2. Arg. He that is in Christ is Justified, and so Justified before he do
believe; Because none can believe before he be in Christ: Faith is the fruit of
the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22.

Answ. Grant indeed, None can believe before he be in Faith, in Gal 5. 22. is
Fidelity, as in Tit. 2. 10. a moral Virtue.
Christ, though that Text do not prove it, yet he may believe so soon as he is
in Christ; and full as soon for time as he is Justified, and for order before
he be Just fied: for understanding whereof, know, That in the first moment of
our Union with Christ, the Soul has a Communion of all that flows from
Christ both for Grace and Glory: But how? In the virtue and power of a Root and
Seed: from this Union flows both Grace to enable the soul to do good actions,
and also Glory to crown and reward each good act that is wrought, but each in
his own order: Ex. gr. The plant engrafted into the stock, receives from it
both sap and fruit: Or thus, from the virtue of life in the soul, does proceed
a power both of Feeding, and of Growing, not both of them in the same manner;
for Feeding comes as an Act, Growing as an Effect, yea an Effect of this Act:
so is it here, To Believe, and To be Justified, come from our Union with Christ
(as indeed, all that we have, and all that we hope for is from him, and without
him we can do nothing.) And in that Union are they folded up as in the root and
seed; But still to be considered in their natural order, in which one is the
cause of the other, and therefore to be considered in order of Nature before
the other: what say we that Glorification no less then Justification does flow
from that Union: will you then say, that he that is in Christ is glorified, yea
glorified before he do believe? Surely no: As none is glorified before he be
Justified: so neither is he justified before he be called, Romans 8. 30. In which
call, if Faith be not included, it will not be effectual. Thus every thing
trust be considered in its own order: All these, Grace and Glory, Faith and the
Fruits thereof, are rolled up as in a Root, and bestowed upon us in our first
Union, but the explicit production and application of each to the Christian
soul is in a just order.

3. and 4. Arg. All the Elect of God are Justified before God, for why, They
cannot be charged with any thing, Romans 8. 33. Their Sins are taken away, Isa.
53. 6. Ioh. 1. 29. 1. Pet. 2. 24. And this before they believe: For some of
them do not yet believe.

Answer. All the Elect of God, even they that yet have no being in the World;
yet when they are looked upon as justified persons, are considered of God as
believers, no less then justified: before the World they are foreseen as
believing, before foreseen as justified; Because, in the World, till they
believe, they are not justified: still that that in the execution of the decree
has the precedence, is considered in the decree as foregoing, Sin before
Condemnation, Faith before Justification. The elect have their sins taken away
before they do believe, But how? Not otherwise save in the purpose of God, and
the purchase of Christ: Else what use, nay what sense in those Exhortations,
Act. 2. 38. Repent and be Baptized for the Remission of sins, Act. 3. 19.
Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, Act. 22. 16. Arise,
be baptized, and wash away thy sins; is it not evident that the sins of these
were not as then blotted out and washed away, that they might use these means
to compass this end? The Texts aleaged for Proof of the Argument, speak not
home to the point intended: That of Isa. 53. 6. only shows that designation
of Christ to be the sacrifice of Expiation: Not is there more in the 6. verse
then was expressed in the 5. verse, He was wounded for our Transgressions; this
only excepted, That v. 6. shows, That Christ should make peace for us by the
way of a sacrifice, even the sacrifice of himself, upon whom God would lay the
iniquities of us all; as Aaron laid the iniquities of the Children of Israel
upon the Goat, Lev. 16. 21. Say the same of Joh. 1. 29. It shows whom God had
appointed to that work. And the Text of 1 Pet. 2. 24. shows, That he has
executed his Office: but none of these Texts do say any thing concerning the
benefit thereof, redounding to any one in particular, whether without, or
before or after Faith: Truth it is, That this was said and done long before
many of the Elect did believe; So also, before many of them had any need of
Faith and Justification, even before they had a being. Nay in that Text, Romans
8. 33. brought to prove the Elect justified, because Nothing can be laid to
their charge: It is evident, that the Apostle speaks of the Elect, now made
actual Believers; For that phrase of laying any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect, does presuppose them living and standing before the Tribunal,
consequently actual Believers: For against the Elect, till actually believing,
does Satan lay no accusation: And we doubt not to affirm, That the Elect of God
believing in Christ, and laying hold on him by Faith, are so justified before
God, that in vain shall Satan seek to charge any thing upon them: But till
then, notwithstanding the Purpose of God, and the Purchase of Christ, yet are
they not actually discharged of their sins, nor actually justified in the sight
of God.

5. Arg. We were made sinners in Adam, before we had done any evil, and so we
are made righteous in Christ, before we have done any good. This is the
Assertion of the Apostle, Romans 5. 18, 19.

Ans. The Text of the Apostle does only set down this, That as Adam is the
Author of condemnation to all that be condemned, so Christ is the Author of
Justification to all that are justified. But as to the time when this is done,
in the one or the other, the Text speaks nothing. Grant indeed, That in
respect of the Merit of Christ, it may be said, that we are justified in the
sight of God, before any good be done by us; but now in respect of actual
Application to particular persons, as no man is condemned till he have an
actual being, and be found a sinner in himself, so neither is any man justified
before he have an actual being, yea an actual being in Christ, and in him made
righteous: Condemnation presupposes sin in the party condemned, and
Justification presupposes Grace and Faith in the party justified.

6. Arg. In Christ crucified (before we believed) was full satisfaction made,
Heb. 10. 11 -- 14. And God was contented to rest in that satisfaction, Mat. 3.
ult. Isa. 53. 11. Therefore there will follow perfect Remission of sins.

Ans. No doubt of it, perfect Remission will follow, because satisfaction is
made and accepted: But when? Not till the sinner need it: not till he be fitted
for it: not till he have a being in Christ; not till he come to Christ, that he
may receive. In very deed, the satisfaction was neither intended nor accepted,
but upon that condition, That whosoever will have it, must come to Christ for it.
Hence they in Ioh. 5. 40. are blamed in that they would not come to Christ,
that they might have life. That Text of Isa. 53. 11. is mis-applied to the
Father, being indeed spoken of Christ himself.

7. Arg. Either we are justified in the sight of God before we believe, or else
even the Elect of God are for some time hated of him; For he hates all the
workers of iniquity, but certainly the Elect of God are at no time hated of
God: If so, Then God should hate to day and love to morrow, with much
changeableness of Affection: Nay more, Gods love to us shall depend upon our
love to God.

Ans. Set this down for a truth; 1. That God hates all the workers of iniquity
whatsoever, Psalm. 5. 5. 2. That the Elect of God are loved of him from all
eternity, Ier. 31. 3. 3. That there is no variableness, nor shadow of change in
God, Iam. 1. 17. 4. That we love him, because he loved us first. Now, if there
seem any contrariety in these laid together, we are forced to some
distinctions, by which a commodious interpretation may be set down: So then
consider of these Explications:

1. The love and hatred of God to the Creature may be considered, either in the
purpose of God, or in the execution of that purpose, and this execution is in
the effects of love and hatred. The purpose of God is this, to appoint the
Creature to be the object upon which in time he will exercise the effects of
love or hatred; in this purpose of God, the Elect are always Loved, never
Hated: nor does God vary and change in this his purpose: nor does this purpose
of his depend upon the foresight of any good in man.

2. In the execution of this purpose, the suspension of the Effects and Fruits
of Love has the name of Hatred: And God may be said to hate them (as the
Husband that Wife) from whom he with draws the Effects of Love. Now in this
does God walk oftentimes according to the present disposition of the Creature:
wheresoever God finds sin, he hates it, (sin is properly the Object of Gods
Hatred, sin I say, not the Creature) and if this sin be in a person appointed
to love though he will not change his purpose, yet will he suspend all effects
and fruit of love, yea, and put forth the effects of hatred, until the party do
part with his sin. Contrarily, wheresoever he finds any good, he loves it,
yea, though it be in a person not appointed to love; though this his purpose
change not, yet will he suspend all the effects of hatred, yea, and with much
tenderness of affection put forth the effects of love to this party, till he
does wilfully let fall his care of goodness, and take up a Resolution of evil,
yea, and that incorrigibly.

3. The love of God to the Creature in respect of the effects thereof, is not
unfitly distinguished into the love of Benevolency, and the love of
Complacency, the former consisting in well wishing or pitying the Creature, is
absolute and free: The other drawing with it delight in, or friendship with the
Creature is respective, and has an eye to the good behavior of the Creature:
see both these expressed in that Parable of the wretched Infant, Ezekiel. 16. 6.
an emblem and fit resemblance, as thereof the Church of Israel, so generally of
the Elect of God. For first God does cast an eye of pity upon them in their
wretched condition* and says unto them Live; His word is operative, and did
them good, as is intimated verse 7. then afterward when his grace has wrought
in them, and fashioned them into a comely beauty, he does again pass by them
and behold them, and lo it is the time of love, whereupon he does enter into a
League and Covenant of friendship; so that now the soul of every one of them
may say, as the Spouse in the Canticles, I am my welbeloveds, and my welbeloved
is mine: Gods delight is in them, and theirs in God: These things well
understood, will easily show the Inconsequence of the Argument, for the Elect
may be loved in the purpose of God, and yet not actually justified, nor God
enter into a Covenant of love, till by the work of his grace they be fitted for
the time of love. Again, whiles they are workers of iniquity and unconverted to
God, their sins may be hated, and the effects of love suspended,
notwithstanding the eternal purpose of God. No variableness in God, because it
is his purpose, not to entertain them into the effects and fruits of his love
and delight* till they be converted and fitted for it, by the actings of the
spirit of grate moving and working in them.

To close up the point, let us to prevent erroneous misconceits which spring
from the Confounding of things that d^ffer, let us, I say, take notice of this
distinction; A man may be said to be justified either Intentionally, or
Virtually, or Actually, either in God, or in Christ, or in Himself.

1. Intentionally, in God, i. e. in Gods purpose and decree, this is from all
eternity: But this decree and intention does not put any thing into a state of
actual being but in the fullness of time; nor does it exclude, nay it does
include and presuppose Faith in the person justified; for though election be of
the persons, yet Justification and Glorification are of the persons so and so
qualified.

2. Virtually, in Christ may a man be said to be justified; And this is from
the Day of Christ's passion, and in the virtue of his satisfaction; yet this
intends no more but this, that satisfaction is made, and Remission purchased
by the blood of Christ: Neither does this exclude the consideration of Faith,
nay it does call for it, that so there may be an actual Application of the
price and purchase. We know that* in a purchase, beside the payment of the
price, there must be Livery and Seisin given, before a man be in actual
possession of what is purchased: so here, there must be application of the
Righteousness of Christ, as well as the Effusion of his Blood, and this is
received by Faith.

3. Actually, in himself is man said to be justified, when he has the
possession of it: But this Actual Justification has It Is degrees of
progression. The beginning thereof is laid in our first Union and Incorporation
into Christ: The Consummation of it is not till the Judge at the latter day
has solemnly pronounced the sentence of final absolution, and so set us in
full possession of entire remission. Between both these there is a progressive
work of Justification, by the constant actings of the Spirit applying the Blood
of Christ, by the hand of Faith, to the quiet and comfort of the soul. The
first you may term Initial justification, the latter perfective, and this
between I would call progressive, it is the fruit of the first, and the
preludial assurance of the latter: This is wrought and sealed in the second
Sacrament, as the former is in the first Sacrament: and both these branches of
Sacramental justification are to us the pre-assurance of that Complemental and
perfective justification; The sentence whereof puts an end to all fears,
changing our faith and hope into fruition and full possession; even the first of
these acts is not transacted without the seed and spirit of Faith, much less
the successive agitations, and progress of the work. Thus every way Faith is
considered as equal with, yea as foregoing the work of Justification.

CHAP. IV. That justification is not transacted all at once, nor any
preremission of sin before it be committed.
BY his knowledge shall my Righteous Servant justify many, says God by the
Prophet Isaiah, cap. 53. 11. Shall justify, is a verb of the future tense, the
work then at that time was not done: the Question is, when was it to be done?
In the day of his passion, say some, then did he bear the sins of many, and
take away the sin of the world, so that from that time and forward to the end
of the world, there is no more imputation of sin to any of the elect. It has
been commonly said, even by some of our best Divines, that justification is
transacted in our first Union and Incorporation into Christ, at which time it
is conceived, that the pardon of all sin is sealed, consequently that it is to
us an act already passed: Nor can we say, He shall, but he has justified: But
I fear that the misunderstanding of this point (not untrue in it self, if not
mistaken and mis-apprehended) has laid the ground upon which the Antinomian
builds that unhappy structure which turns the Grace of God into wantonness.
Who knows not that justification in it is proper acceptance of the word
according to the Scripture phrase, is the act of a Judge, pronouncing a
judicial sentence? and according to this, I suppose we shall not err from the
truth, if we say, that the main work of Justification is even to us as yet
future, and that the time when Christ shall justify those many in the Text of
Isaiah, is when he shall condemn the Residue, viz. at his s^^ond coming, when
he shall separate the sheep from the Goats, then shall he justify them, and at
once absolve them from all accusations and charges laid in against them; then
shall they receive a final quietus and discharge; then shall God wipe all tears
from their eyes, then shall there be no more sorrow nor crying, no more curse
nor fear thereof, according to the words of the Angel, Rev. 21. 4. and 22. 3.

There is, I grant, a praejudicium in foro conscientiae, a preludial
Justification in the Court of Conscience, which is a pregustation and foretaste
of that final Absolution. In the Court of Conscience does Christ set up his
Tribunal, there does he take notice of the Accusations that are put in by Satan
against the sinner upon particular occasions, and by the power and operation of
the spirit working in the Conscience, does he upon the humble confession of the
penitent soul, pronounce the sentence of absolution by the Ministry of the
Word, and seal it by the blessed Sacrament; and what is now done daily upon
emergent occasions, shall be ratified at the latter day, according to that
gracious promise of Christ made to Peter, when he gave him the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 16. 19. Whatsoever thou shall loose on Earth shall be
loosed in Heaven; And the same in effect repeated to the Apostles, Joh. 20. 23.
Thus in present by the Ministry of Reconciliation, there is a work of
Justification in the Court of Conscience; But the final consummation is
reserved to that day, when Christ the Judge proceeding judicially shall
pronounce the sentence of absolution. The main work of Justification therefore
is as yet future: for to say, that justification quatenus it comprehends
remission of sin, is one individual act, or that the blood of Christ does at
once wash us from all, even future sins, in the Antinomian sense, I dare not
yield: It is the blood of Christ, and that alone, which does cleanse us from
all sin; so is it the word and spirit of Christ, that leads us into all
truth, yet not all at once. Truth it is, that in our first union with Christ,
there is conferred the ground and pledge of future remission for all sins to
the end of our lives; the Ground of it is our Adoption sealed to us in our
Baptism, the which is not afterward cut off, no not by the greatest sins which
the believer does commit: still he is the child of God, though in respect of
his sin he may be the child of Wrath, and liable to punishment, still he has
an interest in Christ, and upon his repentance he shall have benefit and
communion with him in his Merits and Graces. The Pledge and pawn of future
Remission, i. e. of the Remission and Forgiveness of all future sins, is that
actual Remission of what sin for the present the soul stood guilty of, at that
time when he was United to Christ: All sins past and present, were actually
pardoned, viz. Actual sins in Converts, Original in their Insants, the guilt of
these is remitted, and their justification in reference to these sealed in
Baptism. This favor received, is a Pledge of assurance to them, that in future
also by applying themselves to Christ, they may and shall receive the
forgiveness of their daily sins. He that by the application of a salve has his
wound cured, has he not therein a Pledge of assurance, that in the use of the
same means, upon the like occasion he may receive the same benefit? But to say,
That in our first Union with Christ we receive an actual Remission of future
sins, is in mine Opinion as incongruous as to say, The Cure is done and past
before the wound be made.

I grant, That it has been received, and passed for current in the schools of
our Divines, That all sins are remitted to the Believer at once; all, viz.
past, present, and to come: so has it been received, That justifying Faith is
a particular persuasion of Gods mercy to me: But as Amesius has well observed
in Medulla Theol. lib. 1. cap. 27. That this was set down only to oppose that
general assent to the Articles of our Creed, in which Papists do place the
essence of justifying faith [And therefore though he grants that Fides
justificans parit hanc specialem fiduciam, etc. yet he defines it to be Qua
recumbimus in Christum ad Remissionem] so I suppose that our Divines did set
down this position of Justification transacted at once, to cut off the Popish
ground for the Sacrament of Penance; not foreseeing what we by experience
find, how unhappy a ground is herein laid for looseness and Libertinism.
Hereupon Amesius (ibidem) coming to set down his Opinion of the matter, does
mince it, Remittuntur peccata justificatorum non praeterita solum sed etiam
aliquo modo futura. Note that aliquo modo: Now to explain himself he adds,
Hoc tamen est discriminis, quod peccata praeterita per formalem applicationem
Remissionis nobis in Christo paratae; futura autem virtualiter tantum*
Praeterita in sese: Futura in subjecto vel persona peccante -- The which is in
effect to say, Non remittuntur nisi in pignore, The actual Remission of sins
past, is the Pledge and Pawn of what shall be upon the use and exercise of
Faith. But to conceive sin remitted as it were by an Ante-dated pardon, is not
only against sense and reason, but also against the grounds of Religion. Sense
and reason says, there is no need of Remission before there be a guilt, nor is
there guilt before the sin be committed: no need of a Plaster, before there be
a wound, prepared aforehand it may be, and laid ready, but application of it
must needs come in after the malady. Then for the ground of Religion,

1. In the fifth Petition we are taught to pray for the pardon of sin. Now
prayer is an act of Faith and hope, and both these are de futuris, of things
expected, and not in present possession. Faith looks upon the Promise, hope
upon the performance, neither of them upon the possession. No man prays for
what he has in hand, or for what is completely done and past already. I know
what is usually said, viz. That not the pardon it self, but the assurance, the
feeling and comfort of it is that which is desired in the Petition. Nor do I
deny, but that in respect of sins past and formerly pardoned, this is so: We
play for greater assurance of that pardon, because our Faith is like a
narrow-mouthed Bottle, which though cast into the sea, yet is not filled but by
degrees. Or rather we pray for the continuance of assurance we have received,
not as if God were off and on with us, or would revoke what he had given: But
because this daily Petition is a mean appointed of God to work that
continuance; and no sooner do we cease to pray, and take off our eye from God
in Christ, but we cease to believe and receive that continuance. Thus I say, it
is in respect of sins past; but now for the sins that daily are committed, it
is the direct pardon of them which we desire of God in that Petition. Nor can
the words receive any other sense, except we should wrest them, and so wrong
the Wisdom of our Savior, as if he could not make choice of such words and
phrases as might plainly and understandingly express his meaning. And if these
words, Forgive us -- do signify, Make us to know that thou have long since
forgiven us, then why shall not the next words, As we forgive -- receive the
same interpretation? Nay why not so also in the other Petitions, Lead us not
into Tentation, Give us our daily Bread, i. e. in the Antinomian sense, Make us
to know that thou have not lead us -- that thou have given us our daily Bread.
Will not this be found a senseless gloss, nay an utter perverting of our
Saviors intention? And why then should it hold only in the fifth Petition, and
in none of the other?

2. Add this, That one end of our daily address to the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, is to obtain the Remission of our sins by the application of Christ's
blood. The words of our Savior touching the Wine are these, This Cup is the
New Testament in my Blood, which is shed for you, and for many for the
Remission of sins: That in it, as we have often need by reason of our daily
Transgressions, so we may often look upon that Brazen serpent for the cure of
our often bitings. Thus what we ask of God in prayer, the same in the Sacrament
does God bestow upon us, viz. The daily pardon of our daily sins. Were it not
in this respect needful to provide for our wants, was the pardon of all actual
sins at once sealed in this Sacrament, as is the pardon of our Original guilt
sealed in Baptism, what necessity to receive this Sacrament any oftener then we
do the other, sc. once for all?

3. And above all, it is a ground of Religion, that nothing is to be received
and believed, but what is Revealed to us for a truth by the Word of God. Now
there is no ground in the Word of God for any particular person to believe that
his sins are remitted already, before he do repent and believe in Christ. The
Word of God sets down what counsel has been given to men, that they might
obtain Remission, Act. 2. 38. and 3. 19. But no where does the Scripture say to
this or that man, Thy sins be forgiven: And for any man to persuade himself of
Remission before it be, yea before he has a word for it, is presumption and
not says. The Antinomian Doctors say, That the Spirit of God does reveal it in
the heart of a man, and the Voice of the Spirit is the Testimony of truth. In
very deed, we may not refuse the Testimony of the Spirit, nor question the
truth of it: But in as much as we know, that Satan does sometimes transform
himself into an Angel of Light, and that there be many false Spirits, in which
respect the Apostles bids us to try the Spirits; nor does Satan seduce only by
the Doctrines of men, but also by false suggestions, whispering to the sinner
comfort upon false grounds: How shall we discern the Testimony of the Spirit
from the suggestion of Satan? They Answer, Hereby it is discerned, Because it
speaks things consonant to the Scripture. Let this be manifested, and the
question is at an end. But where does the Scripture countenance that Voice of
the Spirit speaking to the sinner and saying, Thou art justified in the sight
of God, and thy sin pardoned, and that long ago in the day of Christ's Passion:
How I say, is this proved to be according to the Scriptures? They say, The
Scripture holds forth the Free Grace of God in Christ; viz. That Christ is
given a Savior for sinners, for Enemies, for the Rebellious: That God does
justify the Wicked and the ungodly, even when and while they are such: That he
calls for no works of man's Righteousness, nor any previous dispositions to
qualify men that may come to Christ: So that neither Impiety nor Enmity can
cast in any bar to hinder him that will lay hold upon Christ. This we do not
much question, but withal we add, That the Scripture does also call upon
sinners to Repent and turn to the Lord, that so they may be pardoned, and their
sins bloted out: and in as much as we know that one Text of Scripture is no
less truth then another, nor may we so cleave to the one, as to neglect the
other (for they are not contradictory if rightly understood) we conclude that
Christ is held forth a Savior to sinners, but so, that they repent and forsake
their sins, not else: no sin, not the greatness of any sin, no, nor the
multitude of great Transgressions can bar the humble Penitent. Saint John
says, If we confess our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us, 1 Job.
1. 7. Note that [If] q. d. If not, then there is no ground to hope for it.
Again we say, That God does justify the ungodly, as Christ does save sinners
in sensu diviso, i. e. Not while they are ungodly, not while they are sinners,
but when they have forsaken their wicked ways, and have turned to the Lord by
true and sound repentance. That text of Romans 4. 5. speaking of him that works
not, but believes in him that justifies the ungodly, must not be understood
simply, of such a one that does nothing at all; but respectively of such a one
as does not rest upon his works, nor rely upon his Righteousness, but
renouncing his own works, does cast himself upon the Free Grace of God; nor
does it use that word ungodly in the common sense, s^. for one that has no
goodness in him at all, but in a limited sense, viz for one that wants such a
perfection of goodness, as on which he may build the hopes of his
justification: And the reason of this explication is, because the proposition
is drawn from the instance of Abraham, a man certainly not altogether void of
works and Righteousness, though not so complete and perfect in them, as that he
durst rest upon them, but renouncing his works, he did cast himself upon the
Free grace of God, and so was justified by his Faith. Consequently, that voice
of Revelation in man, which teaches him to comfort himself in the assurance of
his justification, without any respect to the work of Repentance wrought in
him, this is not the voice of Gods spirit, but the delusion of Satan. There is
no word of God on which to ground such an assurance, and therefore it may not
be received nor believed for truth; it being a ground of our Religion, That
nothing is to be received, but what is revealed by the word of God.

I might add this also, Nothing is to be received as a truth which is cross
and contrary to the Text of Scripture: Now, that sins should be actually
pre-remitted beforehand, and the person actually justified, before that by
Faith he be United to Christ, how does it not cross that Text of Saint Paul,
Romans 3. 25. where speaking of the Remission of sin by the blood of Christ, he
mentions not sin indifinitely, but Sins that are past? [for the Remission of
sins that are past] I, know that some do by this phrase, Sins that are past,
understand the Transgressions of them who lived in the time before Christ, the
Transgressions against the first Covenant, Heb. 9. 15. But whether this be not
an overgreat straitning of the Text, I leave it to the judgment of the
Learned.

That of Heb. 11. 6. Without Faith it is impossible to please God, alleged by
some to prove, No Justification before Faith, is by H. D. turned off as not to
the purpose: Why so? To please God (says he) is to do things pleasing to God,
which cannot be done without Faith; But he cannot so easily turn of those
Texts, Joh. 3. 18. and Ephesians. 2. In the former says our blessed Savior, He that
believes not, is condemned already; How so? Is the sentence of condemnation
judicially past upon him, or is the meaning of it, that he is in the state of
condemnation; or in the words of John Baptist, Verse 26. The wrath of God
abides upon him, viz. till by Faith he lay hold upon Christ, By nature we are
the children of wrath, says Saint Paul, we as well as others, Jews and
Gentiles, one common estate of all, till by Grace, by a Quickening grace, there
be put a difference, and this Grace is effectual through Faith, Verse 8.
Consequently, no actual Remission of sin, before the work of Grace, which is
yet more apparent from Verse 12. where speaking of those that then were
quickened and justified; he says, That before that work of Grace calling them,
and quickening to a communion with Christ, they were without Christ, without
hope; It is an overbase and unworthy conceit of the Scripture, which is implied
in the Answer that he makes; viz. This were something, if we were so in Gods
account, as well as in our own esteem: Unworthy of the Scripture, is this
conceit, for whose Word is the Text of Scripture? From whose dictating is it
penned? Does Saint Paul in those words set down the judgment of men, touching
the state of Nature, or rather the mind of God? If so, Howsoever in the
purpose of God they were appointed to the effects and fruits of Love, yet for
the present they were not fitted for it, till quickened by Grace: Consequently,
not justified from their sins before their calling, much less acquitted of
their debts, before they had run out into any sinful arrerages: No
Pre-remission of sin, before it be committed.

CHAP. V. The way of seeking vesolution touching our Adoption and Justification
by signs and marks, viz. The fruits of Sanctification, whether it be altogether
unsatisfactory.
THere be who teach, That no fruit of Sanctification, if it See Dr. Crisps
Sermons upon Isa. 53.
speak as the Lord gives it to speak can speak peace to the soul: And that
inherent Qualifications are but doubtful Evidences for Heaven: consequently,
that the way of seeking resolution by them, is altogether unsatisfactory: This
conclusion, I grant, must needs follow upon those premises, but how are they
proved? The reason alleged is builded upon Gal. 3. 10. The Law is not of
Faith, but the voice of the Law is this, Cursed is every one that continues
not in all things that are written in the Book of the Law to do them -- Are
there not failings in all? Can that that is full of failings speak peace? How
then can it secure a man that he has Interest in Christ?

But now by this text alleged to prove their position, and by the Argument
framed upon it, it is evident that either they do not rightly understand what
it is that we teach, or will not rightly propound it: For did we indeed hold
forth these Qualifications to be immediate evidences in the way of a legal
Righteousness, then did they speak to the point: Not so now, when as we do only
account them mediate * Evidences, and that in a way of Evangelical
Righteousness. We do not say, That he that is Holy and Righteous is adopted for
his Holiness, or justified for his Righteousness, or saved for his good works
and duties performed: No, But this we say, He that is Holy and Righteous is
discerned to be Adopted, Romans 8. 14. They who are led by the spirit of God are
the sons of God; And whosoever is adopted, is justified and shall be saved:
Sanctification is an Evidence of Adoption and Justification, not ex Antecedente
but ex Consequente: Not that either of these does casually depend upon that,
but because there is an inseparable Connection of all these in the person
Adopted: Saint Paul's Argument runs thus, Ye shall live, because ye are
children; and known to be children, because led by the spirit.

For the further clearing of this truth, and discovering of Errors that darken
the light and luster of it, I shall propound and prosecute these two
propositions: 1. That this is the way which the Saints of God have gone, in
seeking for and setting forth the evidence of their Salvation. 2. That the new
way of Evidencing, only by the spirit and Faith, cannot lay the Ground of a
settled Peace, except the work of the sanctifying spirit be also sought to give
in Testimony.

The first Proposition. This is the way which the Saints of God have gone in
seeking for and setting forth the evidence of their Salvation. I manifest this
by three Texts, which I make choice of to examine what Doctor Crisp has
objected against the instance of these three Graces, Universal Obedience,
Sincerity of Heart, and the Love of the Brethren, which he refuses as
insufficient evidence of justification.

1. Text. Psalm. 119. 6. Says David, Then shall I not be ashamed when I have
respect to all thy Commandments: where note, 1. His expectation; Not be ashamed
or confounded, viz. when I am questioned either by God or Man. 2. The ground of
this; When I have respect to all thy Commandments: Do we not see, That David
does comfortably assure himself that his Universal Obedience should give him
boldness and confidence? Whereupon is that it in ver. 5. His earnest desire
was, Oh, that my ways were so directed that I might keep thy Commandments. Now
then, was it so with David (I might add Job also, whence that Confidence of
his expressed, Job. 13. 15. and 27. 16. Is it not from his integrity, see Chap.
23. 10. -- 13. and Chap. 31.) was it so with them, and may it not be so with
us? Had sanctification a greater influence upon their Spiritual estate then it
has upon ours? Doubtless the Conscionable care of Universal Obedience is an
Evidence and comfortable Ground of our assurance.

Object. But how can this be an Evidence which Paul rejects as dross and
dung, Phil. 3. He was blameless as touching the Righteousness of the Law, yet
rejects it and will not rest upon it.

Sol. True indeed, He was in his own opinion, and in others also; But this was
only a Pharisaical blamelesness, such as that that is mentioned, Luke 16. 15.
and 18. 11. When St. Paul came to himself he found it otherwise, Romans 7. 7. And
therefore no wonder if he do reject it. But admit that his Righteousness was
Universal according to the measure of his knowledge, and that what he wanted in
it was through ignorance and misunderstanding of the Law; yet since he speaks
of it in opposition to justification by Christ, and does cast it away as a
thing of no value and confidence when he seeks a Righteousness for
justification: will it follow, That because it is no Antecedent cause of
justification, that therefore it is no Consequent evidence of our Adoption? Or,
because it will not profit a man without Christ, that therefore with Christ and
in Christ it will afford no comfort. Even he that does here cast it off in 2 Timothy 4. 7. does gather it up as a ground of Comfort. Reason good, for though
this Moral Righteousness without Christ avail a man nothing, yet this being
built upon Christ, and wrought by virtue of a principle of Holiness, viz. the
spirit of Christ is an undoubted evidence of the Inhabitation of the spirit,
even the spirit of Adoption; and therefore it is beside the point which the Dr.
alleges: Can that (says he) be an evidence of our being in Christ, which St.
Paul casts away as dross? For though it may be worth nothing in the work of
justification, yet it may be of much worth to evidence the work thereof: Though
without Christ it may not profit a man, yet in him it may afford much comfort.

2. Object. But there is no such thing as this universal obedience to be found
in any; No ship in which not some leak, No pot of Ointment, in which not some
dead fly.

Sol. I do not reply, How then was this universal blamelesness found in Paul,
nay in Paul a persecutor: But I grant, That such a plenary perfection wherein
there is not any thing wanting of what the Law requires, such there is not to
be found in any; nor is it expected: No, this universality is rather Negative
then Positive: Not any one precept is there which the Holy heart does not
willingly embrace as the rule to walk by: Not any one duty which he does not
desire and endeavor: Not any sin that he does indulge or excuse in himself.
This is that that is meant by universal obedience: A desire that nothing be
wanting; An endeavor after perfection. Or in the words of David; It is not so
much an actual keeping of all the Statutes, but an having respect to all the
Commandments: To respect them as a rule both for Direction and Examination. Is
there any thing to be done? the Holy Heart will not venture upon it till he
has sought to the word of God for direction what may, and what may not be done
for matter and manner, when, and how far, together with all other circumstances:
Has he done any thing? he will examine it by the rule, whether it will hold
square with it or not; And in this work, he will not look upon one or two, but
upon every Commandment as his rule to walk by: if any Commandment sorbid, he
will by no means touch with it; Or if he has, he will in no wise excuse or
condemn himself. This is that universal Obedience which we make to be a sign
and mark of Adoption and just^fication: Not so much the perfect work and
practice of the Hand, as the steadfast will and purpose of the Heart. This is
expected, Act. 11. 23. This is accepted, Psalm. 66. 18. and 139. 23.

Ob. Such purposes of the Heart are found in many wicked men in the time of
Sickness, and fear of death: Then may you find them far from excusing any sin,
or neglecting any precept, yea such is their purpose and resolution so to
continue.

Sol. Admit this to be so, though it is sooner said then proved, that thus it
is in any, where some work of the sanctifying spirit is not found: But I say,
admit it, yet does not this objection take off the Argument: For we judge not
of a man by one act, either of good or evil; But by the habit and constant
frame of the heart: It is grace alone, and the spirit of Adoption that
new-mouldeth the heart, and casts it into an Holy temper of universal
obebience. Grace is it that makes the Heart constant in holiness; wicked men
may have good moods and present purposes, but these are like Land-stoods soon
gone again. So then, we understand the comfort of this universality to flow
from the constant purpose of the Heart; This is the fruit and effect of
Sanctifying Grace.

Ob. But who can say from an Heart unfeigned that he has such a constant
purpose: For why, Are there not untoward risings of the Heart, and repining
thoughts against many Truths of God? Are we not often weary of that service to
which God does call us? Do we rejoice in Afflictions as the tokens of Gods
Love, and count it all joy to fall into diverse Tentations?

Sol. This is but to beat the Air, nor does it prove the want of constancy in
the former purpose of the heart. Grant indeed that these risings and repinings
are in us, but are they settled in the h^^rt, are they habituated? Do they rest
therein without a check? Are they excused or pleaded for? If not, The bent of
the heart is still constant, notwithstanding those indispositions. This
constancy is not measured by this, That there is no interruption of the Act, or
intermixture of contrary dispositions: but by this, That there is no
intercission of the Habit, nor any Toleration of these contrary dispositions.
It is our happiness that we have to do with an indulgent Father, who looks
not at men in their fears and frighted passions, especially when they are ready
to take down themselves for their ill-moods. In a Legal strictness no man can
plead his constancy, but in a Gospel uprightness. As there is not any Duty
which the Holy heart does not embrace, so not any Time (if he be himself and
free from Satan's Tentations) when he does not constantly hold that purpose, and
strive against all interruptions.

2. Text. 2 Cor. 1. 12. This (says Saint Paul) is our Rejoicing -- That in
Sincerity and godly Simplicity -- Hence we collect, That sincerity and
single-heartedness in our Obedience is a ground of comfort, an Argument of our
Adoption. Reason, Because it is such a disposition of the heart, by which
whatsoever is done by us, we do it as to Christ, and for the Lords sake. Thus
has Saint Paul described it, Ephesians. 6. 5. Opposing is to eye-service,
men-pleasing and self-seeking. And who can doubt but that sincerity of
Obedience must needs be a ground of comfort and confidence? Can it be found in
any that have not received the Spirit of sanctification? Or does it flow
fro(...)y Fountain, but an heart principled with the Spirit of Christ? Where
this is wanting, there may be some outward Conformity of men's actions, in
respect of the outward work: But the Motive and main cause of their
performances, it is some by-end and base respect, as in Jehu and the Pharisees,
which appears in this, That when that end is gained, or that respect cease,
then also their work is at an end, though the Glory of God, and the good of
Christ's Church be never so much concerned: None but the Child of God does make
the Glory of his Father, the end and aim of all his actions. All others begin
and end in Self.

Object. This sincerity is not found in the ordinary practices of Christians,
either in the exercises of Religion, or in the works of mercy and justice: For
why, says the Doctor, Is there not much Self mixed in their performances? in
praying and fasting? -- Is not the end of these Duties, to be delivered from
Danger?

Sol. It is, I grant, one end, but not the Vltimate end. In these exercises we
seek our own good, bread, pardon, preservation, deliverance, and that not
unlawfully: For Christ has taught us to put them into our prayers, but still
with this caution, For thine is the Glory, i. e. To desire them only as
subservient to the glory of God: should we desire these for our selves, i. e.
to spend them upon our lusts, to live to our selves in matter of profit,
pleasure and preferment, this were self-seeking: But thus to desire them, that
in the use of them we may be the more instrumental to glorify God in our
several places, this is not Self-seeking. Say the same of Men-pleasing, though
a man do encourage himself in goodness by the praise of men, by listening to
the acceptableness of his well doing, yet so long as the praise of men is not
(as it was in the Pharisees) the prime and principal inducement of doing what
is done, this is not Men-pleasing, both of these are defined, not by the
subservient, but by the ultimate end of our endeavors; if that be right, there
is sincerity in the Obedience, and this sincerity is a ground of confidence,
the work of the spirit, an Argument of our Adoption.

Object. Not so says the Antinomian Doctor, For we read in Romans 10. 1. 3. That
the Jews had a zeal-and this was exercised in Obedience to the will of God, yet
these were En(...)to Christ: And how can that be an evidence of Adoption, that
is found in an Enemy?

Sol. Is not this a gross mistake? The point is touching sincerity, and his
proof is by an instance of zeal: Is there no difference? Is not sincerity the
singleness of the heart, and zeal the earnestness of the spirit? Besides, this
their zeal was not according to knowledge: If this kind of zeal profit not,
shall not that which is according to knowledge, and guided by the rules of Holy
discretion, shall not that afford comfort? That which he adds, viz. That
their zeal was not in a corrupt way of their own devising, is directly contrary
to the Apostle: For he says of them, That in seeking to establish their own
Righteousness, they have not submitted to the Righteousness of God: It was
(therefore) a way of their own devising, which is proved Verse 4. Christ is the
end of the Law for Righteousness, to every one that believes: So that to seek
the establishment of the Law (though the Law of God) for another end then God
has appointed, yea in opposition to that end, is not an Argument of sincerity,
but an act of a turbulent passion. Papists contend much for the efficacy of the
Sacraments: But while they place in them an efficacy altogether independent
upon Faith, do they not seek to establish their own fancies, and not the truth
of God? T^^s did these Jews, they pretended for God, but in a way of their own
devising: Not much unlike to many among us, who pretend for the Scepter of
Christ, but only in a way of their own. Were the zeal of all th^se sincere as
it should be, there would be in them a readiness to embrace and submit to what
shall appear to be the mind of God, and say Vnicat Veritas, or as St. Paul in
2 Cor. 13. 8. We can do nothing against the truth.

3. Text. 1 John 3. 14. We know that we have passed from death to life, because
we love the Brethren: Hence we collect, That the state of our Adoption, and
standing right in the sight and favor of God, is a thing that may be known;
that this love of our Brethren is a note and evidence thereof: For why? Love is
of God, cap. 4. 7. an effect of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22. For while the Spirit of
Adoption does shed abroad the love of God in our hearts, and make us sensible
of it; it does cause in us a love to him that loved us first, and for his sake
who has begotten us a love to them also that are as we are, begotten of God.
This is so plain, that it may seem strange that any should either deny it or
doubt of it. Yet says the Doctor,

Object. The scope of the Apostle is to comfort them against the hatred of the
World, and he shows what esteem they had one of another, q. d. though the
World do not esteem us, yet our judgment one of another is, that we are the
people of God, grounding our selves upon this, that we do love one another; so
that this is rather a mark how another may know me, then how I may know my self.

Sol. Is not this strange, That the Apostle should set this down as a ground of
comfort to bear up the heart against the hatred of the World, viz. The good
esteem that Christians have of us; Will this secure the soul against sadness
and sorrow? will not Satan suggest, What if they be deceived? They know not the
heart, they judge by the outward appearance, by the expressions of love to the
Brethren, and therein they may be deceived. And that the Text must be
understood of that immanent and reflexive act of knowledge, which passes a
Censure upon our selves; it is evident by that that follows: For the Apostle
having set this down as a rule of discerning their spiritual estate, and proved
Ve^^e it 15. and pressed it by the example of Christ, whose love was manifested
by laying down his life for us, Verse 16. whom we are to imitate in a real
demonstration of our inward affection to the Brethren: He urges again this
Motive, That hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our
hearts before him: And I would gladly ask, whether here also the Apostle does
intend to teach us, that by this act of love, we way assure our selves touching
others, and rest secure that we are not decceived: And what so great matter is
this, if in the mean space we may not evidently judge the state of our own
souls? And what means he to add this, Verse 21. If our heart condemn us not,
we have boldness toward God. Certainly, the Apostles intention is to set down
an evidence of Self-discerning.

Object. But suppose it so: yet so intricate is this way of Examination, that a
Christian shall find himself much puzzled in it. Why so? Because, hard it is
to know both what it is to love, and who is a Brother: And till these be known,
how can we try our selves by the Sign?

Sol. Grant it to be hard, yet if not impossible, we know that difficulty does
not take off, but stirs up diligence. What it is to love, we may learn from
1 Cor. 13. 5. and 1 Job. 3. 16, 17. And who is a brother, from Gal. 6. 10.

Quest. But who can truly say, I love the Brethren; if those be acts, effects
and properties of love? Who can approve himself to have loved in all those
particulars.

Ans. Even he that has received the Spirit of God; for Love is one of the
fruits of the Spirit. And though peradventure he has not attaind to that
perfection of love which another has, and himself desires; yet is he not
therefore excluded from the truth thereof.

Quest. But who can know that this or that man is a Brother? Does not this
Brotherhood confist in being united unto Christ? Does any man know this but God
alone?

Ans. Is not this in effect to tell the Apostle he speaks absurdly, and sets
down a mark of knowing, which cannot be known? For when the Apostle says, We
know -- Because we love -- Does he not pre-suppose, that it may be known, We
love the Brethren, both in respect of the Act and Object; i. e. both what it is
to love, and who are the brethren? But admit that I cannot infallibly discern
who is, and who is not a Brother; yet may I discern the ground of my love to
him, viz. because I conceive him to be a Brother; I love him under that notion.

Object. So do Papists and Sectaries, these love their own, and under the
notion of Brethren.

Sol. It may be so, but what then? Is this therefore no sign or mark of our
spiritual condition which St. John has set down? But indeed neither Papists
nor Sectaries do love under this notion in St. John's meaning, if their love be
confined to Papists and Sectaries. He loves a man under the right notion of a
Brother, who does love him eo nomine, because there is Aliquid Christi in him,
because he is of the Household of Faith, a believer in Christ: But if in case of
a Brothers necessity, yet there be no fruit of love to be seen, except also
there be in him Aliquid nostri, viz. That he be of our Sect and Opinion: If all
Christianity be confined within the narrow compass of this or that Opinion,
surely this is not to love the Brethren. Let all Sectaries look to it, and the
Antinomians by name, who pretend to be the only Brethren, because they only sit
down by the free grace of God, and rest themselves upon the promises of the
Gospel, though they see themselves full of sin: Let them, I say, look to it,
for if their Charity will not extend it self to relieve the necessities, and
bear with the infirmities of those other whom they accuse to run after Moses
and the Law for their peace and satisfaction of Spirit: in as much as they
cannot but know, that if we do err it is through misunderstanding of the
Scripture, according to which we desire to frame all our faith and practices;
certainly they cannot approve themselves to love the Brethren, you will say,
this may easily be retorted: Nor will I deny the justness thereof, should I
suffer the difference of Opinion so far to draw off mine affection from any
that professes Christ, as in the case of his necessity to neglect him, to
reckon him no better then a Turk, I should doubt whether the Spirit of Christ
dwelled in me or not. Is he a man that would not succor a man, though a Heathen
or Turk, against a Lion or a Bear? And is he a Christian that will not succor a
Christian, though perhaps a Papist or a Sectary against a Turk? Is not the Text
of St Paul plain, Do good to all, but especially to the Household of Faith: And
why to them especially? But because they embrace the Gospel, and so profess
themselves the subjects and servants of Christ: Truth it is, that among them
there is some difference also by a different measure of the Spirit: And as each
is before other in it, so the especially falls upon him. We say that God
himself is the first and chief Beloved: other things are loved for Gods sake;
viz. All the Creatures, but especially Man, because there is in him more of God
then in the rest: All men, but especially Christians; Because they profess
subjection to Christ: All Christians, but especially them in whom the work of
the Spirit is most eminent; This it is to love the Brethren. But now if beyond
all this, there must be Aliquid nostri in them, some special Relation to us, or
else no love extended to them; This is not to love the Brethren: Of such St.
John adds, He that loves not his Brother abides in Death.

The second Proposition. That the new way of evidencing our Adoption and
Justification only by the Spirit and Faith, cannot lay the Ground of a firm
settled Peace, except the work of the Sanctifying Spirit also do come in to give
Testimony. For the manifestation of which I shall show: 1. What is delivered
touching each: 2. Wherein I conceive it to fail of the Truth. See Dr. Crisps.
Sermons upon Isa 53.


First, Touching the Spirit: It is termed, The Revealing evidence which speaks
to a man's own Spirit, saying, Be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven. Christ
administered this Comfort only in general; But the Spirit comes home to every
man in particular: Whence he is called, The Comforter, because he so speaks to
the Soul, that the Judge is also satisfied: And when men do fear, My sin is not
pardoned, The Spirit speaks to the Soul, and says, They are pardoned: Till
this be revealed, all the World shall never satisfy the Soul, all signs and
marks are mere riddles. The Spirit of Adoption teaches as to cry Abba Father:
The Spirit it self, i. e. the immediate voice of the Spirit without any
instrument, what God has determined of this or that man is not set down in the
scripture: But it is revealed by the Spirit: Hence the Spirit is the seal and
the earnest. To this effect the Antinomian Doctor; And hereupon he
expostulateth: Why do men scorn and cry out of them that teach and profess
this, as of Enthusiasts, men that have Revelations? Is not, says he, the
Spirit of God, the Spirit of Revelation? Is he not given to reveal these things?

And to confess the truth, In all this I see not what can be denied, or much
doubted of, though all his proofs are not convincing: that one Text of Romans 8.
16. does speak home to the point, That the Spirit of God is the Revealing
evidence; The voice of the Spirit is the chief, though not the only Testimony
of our Adoption: But all the failing is when he comes to answer that Question,
How shall I know that this is the voice of the Spirit? A needful Question:
Because Satan may and does transform himself into an Angel of light, and
deceive the soul: This is, says he, the usual way of men, if the Word did bear
witness to this particular voice of the Spirit in me, then I could be
satisfied: But if the Word do not bear witness* to this voice of the Spirit, I
dare not trust it. The usual way; Nay is it not the only way? In the Old
Testament thus it was, all Revelations were to be examined by the written word,
Deuteronomy. 13. 1. Isa. 8. 20. And is it not so also in the New Testament? See that
Text of our Savior, Ioh. 16. 13. He that is the Spirit shall lead you into all
Truth: How so? For says Christ, He shall not speak of himself, but what he
shall hear, that shall he speak: And what is that which the Spirit hears? Is
it not that which is already contained in the scriptures? So then, no
Revelation of any Doctrine, no nor the Application of it which is not consonant
to the Scripture, is to be thought to proceed from the spirit: but whatsoever
is pretended to be revealed by the Spirit, does so far forth call for Faith as
is agreeable to the Scriptures. Well, not to quarrel needlessly, nor to be too
strict in terms, he does allow it for a truth, The Spirit of the Lord never
speaks to the heart of a Believer, but he always speaks according to the Word
of grace revealed: But then he adds two limitations which spoil all:

1. That by the Word we must not understand the Law, but the Gospel: And this,
I conceive, is put to choke them who seek for signs and marks of Inherent
Qualifications.

2. That you must not make the credit of this voice of the Spirit to depend
upon the Word, i. e. to receive credit from it; And why not? Because, says he,
if you say that the Word is of greater credit, then the Spirit wants
something in it self of credit; as if a man were trusted for a sureties sake:
But this (says he) must not be allowed, God never intended that any thing
should be of such credit as to give credit to the Spirit. The issue of all
returns to this, That the Testimony of the Spirit is (...), self-sufficient, as
the principles of Arts and Sciences which are indemonstrable, and must be
received as altogether unquestionable, and the meaning thereof is this: If any
urge, how shall I be satisfied that this voice thus speaking, is the voice of
Gods Spirit, his Answer is, It is so, because it is so: Or thus, I know it,
because the Spirit says it. So unwilling are these men, that the Revelations
and Illuminations on which they build their comforts should be searched into
too far.

Object. Nay (you will say) his meaning is I know it, because the Spirit
speaks according to the Word.

Sol. If so, Then he must recant what he said, That it does not depend upon the
Word. And well he may, For howsoever the Truth of what the Spirit speaks,
does not depend upon the Word, yet the credit of it does. The Scripture is
already known, and received as the Word of God: And what comes after it, must
borrow credit from it: St. Peter speaking of the voice which they heard in the
Mount, says yet, We have a more sure Word of Prophecy, 2 Pet. 1. 19. How more
sure? But because it was already received as the undoubted Word of God: And so
to them, and in their Apprehension, it was a more sure Word.

But to draw nearer to the point, Does this voice of the Spirit saying to an
ungodly man, Thy sins are forgiven, does it speak according to the Scripture?
True indeed, the Scripture says, God justifies the ungodly; God has
reconciled the World unto himself: But is it therefore allowed for any one to
say, I am an ungodly man, I am one of the World, therefore I am justified, I am
reconciled? Is there then any Universal Reconciliation and Justification taught
in the Text of Scripture? I mean, any such Reconciliation that is absolute and
irrespective; That Reconciliation is so far wrought by Christ indefinitely for
the World of mankind, that whosoever will come in and lay hold upon Christ by
Faith, shall not perish, this is revealed: None other do I know or acknowledge.
Is it not rather taught us in the Scripture, That before there can be any
conclusion of comfort to the soul, by the particular Application of the Gospel
Promises (any I mean more then this conditional, If I will come in also, I may
as well as others) there must come in the work of the sanctifying spirit,
purifying the soul and conscience, and working in it those inherent
Qualifications to which the Promise is made, and upon which depends the
conclusion of that practical syllogism which brings comfort: The Text of
Scripture says, They that Repent and Believe -- They that are lead by the
Spirit of God are the Sons of God: Then that renewed and sanctified conscience
says, I do Repent and Believe -- I am lead by the Spirit therefore: And so
this conclusion thus deduced, if the immediate Testimony of the Spirit,
manifested by an Heavenly impression and irradiation upon the soul, if it come
in with his attestation to confirm it, we may not doubt of the truth thereof,
because now indeed it speaks according to the Word, and does confirm that
particular conclusion which was comprehended in the general Text of Scripture:
For where the Text of Scripture has not a Quicunque for the Proposition, there
the Testimony of the Spirit that concludes, for hic and ille does not speak
according to the Word.

Object. You will say to me, there is a Quicunque in that of Isa. 55. 1. and
Rev. 22. 17. Whosoever will: and our Savior, Joh. 6. 37. Him that comes to
me, I will in no wise cast out?

Sol. I grant it, No doubt but the Gospel does hold out Christ to all, none
exempted, Jew nor Gentile; But how? As a Physician to cure them, not as an
Husband, to receive them into union with him: Or if you will, as a Husband to
take them into the Bed of love: But not till he has purged them, and fitted
them for his Bed; is it not for this, that the Scripture does call upon sinners
to wash and cleanse their hands and hearts, Isa. 1. 15. Jam. 4. 8. To separate
from the Wicked, 2 Cor. 6. 17. with infinite other Texts of Scripture, all of
them calling upon us to labor for the work of the Spirit upon the soul, that so
we may find the fruits of union and communion with Christ, and by that work of
the Spirit, felt in the heart, we way be assured that the word of the Spirit
speaking comfort to the soul, and assuring the conscience of pardon, is the
word of truth, and worthy of belief. For as when God set down the Text of
Scripture, and revealed the same to the Church of God; he confirmed it by his
works from Heaven, by Miracles which did convince the world that it must needs
be the Word of God, which was accompanied with such mighty and miraculons
operations; so when God will by the Spirit speak to the soul the Application of
a Text for comfort, he does make way for the credit of it by the work of the
Spirit, the work of grace upon the soul: If not, believe it not, the spirit of
truth is a spirit of holiness; There is no truth in that word which speaks
comfort to that heart, in which is not wrought the work of Holiness.
Consequently, Thy sins are forgiven, in the heart of a Drunkard, Swearer,
Whoremonger, is not the voice of the Spirit. The work and the word of the
Spirit go together.

Nay, so evident is this, that the Doctor having sought to establish this
Revelation of the Spirit as a principle that may not be disputed, and that
cannot be demonstrated, does yet in the close come in with this, Yet something
more, for the Spirit does give men to credit what he speaks. His meaning I
conceive to be, That by this work of the Spirit, by which man's heart is framed
to receive the Testimony of the Spirit, and to believe it, by it does it appear
that it is the Spirit of God which witnesses their Adoption; so then, it is
the voice of the Spirit that says, Thy sins are forgiven, and it is evidenced
to be the voice of the Spirit, because he frames the heart to believe it. It
cannot be denied, but that it is the Spirit that gives Faith to believe it;
nor is it doubted, but that if this persuasion do come from the Spirit, it does
afford comfort; but still the question is, Whether this be the work of the
Spirit or not: of the other, viz. The work of sanctification there is no doubt,
which if it do not accompany that work of persuasion, I much doubt whether it
be not an over bold presumption.

2. Touching Faith. This is delivered by the same Author: 1. That the Scripture
does authorize Faith to give full evidence concerning Interest in Christ. 2.
That this evidence of Faith is not Revealing, but a Receiving evidence; viz. As
it takes possession of what the Spirit Reveals, and does rest upon it. This
Faith, says he, brings with it unquestionable evidence, full assurance, and
what needs a man look farther: The spirit within thee says, Thy sin is
forgiven, Faith receives it, and sits down satisfied, here is thine evidence
(says he) and thou have thy portion: For why, the Text of Saint John says, He
that believes has the witness in himself, q. d. He has as much as can be
desired, when he has believing in himself: And he that believes not, has
made God a liar, q. d. If when God has spoken, man will not sit down with Gods
bare Word, but seek for signs and marks drawn from his own works; this man has
made God a liar. The sum of all returns to this, That this act of Faith
receiving the Testimony of the spirit (that is, when the soul does rest in it
without any farther doubting) that this, I say, is the evidence of our Adoption
and Justification: so then, ask him how do you know that sin is pardoned? His
Answer is, because I believe it and rest satisfied in this persuasion. And is
not this, I pray you, a very satisfying evidence? It is so, because I believe
it is so; In this way what profane person is there in the world who may not
conclude for himself, if he will but force upon himself this persuasion.

Object. Nay, but it is not meant but of a persuasion which the Spirit has
wrought in the Heart: If God (says he) has given thee to believe it, this is
thy evidence.

Sol. Yea, but how shall I know whether God has given me this persuasion, or
that Satan has suggested it into my Heart. Does the Spirit of God take a man
out of the Dunghill of filthiness, and instantly without any work of washing and
cleansing, speak to him that word of comfort, pronounce him pardoned, and work
in him the full preswasion of it; or if he do speedily, and as it were suddenly
work him to this full persuasion, Does he not at the same instant work a change
upon his will and affections, by which that light that is set up in the
understanding may be discerned to proceed from the Spirit of God? Surely thus
we have learned Christ, and thus we teach: The Spirit of God does work upon the
whole soul, and all the faculties at once, and equally; Understanding and Will,
Conscience and Affections: Nor is there mroe light of saving knowledge in the
one, then there is heat of holiness in the other: That Faith which does not
purify the heart and cleanse the conscience, is not a saving Faith: such a
persuasion of pardon is but a presumption; that of S. James remains an
everlasting Truth, Faith without works is dead.

Object. That Faith (says he) is not dead where the whole essence of Faith is.

Sol. True, but wherein consists that essence of Faith? This is nothing but
the echo of the Heart (says he) to this voice of the Spirit: Grant Faith to
be the echo of the Heart to the voice of the Spirit (though this indeed be but
one act of Faith) yet by the voice of the Spirit we understand not that
suggestion of Remittuntur, but the whole Text of Scripture, comprehending
Precepts, Promises, Threatenings, in all which there is indeed an echo of the
Heart by Faith, Psalm. 27. 8. But in this the Antinomian is farther off then the
Papist: The essence of Justifying Faith does neither consist in this echo to
the Text of Scripture, nor in that echo to that word of Revelation, but in an
act that comes in between them, ex gr. The Text of Scripture says, He that
believes shall be saved: Is man justified by believing this for a truth, or
rather by doing that duty which the word Believes does intimate, viz. The act
of confidence and affiance in Christ. Again, the Spirit says, Thy sins are
forgiven; Is man justified because the believes this word? Surely, no: He must
have it, before the word that says so be a word of Truth. So then the first
echo goes before, the other does follow after: The right act of justifying
Faith, whence it is so named is that intermediate act of confidence and
affiance. Understand me to speak of these acts of Faith as first, second,
third, in the order of Nature, not in the distance of time: In the order of
Nature justification does not go before Faith, but follow upon it: Nor is man
justisted, because he does persuade himself that so it is.

To wade no farther in this Argument: By this I suppose it is evident, That the
new way of evidencing by the word of the Spirit, and the subscription of Faith,
cannot lay the Ground of perfect peace, except there come in also the evidence
of inherent Qualifications. The voice of Pardon, is not the voice of the
spirit, except when it speaks to a Heart prepared and fitted for it: Then only
is it true, when it falls upon a Penitent soul, a Repenting sinner; otherwise
it is the suggestion of Satan. Again, the subscription of Faith is then a
ground of comfort, when it is accompanied with such inherent Qualifications as
do certainly proclaim the work of the sanctifying spirit in the Heart,
otherwise it is but Presumption and rash Boldness.

The ground of all this is in the nature of this Testimony of the spirit: It is
not denied, But that the testimony of the Spirit is the chief and principal
assurance of our Adoption: that without it the soul is not finally rid of
fears: that when it comes, it takes away all fears and doubts -- But this is
that which we are to nore, that this is rather an Attestation then a Testimony;
a secondary, not the first deponent: is not this rightly concluded from that of
Romans 8. 16. The Spirit witnesses with our Spirit -- where we have two
witnesses joining together their Testimonies to assert this truth, That we are
the Sons of God: Two I say, viz. Our spirit, and the spirit of God, the witness
of our spirit, i. e. of our conscience is the first; The spirit of God is the
second: His work is not (...), but (...), to witness together with our Spirit:
i. e. To confirm and ratify what that has asserted. So that indeed the
evidencing of this Testimony of the spirit is from the Testimony of our own
conscience: If this do not first speak and conclude, that other of the spirit
speaks not at all: Now the Testimony of the conscience is the conclusion of
that practical Syllogism; and the certainty of this conclusion depends upon the
verity of the Assumption, which mentions the work of grace in the Heart. So
then, let it be the care of the Christian to make good the verity of the
Assumption, that he may truly say, I do repent* I am led by the spirit: I do
believe and rest upon Christ, etc. This shall not only afford him comfort by
the conclusion, but also assure him that he is not misled by the suggestion of
Satan, but guided by the spirit, to rest upon that Testimony of his Adoption
and Justification.

CHAP. VI. Touching sin in the Conscience of the Believer; The Doctrine of the
Antinomians in this Point examined and found insufficient to satisfy the
Conscience: The right way of satisfying the Conscience, and of taking away the
scruple of sin, set down.
THe Prophet Isaiah, cap. 53. 11. having set down this, That Christ shall
Justify many, adds this as a reason, For he shall bear their iniquities: A
phrase borrowed from the Levitical Priesthood, in which the sacrificed Beast
did bear the iniquity of the party that brought it, his confession was, that he
had deserved death by his sin; yet now casting himself upon the mercy of God,
he desired that the guilt of his sin might be transferred and laid upon that
sacrifice, and by the Blood of it he might find Atonement: So then, the
meaning of that saying of the Prophet is, That Christ shall as a sacrifice of
expiation take upon him punishment due to the sin of many: Thus by bearing the
punishment does he take away the sin of his people.

This does not please some, the Antinomian Doctors by name; The word iniquities
is found in the 6. Verse of the Chapter; And upon that Text, one of them, Dr.
Crisp, does contend much for this, That not only the punishment of sin, but
the iniquity it self was laid upon Christ: Not the guilt only, but the fault it
self; His reason is, Because otherwise it had been injustice in God to bruise
hi^. I should not much stick either at the Doctrine or the Reason, but that I
find, that the end of this for which they contend is not found; viz. To show
the reason, why it is said in Jer. 50. 20. That the iniquity of Jacob (the
Elect of God) is sought for, but cannot be found; viz. Because God has
conveyed their iniquities away from the sinner, and laid them upon the Back of
Christ; the which he seeks to illustrate by him that to help a thief and
deliver him from the danger of the Hue and Cry, conveyeth away out of the
thiefs house the stolen goods, so that they are not found upon him; It is not we
see for nothing, that these men depart from the received expressions of other
Divines. Iunius reads that sixth Verse thus, Facit ut incurrat pena -- The
punishment of us all met upon him, answerable to Verse 5. The chastisement of
our peace was laid upon him. The Genevenses note is, The punishment of our
iniquity, and not the fault it self: And Deodate says, Not the transgression
nor the fault, but the Bond by which we were liable to Gods Justice, and the
punishment of it, Christ being our surety. Amesius says, That the Imputation
of our sin could agree to Christ in none other sense, then this, that he should
undergo the punishment due to our sins: See his Medulla Theol. Par. 1. cap. 6.

But to let this pass: Upon this truth and text, That God has laid upon Christ
the iniquity of us all, and that accordingly Christ has born our iniquities; A
question is moved, How then comes it to pass, that sin does still trouble and
terrify the Conscience of many? To this Question the Antinomians do Answer,
That many do trouble themselves needlessly; that there is indeed no sin in the
Conscience of the Believer, but that men do put it in, and so vex themselves
without cause.

One of their Doctors out of that Text of Isa. 53. 6. [The See Dr. Crisps
Sermons upon Isa. 53. 6.
Lord has laid on him the iniquities of us all] has delivered these
Doctrines: 1. That it is iniquity it self, and not barely the punishment that
is laid upon Christ. 2. This iniquity of ours is really transacted and laid
upon him, truly, and not only by so thinking. 3. The laying of iniquity upon
Christ, is the Lords own act, it is his prerogative alone to do it. 4. This act
is not now to be done, but it is done already. 5. This grace of laying iniquity
upon Christ, is appliable by forgiveness of sin to persons before the least
measure of Sanctification. Points of Doctrine in which we cannot readily
suspect any iniquity, at least they might pass with a favorable interpretation:
But by the conclusions thence deduced, we cannot but see that there is a snake
in the grass: Hence he infers,

1. That the reason why believers walk in bitterness of Spirit, is because they
imagine sin in the Conscience; whereas indeed believers have no sin at all,
wasting their Conscience, or lying as a burden upon them.

2. That our own performances, faith and repentance, have no hand at all in
laying sin upon Christ: Nor is there any other end of our Faith, save only to
manifest what is done long ago by God and Christ.

3. That we may save all our care and fear, for the work is done to our hand:
yea to think that we must take pains to get pardon, is a deceitful Imagination.

4. That our Righteousness may hinder our closing with Christ, so may our
sinfulness, etc.

Not much unlike is the dealing of another of the same H^ Dens Sermon
entitled, The Man of Sin discovered.
Society: Who having set these two truths; 1. That Christ has taken away sin
out of the sight of God by a sacrifice, the effect whereof is Atonement and
Peace. 2. That he has taken sin also out of the Conscience, that so we might
have the answer of a good Conscience, and this is the effect of our Faith, Act.
15. 9. Hence he draws this conclusion, That it is in effect the Doctrine of
Antichrist, the Man of sin (whose design is to set up again what Christ has
destroyed) To persuade any that sin is not taken away out of Gods sight, or out
of the Conscience, till the work of Baptism, and of Repentance: To say, That
Baptism takes away sin out of the Conscience; Or, that Repentance washes away
sin: That no forgiveness of sin with God before Repentance: Nay he closes up
the discourse with this speech, Does any declare Repentance to be a mean to
obtain Remission; It is a footstep of Antichrist.

These inserences being so dissonant from the truth, give us cause to suspect
the grounds on which they are builded, and upon Examination we find, that the
Explication of the Points delivered is not sound.

Touching the first man, Who from that text [God has laid on him] grounded
those Points aforementioned, viz. That God has laid upon Christ all the sins
of the Elect, and that therefore men do needlessly trouble themselves by putting
them again into the Conscience; And that they should rest upon this assured
ground, that all their sins are so done away, that there is no need of
Repentance and Humiliation for them: This man, I say, either did not thoroughly
look into the text, to find out the true meaning of that phrase, or else did
willingly neglect it as not fit for his purpose: For I desire it may be
seriously considered, whether that phrase [The Lord has laid upon him] does
intend any more then what St. Paul has expressed in that verb (...) Romans 3.
25. God has set him forth, or pre-ordained him to be a propitiation, in which
respect it is that he is called The Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of
the World, i. e. The Lamb, the sacrifice of Expiation which God has appointed
for that end: And so the words of the Prophet do give us this as the intention
of God, that though we every one of us have gone astray, and so incurred the
just wrath and displeasure of God, yet does not God lay the punishment of our
transgression upon our own persons, but has appointed him (the Lord Christ) to
bear the punishment and satisfy the Justice of God, so that we do make the
fault, and he does bear the blame. But now, as touching the mean and manner, how
the fruit of this sacrifice shall redound to us, whether absolutely without any
intervenient act of man, or conditionally in and upon man's recourse to Christ;
this is not determined in that text, but to be fought elsewhere. Consequently,
to that which he urges, That it is Gods own act to lay iniquity upon Christ,
and that it is done long since: We may Reply, This is little to the point, the
Pre-ordination of Christ in this office is Gods own act, man has no hand in
it; No, nor in the purchase of pardon, that is Christ's own act: Both these are
done long since, yet this hinders not, but that in the Application of it to
man, which cannot be till man have a being, it hinders not I say, but that man
may have his Act, as indeed he has: The which is evident by that Analogy which
holds betwixt the Type and the Truth; the sins of the people were not laid
upon the Sacrifice but by the hand of Man. God indeed appointed the Sacrifices
for Expiation, and in that sense may be said, to lay the iniquity of the sinner
upon the sacrifice; but beside this, the man that brought the sacrifice was to
lay his hand upon it: And yet more evident is this in that Doctrinal Ceremony
of the Scapegoat in Lev. 16. 22. Till the Priest by Confession of the
iniquities and transgressions of the people had laid them on him, the
Scapegoat did not bear them away. So that Man also has his act in laying
iniquity upon Christ, no less then God, not in the preparation of the price,
but in the way of Application.

Add this, that the words [Vs all] which he applies to sinners (contending
against the necessity of inherent Qualifications in any, to dispose them and
make them fit to receive the benefit of redemption purchased) these words, I
say, are not Universal, but only in relation to the Church of God: So that till
a man be of the Church, and in the Number of Believers, he may not include
himself in the list of them to whom it does belong. For why? If it belong to
sinners as sinners, then to all sinners: And so he will lay the Ground for an
Universal Redemption, which I believe he does not intend: If this Redemption
belong not to all as sinners, and yet the terms of the promise run in the
Universal; then some act of Man sanctified by the spirit of God must come in
between, by which he may be included before he conclude for himself.

Truth it is, That no sin may keep off the penitent soul from closing with
Christ. And if in saying, that this grace is appliable by forgiveness of sin to
persons besore the least measure of sanctification; if he intend no more but
this, that such is the virtue and value of Christ's Sacrifice, that no sin how
great soever can hinder the hope of Pardon in case he come in and apply himself
to Christ, I know no man that will not subscribe. No sin may may keep off the
Penitent; but till man be Penitent, no man may close with Christ nor conclude
to himself the Remission of sin: The reason hereof is, because men's names are
not set down in the Book of God: They must know, that the conclusion of Comfort
is by the way of a practical Syllogism; in which always the Assumption is the
Testimony of the Conscience, touching that work of Grace in the heart to which
the promise is made: ex. gr. He that believes in the name of the Son of God
shall not perish: If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us
our sins -- Here is the Promise made to the Penitent believer; now says the
Conscience, I do believe, I do confess my sins, this is the Testimony of the
sanctified Conscience, speaking the work of the spirit upon the heart of man:
Hence the conclusion of Comfort is, This promise is mine, My Portion is in it,
and hence both peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.

But now look upon the Antinomian ground of Comfort, and let even reason judge
whether it can produce any true consolation: God has laid the Iniquity of
Sinners upon Christ; God justified the ungodly: But I am a sinner, I am
ungodly, therefore the Benefit is mine. Is it not evident, that except all
sinners promiseuously receive this benefit, there is no certainty of Comfort in
the conclusion? If it may appear, as who doubts but that it may appear, that
there be many ungodly that never had nor shall have benefit by Christ; Is not
the conclusion uncertain? True says the Author aforesaid, Names of particular
persons are not written in the word: But what hinders that thou may not have
part in Christ: the Pardon is to all thieves, may not each particular take his
part? This general tender of free Grace is as sufficient for satisfaction of
man's Spirit as if his name were written. Well, But this Pardon is to all
Thieves, is it not, if they will come in? And surely it is intended, that they
come in as Penitents, not as perverse rebellious Persons, and till they come in
thus, can they claim the benefit of the Kings pardon? And therefore whereas he
adds, Has the Lord given thee an heart to come in, that thou fain would
have Christ if thou durst, it is enough; He should deny himself if he should
cast thee off. This is a precious truth if rightly understood; But in his
Intention it halteth: For besides this, that when God gives an heart to come
in to Christ, he gives an holy heart, an humble and penitent heart, an heart
no less ready to take Christ for a Lord then for a Savior: Nay indeed, more
desirous of this then of that: Not that he might merit favor by his service;
but out of the abundance of Love to Christ, he is much desirous that Christ
should now be glorified by him (as formerly he has been dishonored) before
himself be glorified by Christ. Besides this, I say, the conclusion of comfort
grounded upon the general tender of free grace, is not by the Assumption, I am
a sinner, I am a thief: But by this, I do come in: Hereupon it follows, that
he may not cast me off; And, this coming in, what is it, but to believe in the
name of Christ, Joh. 1. 12. And what is that, but to rest upon him for
salvation. So then, the general tender of free grace made to sinners is
conditional, as touching the benefit of Pardon, viz. If they come in and cast
themselves upon the mercy of God in Christ, there is hope of Pardon. And indeed
it may appear that this is that which the Doctor did intend, howsoever in the
prosecution of the point his words did seem to drive farther; for thus he
concludes in one of his Sermons: So then, notwithstanding any sinfulness which
thou find in thy self, thou may boldly come to Christ and commit thy self
unto him as an All-sufficient Savior.

Touching the second Author, who has more covertly and more cautelously
delivered himself, he sets it down as a Doctrine of Antichrist, to say, That
sin is not taken away out of the Conscience till the work of Baptism and of
Repentance. Particularly touching Baptism this he censureth as a Doctrine of
the Man of Sin, That Baptism does take away sin out of the Conscience, and out
of the sight of God: And well he may, if it be maintained in that sense which
he opposes, viz. As an Ordinance which has in it a virtue and efficacy of
taking away sins not derived from, and subservient to the blood of Christ: In
this sense, if any do maintain any efficacy in that Sacrament, let him be
Anathema. But if it be no derogation to the spirit, that the Ministry of the
word is said to have an effectual working power in the conversion of men, and
causing them by Repentance to return to God: In as much as the efficacy of the
Ministry is subservient to the spirit, as the Instrument by which the spirit
works, Why is it derogatory to the Blood of Christ, that the Sacrament has
an effectual power in this act of taking away sin out of the conscience; In as
much as it is intended hereby to ascribe no efficacy at all to it, save only as
an Ordinance of application, yea, and this also subservient to the spirit. The
blood of Christ is that that takes away sin out of the Conscience: But then
does it perform this spiritual cure when it is applied; And the Sacrament is a
mean of application: A mean, I say, by which the spirit applies the blood of
Christ unto the Conscience: In which respect, by a communication of Phrases, it
is said, To wash away Sin, Act. 22. 16. And God is said to save us by the
washing of Regeneration, Titus 3. 5. And Christ is said to cleanse his Church
by the washing of water, Ephesians 5. 26. Not as if any virtue were in the
Water, which Saint Peter denies, 1 Pet. 3. 21. But because the Blood of Christ
which has that virtue in it is applied in and by the Administration of that
Sacrament. And therefore for him to say, That if Baptism takes away sin out of
the Conscience, then has not Christ finished the taking away sin by his one
and alone offering; This, I say, is not to the purpose, in as much as beside
the paying of the price, there must also be an Application of it, otherwise the
work is not done; A wound in the flesh is not cured by the preparation of an
effectual Plaster, but by the Application of it to the wound. Nor can there be
any perfection to the creature, without the Application of this price, of this
Plaster. This he was not ignorant of, and thereupon seeks to make his
advantage; for thus he argues, Is there (says he) any perfection to the
Creature, without Application? Surely no, and yet Heb. 10. 14. By one offering
he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified; What he would hence
conclude, I see not. Will he from the word [Hath perfected] conclude the
Application already past, viz. From the very hour of Christ's Passion? How can
that be? Is there any here said to be perfected by that one sacrifice, but they
that are sanctified? Are any sanctified but by the Communion of Christ's spirit?
Does not this Communion presuppose an Union? Is not that Union with Christ,
sealed to us in our Baptism? Sanctified persons then are perfected by that one
sacrifice; Yet how perfected? All at once? Not so, But the groundwork of their
perfect consummation is laid in that one sacrifice; And so laid, that in due
time by the virtue and power thereof, without any other offering they shall be
perfected. The true meaning therefore of them that say (if any do say it in
those terms) that sin is not taken away out of the Conscience, till by the
Sacrament of Baptism it be taken away: Their meaning, I say, is no more but
this, That till the Elect of God be really and actually united to Christ, they
are not actually made partakers of that Remission which was purchased for them
by that sacrifice. In which respect they do call upon Converts and Believers,
as did Ananias upon Paul, Arise and be Baptized, and wash away thy sins. A text
plainly proving, that Baptism has some kind of work and efficacy in washing
away sin; He Objecteth, That these words were spoken to a Believer;
Consequently, If Paul was already a Believer, and yet his sins not washed away
until he were Baptized: Then it will follow, that sin is not always pardoned to
a Believer. But this Objection does nothing hinder the Conclusion set down:
Because, Though Paul as a Believer had right to the benefits of Christ, by
virtue of the Promise made to Believers; yet could he not have fruition of them
till he had taken possession of Christ by being incorporated into him; Faith is
the hand of man to receive, but the Sacrament is the hand of the spirit to
convey unto us Christ and all his benefits: Might not he have learned this out
of that text, He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, had he well
marked it? If there be nothing added by Baptism to complete the state of a
Christian, why is it enjoined? I demand, Whether a Believer, suppose him to
live and dye in the wilful neglect of that Sacrament, can be saved? Nay more,
suppose him to have been an Alien, a stranger, or as Paul, a Persecuter of the
Church of God; but now a Convert as Paul was, nay a professor and zealous
Preacher of Christ; and so to have washed away his sins in the sense that this
man gives of Ananias words (The sense of those words of Ananias which H. D.
gives is this, Break off thy sins -- It is a washing in conversation, sc. To
manifest to the world that thou art another man: And he notes, That one washed
in respect of Gods imputation, and washed in Conscience in respect of
manifestation and apprehension of the grace of God in Jesus Christ, may yet be
exhorted to wash in respect of Conversation: By which it seems that there was
no farther use of Baptism to Paul at this time, save only to manifest to the
world that he was a Convert, which I suppose is so senseless a position, that it
needs no Refutation:) I say then, suppose a man thus to have washed away his
sins, Can all this profit him to salvation, if he wilfully reject the Sacrament
of Baptism? Can he by his profession and Preaching obtain a part in Christ, and
a pardon of this wilfulness? Surely, except the Church of God in all ages has
hitherto wanted light and sight to see the true meaning of the words; that text
of our Savior, Ioh. 3. 5. reprehending Nicodemus for his backwardness in this
Duty, is very clear and evident for the proof of the Negative, viz. That such a
man so wilfully rejecting the Sacrament, cannot plead his Faith, nor have
entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven.

This man is not more out in the point of Baptism, then he is in the next
point, touching Repentance. This does he account a Doctrine of the Man of Sin,
to say, That Repentance does wash away sin; that Repentance is a mean to obtain
Remission; that there is no forgiveness with God before Repentancce. Touching
that first Expression, We do not say, that Repentance does wash away sin in any
other sense but this, That there is no forgiveness of sin to the impenitent. It
is necessary as a passive Qualification. It has no efficacy in procuring
pardon or perfecting forgiveness, more then this, that it fitteth the person to
receive it: And this is no Doctrine of the Man of Sin, it was the Doctrine of
Moses and the Prophets. True (says he) it was so in the Old Testament,
Contrition and Confession went before Remission; But in the New Testament,
Remission does go before Contrition. This is soon said, But how is it proved?
What text of Scripture, what Argument from any text of Scripture? The worldly
Tabernacle of Moses, was it not a figure and pattern of Heavenly things? May we
not see, as the mercy of God shadowed forth in those sacrifices of Expiation,
so the Duty of the sinner expressed in those Legal Purifications? To this he
Answers, That Contrition went before Remission in our High Priest: He was
bruised, broken, slain before any Remission; This no man doubts: But we
demand, Whether, as then, Contrition was required of the People, before by
their sacrifice they could have Remission: So now also, it be not required that
Contrition be found in us before we obtain Remission by the sacrisice of
Christ; At no hand will he endure to hear of this: Christ (says he) confesses
our sins, offers for our sins, makes peace through his Blood, and calls
upon us to believe this Peace and Atonement made. This we deny not, But still
insist upon this, Whether Contrition be not required of Believers in the New
Testament, as well as of them in the Old Testament, to make them capable of
Remission; If not, What is there in the New Testament to answer to that figure?
I find it interserted in a parenthesis, That Priest, sacrifices and people,
were all of them figures of Christ: What the meaning of it should be, I cannot
guess, except it be this, That Christ must be all, and do all: Upon him must
lie no less the work of Repentance for sin, then of satisfaction. Thus shall
the burden be increased to him, that so it may be cased to the sinner; had the
Scripture revealed it so to be, we had received it; now we may not. Well it is
that Christ has done for us, what we could not, viz. He has made
satisfaction; It is not much if he require of us what we may well do, viz. To
be truly contrite and penitent for our sins. But (says he) Faith which is the
knowledge of Remission must needs go before Contrition, else would it be sin:
For whatsoever is not of Faith is sin, Romans 14. 23. I might justly reply and
say, Like point, like proof. Neither is justifying Faith the knowledge of
Remission; Nor does that text of St. Paul speak of justifying Faith. But this I
say, That if Faith be the knowledge of Remission, viz. fully past, and already
in possession, it does rather take away Contrition then call for it: There is
no place for sorrow in Heaven; the spirits of just men made perfect, who are in
full possession of Remission, do not now any more weep and shed tears for the
sins that they have committed. He adds, We do not therefore believe
Remission, because we repent; But therefore repent, because we believe
Remission. I Answer, We do both; we believe Remission, because we do repent,
not as if there were any merit in our repentance to deserve it, but because
there is truth in God to perform his Promises: And we repent, because we
believe Remission. Here note, That to believe Remission may be considered
either in the Promise or in the Performance: The Promise of Remission is made
for the Penitent, and Repentance required as a mean to fit men for it. Is not
this evident by the Preaching of Christ and his Apostles, Mar. 1. 15. Act. 2.
38. and 3. 19. The performance of this promised Remission does presuppose
Penitency in the sinner; yea and does put him more upon it. So that, as of
Faith there is one act that does go before Remission, and another act that does
follow after: So also of Repentance, there is something of it does go before
Faith, and something also does follow after.

Indeed says this Author, Judas Repentance may go before Faith, i. e. before
the knowledge of Remission: But Godly Repentance does follow after. I might
reply, That is improperly said to go before this Faith, when as this Faith does
never follow after. Doubtless if Faith be the knowledge of Remission, it does
never follow upon Judas Repentance. But this I rather reply, That it was not a
Judas Repentance that went before Remission in the Old Testament; nor is it a
Judas Repentance which the Apostle does call for, to this end, that their sin
might be blotted out, Act. 3. 19. Nor can it with reason be denied, but that he
who says, Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out -- does
leave them to conclude, that unless they do repent their sins shall not be
blotted out: And again, that if they do repent, their sin shall be blotted out;
Consequently, there is a Repentance which is required as a mean to obtain
Remission, and that by the warrant of Scripture-Text. And therefore it is no
Doctrine of Antichrist, not footstep of the Man of Sin to declare Repentance as
a mean of Remission.

But now to return to the Question propounded, viz. Whence is it, that sin does
trouble and terrify the Conscience? I should rather give this answer; The
reason is, Because sin is not yet taken away out of the Conscience by the
Application of the blood of Christ. To say that there is no sin at all in the
Conscience, when we feel the sting and terror thereof, is it not in effect to
say. No mote in the eye, no thorn in the flesh, when we feel the pain and
pricking of it? How does it vex if it be not there? Doubtless while it vexes
it is not quite taken forth; nor is the rankling of it quite healed: The
Indisposition of the Body may add to the distemper of the mind, till it be
removed and cured by Physic: But when the body is in good order, and yet the
Conscience in spiritual distress; does it not appear that sin lies at the
Door, and must be removed out of the Conscience by the Application of the Blood
of Christ? Application of the Plaster is no less necessary then the
preparation of it. The Brazen-serpent set up cured none that would not look up
to it: Nor does Christ cure any that will not believe him. And how do we
believe in him, if we do not apply our selves to him for remedy?

This application of the blood of Christ is wrought by the Minstery of the Word
and Sacraments; hence it is called The Ministry of Reconciliation; In which
and by which God dispenses his favors and comforts to them of his Household:
And by those Ordinances does he bring home the blood of Christ to the Soul and
Conscience of the worthy receiver.

And as in the Old Testament the guilt of sin was not removed out of the
Conscience, till the sacrifice appointed for this or that sin was offered
(which is not improbably aleaged as a reason why the sin of David lay so heavy
upon him, even because he made no have to confess his sin and to bring his
sacrifice, without which no Remission) so in the New Testament, sin is not
removed out of the Conscience, till by the Ministry of Reconciliation the
blood of Christ be applied to the Conscience for the cure thereof: God has
appointed the Ministry for this end, and he will have his Ordinances honored,
and workings of his spirit in them acknowledged. It is not for this cause that
many who seek for Comfort with much importunity of prayer and supplication, yet
are held off for a long time; Even because they do not address themselves to
God in his Ordinances? And here is that necessity and usefulness of Baptism to
take away sin out of the Conscience, which so much displeased the Antinomian
Doctor, nor of Baptism only but of the Lords Supper also; yea of the whole
Ministry of the Gospel: Not as if the Word and Sacraments, or the Ministry
that dispenses them, had any power and efficacy in themselves: But as has
been said, because these are the Instruments of the spirit in applying the
blood of Christ, which alone is the remedy of our spiritual malady.

Note: This Ministerial Application is only to the worthy Receiver; And none
such does the Text of Scripture acknowledge, but him who being truly humbled
and grieved for his sin, for this and that sin in particular, does judge
himself: And then by Faith looking up to Christ on the Cross (as did Israel
look up to the brazen serpent) and resting upon the passion of Christ, as the
only satisfaction of Gods justice, desires to be purged in his Blood: And in
testimony of his Faith in the blood of Christ does draw near to the Ordinance
of Application, that therein he may be made partaker of the blood of Christ, to
purge his Conscience, and quiet his mind: And here is the necessity of
Repentance, without which no Remission (the second point of Antichristianism in
the Antinomians account) Not as if Repentance has any efficacy of a
meritorious, yea or of an efficient cause; but because Faith neither ought, nor
indeed can close with Christ, and draw virtue from him for the purging of the
Conscience, but when it self is lodged in a penitent soul: The Reason is,
Because, so must the promise of pardon by Christ be received by man as it is
tendered to him: And this is not to the sinner as a sinner, but to the sinner as
humble and penitent, as before was showed.

So then the Answer of the Question returns to this, Sin does yet terrify the
Conscience, notwithstanding that Christ on the Cross has satisfied for it, and
so obtained reconciliation for the sinner: Because otherwhiles men are not
careful to seek for the Application of Christ's blood to themselves, in the
Ordinances appointed. What wonder if Israel dye of the serpent bitings, if they
will not look up to the Brazen serpent: so here, if men neglect the means of
remedy, what wonder is it if they lie and languish.

Object. But even they that have often sought to God in these Ordinances; yea
and with much care have prepared themselves for the worthy receiving of the
sacrament, yet do not find that peace of Conscience which is expected.

Sol. It may be so, But do they withal rest upon it as an Ordinance of the
spirit to apply the blood of Christ, and so to seal unto the soul the Assurance
of peace and pardon? Do they I say rest in it; or do they expect to receive
their Assurance by some irradiation and immediate revelation of the spirit?
This is the error of some; Others are careless in their walking afterward: They
forget that Caveat of the Psalmist, The Lord will speak peace to his people:
But let them not return again to folly, Psa. 85. 8. What wonder if the
readmission of sin into the soul, renew the sting and terror of Conscience.
Satan re-entring brings seven other spirits worse then himself: Hence commonly
the terror afterward is greater then before: Impossible it is that the soul
should find sweetness insin, desire it, delight in it: And the Conscience not
fear and tremble at the thought of Hell, and the wrath of God.

Corol. To close up all: Is the Conscience terrified? See the way to find
remedy, and how thou may provide for comfort. Not in the Antinomian way, viz.
by a violent persuasion of this, That thy sin was long since laid upon Christ
in the day of his Passion; But by seeking for the Application of his blood in
the Word and Sacraments. Prepare thee for the worthy receiving of them, by
renewing thy Repentance: By Faith look upon Christ in the Sacrament, hear him
speaking in the word, as the assured remedy of all spiritual diseases and
distresses: carefully watch against future Tentations; take heed of relapsing
into sin: Remember that as Christ has joined these two Petitions, Forgive us
our Trespasses, and Lead us not into Tentation; so has he bound up the comfort
of the former, in the cautelous observation of the latter: Whosoever does not watch
against Tentation, loses all comfort of Remission.

THE ARGUMENTS OF The Compassionate Samaritan,
Touching the Power of the Magistrate in the compulsion of Conscience, Examined.
THe intent and scope of the Book is to show, That the Magistrate ought not to
punish any for the profession of his Conscience (by Conscience he means the
man's present judgment and opinion) though it be contrary to what is determined
by Authority. His Arguments be these: 1. Because punishment is not due to what
is necessitated. 2. Because no man can presume of infallibility. 3. Because the
Magistrate ought not to compel any man to sin.

The first Argument.
Where there is a necessity, there ought to be no punishment, Because
punishment is the just recompense of voluntary Actions, not of necessitated.
But every man is necessitated to be of that opinion which he holds: Nor can
he choose but be of that judgment whatsoever it is; Because his reason does
necessarily enforce him to it, while it concludes the Position to be true or
false.

Ans. Grant indeed, Where there is a necessity there ought to be no punishment,
if there be no concurrence of the will: Or if that necessitation proceed not
from a faulty cause: ex. gr. The spider is by instinct of nature necessitated
to make poison, as the Be to make honey: The sinew that shrank in Jacobs
thigh, or the joint that is dislocated, necessitateth a man to halt, he cannot
choose; Yet here is no punishment due, because here is no concurrence of the
will, nor is this necessitation from a faulty cause. But now when drunkenness
does necessitate some to lust, and others to wrath; Or rather, when corruption
does necessitate wicked men and Angels to sin (such is their present condition,
they can do nothing but sin) Yet is not this necessitation an excuse to save
from punishment, because this is not from natural instinct, but from voluntary
consent, it is from a faulty cause: so that it is not always true, that where
there is a necessity, there ought to be no punishment. Consequently, we must
inquire, Whence this necessity, viz. That he cannot choose but be of that
opinion, whence, I say, it comes; Whether from a faulty or a faultless cause:
He says, His reason concludes it to be so and so; And hereby he is
necessitated to be of this opinion; He cannot believe otherwise then his reason
guides him: Nor indeed, is it fit he should, during the time that reason so
concludes: But then, enquire farther, whence is it that his reason does so
conclude? Is it from the clearness of the Argument? Or from the cloudiness of
his understanding? In some things there is such clearness in the Argument, and
such evidence in the light thereof, that the judgment cannot but rest in it:
ex. gr. The Articles of the Christian Faith, and the Duties of the Moral Law;
The truth of the one, the equity of the other is so clear, that reason cannot
but see the evidence, and conclude accordingly. But in respect of some other
things, though no less true, and good in themselves, there may be such
cloudiness and darkness in the understanding, that it cannot apprehend the
evidence and force of that Argument and Reason which is aleaged, and so for the
present it is hindered in yielding assent to them; But then, the next enquiry
is, what may be the ground or spring of this darkness and obscurity? Whether
weakness and ignorance, or wilfulness and prejudice. If ignorance, good reason
that as yet the party be excused from punishment, till farther information? Not
so, if it proceed from passion and prejudice. And would you know, whether it
proceed from the one or from the other; Consider these Rules:

1. If it proceed from weakness, and not from wilfulness, you shall find in
the man a readiness, yea a diligence to enquire and search for farther
information, glad he is to be instructed: Not so the other, he is negligent and
careless to enquire, he likes his present opinion, and so pleads Conscience,
when indeed it is affection, and affectation that does wholly guide him: He
would not be convinced of an Error, least he should lose what he hops to
receive in holding this way.

2. If from ignorance and weakness, it is attended with meekness and humility:
Not so the other, he is swelling, supercilious, self-seeking and
self-conceited, ready to contemn others; at no hand ready to yield, no not even
to know truths, if he perceive that they cross the conceit which he has taken
up. Whereas the weak Christian is ready to acknowledge the gifts and graces of
others that are contrary minded; nor will he deny any truth, though he cannot
as yet acknowledge this in question to be a truth, and ^o subscribe unto it.
Nor will he (as does the other too frequently) censure those that are contrary
minded.

3. Weakness and Ignorance, causes in him sadness and sorrow of Heart, in the
consideration of his own dullness: Grieved he is that he cannot see, what other
holy Saints and servants of God do see: Hence also, hearty prayer that God
would reveal this truth also to him, that so he may comply with that duty of
Obedience which he owes to Authority. Not so the other, He neither grieveth
nor prays, but pleases himself, and pleads against Authority, yea, and
censureth their proceedings, as if all the world were bound to learn of him,
and subscribe to what he has concluded. And is it fit that such a man should
by the pretense and plea of Conscience, thus palliate his affected ways, and
yet escape the just lash of Authority?

The second Argument.
NO sort of men can presume of an unerring spirit; for evident it is that all
of them, Fathers, Councels, Parliaments have been grossly mistaken; nor are the
presnet times exempt from error: Why then should one sort compel the other, in
as much as hereby hazard is run, that he who is in the error may be the
constrainer of him who is in the truth.

Ans. Grant the truth of what is laid for the ground; viz. That none are free
from error, according to that of Romans 3. Nor can any one presume of an unerring
spirit; And yet I deny the inference, viz. That therefore one sort may not
compel the other: For why? Though no man may presume of such a spirit, yet
they that are of God may comfortably expect the conduct of the spirit, Psalm.
25. 14. Joh. 16. 13. Again, though none may expect to be guided by inspiration,
yet by the manuduction of that Rule which the Spirit of God has fitted and
perfected for the Church of God; by this I say may the man of God expect to be
thoroughly furnished, 2 Timothy 3. ult. Now then might the Prophets and Apostles
who were guided by an infallible spirit, might they be allowed to compel them
that were contrary minded (which is evident both by the president of Saint
Paul, 1 Timothy 1. ult. and also by the man's Argument: For if they that want it
may not, because they want it; then they that have this infallible spirit, may
compel because they have it) might they be allowed; And may not the Pastors of
the Church, who have a Rule which is no less infallible? Is not the Text of
Scripture as infallible a Rule of Direction to the Church of God in present, as
the Inspiration and Revelation was to the Prophets and Apostles? If not, why is
that exchanged for this? Is the spirit less careful of the Church now, then in
times past? Less careful I mean to lead it into all truth. I may grant indeed,
that the Inspiration and Revelation did carry with it a more active impression
of light upon the understanding of the Prophets and Apostles, to evidence the
truth of what they received: But the Question is not so much, whether that way
had not greater evidence, but whether this way has not as great assurance.
Things concluded by reason, and received by Faith, have in them no less
assurance, then things perceived by sense, though not so great evidence. So
then, In those things whereof the Pastors of the Church are infallibly assured
by the text of Scripture that they are not deceived, they may (even by virtue
of the Authors Argument) use compulsion to restrain the violence of them that
oppose the truth of God.

Object. But of all ways, compulsion is the most unlikely to beget unity of
mind, and uniformity of practice. Sol. Compulsion is not used to this end, but
only ex consequenti, as the suppression of different judgments and practices
may conduce to unity and uniformity: It is a vain thing to think that by fines
and imprisonments the Magistrate does seek to persuade men to piety and
honesty: No, his primary and proper end is to suppress the contrary? As the
weeding of the Garden does not make the seeds to grow, yet in removing
impediments, and making room, it does accidently prosper their growth: So is it
here.

Object. But Club-law causes prejudice against what is so propugned. Sol. It
may be so in some, and for a time; Yet God who is wiser then man, by his own
practice has given us to see, that when the way is hedged in with thorns, and
when the Back does smart under the Rod, the ear is opened to discipline and
instruction. So that though the Rod do not directly convince or persuade; yet
it has its efficacy in the way and work of preparation.

The third Argument.
TO compel me to do contrary to my Conscience, is to compel me to sin; Because
whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin. Of Faith, i. e. Whereof I am not certainly
persuaded that it is lawful. But the Magistrate ought not to tompel any one to
sin; therefore, Not to do contrary to his Conscience, nor to worship God in a
way, of the justness whereof he is not persuaded, nay is persuaded that it is
unlawful.

Ans. True indeed, The Magistrate ought not to compel any one to sin,
understanding the Proposition of Malum in se, of that which is simply evil in
it self. Not so, if we speak of Malum ex accidenti, of that which is
accidentally evil: Evil to me, because of a misguided Conscience, ex. gr.
Nebuchadnezzar did ill, by threatenings to compel the People to worship the
Golden Image: So that second Beast, mentioned Rev. 13. did ill, in causing them
to be killed, who would not worship the Image of the first Beast, Verse 15. Not
so the Magistrate in compelling a Papist or a Separatist to come to Church;
Because, though this may be evil to him, in respect of his unperswadedness, yet
is it not evil in it self: Again, It is not fit that the Magistrate do forbid
what is good in it self, or lay a restraint upon what God has commanded: It
was Darius fault to restrain prayer, Dan. 6. 7. And the Scribes and Rulers
sinned in forbidding the Apostles to preach in the Name of Jesus, Act. 4. 19.
But lawful enough it is for the Magistrate to forbid the doing of something
which is only good by consequence: So likewise, to lay restraint upon what is
only lawful, because not prohibited, ex. gr. if a man will say, This is a
truth, and therefore I will speak it and publish it; Or if he say, This is just
and fit to be done, and therefore I will do it; The Magistrate may put in a bar
of restraint, and punish him that shall transgress: For neither is every truth
to be published at all times and in all places; nor is every man allowed to do
every thing that is lawful and good: And as for things that are not prohibited
by God, but left at large, who knows not but that the use of them is to be
regulated and ordered by the advice and direction of Authority: The
Commandments whereof, though they bind not the Conscience of and by
themselves; yet whosoever does make no Conscience of them sins against God,
whose precept it is, to be subject to the power, not only for wrath, but even
for Conscience and for the Lords sake, Romans 13. 5. 1 Pet. 2. 13.

Now as touching the power of the Magistrate in matters of Religion, we must
look into the Old Testament, and thence fetch direction, since no particular
precepts, as touching his duty are given in the New. In the fourth Commandment,
he is enjoined to look to the stranger within his Gates, no less then to them
of his family: The stranger might not be permitted to pollute the Sabbath, nor
to profane any of Gods Ordinances. Was it not upon this warrant, that Nehemiah
cast forth the Household Stuff of Tobiah out of the Chambers, and threatened
those of Tyrus who made Markets upon the Sabbath?

Asa compelled the People to seek the Lord God; And Josiah caused them to enter
into the Oath and Covenant: From which Texts it is evident, that the power of
the Magistrate in matters of Religion is both Coactive, and Coercive: Coactive
in respect of them within, Coercive in respect of them without the Church:
Strangers are not indeed compelled to sanctify the Sabbath, but restrained
from profaning it. Those that are in Covenant with God, are not only
restrained but also compelled to join with the Assembly in the worship of God:
If nor, they are punnished: Nor is the punishment of these an act of
persecution, but a prudent preservation of the power and purity of Religion and
Gods worship: Now except we should think that God has less regard to the
preservation of the Purity of his worship and service now in the time of the
New Testament then he had in the Old, we cannot with reason deny, but what was
lawfully done by the Kings of Israel, is not unlawful for the Civil Magistrate
in the time of the New Testament. Wherefore the Magistrate has a power from
God to see to the observation of the Moral Law, and a sword to punish offenders
against it: Not only against the second Table, but also against the first: He
is Custos and vindex utriusque tabulae.

Object. Not so, This was allowed in the Old Testament: yet is it not therefore
to be practiced in the New: There, i. e. in the Old Testament there was a
precept so to do: Here, in the New Testament there is rather a prohibition, not
to do so: Let the Tares grow till the Harvest, Mat. 13.

Sol. Truth it is that this Text of our Savior has much prevailed with many
of the Ancient and Modern Divines to draw them to the use of much (perad
venture overmuch) clemency toward Heretics: but if we do remember that God
who is immutable in his essence, is also unchangable in his will, nor does he
so express his mind in any one text of Scripture, that it should draw with it
the contradiction of another, if rightly understood: And if we hold that rule
of Interpretation for good, which Divines deliver, viz. That where there is a
seeming repugnancy in the Texts, there it is fit that plain precepts should
guide our practice rather then dark and obscure parables: We shall easily
conclude, that the meaning of our Savior is not to forbid the use either of
the spiritual or civil sword; Both which are the Ordinances of God, instituted
of God for the Coertion and Restraint of them that do evil: And yet if this
word must stand, Let them alone till the Harvest, there will be no use of
either the Civil sword for the punishment of Malefactors, nor of the Spiritual
Censures for the ejection and excission of scandalous offenders. For why? These
Tares in the Parable are expounded to be the children of the wicked, i. e. of
that wicked one the Devil: And why this Text should be so expounded as to favor
Heretics rather then Hypocrites, I mean such whose practice is not answerable,
nay contrary to their Profession, I desire to learn from these men, who it
seems presume to know more of Gods mind then he has revealed in the word.

The precept of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 5. 13. is plain, and his practice according,
1 Timothy 1. 20. Nor could Saint Jerome otherwise reconcile these two, but by this
Interpretation of that parable, That inasmuch as there is not much difference
and dissimilitude betwixt the wheat and the tares while both are in the herb,
the intention of our Savior is to premonish us not to be overhasty in
pronouncing sentence, where there is any ambiguity and difficulty, but rather
reserve it, and refer all to the judgment of God: And he gives this reason of
so doing; Because it may come to pass, that he who to day is depraved in his
judgment, may repent and amend to morrow, yea and return to the truth, in
which we may rather commend his gentleness, then subscribe to his judgment, in
the sense of the parable; the scope whereof doubtless is not to teach lenity
and mildeness in proceeding against Heretics (the word is not, Let them alone
yet a little, or be not so hasty. But, until the harvest, and that is at the
end of world; Till then let them grow says the parable: and yet Saint Paul
says, An Heretic after the first and second admonition reject) but the
intention of the parable doubtless is to show, that there is no expectation of
universal purity in the Church of God during this life: There will be tares
always till in the end of the world there be made a total separation. This is
the intent, and farther then so it is not doctrinal.

I confess, they speak reason, who granting the tares to be ^eant of Heretics,
and this eradication to be done by the stroke of death, do yet deny, that the
parable does prohibit this eradication any farther, then when there is also
danger of plucking up the wheat, grounding this upon those words, Least
peradventure ye pluck the Wheat; Intimating, that as the Magistrate may justly
punish Malefactors by death, where there is no danger of Sedition, so may the
Pastor, where there is no fear nor danger of a Schism, proceed against
Heretical persons: This I confess is rational, yet I see no reason to depart
from the former.

But this farther observe, that he who forbad the plucking them up, did not
forbid to hinder the sowing of them. Good therefore is the council of Saint
Jerome, Quam^brem non dormiat qui Eelesia prapositus est, ne per illius
negligentiam in i^itus ^^me supersenti^^t zizania i. e. Hereticorum dogmata.
Let not the Church-Governor sleep, least the envious man take that opportunity
to sow tares: And that of Chemnitius is not to be contemned, Quando zizania
volunt triticum crescendo superare, etc, When there is danger and fear least
the Tares do overgrow and so come to choke the Wheat, since God has set up two
distinct Governments, viz. Ecclesiastical and Political, and has forbidden the
Church-Governor to meddle with the sword, no doubt but in this case the Pastor
may with a good Conscience desire the help of the Civil Magistrate, and desire
him to take care least the field of Wheat sustain any harm by the Tares.

Memorable is that Recantation of Saint Austin; Sometimes he had been of that
Opinion, N^minem ad Christi unitatem esse ^^gendum, verbo esse agendum,
disputatione pugnandum, ratione vincendum; Ne fictos Catholicos: haberemus,
quos apertos haereticos n^veramus: But afterward he changed his Opinion,
confessing that he found it by experience what benefit came to many by the
wholesome severity of the imperial Edicts: Even whole Cities recovered from the
poisonons Doctrine of Donatism, while by the Laws they were compelled to return
to the Society and fellowship of the Church: So then, Compulsion is not
unlawful in this case; not only Ecclesiastical by the Censures of the Church,
but also Civil, by the Sword of the Magistrate: Only the doubt is, whether the
sword of the Magistrate may punish Heresy with death: But if the Magistrate
try to reclaim them from their Errors, by those ways which are acknowledged
lawful to be used, viz. Restraining the Ringleaders; by prohibiting the Pulpit
and the Press, by dispersing their Conventicles, by imprisonment of the unruly
and obstinate, So also, by compelling the residue to attend upon the Society of
the Faithful, and public Ministry of the Word [These are acknowledged lawful,
even by those who deny it lawful to put any to death, Non prohibet Christus
conciliabula haereticorum dissipare, ora obstruere, libertatem loquendi
concidere, verum interficere and trucidare vetat: So Chrysostom, as I find him
cited by Chemitius.] Now if these be carefully followed, and made use of,
either there will be no need to proceed any farther in the way of punishing
Heretics; or if there be, it will be so plain and palpable, that none will
make any scruple, except he would have the Magistrate stand for a Cipher, and
suffer both Church and Common Wealth to sink under the unruly disorders of
unquiet spirits.

So then, It is evident, that he who forbade to pluck up the Tares, did not
forbid to hinder the sowing of them: And indeed if we mark it, the Question in
this point of compulsion and liberty of Conscience, is not touching what is to
be done with them that are of another mind, But what is to be done with them
that publish their erroneous Opinions, and seek to druw disciples after them:
Nor touching them that receive not for truth, whatsoever is decreed by the
verdict of Authority, but touching them that oppose and contradict it as
erroneous. It were, I confess, overmuch to bind me to believe whatsoever the
Synod concludes: But it is not unfitting for Authority to restrain my hand and
tongue from open opposition and apparent contradiction.

I close up my thoughts of this Point, with these few Rules, which I conceive
fit to be thought upon, for the prevention of Schism, and the preservation of
peace and unity.

1. In things decreed by Authority, and enjoined by Superiors, the Question
that Subjects are to debate, is not, An hoc sit optimum, but, An hoc sit illi
citum: Not, whether it might no be better; But, whether this be so bad, as not
to be endured Reason; Because if it be not unlawful in it self, it is for the
present to be received, and a fitter apportunity to be waited for, when in
humility we may tender to Authority a farther light of information.

2. The plea of Conscience is not an excuse for our not complying with the
Command of Authority, save only in the case of that weakness before mentioned;
viz. When having used all good means of farther information, yet the
understanding is not able to overmaster the scruple of Conscience.

3. Not they who differ in Opinion, from what is decreed by Authority, but they
that publish their Opinions are justly punished. For why? Though the thoughts
of the heart fall not under the command of the Magistate, yet the publication
of them does; Because, hereby the Peace of the Church, and the Purity of
Religion may come into danger; And the care of these is committed to him, and
only in this care of his does he serve God as a Magistrate, and go beyond the
ordinary service of the Christian, According to that observation of St. Austin,
Epl. 50. ad Bonifacium, Aliter servit Rex quia Homo* aliter etiam quia Rex.
Quia Homo est, Deo servit vivendo fideliter; Quia Rex est, servit Leges justa
praecipientes, and contraria prohibentes conveniente rigore sanciendo. In hoc
serviunt Domino Reges in quantum sunt Reges, cum ea faciunt ad serviendum illi,
quae non possunt facere nisi Reges.

Imprimatur

Novem. 28. 1646. JOHN DOWNHAM.

FINIS.

