JOHN PLIMPTON Ten Charges Against the People, called QUAKERS, BRIEFLY ANSWERED.
HAving seen John Plimpton's Ten Charges against the People, called Quakers,
and understanding he has assumed to himself an Authority of appointing a
Meeting, without the Approbation or Consent of the said People, they decline to
meet him for these Reasons: viz. It being the day of our County Quarterly
Meeting, which was appointed long before his, both as to Time and Place, we
cannot attend him, and was it not so? I do not see we are obliged to it;
because he has not performed the Conditions of William Penn's Offer, (viz.)
get the Heads of the Baptists to Imbarque in him (which he formerly, and also
lately, gave Expectation of) for John Amory, of Wrinton, in Sommersetshire; one
of their Apostles, or Messengers, came with him to John Rutty's, in Melkesham,
the 17th. of the last Mo. and did then, and there, in the Presence of J. P.
himself, and diverse Witnesses, refuse to Sign his Charges against us, and to
imbarque in him, either for the freewill Baptists, in general, or himself in
particular; and also said he knew no body that would, and blamed him for an
Indiscreet Conduct therein; advising him to be quiet, and since that William
Earl did also refuse to sign them, when put to him by Peter Knight, Simon
Shewring, and John Rutty; and therefore, Now, because I believe he will pervert
our Writings, behind our Backs, in picking a Sentence here, and another there,
without due Regard to the Context (a very unfair Method) out of Books, whose
Doctrines I question not, are Coherent to what I have here asserted; the Scope
of them, being duly observed (which would be tedious for a Defendant in a
Discourse, viva voce; but if he thinks mete to commit his Cavils to Print, he
may then expect to see an Answer to them) Wherefore, for the Truth's sake, and
the sake of the Simple hearted who are liable to be abused, and imposed upon by
his Fallacies, I thought mete to Print his Charges, with a Sincere and Candid
Account of our Faith, relating thereunto, and to disperse the same at his
Meeting; that all may see how extremely he has abused us.

As to his Charges against me, I intend to answer; when he has purged himself
of several Charges, as to Matter of Fact, which I for merly drew up against
him, and some of his Brethren, in a Letter to them, dated the 5th. of the 10th.
Month last past, etc. but they then refused to give me a Meeting upon it, and
moved for an Agreement, which Agreement, the said J. P. has broke, as did
clearly appear by his own Words, at my House, the 24th. of the 12th. Month last
past, in the Hearing of John Yeo, William Holloway, and John Ruddle, one of his
Brethren; and John Ruddle will speak the Truth, he must confess that it did
evidently appear so, and then pray who is the Truce-breaker, J. Plimpton or T.
Beaven, and this Method I think but regular, he being first charged; but if he
now refuses, let him for ever be silent.

John Plimpton 's Charges.
A Charge drawn up against the Quakers, both as to Doctrine and Fact; the Fact
is Forgery, in part, declared in a Charge, formerly drawn up against them, the
other are now omitted; the Doctrines are these, etc. AS to what he says of
Forgery, William Penn has answered him, in a Leter, the Copy of which I sent
him, and I do desire all Moderate Persons, that would willingly have farther
Satisfaction therein, to read W. P.'s Book, entitled, A Counterfeit Christian
detected, and the Success of two Disputes at Barbican. I. That Justification by
the Righteousness, which Christ fulfilled for us in his own Person wholly
without us, they boldly affirm to be a Doctrine of Devils, and that the
Shedding of Christ's I. As to his First Charge, we turn it back upon him as
false; for, we believe Justification, only and purely by the Righteousness of
Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who tasted Death for ever* Man, ^^ood was not the
Meritorious Ca^se of our Justification, etc. Heb. 2.9. whose Doings and
Sufferings only, is the Meritorious cause of our Justification, Isa. 53.10, 11,
12. Romans 5.18. Ti. 3.5. II. That the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction is
Irreligious Irrational, Ridiculous, and Dangerous. II. As to his Second Charge,
we believe that Jesus Christ by his Death and Sufferings, has made Atonement
to the Father for all our Sins, upon Terms of Faith, and Repentance by his
Grace. III. That Christ Jesus is not a distinct Person without us, and that he
does not consist of a Humane and Earthly Body of Flesh and Bone. III. As to his
Third Charge, we believe in that Jesus Christ; who was born of the Virgin-Mary,
and after his Resurrection, Ascended into Heaven, in Soul and Body, Acts 1.9,
10. There to appear in the Presence of God for us, Heb. 9.24. IV. That the Soul
is part of God's Being, without Beginning and Infinite, etc. IV. His Fourth
Charge, is a gross Falsehood, for we believe that the Soul of Man, is not a part
of the being of God, but a created Being, Genesis 1.26. Chapter 2.7. Isa. 57.16. V.
That Christ redeems himself, and that what he did in his own Person was truly
the Meritorious and Deserving Cause of his own Justification, and not ours. V.
As to his Fifth Charge, it is not true, for we believe that Christ came to
Redeem us. Isa. 59.20. and that what he did in his own Person, was truly
Meritorious to our Justification, Isa. 53.10, 11. Romans 5.18. VI. They prefer
their own Words and Writings above and before the Scripture; yea, in Derision
of them, they say they have them under their Feet. VI. As to his Sixth Charge,
it is an abominable Slander, for we believe the Holy Scriptures to be the most
excellent Writings in the World, and are Heartily Thankful to God for the
Benefit of them, knowing that whatsoever Things were Written aforetime, were
Written for our Learning, that we through Patience and Comfort of the
Scriptures, might have Hope. Romans 15.4. and that they are given by Inspiration
of God, and are profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof for Correction, for
instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfect thoroughly
furnished unto all good Works, 2 Ti. 3.16.17. VII. They hold Justification by
their own good Works; yea, that they are Meritorious and Deserving. VII. As to
his Seventh Charge we believe Justification, only by the Works of Christ, Isa.
53.10.11. Romans 5.18. etc. and deny that our own Works are the Meritorious cause
of of any good thing, Isa. 64.6. Ti. 3.5. VIII. They hold that is no Command to
them that is a Command to another. VIII. As to his Eighth Charge, we believe
all the Commands of God to Holiness and Purity; to do Justly, to love Mercy,
and to walk humbly with him. Mic. 6.8. that were given to the Lords People of
Old, and are incumbent upon them at this Day, are commands to us. IX. That the
Scriptures is no Rule of Faith and Practice unto Christians; yea, That they are
False and Falsified, both Transcripts and Translations; Yea, That none of them
are right, and that it is Dangerous for ignorant People to read them, and that
they make use of them to no other end, then the Devils does. O Profane and
Ungodly Wretches. IX. As to his Ninth Charge, we believe the Holy Scripture was
given by Inspiration of God, and written for our Learning, etc. As in the Sixth
Article, and Bless God for his Providence, in preserving them so free from
Corruption, down to this Age of the World in which we Live. And I do assert
them, the best outward Rule of Faith and Practice unto Christians, and that
it is the Duty of all People that have this excellent Benefit, to read and use
them (not as the Devil and Wicked Men do, but) to the Advantage of their own
Souls, as the Lord knows, we desire to do. X. That they deny the true Christ
of God, are therefore no Christians. X. As to his Tenth Charge, we believe in
the true Christ of God, who was in the Beginning with God, and was God, by whom
all things was made, John 1.1, 2, 3. who in the fullness of time, took not on
Him the Nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham, and was made Man, John 1.14.
Gallat. 4.4. Heb. 2.16. and Suffered under Pontius Pilate, Matthew. 27.26. And
Rose again the Third Day, Matthew. 28.6. And Ascended into Heaven, as aforesaid,
Acts, 1.9, 10. And is the one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ
Jesus, 1 Tym. 2.5. These things I do boldly affirm, are the Quakers Opinions;
and I do charge them upon them; as Heretical and Damnable; and therefore,
forasmuch as the Baptists do own me in my Proceedings against them, I do expect
that W. Penn be as good as his Word, to give me a Meeting, if not, I I shall
expose him according to his just Demerits; and we shall look upon the Quakers,
as Persons not only Guilty of, but persisting on in the Notorious Wickedness as
can be expressed. These things I do firmly believe, and from Eight or Nine
Years Conversation with the People called Quakers, and their Books, do know
that they also Believe, and therefore I assert them against the Calumnies and
Perversions of our Envious Adversaries, who to abuse us, pretend to know our
Faith, better then we our Selves.

POSTSCRIPT,
THE Foregoing Charges of JOHN PLIMPTON, against the People called QVAKERS, are
the same that many of our inveterate Adversaries among the Baptists and others
have falsely objected against us formerly, and have been fully Answered long
since, as appears by many of our Books extant, in Answer to T. Hicks, J. Faldo,
etc.

THE END.
Bristol: Printed by Will. Bonny, for the Author, 1696.


