THE ENGAGEMENT VINDICATED; From all the Objections, Cavils, Scruples, that
wilful Opposers, or doubtful, unresolved Judgments may cast upon it.
WHEREIN, All such OBJECTIONS are answered; The GOVERNMENT proved; The
ENGAGEMENT it self both lawful, and necessary, from clearest Principles of
Conscience and Reason. To the satisfaction of all such as are doubting.

By T. B.

LONDON, Printed by T. Mab and A. Coals for T. B. and are sold at the sign of
the Angel in Corn-hil. 1650.

The Preface to the Reader.
THe great obligation and sovereign commands of a Conscience in all its
dictates, though proceeding from an erroneous principle, yea though they are
the offspring of a Conscience unresolved or missed; have allured me into the
writing something for the satisfaction of men in this uncertainty, (which like
a fluctus decumanus invades them, and totters all their motions.) So that they
who are willing to take Reason along with them as a guide, and proportion their
actions to it as a rule, may hence be satisfied in their scrupulosities, and
with a full mind set their hands to this Subscription; which is so necessary a
policy, that it is impossible for the Kingdom or State to continue it self in
this New-Model, without it, or something of a like stamp or strain.

'Its true indeed, a man is to obey conscience; and rebellion against its
positions and canons, though erroneous, is unlawful; yet no man must blind
himself, as it were, and stop out that light that might better inform him, and
change the verdict of conscience. I hope some light will slow into men's minds
from the ensuing Treatise; the very design of which, is neither basely and
parasitically to flatter the great Movers and Wheels of this action in their
proceedings, nor servilely to comply with a by-opinion; but out of an ingenuous
aim at the satisfaction of men yet unresolved, and the further confirmation of
those who have entertained this Subscription into their engagements. And here I
cannot but take up a complaint and quarrel against those, who endeavor to lay
snares in men's way, and further to entangle them in their actions, by crying up
I know not what unnecessary cavils, and easting dirt upon the actions of the
Propounders, making an advantage against the Thing it self, from the Authors
of it, and taking rist to declaim against the Engagement, because (forsooth)
the Setters on foot and Motioners of it are obnoxious to such and such
exceptions: Whereas if they dealt impartially, the Thing it self is to be
considered; else, we must refuse many Commodities, because they slow from ill
Authors. Others will needs make friends fall out with one another, and which is
as bad, force Subordinates to mutiny, against that commonly received rule,
Subordinata non pugnant.

But not to pervert this into a Satirical invective, I seriously advise all to
part with their several interests and biasses of affection, and nakedly to
embrace the right and equity of things, and accept of this Discourse as a
servant to praeferre facem, and carry the candle before them. Which is the
attempt of

A well-wisher to peace and unity both in Church and State, T. B.

The Engagement Vindicated, etc.
THe great Bodies Politic of States and Kingdoms, undergo the most visible and
eminent, though not the most frequent vicissitudes. Every change of these is
gazed upon as a signal act of Providence, firing a Beacon as it were, to rouse
the World into wonder and observation: For every State and Republique or
Kingdom interweaving their several interests, and linking one with another, the
transmutation of one is the concernment of all. That there are such variations,
who that is least acquainted with the world does not now perceive; our Age
having been spectatour of a very memorable one: And Histories will acquaint us
with many other, not only with the rising or falling of the States themselves,
but with a mutation of the Government and administration of them. For as it
has been observed, there is a threefold change in every State; a Rise, or
increase; an Acme, or top; a Fall, or total decay: We may note the same in
Governments, which as well as other things have their Climactericks, and
Criticismes of time. This Kingdom has been often bandied by such changes; and
every such change begets new principles, and Axioms of State Policy; so that
those, which exactly hit the former, are quite out-dated and worth nothing in
the successive: For as I said before, though such vicissitudes are not
frequent, the great Wheel of Providence not often overturning these; but the
Preparatives to them working slowly and insensibly, retard the approaches of
them; and the grand disturbance and discomposure which necessarily accompanies,
not suiting with that order, God in whose hand the Balances are, delights in;
yet they are so far different, when they come, from that which was before them,
that they new-mould the subjects of then: and though many of the necessary Laws
that upheld the former as a government, and not as such a government; yet many
must needs be expunged and wiped out of the Canon, as diametrically opposite.

For the better confirming the new dispensation of a metamorphos'd Kingdom,
Oaths and Engagements have been always held effectual, and practiced as
conducing; to which how far a man may lawfully yield, is the question now on
the rack, and to which I immediately address my self.

I shall square out my discourse by these disquisitions,

1. Concerning Oaths and other engagements. 2. Concerning Government. 3.
Concerning this Subscription. 4. Concerning this Government.
1. Oaths are the strictest Ties and Obligations, that a man can be under; for
they directly respect and attest God the revenger of perjury, and conscience is
specially bound by it.

An Oath then is the confirmation of any thing attested, or promised, by the
invocation of God; and so a special Engagement to the performance of a promise,
and the upright attestation of any thing affirmed, concerning which, we hold
these three conclusions.

1. Oaths are lawful under the Gospel, for they depended not upon any
Ceremonial Right or Judicial Constitution, but are purely of a Moral
complexion; and so not discharged Christendom, under any notion of a Ceremony
out-dated, or a Judicial Rite now out-customed; nor can any reason be given of
the ancient Institution, and lawfulness of them, which does not exactly
compromise with the use of it under the Gospel. They much mistake, who conclude
otherwise out of Christ's, Swear not at all; which must either be understood of
the neighbour-formes of swearing, or the vain and familiar custom of idle
Oaths, for which it is to be feared the Land now mourns: True it is, to swear
by any thing beneath God, is not only merely unlawful, but comprehends in it a
degree of idolatry; for none can be a sufficient witness of an Oath, but the
Searcher of hearts; but to sequester God, as it were, of this part of his
Worship, seems sacrilegious, and there we may to such a one, Thou that
abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege?

2. Oaths are to be taken conformable to the fence and meaning of the giver,
and not under those by and underhand meanings, which we reserve to our selves;
for if so, an Oath is a mere piece of mockery, and to no purpose; for the
adaequate end of it being some obligation proposed, if we yet take it, and find
reasons from the Obligation of it, the end and aim of it is clearly frustrate
and disappointed: Yea, the Obligation of an Oath specially respecting the
conscience, and binding the inward man as well as the outward, it is necessary
to the taking of an Oath, that the heart should as fully and freely comply with
the Obligation and matter of it, as the outward.

3. Oaths may be imposed by a lawful Magistrate, without domineering or
lording over the conscience, provided it be in a case not repugnant to the law
of God, for all must be subject to that royal law: But the great knot of this
controversy lies in this, That which seems to one conscience to be according
to Gods law, seems to another quite contrary; and what must the unsatisfied
conscience do? To which I answer,

The conscience may be in most points clearly satisfied, if it be not wilful;
but if it still stand out, and deny it self satisfied, the man so conscienc'd
is to resolve upon suffering. But the Magistracy is to endeavor all means to
find out the native principle of resistance, and if it prove truly tenderness
of conscience, the discretion of the Magistrate is expected in patience, and a
total forbearance, if in things not indifferent: But if after clear
representations of the lawfulness of the thing, the man still holds his first
principle of resistance, and it be in a matter not indifferent, the penalty
must be proportioned, not only to the offense, but the person; For a
scrupulous conscience is a punishment, at least, a trial of God's upon a man.

4. A Magistrate lawfully constituted can take off the obligation of an oath,
if he be in materia superior, if the matter of it be in his power; as a man
swearing fealty to a Prince, may by the dispensation of the Prince, lay down
this obligation: If it be in matter of Religion, or such cases, it is beyond
the reach of his power; nay, he cannot disengage him of that obligation knit
between him and another. It is a high arrogance of the Pope, that usurpes so
supreme a Prerogative.

5. When the ratio formalis, the formality of the oath cease, the obligation
cease too. As a man swearing homage and obedience to a Prince or Lord, his
obligation cease, when he is unlorded or unprinc'd, because he was bound to
him only under that capacity, which ceasing, the obligation must needs cease
too.

The second inquiry is concerning Government, which is a subjection of men to
the obedience of laws, and the Makers, Keepers, Officers of those laws;
whether he be only one, and so is called Monarchy; or by a few of the chief,
and so Aristocracy; or by the Representatives of a people, and so a Democracy.
Concerning Government, I lay down these following conclusions.

1. A government is established by the law of nature, without government a
second Chaos must needs return upon the world: This only maintains it a
Cosmos, cements and joints it, that it stands and remains a body; every
confusion is destructive; but great bodies, twisted by many severals, must
needs presently ruinate and dissolve, if unknit by the want of government. Now
nature being a principle of selfe-conservation, not only leads men to this
constitution, but enstamps upon Governors such an impresse of Majesty, that it
even commands the very hearts of men subjected to them. Laws, and Governors
the tutelar Angels of them, have been by all States and Politicians looked upon
as the very Basises of the world, from which if it be unhinged, it must needs
sink into a heap of rubbish.

2. The first Government came in neither by Election nor Conquest, but by the
right of Primogeniture. Heirs or families were heirs of Kingdoms, and had
the power of life and death; and so long then were the lives of men continued
to them, that they might see a competent Kingdom rising out of their families;
their childrens children, and servants children, all members of the family, and
subject to the firstborn.

3. No other government is individually a constitution of the law of nature;
for if it were, they must needs offer force to nature, that are not molded
under such a government. But we know the people of Israel, under Gods special
administration, were subject to diverse Governments, and that with Gods
approbation. Nature has not punctually obliged men to any individual or
particular Form of Government, but only generally impressed the notion of
Government upon men, yea, and beasts too, at least a resemblance of it.

4. A Republique comes nearest to the law of nature, since the disbanding of
men from that family-government, which was the necessary consequent of their
abridg'd lives. It was the ambition of some stirring heads, that first screwed
them into thrones; but the very dictate of nature seems to point men to the
other, unless some particular emergent give some one a particular, though but
temporary reign.

5. Monarchs are merely Creatures of the Peoples choice, and dependent upon the
continuation of their pleasure. I do not mean the hurly-burly confusions of the
people, but of the orderly chosen Representatives of a people; and it can be no
treason, or breach of law, to proceed against them either to a deposall, or
upon forfeiture of their trust, to further punishment. For if they came in by
conquest, the people armed with opportunity may lawfully regaine their liberty;
if they are merely elective, the known axiom shall speak, Cujus est
instituere, ejus est destituere; if by both, yea, and confirmed by succession,
and engagements of Parliaments, and particular Subjects, yet they are
accountable to these Creators of them, which may strip them of their authority,
and disoblige themselves, if it be done by a general consent; for if any
particular man, or company of men attempt it, not warranted by orderly
procedure, they are so long Traitors, Usurpers, Rebels, and liable to the
penalties of them, as long as their actions remain unback'd, unauthoriz'd, and
discountenanced by the Representatives of that State, who are jointly the only
competent actors, and most justly enabled to negotiate Public affairs. And
though it is true, Monarchy does most resemble Gods manner of government; yet
this does not prove it the most accommodate to humane affairs, unless we
could attain to a succession of Kings perpetually, that would exactly imitate
God in his dispensation. For the height and unlimited power of Kings lays them
open to the strongest provocations and temptations to Tyranny, and facilitates
to them the destruction of that Kingdom they are ordained the defenders of;
for I cannot conceive of them as other than Officers of the Kingdom, chosen to
the highest Province and charge by the People; or else, who have cut their way
to the Throne by the sword; whom the next opportunity may as lawfully dethrone
and dis-impower.

Three objections impugn these Premises.

1. We read of no such power in Scripture instituted on the people of Israel,
but rather the contrary. To omit some footsteps that may be found of it, we
will concede; but yet the case is far different, for we read of God's
special acting in the promotion of those to the Throne, which we can no
otherwise guess of now, than by the hand of Providence, which permits of many
things it does not approve of.

Obj. 2. God attributes to himself in special the dealing with and ordering
of Kings, setting them up, turning their hearts, entitling himself King of
Kings. I answer, we may find as many eminent expressions of others, meaner
Officers, as of them. But let that be granted; God herein condescends, as in
many other places, to the customs of men, amongst whom Princes are looked upon
generally as the most absolute and supreme, and so it is argumentum a majori;
if God swayes their Scepters, and has them at his direction, much the more,
sublunary men of the world, that move in a lower sphere: He must be a great
King, that is King of Kings, who disposes of the Kings and Kingdoms of the
world.

Thirdly, They object the Example of primitive Times, who found neck for any
yoke, and back for any sufferings, that they might not prejudice the Royal
Prerogative, or prove in the least commotioners of States. But I answer, let it
first be pro'vd, that there were such competent numbers of Christians, as might
make up and be orderly chosen the Representatives of a Kingdom: and then we
have yet a reserve, and a full answer to their objection, viz. In those times,
the providence of God so directing it, the sufferings of the Christians were
improved to the advantage of the Church, according to that received Axiom,
Sanguis martirum fuit semen Ecclesiae, The Churches harvest was rooted in the
Martyrs blood. And so eager were men on propagating the Church this way, that
many doubt, whether they were not honestly, and with good intentions, profuse
and prodigal of themselves by their over-liberal sufferings.

I come now to speak of the third proposal for Inquiry.

3. Concering this Subscription; and first briefly, as I promised, of the
nature of Engagements. Engagements are of an order inferior to Oaths, not
attesting God, not immediately eyeing Religion and Conscience; but obligatory
by the law of mutual Faith and Honesty, the Pillar of humane Converse. So that
a man may with less regret give up himself to such a tie, and the Magistrate
with greater authority exact it; Not that I would hereby prejudice the
Civil-world, by introducing an unobliging principle, to the Faith promised and
obliged by Engagement, or open a backdoor and evasion to dishonesty; for
though some promises imply conditions, yet I conceive Engagements and Promises
of this nature, as strict in this respect as Oaths, that a man is to eye all
inconveniences, and not after the submission to the Engagement make inquiry;
but their Obligation differs in regard of the witness of our Engagement, God
being concerned immediately in one, man immediately in the other; and in regard
of the principle engaged, in one Conscience and Religion, in the other Moral
Honesty and Faith; so that the latter bears not the face of dominion over
Conscience, as the other does, and so with more right may be imposed by the
Civil Magistrate. But particularly, This Engagement is of the same nature,
justly imposed by the Civil Magistrate, justly may the neglect of it be
punished by him according to his arbitrament, because the refusal cannot
consist with the good of the Commonwealth. The rest of the time will be well
spent in the removal of Objections: And first,

1. It is opposite and contradictory to Oaths, Engagements of a higher nature,
yea to a Solemn Covenant. For the first, we grant it is so: But we answer, the
Obligation of those Oaths, is already ceased; for, the formality of the
Obligation is nulled: As, we were bound to the maintaining of the King and his
Heirs; but they being wholly annihilate, the Obligation must of necessity
cease, as we proved heretofore. They were Kings, by the common consent of the
People, which has dethroned them; so that we are wholly disengaged and free.

For the Covenant, I answer, it is not contrary to that, contending only for
that Government which is suitable to the law of God and Reason, with both which
this Law is exactly correspondent, which we have pro'vd before.

2. It contradicts the former agreeances of themselves, the Agreement of the
People, and the like; an Argument much pressed in a public auditory, though
something unsuitable to an exercise proper to practical Divinity. That which
was concluded by some Pieces or Parts of the Kingdom, does not reflect on the
whole; or, was it concluded by the Body or Representatives of it, yet it was
not matur'd nor ratified, and so not engaging to non-alteration: Besides, I do
not conceive of this Government, as a thing unalterable; nor this Engagement,
as such as for ever to disoblige us to any other; but only thus far it binds,
to restrain the irregular motions or insurrections of any not lawfully called
to it, and obliging to the confirmation of this, till altered by due course of
law. So that if the Representatives, and Pillars of this Government, should now
on the sudden face about, and revive the ancient Monarchy, we were not at all
bound to the support of this, by this Engagement: for so long I account any
Government unlawful, whether introduced by Policy or Conquest, and a mere
Usurpation, till it be confirmed by the Representatives of a Kingdom; and
those, Factions and Rebellions, that comply not with the motions of these; here
only excepting any such Constitution, is a real destructive of Christian
Religion, which is not the case now in hand.

3. It is not imposed by a lawful Magistrate. Which leads me to the fourth
inquiry, concerning this Government; which is composed of the Representatives
or Choice of the Kingdom, voting together in consultation and determination of
businesses of State, and having an influence upon all Officers, Courts of
Judicature, without the assistance of King or Lords. Against which it is
objected by some, that it is no Government. To which I answer, in the essential
requisites it is; though it cannot but be confessed, by the distractions and
parties that yet keep up these several factions, by the infancy of it in this
Kingdom, it is not in all points so composed, as time and continued peace may
order it. For we know, that of all the things imaginable, nothing meets with
more difficulty, then the re-setling a Kingdom, that has suffered some great
mutation: It Is no small pains that must reduce every Notion to its right
channel, silence all the clamours and complaints of men, refute the bold
pretenses and intrusions of others into Government. And therefore one compared
the alteration, yea, but the succession of Princes, to the removing of the
world from one shoulder of Atlas to the other; in which time it is not
imaginable, but the Earth must suffer a kind of Epilepsie, an Ague-fit, as it
were; but much more, when the strain of a Government is quite changed. I have
said enough to the lawfulness of it in the former Conclusions, and chiefly now
look upon the gaps in it, the escapes not yet mended; and compare them with
what we enjoy, and consider the Apologies may be made for what is wanting, with
which we will begin. And those we find chiefly to proceed from the Three great
Challengers of an Interest in the Kingdom, to be opposed.

1. Those wholly addicted to Monarchy; against whom, though there has been
little need as yet of Medicinal physic, yet much of Prophylactick. I say, to
prevent the designs of those, whose judgments are wholly devote to Monarchy,
and its utmost exactions; are wholly for the Prerogative-Royal; and the hard
yoke so much groaned under by others, is to them like an ornament; who think
the little finger of this Government, thicker then the loins of the former; the
grievances of the former, whips; the lashes of the latter, scorpions. Now from
such judgments, what can be expected but suitable practices and plots, to
return things to the ancient Model; and they have this to encourage them in
their hopes (which calls for the greatest prudence of the present Authority) The
votes of all other Monarchs, whose interests must needs join with the full
glory of Monarchy, though probably other inferior ends may a little rebate the
edge of their desires this way. But who would not fear such a storm? and can
this be any other then a remora to the full and free establishment of affairs?

2. The Party in the Kingdom, who would moderate, but not destroy Monarchy;
they were for the Government, but not the extravagancy, nor full cariere of it;
and I must ingeniously confess, it seems a very excellent Form, as might be
made out, if it were seasonable; only thus excepted; It was not approved of by
the Supreme Power of the Nation. Now the satisfying in some things, and
restraining in others this Party, cannot but have some time impeded a full
settlement; for the care that must eye every appearance of danger, could not
but a while attend this, which had not only a Chymera of fear in it;
considering, that not only a great part of the Kingdom, yea, and of the best
part too, the Ministry, who have the advantage of the Pulpit; many of the
Nobility, who have great trains of dependents, yea most of the Gentry, and the
whole Kingdom of Scotland are engaged as partisans in it, and very probably the
whole body of Royalists complying at least with the opportunity of their action.

3. That Hydra of confusion, the motley hundred-headed Faction of the
Levellers, like a Torrent threatening to carry all before them, who created two
troubles this last year to the Government on foot: On which a very diligent
eye, and a strait bit is necessary; for it being an attempt, that is
entertained in the dregs of the people, and basest sort of men, and derived
to them from some that have the power of the sword, and others the knack of
committing powder-plots to paper, baited with very plausible insinuations, is
like to carry high, if once well on motion; and though it has had some
discouragements, yet doubtless takes up the most serious thoughts of our
Senators, lest it prevail above them. For of all that I have yet named, I
confess, in my thoughts, this bids fairest for a Supremacy, I wish I may be so
well deceived for though I believe it is looked upon as a mere bubble or
trifle, that must needs be its own ruin; yet if well scanned, it will prove a
very politic Constitution, though a most Atheistical one. It Is true, the
hang-byes of it, I mean, the furious Vulgar, conceive of it as a thing of such
a nature, that would never endure, yet as it is contrived and plotted by the
great Engineers and movers of it, is far another thing. I Will add,

4. The prosecution of the war in Ireland, a necessary Expedition for the
English safety, has stood in the way of other dispatches. A service which has
been hitherto prosperous to amazement, and may well justify the care of it, by
its success; wherewith the undertakers and abetters of it are sufficiently
rewarded: besides, the safety and security has smiled on England, by the
removal of that danger, and has shut up the way against the invading fear of
Invasion. Now all these laid together, may apologize for greater defects, than
we can object against the present Government, as will appear if we look upon
them.

1. I Will begin with the greatest first, and that is, The not effectual
settlement of Learning and Religion; for Learning is the Only ordinary means
for the promotion of Religion. And here, O ye Worthies! let me speak in the
behalf of this great pillar of States, without which they crumble into
confusion, and sink into Barbarism; Religion leaves that Kingdom suddenly,
that is not paved and adorned with Learning. Tell me, what has reduced this
face of thing, into so excellent a form, that mean Proficients now excel many
great Names, that were on the wing in former times, but Learning? should we
remember the Popery and Superstition of former times; let us remember the want
of Learning: And can we hope that Religion should stand firm, when this is
discountenanced? Lord, let us never see the result of such a departure!
Religion is still unsettled, and 'twere worth our most earnest prayers, that we
might see it composed, and the Government of the Church strongly confirmed. And
what more effectual means, then the settling of a competent means for the
Ministry, and Universities of the Kingdom, those springs that make glad the
City of God. But let us consider, in comparison with this, the Essentials of
both these yet maintained and upheld, and the gracious offertures for the
promotion of them in the circumstantials; and I wish the further prosecution of
it may be the serious care of those that sit at the Helm. Government is
necessary to Religion, and Religion essential to good Governments and
therefore all States have joined these, in die cementing themselves, and
uniting all into a body.

2. The Taxes and burdensome Impositions, that so pinch men's shoulders, are
great arguments and complaints against this Government. But let us consider the
necessity of them; Can an Army be maintained without these? can the great
charges and expenses be defrayed without them? and can the state of things be
held up in any tolerable condition, without the help of Armies? Did we not cry
out upon former Taxations and Subsidies; and will we not be content with
temporary exactions, to be freed from standing ones? But what, say some, is
become of those great sums, that Royal Lands and Spiritual Manours have brought
in? I answer, Shall we put in trust our selves, and status, and not rely upon
the faithfulness of the entrusted? We may with more equity, if we consider all
things, wonder at the fewness and lightness of such exactions, then quarrel
at the superfluity.

3. The perpetuity of the Parliament, and too long Power of the
Representatives. But let us consider, whether it be for our security, that in
this flux of things, and the storm that is in the world, the Great Balasters of
it should give up their hold, and leave affairs to that forlorn hope, that
necessarily will ensue upon such an inter-regnum, as it were: These things are
to be done by degrees, and insensibly, when businesses are nearer a full and
happy accommodation. Rather let us bless our selves in that Order and Hope we
sit under, by the protection and prudence of those faithful Steerers, that have
stood up for our safety, that have ventured and hazarded their all for us, and
who are daily consulting a further settlement and assurance of our hopes. And
thus far I dare promise my self, that every day will give us greater
encouragements, till our desires arrive to a kind of non ultra. I have now
performed the task I set my self; if it may gain its end, I shall think my self
well rewarded; However, it cannot but remove prejudice, except wilfully and
causelessely retained.

FINIS.

