Dublin, 9. May, 1642, An Exceeding true RELATION, OF A RENOWNED VICTORY
Obtained against the Rebels on the 2. of May. 1642. On the North side of
Tredarth.

By the Discreet Council, and Heroicke Courage of Captain Stutfield, and
Captain Bartlet.

Who with a very small number of men slew almost six thousand Rebels.

Being the Copy of a Letter sent to Mr. Dudley Ratcliffe, Citizen, Jnhabitant
at Tower Hill.

Whereunto is added, the Copy of another Letter sent to a Gentleman of worth
in London, and read in the House of COMMONS.

It is Ordered, That this be forthwith Printed

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



LONDON, Printed for John Reyn^r. 1642.

The Copy of a Letter sent from Dublin to Mr. Dudley Ratcliffe, at Tower Hill
in LONDON.
Loving friend,
THe last Letter I sent, dated April the 18. J wrote to you of sorrow and
distress, but now God be thanked, our sighs are converted to smiles, and our
sorrows into rejoicing, for so it has pleased Almighty God to bless us in
our late proceedings against the Rebels, that we are almost quite clear of
them in our parts the manner of our delivery, J will relate at large as
follows.

On the 2. day of May, Mack-mahaun with 10000 Rebels came up against us we
being but 4000 foot and 800 horse thinkin^ to put us all to death, or flight,
to prev^^^ which, upon a decayed Castle that we h^^ we mounted 4. pieces of
Ordnance; Like wise we ravl'd a block-house on the South side of our small
Camp, with two small Pieces, being all we had, likewise our men threw up Walls
of Turffe and Earth to shelter them from the Rebels shot, and to give
themselves advantage to offend the Enemy.

Which being done, Captain Stutfield gave strict command that general shouts
and acclamations would be heard throughout the Army, the Trumpets, Drums, and
Fiffes with their shrill Notes and pleasant accents filled the Ecchoing Air,
our Canons ratled, and with swifrest speed unto the Rebels, gave a Churlish
welcome, for our swift Bullets made a large Lane amongst them, the Rebels
hearing our joyful acclamations, began to fear some Treachery, and as our
mirth increased so did their fear, which made them afraid to fall upon us, or
to draw nigher for fear the ground was undermined.

Wherefore they took their stand, and with their best speed planted theirField
pieces against our block-house, shooting very often, though but to little
purpose, for spite of all their Battries we continued our shouts and
acclamations, in the mean time Captain Stutfield sent out some Scouts in
request of Captain Bartlet, who was gone with 5. hundred men, to fetch in some
provision.

Likewise he set strong watches in their view, though not within their shot, to
make them think our Forces greater then they were, that day being spent, the
next day being Tuesday, he gave Command that all of them that were in health
should fast and Pray, which was with willingness effected, likewise that Night
Captain Bart let came in unto us, bringing in provision, with which we were
replenished, our joy and shouts increasing, the Rebels being amazed and having
intelligence of our new-come Forces, resolved that night to steal away, but to
prevent that, we marched out against them, charging them siercely, Captain
Stutfield with three Troops of Horse, troop up unto their Faces and discharged,
making such breaches in their Main-Battalia, that Mack-Mahaun swore he was a
Devil not a mortal man.

Our Foot likewise fired so fast upon them that they fell to running, not to
fighting, for in the space of 4. hours there was slain almost six thousand of
the Rebels, we having lost not above 2. hundred men, beside some threescore
maimed.

Captain Bartlet seeing their Rear begin to slye, encouraged on his men, and
usd his utmost power to intercept their passage, which they seeing, (like
desperate Cowards) drew up their Ordnance, and discharged upon him all at one
time, which made a breach amongst our men, which so incensed them to see their
Comerades fall so fast before them, so that they fell on like Devils never
ceasing till they had surpizd the Rebels Ordnance, and discharged them against
their Masters, amongst whom they did a fearful execution, the Rebels
immediately took them to their heels, and we retreated to our Quarters, thus
was this great Victory obtained by the discreet Council and undanted Courage
of these Noble Commanders, of whose future explovts at my, next opportunity, I
will acquaint you with. till which time J rest.

Your Friend and Servant, VV, Benningfield.

Good News from Ireland.
Master Hawkredge,
I Have written by the two last Posts, and having good News, I shall impart it
unto you.

The last Saturday the Lord Moore and Sir Henry Titchburne sallyed out of the
Town, and fell upon the Enemies, and raised their Siege, slew about 350 of
their men's, and took many of their chief Officers, and have relieved
themselves bravely, and took 150 of their Muskets, and a Field full of Pikes,
we having lost, as some astirme no men. Here are three of our Captains come by
Land, so that this News is true.

Upon Monday our Forces went out, 4000 Foot and 500 Horse, they are already
within 5. miles of Tredagb: by the way; Lieutenant Colonel Read came into our
men, and submitted, if he had not done it, he could not have escaped, he is sent
hither, and lodged in the Castle, I do believe w^ shall now get good store of
Corn out of the Country, which will keep the price from rising. Our men are
not expected home this week, pray God keep them safe.

With my true love, I rest: Your affection friend, R. P.

It is this day Ordered, That this be forthwith Printed

Hen. Elsynge, Cleric. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

