A Perfect Summary Of the most Remarkable PASSAGES BETWEEN The Kings Majesty
and the Commissioners of Parliament at the Treating-house in NEWPORT. From
October the 2. to October the 9.
Concerning, 1. The Kings Majesty's last Propositions to the Commissioners and
their Answer. 2. His Majesty's possitive answer to the point of Religion. 3. A
learned Speech spoken by his Majesty touching Episcopacy. With the Answer
thereunto. 4. Diverse Remarkable Passages between his Majesty and the
Commissioners sent to the Army. 5. A Message sent to the Lord General touching
the Treaty. 6. The Parliaments Answer touching His Majesty's last Propositions.
7. His Majesty's last Papers delivered at the Treaty. 8. Several Letters from
Newport, concerning the proceedings between his Majesty and the Commissioners
since the last continuance of the Treaty.


Beginning October. 2. Newport one of which specifieth, That the Kings Majesty
with his Bishops and Lawyers, have had a great conference concerning the
affairs of the Treaty, and his Majesty declars his earnest desires to Treat
personally with his houses of Parl. and made some progress in the Bill for the
setlement of Religion. Papers came from his Maj. viz.

His Majesty will consent that the calling and sitting of the Assembly of
Divines at westminster, be confirmed for 3. years by Act of Parliament. And
confirm for 3. years the Directory. And the form of Church Government, to be
used for the Churches of England and Ireland, and Dominion of Wales; provided,
that his Majesty and those of his Judgment, or any others who cannot in
Conscience submit thereunto be not in the mean time obliged to comply with the
same. And that a free consultation and debate be had, with the Assembly of
Divines at Westminster in the mean time (20. of His Majesty's homination being
added unto them) whereby it may be determined by His Majesty and his two Houses
of Parliament, how the said Church Government and form of public worship after
the said time, And how Religion may be settled, and the Articles determined, and
care taken for the ease of tender consciences. Concerning Bishops Lands and
Revenues, His Maj. will consent to an Act or Acts of Parl. whereby Lives or for
years, not exceeding 99 years, shall be made of those Lands toward the
satisfaction of the purchasers, and others to whom they are engaged, whereby
they may receive satisfaction, or His Maj. will some other way, for their
further satisfaction. Provided that the propriety and inheritance of those
Lands may still remain to the Church: And the rest shall be reserved to be for
their maintenance.

His Maj. will give his Royal assent for the better observation of the Lords
day; for suppressing of innovations in Churches and Chapels, in and about the
worship of God, and for the better advancing of the preaching of Gods holy word
in all parts of this Kingdom. And to an Act against enjoying pluralities of
Benefices by Spiritual persons, and Nonresidency, for regulating and reforming
both Universities, and the Collidges of Westminster, Winchester and Eaton, for
the better discovery and speedy conviction of Popish Recusants, as is desired
in your Propositions; for the education of the children of Papists by
Protestants, in the Protestant Religion, for levying penalties against Papists,
to an Act to prevent the practices of Papists against State, and for putting
the Laws in execution and for a stricter course to prevent hearing and saying
of Mass.

But as to the Covenant, his Majesty is not yet therein satisfied, that he can
sign or swear it or consent to impose it, does conceive it proper or useful
on the consciences of others. Nor at this time to be insisted on.

Touching the Militia, His Majesty will consent to an Act of Parliament.

That the Lords and Commons in the Parliament of England now assembled, or
hereafter to be assembled, or such as they shall appoint, during the space of 10
years shall Arm, Train and Discipline, or cause to be Armed Disciplined, All
the forces of the Kingdoms of England and Jreland, and Dominion of Wales, the
Isles of Gernsey and Gersey and the Town of Barwick up to Tweed, already
raised, both for Sea and Land service, And shall from time to time during the
space of 10 years raise, levy, arm, train, and Discipline, or caused to be
raised, levied, armed, trained and disciplined any other forces for land and
Sea service in the Kingdoms, Dominions, and places aforesaid as in their
judgments they shall during the space of 10 years think fit to appoint.

And that neither the King, his heirs or successors, or any other but such as
shall Act by the authority or approbation of the said Lords and Commons shall
during the said space of 10 years exercise any of the powers aforesaid. And all
the said forces disposed by the Lords and Commons as they shall think fit and
not otherwise. And have power to suppress all forces raised without their
authority. To suppress any foreign Forces invading the Kingdoms of England
and Ireland, Dominion of Wales, the Isles of Gernsey and Iersey, and the Town
of Barwick upon Tweed, or any of them.

And after the expiration of the said ten years, neither the King His Heirs
or Successors, or any person or persons by color or pretense of any
Commissions power, deputation, or authority to be derived from the King. His
Heirs or Successors, or any of them, shall without the consent of the said
Lords and Commons, raise arm, train, discipline, employ, order, manage,
disband, or dispose any the forces by sea or land, without the consent of the
said Lords and Commons.

And with the same provisoes, for saving the ordinary Legal power of Officers
of Justice, not being Military Officers, as is set down in your propositions.

And with a Declaration that if 30 persons be assembled in a warlike manner,
and not forthwith disperse themselves being required by them, To be guilty of
High Treason; to be incapable of any pardon from his Majesty, his heirs or
Successors. And that the City of London shall have and enjoy all their Rights,
Liberties, etc. in raising and employing the forces of that City, in such sort
as is mentioned in the propositions.

1. That none be compelled, but in case of coming in of strange enemies. And
that the powers for maintenance of forts and Garrisons, and pay of this present
Army, be exercised to no other purposes then to the suppressing of forces
raised, or to be raised, without authority and consent of the said Lords and
Commons as aforesaid or for suppressing of any foreign forces invading. And
that the, moneys be raised by general, and equal Taxations, saving that
Tonnage and Poundage, and such imposts as have been applied to the Navy, and be
raised as has been usual. And that all Patents, Commissioners, and other Acts
concerning the premises, be made and Acted in his Majesty's name by Warrant,
signed by the Lords and Commons, and such other as they shall think fit to
authorize for that purpose.

Touching Irel^nd, after advice with his 2 houses, He will leave it to their
determination, and give His consent accordingly, as is herein hereafter
expressed.

Touching public debts, His Maj. will give his consent to such an Act, for
raising of moneys by general and equal taxations. His Majesty will consent to
an Act, that during the said space of 10. years, the L. Chancelour, or the L.
Keeper Com. of the great Seal, or treasury L. Warden of the Cinque Ports,
Chancellor of the Exchequer, and Duchy, Secretaries of State Master of the
Rolls, Judges of both Benches, and Barons of the Exchequer of England, be
nominated by both houses of the Parliament of England to continue quam Diu se
been gesserint: And in the intervaies of Parl, by such others as they shall
authorize for that purpose. His Maj. will consent that the Militia of the City
of London and Liberties thereof, during 10 years may be in the ordering and
Government of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Commons in the Common Council
Assembled, or such as they from time to time appoint, to be employed and
directed from time to time during the space of 10 years in such manner as shall
be agreed upon, and appointed by both houses of Parl. And no Citizen of London,
nor any Officers of the said City shall be drawn forth, or compelled to go out
of the said City or Liberties thereof, for Millitary service, without their own
free consent. That an Act be passed for granting and confirming the Charters,
Customs, Liberties and Franchises of the City of London, notwithstanding the
Non user, Misuser, or Abuser. And that during the ten years, the Tower of
London may be in the Government of the City of London.

And his Majesty does only propose, that he may have liberty, to repair
forthwith to Westminster, and to be restored to a condition of freedom and
safety, (a thing which he shall never deny to any of his Subjects) and to the
possession of his Lands and Revenues; And that an Act of Oblivion, and
Indemnity may pass, to extend to all persons, for all matters relating to the
late unhappy differences, which being agreed by his 2. Houses of Parliament,
his Majesty will be ready to make these his Concessions binding by giving them
the force of Laws by his Royal Assent.

The Lords this day received this letter from the King, brought by Captain
Titus. And both Houses had letters from the Commissioners, sent by a Messenger
of theirs, concerning the Treaty, Upon which both Houses voted that they do
approve of what the Commissioners have done. And a letter of thanks to be sent
them, desiring them to go on according to their instructions.

The Parliament Message to the Army touching the Treaty.

Sir Thomas Withrington, Mr. Solicitor, Mr. Nathaniell Fines, and Mr. Thomas
Chaloner, were chosen Commissioners from the Parl. to congratulate the Lord
Genesis and gives his Excellency thanks for all his good services, and communicate
the particulers of what is done as to himself, and for his Army. And some votes
concerning the easing of free quarter.

October 3.

Right Honorable,
THe business here is of little consequence for matter of News, only that
which I believe you have formerly had, which is as follows, viz. That His
Majesty (in the absence of the Commissioners) and those that have leave of the
Parliament to attend him, were very close about the Bill of Church Government.

But at night after supper, his Majesty withdrew to prepare a paper to be
presented to the Parliaments Commissioners the next day; But in regard that all
things were not finished (as to satisfy) the Bishops and Doctors were
appointed to meet him again the next morning.

But besides the dispute about this business of Church Government, The King
had consultation with the Lords, and also with the Lawyers, and others about
him, concerning the rest of the propositions, some of them (as was said) having
given his Najesty advice to send a letter to the Parl. to propound something to
the Houses in a taking way, so as that his Maj. may come to London, and treat
with the Parliament at Westminster about such things as are not considerable.

And besides that, by such Propositions he would find what the sense of the 2.
Houses of Parliament is, and what his friends will do.

And his Majesty was advised (as was said) first to offer this letter to the
Comm^ssioners, and they refusing it, he would send it up by one of his own
Messengers, or attendants.

His Majesty presented to the Commissioners a letter to the Parliament with
Propositions to the Parliament concerning many things contained in the
Proposition from the Parliament, and offering to treat for the rest, desiring
that they would send it to the Parliament.

But in regard that it is contrary to their Instructions, the Commissioners
desired to be excused, and desired that His Majesty would please to give his
answer to the Bill for Religion, and so proceed by the way of Treaty, upon the
rest in order, which was the thing which they received in command from the
Parliament.

The Commissioners that night dispatched a Messenger to the Parl. with Letters
to acquaint the Houses that His Majesty has as yet consented to nothing, but
only the bill for recalling of the Declarations, etc. And that ever since they
have proceeded upon the Bill for Religion, but nothing as yet concluded.

And also to advertise the Parl. that his Maj. offered to them a paper to be
sent to the Parl. of Propositions by him made, to grant such and such things,
and then the King to come to London, and treat for the rest.

These being the chiefest passages here for the present, I remain yours

T. B.


October. 5. Right Honorable,
HIs Maj. thought to stay his possitive answer to the matter of Religion (now
in debate here) until he heard answer of his Message sent by Capt. Titus; but
upon a motion from Mr. Seamer, one of the Ministers with the Commissioners to
undertake to prove that Lay Presbyterians are Jure Divino.

His Majesty said that he had heard much of him (though a stranger) And that he
did desire to discourse with him, A conference was had, and excellent Arguments
laid down, And the King also discoursed very learnedly, but how far his
Majesty is satisfied therein, he has not yet declared. The Treaty now goes on
again, And you will hear something (considerable) from hence suddenly.

Newport 4. October. 1648.



October. 6. Right Worshipful,
HAving so trusty a Messenger, I could not choose but advise you something of the
State of businesses with us in this Island, viz. The Kings Majesty is in all
likelihood in a way to come to an Agreement with the Commissioners, so that
here is great hopes of a Conclusion; the point of Religion was the last thing
they were upon, some papers were delivered to the Commissioners, which have
caused much scruple betwixt the King and Commissioners, but we hope all
difficulties will be passed over with faci^ty and a happy conclusion for the
good of the Kingdom. So I remain

From Newport this 2. of October. 1648. Your humble Servant T. B.




October. 7

SIR,
ACcording to your desires in your last, I have sent you a Narrative of the
proceedings in these parts, viz. That the Kings Majesty as yet has given no
answer to to the Matter of Religion; but through some occasions given, has had
some small disputation with Mr. Seamer a Minister with the Com: and discoursed
very learnedly about the Presbyterian Government; His Majesty delivered some
papers touching the Bishops. His Majesty cannot consent to abolishing
Episcopacy, neither could he be satisfied how he might in concience do it, in
regard of his coronation oht, both which the Ministers and Lawyers gave his
Majesty satisfaction in, Sir I remain

From Newport October. 6. 1648. Your humble devoted Servant L. S.


FINIS.

