Exceeding good NEWS FROM IRELAND: BEING A perfect RELATION of the late great
Overthrow given to the Rebels, by the Forces of Vlster, under the Command of
Col. Conoway, and Lieut. Col. Oconally: With the manner of their routing and
defeating them in the Counties of Cavon, Monakon, Louth, and Westmeath; taking
1200. Cowes, 400. Horse, 1000. Sheep, with all their Arms and Ammunition.

Also, their surprising of all the Magazine and Provisions, that were prepared
for General Preston, and Owen Macharts Armies at the Siege against DUBLIN.

Together with the Lord Inchiquins taking the Field with 5000. Horse and Foot.
And the raising of the Siege at DUBLIN.

Certified by several Letters, November. 13. 1646.

London, Printed for Richard Woodnoth, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Sign of the Star in Cornwall, 1646

Exceeding good News FROM IRELAND.
THE vigilant endeavors, and inexpressable care and industrious pains of
these under-named Worthies, and ever renowned Patriots of their Country, has
not been wanting in the Province of Vlster, since the time of their receiving
the Great Trust reposed in them (by the Parliament of England,) but with all
faithfulness* active spirits, and undanted hearts has endeavored the
preservation of that Country, and has sought by all means possible the
advancing of the Protestant party, and the utter extirpation of the Popish; and
to that end has been very active against the blood-thirsty and barbarous
Rebels; as will appear by this ensuing Letter.

SIR,
ON Thursday the 27 of October, 1646. Arthur Anslo Esquire, Son and Heir to
the right honorable, Francis Lord Mountnorris, Viscount Valentia, and Colonel
William Beal of the City of London, being Commissioners for the Parliament in
Ulster, sent out a Party (resolute and gallantly armed) consisting of seven
hundred Horse and Dragoones of the British Army, under the command of Colonel
Edward Conoway, Son to the Lord Vicount Conoway, accompanied with Lieutenant
Colonel Oconally, and other Officers, who marched out on Tuesday the seven and
twentieth of October, 1646. from Lisuegarner, with intention to divert the
Rebels from Dublin, and to spoil Owen Macharts Quarters while he was attending
that City; they continued abroad almost fourteen days, burning and spoiling
the Counties of Cavon, Monakan, Louth, and Westmeath, with so good success,
that the Corn they burned could not be valued at less then fifty thousand
pounds, and many Towns and Villages were burned that had not tasted of this
Rebellion.

Several Magazines of provisions for Owen Macharts Army was surprised, and
burnt by them; and at length they returned with a prey of twelve hundred Cowes,
four hundred horse, one thousand sheep, and as much of other plunder as they
could carry, and were forced to leave much behind them of all sorts, for want
of drivers for the Cattle and Carriage horses to bring away their spoil,
being fain to give some of the Rebels their lives to assist them to bring away
what they did.

They had the better opportunity to do this good service, by reason that Owen
Machart had persuaded the Inhabitants, that they had made a Cessation with the
Parliaments Forces in Vlster, which the cillie people were so confident of,
that when they perceived their approach in a hostile manner, they betook
themselves to their hills and bogs, and there rayled, as treacherous breakers
of the Cessation till our men satisfied them of their delusion, Owen-Machart
prevailed so far upon this deceitful assurance of a Cessation that almost
all the fighting men were marched with him to Dublin, so that our forces could
have no great slaughter of them, killing only about forty men.

Amongst other places, Carick Mac-Roso was burned and the Rebels strong Works
there quitted: As also, several other places very defensible; which our Forces
being only horse, were not in condition to garrison, but they demolished their
Works, and quite disabled the Enemy of bearing any arms.

There was one Scottish woman returned with our men, who had continued with the
Rebels from the beginning, and could not have opportunity to come from them.

Thus it has pleased the great God of Heaven, so to bless and prosper the
endeavors and undertakings of the Worthies of England (the High and Honorable
Court of Parliament) that by their vigilant care, and unwearied pains, in
seeking the preservation of that poor distressed, and bleeding Kingdom of
Ireland, by taking care, and sending over, some eminent and faithful Patriots
of their Country (who by the assistance of the Almighty) have been Instruments
of clearing several Counties in that Kingdom, and taken in many of the Rebels
strong Garrisons and Holds; so that for a great distance, the Rebels have but
very little shelter.

These Worthies having spent these foureteen months as Commissioners in
ordering the Armies in Ireland, are returned safe to London on Tuesday the
three and twentieth of November 1646. with this glad news, and assuring the
Parliament that there was no great doubt of Dublin, they being in a good
condition to resist the enemy, their works being finished, and expecting daily
forces from England, and the enemy, Owen, Machant and General Preston being
not very unanimous in their designs. It is said that the Lord Digby
endeavoring to revenge himself of the Rebels, by dividing the old English and
Irish was hunted after by the Popes Nuntio, who vowed his death, whereupon
disguising himself, he was forced to lurk from place to place, and unless he
had escaped safe to the Earl of Clenrickard, it is not known what is become
of him.

Sir Charles Coote the Lord president of Conath is returned out of Vister to
Conath with his Horse, and will speedily fall upon the Rebels in wonted manner,
but is so scanted of provisions for his men, that without speedy and plentiful
relief, there will be suddenly an end both of his Service and Army.

Thus having acquainted you with the remarkablest passages that has happened
these many weeks, I humbly take my leave, and remain

Your ever true and faithful friend, E. G.


But to proceed a little further, and to give you a hint of the victorious, and
gallant achievements, of the ever renowned and undanted General, the Lord
Inchiquin, which for your better satisfaction, I shall here insert, as
follows:

By letters from Cork in Ireland, it is also certified, that the Lord
Inchiqueene has lately mustered his forces, both horse and foot which does
consist of 5000. in number, most of them being old Soldiers, and gallantly
armed, are now marched toward the Rebels quarters and Garrisons: they march in
two several bodies, but at no great distance, and coming near to one of the
Rebels Garrisons, a place of great strength, the General gave command, that a
party of horse and foot should be drawn forth, to advance nearer to that
Garrison for the sudden surprisall of the enemy, if any were in the adjacent
Towns; Whereupon they advanced, and drawing near to the place, met with some
opposition, of the Rebels, where they began a hot encounter, but being
overpowred by the Rebels, the Protestants were forced to retreat, the Rebels
pursuing them; but immediately the whole body came on, and fell violently upon
the enemy, killing a great number and put the rest to flight, and pursued them
to their Garrison, where the Rebels had much Corn and provision together with
great store of Ammunition; and within few hours, they fired all their Corn
and Ammunition, with Grenades, doing great execution upon the Rebels within
the Castle.

Whereupon General Preston, and Oneale, presently called a Council of war,
and there concluded, that all the forces, both horse and foot, that were at
the Siege of Dublin, should presently be commanded to draw off, and to reside
and keep their head quarters within 18. miles of the said City, where as yet
they remain.

FINIS.

