A true and impartial NARRATIVE OF The most material Debates and passages in
the late PARLIAMENT. TOGETHER With the Rise and Disolution of it, published for
the satisfaction of those that desire to know how they spent their time.

By a Member of that Parliament, who is none of the present Parliament.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Brewster, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
sign of the three Bibles in Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

A true and perfect Narrative, of the most material Debates and Passages in the
late Parliament, etc.
THe overruling hand of Providence, having upon the third of September (a day
of signal mercies unto this Nation) taken away the late Usurper, whilst he was
in possession of the Title of Protector of the Commonwealth, his Son Richard
was the next day by the Council at White Hall proclaimed his Successor: He, by
the Authority thereof, did, about three months after, issue out Writs for a
Parliament to begin the 27th of January following. The people who in their
diffused condition, is capable only of obeying their Superiors, and not of
disputing the legality, or illegality of their commands, made choice of Members
to serve in Parliament, they according to their summons assembled upon the day
appointed; when they were met, the pretended Protector sent the black Rod to
let them know that he was in the Other House, and desired to speak to them
there, at which call, not above ten or twelve went out of the House, though
more that was not come in appeared before him: Mr. Chute was that day chosen
Speaker, and after a Bill unpassed left by the precedent Parliament, was
according to custom read, the House Adjurned until the next day, Then a
Gentleman was complained of for affronting two Members, and he ordered to be
brought to the Bar of the House by the Sergeant: A private Fast in the House,
and the Ministers to perform the duties of that day was appointed, a Committee
for Elections and Privileges chosen, and so the House Adjurned until the 31. of
January, it being customary at the beginning of Parliaments, to give the
Speaker a day or two to settle his own business, in that he may the better
afterward attend the service of the House. The Gentleman that affronted the
Members was brought to the Bar upon his knees, and for his offense committed to
the Tower; but in a few days, upon his submission, and at the intercession of
the Gentlemen abused, he was released. The first of February a Bill was brought
in by Mr. Secretary, under pretense only of acknowledging the pretended
Protector, but under such terms as had no less in them, than the admittance of
the Chief Magistrate, and the Persons then sitting in the Other House, unto the
full power, privileges, and prerogative of the ancient Kings, and ancient House
of Lords which the court party designed to have carried undiscovered, and so
have left the Nation, either to have fought the late quarrel over again, or
else to be content with a bad change of persons, where there was none of things.

The Bill was that day without much difficulty read the first time, which
encouraged those of the long robe related to the single person to press for the
reading of it again the same day to the end that it being the next day read the
third time (as they designed it) it might have passed into an Act; but in
opposition to that, some who were more careful of the Liberties of the people
than those of the long Robe ordinarily are, moved, that according to rule in
cases of such weight, it might be referred to a grand Committee of the whole
House; and when that would not be granted, that the second reading of it might
at least be put off for some days, and liberty given to the Members to take
Copies, that considering of the business, they might be the more fitting for
the debate, which was yielded unto, and the seventh of February appointed for
the second reading.

The State of Major General Overtons sad and deplorable condition was given at
the door, and at the same time the House was Petitioned by his Sister for a
hearing of him by them, which was granted, and two Votes passed in order to it;
first, that his Keeper should with all speed bring him, with the cause of his
imprisonment before the Parliament: and secondly, that a Frigot should be sent
to fetch him from the Isle of Jersey, where he was then prisoner; About six
weeks after he was brought to the Bar of the House, by his Keeper, who produced
no authority for his detainment, but a bare command (without any cause
expressed) from the late Usurper; whereupon the Parliament voted his
imprisonment illegal and unjust; and that first, because no Chief Magistrate
had ever power to commit any person by his own warrant: secondly, because there
was no cause axpressed in the Warrant: and thirdly, because no man can
according to Law be banished, but by Act of Parliament; and so released him
from his imprisonment, without paying any fees or charges.

The fifth of February a person who sat in the House, being found to be no
Member, was for his offense therein committed to Newgate, and not to the Tower,
which is the Parliaments prison, chiefly in regard of the present Lieutenants
great exactions and oppressions, and partly, that upon inquiry, the offender
was found to be under some degree of distraction.

Upon the day appointed, the Bill for recognizing the Protector, was read the
second time, and the debate begun: The Petition and Advice was pleaded by the
Court party, as the foundation of his Title, but by those that was for the
Commonwealth it was denied to be a Law; and that not only from the
inconsistency, lameness, and insufficiency of it, but also from the corrupt
manner of its procurement, that Assembly that made it being no Parliament, but
a Faction, in that the members were never suffered to meet, but so many of them
kept out even by him that called them, as he judged would hinder the execution
of his will; besides that at the creation of that monster, there was but of
460. chosen, but 104. in the House, whereof 51. was against it, and carried
merely by the strength of Scotch and Irish members, who had no right to sit,
but were Usurpers in the making Laws for England; It was further shown, that
if Caesar Burgia, Pope Alexander the sixth, and Matchivel, had all laid their
heads together, they could not have framed a thing more destructive to the
Liberties of the people, and for absolute tyranny, giving away all that our
ancestors have fought for ever since the Conquest, Than the Petition and
Advice, As the Negative Vote, The power of dissolving Parliaments, The purse of
the people, and in that all the security they had for their Rights and
Liberties; For, give the Single Person your purse, and you give him the
Militia; and if he have that, all bounding, of him by Laws, signifies no more
than binding of a Lion with paper Chains. But the Courtiers being resolved of
nothing less than a Turkish power, would suffer no strength of reason to
prevail with them to the making of the Petition and Advice unauthentick but
would by force allow it for a good Law; which provoked the demanding the
pursuance of that Law to be proved, and that the pretenders designation was
according as it is there directed; but though this was pressed by diverse
persons of great abilities, never any answer was given unto it; those of that
party knowing, that by the strength of their Members, they could overruled the
strength of Reason: It was from such silence in the point of designation
argued, that if Providence had prevented the Usurper of keeping to the Rules of
the Petition and Advice, and that it was thereby fallen to the ground, all
Government was reverted to its original (the People) and ought by them
assembled in Parliament to be derived where ever it should be seeked, which
would readily have been done to the Gentleman in possession, if he and his
party would upon those terms have accepted of it.

This debate (no man speaking twice to the matter) held eight days, in which
time superlative excellency and good affections to the public appeared in
several Gentlemen, yet the best end they could bring this debate unto, was to
conclude with the two following Votes, as previous to the commitment of the
Bill.

Monday 14. Feb. 1658.
Resolved, That it be part of this Bill to recognize and declare his Highness
Richard Lord Protector, to be Lord Protector and Chief Magistrate of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions and
Territories thereunto belonging.

Resolved, That before this Bill be committed, this House do declare such
additional Clauses to be part of this Bill, as may bound the power of the Chief
Magistrate, and fully secure the Rights and Privileges of the Parliament, and
the Liberties and Rights of the people, and that neither this nor any other
previous Vote that is, or shall be passed in order to this Bill, is, or shall
be of force or binding unto the people, until the whole Bill be passed.

This last previous Vote passed the House without one Negative more then the
Secretary; but when the Courtiers knew the sense of White Hall upon it, from
that time forward they owned themselves such slavish executioners of a
pretenders will and lust, that they never appeared in the least for the making
good one word of it.

During this debate, several complaints was made (reflecting upon the Court
designs) as that the Assizes (without president, upon no greater occasion) was
put off, to the common wrong of the whole Nation; desiring therefore, that to
the end that the people might receive no prejudice by the sitting of
Parliament, nor have cause to be out of love with Parliaments, that the
Protector might be moved to command the carrying on of the Assizes; but the
Courtiers being resolved not to lose so considerable a part of their strength
as the Lawyers, they would have the whole Nation to suffer in the want of
Justice, rather than they would want one of their Members.

That White Hall had writ eighty Letters for the making members of Parliament,
most of which had had their effect. That Mr. Howard a Papist, and brother to
the Earl of Arundel boasted, that at the instance of the Protector and
Secretary, he had sent twenty four members to Parliament. That several Tables
were kept at White Hall at the vast charge of the public, on purpose to
corrupt and deboist members by great entertainments; all which was acknowledged
to be against the orders of the House, and particularly for any members (not
menial servants) to go to White Hall during the sitting of the Parliament.

After this the Secretary gave an occasion of foreign affairs, declaring a
million of money needful for defraying the Naval expenses for this Summer,
which brought on the debate concerning the Navy, in behalf of the public; that
as the Navy is part of the Militia, and the Militia the right of the people
assembled in Parliament; and that without the Militia the Parliament could not
make good their promises to the people, in bounding the power of the chief
Magistrate, and securing their Rights and Liberities; That the House would
appoint certain Commissioners for management of the Naval forces; The debate
for setting out a very Considerable fleet to Sea for Defense of the
Commonwealth, and Commerce hold not long; the thing being readily and
unanimously agreed on: But who should Manage the Fleet was a Debate of several
days; and at last Carried with a strong hand by the Court party against all
Reason and Policy that the Protector should have the Disposal of it; only the
Commonwealths men got into the Vote that the making Peace and War should be
reserved unto the Parliament.

Mr. Portman a prisoner in the Tower, was upon his Petition brought before the
House, with the Cause of his imprisonment, The Warrant to the Lieutenant of the
Tower for apprehending him was produced, and being only from the Usurper in
these Words following;

Sir, Dated Feb. 3^ 57.
I desire you to ceaze Major General Harrison, Mr. Carew, Portman, and such as
are eminent Fifth-Monarchy men, especially Feake and Rogers; do it speedily and
you shall have a Warrant after you have done. The Parliament Voted his
Imprisonment illegal and unjust, and freed him out of Prison without paying
either Fees or Charges. Several other Complaints of a higher Nature; as for
Banishment and Selling of Gentlemen to the Barbados for Slaves, was before the
Parliament, wherein they were prevented by their Dissolution of doing any
thing; but Mr. Maynard (then Called a Sergeant from the Usurpers making) was
Ordered to bring in a Bill for prevention of the like Tyranny in the future.
The Accounts of the Commonwealth was Called for, and a Committee appointed to
Examine them and report the state of them to the House.

The House was called upon to make good their Vote of bounding the power of the
Chief Magistrate, and securing the Rights, Privileges and Liberties of the
Parliament and people, and that as they had filled the hearts of all men with
joy, in expectation of having their Rights ascertained, that they would not
render themselves Juglers, in promising what they never intended to perform.
But to take the several parts of the previous Vote into consideration: and as
bounding the Chief Magistrate is first in order, so to begin with it. Yet such
was the dis-ingenuity of the Court-party, being made up of Houshold-servants,
Officers of profit, suitors for Offices, Lawyers (the corrupt part of whose
Trade, cannot be maintained but by a Corrupt Government) Scotch and Irish
Members, chosen by the Pretender's Interest; that no Arguments of honor or
honesty could engage them to be Faithful to their Country: such as were most
open, confessing plainly that they were so far from bounding the Chief
Magistrate, that they desired to give him as much, nay more power then any King
or Prince of England ever had, seeming to cast Dirt upon the famous long
Parliament (whose successes and great Atchievments will by posterity be had in
Admiration) for asserting the Rights of the people against the Kings own
person, not sticking to charge them with murder for that War: and that without
reproof, but rather contenance from them. But others more prudent waved
bounding of the Chief Magistrate, under pretense of first settling the
Constitution of the Government; and so falling upon the Debate of that, after
some days spent in it, at the last voted, that it should be part of the Bill
for Recognition to declare the Parliament to consist of two Houses. After this
the House was again put in mind of their duties to the people, and urged to
fall upon bounding the power of the Chief Magistrate: which as it was first in
Order, ought to have been first in Debate. But the Courtiers commanding all by
the strength of their Members, waved the Chief Magistrate, and fell upon
constituting the other House, in which some days were spent in disputes
betwixt the new and old Royalists, the Commonwealths-men remaining silent, to
see what the strength of the others Brains would produce. The first was for the
new Creation of Lords, with the mixture of the old, upon such limitations as
they might not overtop the new: The other for the old with a mixture of the
new, and for the full privileges of the ancient Houses of Peers: but after it
appeared, that they could make nothing of the Debate, not daring to trust one
another. The Commonwealth-men fell in, and showed that where the Cause is taken
away, the Effect must cease. That as the House of Lords had anciently a natural
Right to a superior Jurisdiction, in that their propriety was five parts of
six, of the whole Nation: so is it now more natural for the Commons, to have
that Superiority; their proportion of propriety being ninty nine parts, or
more, of a hundred. And therefore Moved, that if they would have another House,
it might be so bounded, as might suit with the people's Interest: whereupon
they proceeded to the Debate of the Bounds and Powers of the Members sitting in
the other House of Parliament, and begun with the other House of Parliament, in
which some days was spent, they being but for life, for that it is against the
Common Law for any one to be a Judge for him and his Heirs for ever. Then for
their being first allowed and approved of by the Parliament. Then upon their
having Negatives only in some matters. Yet ended none, but at last
dis-ingenuously laid all aside; and, in stead of bounding and approving of
them: a bare Question was brought on foot, Whether the members sitting in the
other House, as then constituted, should be transacted with or no, thereby to
let them at once into the full privileges of the ancient Lords, and to make it
pass the smoothlier. A plausible Cause, to save the Rights of the ancient
Peers, was added by the Courtiers, which was done only to gain the Cavaliers in
that Vote, and not with any intent to let in the Lords: they confessing
occasionally, that the Rights of the ancient Peers could be nothing, so long as
the act for taking of them away was in being, and un-repealed. Against acting
with the Members sitting in the other House as then Constituted, was alleged
the inconsistency of it with the Rights and Liberties of the People, which they
had sworn to maintain. As first, in that they were most dependants upon the
Single person by way of salaries: and so likely to be his Mercenaries.
Secondly, for that the Militia both by Sea and Land was in the hands of the
persons then sitting in that House. Thirdly, That all the chief Judges were
Members: as the three Keepers of the Seal, two Chief Justices, Master of the
Rowls: and that it might well be thought, that the Lord chief Barron would be
accounted as worthy to be one as the rest. And then the people in all Cases of
Appeals, could do no more then Appeal from the Judges in Westminster Hall, to
the same persons sitting in Parliament. And that the chief Judicature being in
that House, and having the Militia to maintain it; That House might wrong the
Commons as they pleased, and they remain without Remedy. Fourthly, That all the
Privy Council, the chief Judges, and General Officers, both by Sea and Land,
being Members; The Lawyers and Officers of profit (of whom the Body of the
House of Commons would be made up) would be the Creatures and Mercenaries of
one or other of them of the other House: and so make the House of Commons to be
nothing but the Executioners of their Lords and Masters Will's; But
notwithstanding these and many more excellent Arguments incomparably pressed by
persons of great Virtue and Abilities, the servile and mercenary Court-party
would not be prevailed with to bound and approve the Members sitting in the
other House, before they put it to the Vote for transacting with them: which
made the Commonwealths-men immediately, as the Question was coming on, to
except against the Constitution of the House, as having sixty persons in it
sent from Scotland and Ireland, which had no Right nor Title to sit, which they
did as being afraid to venture the Question for the transacting with the other
House, without first bounding and approving therewith. With this new-started
exception, which held afterward fourteen days Debate, the House risse, and
the next day Mr. Chute, their Worthy and Impartial Speaker, finding himself
indisposed, desired to be dismissed the service; but the House valuing him at a
high Rate, would not accept of his Resignation, but dispensed with his
attendance until he should recover his health, by withdrawing into the
Country, or otherwise as he should think fit; and, to supply his place in the
mean time, Mr. Long, Recorder of London was chosen, but it pleased God, the
great Disposer of all things to end both their days before the end of the
Parliament; taking away the latter first, in whose room as supplying Mr.
Chutes's place, was chosen Mr. Bamfield, Mr. Chute being yet living, though
lived not to come any more unto the House.

The Debate concerning the Scotch and Irish Members, came on, which run several
ways: The Courtiers after they found the want of Law, flew to Prudence,
arguing that for obliging the Scotch and Irish Nations, their Members ought to
be admitted: to which was answered, that nothing could be more provoking to
those two Nations, then fraudulently to give them the Name of having Members in
Parliament: when in truth by the late Elections they had few or none, most of
them being chosen at White hall, whereof some had hardly been ever nearer
Scotland then Grayes-Inne. But besides this answer to the Courtiers Arguments
of Prudence; The Commonwealths men, argued against their sitting, as having no
legal Right or Title, to sit, and that without keeping to legal Rules,
Foundations could not be maintained; for otherwise they that sent sixty now,
might send three hundred next time: and so make Parliaments of what number and
temper they pleased: and therefore would that the Members of both Nations might
withdraw, and be afterward brought in upon legal and equal feet: But White
hall being resolved not to part with any of their strength (though after they
had done their Work, they intended to have cast them off) would have nothing to
do with Law or Right, and therefore whereas the Question should have been,
Whether the Scotch and Irish Members had any legal Right to sit, the words
Legal Right was thrown out. And the bare question put, Whether the Scotch and
Irish Members should sit? And, by the help of the Scotch and Irish, who were
suffered contrary to the Law of nature to Vote in their own Case; It was
carried that they should sit in Parliament. In which Vote, the Parliament may
be said to have betrayed their trust, in taking in strangers without Law to
make Laws for the English Nation: and in not punishing the Keepers of the Seal:
who presumptuously took upon them without and against Law to send sixty
Stangers as Members to Parliament.

After this, the main Question, for transacting with the other House,
before-bounded or approved, which had been interrupted by the Debate about the
Scotch and Irish Members came on again, It was endeavoring to get the Words
Bounding and Approving the Members into the Question; but they were thrown out
by a Vote, and the bare question put; Whether they should be transacted with or
no, as then Constituted, only the Commonwealths-men got the words, during this
present Parliament, into the question: and then by the help of the Scotch and
Irish Votes, by whose number all questions was carried in favor of the Court,
it was resolved to transact with the persons then sitting in the Other House of
Parliament, during this present Parliament.

The Report of the Committee concerning the Accounts of the Commonwealth was
brought in; By it appeared much bad husbandry, and ill Government in the last 5
years: Several Offices being created to serve persons and make Creatures,
without having in them any eye to the public, insomuch that, whereas at the
interruption of Government, the Commonwealth (reckoning the ready money in Cash,
the Army's paid some months before hand, and the stores newly laid in) might
be accounted rich, they are now near two Millions and a half in debt.

The Lady Mary Huet petitioned the Grand Committee of the whole House for
grievances, against the High Court of Juflice, for unjustly taking away the
life of her Husband: but some Members declaring themselves concerned, and it
being the privilege of a Member not to be petitioned against, any where but to
the Parliament, the Petition was returned her with that Intimation.

A public Fast through the three Nations was voted, and a declaration for the
same, from the Commons and the Protector only, was ordered to be brought in:
But the Court party, to the end to engage the transacting with the other house,
brought in the Declaration in the form of a Bill to be made an Act, which
caused the expense of some days in debating in what manner and form to send it
to the Other House, for that the first transaction would be the Rule for the
future: It was in order thereunto voted, That the Commons would not show the
Other House any other respect then they should show to them. Secondly, That
they would send Members of their own to the Other House, and that they would
receive no Messages from them but by Members of their own number. This was all
the Votes of public concernment that was carried in the whole time of the
Parliament, which was either honorable or advantageous for the Commons, and
yet the Courtiers, after they had consulted with White Hall, were resolved to
have unvoted and made it null and void: It was under debate what Ceremony the
Messenger should use at his approach into their House, and what Title to give
them; Mr. Speaker, My Lord Commissioner, and My Lords and Gentlemen, was all
severally spoken of, but none agreed on; and the Courtiers haste being such as
they could not stay, the Messenger that carried the Act for the Fast down to
the Other House, was advised to give them no Title at all, which directions he
followed, and so left the Bill with them, which was never retured. During this
debate some exceptions being taken at Mr. Speaker's carriage as unequal; he was
accused of having had Conference at White Hall with the Pretender, as that
which was contrary to the orders of the House; This Charge put the House into a
great heat, some taking part with him, and some against him, and as the
Courtiers were not only most in number but best at brawling, so they made the
greatest noise, until they observed matter of truth in the thing; and then as
the party charging was satisfied with giving the reproof, so the Courtiers were
willing to have it dye. Some deficiency was observed by the Court in the Acts
for forcing the payment of the Excise, and therefore a Bill was brought in by
one of that party, under a specious pretense of settling it but for a certain
number of years, as the Parliament should agree on, whereas it was settled for
ever. This Bill after long debate, was by means of Common-wealths-men laid
aside, and a Declaration brought in by them to enjoin the payment of the Excise
during the sitting of the Parliament, owning clearly their design to be, That
if the Laws were not good, the ascertaining the Excise no longer then during
the Parliament, would put a necessity upon the Chief Magistrate to let the
Parliament sit until they had done some good for the poor people of England;
and if they were good, the Declaration did not prejudice them: But as the
Commonwealths-men laid aside the Courtiers Bill, so they laid aside the
Commonwealths-mens Declaration.

The Parliament fell upon the Accounts of the Commonwealth again, considered
how to retrench the Charges, bring the disbursements not to exceed the income,
raise present money for the Army out of the Arrears owing the state, and other
ways if possile, without laying any new Tax (which the Court party was much
for) upon the People: But in this they were interrupted by the Courtiers, who
brought on foot, 1. To vote all the Officers of the Army to go to their
several Charges. 2. That they should hold no meeting during the sitting of
Parliament, but by consent of the Protector and both Houses. 3. That none
should be in Office but such as would subscribe not to interrupt either House
of Parliament in their debates etc. These Votes were sent down to the Other
House where they remained unreturned. The next day the Accounts were sallen
upon again, but interrupted the second time by the Courtiers, who brought on
foot the question; Where the right of the Militia did reside? with a design,
first, to vote it in the Protector and both Houses of Parl. And secondly, to
vote the Protector General, knowing that in such Case the Parliaments Interest
in it, even during their sitting, would have signified nothing, and after they
were dissolved it would fall naturally to the Protector soly, because no other
power pretending to it would be in being; but in this business they could not
come to a Question that night though striven hard for by the Court party who
was so eager upon it, that when it was desired that they would but consult the
declarations of the Parliament, and the Kings Concessions thereupon concerning
the Militia, that so they might not rashly give away from the people what the
King had granted to be their right; they would not endure the reading of them,
lest they could not for shame make the people Slaves after their eyes were
open, which they were resolved blindfolded to do. The next day being the 22 of
April, the black Rod came to the door to have entrance. The Sergeant, who
should have done no more then acquainted the House that such a Messenger was at
the door, acquainted them with his Message, (viz.) That by order of the
Protector, the Speaker of the other House sent to the House of Commons to come
with their Speaker to them in the Other House: which the House received
generally with great indignation and scorn, some saying They were the Upper
House, and so without receiving the Messenger, the House adjourned till Monday
the 25th of April: But the next day the pretended Protector dissolved the
pretended Parliament by a Proclamation.

This is a brief Relation of the most material debates of the late Parliament,
many private and some public businesses of lesser concernment being omitted.

Upon the whole it may be observed, that as the Court had by the advantages
which always follow the Authority of the Chief Magistrate, so packed the
Parliament, that the overruling Vote was at their Command; So the persons of
that party were of such servile and mercenary principles, that they knew no
public Interest, nor any other then the private Interest of the single Person,
and their own.

That all that the Commonwealths-men were able to do was to defer and keep off
Slavery for a small time (in hope that God would send deliverance) without
power of doing any more good, then by sometimes getting a qualifying word into
a Question. For,

If the Parliament had sat longer, the Commonwealths-men could not have
preserved the Liberties of the Nation many weeks more, from the ruins the
Couriers had designed. And therefore the Dissolution of it may well be looked
upon as a deliverance equal with that from the Gunpowder-Plot.

And lastly, That as the old Monarchy, The House Lords, the Bishops, and the
Presbyterians, were all, in their several Interests, severally destroyed, by
their several endeavors to maintain the corrupt parts of each several
Interest; So the downfall of the new Monarchy has proceeded from the same
Cause. For would a moderate power have satisfied the Pretender and his party,
it had been readily yielded, the Commonwealths-men being so low in their hopes
of what God has since wonderfully brought about, that they would have been
glad of any indifferent terms for the good People of this Nation, for whom many
and deep Pits were dug, but God has delivered them out of all.

FINIS.

