IT is with all Lowliness imaginable, hereby most humbly hinted to the Right
Reverend, Right Honorable, much Honored, Reverend and Worshipful Persons, all
which we have presumed to nominate in the other side of this Paper, as
Referrees of the Ladies intended Hospital, That on the 3 and 4th of this
Instant, a Messenger was sent with great Care to the several houses of the four
Gentlemen herein mentioned, Sr. F. Pemberton, and the other three, in manner
and form of this Letter following.

Right Worshipful Sir,
YOu know I have too much Matter and Backwardness publicly to complain of though
in part I yet do in these two printed sheets; which is the same that I am this
3 and 4 of April sending to the Right Honorable, Right Reverend, Reverend and
Worshipful Persons, many whose great Prudence may be equal, and most of them
better able to judge of true Charity and Christian Duties than you Sr. Francis,
who was pleased to promise August 27. 1683. in the presence of five Gentlemen,
You would encourage any thing toward upholding the Hospital, The Lord Berkly,
the Lord of London, the Dean of Canterbury, the Dean of Norwich, Dr Haiscard,
Dr Horneck, with others should think worthy; and did then further say, If you
should do any thing to hinder true Charity, you hoped God would never prosper
you in it, as may be attested -- yet, I say, You all have -- And leave you,
with the other three Gentlemen to give your Reasons above board, or in print,
as I have done, who intend nothing but good to all and am your humble Servant

W B


The Copy of this Letter to Sr. Fr. Pemberton, was sent to Fr. Blake, Esquire Henry
Cornish, Esquire late Alderman, and to Mr. Ashurst, with two sheets to each, of the
Ladies Referees papers.

And now, not certainly knowing whether this short modest and humble Complaint
in Behalf of the Nobility's and Gentry's Hospital, all which the Word Ladies
does include, might safely come to the hands of all those honorable, reverend
and worshipful persons to whom they were really intended and directed, for a
great and public good. It is presumed to offer over again the same papers and
number with this little Addition, whereby it may easily be perceived in the
persons complained of, That they are too conscious to themselves of some guilt
at least, which they much rather desire may be past over, hushed up and buried
in Silence, then in the least brought into debate: Wherefore this cause being
the virtuous Ladies, the way cheap, green, plain and pleasant for carrying it
on, it is hoped and confidently presumed, the right Reverend, noble Lords,
Bishops, Knights Barronets, Reverend Clergy and other worthy Persons will
consider what more is in their great prudence yet further to be done; it being
no ways fitting so inferior person should presume to stir one hairs breadth
in any way whatever, without leave.

But he does yet presume or beg leave to think this one time only, that if the
Noble Lords, Right Reverend Bishops, or the Right worshipful Knights Barronets,
with the Reverend Deans, Doctors and Worshipful Esquires would by their
Gentlemen, Stewards or Servants, as they shall think fit, commend one two or
three of these papers on the Ladies behalf, they might mightily oblige them;
and immediately gain an hundred times more than he who with sincerity and long
Labor has still fished, caught nothing but good Approbation, Promises and
Subscriptions; (as is mentioned in the Close) in comparison of what one quarter
of a word of the above mentioned eminent worthy and prudent may easily prevail
and do: Wherefore it is humbly and most earnestly prayed, by the cheerful yet
much unworthy sufferer, who has had a hard Winter, needless politic
Imprisonment, He not being bound for, or owing to any in the World one groat,
but what the Marquesses house would more than pay (would he sell it from this
Design, but will die a hundred Deaths rather than betray this public Good,)
That you would not for your own and the Noble Ladies sake, let this present
Spring be lost, which presents them with all their bosom flowers, you their
Lords and Masters, and every Ey, a a hundred green and fresh delights.

W. B.

The LADIES Milk-House: OR, The Oppressed Man's COMPLAINT,
WITH an humble Offer of a REFERENCE in the behalf of their Hospital
Charity-School or Milk-house now at HIGH-GATE, for the good of Numberless poor
Children, nigh and in the Suburbs of Westminster, and County of Middlesex,
especially these six Parishes, St. Martin's in the Fields, St. Giles's in the
Fields, St. Clement's Danes, St. Paul's Covent Garden, St. Mary Savoy, and part
of St. Andrews Holborn.
Whereas an Opposition has been made, and a great Endeavor still is to Martyr
and share this Eminently good DESIGN, by these four (otherwise worthy) Persons,
viz. Sir Francis Pemberton, late Lord Chief Justice of England; Francis Blake
of High-gate Esquire Henry Cornish Esquire late Alderman of London; William Ashurst of
London Draper: To which Persons it is hereby Offered, by him who has been
all-along too much discouraged, wronged, and oppressed, to be discoursed in
this single sheet, by the aforesaid Gentlemen, to whom he makes this large
Offer for a friendly Reference, viz.

THat if they can get it under the Hands and Seals of any three Persons out of
the Thirty one, here under-nominated, as they stand mentioned, Then the said
concerned Person so much injured will sit down satisfied under the great
Damages and Losses he has hitherto patiently sustained during this great
Undertaking for the good of many yet unborn.

The Referrees.

The Honorable, and Right Reverend, the Lord Bishop of London: the right
Reverend the Lord Bishop of Lincoln: the right Reverend, the Lord Bishop of
Rochester. The reverend Dean of Canterbury; the Dean of St. Paul's London; the
Dean of Norwich; the reverend Doctor Tennison, Minister of St. Martins; Doctor
Haiscard, minister of St. Clement's Danes. Doctor Horneck, Minister of St. Mary
Savoy; Doctor More, Doctor Wiggons, Doctor Turner, at the Lord of London's;
Doctor Meriton, Lecturer of St. Martin's; Mr. Leech, Lecturer of St. Giles's;
Mr. Hopkins, Lecturer of St. Paul's Covent Garden.

And if to none of all these Reverend Divines, Then to any Three of these Four
most Honorable Lords, or right worshipful, and Worshipful Knights Baronets, and
Esquires. The Right Honorable the Earl of Kent, the Right Honorable the Earl of
Bedford, the Right Honorable the Earl of Berkly, the Right Honorable the Lord
Falconbridge.

Or the right Woshipful Sir Walter St. John's, Sir James Langham, Sergeant
Maynard, Sir Charles Cottrel, Sir Richard Mason, Sir Christopher Wren; Sir
William Turner, Sir Robert Clayton, Sir John Shorter. The Worshipful Alderman
Arnold, Robert Bartlet Esquire John Nichols Esquire, Counselor of the Temple.

So that if any three of these right Honorable, Reverend or Worshipful Persons,
as they stand, shall give it under their hands and Seals, That they Believe or
think this DESIGN is not Good, Much, or at all Wanted in these Parts, well Fixed
and placed for which it is endeavored, petitioned and intended; and that the
late Lord Marquess of Dorchester's House is not a Noble, Graceful, Cheap and
Convenient Building for this DESIGN, where the Children may be more Healthfully
kept, and less diverted from their Learning than else where, it being much in
the View of the Gentry.

Or else, that the right Worshipful Sir Francis, and the three other Gentlemen
have done kindly or neighbourly according to Law, or as they should or ought to
have done by the Petitioner: yea, if they have not done unkindly and
unneighbourly in what they have done against him, he will be bound in a great
measure to sit down satisfied in what they have already done against him, with
the Loss of all his Expenses although they have been very great and
considerable, and purely occasioned by them, besides his Pains, Abuses and
Sufferings even to this day, which has been almost unspeakable also.

But if Sir Francis P. and the three Gentlemen or Esquires, cannot procure
thtee of the four Noble men's hands, nor the three right Reverend Bishops, nor
the three reverend Deans, nor three of the six Doctors, nor the three
Lecturers, nor any three of the nine right worshipful Knights and Baronets, or
the three Esquires, to give it under their hands and Seals, as above mentioned,
within the space of one Fortnights time, or else to knock under board -- and
for ever cease their Opposition against the LADIES HOSPITAL; and think on that
great Wrong, with some part of Amends, for what they have done to their
harmless Friend and Neighbor, his Wife and good Children, (Son and Daughters,
which he loves next GOD and his Soul) by inciting and stirring them up against
this Public GOOD, tending to the Advantage of the Poor, the Nobilities,
Gentries, Clergy's, yea, RELIGION's Praise, to the Worlds End. All which this
DESIGN Was, Is, and Ever will be for.

And Three or Four Hundred Pounds will set it immediately going, against all
Opposition, toward which it is hoped and verily believed several pious and
charitable minded Persons will forthwith send their Kindness: (Many having
formerly promised and subscribed) to some one of these Reverend Divines, making
them as so many Treasurers in their own Parishes, till they shall think on some
other, that their High Calling and great Studies may not be too much
interrupted, by this truly Good and Charitable Work, who will doubtless see it
well managed to their perpetual Honor: and the present pleasure of the Ey, by
seeing many Children in their Habit, before next Quarter, or this Summer come
about, or else their Money to be all restored.

And he who has been laboring at it, will Refer every thing into their own, or
others hands, as they shall think best, without any thing of his own Name, to
the World's End: And give, in his Accounts, if desired, very considerably
toward it, besides all his Labor and Pains: And settle every thing by a
Surrender, Leaving such Worthy Persons as shall assist or manage it as
Governors, by his most Gracious Majesty's Favor and Patent to re-imburse him,
in such manner and time as they themselves shall think fit.

And now, can it be imagined, but that some, nay, many will do as the wise in
heart did, in another Case, about the Rearing of the Tabernacle, this being, in
a little measure, toward such a Work: VVisely considering they do but lay up
for themselves, 1 Timothy 6. 17. And how the Night comes, when no man can work:
the Silver Cord and Golden Bowl will soon be broken, like the Pitcher at the
Fountain head; and then VANITY of VANITIES ALL IS VANITY, Except CHRIST and
Good Works, Exodus 35. 22, 29. John 9. 4. Eccles. 12. 6, 7, 8. Dan. 12. 13. So
that without Repentance, the great Opposers of Charity, will be in danger to go
where it shall never avail to weep, Matt. 8. 12. and 25. 46 when they come to
step upon the dark Mountains of Eternity, Jer. 13. 16. which they would do well
to Consider. And this particular Prayer and Epistle, as well as our daily ones
for poor and Fatherless Children, ordered and appointed for all Churches, the
first week in Lent.

O Lord, who has taught us, that all our doings without Charity are nothing
worth, send thy Holy Ghost, and pour into our Hearts that most excellent Gift
of Charity, the very Bond of Peace and of all Virtues, without which whosoever
lives is accounted dead before Thee; Grant this for thy only Son Jesus Christ
his sake, Amen. The Epistle 1 Cor. 13. 1. Though I speak with the Tongues of
Men and Angels, and have not Charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a
tinkling Cimball: Though I have the gift of Prophecy, and understand all
Mysteries, and knowledge; and have all Faith to remove mountains, and have no
Charity, it profits me nothing. And now abides Faith, Hope, and Charity, but
the greatest of these is Charity.

It is rationally guessed, that the Promises already given and made will amount
to 4 or 500 l. per annum, which may appear by their own Subsciptions and
Promises.

Dated, April 2. 1684. W. B.


