The Best NEVVES That ever was PRINTED.

1. Prince Ruperts resolution to be gone to his Mother who has sent for him.
2. His Majesty's Royal intentions declared to join with the Parliament in a
treaty for peace. 3. The part^culars of the high Court of Parliament drawn up
to be sent to his Majesty for peace. 4. Directions from the Lords and Commons,
directed to the Commanders for the ordering of the Army.
feb: 20 1642 London, Printed for I. A. 1643.

Prince RUPERTS Resolution to be gone to his Mother, who has sent for him.
WE do in the presence of Almighty God, and to all the whole world, and in the
sight of all good men, in no manner approve, allow, give consent, or any way
countenance the unjust and unruly actions of my Son Prince Rupert now in
England; and so do I the same with the Queen, my dear mother, by the same vow
disrellish and hate all those outrages and cru^lties of any brother Prince
Rupert, and it grieves us at our very Souls for his unhumane cruelties we
hear he commit, whose passion we cannot confine, and whose (...) spirit we
cannot calm nor dis^ him from acting, by the lawful means which we have used,
as by Letters, Messages, and intimate friends.

And our petition and desire is to the honorable Houses of Parliament, that our
annual pensions may be duly paydus, which is our chiefest livelihood under
God, and that we may not suffer and languish for his sake, whose actions and
behavior we cannot help. Hoping that both. Houses of Parliament will speedily
consider of our petition which we have sent unto them, having continually
found that savor from this Kingdom of England, for their real loves in our
distress, that we are bound to assist you and your Nation both with our praser
and thanks which is only acceptable and best ^l^^sing to God and to all
righteous men (...) And for my particular, I take God to witness, so long as I
was ^n England with His Majesty, I labored for peace, and a Reconciliation
betwixt his Majesty and his Parliament, but finding that I could not prevail,
but I was over borne by a strong faction who had his Majesty's care, I took my
leave, and went for Holland, obeying and harkening unto my mothers counsel whom
I shall willingly obey and abide with.

Prince Rupert began to declare his resolution to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, and the rest of the Nobles, attending upon his Royal person, which was
to this effect.

That he had in or mation by letters from Holland that his Royal mother was
much discontented and troubled in mind for his residence here in England, and
way very desirous that be should take leave of his Royal. Oakle the King of
England, and to go to Hosland to her, whereby she might impart her mind unto
him, be bring willing to ^^lfill his mother, desires, and sorry for his first
comening over, declared his resolucion to his Majesly that he was now resolved
to leave England, desering his Majesty not to be displeased thereat; and that
according to the utmost of his power, he would endeavor to send over such
able Commanders, as should finish what be had begun.

His Majesty's Royal intentions declared to joynewith his Parliament in a
treaty of Peace.
WE will not repeat what means we have used to prevent the dangerous, and
distracted estate of the Kingdom, nor how those means have been interpreted,
because being desirous to avoid effusion of blood, we are willing to decline
all memory of former bitterness that might make our offer of a treaty less
readily accepted.

We never did declare, nor ever intended to declare both Our houses of
Parliament traitors, or set up our Standard against them, We utterly profess
against it before God and the world, and further to remove all possible
scruples which may hinder the treaty so much desired by us: we hereby promise,
so that a day be appointed by you, for the revoking of your Declarations
against all persons as traitors, or otherwise for assisting of us. We shall
with all chearfullnesse upon the same day recall our Proclamations, and
Declarations, and take down our Standard. In which treaty, we shall be ready to
grant any thing, that shall be really for the good of Our Subjects, conjuring
you to consider the bleeding condition of Ireland, and the dangerous condition
of England, in as high a degree, as by these Our offer. We have declared Our
self to do: And assuring you that Our chief desire in this world, is to beget
a good understanding, and mutual considence betwixt Us, and Our two Houses of
Parliament.

The particulers of the high Court of Parliament drawn up to be sent to his
Majesty for peace.
THe House of Commons spent much time in debating upon His Majesty's
Propositions lately sent to the House concerning an Accommodation, there being
usually in the House at this debate at least two hundred of the Members,
besides many there be which are employed upon special service of the Kingdom
in several Countries, by which it appears that the Parliament are not so few
in number as some disaffected persons do report they are; and at last it was
voted to this effect, viz. 1. That there should be a speedy disbanding of both
Armies. 2. That the Armies in the Northern and Western Counties and other
remote part, shall be disbanded by the first of March. 3. That the Armies at
Oxford, Redding, Windsore, and the parts adjacent, be disbanded by the tenth
of March. 4. That Messengers be sent to the King, to treat of the true and
manner of disbanding, and that a cessation of arms shall be assented unto, in
reference in the dishanding. 5. That presently after the disbanding of both
Armies, a committee shall be sent to attend His Majesty by an humble Treaty to
give him satisfaction conce^n^ng the ^rop^sitions sent to them from the King
and likewise those Propositions wh^^^ were presentied from the Parliament to
His Majesty.


An order by the Lords and Commons for direction in the Army.
Whereas there have been diverse complaints made unto us of many disorders,
committed by the soldiers; in their marching, and in such places wherein they
have been quairered and billered, which disorders (as is informed) have been
partly occasioned by the neglect of their Officers to go along with them: It
is therefore ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that the
Lord General be desired to give command to all the officers, that they take
care to attend, according to the duty of their several pl^^^s, that the
soldiers thereby may be hereafter kept from straggling up and down the
Countries. And to that end to lay his command upon the Officers of each
Company, both in the marching, quartering, and billeting, to be in person
amongst the soldiers, to prevent any disorders whatsoever, and punish such as
shall offend.

FINIS.

