THE Best Way OF Using the True Salt POLYCHREST OF MESSIEVRS SEIGNETTE OF
ROCHEL.

LONDON, Printed for the Author. MDCLXXXV.

The best Way of Using the true Salt Polychrest of Messieurs Seignette of
Rochel.
THis Remedy has got such a Reputation abroad, that it is no Wonder if some
People have been and are still very eager to discover it. So natural it is for
Mankind to inquire into all Things; and such is the Duty incumbent on those who
take upon them the Cure of Diseases, as to omit nothing that may conduce to so
great a Thing as Health is. But we have reason to wonder both at the Ignorance
and Baseness of those Men, who, abusing the Trust we had reposed in them for
the Sale of this Polychrest, have counterfeited it, and do still counterfeit it
(as does one Mr. Roussean in Paris) with a Mixture of Sulphur and Saltpeter
burnt together. The Effects of which have been too fatal, and have sufficiently
taught us how dangerous it was to be surprised by the Equivoque of a Name
signifying so contrary Things. It was upon that ground that in the Year 1675 we
published a Treatise of all the Imitations of our Polychrest that were then
made, wherein we made it appear how much they differed from ours. Of which
Truth the Learned were so fully convinced, upon a strict Inquiry made in that
Juncture of Time in the most famous Universities of France, and by the
Experiments that were made of it in private, that I need not enlarge upon it.

The only Design of these Papers is, to show how to use this Remedy more
methodically and to more Advantage than has been done hitherto; and to declare
withal, that we have took away the Selling of it from Mr. Angibaud, a French
Apothecary living in S. Martins Lane, who was entrusted with the Sale thereof.
For, having made an ill Use of the Trust we had put in him, and taking an
Advantage of our dwelling out of this Kingdom, he has made bold to put off,
under our Name and Seal, a Powder of his own making. Which has proved so
pernicious, and has so far endangered the Lives of some Persons of great
Quality in this Kingdom, that the true Polychrest was brought into Suspicion.
And indeed it was natural enough for Persons that could not, through such a
cunning Disguise, and so deceitful an Outside, discen the true Remedy from the
Counterfeit, to exclaim against the true one, and charge it as a mischievous
Thing, though never so beneficial to Mankind.

This very Thing was fit to be took notice of, the rather for that our
Reputation and the Lives of such Persons are at stake, and because Mr. Angibaud
(as we are informed) continues to sell his Polychrest, contrary to a Promise he
has given us under his own hand, that he would not meddle with it any more.
It Is true he has dressed it up with new Covers, and that the Name and Town
printed thereon are sufficient Marks to distinguish it from ours. But, if on
the one side he has stripped it of its former borrowed Outside, he has
enriched it on the other with the Spoils of a small Treatise published by us in
French about fifteen Years since. Insomuch that he gives his Polychrest all the
Virtues of ours, though he knows well enough, and has been told of it
sufficiently, that there is a vast Difference.

This second Shift is no less captious and cunning than the first. For he
foresaw very well, that few Persons would give themselves the trouble of
comparing the Copy with the Original. And, if any were so far curious, he knew
they could but commend him for his faithful Translation, for having followed
his Text close, without adding or diminishing, without changing the Words or
the Sense, but rendering the Whole, word for word, out of French into English.
The Gentleman was sensible, that in such a Case as this, if any, he must be
strict and conscientious, and do things bona fide. The Truth is, we cannot but
commend his for it, and return him Thanks forsooth for the Respect he showed to
our Treatise, so far as to imagine it should contain all the Virtues of his
Powder, and that it was of it self sufficient to cry it up. One good Turn
deserves another; and it is but fit we should express our Gratitude to him by
these two good Offices.

In the first place, I shall make his Apology against those that might find
fault with him for having altered the Method of our Book which he was pleased
to transcribe. For, whereas we had spoke but toward the end of it of the Use
which might be made of our Polychrest with Mineral Waters, without opening at
large the Advantages that might come by it, he began his Treatise by showing
how easily his Powder is dissolved in the said Waters, and how it brings them
out of the Body, sometimes by Stools, and sometimes by Urine. Now this
Transposition is certainly very judicious, and nothing could be better
contrived for his purpose, being it contains all the Virtues one may most
rationally attribute unto his Powder. Which, if capable of producing any good
Effect, must needs do it on this Occasion. It Is well known, that most of the
Salts used in Physic, being suspected in a small quantity of Water, may be
drunk without Fear, being well dissolved, and especially in that vast Quantity
of Water which some People use to drink up.

In the next place we shall do him the Kindness to show him a more ready, and
perhaps a cheaper, Way than he has to make his Powder. Let him but take what
Quantity he pleases of Salt of Tartar, or of any other Alkali, fixed and
well-purified, and add to it a reasonable quantity of acid Spirit, and he shall
see presently all his Salt purified and chrystallized. If he question this
Experiment, he may inquire about it of the Physicians, and other Virtuosi, in
whose Presence I made it. They will assure him, that out of that Mixture of
Acid and Alkali, there comes a Salt of the same Taste and nature as his, that
will stand any Proof. They will testify unto him, that, after it is dried up
and pulverized, if it be thrown into cold Water, it is presently congealed, and
turned into chrystalline lumps, instead of being dissolved; that those
Chrystals are long, sharppointed, and easily reduced into Powder, their figure
coming near those of Saltpeter; that being put upon glowing Coals, they melt
away to Water, and that in the quenching of them they make them cake together
by a kind of Vitrification. They will further tell him, that the same Chrystals
being exposed to a moderate Heat, or to an Air somewhat dry, lose presently
their from, and are reduced into a Powder almost impalpable. By those Gentlemen
he shall be informed, that our Salt is (much like Cashoo) bitter-sweet, that it
easily dissolves in the Water, that its Chrystals are hard, compacted, and of
the figure of Lozenges, that they never dissolve in the Air nor yet in the
Fire, that they neither quench burning Coals nor make them Cake; but on the
contrary grow red-hot like Iron, and lose only their Transparence, without
receiving any other Alteration whatsoever.

The aversion that People always had against Physical Remedy's, but chiefly
against Purges, has given us occasion to go about to correct the same, and to
take off from them that unpleasant Taste and dreadful Color which daunts the
spirits of the stoutest Men, and often deprives them from the benefit which
might be got by those Remedy's. To compass our Design, that which seemed most
proper for it is the Matter of Salts; which is not only of the greatest
latitude, but withal includes in it self all the Virtue inherent in the Mixts,
and contains in a short compass what is diffused in other Body's. Therefore we
made choice of three sorts of Salt, the best known to us, to compose a Remedy
of many Uses in Physic, and such as could be taken without any great caution.
Which Remdey we named Polychrest, from a Greek Word that signify's a Thing of
several Uses.

And indeed in the first place it purges, without irritation and pain, the
gross Excrements and the most viscous Humors, so that it may be safely
administered to the weakest Persons, and to Women at any time of their
Childbearing, even when they have upon them those griping Pains which are
commonly the forerunners of a Labor. And, as it is safe and proper to Women
in that Condition before their Deliverance, so it is in their After-pains
whilst they ly in Childbed.

Secondly, this Polychrest is excellent to remove Obstructions in any part of
the Body whatever, and likewise to correct the putrified Mass of the Blood, and
restore it to its natural state. Which two Property's are of that great
consequence, that they should make the Receipt so much the more valuable; but
they are Things the least known, and therefore the least regarded. For many
People are prepossessed, that a Physic don't work, and no Good is to be
expected from it, unless it works violently, and carry's off with it a great
deal of thick Matter; as if this were the only Way to ease Nature, and the Cure
of all Diseases should depend upon those Evacuations.

These Things being premised, our Design is now to propose a short and easy
Method, that may serve on the one side as a Guide and Direction for the sick,
and a Ground-plot on the other side for such as shall be appointed to
administer this physical Remedy. Insomuch that it will be an easy matter for
these, according to their Insight and Experience in Physic, to stretch or vary
it, as Occasion shall serve, having still a regard to the differency of
Distempers, and the symptoms that may happen. I have frobore to descend to
Particulars, and that for these three Reasons. First, because they may be
easily discovered. Secondly, because otherwise they may be left to the care and
fidelity of the Patients Physician. And thirdly, because Mr. Angibaud has saved
us the trouble of it by publishing our forementioned Treatise, which I suppose
has been read by several.

Therefore it will be sufficient to observe three principal Ways, in the Use of
our Polychrest, according to the three Intentions one ought to have in the Cure
of Diseases. The first is in order to Purge the gross Excrements, and all the
filth that remains in the Ventricle. The second is, to allay and dissolve the
Humors that ly stagnant in the inward Parts, as the Liver, Spleen, Reins,
Mesenterium, Pancreas, and the Womb. The third is, to make it circulate with
the Blood, to correct and purify it when putrid, to sweeten it when it is come
to be too sharp or acid, to make it fluid when too thick to diffuse it self
through all the Parts of the Body, or when it is so active and violent as to
run without giving any nourishment of Spirits want still to being wasted of
Spirits want still to be recruited. Now these are the Ways called by the
Physicians, Prima, Secunda, and Tertia Via, this last being the remotest of all.

The common Dose of this Remedy to Purge the first Way is six Drams, to be put
in a Quart or three parts of a Quart of Water, or of any other Liquour. But one
may take a lesser quantity both of the Powder and Liquour, according to the Age
and Strength of the Patient. As for a Child one or two years of age, the fourth
part of the Doze will be enough, being taken in four or five ounces of
blood-warm Milk, and that in the space of five or six hours, one hour before
and after it has sucked. Half the Doze in a Pint of Water will be sufficient
for a Child five or six years old; which he may take at any time of the Day,
provided it be some time before he eats, or after he has eaten. The two thirds
of the Doze in three parts of a Quart of Water is proper for a Child ten or
eleven years old. And lastly, the whole Doze in a Quart or three parts of a
Quart of Water, for any Person fifteen years of Age, and all above that Age. As
for such Persons who, by reason of the weakness of their Stomach, cannot bear
with such a quantity of Water, they may freely reduce it to a Pint, steeping
some Licorish therein, to take off a bitterish kind of Taste which some Persons
might be disgusted at.

The most proper Time to purge with this Remedy is in the Morning, fasting.
But, in case of Necessity, it may be taken at any time of the Day, except
immediately after Meals. Two or three Hours after one has drunk the last Glass
of the Doze, he may take some Veal or Mutton-broth.

In general it is to be observed, that in all Diseases contracted by an
abundance of Humors, but especially by viscous and melancholy Humors, such as
hinder the Digestion and interrupt the course of the animal Spirits (which is
observable in a sick Body, by a low intermittent Pulse) the whole Doze must be
put into three parts of a Quart at the most, or a Pint of Spring Water warmed,
or else instead of common Water, in some Decoctions of Roots, Barks, and
Aromatical Herbs, the better to extenuate and divide that gross and viscous
Humor. And because it sometimes falls out in such Diseases, that the Patient
brings up all the Doze, or some part of it, the Way to remedy that is to take
again as much of the Dose as is come up, thereby to open the Passage to and
precipitate the Humors. But, if the Patient continue to vomit (which happens
but too often) then we make use of a purging Salt; and this we give either
alone, or with the fourth part of the Doze of Polychrest, in two Glasses of
warm Water, or else in some cooling Broth. Which Salt does evacuate much more
than the Polychrest, and is most proper in this Exigence.

But in such Diseases as proceed from the overflowing of the Choler, which
rarifying or mingling it self with the other Humors, causes Fermentations in
the Blood, and provokes Keckings and Vomitings, it is more proper to put the
Doze of Polychrest into a Quart or three pints of Spring Water, and to drink it
cold by degrees, one Glass full every Hour or Half-hour. But, if the Patient be
under any great Pains, either of Cholick or Diarrhaea, he may take the Remedy
in the same quantity of Water very hot, and as is before said.

This Remedy does not only purge gently, but corrects also the Violence of all
other Purges, if one put but one half or a fourth part of the Doze into their
Infusion. It has also a singular Property, viz. to stop and appease the
Vomiting occasioned by the most powerful Emeticks; which do not only give
terrible Jerks to the Membranes of the Stomach, but leave commonly a bad
Impression, especially upon a weak Stomach. To prevent which, put a third part,
or one half of our Doze, into one half pint of cold Water, and take it half an
Hour before the Emetick. And, if the Operation of the Emetick be such as to
cause too violent and constant a Vomiting, it is but taking the fourth part of
the Doze into a great Glass of Water or warm Decoction. The Vomit having done
working, there remains still commonly some Disposition to vomit, with a
swimming of the Head; and the long stay either of Antimony, or of any other
Emetick in the Stomach, is known to be of a dangerous Consequence. Which to
avoid, do but take one half or a third part of the Doze of Polychrest in a
great Glass of Water. The same will remove the pricking of the Sulphurs and the
Salts of Antimony, and precipitate them with the Humors disgorged into the
Stomach by the lower Parts, which is the most natural Way.

The second Way is to remove the Obstructions which are bred in the Liver,
Spleen, and Mesenterium, in the Pancreas, the Reins, the Bladder, and the Womb;
from whence proceed a great number of long and stubborn Diseases, such as
Rhumatisms, heaviness of the Head and Head-akes, Sleepiness, Apoplexy, Palsy,
Cachexy, Jaundice, the Dropsy either of the Brain or Breast, of the low Belly
or the Womb, the Asthma, or shortness of Breath, Ischuries or retentions of
Urine, the Nephreticks, the Gout, and Sciatick. To which add diverse other
Diseases, caused by those Obstructions; which do not only obstruct the Passage
of the Blood, but make it besides too sharp and too brackish. And of this
Number I reckon Restlesness, great Pains in the Head, Giddiness, Phrensy, the
Contractions of the Nerves, Convulsions, Inflammations of the Breast,
Hysterical or Hypocondriacal Vapors, and the Scurvy.

In all which Diseases, the chief end of this Remedy being to separate and
extenuate the thick and stagnant Humors that lay in the narrowest Passages,
and to give free passage to the Blood, and to the motion of the Spirits, this
following Method is to be observed.

First of all, the Patient is to be prepared by a Purge with a Doze of the
Polychrest, in a pint or a pint and a half of River or Spring Water, to carry
off by this means the coursest Excrements, and to facilitate the distribution
of the remedy through all the Parts of the Body. After which, the very Night
after the Purge, he may put a Doze in a quart or three pints of Water, and take
a great Glass of it three hours after Supper, and another the next day very
early, that he may sleep upon it, and the rest in the Daytime between Meals,
continuing the use of it during five or six Days more or less, according to the
Nature of the Disease, and the Condition of the Diseased. Nay he may, if he
pleases (which is our usual Method) forbear drinking of it between Meals, so he
takes a great Glass in the Night when he goes to Bed, and the rest in the
Morning fasting, in the compass of two or three Hours.

But for a greater ease to the Patient, and to follow the Indications that
offer themselves, it is proper enough to put the Remedy into different
Liquours. So, when the Patient is of a bilious Temper, it may be put in
Liquours made sowrish with the Juice of Lemons, Gooseberry's, or Barberry's,
etc. if he be of a moist or pituitous Temper, let it be put in Ptisanes, or
Decoctions, made with Roots, Barks, Leaves, or aromatical Flowers. And, if one
would have these Liquors work by Stools rather than Urine, they must be drunk
very warm, walking abroad in the Air, or taking some other Exercise. But, if he
had rather they should work by Urine than by Stools, he must take it cold, and
that by Intervals, keeping his Bed or his Chamber, and adding to his Doze a
little Spirit of Sulphur or Vitriol. Instead of Decoctions he may use
River-water, which runs through the Body much quicker than Spring Water. The
same will become mineral, and very strong, if one put the fourth or third part
of the Doze upon two Quarts to be drunk in the Morning, fasting, within the
compass of two or three Hours, during the first five or six Days, diminishing
afterward the Doze of the Powder to the fourth part or something less upon the
same Quantity of Water. The use whereof must be continued yet a while,
according to the Patient's Distemper.

The Third and last Way of using this physical Remedy is in order to have it
mingled with the Chylus and the Blood; that running by this means into the most
secret Conduits, it may qualify and refresh the too sharp and inflamed Choler,
correct and dulcifie the other Juices too acid or too corroding, and restore
the whole Mass of Blood to its true Consistence, and that balsamic Quality it
must have to distribute to all Parts of the Body the Nourishment they want. To
do this effectually, the two first Ways must be made use of, or else one must
be at least sufficiently purged. This being done, put the third part of the
Doze into a Quart of Water, or any other convenient Liquor, and take a Glass
on it two hours after Suppper, and another in the Morning. Sleep upon it, if you
can possibly, and drink the rest in the Daytime, an Hour before every Meal,
and two or three Hours after. So the whole Doze will be taken in twenty four
Hours, whereby the Patient shall be brought to a good Temper, and find a great
deal of ease; his Water will come more freely, and his Belly will be loosened,
without any other sensible Effect. If so be the Patient is of a lean and dry
Constitution, or is wasted away by his long Distemper, it is fit in such a Case
he should be bathed in a Room for several days together, or (if he be too weak)
every other day. But the Water must only be lukewarm, whereby to provoke an
insensible Transpiration, or at the most a little Moisture on the Skin. And,
during the Bath, the Polychrest shall be used just as before, only the Patient
shall drink a Glass on it at his entering into the Bath, and some Glasses while
he is in. Which Method is to be observed in all Diseases proceeding from the
Corruption of the Blood; such as consumptive, putrid, and hectic Fevers,
quotidian, tertian, and double tertian Agues; also in all Venereal Diseases,
and all such as proceed from an exceeding great Effervescency or Irritation of
Humors, as bloody Fluxes, whether they proceed from the Brain, or from the
Breast, from the Stomach, or the Reins, from the Haemorrhoids, or the Womb.
But, if the Patient be fat, and of a moist Complexion, it is fit he should take
some Exercise during this Use of the Remedy, and a convenient Sweating will be
very proper for him.

Thus you have in general the Character of this Remedy, and the Method to be
used for the Cure of the forementioned Diseases. Those that judge only of the
Goodness of Physic by the great quantity of Drugs, and that are used to seek
their Ease in great Compositions (though their Virtue does commonly fall short
of their show) will undoubtedly look upon the Virtues we attribute to our Salt,
as a Piece of Exaggeration. But we are fully persuaded on the other side, that
those who understand Physic, being conscious that the plainest Physics are
the best, will think well of our Remedy; especially if they do but examine the
Nature of it, and consider the Virtues of Salts and mineral Waters, the Effects
whereof do oftentimes exceed the Expectation both of those that take them, and
of those that prescribe 'em.

What remains, before we conclude, is to acquaint you, that our Reflections and
long Experience have taught us, that Polychrest does not work upon all
Occasions alike, but that it operates best in case of a Cholick, a Diarrhea,
and Gripings in the Guts, in an overflowing of the Choler, in hysterical
Suffocations and melancholy Vapors, and in the menstrual Retentions. Upon
these Occasions I may say that Polychrest has signalized it self, and has often
exceeded our Expectations. And therefore, though from the Ground-plot we have
already laid, one may guess what course must be taken in those kind of
Diseases, yet for the public Good we shall enlarge a little upon it.

In case of a bilious Cholick (which is easily discerned by the Temper of the
Person troubled therewith, by the Diseases he is subject to, such as burning
Fevers and Light-headedness, by a bitter Taste in the Mouth, by a frequent
disposition to Vomiting, and by a yellowish Complexion) let the whole Doze be
put in a Quart of Spring Water, or thin Veal-broth, and let the Patient take it
as hot as he can possibly, in the space of an hour and a half or two hours.
But, if the Pains continue, and the Belly don't grow loose, let him take
another Doze either immediately after the first Doze is drunk up, or else six
or seven Hours after. And, during this Interval, let him take some good
nourishing Broth.

For a pituitous Cholick (which is discernable by the good Complexion of the
Person which is troubled with it, by the frequent Waters that run out of his
Nose and Mouth; and by the Rhumatisms he is often affected with) let the whole
Doze be put only in a Quart of aromatic Decoction, or (for want thereof) of
plain Water, and let the Patient take it, in the space of an Hour or an Hour
and a half at the most, as hot as he can drink it. And, if that be not
sufficient, (as most times it is not) let him take another Doze, Glass upon
Glass, if he can bear with it; or else an Interval may be allowed him, during
which the Patient must take good nourishing Broth.

As for a windy Cholick, common to pituitous and melancholy People, and easy to
be discerned by the Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Hypocondria, and by
the Winds those Persons make both upwards and downwards, by a considerable
stretching of the Ventricle, by the grumbling noise and swelling of the
Abdomen, by the bringing up of Nourishments and Remedies, by being bound, and
by a closing up of the Anus whereby the Injection of Clisters is often hindered;
for this kind of Cholick, I say, let the whole Doze be put into a Quart of
aromatic Decoction, adding to it some Flowers of Camomil and Claver, and let
the Patient take it hot, one Glass full every quarter of an hour, or every half
hour. At the same time let there be some Fomentations of Rue, Camomil, and
Claver, be applied to the Part. And, whereas this is the most malignant and
obstinate of all the Cholicks, two or three Dozes will be requisite, to be
taken quicker or sloower according to the Strength of the Patient.

This withal take along with you, that whatever Cholick it is, as soon as the
violent Pains are allayed, it is absolutely necessary by emollient or
wind-expelling Clisters to carry off the Humors that are got into the Bowels,
and to purge the Patient as soon as he shall be in a condition to endure new
Evacuations, lest some leven should remain, which might disorder him again.

For a simple Diarrhea, let the Patient take half the Doze in a Quart of
Decoction, either of Barley or Bran. But, if there be any thing of Blood, let
there be added to the Decoction some handfuls of red Roses, and of grains of
Wall-wort very ripe, to be infused or boiled therein. The Use of which must be
continued for the space of two or three Days, till the Humor be a little
sweetened. After which, the Patient must be purged with the whole Dose, in a
Quart of Water, or of the same Decoction.

In case of a Cholerd Morbus, whereby the Patient lies under a great misery,
first an attempt must be made to put a stop to his Vomiting by a Bolus of
Treacle and Myrrh, with a grain or two of Laudanum. As Soon as he has got some
rest, and has recovered strength by some Yolks of Eggs, let him take by little
and little, and from time to time, a Doze of the Powder in a Quart of
Decoction, or warm Water. His Vomiting being stopped, and the Choler having
ceased its fermentation, let him be purged with the whole Doze in a Quart of
Water, to be taken in the space of an hour. Which must be reiterated as often
as occasion shall serve, that nothing may remain either in the Stomach or
Bowels, that may in time awaken the Distemper.

For hysterical Suffocations and melancholy Vapors, let half the Doze be put
in a Quart of cold Water, to be taken in the space of two or three hours. But,
if the Patient have lost his Senses, and be not in a condition to take it in
that manner, let some dry Powder be put into his Mouth, or let there be so much
of it dissolved in some Water as he can take, which he shall take by spoonfuls,
till he comes to himself again. Then let him take the half Doze as aforesaid,
and the next day let him be sure to purge himself with a whole Doze in a Quart
of cold Water. And, forasumuch as those suffocating Fumes are only caused by
Obstructions and fuliginous Matters remaining in the small Vessels, where they
ferment from time to time, and make Explosions as it were, it would not be
improper to cleanse the Conduits, by taking it several Days together as an
opening Remedy. This were the way to prevent their frequent returns, and to
extirpate the Evil which oftentimes is but palliated.

In case the menstrual Blood be stopped, which often breeds the Jaundice, and is
the common cause of hysterical Vapors, the Polychrest ought to be used in the
manner prescribed for all Obstructions in general. Only it is to be observed,
that the Patient must purge her self with it two or three days before the time
her monthly flowers should come, that it may operate the better, and help
Nature the more effectually in this kind of flowing. But, if this Evacuation be
suppressed long since, and that several Ways have been tried to rectify it, the
Polychrest must be used with the same assiduity, and as long as is usual with
Mineral Waters. I mean, that one half or a fourth part of the Doze be put in a
Quart of River or Spring Water, and two or three Quarts of the same be drunk up
every morning, for the space of four or five Weeks.

Now this Remedy has in this Case many Advantages over the mineral Waters. As,
amongst others, the Certainty of its Nature and Effects, which cannot be
asserted of the Minerals which impregnate the mineral Springs. For, besides
that those Minerals are not always certainly known, there happen sometimes
considerable Changes from Year to Year, by the Mixture and Concourse of new
Matters, whereby their Property is much altered. Moreover it is a certain Truth,
that there is no danger of keeping long in the Stomach this great quantity of
Water that is drunk; neither is it a small Convenience and Satisfaction for
one, that he can take this mineral artificial Water at all Times, and in all
Places, It Is doubtless a great Convenience for such Persons as are confined to
a Place, either by their Calling, or for want of competent Means to transport
themselves to the Waters.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Polychrest of Messieurs Seignette is sold by Monsieur Barbeau, in
Pall Mall, at the Sign of Bourdeaux Town. Every Doze is made up in a Paper,
with a Swan printed upon it, and this Motto Cum Sole and Sale omnia fiunt. The
Paper is sealed up with a Seal, having the Name of Seignette in it.


