THE CASE OF WILLIAM BENTLEY, Printer at FINSBURY near LONDON, touching his
Right to the Printing of BIBLES and PSALMS.
THat in 1644. the late Kings Printers (who before did solely print Bibles at
London) were Delinquents in Arms, and no Impressions of Bibles then made: By
means whereof the books became very scarce, and the prices very dear: Which
gave occasion to the Dutch to print them beyond Seas, and import them hither;
but so notoriously false, and erroneous, as that the then Assembly of Divines,
taking notice thereof, and desiring to redress so great a mischief (for the
better Communication of the word of God to all sorts of people in its purity)
sent for the London Stationers to know at what rates they would undertake to
serve the Commonwealth with Bibles and Psalms, who affirmed, they could not,
under 4. s. 6. d. per book in quires, and so declined the work.

That thereupon Bentley gave over a very good trade in London, and sold above
40. l. per annum Lands of Inheritance, and for the public good did, by the
favor of the Parliament, erect a Printing House on purpose, and undertake to
furnish the Commonwealth with Bibles and Psalms, (better printed and corrected
than any former Editions) in Octavo (with Marginal references) and in twelves,
at 2. s. per book. And (finishing five considerable Impressions) did
accordingly afford the same.

That in 1649. upon the Armies advance to Ireland, Bentley supplied them with
4000 of the said books in Octavo bound up in Leather, at no more than 2. s. 4.
d. per book.

And thereupon, and for his former services, The Parliament in the Act for
regulating Printing, dated 20. Sept. 1649. made an explicit Proviso, that
(notwithstanding the particular Restrictions thereby made) That Act should not
extend to the printing Press at Finsbury, for printing Bibles and Psalms: but
that it should continue to all intents and purposes, as if that Act had not
been had, or made.

That in 1650. upon the Armies advance to Scotland, Bentley furnished them with
5000 of his said books in Octavo in Quires, at no more than 20. d. per book.

That in 1652. Robert Barker the younger, claiming a title and Interest to the
sole printing of the translated Copy of the Bible, called the new Translation,
endeavored to have it confirmed to him by Act of Parliament; And to that end
before the passing of the Act 7. Jan. 1652. for reviving the former Act for
regulating Printing, put in a Proviso to the House: which being twice read, and
after full Debate put to the question was with a Negative Vote cast out (the
Parliament no ways intending to Monopolize the Printing of the Bible.) And the
said 7. Jan. upon reading Bentley's Petition to have a Liberty according to his
Proviso in the Act 20. Sept. 1649. the Parliament passed the Act, reviving and
continuing all the clauses and things of the former. As by the Records of
Parliament may appear. By which Bentley's right is Implicitly confirmed, both
Acts being relative and connexive, and now in force as a Law.

That Bentley provided himself with Letter and Materials for several
impressions of Bibles and Psalms, above twelve months since, to be afforded at
reasonable rates, engaging himself and friends to a very great value.

But by some irregular dealings, and upon misinformation, the Company of
Stationers have been enforced the sixth of March last, to make an undue Entry
in their Registry, contrary to their custom, to Henry Hills and John Field
(his Highness Printers) of that Individual Copy of Barker, which the
Parliament rejected, and adjudged as a Monopoly; Notwithstanding, that Bentley
and others had put in their Caveats upon better grounds before hand, but never
were heard, contrary to all right and equity. Whereby Hills and Field have
sought to appropriate to themselves by abusing the Supreme Authority, that
Book, which is the common Interest, and evidence of all Christians
indefinitely, and concern's the State no further than to have it well
Translated, and published by a prudential securing the doing of the work by
able men in that Mystery; neither ought it to be restrained to the Ceremony of
an Entry as any man's private Copy, It being (truly Translated) the Word of God
and infallible truth, and not to be conceived in the qualification of men's
private works, though never so Divine.

That 7. March last, Hills and Field (pretending good service to the
Commonwealth) obtained Deputations to themselves from Sir John Barkstead, and
Mr. Foxcroft, (his Highness Commissioners for regulating of printing) in
pursuance of his Highness Instructions of 28. August 1655. only to search
for, and seize all scandalous, and unlicensed books and Pamphlets: Who
unlawfully, and contrary to the purport of their Deputations, abusing their
power by prostituting it to their own private ends, suppress all printing of
the Bible and Testament, by those who were upon the work, or bring them to
unreasonable compositions with them; whereby the prices of Bibles and
Testaments are very much raised: And in particular the 28. August last, Hills
and Field assisted by some Soldiers, and producing nothing, but the said
Deputations, did carry away from Bentleys house the Form and Materials for
printing part of the New Testament, and seized the Sheets to his Highness use,
as if the same were scandalous. And several times before, and since have
otherwise wrongfully disturbed him; So that he, his Wife, and 7. Children being
debarred of their livelihood, so advisedly provided, for by the Parliament, are
likely to be utterly ruined and undone.

That Bentleys Bibles (being for the fairness of the print, and truth of the
Editions generally approved of to be the best that ever were printed) are now
sold at 8. s. per book in Quires, at the least, by the Booksellers: And Field
has so far advanced the prices of his Bibles, that he will get above 1500. l.
in one bargain, more, than otherwise he could have done, if Bentley was not
obstructed. And those singing Psalms which Bentley sold at 2. d. and 3. d. are
now sold at 6. d. by the Stationers Company; to the apparent charge and loss
of the people as well of the three Nations, as of all the foreign Plantations.
And moreover, Bentley during the time that he printed his said Impressions, did
constantly keep an able, and Judicious Correctour in his House, and allowed him
above 100 Marks per Annum, for his care and pains. But in 1653. Field made an
Impression of the Bible and Psalms in 24o;. which for the smalnesse to carry in
a pocket, has sold very much: but it is so egregiously and wilfully false
printed, (In which notwithstanding, Field stands peremptorily to justify
himself, upon this nugatory pretense; that because a society of Stationers
having a great stock, did under-sell him, he could not bear the charges of the
careful, and well correcting, and printing his books) That if these Texts
(amongst many hundreds of other dangerous, and pernicious faults and errors)
viz. John 9.21. (wherein these words are omitted) Or who has opened his eyes,
we know not) 1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall inherit the
Kingdom of God, Romans 6.13. Neither yield ye your Members as instruments of
righteousness unto sin, etc. Romans 8.3. Romans 9.29. 1 Cor. 6.15. 2 Epist. Joh.
verse. 5. Rev. 22.16.) be all of them severally compared with the true, and
Authentic translation, Those Bibles are worthy of some remarkable distinction,
to prevent the danger of the loss of many poor ignorant Souls, who ground
their belief upon what they hear, or read, or of others, who being wickedly
inclined, will found to themselves a Doctrine of licentiousness, by avouching
a corrupted Text; The very publishing whereof shall bear a kind of allowance,
and approbation of Authority, being past over in silence.

That Hills never yet perfected, or published any Impression of the Bible; And
if his knowledge and experience in the Art of printing be duly inquired into,
he may perhaps upon some good grounds, be adjudged no proper qualified person
for so serious Employment.

That his Highness 2. July last, upon Bentley's Petition referred his right,
and matter of fact to be examined, and certified by several honorable and
reverend persons: Who 10. Sept. last, after a full hearing have reported in
writing their opinion, As to his right to the printing of Bibles and Psalms by
virtue of the said Acts of Parliament: But (through the great affairs of the
Commonwealth) Bentley has had no opportunity to present it to his Highness.

And whereas a Bill is preparing to be offered to the Parliament by Hills and
Field, and the Company of Stationers, to have (according to their pretenses of
several proprieties) the sole power of printing Bibles and Psalms, and totally
to exclude Bentley's Interest so provided for by the said Acts of Parliament.
Therefore least any thing should be done for regulating of printing in general,
or particular, (being of such grand concernment to this Commonwealth) to his
prejudice for want of a true Information of the premises, (which he is ready to
make good) Bentley does humbly present this to your Honor; And prays your
noble favor and assistance, that he may be truly represented to his
Highness, and the Parliament, and receive Justice, as to their wisdoms shall
seem meet.


