JAMES FRANCIS EDWARD PRINCE OF WALES and PRINCE AND STEWARD OF SCOTL: and

ICH DIEN portrait of James Francis Edward Stuart

A Brief Treatise OF Education, WITH A Particular Respect to the Children of
Great Personages. For the Use of His Royal Highness, THE PRINCE.

By John Bettam, D. F. S. and Tutor to His Highness.

Imprinted at Paris by P. Laure^, near the Louvre, 1693.

A Brief Treatise OF EDUCATION.
The First Part.
A Young Prince is a Child of the Almigh^y, set apart by His Divine Providence
for Employments of the greatest Importance, but withal of the greatest Danger;
and who may prove a great Instrument, either of God's Mercy, or wrath on Men.

2. The end proposed in his Educaion ought to be the r^ndring him able to
comply with all the Duties to which his Condition obliges him, and to prepare
him against all the dangers he is thereby exposed to.

3. A Prince is not his own: He is the State's. God gives him to the People in
making him Prince, To them he is accountable for all his time. And, as soon as
he arrives ar years of Discretion, he becomes guilty of a double Fault, if he
apply not himself with all the care he can to such Studies and Exercises, as
may dispose him to perform all the devoi^s of a Prince. For in mispending his
time, he does not only wrong himself, but the State to whom he ows it.

4 They who are charged with the care of his Breeding, are yet more guilty than
he, if they do not p^ocure him the best, and most worthy a Prince, that
possibly they can. For, besides the injustice they commit against this Prince
and the State, they moreover become Guilty of all the Faults he might have been
preserved from by a good Education.

5. This Christian Education directly aiming at the Eternal Happiness of the
Prince* and the good of his People, and apt to have effects of infinite
consequence, ought to be looked on as a thing of the greatest importance in the
World. All considerations of Interest and Charge, all Humane Respects ought
every where to give place to it. Noth^ng must be omitted, that may conduce
thereunto; and whatever may prove disadvantageous ought to be thrown aside: In
short, it is this must be looked on as the End; all else can be considered only
as Means to it.

6. It is certain that one of the principal cares of those who are entrusted
with this Education, ought to be to make a good choice of some one or more, to
whom they may commit the bringing up this young Prince. But it is impossible
not to go rashly to work, if the qualities necessary for such an Employment be
not known.

7. The ill Choice sometimes made on these occasions, proceeds from the low
Idea we have of what is necessary for one who undertakes the breeding of a
young Prince. The most think it sufficient, if such an one be not Vicious; and
that he have some Knowledge of polite Literature: Others particularly Belles
are desirous that he be skilled Lettres and conversant in History. There are
some who require able Mathematicians* others consider principly that which is
called Knowing the World. In fine, they ordinarily have only particular and low
regards, and such as in no wise answer the greatess of the end they ought to
propose to themselves.

8. It is easy to discern That all these aims are mean, and that they bear no
propo^tion to the end one ought to have in instructing a young Prince; since
one may be endowed with all these qualities, and yet be no able Man; and a
Prince may be very well instructed in Languages, in History, and Mathamaticks,
and yet very ill brought up; because his Judgment may be spoiled, and he not at
all framed for any of those things which are of greatest necessity to make him
live like a Christian Prince.

9 For Example, History is looked on as of great concern for Princes, and that
not without Reason, since it may stand them in great Stead, provided it be
taught them as it ought. But, if necessary Advice be not given, it may do them
more harm than good For History of it self is but a confused heap of things
done; Men therein mentioned are for the most part Vicious, Unadvised, and Led
on by the^r Passions; their Actions are often related by Writers of small
Judgment; who praise and blame by Humor, and who by their Discourses imprint a
Thousand ill Models and false Maxims in the Minds of those who read them
without a discerning Eye.

10. A Tutor whose Judgment were not Acurate, might make this kind of Study
much more dangerous. Such an one would indifferently fill the Mind of our young
Prince with the fooleries of Books, and his own too; he would spoil the best
things with the ill dress he put them in; so that it may often happen that
whilst he loads h^s Pupil with confused Knowledge, he shall only stifle what
Nature may have bestowed on him of right Sense or Reason,

11. The greatest part of things are good or bad, according as they are
represented. The Story of a wicked Man's Life may ye^ld as much Profit, as that
of a Saint, if duly told; if its misery be laid open, and a horror of it
instilled: And the Life of a Saint may be as dangerous as that of a wicked Man,
when so described as inclines us either to abuse or contemn it.

12. Sciences have their beneficialness and usefulness, especially to Princes;
and they may all be taught them either in a low or mean, or in a high and
elavated Way. There are few who know this difference; yet it is of that
Importance, that it is better to be totally ignorant of them than to know 'em
meanly, and to busy ones self, and to wade deep into what they have of
frivolous and useless. The Praise Tacitus gives Agricola is extraordinary,
Retinu itque, quod est difficillimum, ex Sapientia modum. The most part of
those who are the ablest in them judge the worst; because they make them the
object of their Passion, and place their Glory in the nice acurateness, not in
the use and profit of their Knowledges. There are some able Mathematicians, who
imagine it is the rarest thing in the World, to know whether there be a Bridge
and an Arch hanging round about the Planet Saturn. A Prince ought to be
acquainted with such opinions, because the knowledge of them costs little: But
he has wrong done him, if at the same time he is not taught that these
Knowledges are but a vain curiosity. For it is better to be ignorant of such
things, than not to know that they are frivolous, and of no use.

11. The quality most essential to a Tutor fit to Educate a Prince, is a
Quality without a Name, and which is not fixed to any certain Profession. It is
not simply to be skilled in History, in Mathematics, Languages, Politics,
Philosophy, in the Ceremonies and Interests of Princes: all this may be
supplied. It Is not necessary that he who has the care of instructing a Prince
should teach him all; it is sufficient he teach him the use of all. There is a
necessity he should sometimes ease himself, and that whilst he prepares and
studies to teach his Pupil some certain things, he should only stand by, and be
a Witness of what is taught him by others. But this Quality, so essential to
his Employment, is not to be supplied from abroad, is not to be borrowed from
others, nor procured by Study. It has its beginning from Nature, and is ripened
by long exercise and continual reflection. Thus they who have not this Quality,
and are already struck in Age, are incapable of ever attaining to it.

12. Ordinary Tutors think themselves only obliged to instruct Princes at
certain hours, to wit, when they teach them what they call their Lesson. But
the Man we speak of, has no set hour of teaching, or rather, he teaches him at
every hour: For, he often instructs him as much in his Play, in his Visits, in
Conversation, and Table talk with those present; as when he makes him read
Books; because, having for principal aim to frame his Judgment right; for this
he finds the various objects, that offer themselves often more available, than
premeditated Discourses: Since nothing sinks less into the Mind, than what
enters there, under the unpleasant shape of a Lesson or Instruction.

13. As this way of Instucting is insensible, so also in a manner is the Profit
thereby gained; that is, it is not perceived by certain gross and exterior
signs; and th^s it is that dece^ves shallow Considerers, who imagine a Child
taught in this manner, is not fo^warder than another; because, perhaps he
cannot translate better into his own Language a p^ece of Latin, or recite more
readily a Lesson out of Virgil. And thus judg^ng of a Child's advance, by such
like fooleries, they shall often value a Tutor truly able, less than another,
whose Knowledge shall be mean, and his Soul without light,

14. Not that common things ought to be neglected in the Instruction of a
Prince. They ought to learn Languages, History, Chronology, Geography,
Mathematics, and even Civil Law, to a certain degree. Their Studies ought to
be regulated like those of other Persons; one ought to endeavor to make them
laborious, and ^each them to go from one Employment to another, without leaving
any void and unprofitable time between: All Occasions ought to be husbanded
with a dress to teach them several things: if possible, they ought to be
ignorant of nothing that is remarkable in the World. All this in it self is
good, useful and necessary, provided we fix not here, as the last end of
Instruction, but make use thereof, to frame their manners and judgment.

15. To fashion and frame the Judgment, is to make the Soul relish Truths, and
teach it how to discern and know them; it is to make it quick-sighted in finding
out false ratiocinations; it is to learn it, not to be dazzled by the vain
flashes of Words void of Sense; not to content it self with terms, or obscure
principles; and never to be satisfied, till it ha^h d^v^d even to the bottom of
things: it is to make it subtle, in finding where the difficulty lies in
in^^icate Questi^ns, and discern in those, who fly and wander from the point:
it is to fill the Soul with Principles, useful for the finding out of Truth in
all things, particularly in those one has most need of.

16. In fine, a Prince must be made to take notice that falsity is to be met
with every where: that there is a false Valor, a false Honesty, a false
Liberality, a false Gallantry, a false Eloquence, a false Railery, false
Agreeableness. He must look very near, not to take the one for the other; and
it is very difficult not to be mistaken, when one his no rule to judge by, and
only follows the impression received from others.

17, Moral^ty is the Science of Men, and particularly of Princes, since they
a^e not only Men, but ought to rule and command Men; and they cannot perform
this without they know both themselves and others, in their defects and
passions, and without they be thoroughly instructed in all their Devoirs. It Is
then in this Science, that a Prince's Mind ought to be principally instructed
and molded: For as its use will be continual, so also ought the Study thereof.
It cannot be begun too soon, because one cannot begin too soon to know himself:
and this Study is so much the more conven^ent as all things may be assistant to
it: For Men and their Faults are to be found everywhere.

18. Endeavors ought to be used, not only to teach him the true Principles of
this Science, but also to let him know its necessity, See Discourse of the
Necessity of not living by hazard.
and to instill into him, a Love and Esteem thereof, by making him sensible of
the horrible unhappiness of the most part of Great Ones, who pass away their
Lives in a dreadful Ignorance of what concerns them most; who know not what
they do, nor whither they go; who fancy to themselves that they have nothing
else to do here, but to hunt and recreate themselves; or to frame ambitious
designs of raising their Families; and who, after the short space of a wretched
Life, full of continual Illusions, and fed with Dreams and Chimera's, at the
Hour of Death, see all these vain Fantasmes disappear, whilst they themselves
fall headlong into the utmost extremity of eternal Misery.

19. He ought to be instucted both in general duties See the Treatise of
Grandeur and the 3 Discourses of Monsieur Pascal.
of Man, and the partic^lar ones of Princes; and to know how to tie and link
these together; and above all, endeavor must be used that he insensibly fo^get
not (as most G^ear Ones do) what is common to him with other Men, whilst he
only Busies his Imagination about what distinguishes him from them. For this
purpose, it is necessary to make him well comprehend the true nature of all
these things; what greatness is, whence it springs, and where it ends; what it
has of solid and real, and wh^t of idle and vain; what it is that infeririors
owe to Great Ones, and what these ough^ to re^ay them: Lastly, what it is that
abases or sets them high in the esteem of God and Man.

20. As the Love and Affection of Men are necessary for the Employment to which
Princes are cal^'d, so a Prince ought with great care to be instucted in what
purchases or looses them, in what gains or shocks Men's Minds, and in what
pleares or displeases the World He must discover the hidden sources of these
effects, and the secret Springs, whence flow all these motions; to the end he
may make them P^ay, as need shall require. But at the same time, he is to be
made acquainted with the vanity and foolery of this little Address when he
proposes to himself no other end, than the driving on some wordly design, or
the e^joying the satisfaction of being beloved. And for this reason he is ^o
understand, That all the^e actions may be practiced upon the score of h^gher
and nobler considerations, and that they may be made infinitely more
serv^ceable for his concerns in Heaven, than for those he can have on Earth.

For Example Great See the Treatise of Christian Civ^lity.
Ones by their very Condition are obliged to be in a cont^nual exercise of
Civilit^; and when they, as they ought, comply with this their Duty, it stands
them in great stead to gain the Esteem and Love of others. Yet for the most
p^rt this Exercise passes amongst them for a most vain and frivolous amusement.
As they practice it with great inequality, being extreme complaisant to so^e,
and as fierce and rude to others, it often happens that the do not succeed in
the Design they have of making themselves beloved: And should they succeed, it
could procure them but very small Advantages B^t the same office^ of Civility
practiced on other motiv^s; v^z those of Ch^^i^y may become a continual
exercise of Virtue, and they by this means prod^ce even ^ore certainly, that
temporal effect or^in^r^ly expected by them, of ga^n^ng the Love of those to
whom they a^e pa^d.

21. In the one o^ght to make a young Prince observe, that in all particular
act^ons the Laws of God are so equ^table and holy that there is no readier way
to g^^n the Admi^ation of Men than by p^act^sing Christian Virtue in the most
heroic and elevated way; and that these qualities and actions which displease
God the most, as Insolence, Pride, In^ustice, Anger, are those that draw on
them in greater measure the Contempt and Hatred of others, wherein consists the
Piety of a Christian: And there is nothing so hateful as one who loves none but
himself, who refers all things solely to himself, wherein consists the
deordination of Man.

22. But though this Study ought to be the ch^efest and frequentest of all
those to which one applies a Prin^e; yet ought it to be done in a way bearing
such a proportion to his Age, and the quality of his Mind that he be not
overcha^g'd therewith; nay, that even feels it not. Endeavor must be used that
he learn all Morality, without kn^w^ng almost there is such a Science, or that
there is a design to teach him any such thing; so that when he shall apply
himself to it in the course of his Stud^es he shall be aston^shed that he knows
before Hand much more than is there taught.

23 There is nothing more difficult, than to find this proportion to the
Understanding of Children; and it is with Reason that a Man of the World said,
That, It is the Part of a strong and elevated Soul, to be able to proportion,
and frame it self to the ways and humors of Children. It Is an ea^y matter to
make a Discourse of Morality for an Hour together; but to reduce all things to
it, so that the Child neither perceives nor takes'd staste thereat, is what
requires an admirable address, and suchas is to be found in very few.

24. In Vice there are too things considerable, The Deordination, which makes
them displease Almighty God, and the Folly and Ridiculousness, which makes them
contemptible in the Eyes of Men. Children for the most part are little sensible
of the first, but the second may be inculcated to them by a Thousand Ingenious
Ways which the Occasions suggest. Thus by making them hate Vice as Ridiculous,
one prepares them to hate it as contrary to the Laws of God; and mean while
prevents its making full impression on their Minds.

25. One ought not to think it enough to enlighten his Understanding by many
principles of Truth, which may help him to guide and regulate himself in his
Actions: But he ought to be possessed in general with a love of Truth in all
things, and an adversion from being deceived; and be made thoroughly to
comprehend, that it is impossible he should not be so all his Life, if he does
not let all those who approach him know, he loves nothing so much as Truth, and
hates nothing more than Lies and cheating.

26. There are some who deceive others out of Interest, without being See the
Treatise where it is showed how dangerous the Discourses of Men are.
deceived themselves, but there are also a number of others who only
communicate their own Errors, that is, Those Idea's and Opinions their Minds
are full of, And as the Life of Great Ones passes in almost continual Commerce
with Men, they are also more exposed than others to this danger: so that if
they have not a care on it, they unite in themselves all the falsities which are
to be found dispersed amongst other Men. He therefore who is to be instructed
ought to be made to know how much it concerns him, not only to defend him, self
against the artificial, malignant -- and interested Cheat of rhose who would
surprise and impose upon him; but also against that other honest, and one may
say, Fair-dealing Deceit, which commonicates it self; by the Discourses of
almost all those with whom he will be ob^^g'd to l^ve; who being themselves
full ^f falsities they are not aware of, propagate the^, without knowing it, in
their discourse to others.

27. The ordinary causes of the miseries of Great ones are to be particularized
and taken notice of, and endeavors used to fortify him on that side: And
above all, he thought to be inspired with a great horror of Civil Wars, and all
kind of dissentions, which, to Princes, a^e the causes of Evils almost
irreparable, and Gulphs without bottom.

28. It is necessary to know the faults and defects of him we Instruct; that
is, we must well observe whither the bent of his Concupiscence sways him, to
the end all means and arts may be used to lessen it, by taking away whatsoever
may either exaspera^e or fortify it; yet so as to distingu^sh always between
those transient faults which Age destroys, and such as with years grow and get
strength.

29. It Is not enough only to aim at preserving Princes from falling, but at
sowing too in their minds certain seeds, which may aid them to rise again, if
they be so unfortunate as to fall. And these seeds are the solid truths of
Religion, principally as to the manner of reestablishing our selves in our lost
Innocence. For, though these truths are sometimes obscured by the intoxication
of the World, when young P^inces beg^n to taste and relish it, yet they many
times break forth again af^erwards, when it pleases God to look on them with an
eye of Mercy.

30 It is not only necessary to frame and fashion, as much as one can, their
mind to Virtue; but it is req^isite also to give their Bodies a ply and bent
the^eunto; that is, endeavors must be used that the^r Bodies prove not an
hindrance to their leading a regular L^fe; and that they draw them not by their
sway to Debauchery and D^sorder.

For we must know, That Man being composed of Mind and Body, the evil ply and
bent that is given to the latter, during one's Youth, proves often, in the
sequel of one's Life, a very great hindrance to Virtue. There are some who
accustom themselves to be so flitting, so impatient, so hasty, that they become
incapable of any regular Employments. Others prove so nice and ^ender, that
they cannot endure the least trouble or pain. There are some who give
themselves up to endless disquiets, wherewith they are tormented all their Life
time.

One may say, That these are faults of the Mind, but they have their permament
cause in the Body; and that is the reason they continue in them even when the
Mind appears absolutely free from them. For behold how, for example sake, many
become subject to these irk^ome Disquiets.

31. Instruction aims at advancing the Mind to the highest point it is capable
of; it requires neither Memory, Imagination* nor Understanding; but it
cultivates all these, in fortifying rhem by one another. Judgment is helped by
Memory, and Memory is refreshed by Imagination and Judgment.

32. When either of these is wanting, the defect must be supplied by the rest.
Thus the great address of a Master is to apply those under his Care to such
studies, as they are naturally most inclined to. There are some Children almost
only to be exercised in what depends on Memory, because their Me^ories are
strong, and their Judgments weak; and there are others who ought immediately to
be set on work about things of Judgment, because they have more of that than of
Memory.

33. Properly Speaking, neither Masters nor outward Instructions they give,
make Learners comprehend things. These only expose them to the interior light
of the Mind, by which alone they are comprehended. So that when one does not
meet with this light, Instructions prove as useless as it would be to expose
and show Pictures in the dark.

34. The greatest Wits have but limited Understandings. In them there are
always some cloudy and darksome Corners: but the Understandings of Children are
almost totally over cast, they discover only some little glimpses of light. So
that the great work consists in managing these small Rays, in increasing them,
and placing therein whatsoever one would make them comprehend.

35. Hence it is, that it is so difficult to give general Rules for the
instruction of any one, because they ought to be proportioned to that mixture
of light and darkness, which is various, according to the difference of Wits,
particularly in Childen. We must observe, where day in them begins to break,
and thither we ought to bring whatever we would make them understand: And thus
several ways must be tried to get admittance into their Minds; and in those we
must persist, where we find the best success.

36. It may nevertheless in general be said, That the light or knowledge of
Children depending very much on sense, one ought, as much as possible, fasten
to sensible things the Instructions that are given them; and, not only to make
them enter by the Ear, but also by the Eye: there being no sense that makes a
more lively impression on the Soul, nor that forms therein Idea's more distinct
and clear.

37. Laying hold on this hint, one may aver, That the study of Geography is
very fit for Children, because it depends much on the Senses, and they may be
made to see by their eyes the situation of Towns and Provinces; besides, it is
pleasant enough, (a necessary circumstance not to discourage them at the first)
and needs little of ratiocination, wherein they are most deficient at that Age.

38. But to make this study at once both more profitable and pleasant, it is
not enough barely to show them in Maps the Name of Towns and Provinces, but
moreover several Arts and Addresses are to he used to fix them in their
Memories.

Book may be provided with the Cuts of great Towns, which they may peruse:
Children are taken with this kind of divertisement. Some remarkable History may
be told of each Place, which may rivet it in the Memory. One may make them
observe the Battle fought, the Councils held there, and the Famous Men sprung
thence. Something may be told them either of Natural History, if any rarity be
there to be found, or of their Government, Greatness, and Traffic. If the
Towns be in France, it would not be amiss, if one could, to let them know the
Lord to whom they belong, or the Governors rhey are under.

39. Besides Geography, there are yet many other useful Knowledges, which may
find admittance, by the sight, into the Mind of young Children.

In the Books of Lipsius are represented in Pictures the Engines used in War by
the Romans, with their Clothes, Arms, Punishments, and several other things of
this nature, which may be shown to Children with much advantage: For example,
they may there see what a Ram is, what a Buckler, what a Testudo; how the Roman
Armies were drawn up, what number rheir Cohortes and Legions consisted of, the
Officers of their Armies, and an infinity of other curious and delightful
things; omitting the more intricate. The same advantage almost may be made of a
Book called Roma subteranea, and some others, where may be seen in Cuts, what
remains of the Antiquities of this chief City of the World. To these one may
add the Pictures that are to be found in the Relations of certain Voyages into
the Indies and China; wherein are described the Sacrifices and Pagods of those
Wretches: And Children at the same time may be made to observe to what excess
of Folly Man may pass when he follows his own fancies and the dark lights of
his own mind.

40. Aldrovandus, or rather his Abridgement by Johnston, may also be useful for
their profitable divertisement; pro^ided he who shows them have a care to tell
them something of the nature of the Beasts, not by way of Lesson, but
Discourse. This Book also ought to be made use of, to let them see the Figures
and Shapes of the Beasts they find mentioned either in Books or Discourse.

42. An ingenious Man by Trial with one of his own Ch^ldren, has lately made
it appear that these early Years are very capable of learning Anatomy: And
without doubt some general Principles may be usefully shown them* if it were
for nothing else, but to make them remember the Latin Names of the parts of
Humane Bodies; but one must have a care of leading them into some curiosities,
that are dangerous in this particular.

43. For the same reason it would be profitable to let them see the
Portraictures of the Kings of France, of the Roman Emperors, of the Sultans;
of great Captains, and of the famous Heroes of several Nations. It is good they
should take Pleasure in viewing these in Books of Pictures, and that they
should have recourse thereunto as often as mention thereof is made. Fot all
this serves to fix Notions and Idea's in their Memory.

44. One ought to endeavor to incline the Minds of Children to a commendable
curiosity of seeing things that are strange and curious, and encourage them to
be inquisitive of the reasons of whatsoever occurs. This Curiosity is no fault
in their Age, because it opens and enlarges their Minds, and diverts them from
many ill turns.

The End of the first Part.

