THE Great Charter FOR THE INTERPRETATION OF ALL Prophecy of Scripture, AND OF
The TIMES Defined by it: PLEADED, In Justification of what has been Written
thereupon, against the several Imputations of Curiosity, Groundless
Presumption, Phantastry, or Enthusiasm.
2 PET. I. 20. Knowing this first, That no Prophecy of Scripture is of any
private Interpretation.
IT is very Notorious, there is nothing Learned, and good Men are more
Scandalized at, or give slighter Regard to, throughout all that is offered to
them from the Word of God, than the Interpretation of Scripture Prophecy;
especially, if Any come to the Interpretation of those Prophecies that Define
Time.

Now this arises from a strong Pre-judgment or Pre-possession of Mind, That
such Prophecies, and most particularly concerning Time, are not possible, or
hardly Lawful to be Interpreted, and that it is presumption to offer at it; and
that all that is drawn from such Interpretation, is no other than Groundless
Phantastry.

I have therefore Resolved, since the Lord, as I Trust, has Himself engaged my
Labors in this his Vineyard, to make it my Humble endeavor to Explorate, and
to Find out by this Scripture, How far such Attempts of Interpretation are
Justified, and the Success assured by the Word of God: Now, this Text, and the
whole Context seem, even at the first sight, to give Highest Countenance and
Favor hereunto; for it expressly affirms, No Prophecy of Scripture, not of
Daniel, or of the Revelation, or any other Scripture Prophecy, nor of the
Numbers, relating to Time in those Prophecies, and wherein the preciseness of
Times is Deposited and Laid up, is of Private Interpretation.

I begin therefore with the Consideration of the Direct Terms, or Words of this
so Full Proposition of the Apostle:

1. The Subject Matter, concerning which the Apostle thus affirms, is not
Scripture in general, but most particularly Prophecy of Scripture; If his
Proposition had been upon Scripture in general, it had necessarily included
Prophecy of Scripture in particular; Because Prophecy is so excellent a part of
Scripture; but it is Greater, and more Emphatical, that He particularises upon
Prophecy it self.

2. The Care the Apostle has Taken to show it is the Universality of
Scripture-Prophecy, He thus asserts concerning All Prophecy of Scripture,
(...); which imports, All Prophecy; and Every Prophecy. All Prophecy in
general, and Every Prophecy in particular is the subject spoken of; and
therefore a Word is chosen out by the Spirit of God, that may fully Answer
thereunto in both regards.

3. That to which the Apostle directs his Speech, is not with Relation to the
Excellency, or Certainty, or Divine Inspiration of Scripture Prophecy it self;
although that He does also in the former Verse, calling it the Sure Word of
Prophecy; and by way of proof in the next Verse, of what he affirms in this:
But that which He is precise upon in this Verse Relates to Interpretation of
Scripture Prophecy.

4. That which He fixes upon as to his Point, to consider concerning
Interpretation, is concerning the Privacy of it; Whether it is a Public, Free,
Open, Accessible, Self-communicative Thing; or whether Private, Reserved,
Uncommunicated, or under Any ones Propriety and Enclosure, so that no other may
Presume to Enter into the Interpretation of it, but under some Character for
such a Propriety?

5. The Form of the Apostle's Proposition is a flat and downright Negative;
Scripture-Prophecy, All Scripture-Prophecy, Every Scripture Prophecy is so
Constituted, Framed, Descended, as not to be of Private Interpretation; and
that the Negation may be the stronger, It is Kept, and Reserved to be placed
with the Full strength of its Accent upon the Words, Is not private: The
Apostle would not lessen it by setting (...) in place of (...), both for the
Force of the Word of Universality before Noted, as also, That the Negative
might urge the more, being applied to Private; And so it amounts to a strong
Affirmation; on the other side, it is of an Interpretation, Open, Public,
Free; a Common Good and Right.

6. The Apostle lays it as a Foundation, as a first Principle, Knowing (says
He) this first, That All Prophecy of Scripture is not of a Private
Interpretation. And it comes in as a strong Argument or Motive for what he had
spoken, by way of Vehement Incitation to the Taking Heed to Prophecy; for
saying That Every one did well, who Took Heed to the More sure Word of
Prophecy. He goes on by way of Encouragement, and Assurance of Good Success,
Knowing, That It is of an Open, Ftee Interpretation, or being well principled
in that first, as is after to be urged.

Now who that Considers these Words of the Apostle thus presented, and laid
out before Him, and what The Spirit by his Holy Minister has spoken thus,
(...), so expressly can have a prejudice against All utmost Endeavor to
Interpret Any, Every Prophecy of Scripture, and contradict the Holy Ghost;
saying, It is a Dark, Retired, Reserved Thing; not to be presumed upon, or to
be meddled with.

But before I proceed upon the main Points arising from this Proposition of the
Apostle, in Justification of Interpretation of Scripture-Prophecy; I am very
sensible, the very Foundation is endeavored to be shaken by suppositing, or
shifting in another word for (...) or Interpretation, viz. (...), a word
differing but an Iota, an (...) for (...); and so may seem fair for admission;
and a word that would be had, to signify Inspiration; or if that be not found
so convenient to Change the word; yet it is Designed to Bring the Matter to the
same Point by giving a sense to it foreign to this Point, viz by affixing to
(...) a sense the same with Inspiration; viz. Dismission or sending out the
Prophets; that so either way the Apostles Proposition might speak thus: Knowing
this first, That no Prophecy of Scripture is of a private Illaps, or
Inspiration; and so Interpretation should have no place, nor any thing to do
here.

I will therefore Argue, first against any other word, than that of (...), and
then against any other sense of the word (...), but that of Interpretation.

The Arguments that the word Epilusis, and not Epelusis, was used by the Divine
Spirit, are these two.

1. There is an Universal Consent, and Agreement of All Coppies in the word
Epilusis, wherein that Providence watchful over All Scripture, has
particularly shown it self in care over this; so that there is no occasion for
any one to Change it, except He Himself were Given to Change, or would make an
Interest against it, because He would not own the Prophecy (at least) of
Scripture, to be of a Free, Open, Public Interpretation; nor to be Approached
unto.

2. It is observed by the Learned, The word Epelusis is not the proper word to
signify Illaps, or Inspiration, or any thing like it; But the word (...), as it
comes something near the word (...), and yet can never be it, or the same; so
it seems somewhat akin in sense to Super, or Preternatural Emotion, but at so
great a distance, It can never be Divine Supernatural, nor like it, but most
Contrary to it, and Abhorred of it: For it is a word of very ill Intention, and
signifies the Force of Enchantment on the Enchanted Person; a sense that can by
no means be suffered to Enter into the Tabernacle of the Holy Spirit, the
Spirits of his Prophets; nor Agree to the Sacred scope and purpose of the
Apostle.

But I will yet further Argue against any other word, but Epilusis in Arguing
against any other sense, but that sole and single sense of Interpretation; so
that by Epilusis shall not, cannot be understood, as some would have it, any
kind of Dismission, or sending out the Prophets to Prophecy. For,

1. The very same word, differing only as a Noun and a Verb, that is used here
by the Apostle Peter, is used in the very same Sense, and in the very same
matter, and purpose, Mark 3. 34. Only what is denied here by this Apostle is
affirmed in another Case there, viz. Our Lord Expounded his Parables but Apart
or Privately to his Disciples: There Epelue, He Expounded (...), or Apart; Here
the Exposition or Interpretation of Prophecy is denied to be Apart.

This Scripture in Mark therefore is, as if the Spirit of God had on purpose
provided an Assurance, in what manner these same Words are to be understood in
Peter, viz. by the Certain, Undoubted Sense of them in Mark: And it is the more
to be Noted, if we give heed to the Ecclesiastic Memoir, that, the Apostle
Peter super-intended the Evangelist Mark in his Writing that Gospel: Observe
therefore, The same Divine Spirit by the very same Servant of his, the Penman
of this Epistle, and the Supervisor of that Gospel, uses both Words; the word
so much the same with Epilusis, so undoubtedly in the sense of Expounded; and
of Privately, or Apart in the Word Idios; and that they are used both
Affirmatively, and Negatively in the same sense: For what the Evangelist spoke
Affirmatively, viz. Christ did Expound or Interpret but Apart, that the Apostle
in this Text lays down in the Negative, or denies concerning the same
Exposition or Interpretation, viz. That it is not Apart or Private.

This is so full in this kind of Argument, that it seems unnecessary to add; It
is the word used by the Septuagint, for the Interpretation of the Dreams of
Pharaohs Officers by Joseph, Genesis 41. 82.

2. But that which is indeed above All, is, The Reason, and Scope of the
Apostles Discourse, require the word, Interpretation, and no other; For the
Apostle was not Pressing, that the word of Prophecy is a sure Word; That He
knew, was Agreed, and most acknowledged between Him, and the Hebrew Strangers
scattered Abroad, to whom He wrote, and so the Apostle takes that for a most
confessed Thing, and that they gave heed to it, as such; but that which
required immediately to be further spoken to, was, That the sure Word of
Prophecy shines, as a Light in the dark place, in which the Churches of Christ
are, till the Day of the Kingdom of Christ dawn, and He the Phosphor, and
Day Star of it shine into the Hearts All His; For that is every where the
Character of that Kingdom, it first dawns, and then it shines, and it shines
into All Hearts, possesses All Minds; The Day of Gospel Light, and the Day Star
of that had already shone; for they were Established in the present Truth; but
that the Apostle intended, was to come; For He says, Until it shine, which
could not be properly said of what is past: Besides, That could not be come,
that was yet in Prophecy, and needed Prophecy to shine in the place of it;
which Place had been altogether Dark, if it had not been for the Light of
Prophecy: And the Darkness of it was, because that Day did not yet Dawn, nor
the Day Star Arise.

Now to this Light of Prophecy, says the Apostle, You do well to Take Heed,
you do well, as it is your Duty so to do; and as it is honorably well; So it
is said; Blessed is He that Reads, and They that Hear.

But to this, This Objection might well be made; It is a great difficulty to
understand Prophecy; who, or how few are agreed about the Sense and
Interpretation of it? and especially in what relates to the Time of it, and
those Numbers relating to Time so particularly in Daniel. This therefore the
Apostle would prevent, and surprise before hand, and He does it by laying this,
as a first Principle, That All, and every Prophecy of Scripture is not of
Private Interpretation; If it were so, it were indeed vain to Take Heed to it,
as to a Light shining in a dark place, for then it would be as dark, as the
dark place it self; A Prophecy of the Kingdom, that cannot be Interpreted, can
no way enlighten the Dark State of the Nonappearance of the Kingdom: But the
Apostle assuring, the Sure word of Prophecy is not Private, Secret, Apart, but
of an Open, Ftee Interpretation, is full to the Purpose of Taking Heed, or
Giving Attendance to it, as to such a Light.

And then the Apostles following words evince the same Thing; Prophecy came not
of old Time by the will of Man; But Holy Men of God spoke, as they were (...),
Carried, Moved, Inspired by the Holy Spirit, as is further to be Explained: Now
this comes as a Reason of what had been said before, as is manifest by the
Particle For; And it is, indeed, a great Reason, why no Prophecy of Sceipture
should be of a private Interpretation; because it was given, as shall be shown,
from the Public Spirit, and not from a Private Spirit, as every Created Human
Spirit is.

But if we understand the word used for Interpretation, to signify either
Illapse, or Inspiration, these following words would be only words of
Amplification, and not of Proof; and to be Interpreted as the opposite to
Private, by the Adversative But; and not Ratiocinative as the Causal
Conjunction For, assures them to be. And the sense must run thus; No Prophecy
of Scripture is of Private Interpretation; But Holy Men of God spoke, moved by
the Holy Spirit; and if any one should put in For, after Inspiration; or
Illapse supposed in place of Interpretation; It is as if the Apostle had said,
It is not of private Inspiration, and therefore of Divine; For there can be no
opposite to Private, but Divine in the Apostles sense, and therefore it is not
of private Inspiration; Because, or, For, Holy men were not Privately, but
Divinely Inspired; which is Amplification, and not Probation: But if we take,
as on all Accounts we ought, the word to be Interpretation, the For, comes in
most justly, as introducing a Great Reason, Why Prophecy cannot be of private
Interpretation, because it is of public Inspiration, as shall be shown; How
strong a Reason is this!

Now seeing Probation, or Proof, makes a Discourse stronger than Amplification
only; If there be any doubt concerning a word, Whether This or That? That ought
to be preferred which makes the Sacred Text more Sinewy and strong, and so does
the word Interpretation here: And seeing there is so much for that word, and
nothing against it, it ought to be acquiesced in by All, as offering so great a
Truth; That we ought as in Hearing, so in Preaching, to give the sense of
Prophecy; as it is said of Ezra and the other Levites, and the People under
them, Nehem. 8. 7. They gave the sense of the Law, and Caused the People to
understand, the Reading, or Preaching; that is, the inward sense of it, and not
only the Syllabical Reading lost in Babylon; as some may suppose; For that is
beneath the Holy Spirits notice: And thus ought Prophetical Scripture to be
Administered; Because it is not of private Interpretation. It, and the Time of
it, ought to be opened, and explained, All and every part in all its Divine
senses.

But that, further yet, This point of Interpretation may be settled, and
secured, and not only so, but highly illustrated; I will endeavor to clear,
that the Grand Importance of the Context, nay, of this whole Epistle, is
Adjusted and Prepared to Assure, That Prophecy of Scripture is not of a Private
Interpretation in that greatest Point of Prophecy, of the Kingdom of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and the Time of it; That Mystery of God to be Fulfilled,
Evangelized by All his Prophets, that Restitution of All Things in that Kingdom
spoken of by All the Prophets, since the World began: Now of this Kingdom, and
the Time of it, The Apostles Affirmation, The Prophecies of Scripture are not
of any private Interpretation, when and in what they speak of it, has the
chief, and most eminent place; And therefore the Discourse upon so great a
Scripture, so levelled, and prepared (as I may say) to all intents and
purposes, for the Justification of search into Prophecy, concerning the Kingdom
of Christ, and what, ot what manner of Time, the Spirit of God has signified,
is, indeed, a Magna Charta for Interpretation of it.

Now then, the occasion of all the Context, is the mention of the Abundant
Entrance into the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and That, an
Everlasting Kingdom: Now of this Kingdom there is a Twofold state; That which
is now at present and by way of preparation, or the Ministration of an
Entrance; and concerning that, The Apostle says, They were established in the
present Truth. 2. There is a Future State, and Glory of that Kingdom, which is
that Everlasting Kingdom, and to which this present Kingdom of Grace Ministers
an Entrance; and of this, says the Apostle, I will not be negligent to put you
in remembrance.

Upon this Basis or Foundation laid then, I will first give great Arguments,
That through the whole Epistle, and particularly in this Context, the Apostle
has very great Relation to this Kingdom, and most particularly to the Time of
it. 2. That the Context having so great Relation to this Kingdom, and
particularly to the Time of it also, there is great Reason the Apostle should
speak concerning the Interpretation of Prophecy, as the principal Point, and
that Inspiration should Attend upon it; In the first Part I will give
Arguments, First, That the Kingdom is intended; And then in the second place,
for the Time, as intended also.

Argument 1. That which I have already said is most manifest; That the mention
of the Kingdom of Christ, to which the Apostles Discourse before made haste,
and to which the whole Epistle after issues, has immediate Relation to this
Context: For the Connection and Coherence is so close and strict, that there is
no dividing the one from the other; as will appear in the following
Particulars. For,

2. The Apostle gives notice what Kingdom of Christ He had regard to, when He
Styles it in Remembrance of that Kingdom Promised in Daniel, the Everlasting
Kingdom, as it is there Styled, C. 7. an Everlasting Dominion, and a Kingdom,
that shall not be destroyed.

3. In that so Emphatically, He gives the Title of Savior to Christ; as the
Apostle Paul joins the appearance of the Great God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ together: For therein above All Christ is seen, and will be known to be
the Savior, Restoring All that was Ruined by the sin of the First Adam.

4. The great care the Apostle expresses, They should have that Kingdom in
remembrance, although they were established in the present Truth, that
Ministers but an entrance into that Kingdam; as was intimated before.

5. The Apostle, as the New Testament generally does, calling the Kingdom of
Christ his coming, remembers the Admonition Christ gave him of hss dying, or
putting off that Tabernacle before he should so come; whereas the Apostle had
an expectation of that Kingdom immediately, as they said; Will thou at this
time restore the Kingdom to Israel.

6. The Apostle giving so full a Representation of the Transfiguration, which
was it self an admirable Landscape, and a Model of i^, gives it on purpose to
foreshew it; the Apostle therefore gives it in Terms most expressive of the
Kingdom of Christ, v. 16. to v. 19.

1. It is called the Power and Coming of Christ, and the word Masesty imports
Royal Greatness, v. 16.

2. The sollemn Inauguration of Christ by the Voice from the excellent glory;
This is the beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; like unto that other so
great Declaration of him. Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee, when
he set his Kingdom on his holy hill of Sion, v. 18.

3. As the New-Jerusalem, the Palace of the Kingdom of Christ is an exceeding
high and holy Mountain, so all this glory was on the holy Mountain.

4. In that the Apostle is so apprehensive, it might be suspected to be a
cunningly devised Table, which Caution of the Apostle is indeed a great Key of
this whole Discourse; and will lead us into the reason of this Context, as
shall appear after.

5. In that the Apostle passes so immediately from the Transfiguration, to the
sure Word of Prophecy, and to prophecy shining as a light in a dark place; by
which two Characters put together, it manifestly appears the Kingdom of Christ
intended is neither the Kingdom of Grace, the Spiritual Kingdom, the Gospel of
Grace, as we generally speak; nor the Kingdom of Eternity; not the Kingdom of
Grace: because not only Prophecy looks to things to come, if still in Prophecy,
and to be fulfilled; but also if it should be supposed: That Prophecy shined in
that Kingdom of Grace, and of the Gospel by the Apostles so Illustrious
Ministry; that could be by no means called a dark, or squalid or foul place:
For it was the Gloriousest State of the Kingdom; and of Prophecy fulfilled in
it, that had been ever before, or has been since, or that shall be, till that
very Everlasting Kingdom of Christ come into its succession; then it could not
be the Kingdom of Eternity, For the Kingdom of Eternity is not the
manifestation of Prophecy, but one of the plainest and most Fundamental
Doctrines of the Gospel, and of Christianity.

I come therefore to the second thing; that this Epistle of the Apostle Peter
is adjusted to, and that is, to the showing the time of the Kingdom; for which
I give these Arguments.

1. That the Apostle calls it the Everlasting Kingdom; by which; as was before
intimated, he refers to Daniel's Prophecy of that Everlasting Kingdom and
Dominion, Dan. 7. 27. which is postpon'd to four Kingdoms and Monarchies, the
last of which was then in course, when the Apostle wrote this; and to the last
state of which, viz. the Feet of Iron and Clay, and the ten Horns, and a little
one chief of the Ten, there was an allowance of Time, Times and Half a Time,
before the Kingdom of Christ could come into its Succession.

2. The Apostle by saying, The sure word of prophecy shines as a light in a
dark place, intimates, it foretells the time of that glorious Kingdom; how could
it shine so effectually, as to enlighten the dark place, if it gave no
Knowledge, when Prophecy should be fulfilled. For that Prophecy does not pass
immediately into effect, made the space between the appearance of Christ in
Flesh and in Glory dark: and therefore the light of Prophecy gives us a
direction upon the Time, when the eflect of Prophecy shall be, the hope and
assurance of which Enlightens.

3. The Apostle according to other Scriptures, distinguishes between the day
dawning, and the Day Star arising; one signifying the succession of the Kingdom
of Christ; the other the glory of that Kingdom. So the Mystery of God is to be
fulfilled in the days of the Seventh Angel, and then Christ appears in his
Glory. So the Apostle distinguishes between Christ blasting the man of sin with
the Breath of his Mouth; which is by the mighty power of the Everlasting
Gospel, and then utterly consuming and annihilating Him, with the Brightness of
his Coming, or Appearanee.

4. The Apostle describes the Apostasy that should so long delay the Kingdom of
Christ in mystical Terms, under the shade of Nicolaianism, and Gnostiscism, so
fit to type out the Idolatry, impurity of Manners, and all the Abominablenesses
of the Antichristian State; of which Antichrist, the little Horn in Daniel,
whose representation Daniel gave, as thinking to change Times and Laws, until
the time of the Kingdom of Christ; Now of this very changing Times and Laws, is
the Second Chapter of this Epistle a delineation and most prophetically, and at
greatest advantage after the mention of Prophecy, it is given.

5. His Third Chapfer most plainly and exprsly refers to Time; for he answers
not as some think, the Atheists, but the Antichristians Objection, those great
Burlesquers of Christianity into Fables; called therefore Scoffers; who say,
That all things from the Flood having continued as they were, there is no such
change as of the Kingdom of Christ to be expected; and so all that which
concerns the Kingdom of Christ has passed with them for Millenarian Heresy.
The Apostle has therefore laid down the Rule and Standard of Time, accounting
the Six-days of Creation, each as at a Thousand Years; and in the Evening, or
as between the two Evenings of the sixth Millenary begins the Sabbatical
Milenary, or the Seventh Thousand; which is with the Lord; that is, with
relation to the Lord, or the Lord Jesus Christ, in relation to his Kingdom; but
as one day, often called the Day of Judgment, and that Sabbath Day; in which
Saying of the Apostle, That a Thousand Years is as one Day; there is a manifest
foresight of the Divine Spirit, what it would make known by John, even that
numbered, exactly Numbered Time of a Thousand years; which the Apostle Peter
affirmed to be with the Lord, viz. as Time designed, and set out to the Lord as
his own Times That one Day.

Now as this view of this Epistle gives us a clear apprehension, how full to
the purpose of Prophetical Scripture, this Epistle is written, how it
simpathizes, and is contemporate with the whole Scope and Spirit of it; so the
Words and Sense of Interpretation is exactly fitted to all, and no other can
fit it.

For there were two things, all the Hebrews, both unbelieving, and believers,
were fully agreed in.

1. That the Prophecies of Scripture were of Divine Inspiratien; that Prophecy
of Scripture came not by the will of man, but was from the Holy Spirit: This
the Believing, and Unbelieving Jews were both most zealous of.

2. That Messiah had a Kingdom assured to him in the Prophesies of Scripture:
This even the Unbelieving Jews were all in highest expectation of at that very
time; and the Believing Jews also were earnestly at that time in expectation of.

To these the Apostle therefore cannot be supposed to direct the force of his
Discourse.

But that Jesus Christ was not to be owned as the true Messiah, the Son of God,
and the King of Israel; notwithstanding his Kingdom did not immediately appear;
was a Point the Unbelieving Jews are to this day scandalized at, even to their
rejection of Christ the True Messiah; and the Christian Hebrews were very
tender in. Therefore that Jesus Christ was the True Messiah, and that great
Prince, the Apostle gave first the proof of the Transfiguration, as has been
shown: And that he with James and John were Eye and Ear-Witnesses; Three
Witnesses; in the Mouths of whom it was established, and no Cunningly devised
Fable, to shift off the Scandal of the mean Appearance of our Lord, in the days
of his Flesh. But, says the Apostle, We have a more sure word of Prophecy, as
has been opened; to which you do well to take heed.

But the Objection still remains; That the Prophecys run all upon a Glorious
Kingdom of Messiah at that time to appear, as the Unbelieving Jews thought; and
therefore the Scribes, Pharisees, Chief-Priests, Elders, their whole Sanhedrim
determined against him with a high hand, that he was a Deceiver. The asserting
therefore the Divine Inspiration of Prophecy could not be to the main purpose;
but that it is not of Private Interpretation, but that serious Christians may
find the sense and meaning of it, and that it is not within the Enclosure or
Embarasse of any Sanhedrim, Council, or Infallible Breast; This is indeed
highly to the purpose; and that according to the Sense and Meaning of the
Divine Spirit in it; one part compared with another, by the Assistances of the
same Spirit; it would appear, that as Daniel's Seventy Weeks brought down Time
to its fullness, viz. at the Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ, that
a dark place, or Interval of delay and patience, for that Kingdom must needs be
for a long space, but that yet that all Takers heed to prophecy Prophecy leads
through the dark place, with the Illumination of that Course of Time, and how
long it shall be until the dawning of the day, and the shining of the day Star
into the hearts of all his Saints, by the glorious appearance of Christ, and in
the fullness of times, or all Times.

Now all this is very evidently to a great and admirable end, purpose and
effect in the Apostle's Discourse in this Context and whole Epistle, viz. to
settle the hearts of the Believing Hebrews, and of all Christians in the
comfortable Expectations of that Kingdom, in the midst of the greatest Darkness
of the worst Times; and it is with the greatest Wisdom of the Divine Spirit of
Prophecy, that at this very Advantage the Apostle goes on to set out this
Apostasy, at this very Joint of Discourse of the dark place, which that very
Apostasy was to create; and at naming of prophecy; and tells them, that there
shall be false Prophets among Christians, as there were among the People of
Israel of old: (So the Apostle John in the Revelations joins the Antichristian
Beast, and False Prophet) in several Particulars opposite to the Apostles
Doctrine, concerning Prophecy and Interpretation of Scripture, wherein they
have Antichristianiz'd, as the Pharisees at that time had Prevaricated.

1. In that insolent Pretense to Infallibility of Interpretation by a Pope and
Council; and their Clergy would engross Interpretation, and the Power of
Interpreting Scripture, as their own Propriety, Right and Dominion.

2. In their Locking up Scripture from the people, under this very Pretense;
They cannot interpret, nor have right to interpret it; so they cannot attend to
the sure word of prophecy, as they are commended here for doing.

3. In their peculiar Enmity to the searching the Prophecy of Scripture, and
denying even to the most Learned to intermeddle with it, seeing their own
Condemnation in it; contrary to the Apostle's most peculiar Commendation of
those, who give heed to Prophecy.

4. In their setting up Tradition, a thing dependent wholly on Human Will above
Scripture; whereas the Apostle commends Scripture and its Prophecy, that it
came not by the Will of man, but by the Spirit.

5. In their allowing to their own Votaries the Credit and Honor of their
pretended Inspirations above the Close attendance to Scripture Prophecy, and
its Interpretation; which the Apostle has here so recommended to every
Christian, and without the least signification of Inspiration Given to All; and
his plain making former Scripture the Test of All following.

6. By exalting their Fabulous Legendary Miracles above Scripture, or the
Prophecies; notwithstanding even to the Transfiguration, The Apostle prefers
the sure Word of Prophecy; Although That was no Cunning devised Fable, and of
so great an Excellency; by which the Apostle seems prophetically to Glance most
severely upon those Cunningly Devised Fables, that should arise in the
Christian Profession.

7. The Apostle, Foretelling those Scoffers in the last days, who should set up
the Mock Fifth Monarchy; so earnestly recommends the Words of the Prophets, and
the Commandments of the Apostles of the Lord and Savior, the Great Messiah,
and Jesus; whereby he has also given a very damning Predictory Admonition of
the Grand Antichristian Apostasy.

Now in all these, it may be said to those Antichristians, as it was to the
Jews, and their Rulers of old; while they read these Scriptures, and the
Prophecys of Scripture in their own way, they not understanding the Voices of
the Prophets, are most justly condemned in fulfilling them. For thus ought the
Antichristian Apostasy to do, though most wickedly they do so, that these
Scripture Prophecys may be fulfilled.

All that has now been spoken being by way of premisal and preparation, I lay
down these Propositions;

1. That Scripture Prophecy is given by God, for a Light that must shine in the
dark place of the Antichristian Apostasy, till the end of which the Kingdom of
Christ is in delay.

2. Christians do well to take heed to it as so shining, and giving the time,
when the day of that Kingdom shall dawn, and the day Star of it shine into the
hearts of all Saints.

3. Such heed cannot be given, except there be a Right given to Christians, and
a power of interpreting Scripture Prophecies.

4. It is a First Principle to Christians, of the Apostle's setting and fixing,
that all and every Prophecy of Scripture, and particularly of Time relating to
the Kingdom of Christ is Open and Free, and not a Private Record, or of any way
an Enclosed, Impropriated, or Appropriated Interpretation.

For the more clear and illustrious arguing the Grand Proposition; That all,
and every Prophecy of Scripture is not of a private or secret, but of an open,
free, and public Interpretation; I will first proceed by direct and down right
proof and Argument, that of all Scripture, except that which lays down the
Truths, precisely, and absolutely necessary to Salvarion: The Prophecy of
Scripture is in its Interpretation, most Free, open, and most certain.

I will in the second place give Answers to the great Objections against this
Proposition so proved.

I will in the Third Place consider what Standards according to Reason and
Scripture-understanding may be given, whereby we may judge whether any one has
given a true Interpretation of Scripture Prophecy, viz. whereby the person
giving such true Interpretation, and whereby Any other may judge of it, and
find it so.

In the Fourth Place, I will draw out in most public view, the Evidences I my
self have within my self, and have offered to others, that I have given a True
Interpretation of Scripture Prophecy.

All this I will do with most particular relation to prophetical numbers of
Time.

I will Super-add a Judgment upon the state of Time Intermedious from hence to
the Kingdom of Christ; and show, that the Kingdom of Christ shall be very
sudden, and as Lightning: And this I shall do by way of retractation, and
correction of Any thing wherein I have erred in this matter; and what will be
as an Answer of an Objection, that Glories in the present appearance of Things
to Sense, as if no such Kingdom were near.

I will recollect the whole in some very Brief Reflections for the settlement
of the Judgment and practice, in relation to Scripture Prophecy, concerning
Time.

I begin with the First; The arguing the Proposition, which shall insist upon
these Four Heads, or Topics.

1. I argue from the Infinite Ability of the Divine Spirit, so to give
Prophecy, that the Interpretation may be Free and Public.

2. I argue from the necessity; That whatever is written with sense, and
coherence of the things written, and with the Harmony of Truth, if the parts of
such Discourses are diligently compared, and sagaciously intermedled with by
persons separating themselves thereunto, a certain Interpretation must needs
fly out to them.

3. I argue from the gracious Assistances and Promises that the Holy Spirit
will as the Spirit of Truth lead into all Truth, showing things that are to
come; and give the key of knowledge, leading into the Sectets of Prophecy; even
wherein our Dullness and Slowness of Heart makes them so, notwithstanding the
Provision of the Spirit for their Interpretation.

Argument I. The Divine Spirit has an Infinite and Infallible Prescience of
things that are to come to pass; Known to him are the Works of God from the
very Foundation of the World to the end of it, with every particular Accident
to the very least Circumstance; and therefore he can foretell all things, as
clearly as he pleases; and so that they may be interpreted and understood.

He searches all things, even the deep things of God, whose Counsels of old
are faithfulness and truth; who calls the End from the Beginning, and can
declare it; For he works all thingsafter the Counsel of his own Will, which
Will he knew from Eternity within himself.

This Prescience of the Divine Spirit is acknowledged by All Christians, except
some few who least deserve the Name of Christians, who deny the Actual
Determinations of Free, or what we call Fortuitous Agents, to be Scibilia, or
Knowable.

I make not therefore here any dispute concerning the High Mystery of the
Supreme Prescience; how, or in what manner God foreknew, when the things fore
known depend on causes acting so freely, that what they will choose, seems
impossible to be known before hand; or so fortuitously, that if it could be
foreseen how they would be cast, the Fortuitousness seems destroyed: But that
God does foreknow, I take for granted, even as it is much the more generally
agreed; and in several greatest Instances of each kind, it is most evident and
undeniable in Scripture, God has foretold the Events of each sort; God
magnifies his own Divinity; and challenges all False Names of Deity upon this
very Point: For thus he says, Declare to us things to come, that we may know
you are Gods, Isa. 43. 23. And as he foresees, and fore-knows with infinite
clearness and perspicuity; even so he is able, according to the nature of
Prophetic Language, which he has constituted and framed, taking the Example
from none, but giving it to all.

-- to Express all things Prophetically.

He employs the true Laws of speaking Prophetically, and showing things to
come; he knows by his own Wisdom, so to govern the speaking of his Servants the
Prophets, that prophetical things may be compared with prophetical: Prophetical
things in the Old Testament, with prophetical things in the New: Even as he
has taken care in all Spiritual Things in General, as the Apostle shows at
large, 1 Cor. c. 2. That they may be so expressed, that Spiritual things may be
compared with Spiritual; Even so that Prophetical Emblems, Figures, Iconisms,
Types, Numbers of Time in the Old and New Testament may be compared and
co-ordinated one with another; that They as face to face, or as Tally to Tally
may answer and agree, the one to the other; and may not be of any such private
Interpretation, as not to be searched into, or understood. He also foresaw
there would be, and took care there should be Monuments of clear, undoubted,
and Universal History, to correspond with Prophecy, as Testimonies of a mighty
and powerful providence, that should ratify it by event; and that there should
be among all Nations in their Historical Records witnesses thereunto.

Nay, beyond this, by the Infiniteness of the Divine Foresight, the Holy Spirit
has chosen out such Words, as should themselves give great Light and
Confirmation in the Explanation of Prophecy by their own Light; by falling in
with the Words, made use of in the time of Events coming to pass. For the Holy
Spirit having a certain Foresight of the Words that should be at any time in
general use, could point to them many Ages before, for his own service in
Prophecy; and being so pointed to, and coming so into use, they make a very
considerable Character to distinguish both Times, and their just place in
Prophecy. In the same manner the Holy Spirit foreknew, what celebrated Rule or
Number there would be found necessary in any Age for the Adjustment and
Mensuration of time to such purposes, as he had to remark upon in his
Prophetical Frame; and when he is pleased to make any Allusion to it, it is of
singular use to the Explication and assurance of Prophetical Time, and
whereabout in Time we are, by concerting one with another, viz. One such Note
in History, and Event with such its correspondent Note in Prophecy; many
particulars in each sort of these shall after be remarked, and they will plainly
show, that Prophecy was not intended, nor designed for secrecy, and reserve
from All Interpretation.

Now in all these Particulars I use the Word Foreknew, or Foresaw; to avoid any
dispute on the Word Fore-ordered, which else I altogether prefer.

God therefore in scorn to the Dark Oracles of the Devil, as well as to the
Black Dens and Caves, out of which he gave them, says thus; Esaias 45. 19. I have
not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth; I said not unto the seed of
Jacob, seek ye my face in vain, viz. my Counsel and Will in Prophecy, as they
that seek to the Idols of the Heathen; For I the Lord speak Righteousness, I
declare the things that are Right; Right in Regard of Infinite Understanding
and Fore-knowledg of all Events; I speak Things That are All plain to him that
Understands, and Right to them that find Knowledge.

It cannot be suposed, that the Divine Spirit can have any necessity upon him
to speak Darkly, or Ambiguously concerning things to come, if he please to
speak at all of them; as undoubtedly he has been pleased to speak of them; or
that in that Regard Prophecy of Scripture should be of any reserved, or secret
Interpretation; For all things, however to come, are so Open and Naked before
him, with whom we have to do, that he need not Darken Counsel by words without
Knowledge, either, as they do, who know not Themselves, nor Understand; and so
cannot beget Knowledge in others; Or that would deceive; For he knows All, so as
to speak plainly, clearly, certainly, concerning Them; He understands them
fully, the certainty of their coming to pass: He is neither Nescient, nor
Doubtful concerning any Thing, or the Manner, or the Time of its coming to
pass; and therefore, how long soever he speaks of them before hand, yet he
needs not so to speak, as to hide himself in his Prophecy concerning Them, or
seek Subter-fuges, or Ambi Dextrous expressions concerning Them any more, nor
so much as any Other He, that looks most downright on things present; For as
Darkness and Light are all one to the Father of Lights, so Yesterday and to Day
are all one to him, who Inhabits Eternity, and who is without any Variation, or
Shadow of Turning.

All these Things are so undoubtedly certain, so Universally Agreed, and
Acknowledged, that although they themselves make a High Argument in this point;
yet They need no Proof, but Require only to be Magnified, Displayed, and
Illustrated.

Argum. 2. Any Author, or Writer that can Write Sense, and who does indeed
Write Sense, and Writes with some Largeness, and Diffusiveness of that his
Sense, and does declare He would be Heard, and Read; and would have the Minds
that have Wisdom, Exercise themselves upon what is Written; let him wrap up his
Mind, and Sense in such Figures, that none but the Wise, and Considering should
find out his meaning, and let it but be, that he accordingly has Framed his
Discourse; whenever such a Writer gives out, and makes public such a Writing;
he thereby puts it under the Dominion of every One, that is Wise and Sagacious,
and who will allow the Time, and Thought, that is necessary to make such
Observation and Compare of the Hints, and Remarks that cannot be Avoided in
Rational and Coherent Discourse; however Involved in Symbols and Figures; by
which the Sense and Meaning may be Understood, and Found out.

But now it is on one side most True, that None, as the Divine Spirit can Write
Highest Truth, and of Stupendous Significancy, and Coherence; and yet Veil,
and Hide it so, as that it should be impossible to find it out, but remain
perfect Mystery, till the time of Revealing it should come; if he pleased so to
have it; But then on the other hand, none, as he can Write in Figures, and
under Veils, and yet so mix the Lights, and the Shades, if he please to have it
so; that the Minds, that have Wisdom shall find Light Arising, and Springing
out in Taking heed to the sure Word of Prophecy: And if They are Inclined and
stirred up, to separate Themselves to Intermiddle with this Wisdom, it cannot
be, but they must make great Discoveries; If they faithfully attend and lay the
parts one to another, and it be the will of that Holy Spirit of Prophecy, they
should do so.

Now that it is his Pleasure, They should do so, is made known by the very
Writing, and Publication of Prophecy, and no Prohibition of Searching it; as
also by the obligation, that lies upon all, when he Writes to observe, and
understand. (This is due in Measure to every Intelligent, and Worthy Writer,
but without Measure to his, the Spirits Writing) It is known to be his
pleasure; Because there is a General Command to Search the Scripture; Because
All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is Profitable, and there is
no Interdict upon Prophecy as to the search, nor Limitation, as to the
Profitableness; It is known to be his pleasure concerning Prophecy, because it
is said by our Lord with Relation to the Prophecy of Daniel; Let him that
reads Understand; Because the Apostle Peter has said of the more sure word
of Prophecy, ye do well in Taking heed to it; because it is written, as in
Golden Letters on the Portal of the Revelation; Blessed is he that Reads, and
they that hear the words of the Prophecy of this Book; which must needs imply
with Understanding; Because it is the Epiphonema, the Burden of every Epistle
of it; He that has an Ear, let him hear.

And if it be thus, then all the Locking up the Mind of the Holy Spirit of
Prophecy is, that he may reserve the Secrets of it for the peculiar Friends (I
say not of his word in general) but of his Prophetic Word; and that they may
whet up the sharpest Exercise of their Powers of Understanding to find the
Golden Taches, and Couplings; and one Part of Prophecy may be joined to
Another, and the whole piece be under view in all its Frame, and Contexture.

As soon as ever therefore, the Holy Spirit has once Published, and Exposed
his Prophetic Writings, and thereby, and therein Affixed them to the Pillars of
the Temple; They are by his Grace made the Right of his Servants to search
into, and to Understand; For they then cease to be the Secret Things that
Belong to God; But they being Revealed, become those that Belong to us, and to
our Children; we enter into that Privilege of the Israel of God, To us belong
the Oracles of God; every servant of God, that has his Heart stirred up, has
very good Right to search, and his search is no Sacriledg, nor shall be imputed
to him, as Curiosity, or presumption; It is his Right to Search, even as among
Men, it is no Violation to Inquire into the Sense of any Author, offering
himself to the Public; and there is greater Encouragement in Searching the
sure Word of Prophecy than in Searching any other Author, or Writing, as is
next to be spoken.

Argum. 3. I Argue from the Infinite Grace of the Divine Spirit, that as he
has Given to Man a searching Mind after all Knowledge, so he would not give any
part of Scripture, as a Torment of wise Inquisitive Persons, but give the Key
of Knowledge to Them; and that he will, as the Spirit of Truth so Lead into All
Truth, and show his Servants Things to Come, with such Uprightness,
Faithfulness, and Sincerity; that there shall be no more Secresy, or privacy in
the Interpretation of Prophecy, than is necessary according to the Laws, He
knows Just, and Due; and which he has himself weighed out, as so Just, and Due
to Prophetic Oracles; even as in All other parts of Scripture, he has in
Infinite Wisdom, as he weighed out the Mountains in Scales, and the HIlls in a
Balance, so proportioned to every point of Scripture-Truth its Exact measure
of clearness of Revelation, and so consequently of Interpretation; the most
necessary are the most plain; and yet there are Truths of the Grace of God
freely Justifying, and Accepting sinners in Christ, that call for the most
Quickened, and Awakened Faculties, for the Interpretation of them; as also
concerning the inward Operations of the Grace of God in the Hearts of Men; and
yet in all These, and such as These, The Holy Spirit has Wisely, and Holyly
Given out his Oracles in a most Righteous Scale, between the Excellency of the
Truth he Reveals, and the Exercise he knows necessary to the Mind of Man in
Searching out the Interpretation; and so has made the Manifestation more
Ligtsome, or Requiring Closer Attendance; And thus in Prophecy according to the
Vehemence of Search and Enquiry he has thought fit, he has Dispensed. This
does not make it yet Private Interpretation; because there are such Lines of
Communication between part, and part, Emblem and Emblem, number of Time, and
number of Time; between words in Prophecy, and words used in the Time of
Prophecy Fullfill'd; between Rules of Time in Prophecy and celebrated Rules of
Time among Men in Prophecy Fulfilled; between Prophecy, and Universal History,
that all may be made Plain.

But beyond All this, Interpretation of Prophecy is not Private, because The
Spirit of Prophecy, who Knows it, because he gave it; Even that Blessed
Public Spirit of Wisdom, Truth, Scripture, is present to Assist his Servants,
Searching into Prophecy; Leading them into the Treasures of it; Springing
Thoughts into them all of the Sudden; Bringing Things to their Remembrance,
that else would not have come there; and so Enabling them to Match, and
Enterweave All those Forementioned Indentings one with another; and thereby
raising in them Assurances, equal to Demonstration.

He also foresaw, what Humble Enquirers into these Things he would stir up and
Assist in every Time, and what measures of Assistance he would Allow them; And
yet, this does not make Interpretation Private to such persons apart, because
such Accesses to All the Means of Interpretation, and to those Assistances of
the Spirit are free and open to one, as well as another; and what is given in
Interpretation to any one, ought to be freely Communicated, and in the Reasons
and Grounds of it, It lies open to All: And they who are thus Assisted, are not
Assisted for Themselves only, but as Lights set on an hill, that they may not
be Hid.

Now this Assistance of that Blessed Spirit, as a Spirit Graciously present to
the Searchers into Prophecy, is an Encouragement beyond what any Author in the
World can give to them, who search into their Writings; For who as he, can be
so always present to the Minds, and Understandings of Those, who Read, and
Meditate upon them? Who, as he can Recompense the Love Reverence and Diligence
of those, who wait upon Him? Who can, as he Prompt to Them, summon to their
Memory; keep them in Doubt, and so urge them to further Enquiries, refresh
their Researches, and so make Things further known to Them? so settle, confirm,
and assure Them, that they may know the Certainty of the Words of Truth?

This is an undeniable Privilege, and Ground of Hope to All, who set Themselves
by Prayer, Desire and Humble Endeavors to Search, and so seek out the
Mysteries of Wisdom to be found out in the Book of Prophecy; why then should it
be Thought a Hopeless Undertaking, or an Incredible Thing that any one should
be so Assisted, that does Humbly Profess, he has so waited upon God in his
Word? Or that That Key of Prophetical Knowledge should be vouchsafed to such a
one, when so gracious Assistances are Promised from and by the Divine Spirit,
the Public Spirit of Prophecy, and its Interpretation?

Now All this I have Discoursed in General, I would particularly Argue
concerning Prophetic Time, and by an Argument most peculiar to it:

For not only in general, If All and Every Prophecy be Constituted of a not
private Interpretation, then not Prophecies by Numbers defining Time to the
Kingdom of Christ; For as has been said, if All Scripture, as the Apostle Paul
says, be of Divine Inspiration, Then Prophecy; So if All Prophecy be not of
Private Interpretation, then not that very particular Part of Prophecy, which
Defines Time; And as Prophecy is so excellent a part of Scripture, so the
Numbers Defining Time are an excellent part of Prophecy, and therefore cannot
be of private Interpretation, if Prophecy be not so; For every General includes
all, especially chiefest Particulars.

But I shall further Argue with a Peculiar Respect to the Prophetic Numbers of
Time, that they of any cannot be of Private Interpretation; For Number, Weight
and Measure are Things of so great Exactness, that the whole Communication of
the World Depends upon them; and Scripture puts upon them great Honor also,
requiring above all, that they be Exact; as the Rules of all Enter-Course; Now
therefore when Scripture takes Number and Measures of Time into it self; if
these are not well understood, how can they be such Standards of Enter-course?
Seeing then Prophecy has so many Numbers 2300 Eves, Morns; Time, Times, Half a
Time; 1290 Days; 1335 Days in Daniel; 1260 Days with Time, Times, Half a Time,
Three Days and an Half; and 42 Months 2 Times mentioned in the Revel. if these
Numbers, that so evidently speak a Fitness for Calculation of Time with
greatest Exactness; If these by a due Search and Compare one with another
cannot be understood; what spaces of Time they Define, when they begin, and
when they End; They of all the Points of Prophecy, tho they carry the Face, and
Appearance of Greatest Significancy, yet would be indeed of all the most
Insignificant. Now seeing an Insignificancy in the Highest Points of
Signification can by no means be imputed to the Wise, and Holy Spirit of
Prophecy; I conclude, that even these Prophetic Numbers in a peculiar, and
Eminent Manner, may be understood, both what space of Time they Emensurate, or
Line out to us, and also when they Begin, and when they End; and so I have
finished the First Head of Discourse I proposed.

I come now therefore to the Second Head proposed, to give Answers to the great
Objections, that are Levied against this Proposition, viz. That All, and every
Prophecy of Scripture is not of Private, or Reserved, but Public, Free and
open Interpretation.

Object. 1. If Prophecy of Scripture be of so Free, Public and Unreserv'd
Interpretation, how comes it to pass, that so few have so much, as Attempted
the Books of Prophecy, that Foretell Great Events, and the Times of Them? Yea,
that Most judge it so Unpresumable and Undertaking, as to Reject all
Interpretations of Daniel, and the Revelation, that Debate Things thoroughly to
their utmost point and issue; and that search what, or what manner of Time is
signified by the Spirit in them; or is more, than by way of ordinary Comment;
as if they were the Performances of only Fanatical, and Imaginative Men; and
upon the Evidence but of such an Endeavor, condemn them immediately as such.

Ans. Let God be True, and every Man a Liar; Now God has said Every Prophecy
of Scripture is so Descended, that it is not of Private Interpretation; that
they do well, who attend to the Light of it, shining as in a Dark place, and so
Enlightening it; if then it were Dark it self, how should it enlighten a Dark
Place; for it would be Dark to Dark, which increases Darkness still; whatsoever
enlightens, must be it self Light. This main Truth ought therefore at all times
to remain Stable, and Firm.

The immediate Cause therefore of this so general prejudice against search into
Prophecy, however Colored over with Modesty and Reverence of Divine Mysteries,
and secrets, into which Men pretend they would not Pry, are these.

1. There is so great a Darkness upon the present state, that though the Light
Shines in it, yet it, as Darkness, comprehends not the Light of Prophecy
shining upon it.

2. Hence, as Men in the Dark, they are Afraid of every appearance of
Difficulty; They say concerning All Interpretation of Prophecy, There is a Lion
in the way. It is as the Sons of Anak to them, that cannot be Encountered, and
as the Walls that cannot be Scaled; so difficult and unintelligible is
Prophecy, that it cannot be Interpreted; It is as a Sealed Book, the Learned
cannot Read, because Sealed; nor the unlearned, because not Learned:

3. How many are they, who are afraid of the very Light it self? what Prophecy
Reveals, is so contrary to the State they are in, that they are, as the
Expression is in Job, upon all appearance of such Light, as it were in the
Terrors of the shadow of Death; The Aspect of Prophecy upon both the Civil and
Ecclesiastic State of the present World is most Terrible, especially, when it
comes to the Determination of Time, as near: Thus the Lord makes Foolish the
Wisdom of the Wise, etc. Esaias 28. that they cannot endure it, and so hate the
Light, and will not come to it, least their State should be Reproved and
Shaken; and are Angry, that such a Light should be flashed in their Faces.

But these are only the next, or second Causes, there is a higher judiciary
Cause, that sways Righteously, and Holily; and yet so, as Permitting, and
leaving Men to themselves; even this; That Because men do not like to attend to
the sure Word of Prophecy, God gives them up to this Culpable Cause, and
Reason, of all the Injudiciousnesses concerning the meaning of Prophecy and
(...)
Prepossessions against the Interpretation of it, as if it were private, and
Reserved; and thus that his Wise, and Just purpose purpose should be fulfilled;
that the dark place should be a dark place still, while the Apostasy should,
according to the Oath of Christ for Time, Times and half Time continue; and
till the Day down, and the Day Star arise in men's hearts; and yet no
Encouragement, or Boldness ministered to it, that it might continue so Dark
without Great Sin. And indeed, though the faulty Cause of all this be the not
Receiving the Truth in the Love of it; (on which God gives up the Apostasy to
strong Delusions, and to believe a Lie;) and because of the Few, and Small
Things he has against his Suffering Churches of Pergamus and Thyatyra; and the
Sardian State of the Reformation, that has a Name to Live, and yet is dead;
Upon all these Accounts Prophccy is so little understood; saying the
Glimmerings of Light given by a very Few, and those very Little Acceptable
Interpreters, that do inlighten, and show by a Little, how this dark place
would be enlightened by taking heed to the Sure Word of Prophecy. But I am about
to say, if Prophecy were as Fully and Truly Interpreted, as the Publickness of
its Constitution for Interpretation, would give Leave to; it would especially
now so near the End, so inlighten the dark place, that there would be no Room
found for the Darkness of the Apostasy, but it would fly away like Shades of
the Night at the Morning Appearance. But as the Apostle says, God has
concluded All under Sin, so under the Apostasy, either in Full, as in the
Antichristian World; or in Part, as in the Reformation-Part, that in his own
Time he might have mercy upon All. On the Height and Depth of the Riches of
both the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his paths, and his
ways past finding out! For of him and by him are all things, to him be glory
for ever.

2. The Disagreement among the Interpreters of Prophecy, and more particularly,
the Great Mistakes they have fallen into in point of Time, seems a more
formidable Objection against the Freeness and Publickness of the Interpretation
of Prophecy; and most as to Time; For when Wise, Learned, Sagacious, and very
Diligent, Zealous, and Holy Persons have set themselves to inquire, and find
out the Mind of the Spirit, and have not found it, but have disagreed among
themselves; and so some must be in mistakes; For they cannot differ, and all be
in the Right; This is much more against the Interpretation of Prophecy, being
not private, than if none had attempted: For were it not under Reserve, why
have they not been more successful in finding, that have so tried, and put
themselves forth to the utmost therein.

Answ. 1. We ought to be very wary to urge either Mistakes or Differences of
Interpreters, in interpreting Prophecy of Scripture, lest we shut our selves
out of all Interpretation of Scripture in General; yea, even out of Great
Points of Faith, and Truth of the Gospel; Because in all these there are Great
Differences of Explication; and therefore Mistakes on some side: Should we
therefore Reason, These are so Dark and Reserved as not to be meddled with? This
would be an high Dishonor to our Christian Profession; Let us much rather make
our Attendances to Reading and Meditation, more Inward, Constant, Serious,
Deep, Humble, with more earnest Supplications for Divine Assistance, and Free
Communications of his Spirit, the Author of all Knowledge in the Truths making
wise to Salvation, and so in Interpretation of Prophecy.

Answ. 2. Whenever Any have fallen short, or are mistaken in the
Interpretation of Prophecy, we must conclude there was a want of Due
Attendance; and God Left even Good Men and his Servants so to themselves, that
they have missed in what they have seemed to themselves, or even to others, to
have attained. But in the mean time nothing is to be charged upon Prophecy of
Scripture, or the Nature and Constitution of it as to Interpretation; as if it
were dark and uncertain, and we could never be sure whether we had it aright or
not, so contrary to the Apostles Doctrine concerning it; For as no Weakness or
Indisposition of the Eye, or Disadvantage in Avenues, or Entrances of Light,
are to be charged on the Light it self; so none of the Hallucinations, or
over-sights, or Stumbles of the Interpreters of Prophecy, are to be imputed so
much to the Difficulty of Interpretation of it, as in it self; but to our
Dullness of sight, or hearing, what the Spirit has therein said to the
Churches. Nor is any one therefore to be discouraged, but only cautioned, not
to be high minded, but to fear; Even as the many Miscarriages in persons
seeking Eternal Happiness, should not deter us from walking in the way of Life,
but oblige us to do it with an holy fear and trembling, lest we should so much
as seem to fall short.

Object. 3. It will be said, It is true, Nothing is to be laid to the charge of
Prophecy it self, or to the Constitution of it for such Interpretation, as God
intended for it. But it may hence be collected, God intended Prophecies should
be kept secret, until either they shall be opened in such a glorious state of
the Church, as is signified by the Kingdom of Christ, or till each Prophecy
shall be fullfilled; or, at least, till as near the Time of fullfilling, as it
was when Daniel by Beoks understood concerning the End of the Seventy Years
Captivity.

Answ. 1. Nothing of what is mentioned in this Objection will satisfy what the
Apostle Peter has here affirmed; For that Prophecy should be a Light shining
in a dark place, can by no means be accommodated to the state of the Kingdom of
Christ: That could never be styled by the Apostle a dark place; although it is
most True, Prophecy shall lie open, as a Volume, most clearly and fully
understood, in the Hall (as I may say) of that Palace of the Kingdom; but not
as in a dark place, but as Light uniting with Light, unto perfect Brightness;
Then it is the Day shall dawn, and the Day Star shine in the very Hearts of all
the Servants of Christ, and the Light of one Day be as the Light of seven.

Nor can the Apostles sense be made good by Prophecy being understood, when
fullfilled: For indeed the Disputes are as Great concerning the Time, at which
Prophecies, that undoubtedly have been long ago fullfilled, were fullfilled as
concerning Prophecies yet to be fullfilled. And though it may well be allowed,
that there have been some Bruits and Noises of the Things foretold by Prophecy,
that they were coming to pass at the time they did come to pass; yet there are
Two Things evidently intended by the Apostle as the Great Scope and End of his
Discourse, much to be considered by all that would find the Purpose of the Holy
Spirit by him.

1. That there is one Glorious Day, and Day Star to break out and shine in the
World; which is the Great Point at which Prophecy aims, and into which it shall
unite, as a Lesser Light with a Greater, and more Glorious: which is indeed the
Kingdom of Christ, and to which the Apostle had respect, as is to be shown
throughout this Epistle. This is that Time of the Restitution of All Things, of
which all the Prophets have spoken, since the World began, as that same Apostle
Peter spoke, Acts 3. 21. This is the Mpstery to be fulfilled, as he has
spoken, or Evangelized, as Happiest Tidings, by All his Sevants the Prophets:
Rev. 10. 7. Prophecy is therefore a Light shining till then, and guiding to the
Time when it is to begin, and then falls in One with it, as the forenam'd
Scriptures show.

2. There is a very particular dark place, that Prophecy shines as a Light in,
till then; and it is indeed the whole Time from the Delay of the Kingdom of
Christ at his Resurrestion and Ascension, till it dawns and rises as a
Day Star; but it is yet more particularly the Time and State of the Apostasy,
which is as a Smoke darkning the Air, even the whole State of Christianity in
the very Heavens of it. Prophecy shines therefore as a Light in a dark place,
giving Assurance of, and showing the Time of that Day; and Day Star dawning
upon the World; till it shall Illuminate into the very Heart, with its mighty
Influences and Beams of Glory.

Object. 4. It is to be further urged, If the Time of this Kingdom and Glory be
not generally known, and agreed upon, it can do but little Service for the
Inlightning the dark place of the Apostasy; and that we do not find it has
been; and if Prophecy be not in its own Constitution of private Interpretation,
yet if it has Eventually proved so, how is the Light of it seen?

Answ. 1. It is very agreeable to the Wisdom and Glory of God, that the
Fountains of Truth should be running, and the Lights of it shining, though the
Streams and Rays are not received, nor have their kindly Effect; as the
Evangelist John says, The Light shines in darkness, though the darkness
comprehend it not. God left not himself without Witness among the Heathen,
though we know of Few who received the Testimony, Acts 14. 17. How many have
the Gospel Light without its proper saving Effect!

Answ. 2. There has been a strange Collineation, or Levelling, and Aiming of
the Servants of God upon the Years of this Last Part of this Seventeenth
Century, for the Glory of Christ's Kingdom; and besides some Later, a Prophecy
found in the Study of Justus Lipsius transcribed into the Preface of Dr. Mayer,
to the Volume of his Interpretation on the Prophets Great and Small, is
perpendicular on the Year Ninety Eight, in such a Language as speaks Effects
begun, and in their Course as at Ninety Seven, as shall Appear in a short
Appendix to this Treatise.

But to All that has been said, it may be added, in satisfaction of the
Principal Objection; that supposes Prophecy has not been understood till
fullfilled. It is very plain, we cannot give a certain Account what Light God
may have given his Servants into Prophecy in any Times. He gave Noah the Exact
Time of an Hundred and Twenty Years before the Flood; to Abraham Four Hundred
years from the Time of that Oracle to his seed Returning from the Egyptian
Nation, after God had Judged them; Till which time They were under that
oppression; According to which Moses very Probably thought, His brethren would
have understood, God would deliver his people by his hand; Because it grew so
near the time, and Moses was a person so signalized by God in his miraculous
preservation, and his having the offer of being called the Son of Pharoahs
daughter, and yet Refusing that Glittering Honor, as marked out by God for
much Higher, viz. In the deliverance of his People, with whom he Chose to
suffer Affliction rather then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. Of
all which I have no doubt, He had the notices from the four hundred years, He
knew were Given to Abraham; The Children of Issachar were men, that had
Knowledge, and understanding of Times, and Knew what Israel ought to Do; 1 Chronicles. 12. 32. And undoubtedly some Oracular Instructions they had Joined with
Jacobs Prophecy, by which they knew, Judahs being a Royal Tribe, and that the
Lion of the Tribe was the Emblem of it, even till Christ, the Lion indeed of
it; and they Collected David's Royalty should then begin; Daniel understood by
Books, not only the Book of the Prophet Jeremy; But (as we may very Reasonably
suppose) by the Books of other Servants of God, that Kept, or Searched Records
of Times, according to Jeremies Prophecy; I doubt not, Simeon Waited for the
Consolation of Israel according to Daniels Seventy Weeks. What Light God gave
to his servants in the First times of Christianity, we have not such certain
accounts as might be desired: But as it is reported to us by Ecclesiastic
History, It was foretold of Julian, he was Nubecula cito Transitura, a Cloud
tbat would soon vanish. But this I am sure was according to Prophecy, that
Satan being cast down by the change of the Pagan Empire into the Christian
Empire, After Constantine there could be in the Roman Empire no place found for
him any more, of continuance in its Heaven (though some short Attempts there
might be, as of Julian, Eugenius, Argobastes, Maximus) in his Pagan Supremacy;
although under the Name of Christ, as it were in his Right, and as the Vicar of
the Fifth Monarchy of him the Manly Birth on the Throne, Satan crept in as an
underminer, and in the Antichristian Supremacy He has a Throne as on Earth;
whether therefore the Speaker had his Ground it self in Prophecy, The thing it
self had; and it could not be otherwise, but that the Empire of an Apostate to
Paganism must be very Short, even as of a Prince relapsing to Popery in these
Nations.

It was the business of Anti-Christianism to suppress the Interpretation of
Prophecy; that had so dreadful an Aspect upon it self, as much as it could; yet
the common Fame and Bruit of Antichrists coming was spread far and near, when
the Christian Empire, which was the Let, according to These. 2. c. 2. was taken
out of the way; the joint being so Natural between the Christian Ceasing, and
the Antichristian Beginning to supplant, having so much of the Name Christian.

The Voicing the Papacy to be that Antichrist lifting up himself above what
ever was called Sebast or August; as he did about that Time; was heard all
along from the time of Petrus Waldo, till the Reformation; and since the
Reformation how many Eminent Servants of Christ have Labored with success in
the Interpretation of Prophecy, notwithstanding some particular mistakes; with
whom I humbly join my self a Fellow Labourer, and one that has taken part of
their Labor; and now the Fields are white unto the Harvest, when many others
shall enter into our Labors; according to that saying, One sows, and another
Reapeth; and yet he that Reapeth, shall yet receive wages unto Life Eternal; so
that they who have sown, and they that reap, may Rejoice together.

And indeed, the Time is now so near, that whatever Influence, That nearness
may be hoped to have upon Interpretation of Prophecy according to Truth I may
humbly hope for; For tho the Time of Daniels public Interpretation upon the
Seventy Years, was nearer to their End; yet the Time of his understanding was
undoubtedly earlyer; The Time of his Prophecy was designed to be close upon the
very end of the Seventy Years, and that so sollemn Prayer; for else it is
Evident, The Time of his praying was every Day, toward the Desolations of
Jerusalem, with his Windows opened Three Times, with foresight of the very time.

Seeing then the very Time of Ninety Seven, I have now for some years pitched
upon, as the very Time, when the Desolations of the Sanctuary shall be
Accomplished, and the Kingdom of Christ be in Succession; of which I find daily
new Confirmations, and Assurances, as the Time Approaches; Therefore I hope I
shall be Enabled, and many Servants of God with me, to set our selves daily by
Supplication, and Prayer, and so much the more, as we see the Day approaching.

Obj. 1. It may be said, what is the Good, or Advantage of Knowing the Secrets
of Prophecy. or the Times more especially Defined by it; have we not such plain
Doctrines and Rules of Scripture, that are every way sufficient to take up our
Time, and Thoughts, that are more sure, and certain in their tendency to God,
and have less of Scruple and Dispute in their Sense, and Importance?

Ans. 1. Whatsoever is vouchsafed to us by God, as a Manifestation of, and
Revelation from himself to us in his Word; not to regard, receive, and improve
it, is in the Scripture Phrase, a wearying of God, Isa. 7. Ahaz made a fair and
plausible Pretense of Trusting God without a Sign, when God so Graciously
offered it to him; he said, He would not Tempt God, and yet this his Refusal
was called a wearying of God; God understanding much better what is necessary
for us, and to our advantage, than we do our selves; and if he has given us a
Rule of Times, it will be found to be our great Sin, and Neglect, if we do not
search, and enquire, every one in our places, What of the Night, and also how
near the Morning is Coming. Esaias. 21. 11.

Ans. 2. Let us ask what Good it was to Noah, that God told him, The Old World
should have only the Reprieve of an hundred and Twenty years before the Flood?
What Good was it to Abraham, when God told him, It should be Four Hundred
years, ere his Seed should be brought back? What Good was it to the Church of
the Jews to be assured, the Babylonish captivity should be but Seventy VVeeks;
and that there should be but Seventy weeks of years from the full Restoring
Jerusalem, to the coming of Messiah? Such as was the Good of these
Manifestations to the Servants of God; such is the good, that arises from the
Knowledge of Time, Times, and Half Time, the 1260, 1290, and 1335 days of years,
given as the measure of the Antichristian Times; as the Measure of the
Preparation for the Kingdom of Christ, till the Glory of it; such is the
Knowledge of the 2300 Eves, Morns from the Babylonish Captivity ending, to the
Justification of the Sanctuary in the New Jerusalem, according to the Vision of
Ezekiels Temple: And Lastly, such is the Good of the Knowledge of the 1000 years
Glory of Christ's Kingdom manifested to us; and then of the Kingdom Delivered up
to God and the Father, the Last end, and Consummation of All.

I have thus far argued the Grand Assertion, that All, and every Prophecy of
Scripture is not of private Interpretation, and therefore not prophetic
Numbers of Time, but that there are Standards of Interpretation in laid into
Prophecy it self; and such Assistances from that public Spirit vouchsafed to
All that wait for them; that it is justly to be styled not private but public
Interpretation; I have also counter-argued all the Objections I could discover;
I come now to the Third Head.

Head 3 d. The Third Head shall be to consider, What Standards, according to
Scripture-Reason, and the Balance of the Sanctuary, there are, by which the
Interpretation of prophecy may be judged to be a True Interpretation, when it
is offered us by any one that has made it; or whereby the person that has
himself made it, may know it to be Just, and according to the Sense of the Holy
Spirit of prophecy, and his Conduct into that Sense.

The Standards of Trial for the True Interpretation of prophecy, I would lay
down, are These:

1. When the Types and Symbols of prophecy in the Old and New Testament, are
taken, All, as under One entire View and Consideration, and so Analogized, and
shown in their Agreement one with another, as to make up a Full and perfect
Portraicture and Table, each Part appearing in its proper Symetry and
Proportion, in its own Situation, in its Lively (...), the Beauty, and Lively
Air of prophecy. This is like a philosophic System of the Creation, solving
All Phenomena. But if we take some single Parts only, though there may be
handsome and fine plausible and probable Descants upon them, as they stand by
themselves, and if they alone were to be answered for; Yet when they come to be
examined by the rest of prophecy, and it be considered, how one part answers
another, in the whole Frame of prophecy, and one single part under such or such
a Descant; Those Descants will be discovered to be only worthy of Rejection
This therefore I have endeavored, and most closely and diligently attended to
in the Scheme of prophecy I have given, viz. to make a Just and Full Agreement
and Correspondency between All parts of it, and a Conciliated Harmony in the
whole Frame of prophecy.

2. In the point of prophetic Numbers the Standard is,

1. That All the Prophetic Numbers are made to meet also in One full and
entire Consideration and Computation of them one with another, and not any of
them single, and by themselves only. And that they be so both distinguished,
and yet so joined, and so concerted, that they stand fair one with another:
Else the application of them will be precarious, uncertain and contingent only.

2. That when they are thus both Distinguished and Harmonized; they can be
applied and ascertained by that Application to such Events, as are witnessed
to, and acknowledged by the most known, agreed and general Records of History
and Chronology; providentially prepared by God to Gibeonite, as it were, to
Sacred Prophecy; to give both Testimony to the Truth of Prophecy, as also to be
Helps to the Interpretation of it; if Interpreters take care to compare one
with the other, or would be persuaded to do so. Furthermore, these being so
settled by Compare, and so Testified, enable the Interpreter himself, and those
to whom his Interpretation is offered, to Judge whether the Interpretation be
True, and whether it be Just and Right: Whereas, if either there be no Concord
of Supporting History; or that if it be not as a City on an Hill, History
universally Known, and agreed; the Interpretation will be but Dark and
Lubricous, and the standing upon it not firm and stable.

3. When the Prophetical Numbers being by Fair and Just Commissures, Joined to,
and United with the Plain Historical first Part of the Scripture-Line of Time,
Run on together in a strait, even, progressive Motion, from the Creation and
first Sabbatism, so as to Run upon a Last Issue and Event; Great enough to be
that Last, and to constitute a Fullness of Times, or of All Times; the New
Creation and its Sabbatism, the Apocatastasis, or Restitution of All Things to
the First State, and much above it; the Anacephalaiosis, or Bringing All under
Christ, as the Head: And all This, as I said, in a Strait, Even, Progressive
Motion, Taking in at their Just and Proper Seasons All other Great and Cardinal
Events, Embossing the Line of Time; and principally that Great and Sovereign
One, the Coming, Dying, Rising and Ascension of our Lord Jesus into Heaven,
styled by the Apostle, the Fullness of Time; the greatest Honor of Time,
except the Forenamed Fullness of All Times. These Two, The Fullness of Time;
and the Fullness of Times, or of All Times, stand thus Distinguished, Gal. 4.
4. and Ephesians. 1. 10. and Fix all Time.

Now This Constant, Even Progression of Time, keeps All Interpretation at a
Gauge, and at a Certainty, from a Fugitive, or Arbitrarious wandering hither and
thither; and is the greatest security for the Truth of it; both to the
Interpreter himself, and to All that would put his Interpretation to the Test,
that can be; For thus Nothing can be taken in, nor thrust out at pleasure; nor
can there be Any Other Events shuffled in, but what are found in that very Just
and Natural Order of Time, according to all History. Thus Interpretation comes
to the same Certainty as the Progresses of Time it self; from Day to Day, Month
to Month, Year to Year, and Century to Century; or as the parts of the Body in
their True Situation one to another. Whereas any other way of Interpretation
has its Starts and Leaps, its Subterfuges and Evasions, without Certainty or
Fixedness.

3. Another Standard of Interpretation of Prophecy, is, when there are found in
the Interpretation, some surprising Transcendencies in the Contrivances and, as
one may humbly say, Artifices which the Spirit of Prophecy has inlaid the
Prophetical Frame with, and engraven upon it, as upon the Stone that has seven
Eyes, throughout Perspicuous, as well as Perspicacious. And these falling in
with the more Essential, and Substantial Parts of Prophecy, and the Events
Answering in not only those Substantials, but those Extraordinaries, as it
were, Pieces of Art, in the Frame of Prophecy; They must needs give sometimes
even Ravishing Transports of Satisfaction, and Assurance; That one has the
True Key of Interpretation of Prophecy, by the Becomingness of the Work to the
Great Artist, when Materiam fuperat Opus; The Curiousness of the Work excells
the very Materials wrought upon.

Even as besides the main Pillars and Rafters of the Creation, and the more
Bulky Parts of the Animal Creatures; such Exquisite Curiosities are found
herein; They, as much as is possible, give Scientific Proofs of the Supreme and
Divine Workman: and when any one has found them, he cannot but break out into
a Kind of Ecstatical (...); or, as Galen, I have Found.
into an Hymn to the Creator, upon beholding the Admirablenesses of his Divine
Hand, in the Animal Contextures; For both in the Works of God, and in his
Prophetic Word, such Wonders plainly discovered give greatest pleasure, both
in regard of the Beauties of the Hand of God, and in regard of the Joy, that we
have received the Key of Natural, or Prophetic Knowledge.

For these are Great Things, we looked not for, and meeting with them
unexpectedly, we become more than Assured, even Triumphantly Assured; For thus
it becomes him, whose Understanding is Infinite, both in Creation, and
Prophecy, to abound to us beyond All we could Ask or Think; and though our
Assurance might be solid without these, yet it would not be vivid, and so high.

4. A Fourth Standard of True Interpretation of Prophecy, is, When there is
Found in All Parts of the Interpretation of Prophecy, a perfect Agreement
between Prophecy Interpreted, and the Grand Principles of Scripture, which the
Apostle calls Prophesying according to the Analogy of Faith: When Prophecy is
so Interpreted concerning the Kingdom of Christ, that it be not Represented as
a Carnal, Sensual Kingdom, but like it self, Holy and Spiritual; That it Agree
with the Apostles, and our Lord's Doctrine, concerning the Resurrection, both
as to the Saints dead and sleeping in and by Jesus Incorruptibly Raised, and
the Living Remaining Saints Changed, and as to the wicked Rising to
Condemnation, to Shame and Contempt; that Prophecy is not made to call the
Proud happy, or to make sad the Souls, whom God would not have made sad; that
Darkness is not put for Light, nor Light for Darkness; That those Black Names
in Scripture-Prophecy, as Beast, False Prophet, Whore, Horns Giving their Power
to the Beast, be applied to such Persons, and Things, as the Constant and most
Avowed Doctrine of Scripture makes worthy to be so Charactered; however called
by Great and Glorious Names in this Dark place of the Apostasy. And on the
other side, that Persons and Things be Clothed with the Honorable Names,
Prophecy has put upon them; as the Woman Clothed with the Sun, Witnesses,
Martyrs of Jesus; to whom the same Constant and Allowed Doctrine of Scripture
will Allow them; although in this Thick and Gross Atmospher, they are
Bandenitoe'd with other Names, as Heretics, Schismatics, Factious, or
Fanatics.

5. The Crowning, and Topping, and most Assuring Standard for the
Interpretation of Prophecy is, when a Thread and Line is Laid from some Plain,
and Litteral Interpretation of Prophecy by the Holy Spirit of Prophecy it self
in one Place, to such Litteral Interpretation in another place; till we come at
last to that Issuing Point of All Prophecy, The Glory of the Kingdom of Christ:
We have the Beginning of the Four Monarchies in Nebuchadnezzars Image by very
Litteral Interpretation, settled in Nebuchadnezzar himself; For Daniel said to
him, Thou art this Head of Gold, Dan. 2. The Persian and Grecian Monarchies are
in the same manner by Litteral Interpretation of Prophecy, assured, Dan. 8. In
the same manner the Epoch of the Revelation is Assured by the Apostles being in
the Spirit on the Lords Day of the Resurrection, Rev. 1. c. 5. By the Mention
of the Lamb Newly Slain. The Fourth Monarchy is Assured to be Current in the
Time of the New Testament by Augustus Caesar Censing all the World, Luke 2. By
the Litteral Interpretation of the Great Whore to be the City Reigning then, or
that at that present was Holding the Kingdom over the Kings of the Earth, which
could be no other than Rome; For no other had then the Kingdom: besides the
Seven Mountains, on which she Sat, is Litteral; The Seven Successions of
Government are given Literally; And that under the Beast, is Affirmed to be
the Seventh Succession, as Head, and the Eighth as King; The Sixth Succession
is Literally Affirmed to be then in Being, or now is: that the Seventh King,
being the Christian Emperors, was no Head; It is Literally Assured, the
Eighth King, but Seventh Head, called The Beast, goes into Perdition, and the
Kingdom of Christ immediately Succeeds; Now all these do so lead us in the True
Line, and Course of Time, that we cannot be surer of the Course of the Seasons,
and Months, that run along, and fall out between Season, and Season; then we
are of the Things, which in Event or Matter of Fact, and History run along all
this Time, from the Resurrection of our Lord, and Answer the Symbols, and
Images of Prophecy; Hereby then the Seals, the Trumpets, with the grand Events
Comprised under Them are made most certain to Run along the Time of the Roman
Empire from the Appearance of Christ in the Flesh, at the Fullness of Time, to
his Appearance in the Fullness of Times, or of All Time at the Kingdom of
Christ.

Now if any one should say, These Standards of Interpretation of Prophecy of
Scripture are not sufficient to secure Interpretation according to them, to be
also according to the Mind, and Sense of the Holy Spirit of Prophecy; I should
be Bold to say, he either Contradicts, what the Apostle has said, That
Prophecy of Scripture is not of private Interpretation; or he must suppose the
Sense of the Apostle in these very words, All, Every Prophecy of Scripture is
not of private Interpretation, are, as, or more Dark, and more Hard to be
Understood, than the Darkest Prophecy of Scripture it self; and Further, That
things may be made by Art. or by Chance to fall into an Exact Harmony with the
Word of Prophecy; or that even a Serious, well grounded Research of Scripture,
according to all the Commands, and Encouragements of the Word of God, and a
keeping close to all the Rules of Scripture, and Reason in such a Search, may
be all to no End, or purpose; we are never the Nearer to the Truth and Mind of
the Holy Spirit of Prophecy, than if we had never searched at all; which how
Opprobrious and how near to Blasphemy against the Holy Spirit, It is so to say,
I leave to every serious Considerer to Judge.

Now as to what I have my self done, I cannot without Transcribing a
Considerable Part, of what I have already Written, and made Public, show; How
close I have kept to these Rules, and Standards, given by my self for
Interpretation of Prophecy; Nor will I presume to say any thing in the gross
concerning it; I will only first make my Humble Petition to any Person, able to
Weigh, and to Consider, and to Compare one part of Things with another; that if
I have been wanting in any one, he would please by Free Entercourses to
Remonstrate it to me, and to allow Liberty of Debate upon it, that so a due
Care may be Taken to Vindicate, Enlarge, Strengthen, or if necessity should so
Require, to Retract or Reform.

I will therefore here subjoyn but some of the grounds I have rested upon in
the Interpretation of Prophecy according to a few Notes on these Standards, as
the Next Head of Discourse Proposed.

I First, according to our General Scripture Account, Fix Historical Time.

For the drawing then into one View the Types and Symbols of Prophecy, from the
Time the Spirit of Prophecy was pleased to Compose it into a Scheme, and had
prepared so to do; I have considered the Archetypal Vision of Ezekiel's Temple,
and City, c. 40. to the End: Representing the Kingdom of Christ in its Glory,
and the New Jerusalem also, having the Glory of God: Now when this was once
given, it becomes a Standard; gives Types to the State of the Church of god
from that Time among the Jews before Christ, and in the Days of our Lord in the
Flesh: then of the Jewish and Gentile Christian Church in all the States of it;
either in the Dartings out of the Glory of it; or the Stops, Stays and
Darknings of its Glory; because, as is Evident both by Scripture, and
Experience, that Glory has been, and yet is under so long a Delay, from the
Time of that Vision given to this Day.

Now this I have all along observed, from Prophetic Vision to Prophetic
Vision, through the Prophecy of Daniel, and of the Revelation, in those Express
References to that, as I justly call it, Archetypal Vision, from the very
giving it to the End; And I Account it as a Pole Star; like the Star that Led
the Wise men to Christ; so this Vision shapes an Unerring Course to the Kingdom
of Christ.

And because, one Principal Point in that Vision of Ezekiel, was the Throne,
^eading to the Throne of God, and of the Lamb in the New Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 4. 3.
7. and Rev. 22. 3. And that there was to be, as I have said, so long a Delay;
Soon after the Vision of Ezekiel given, There is a Vision given to Daniel, c. 2
in Nebuchadnezzars Image, and of Four Beasts, c. 7. describing Four Monarchies,
as Four Thrones, which should successively reach to the Kingdom and Throne of
Christ; And then, as it is expressly said, the Thrones were cast down; these
Counter Thrones to the Throne of Christ; and the Throne of the Son of Man
Established alone, Dan. 7. v. 9

This therefore I lay before me, as another Archetypal Vision; relating to the
Powers of the Gentiles, and the Enemies of the Kingdom of Christ.

And having to do with the Roman Monarchy, the last of the Four from the Times
of the New Testament; I most particularly consider that; and Finding, that the
Evangelist Luke gives an Early Notice of it as an Universal Monarchy in
Augustus Caesar Commanding a Cense of the whole World, as his own Dominion,
Luke 2. 1. Even before the Birth of our Lord: I conclude this must be the
Fourth of Daniels Monarchies; For though some would have it the Macedonian, as
Divided after the Death of Alexander the Great; I find, That cannot be; both
because the God of Heaven would not have set up a Kingdom in the Days of those
Kings, as is expressly said, Dan. 2. v 44. And also because, The Kingdom of
Christ, Even yet, is not that Universal Dominion, it was Foretold, it should
be: And Lastly, Because I find so Admirable an Harmony between the Prophetic
Figures in the Revelation, and the plain Historical Accounts of that Monarchy;
and that the Spirit of God has even to plain Litteralness, or more than so,
Interpreted it to be Rome and its Empire; I lay therefore before me this Roman
Monarchy in the Pagan Empire; in the Antichristian Empire, viz. The Papacy;
which to give public Notice, it is a Throne, Assumes so Solemnly, and
Notoriously Enthroniczation to it self; and the European Kings given as Horns
of Strength to it; as also the Mohammedan Saracens, and Turks, coming as two
Woes upon it, are adjusted in Time.

Now finding the Iconismes, or Images of Prophecy every way Agreeing herewith,
both in the Freest Analogical, and even Litteral Interpretation, as I have
shown, all parts squaring one with Another; I cannot but be thus far assured,
The Interpretation of the sure word of Phrophesy must needs be Fair, Just and
Right; or seeing no other Interpretation can be Found thus to Square, Prophecy
must be indeed of Private Interpretation, although the Apostle assures it is not
so.

More particularly with Relation to the Prophetical Numbers of Time, I Found
the purely prophetical Time on that Basis, or Ground of it, the Three Hundred
Ninety Days of Years of Ezekiel his Bearing the Iniquity of the House of
Israel. These I make Sevenfold, according to the Standard of Seven God so often
fixes in the punnishment of Iniquity, Levit. 26. And so they comprehend in that
Sevenfoldness, (which makes the 390, 2730,) the Forty Days of Years of Ezekiels
Bearing the Iniquity of the House of Judah, and the Twenty Three Hundred Eves,
Morns of the Sanctuary Trodden under Foot, until the Sanctuary Cleansed, or
Justified, according to Ezekiels Vision, in the Glorious Kingdom of Christ.

These Twenty Seven Hundred Thirty Years, making Seven Times Three Hundred and
Ninety, is one of the Transcendents I find in the Scripture-Line of Time,
according to my Computation of it, and the Third Standard now given.

In this Grand Portion of the Line, viz. Of the Twenty Three Hundred Eves,
Morns; Fall Evenly and Justly All the Numbers of Time given after in Daniel,
and the Revelation; or that can be supposed necessary to fill up any Spaces
according to History; or that are necessary to make up the 2300. although the
Numbers are not, in Lesser or Collatteral Lines to the 2300, Named in Prophecy,
which Yet must be, and are Seventy Five before the Weeks, and Four Hundred
Years after the Weeks; For all others are expressly named in Scripture-Prophecy;
But however, as I have often shown, All Agree in their Just Order, and Agree
among themselves, and Agree with the Notes of Discerning them, Scripture has
given; and lastly, Agree with History and General Chronology. All which make as
great Assurance, as can be of a True Computation and Account; seeing neither
Chance, nor Art can Tune Things to such a Manifold Agreement; For, as They say,
Res nolunt Decipi, Things will not be deceived, nor imposed upon; so they
cannot be Forced, Compelled, nor Flattered into an Agreement, and so manifold
an Agreement; when the Natural, Mutual Respect, they have one to another, does
not incline them.

That particular Portion of the Line of Time, given to measure the Time of the
Apostasy by, so often, and so variously given; viz Time, Times, Half a Time;
Twice Forty Two Months; Twice Twelve Hundred Sixty Days; and Three Days and an
half; and so the Last Thirty, and Forty Five, most Evenly and Justly, according
to the Line of Time, take hold of, and succeed one another in their Just
Places, The 1260 concert with the Ten Kings Receiving Power at one hour with
the Beast; The Beasts Supremacy, the Mohammedan Times; (So as to give all the
Assurance that can be) Fall in One with Another; All according to the Justest
Configurations of Prophetical Images, and Historical Events. And herein I
observe Four Transcendencies, which most unexpectedly and surprizingly meet the
Considerer herein, according to the Third Standard here given; and would make
the Meditative upon them cry out, I have found, I have found.

1. That as Scripture-Prophecy gives the Time by Moons to the Gentiles, and to
the Beast; and Days of the Sun, to the Witnesses, and the Woman; and that these
Days of the Sun and Moons, are to Agree one with another, as Lunar and Solar
Time do; I find, according to my Calculation, they do Agree according to the so
celebrated Rule of the Golden Number; and that thereby the Succession of the
Beast, or the Antichristian Papacy, according to the Exact Laws of Succession,
to the Christian Emperor, as Seventh Head, and Eighth King, Revel. 17. 10, 11.
is fixed at 475, or 6. as it ought, according to all History, to be; and
determined to its End, or Going into perdition at 1697. Lunar Time and Solar
Falling in Exactly according to all Chronology with this Prophecy.

2. According to my Calculation, by the Time, the so known Character of Time,
Indiction, or accounting by Fifteens of Years, was well known and settled after
Constantine; the Spirit of Poophecy has Adopted it to Enter into its Own
Computation of Time; For the Time, Times and half Time, beginning accordingly
at 437. are in the whole, and in each Division, cast into Indictions, or
Fifteens of Years; viz. the Three Times, or Thrice Three Hundreds and Sixties;
and the Half Time, or the One Hundred Eighty; and for their sakes the Thirty,
making 1260 1290, by Two Fifteens; and the Forty Five making 1290 to be 1335.
Dan. 12. 11. 12. is evidently by Three Indictions, or Fifteens.

And to All this may be added the Observation, that the Words chosen out by the
Spirit of God in the Chaldee, Hebrew, and Greek, to express Time, Times and
Half Time, so Sworn by Christ, as to be Determinate Time, may be Emphatically
Translated Indiction, or Indicted Time.

Now what can this mean? but that, Overruling Providence so Disposes All, that
such Notations of Time should be found out, and come into Use, as when it self
has Occasion for them to Ascertain its own Calendar of Prophetic Time; and
who also would Direct, and Guide his Servants into the Observation of, and most
Assured Distinction of Prophetic Time by Them; according to the fit Seasons
appointed by himself, to make them so known to them; so that it is no wonder
they have not been known before; or that they are made known to some, and not
to others, when they are made known.

3. It is even of Transcendent Remark, that the Reformation, at that so Agreed
Epoch of it, should be at 1517. as the just Point of Half Time beginning; that
necessarily casts the beginning of the Time and Times upon 437. according to my
Fixation of it; before (I can Truly Appeal) I had made a Reflection upon the
Wonderful Service it does to assure the Line of Time, and the beginning of
those 1260 days, at 437; but according to the Natural Progress of the 2300
Eves, Morns, in the Assignation of Each to their Proper Points of Time Adorned
with their Suitable Events; Each, I say, of the Collatteral Lines so Assigned
Led me to 97.

Now all these Transcendencies of Evidence concerning the just Interpretation
of Prophecy, I have from Time to Time fully opened, declared, and argued in
their Proper Treatises, according to further and further Light, Evidence and
Assurance, given in by the Father of Lights; and which are in many Hands.

4. That which it has pleased the Lord further to open and manifest to his
Unworthy Servant, by way of Transeendency, is; That whereas I was led to fix
upon 437. as the Beginning of the Times given to the Apostasy, as I said by the
most Free, and Natural Progress upon the Line of the 2300 Eves, Morns;
Distributed into the Particular, Lesser and Collatteral Lines: The very Year
437. lay only amongst the Years of Great Events, most Agreeable to all the
Prophetical Characters of that Time; But it self was unadorned, and lay bare
from any Notable Event, or Events to guard it; and it has been charged by
several, as an Objection against my Fixing so positively upon it. But by
Further Search, and particularly helped by that Worthy Annotator on the
Annotat. on the Revelation.
Revelation, I find that Year very Notably Remarked, with Events suitable to
such an Epoch, or Year, Beginning the 1260 Years, as it does. And that this may
be Fully understood, I will somewhat more at Large Discourse it; Because I have
not in any Treatise upon Prophetical Subjects, had the so Attent Consideration
of it, as it requires; especially being charged as an Objection against it,
that there are no Reasons in History to rest so upon it.

Now then first, I must premise, that there is not the same Reason to expect so
particular an Illustration of it by any pecuculiar Event, as in some Cases in
the Line of Time, For the Line of Time it self must Umpire, and Determine which
shall be such, or such an Epoch, or Point of Beginning; when a Great Likeness
or Similarity of Events gives a Likelihood to One Point of Time, as much as to
another.

Thus when the Seventy Years of the Captivity of the People of God in Babylon
began, (because there were several Captivations) cannot be Judged, but by very
strict Attention to the Line of Time; as I have endeavored to make appear in
Discourses proper thereunto.

In like manner, where we should Fix the Seventy Weeks beginning, Dated from
that Word given forth for Restoring Jerusalem; which went forth first by Cyrus,
then by Darius, and by Artaxerxes in Full; must be Judged by deep Intuition
into the Line of Time; And to bring this to our purpose, The Epoch of Time,
Times, and Half a Time, must be chiefly assured by the Line of Time, and
Evidences thence arising; because if we would Judge of it either by the
Barbarous Nations Invading the Roman Western Empire; the Design of the Four
first Trumpets; whose Impression upon the Universal Roman Territories, was the
often taking the City Rome; Removing out of the midst the very Name, and Thing
of Western Emperor; the taking away all Consular Power from it.

Now here is such a Similarity of Events, no certain Judgment can be made; but
as Samuel was deceived in the Sons of Jesse, concerning the Lord's Anointed, by
the Fairer Appearance of some of them, than of David, whom God had alone
Chosen; So shall we be mistaken in the Fairer Appearance of some Events to give
the Epoch of the Time, Times, and Half a Time, than that which is indeed so;
such another Concatenated Similarity of Events was Ceremonialness; preparing to
Superstition; Superstition to Idolatry; So Love of Pre-eminence preparing to
Hierarchy, Hierarchy to Papacy; and this from the very working of the mystery
of Iniquity in the Apostles days, until the Beast, or that Papacy entering into
its Succession; when the Roman Empire ceasing, viz. at 476. That Name of Bishop
then, and to this Day by an Especial Ordination of Providence was the Sole
Title of a Single Person over that great City Rome (tho in Spirituals) who
thence Rose to Supremacy over all Bishops. Thence he came to his Number in
having an Image made to himself in the Worship of Images, settled by the 2d
Council of Nice; and Assuming Power over Emperors, from that Time, to the
Exalting himself above All Styled, August.

Now in such Chain shot Events, as these may be Justly Denominated, No single
Event either ought or can express the Epoch; For neither in Nature can a Chain
of Events suffer it self to be engrossed by any One, nor can one be
Comprehensive of All, tho it be a very grand, and principal one; indeed when
any Epoch is wholly, and fully Comprehended in one Event, then the Time is
Fixed, and solely Determined by it; as the Cessation of the Christian Empire in
the West, as in one Indivisible Point, fixes the very Succession of the Seventh
Head, and Eighth King, called the Beast; together with the Ten Kings Receiving
Power, at the same Time with him. In the Reformation, tho the Event indeed did
not consist in an Indivisible Point; yet in that it began the Retrenchment of
the Papal Power, that had so long been Entire; It was as in an Indivisible
Point of one straight, or Right Line Drawn out.

But indeed in the very whole Course of Events, the Plumbing by the Line of
Time, and comparing every part of the Line with the Event, and of the Event
with the Line is the most Stable, and Satisfactory Assurance that can be Given;
and in such a Multiplicity of Events Frees from Distraction, and Perplexity:
And this has given me Plerophory of Assurance, as from the Bright Shining of
the sure Word of Prophecy in the midst of so many Mistakes, and so much
Incertainty thereupon.

But although Any single Event among so many, and in a Conjunction one with
another, ought not without the Peculiar Distinction of the Line of Time to
separate it self from all the Rest, and Claim to it self the Right of Giving
the Epoch; yet it was most Condecent to the Wisdom of that Providence, that
looks to the bringing to pass All, that has been declared by the sure word of
Prophecy; to take care, that there should be a sufficiency of Events to Type
out the whole Chain, having a Concentring and Rest upon that year as the Epoch
of Time, Times and Half a Time; as I shall very briefly present to View.

When then God had been pleased to make known by the Types of Prophecy; that
soon after the Empire in Constantine became Christian, the Apostasy was
preparing to Enter; in that the Hundred Forty, and Four Thousand were Sealed;
that the Worshipers were taken, as it were, in their last Appearance in the
Outward Court, and Retired into the Inner Temple; and the Church Flying into
the Wilderness; and the Trumpets in preparation to Sound. Thus All being in
Readiness, God gives Types of those Four great Events, to which Time, Times,
Half a Time, Three Days and an Half, Twice Forty two Months, and Twice Twelve
Hundred Sixty Days as has been often observed, are allowed; and which Received
their Epoch here; Types I say; For I have not, I declare, dared to Rely upon
them, as events Determining the Epoch, of these Great Times, but fair Types,
and Representations of Each.

1. The First Event, I would observe, is; That, which I find most agreed in All
Chronology; that this very year; Cyril, Bishop of Alexandria, brought forth his
Cyclus Paschalis for settling the Due Time of Easter; Adjusting Lunar years to
Solar, according to the Golden Number. Now this is very Wonderful, that just at
the Time, when the Lord, for the Interpretation of Prophetical Time should, (to
Allude to the Need Christ had of the Ass in the Gospel,) have need of such an
Adjustment to be sollemnly brought in, and Avowed in the profession of
Christianity Antichristianized; which is the Outward Court given to the
Gentiles, viz. the Antichristian Gentiles to Tread under Foot, it was so done:
For then Forty two Months of the Gentiles Precalated to the Forty two Months of
the Beast, This was very observable.

1. Because hereby Providence gave notice; that this was the very year, that by
Prophecy, according to the Foundations, upon which a settled Time of Easter is
Found, viz. by Conforming Lunar, and Solar Time one to another; The Moons of
the Gentiles, and the Beasts Moons are together made just even to the 1260
Solar Years; And which is very wonderful, just so many years, as the Beasts
Moons want to make them equal to 1260 Solar years of the Witnesses, and the
Woman according to that Golden Number; (the very Ground of any Cyclus
Paschalis;) viz. 38 years, and something more; Just so many are Found between
437, (when the Paschal Cycle was, as I say, first brought forth,) and the
Cessation of the Christian Empire; when the Beasts Succession, and so Time
Dated from him, as the Supreme or Seventh Head, and Eighth King (for so it
ought to be) began, viz. at 475 ending, or 476.

2. It is very observable, Because as has been also more Fully spoken of
elsewhere, and as is very well known; The Apostasy has in regard of Shrivings,
or Confessions, Pennances, Indulgences, Pardons; the so superstitious
Sollemnities of its Good Friday; the Idolatry of its High Easter Day Mass; such
deep Interests in Easter, and the Moveable Feasts dependent upon it.

But although I cannot but think this very Remarkable, when I find 437, the very
year Determined upon by the Line of Time; yet I could not dare to rest upon it
without that; For some Attempt the Predecessor of Cyril, Theophilus Bishop of
Alexandria had made this way; and Dionysius, Sirnam'd Exiguus, perfected upon
what Cyril had done; But when the Line of Time concurs with such a Note of
Lunar Time, proper to Moons, Equated to Solar Time; It appears to me very great.

Event 2 The Barbarians or Goths this year made an Excursion upon the People of
the Empire, called the Arverni, with all manner of Calamities; This was a Type
of the Hail mingled with Fire in the First Trumpet; yet so that this is not to
be taken, but in Conjunction, as has been already said, with what went before,
and followed after; For it could not be in one year, that the whole third part
of Trees, and of Green Grass; that is; the Territories of so great an Empire,
(of which Empire Third part is made by this Prophecy as a Hieroglyphic,) should
be destroyed. But a Resemblance of this, Any part of the Empire, and at what
distance soever from Rome (the Further, the more Lively the Emblem) might be of
the Hail Dishevelling it self year after year, through the whole Empire; Yet on
this neither dare I rely alone; For as great Events of this Kind, and much
Greater before and after There were; yet this, however a small Figure coming in
its just Place after so great a Figure, as the Line of Time, Directing
perpendicularly upon 437, as the Epoch of the Time, Times, Half Time, is very
puissant Assurance of that very year.

Event 3. As a Resemblance of the Gentiles Entering into the Outward-Court, this
very year; Gensericus, the King of the Vandals, set himself to Extirpate for
the sake of Arrianism, the Faith of Jesus Christ, the Eternal Son of God; and
Raised in Africa, where he had planted himself within the Roman Empire, a Cruel
Persecution upon it.

Now, as in the Former, I do not Lay stress upon this without that principal
Figure, Testimony and Evidence from the Line of Time: But that lying in the
Foundation, I Reflect in these Observations upon this, as Agreeing to this
Epoch of this Time.

1. That taking the Arrian denial of Jesus Christ the Son of God, it was in two
Regards a most fit Type to give notice by of the Antichristian Apostasy.

1. That tho it be not a plain Point of that Roman Antichristian Apostasy; yet
in that it is a Denial of Christ being come in the Elesh, which the Apostle
John says is the very Spirit of Antichrist; It is most Fit, as a Type to
Represent that, which in many grand Instances has overthrown Christ's coming in
the Flesh, in the Scripture sense of him, as the One Mediator; a Point as
Fundamental in Christianity, as the one God is in Natural Religion.

2. It was Fit in this Regard, that it might give notice of Antichrist in that
Antichristianiz'd Age, in a Point wherein they were very Zealous; that is; the
Eternal Godhead of Christ; in other points of Antichristianism found in
Themselves, they could not discern it.

2. There could not be a fitter Type of the Witnesses putting on Sackcloath,
than the Spread of the persecution, and several Excellent Persons
Ecclesiastical History makes mention of, who suffered even to Death in that
persecution, though I own it but a Type; And this gives also the Fourth Event,
viz. of the Witnesses putting on Sackcloath, and the Church flying into the
Wilderness.

3. Africa was a very fit place to be used in such a Type, both as it was one
of the Three Parts of the Known World; and as it was a worthy, and excellent
part of the Christian Church; where God had settled so great a Light in the
Ministry of Augustine Bishop of Hippo; who had in his Epistle to Januarius,
Remonstrated against that Throng of Ceremonies, Crowding in upon Christianity
in that Time; and in that, a place was most Fit to be Chosen, that should not
it self be the Seat of either pretenders of Rome, or Constantinople.

4. Gensericus being King of the Vandals was a fit Type of the Gentiles coming
into the Outer Court, and Holy City; as he was one of those that came in upon
the Christian Empire, that had been made an Emblem of the Kingdom of Christ;
and as those Irruptions Caused great Mourning of all the Servants of Christ
from a Sympathy with those Calamities upon their own Country, and the
Profession of Christianity.

2. As the People he brought in were to Coalesce, and become Incorporated with
the People of the Roman Empire; and so to be the Beasts People, and to
Constitute the ten Kingdoms under the ten Kings, that should receive Power with
the Beast.

And tho all these are thus very Worthy to be Considered; and It Appears, when
once the Line of Time has pointed upon them; They fall in with great
Conformity to the showing the Epoch of the Time, Times Half a Time, the Forty
two Months and the 1260 days of years, to be 437.

Having then an undoubted Assurance of 97, as the Period of the 1260 years It
lies with some Pressure upon my Thoughts, to make a Judgment according to the
greatest Light, I can Obtain from Prophecy, upon these Three Years, or till 97;
what we may humbly Expect, and especially under the great Phenomenon, the
Blazing Star, as I may call it, of the French Power; here the Doubt Hangs
between two Points, which should cast the Scale.

1. Whether the Progression of Providence in Preparation to the Kingdom of
Christ, may be expected to be Gradual; or whether the Motion may be expected to
be sudden; whether things may continue much at a Balance till upon that Time,
and that then the Divine Power may, as all on the Sudden, manifest it self; and
like it self work in an Instant, and as it were in one Day.

I must Acknowledge, as I have also publicly Declared; I have been much more
inclined to Hope (tho not without, as Freely, Professed Fears, and Doubts for
Reasons, as openly given) that we should in these years have seen much greater
Works of God; because I estimated the Pace, I thought Providence would choose,
and the steps, it would take, according to what has been generally hitherto in
the World.

But it Pleased the Wise, and Holy, and Gracious Governor of All things, so to
Direct; that One peculiar Advertisement of Prophecy should even start out to
me; that tho I do not profess the same Confidence upon it, as upon the
Scripture Line of Time, I have given; yet I am Reduced by it to another kind of
Expectation, till 97. than I have had; For in place of the wonderful Progress
of Providence, for the Pulling down the French Power, the Change of the ten
Kings, and other the great Effects I expect at 97. I have now far greater
Reason to Believe; There shall at present be only a Divine Interposition for
the staying things much where they are, and that there shall be neither a
Remarkable going forward, or backward. VIZ.

1. That none of the Eminent Kingdoms, that have Reversed their Power from the
Beast, shall ever be Re-Enthrall'd under that Power; or shall Re-exchange their
Protestant, and, as we style it, Reformed State for a Papal Government; which I
now find to be the great Account of these so many late Extraordinary
Revolutions within the Nations of England, Scotland and Ireland; and yet the
Dawns, Appearances, and the very, so much, as Apprehensions of the Kingdom of
Christ are so Reserved, and make so small Offertures to the World, or so much
as to these Nations.

2. That no one of the Ten Kings shall so much Exceed his Figure, as to be more
than one of Ten; However some one may stretch himself every way to Grasp at
Universal Monarchy; and be so far succssful, as to draw great Powers to
himself, that he may answer one Peculiar Note in Prophecy, presently to be
given in Memorial.

And this is that most Acquiescible and Satisfactory Resolution of the
Mysterious Providence in Twisting a Confederacy betwixt Protestant Nations and
so many of the Vowed Tributaries of the Antichristian Supremacy of the Beast;
whose Interest Lies, as Deep, in the Extirpation of Protestancy, which they
call, Heresy, as that of France; and in Pure Bigottry to Rome much deeper; and
have been, and now are, as great, tho more silent Oppressors of the Reformation
within their own Territories, and Persecutors of it, if any appear for it: But
thus Infinite Wisdom has Harmonized this State of the European Nations for his
own Wise and Holy Ends, according to Prophecy; that the French Aspirings to
Universal Monarchy may be Embarrass'd.

These things then being Premised, I have very great Reason to Doubt, and Fear;
The Protestant Princes, and the Reformation under them shall Advance little
higher, till the Period it self 97; which I ground upon singular Remarks in
that Prophesy of the Vision of Nebachadnezzars Image, Dan. 2.

First, I observe in that grand Calendar of Time for the Kingdom of Christ; The
Descent of Time is by the parts of the Image, and so by the Metals Assigned to
the several, as I may call them Regions or Parts; the First, or Beginning Point
of Time is in the Gold of the Head, or the Babylonish Empire; Thence it goes
down to the Breast, and Arms of Silver the Persian Kingdom; and from thence to
the Belly, and Thighs of Brass, the Kingdom of Greece, and so comes down to the
Legs of Iron, the First part of the Roman Pagan Empire, and lastly, To the Feet
and Ten Toes, part of Iron, and part of Clay; that is, the Ten European
Kingdoms, into which that Pagan Empire was Divided; when joined with the
Papacy, and Hierarchy, the Clay proper to each of those Kingdoms.

Now the Order, and Distinction of the Parts, and of the Metals of the Image is
so Essential to the Vision, and Prophecy is so exact; there can be no change
without great Reafon, and even great signification Designed by that Change, and
no chance in it.

The Order of the Parts, and the Metals, is given first Synthetically, or
Constitutively, v. 32. 33. The Image's Head was of Fine Gold; his Breast and
Arms were of Silver; His Belly and his Thighs of Brass; his Legs of Iron; his
Feet part of Iron, part of Clay; The Conjunction therefore between the Iron,
and the Clay; tho they did not mix one with the other, must needs be very close
in the Constituting the Feet; and yet to make more clear this conjunction, and
order; It is said, when the Stone cut of the Mountain came to smite the Image,
the stroke was upon the Feet, that were of Iron, and of Clay. Again, v. 35.
when the Method is given, as they say, Analytically, or the Image in the
Breaking is Resolved from its Bottom to its Top, from the Foundation to the
Neck. It is said, Then was the Iron, the Clay, the Brass, the Silver, and the
Gold Broken to Pieces together, and became like the chaff of the Summer
Threshing Floor. Before the Image was given from Head to Foot; Here from Foot
to Head; But the Conjunction is kept most Inviolate, and the Order, considering
forward First, and then backward, is the very same.

Now this Conjunction, and order are so Essentially, and Substantially Fixed,
They can never be unfix'd any more; This must be the Conjunction, this must be
the Order, and nothing that Comes after it, can Disannul it.

And yet when it comes to the last Catastrophe in the Interpretation of the
Dream; and so when the Event is supposed to come to its Complement, that the
Stone cut out of the Mountain without Hands Falls upon All, and Grinds them to
powder. Then the Iron and the Clay are separated by the Brass; that has nothing
to do in the Feet, but with the Belly, and the Thighs only; For they only were
of Brass.

This is the very Order given by the Spirit of God in this last part of the
Vision, I Find upon search no Reason to doubt in the least; there appearing no
demurr on a Different Reading, as it stands in the Chaldee Verity, or the
Syriac Version, as may be seen in B. Walton's Polyglot Bible: And yet it is, as
if the Feet of Iron were joined immediately with the Thighs of Brass, and the
Clay removed out of their place; and, as if the stroke were on the Brass,
before it was on the Clay; whereas it was made again and again, and a third
Time Certain, The stroke is on the Feet of Iron and Clay, before the Brass
should feel the Force of it; Now all these are so great Points of the Vision,
that nothing can unsettle them without subverting the whole Frame: For then the
Dream could not, as he has said, be Certain, nor the Interpretation be sure,
nor what is grounded upon it be unshaken.

It must needs therefore be; That for the Truth of the Conjunction, the Order
of the Metals, and of the Parts, and the Order of the Stroke, were all given
before, as they are, were and shall be; And that the Spirit of Prophecy
presumes, that none would think; It either on purpose, or Casually, would
Destroy its own Frame.

I offer therefore to deep search of others, and the Consideration of All, who
have Regard for the sure word of Prophecy to Attend to the Reason, He has
Assisted me, the Unworthiest of all his Servants to give: and I am Humbly
persuaded, he Foresaw, He would so Assist me, to give it in so public a
Ministry to his Servants in general.

And the Reason is this, That God might make known to the King, and in him to
after Ages, what should be hereafter, As Daniel assures us. Now the very utmost
of that Hereafter is very near Come, Even, as Near, as Ninety Seven, as I have
fully set out; By comparing therefore the state of Things now with this Change
in the Vision, we may arrive to some good degree of Understanding in the Reason
of the Change; I say, comparing it with the present State.

I look then upon the present state of the Ten Horns, as Prophecy calls them,
or Kings, and their Kingdoms, I consider, which of them, of All others bears
the Metal; Iron; at the greatest Luster of Appearance at this Time; and by
plain matter of Fact that is the French Power, and Kingdom; Then I consider
where that, which was heretofore, called the Brass in the Image of the Four
Kingdoms now Resides; and the Brass being the Grecian Kindom, as All
Interpreters agree; The Grecian Empire is beyond all Contest, known to be in
the Hands of the Turk, whose Port is known to be at Constantinople.

There are then two things, God makes known to us by this Change in the Vision,
concerning that last State of this Image, when the Stone shall fall upon it.

1. That the Stroke shall be struck, and the Fall of the Stone Grinding the
Image to Powder, shall be, when the Iron in the most Illustrious Appearance of
it, near the very End shall be joined to the Brass, and in League with it; So
that tho the Iron, even the whole Iron together with the Clay shall be broken
before the Brass; yet the Brass is Transferred out of its proper, both
Conjunction, and Order; not indeed so, but as in a Figure to give a Watchword,
that when the Iron in an Eminency shall be signally Conjoined with the Brass,
viz. That Turco-Grecian Power; Then the Blow shall be given; and the Brass, not
before the Clay, but in its own Order shall be Broken, viz. The Feet of Iron
and Clay First, and in their own Conjunction; then the Brass, and the Silver,
and Gold immediately upon it; Now therefore observing the Iron in so
Illustrious Appearance, joined with the Brass, at a Time, we know by the Line
of Time the Blow is so near to be given, It is a Concurrent Assurance, It is
very near.

2. The Spirit of Prophecy is pleased hereby to Brand the Unnaturalness of the
Conjunction of France with the Turkish Power; a Kingdom belonging to the Feet,
and Toes, mixed with the Hierarchic, Antichristian Clay, and giving Power to
it; and yet Uniting with the Brass or Mohammedan Power, a Woe upon that
Antichristian State; A thing, as Monstrous, as if the most Eminent Toe should
separate it self from the Feet to join it self immediately with the Belly, and
Thighs; so is the Papacies most Christian King Leagued with the Mohammedan Enemy
of Christianity, as in the Antichristian State.

Rem. 2. The second Remark I make on that Vision is from yet more undeniable,
if possible, Letter of Prophecy; that the management of the last Stroke, when
the Stone, by its own Direction of it self, shall fall on the Image, and Smite
it; It shall be not by Humane, but by Immediate Divine Power; that tho it will
Raise, and Fit what Instruments it pleases; Seven Shephards, and Eight
Principal Men; yet the Stone it self will be Visibly seen Illustrious above
All; although there shall be with the Lamb the Faithful, and Called, and Chosen;
yet the Lamb himself, as by his Immediate Power, shall be seen above All: For
the Stone that is Cut out of the Mountains is said to be in no Hand, or which
is not in Hands, (according to the Strictness of Translation) or in any Hand of
Man; And when he comes to work, it shall be as on the sudden, and at an
Instant. For when Divine Power works, Nullum Tempus Occurrit Regi, Nothing can
Let Divine Power.

Although then I most Sincerely, and Earnestly Pray, that the Lord of Hosts would
Please to give Success to the Arms of the Protestant Princes and States, and
most particularly to our own; So far as may possibly consist with his own Wise,
and Holy Determinations; Yet I am Bold to make these Prognostics from this
Light of Prophecy, I have first Received, and now Offered; Partly to Arm with
Patience, and Submission to the Delay of such an Issue, as we Naturally Desire;
partly to Encourage, and Assure, as to some great Points at the Present; and
Especially to Ascertain that Grand Issue of the Kingdom of Christ in the End.

Prog. 1. Seeing the Time of the Fall and Stroke of the Stone is not upon the
Iron and Brass till 97. and that it is to be upon them in Conjunction, and upon
the Iron, as it shall in any Part in an Eminency be Conjoined: Therefore
neither the Eminency of France as the Iron, and so in League with the Turk, nor
the Potentacy of the Turk, who is so to continue a Woe upon the Antichristian
State; shall be brought down, till 97. Let therefore no Impatience at the
Disappointment of an Expectation herein seize us; For thus it is Determined by
the sure word of Prophecy, They must both continue in a Conjunction till that
Time, and the Stroke with it so fall upon Them so far as can be Found by
Prophecy.

Prognos. 2. Notwithstanding this; Let what can be done, France shall be kept
within his own Bounds, to be, but one of Ten; and the Turk shall be but in a
Low, Tottering Condition, to be Supported only upon the Aides, and Help of
France; that he may not come to his End so soon, but must do at last; as is
intimated concerning the Turkish King of the North, Dan. 11. ult. Now to keep
France so within its own Figure, is a Service so considerable to Providence
according to Prophecy; that it should make Princes, and Nations Patient under
the inconveniency of War to such an End; And it may Answer for a Confederacy of
Protestants with Popish Powers so far; as that it may be made use of by
Providence to such an End as Restraining France, Agreeably to Divine
Determination; And it may justly call us to the Observation of Providence, in
Ballancing Things so, as this Last and former Years it has done; so that while,
as with one hand, God is pleased to keep the French Power at such a Height;
with the other he so Balances, that it should not exceed its Figure; So we see
it in all the Disposes of Things to this Day; So in the Wonderful Preservation
of the Kings Person, when danger was so every way about, and Death so near him:
Because he has raised Him up, as so peculiar an Instrument to that purpose, to
give a stop to the Exorbitant Power of France; as also to be an Interposer
against the Return of Papal Power on these Protestant Nations, of England,
Scotland and Ireland.

3. As it was said to Barak; This Journey, or Expedition shall not be for thy
Honor, because God would sell Sisera into the Hands of a Woman; Judges 4. 9 So
the great Success of Finishing the War upon France in Conjunction with the
Turks, God has reserved for the Stone cut out of the Mountains, who is not in
any Human Hand; No Greater, nor more Victorious Achievements have been
therefore Granted to the Confederate Armies, nor any gradual Appearances of the
Kingdom of Christ, because the Glory is reserved to Christ; so that all shall
be done by him in an instant, on the sudden, at the very Time Appointed by God,
viz. in the year 97. so near Approaching, These things shall be done; The
French Grandieur, as it now stands in opposition to the Kingdom of Christ,
shall be ground to Powder; The Witnesses, both the Vaudois, and the French
Protestants at this Time under his Power, and Tyranny, shall see the Morning
Star Dawning; They shall be with Christ, when he Breaks the Nations with a Rod
of Iron; They shall feel a Spirit of Life Entering into them, and Causing them
to stand on their Feet, and they shall hear a Voice from Heaven, saying, Come
up hither. The Turkish Woe shall be clear Removed; But then together with this,
The Confederate Princes as giving their Kingdom yet to the Beast, or Bapacy;
and even the Protestant Princes so Far, as they enter into the Constitution of
a Nebuchadnezzars Image; the Papal Hierarchic Clay; where ever it is Found;
with its 7000 Names, shall all be Ground to Powder also.

5. The Supreme Sovereign Event of Events shall then come to pass; The Kingdoms
of this World shall become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ; He
shall Reign in his own Name, take to himself his Great Power, and send out his
Everlasting Gospel, as on the Wings of Angels; and Blessed is he, who is not
offended at these Things, but Loves, and Waits for them.

But indeed, if God should please any way to bring down the French Power, or
Cause it, but so much as to Lie still; and to Dissolve the League between him,
and the Turkish Potentacy sooner; my Hopes, and Expectations might be, that God
were sooner also working by such Beginnings to much greater Things for the
Change of the World. In the mean Time I cannot but Represent things as Prophecy
Represents them, and I presume no further, And that I find not to be till 97.

Another Prophetical Note, The Lord has been pleased much to imprint upon my
Spirit, is that Habac. 2. 13, 14. where the Prophet beholds in Litteral
Babylon, the Mystical Babylon; the Town Built with Blood; the Intoxicating
Sorceress, Enchanting the Nations to the Exposing their Nakedness, and Shame,
through Inebriating them with the Golden Cup of Fornication, she holds in her
hand; and makes the Kings of the Earth Drunk with, that they may commit the
Whoredoms of Idolatry with her; and in the beholding of this, and the Foresight
of the End, and Destruction of it; The Prophet is made to see in Spirit, by the
mighty Influence of that upon him; while That bore, and carried him alought;
and moved him; and not any Created Will, but the Holy Spirit alone: He speaks
the State and Posture of Things, that shall Confine, and Border upon the Ruin,
and Destruction of that Babylon; and the Manifestation of the Glory of the
Lord, Immediately Consequent upon it; And this State he declares, shall be by
the peculiar Ordination, and Constitution of the Lord of Hosts; of him, who has
the Government of the whole Host of Heaven and Earth; so that nothing shall be
able to move to the Contrary. The People shall Labor, as in the very Fire, the
pure perfect Fire, and shall weary themselves for very Vanity, pure and perfect
Vanity; For so is it ordained by God, that thus he may prepare for that great
change of the World; The very Reason, why he orders it so, is, Because the
Knowledge of the Glory of the Lord shall cover the Earth; The Glory shall cover
the Earth, that the knowledge of the Glory of God may so cover it also; even as
the Waters the Sea; that even as in the Sea, there is nothfng to be seen for
Water; even so in the Earth, There shall be nothing to be seen for the Glory of
the Lord, it shall so take up the whole View, througout all the Earth. From
hence therefore, I Argue, All kinds of Disappointment, and Frustrations of All
the Labor, Undertakings, Enterprizings, that are in the World; the
Expectations from Princes, Councels, Governments; From Trade and Commerce at
Home, and Abroad; From Armies, and Navies; From Generals and Commanders of
them, and their whole Force; and this not only in one part of the World, but in
the Nations, and People taken together, and in the Gross; Such Laboring in the
very Fire and wearying themselves for very vanity, are no Argument against such
a Glory of God being near, and the Knowledge of such a Glory covering the Earth
as the Waters do the Sea. Such a Glorious Revolution, and Change of the World,
being very nigh, and at the doors; so that they are rather an Argument for the
nighness of it to us. For God has given us this, as a Prognostic.

In the very same manner, This Divine Prophet beholding that Great Vision of
the Kingdom of Christ in its last Accomplishment; when all his Enemies shall be
under the Invasion with his Troops; Intimates That even in the Labor and
Service of Nature it self; There shall be great Frustrations, and
Disappointments, that the Fig Tree may not Blossom, the Labor of the Olive may
fail; there may be no Fruit in the Vine; the Flock may be cut off from the
Fold, and the Heard from the Stall; And yet, says he, will I Rejoice in the
Lord, and Glory in the God of our Salvation; For tho I do Acknowledge, the World
is always so full of Disappointments in, all these Kinds, that what the Prophet
speaks; is most suitable to all Times; All is full of Labor and Vanity, as
Solomon speaks; Vanity of Vanities, All is Vanity, and Vexation of Spirit; All
is made subject to Vanity, and to Corruption; yet as if God would wind up the
whole Web of Vanity, before the Time of the Salvation, of the Restitution of
All Things. The Prophet thus speaks, and goes on, That the Lord will make his
Feet like Hinds feet, and set them upon the high places, the Mountain of
Spices; and that then the Time of Songs shall indeed come in, and of Singing to
the Stringed Instruments Like David; at the Kingdom of the True David, the Root
and Offspring of David together; in comparison of which, All songs are but
Howling, and Lamentation now.

Now if we were to Judge of Things by the present Aspect of Things, and of what
is in Prospect; we may have Reason to hope, That the Change of the World is
near; and I should Rejoice to be so happily Mistaken; that it is indeed nearer,
than, according to the Line of Time, I can conclude it; There is every where
such Laboring in the very Fire, and Wearying our selves for very Vanity

In the last place, to conclude the whole Argument from the sure Word of
Prophecy, I would in brief present the whole Table of Time.

The whole ground Plot of Prophecy is the State of Things from the First
Creation, and Sabbatism under the First Adam, to the New Creation and Sabbatism
of the Second Adam; First Designed, but Remaining to be Accomplished; even from
the Foundation of the World; even when God on the Seventh Day Rested from the
Works, which He had made, according to Heb. 4 5, 7. It began to Remain to be
Accomplished.

This Sabbatism Comprehends the Highest and most excellent Temple State, or a
State of Enjoyment of God; and also a Dominion, Lordship, Throne and Kingdom of
the Second Adam, and of his Seed over the Creation of God; All things being put
under the Feet of him, and of his Seed, in the Sabbatism which remains to the
People of God.

God the Lord of Time,, has made, and given in his word an exact Line of Time,
from Sabbatism to Sabbatism; of near, or to the Evening, or between the two
Evenings of the Sixth and Last Milenary, and allotted a Just Cubical Thousand
years, the perfection of Time to that Sabbatism it self, or Kingdom of Christ;

This Line is at this Day to be Found in Scripture, made up of Historical Time;
reaching as far, as it was necessary to Reach, to make up such a space of Time;
Till by Fair Commissures Prophetic Time came in, and joined it, and made up the
Rest even 5759 years, to the great Sabbath.

To the two great Types of this Temple, and Kingdom expiring, viz. The Reigns
of David and Solomon, at Solomon's Death, This Line of Time is given plainly and
Historically; Embossed only with some Ornamental Resemblances of that Kingdom
and Temple-State: All which I have made out according to the very Letter of
Scripture, and Fortified our Hebrew Copy, as truly the Word of God, by great
Evidence (as I hope) of Argument from Scripture, and Scripture-Reason; And
those several Historical Lines to Solomon's Death make 3029 years; These I do
not particularize, because they do not so properly fall under the sure word of
Prophecy, but the sure word of Scripture-History.

From thence, even at Solomon's Death, begins Prophetical Time, however
Historically Supported in many great Branches of it; yet the Ministration, and
Representation of it is All Prophetical, and Mystical: All and Each of these
are of great Consideration to him, whoever he be, that would understand
Prophecy.

This general Platform being now laid according to, and in my Line of Time, I
here present it in brief to View together.

THE Prophetical Scripture Line of Time, As it is Given from the Death of
Solomon to the Temple, New Jerusalem, and Throne of the great Solomon, Son of
David, in purely Prophetical Numbers.
Days of Years. FRom Solomon's Death, when the Types of the Kingdom of Christ
in David his Father, and himself, Ceased, to Ezekeil's Temple, etc. The first
Time of Sollemn Bearing Iniquity, or the Punishment of it in the delay of the
Kingdom of Christ the Antitype, giving Spring to all Prophetic Time. 390.
Ezekiel. 4. 5. c. 40. etc. In that Ezekiels Temple was but a Visional Temple, the
former 390, years are made, according to the Standard of Seven given by God,
Levitic. 26. 18, etc.
seven times three Hundred ninty days of years of bearing Iniquity; in the
Delay of the Kingdom of Christ, to Ezekiels Sanctuary Cleans'd or Expiated, and
Justified in that Kingdom. 2340 From Ezekiel's Vision of the Temple after Forty
Days of years Bearing the Sin of Judah; and stoping any so much as Appearance
of a Temple-state to a Faint Appearance of that Vision; in Cyrus his Decree for
Building the Temple, the first 40 of the 2340. 0-40. Ezekiel. 4. 6. From the End
of the 40 days of years at Cyrus his Decree to the Sanctuary Cleans'd. 2300
eves, morns, Dan. 8. 14. From the Decree of Cyrus; the first going out of the
word for the Restoring the Temple by the God of Israel, and Cyrus King of
Persia; to the full going out of that word by Artaxerxes Longimanus; the first
75 of the 2300 Eves, Morns of years, a Time of the Treading it under foot; this
Time therefore is Detached from the 2300. 75. Made out by Scripture Argument
and Chronology. From the word fully gone Forth, to the Time of Anointing the
Sanctuary by the Pouring out the Spirit on the Apostolic Church at the
Ascension of Christ; Represented in the midst of the Half week by the Vision,
Revel. c. 4. c. 5. And so the other Half Week continues the Time of the
Confirming of the Covenant, a Time cut off from the 2300 of Treading the
Sanctuary under Foot. 490 Dan. 9. 24. Of these 490 years, or 70 Weeks, seven of
them were a Time of Building the Walls, and Streets of Jerusalem, according to
all History; Assuring the former 75, with these 49 years to reach ten years
within the Reign of Darius Nothus, and to be 124 years; and therefore the First
seven weeks are so cut off from the seventy Weeks, and so many Persian Princes
expressly named in sacred History. 49 Dan. 9. 25. Ezr. 6. 14. Fsther. 1. 1. Neh.
12. 22. From the end of the First forty nine years of the Weeks, are Sixty two
Weeks distinctly named, a Time of Vassalage, Tributariness, Straits and
Difficulties under Heathen Princes; especially Antiochus Epiphanes; a great
Type of treading the Sanctuary under foot by Antichrist; until the Public
Ministry of Messiah the Prince. 434 Dan. 9. 25. From Messiah the Prince
Appearing in his Ministry, to the end of confirming the covenant to the Jews,
at the last week; in the midst of which he Died; the other half week by the
Apostles; and their Beginning Desolations. 0007 Dan. 9. 27. The Duration of the
Force of Anointing the Sanctuary was to continue during the Sealing of Vision
and Prophecy; viz. That great Vision of Ezekiels Temple; which Sealing was both
of Reserve from Immediate coming to pass of that Vision; and of securing it
from Antichristian Violation for that Time. 400. Rev. 6. c. 7. Therefore this
Sealed time is Divided into two halves. The First of which was of the Purer
time of the Sanctuary, when the Anointing was most upon it; And this the
Wisdom of the Spirit of Prophecy has set out by Balances in the hand of that
Just Emperor Alexander Severus, weighout the time of the Purity of the
Sanctuary, according to the weights of the Sanctuary. 202 Rev. 6. 6. The
Sealing was to secure, till there was a Full and Perfect Emblem of Christ's
Kingdom in the Christian Empire. The other half from Alexander Severus his
Death, till the taking away the Daily Sacrifice; when the Anointing passed
off, and the Sealing, as to the Security, went off from the Outer-court; and
Rested on the Inner-court, and Persons Worshipping in it. 202 Rev. c. 6. to c.
8. and c. 11. 1. From the end of sealed time, began Indicted time, or time,
times, half time, so styled in Chaldee, Hebrew, Greek, so called, because sworn
Time, or Time declared by Oath, Dan. 12. 7. Dan. 7. 25. c. 12. 7. And
Accordingly God Provided by Constantine a Character of Time to be an Agreeable
Distinction of Time, viz. Indictions of 15 y. to Ascertain when the Indicted
time, times and half time should have place; there are therefore twenty four
Indictions that make the first Time, or Third of 1080 Days. 360 Rev. 11. 3. c.
12. 16. The two Times, or two Thirds of 1080 Days, are twice 24 15 of years, or
24 Indictions. 720 The last half of Indicted Time or an 180 years, in twelve
Indictions making up 1260 y. 180 At Rev. 10. Half Time begins as has been
shown. The Epoch, or beginning of the Time, Times, and half Time, is to be
taken from the 42 Moons of the Gentiles; as has been shown; Beyond the time,
times, and half time, or the 1260 days of years are the Thirty days of years of
the Voices, making 1290, by the Addition of two Fifteens or Indictions. 30 Dan.
12. 11. Rev. 14. The last part of Time till the Fullness of Time, makes the
1290, 1335, by the Addition of three, Fitteens, or Indictions, or 45 Days of
years; and are the time of Pouring out the Vials. 45 Dan. 12. 12. Rev. 16. Now
these two last parts of Time, are Indicted Time also; because they come under
the Oath of Christ; that in the Days of the Seventh Angel, and his beginning to
Sound, the Mystery of God shall be Finished. Then follows the Thousand years,
the Glorious Kingdom of Christ, the Fullness, the Perfection of time, Stild,
Rev. 20. Thrice, The Thousand Years. 1000

I am now come to the last Head of this Discourse I proposed; Some Brief
Reflections, by way of Inference upon the whole.

Infer. 1. This shows the great Price God has put into our Hands, in the
Profession of Christianity, of giving mighty Evidence to the Truth of the
Scriptures; if the Apostasy that has come upon our Profession, had not Robbed
us of the Hearts, to make use of it.

For God has given us a Sure word of Prophecy, that cannot Fail, nor deceive
us in any of the great Futurities, the things to Come, It has Foretold; They
shall certainly be Fulfilled, each in their Season; For Infinite Wisdom, has
designed, and contrived them, that cannot upon any Emergent Unconsidered,
Change its Counsel; For it calls the End at the very beginning; Infinite
Veracity or Truth has Declared them, which cannot deceive, it is a sure word;
and Allmighty Power will bring them to pass.

Now Prophecy, or Declaring things to Come is by God insisted upon, as the
greatest Assurance of the Divine Being; Declare to us, says God, Things to
Come, that we may know, you are Gods: Yea, do good, or evil; viz. When you have
Foretold them; Let the Things Foretold come to pass by your power: Now seeing
our Scriptures are full of Prophecies, on which these Evidences must be
Founded; There wants nothing but Interpretation; Adjusting what is past, to its
Just Times of Coming to pass, according to Prophecy, and History; and thereby
laying assured Grounds of Interpreting Prophecy concerning what is to come: Oh,
why do we not then concerning Things to Come, which Christ has Promised, the
Spirit shall lead us into and show us; engage our selves in Interpretation?
Seeing the Apostle Peter has assured, No Prophecy is of Private
Interpretation, or Reserved; even as in things past, Relating to Christ, which
we so vehernently Argue upon against the Jews, and with so great Reason, why
not in things to come concerning his Kingdom?

Infer. 2. We have hence Authority to Join Interpretation of Prophecy, and the
Expectation of the Return of Miracles together, that when in Daniel, c. 12. 6.
It is Enquired, How long shall it be to the End, or to the Perfecting of
Wonders? Those great Numbers of Time leading to the Blessed Time of the 1335
Days, that shall make every one Blessed, that Comes to them are Given;
Certainly therefore Wonders shall be, or Miracles Return, when the Time of
Finishing is. And those numbers must Lead to that Time.

Infer. 3. How Earnest, and Diligent should we be to be Found of him in Peace,
without Spot, and Blameless; not in a state of War, when that Prince Comes,
with his Name written on his Vesture, and on his Thigh, King of Kings, Lord of
Lords; who in Righteousness Judges, and makes War, and slays with the Sword,
that proceeds out of his mouth: Oh, Let us therefore be Diligent, we may be
found of him in Peace, and not in the Army of Armageddon, in that Battle with
God Almighty; this is the coming to the 1335 Days, A Blessedness is pronounced
upon in Daniel; A Coming with Christ, with the Armies of Heaven, in white
Linen, on white Horses, as his Called, Faithful, and Chosen; with him, on his
side. How looking, and considerate should we be upon this Concernment! That we
be found truly Fixed in the Firmament of Christianity, that neither in Regard
of the fowl Antichristian Errors, nor the inward Impurities of Heart, and Life,
we are as mandring, and Falling Stars, for whom is reserved the blackness of
Darkness for ever; but may shine, as the Stars, and as the Firmament, Fixed in
that Firmament of Christianity; by the light of which Holy Men are now wise to
win Souls, and to turn many to Righteousness; from which Antichrist by
Transgression Fell, as a Star from Heaven upon Earth, and went down to Open
that bottomless Pit, and filled the World with Darkness and Smoke; and shall be
cast into his own place at that day, the Lake that Burns Rev. 9. 1.
with Fire and Brimstone; But the Righteous shall shine forth as the Sun in the
Kingdom of their Father, in the New Jerusalem with God and the Lamb; and for
Ever.

If these Things seem hard to be understood, let us therefore grow in Grace,
and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To him be Glory for
Ever.

THE END.
An APPENDIX.
This Prediction I have added by way of Appendix, concerning Greatest
Revolutions in the so near Approaching Year, School.

Found in the Study of that eminent, Learned Person, Justus Lipsius, who Dyed
in the year 1606.

Transcribed by Dr. Mayer, into his Preface upon all the Prophets, published
1653. and there to be seen by any who will inspect it.

Translated, and Remarked upon according to its Agreement with Scripture
Prophecy, and the Line of it is Time explained in several Discourses;
demonstrating, the time, times and half time sworn by Christ, as the space of
the Antichristian Apostasy shall end in the year 1697. And so these so Grand
Events appear in a settlement and Consistency, School.

The Original PREDICTION.
POst Mill Expletos a Partu Virginis Annos,
Et post sexcentos Rursus ab Orb Datos,
Nonagesimus Octavus, Mirabilis Annus
Ingruet; Issecum Gaudia Laeta Feret.
Corruet hoc Anno Turcarum Invisa Propago;
Roma, Tuum in Libris Fabula Nomen Erit,
Omnia Tunc Ibunt Mundi sursum, atque Deorsum
Imperia, ut Populos Sceptra Novella Premant;
Utque suum Cunctas Verbum Diffundat in Oras
Christus, and Imperitet Nomine Ubique Suo.
The Translation.
FRom Virgins Son a Thousand Years when told,
And after them six Hundred more are Rolled;
Then Ninety Eight, a year of Wonders Comes,
And Joys on Joys It heaps, to Vastest Sums;
The Hated Stem of Turks that year shall Fall:
Oh Rome, in Sacred Books Foretold, men All
Shall call thy Name That Lie: Earths Empires Move
Their upside down; a Novel Empire prove
The Universal Monarchy; Then Christ
To the Everlasting Gospel giving Rist,
Shall through all Tongues, and Kindreds it diffuse,
And for Imperial Style his own Name use.
I can Humbly Bless God, I have never been subject to be lightly Impressed upon
by any Pretensions to Prophecy; Revering only that sure word of Prophecy,
Scripture Prophecy; to which I esteem the word, Prophecy, in proper speaking,
to be now only due; as the word Scripture to Sacred Writ; and the Word to the
Word of God; yet it is very certain, there may be still, and there is still
vouchsafed by God such Expositions of the sure Word of Prophecy, as that his
Servants thereby have the Testimony of Jesus, which is the Spirit of Prophecy;
or some Eminent Servants of God, as A. B. Usher had; may have particular
Foresights given them; or God may providentially Dictate to the minds of whom
he pleases, the Foretelling of particular Events, and their Times; and each of
these may, in general speaking, be called Prophecy, or rather (as I choose)
Prediction; All this notwithstanding; A Vain Credulity, a weak
Superstitiousness, Fanatic Heats I have, through his Grace, Far Removed from
me; and I desire still to Renunciate to them.

Yet being (as I may Account) Providentially Directed to this Prediction; which
I can sollemnly Affirm had so little to do yet with my so constant Fixing on
Ninety Seven; that I had never Taken the least notice of it, before the latter
part of the last year; Nor had I now minded it in the least; but that I found
it to Tread the path of Scripture Prophecy in so great, and wonderful Events;
and according to the Line of Time given also by that Prophecy; with which I
have for several years last past, Separated my self to Intermeddle, and to
make, as public, as I could, as one Principal Point of Wisdom at this Season,
now the Day is so near Approaching; I have found upon most Assured grounds;
This Prediction has fallen upon the Just Time for those Events, that
commencing 1697 shall settledly appear, School.

Moreover, I find, This Prediction Formed in the very Phrase and Words, which
are so Applicable to the sacred Style; that considering both the Substance and
the Happiness of the very Expression in several Instances, I cannot deny my
self the Satisfaction, and others the Benefit (as I hope and desire) of making
some Remarks upon such an Effort of Providence; in giving to, whoever it was, a
Prediction so agreeable to Prophecy; a Prediction, in undeniable Fact, many
years before the present Time, so consonous to what, upon strongest Arguments
from the Word of God, with the Consent of Undeniable, Universal History, I have
offered to General Knowledge, and Observation; To Excite to the Pondering of
which Substantial Proof, I have some Expectation; such a Concurrent, short
Prediction (because we are naturally Inclined to have some kind of Quicker
Thoughts for such) may not be unuseful.

This Prediction is affirmed by Dr. Mayer, to have been found in the Study of
Justus Lipsius, a Name so known to the World, for All Learning, and Sagacity of
Enquiry into All Things; and of the Roman, (as they will have it called)
Catholic Church.

I confess, I can give no greater Proof, It was found there, than that Dr.
Mayer has left it so Affirmed; but if it was so; It Argues, There was some
Observation Deferred to it by him; that he gave that Paper a place in his Study,
which Foretold Rome, as the Catholic Church, should become one of the most
notorious Fables in the World; and be exposed, as one of the greatest Cheats
upon it, Although he seemed to adhere to it; I say, He seemed (for of so great a
Wit, I question it) However bigoted he appeared in Writing the Virgo Hallensis.

But that which is enough to me, and will be, I suppose, to others in this
Kind, is; That it has undoubtedly been extant in Print above Forty years, and
so in the Hands of many persons; and that any one may see it at any Time, that
Pleases.

Now it must needs be, Dr. Mayer knew it a Prediction of some Age in his Time,
in Assigning it to Lipsius his Study, who Died near Fifty years before; and how
long before it came into Lipsius his Study, it cannot be said: Yet indeed Forty
years in this matter, is as much as an Hundred; and Dr Mayers Preface in this
Case, as much as Lipsius his Study. For the whole stress lies here; that such
Events were Foretold so long before; that there was no Train of Causes leading
probably to that Ninety Eight, more than any other year; and that there be
sufficient Assurance of this by the Predictions being in well known Hands: Now
both these are uncontestable concerning this Prediction by being so long ago in
Print in Dr. Mayer, and Dr. Mayer's Works in many Hands. The Sum of the matter
is, This Prediction was so long, before 98, an undeniable matter of Fact in
Print, and known to be so.

But I must not conceal; There is a Prediction in Stows Annals, p: 749.
According to which, This, I am Discoursing, most probably was Formed, as
appears by several Allusions of the one to the other, so plain as not to be
Denied. It is a Prediction upon that famous year 1588, running thus.

Post Mill Expletos a partu Virginis Annos,
Et post Quingentos Rursus ab orb Datos.
Octagesimus Octavus, Mirabilis Annus
Ingruet; Is secum Tristia Fata Feret:
Si non hoc Anno Totus Malus Occidet Orbis,
Si non in Nihilum, Terra, Fretumque Ruant
Cuncta Tamen Mundi sursum, Ibuntque Retrorsum
Imperia, and Luctus undique Grandis Erit.
There Englished thus
When after Christ's Birth, there shall be expired,
Of Hundreds Fifteen years, Eeighty and Eight;
Then comes the Time of Danger to be feared,
And all mankind with Dolors it shall fright;
For if the World that year shall not fall,
If Sea and Land then Perish, ne decay,
Yet States and Kingdoms then alter shall,
And men to ease themselves shall have no way.
Now this last Recited Prediction is said to be written by Regiomontanus, that
most Famous Astronomer of his Time, in the year 1475. the year before he died
at Rome; And the Prediction I now Recommend, may seem to be a mere Imitation of
it; and so to be the Diversion of a Fanciful, Poetical, and Adventrous Pen,
wantonizing upon a Former Prediction, and Running Counter to it; and that
therefore there is no Regard to be had to it. But I shall argue the contrary,
and that upon Due Compare of the one with the other, That in Dr. Mayer will be
much advanced in Repute.

I do grant, That it was written by one, that had laid the Prediction of
Regiomontanus before him: Nay, I make no doubt, he writ it after the year 1588.
when the Remarkable Events of that Famous Year had given Reputation to the
Prediction upon it: Whoever therefore writ the Prediction before us, Coasted,
and Glanced along upon that of Regiomontanus, grown into Esteem by Things
Answering it; and grafts a far greater Prediction upon so much, as would serve
his main purpose, and Leaves the Rest. And this he did to give it some
Remarkableness, by appearing in some of the Garb of what had obtained a Degree
of Honor by the Effect Following it: But it indeed far exceeds its Copy; and
since I know, it is so Truly according to the Sure Word of Prophecy, I am
assured, whoever writ it, writ it either from a Judgment enlightened by deep
Enquiry into Scripture Prophecy, or by some Divine Impulse, and far above the
Copy.

And as Reasons of my Assurance herein, I make these Observations upon it.

1. In the other Prediction, there is nothing, but what falls within an
ordinary Human imagination, supposing the world in an Hurly-Burly, and
Confusion; but such a Series of Events known only to Scripture, and its
Prophecy, not to be Read in the Stars, nor in the Book of Nature, but the Book
of God only, shows a much higher Original, than Human Imagination, taking Copy
from one much lower than it self; but either a mind Divinely Taught by
Scripture Prophecy, or at least, Providentially Impelled, as Caiaphas's was,
John 11. 51. and not speaking of it self.

2. Whereas in the other Prediction, The Events, though signified to be great,
yet are but General, and Confused, and no one Express; In this Prophecy, all is
very great, each Event is of the greatest, that can be Thought of within the
state of the whole present World; each is Distinct, Firmly declared, Like one
that knew he spoke on great ground; this Poetry and Fancy do not use to do.

3. Whereas a mere Fancy, or Humor of Foretelling would have chosen some nearer
Time than above a Century beyond that 1588, to raise a quicker Expectation; and
thereby a greater Amuse; this Prediction, carries steddily to School, so far off.

4. A Naked Fancy, or Incertainly guided Arrogance of Foretelling, if it had
born so Aloft, and at a Distance from the Time of the Former Prediction, would
have hardly missed of the Crime of 1688, Answering 1588. For we see common
Expectation has of it self run upon that year, and has not been greatly
mistaken, in Regard of the Revolution in this Nation, wherein All the European
World has been so much concerned also; to carry therefore the Prediction as
from one 88, and not to stop, and quarry (as one may say) upon the next 88. but
to fall Perpendicularly upon 98. is a higher flight, than of a Fancy.

5. The words chosen out, by whoever, was the Predictor, so susceptible of, so
ready to Fall into, and to Cope with the words, and Images of Scripture
Prophecy, are a very great Argument, and Assurance; He either from Great
Acquaintance with Scripture Prophecy, and Assistance from it in that mediate
way, or some more immediate Inspirings of that Holy Spirit of Prophecy; or at
least from a Providential Impulse, or Motion of Mind was Enabled to use words,
which the Holy Spirit Teaches, comparing Spiritual Things with Spiritual.

6r That, which above All Assures me, there was a Divine Extraordinary, either
Explorating, and searching out of the Testimony of Jesus in the Written word;
or from some Emotion of the Spirit of Prophecy in some Holy and Sanctified
Person; or at least from some Providential Impulse of that Spirit upon the
Person, that writ the Prediction, is, that he has fallen upon that very time,
I have by exact Calculation found to be the very Time for the Coming of these
great Events to pass in a settlement in 98, after their beginning 97.

FINIS.

