A Demonstrative Scripture Proof FROM Mohammedan Times: THE Kingdom of Christ
Must needs be in its Succession, 1697.

By T. BEVERLEY.

REVEL. XI. 14, 15. The Second Woe is past; Behold the Third Woe comes
Quickly: And the Seventh Angel sounded; and I heard Loud Voices in Heaven,
saying, The Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of
his Christ.

printer's device(?), flower

London, Printed in the Year, 1692.

A Demonstrative Proof from the Space of Time run out, since the Hegire Era, or
Great Date of Time to the Mahometans; like the Year of our Lord to Christians,
when the False Prophet Mahomet appeared Armed, viz at 622. That the Kingdom of
Christ must at the farthest be in its Succession 1697. the 1260. Days of Years
of the Roman Empire in the Papal Tyranny then Ending; and the Mohammedan
Imposture, and Barbarous Potentacy shall then also pass away, according to the
Line of Time given.
SEeing It will easily be allowed, the Parahles of Scripture are as truly the
Word of God, whether expounded or not, if rightly understood, as the most plain
Doctrinal Scripture; It must also be allowed, That we ought to search for that
True Meaning and Sense of them, seeing it is a Rule concerning All Scripture,
it ought to be searched; and because Parables require more laborious search,
that they may be understood, Christ giving his Doctrine in Parables, so often
used that Parabolical Admonition, He that has Ears to hear, let him hear: And
when Christ said to his Disciples, not understanding the Parable of the Sower,
though he had not then ex^ounded it; Understand ye not this Parable! How then
will ye understand all Parables? Mark 4. He implied thereby, There would be
given in his Word, many, and very dark Parables; and yet that All Scripture
Parables ought to be understood by Christians, though not expounded, viz. by
Search and Compare with other Scriptures; and so they may be understood, else
it could not be our Duty to understand them.

Now All Prophetical, Hierogliphick Emblems and Figures, particularly those of
the Revelation, are Prophetical Parables, and so ought to be searched and
understood, and may be, as other Parables. Christ therefore Seven Times
together uses that very Parabolical Admonition he used in the Gospels, He that
has an Ear, let him hear, c. 2. c. 3. And yet in a more dark Parable, and less
practical than those Epistles to the Churches, viz. that of the Beast, c. 13.
10. he again says, If any Man has an Ear, let him hear. And because the
Parables of the Revelation are of so deep Enquiry, and require much Thought,
Christ invit^s so painful Re-searches, with the Promise of Blessedness, not
only to h^s Min^sterial Servants, to Read and Expound, but to his People, who
are to be Instructed, to Hear, by that Inscription, as in Letters of Gold, on
the Portal. Blessed is he that Reads, etc. c. 1. 3. All which assure us, That
its Parables are given to be understood; and that we may, and it is our Duty so
to search, as to understand; to be assured, we have the True Word of God, and
the Sense of it, even as in other Scriptures, and that our Blessedness is to be
found therein; Else the giving that Book of Scriptures, and the Promise before
it, were vain, and unreasonable.

Having thus far Prefac'd to the Arguing from the Space, the Mahometans False
Prophetism and Tyranny, have been in the World; that the Kingdom of Christ must
at the farthest be in its Succession at 97, I propose Two Heads of Argument:
The First shall be taken from General Scripture-Principles, which none can deny.

The Second shall be taken from the ver^ Letter or most unavoidably necessary
Sense, of what we find in that Book of the Revelation relating hereunto; which
also None shall be Able to Deny, when the Reason for so giving the Sense is
duly considered, and that All Chronology and History undoubtedly Agree.

I begin therefore with such Principles as will strongly Argue from the
Consideration of Mahometanism, according to General Rules of Scripture.

Mohammedan Falsehood and Tyranny has been a Judgment upon the Christian World;
No Christian, of what Pe^swasion soever, can, or will, I think, deny. That it
has arisen for this 1069 Years, viz. from 622, to th^s 1691. can no more be
denied than the other: I Argue therefore, seeing there has heen so Great and
settled a Judgment upon so Universal a Profession, as the Christian is; a Sin of
proportionable Settlement and Duration, ought to be searched out, and matched
with it, ac^ording to the whole Tenor of Scripture: as the Jews Killing the
Lord of Life, and Calling his Blood on Them, and on their Children* and their
so Obstinate Unbelief in him, is owned by all Christians, to be the Just Cause
of the Wrath that has come upon them to the End. Now what sin of the Christian
World can be thought to be that Sin, but the Apostasy in the Christian Church,
the Apostle so long ago foretold, 2 These. 2. and which All Protestants
acknowledge has been in it ever since the Rising of Mahometanism, and from
Time before it very near 200 years in its Beginnings.

Pope having taken upon him to be Universal Bishop and Pastor, Vicar of Christ,
Head of the Church, and so Vniver^al Prophet; and to have the Power of the
Keys, and so of the Sword, in Ordine ad Spiritualia; and by his Infallibility
to give Universal Law to the World; and so many Christian Princes Enchanted to
support him in All; and then compares Mahomet taking upon himself to be the
Greatest True Prophet of the World; yet with some Allowance to Moses and to
Christ; to give the Alcoran as an Universal Law, and to be appointed by God to
Proselyte the World by the Power of the Sword, and to have thereby prevailed on
so great a part of the World; and withal to be a Detester of all Image Worship,
in opposition to Popish Idolatry. How must it needs be owned God has Angered
the Christian, or rather Antichristian State, by a Foolish Religion, as he
speaks Deuteronomy. 32. and set Mahometanism, as a Counter-Antichristianism to
Antichrist, in a way of Horrible and Dreadful Judgment upon that Antichrist,
and as a Paraselene or Mock -Moon to the Beasts Moons.

Iniquity purged till they die.

Antichristianism, which is by all Protestants acknowledged to have entered
much earlier than Mahomet: But these Judgments, though they removed the former
State of the Western Empire; yet under the New Model of several Supreme
Monarchs, together with the Papacy, in the Place of the Emperor, It was
continued; and even the very Imperial Grandeur survived as Roman, in the
Eastern Empire. And when the Sin of the former Model is so close Rivetted, and
that it enters so into the Substance, as to pass along into all Change of
Forms, and People; Then God knits a Chain of Judgments, that shall for ever
make an End of that Sin.

Jews, and the Judment upon them; which is by our Savior foretold to be as
long as any Gentile Times: It is a strong Presumption all these are now near an
End.

Jew and Gentile, as he never yet gave from the Beginning of the World to this
Day; We have Reason to believe, the next Change shall be a Final Change to his
Kingdom and Glory; For so the Course or all Scripture runs: So that as we have
so great Reason to believe some Change, after so long a lasting Sin, and
Judgment, is near; we have also Reason to believe, that the next Change, so
near, shall be a Change, once for all, to that never Ending Kingdom of Christ.

Prophecies of Scripture, that shall not only agree with these Great Principles
of Scripture-Reason; but shall by Evidence from Prophecies themselves, show;
that they Pourtray, and Represent to us both the Antichristian Apostasy, as the
Grand Sin; and the Mohammedan Imposture and Tyranny, lying as a Judgment upon
that Grand Sin; and the Notes of Time exactly agreeing to both; we have Reason
to be assured, Such Interpretation is a True Interpretation of Prophecy, and
that we may expect Things to come to pass accordingly.

I come therefore to give, as I hope they will appear, Irresistible Proofs from
the Letter of Prophecy, from the Types, and from the Times Assigned by it; that
the Space of Time, the Mohammedan Imposture and Tyranny, as a Judgment on the
Antichristian Apostasy, have already taken up, has been such, that the Kingdom
of Christ must needs be so near coming into its Succession as 1697.

Prophecy, Rev. 10. c. 11. That the Time of the Seventh Angels sounding the
Seventh Trumpet, cannot be a Time, wherein any thing of such Enmity to the
Kingdom of Christ, as Mahometanism is by All, that bear the Name of Christians;
and the Papacy by All Protestants; is acknowledged to be, have any place. For
it is sworn, c. 10. 6, 7. there shall be Time no more, viz. of such Time, Times
and Half Time, as were sworn should be, Dan 12. 7. for the scattering the holy
people, and for the wearing out the Saints of the Most High; but that the
Mystery of God in the Glory of his Kingdom should be finished. The Contrary
therefore could then have no place. And when the Display of the Seventh Trumpet
is described, the Kingdoms of this World are by Loud Voices in Heaven
proclaimed to be become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, Rev. 11.
15. 18. and then his Servants, Great and Small, shall have Rewards given them,
and They be destroyed who destroyed the Earth. There could then be no possible
Room for the Mahometans, whose King is Apollyon; nor for the Papacy,
Represented by the Beast making War with the Saints.

Seventh Trumpet is so distinguished, that there should be such Time, Times and
Half Time no more, and that None of the Six foregoing Trumpets are so
Distinguished, There is a Great Assurance given, that those Time, Times, and
Half Time, flow back into the Six Trumpets, and take them up; For then Times of
a contrary Temper to the Kingdom of Christ, and to Finishing the Mystery, had,
according to the Oath, Dan. 12. their Place, Rev. 8. c. 9.

Fifth and the Sixth Trumpets must in some things agree with the Seventh
Trumpet, and in some things so utterly disagree; that the Space of the one (as
has been said) cannot be the Space of the other: They agree in that, They are
All Three Woe-Trumpets, and bring Judgment and Woe upon some Grand Enemy of the
Kingdom of Christ; And so the Two First Woes are Preparatoty Woes to the Third
Woe of the Seventh Trumpet. They agree also with the Seventh Trumpet in this,
That they carry on Time, so that there should be no Remaining Time of
Hinderance to the Finishing the Mystery of God, but that such Time should be no
more.

But they must herein disagree to the utmost; that the Executioners of these
Two Woes are (as the Assyrians and Babylonians of Old) though executing the
Judgments of God on Idolatrous Pretenders to be his People; yet themselves
great Enemies to the Kingdom of Christ, and of the Serpentine Kind, compared to
Scorpions and Serpents, Rev. 9. 10, 11. 14 and are under their Prince, the
Angel of the Bottomless Pit. They therefore are themselves to be enfolded in
the Last Woe, being to be destroyed, as the Destroyers of the Earth.

Days of the Seventh Angel Sounding, cannnt be yet, because the Papacy, in the
Sense of All Protestants, and the Mohammedan Imposture, and Tyranny, in the
Sense of All Christians, are so opposite to the Kingdom of Christ, and have yet
such a prevalent Interest in the World; that the Kingdoms of this World cannot
by such loud Voices be said to be the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ.

Revelation has fixed 42 Months of the Gentiles treading under Foot the
Outward Court, and the Holy City; and of the Beasts having power over Tongues,
and People, and making War with the Saints; and 1260 Days, called also, Time,
Times, and Half a Time; and Three Days and a Half of the Witnesses being in
Sackcloth; the Woman, the Church in the Wilderness; the Witnesses lying Dead,
and the Church hid from the Face of the Serpent. Rev. 11. 2. c. 12. 6. 14. c.
13. 5.
It is also most certain; there are great Examples in Scripture of a Day
appointed for a Year, when Prophetical Time is Cypher'd. And it appears on
greatest Reason, from Ezekiel. 4. to be made a Standard of Prophetic Time. It is,
lastly, out of all doubt, that these Notes of Time, so discypher'd, make 1260
Years, and conspire in so doing.

Mohammedan Imposture becoming an Armed Power, has lasted 1069 years, from 622
to 1691. And that the Papacy (in the Sense of All Protestants, a Fowl
Corruption and Usurpation; and in the Sense of the most Zealous Protestants,
the Antichristian Apostasy* has run parallel with it; and they have so long
counter-ballanc'd one another, as a Sin, and as a Judgment. But further, that
such a Mystery of Iniquity was working, 2 These. 2. 7. to discover it self about
200 years more or less, before the Mohammedan Era; so as to make up now much
what 1260 years.

History, that before the Mohammedan Imposture, and Armed Power came, as a
Judgment on the Christian Profession, there were Judgments on the Roman Empire,
not only as mixed of Pagan People; but as the Emperors, and Magistracy, and
Multitudes of People under them, were Christians; but All at the same time
began to be corrupted with what has since settled into the Antichristian
Apostasy. Now these Judgments were, as has been argued, very severe, yet of a
very different Severity from the Mohammedan Scourge. For first, They did not
establish such an Horrible Imposture, and Counter Religion to the Christian
Name, Both calling themselves Believers, and one another Infidels*
and therein to Antichristianism also, that disguises it self under that
excellent Christian Name, and so supports it self by it. Then, they did not
take away the Roman Name, Empire, and City in the West, as the Mahometans have
done in the East; but the Barbarians so Coalescd, or Knit themselves into the
Roman, Papal Supremacy, by degrees, that All became a Variety of Kingdoms,
Supreme within themselves, yet refunding, or giving back their Supremacies to
one Spiritual Roman Supreme; who in order to that Spiritual Supremacy wound in,
to himself, a vast Imperialness also, on, as they are called, the Temporal
Powers; So that though the Incursion of the Barbarians upon All Parts of the
Roman Empire, effected such a Division of the Empire; yet it is well known,
they Reunited in such a Recognition of a Spiritual Supreme: There was indeed a
Taking, and Re-taking the Great City Rome; so that it was for a Time deprived
of all Face of any other Metropolitanism, but of the Bishop of Rome, (which, it
is to be observed, was always firm to it,) and was under the Exarch of Ravenna;
But in that Eternal Rome, as it was styl*d (how wickedly soever) rose up, and
took the Name of the Catholic Church; as its Bishop the Name of Supreme Bishop
and Pastor; It Lived still and became Great.

Now it is beyond all Controversy in Chronology, From the Mohammedan Hegire at
622. Going back to the Death of that Great and Excellent Prince Theodos^us ^he
first, when the Empire began to be played upon by those lesser Judgments,
particularly the Invasion of Italy; which may look like a Beginning of them,
which was A. D. 402. There are years enough, and many to spare, to make the
1069. (from 622. to 1691) 1260

Insomuch then, as we see not yet that Great Event of the Kingdom of Christ,
which shall begin at the Seventh Trumpet's Sounding; and yet find, that Twelve
hundred and sixty years, and many more, must needs have passed since 402. We
must not begin them there, because we know so well such Great Effects as are
just before, and at the Beginning of that Trumpet, have not yet been. We must
therefore either the very Next Year, or every Next Year, be in Expectation of
such Great Events, on which the Seventh Trumpet should begin to Sound, and so
the Kingdom of Christ come into Succession; In as much, as if we go back from
1691. to 622. we have 1069. years; and to make them 1260. we need go back no
farther than to 431. when there was Appearance enough of those Judgmen^s begun;
Bu^ for very Great Reasons presently to be given, I begin the Judgments
precisely at 437, as much about the middle Point betwixt Theodosius his Death,
395, and the Cessation of the Western Imperial Name, in Augustus, at 476.

Types in the Prophecy of the Revelation answer the Great Events in History,
Rev. 8. all along.
coming each at the just Times. What more Admirable Type of the Western Empire,
Invaded in all parts, than a Storm of Hail and Fire, mingled with Blood?
yielding 18 years of the 1260. Or what Time more exact, than at 437? as we
shall presently see to Begin.

What more exact Emblem of Rome, so often Taken and Re-taken, to the so great
Amazement of, and Noise in the World, and yet preserved, then a Mountain, like
an Etna, or Vesuvius, Spouting Fire into, or cast flaming into the Sea; that it
makes a terrible hissing in the Waves, yet the Fire so re-bated, as not to
consume it? This began A. D. 455. to purpose, (the First Taking Anno 410. being
but for Few days,) yielding 21 years more to the 1260.

What more Wonderful Figure of the Cessa^ion of the Western Empire, Falling in
Augustulus, as a Hesperus, or Evening-Star, than a Lamp quenched in the Waters,
at 476, and imbittering all Refreshments, in the Empire, or Commerce, like
Wormwood? yielding 66 years more of the 1260.

What more curious Emblem of Rome, the Metropolis of the Western Empire, having
no proper Supreme of its own, except the Roman Bishop, (not so much as Consular
power,) who was indeed in Providence, already in his Succession, but not Able
to cast any Rays of Secular Majesty upon Rome; till he Fell, as a Star on the
Earth, then the Third part of the Sun, Mo^n and Stars were smitten; and a Third
part of the Day and Night not shining? Third, because the Prophecy makes Third
the Hieroglyphical Number of each Rome, the Western Old, the Eastern New Rome,
or Constantinople; Yielding 64 years more to the 1260 years.

What more Admirable Type of a Christian Bishop, becoming C. 9. all along.
such a Secular Prince, under the Disguise of a S^iritual Supreme Pastor, then
a Star Falling to the Earth, when Christ had styled the Angels of the Churches
Stars in his Right Hand? Yielding 16 Years more to the 1260 Days, and so making
up the 191, wanting to the 1069.

What more Stupendous Image of the Mohammedan Imposture becoming Armed, first
in the Saracens, and Rising out of the Antichristian Darkness of the Pope's
Supremacy, (Arrogating the Keys of Purgatory, as his own, to which the
Mohammedan Parad^se is such a Fabulary opposite) than Venomous Locusts coming
out of the Smoke, swarming every way, and running up and down the World with a
perpetual Disquiet, under the Abaddon of the Bottomless Pit? and yielding by
Five Months and Five Months, and the Time of Non-Action 490 years more to the
1260. and yet They in all that Time could not Kill, that is, deprive Any of
Supreme Power, nor Themselves, found any settled Illustrious Monarchy.

What more Admirable Resemblance of the Turkish Cavalry, or Horsemen, swelling
with the Poison of Mahomet in their ^eads and Tails, than Four Angels, viz*
Attendants upon the fore-nam*d Abaddon, Angel of the Bottomless Pit; who were
therefore Bound till the Just Time appointed by God, and then prepar*d to Kill
the Third part of Men, or to put an utter End to the Eastern Roman Monarchy,
called Third, (as before-noted) and to seize upon Constantinople, the Acropolis
of it, within about 396 Years after the Cessation of the Saracenic, (so
vexatious Scorpions that yet could not Kill,) viz. at A.D. 1453. And yet by the
Virtue of their Grant of an Hour, or Season over, to their Day, Month and Year,
continue to this very Day; and shall continue until the Seventh Trumpet; Their
coming from Euphrates, at the Voice from the VVitnesses at the Golden Alter of
Incense; Their Numerous Armies of Horsemen, their Vomiting Fire, (an Admirable
Figure of their Great Guns, then come into Use, and of Prodigious Greatness,
prepared for the Taking Constantinople,) are sure Notes of them, as also that
they continue to this Day. This has yielded to the 1260 Days, so many, as to
make up the whole Mohammedan Time to this 1691, as has been said, 1069 years.

Lastly, How Perspicuous a Veil of the Reformation, about 64 years after the
Taking of Constantinople; is that Representation of Christ making a Seizure of
his Kingdom, Roaring as a Lion, holding the C. 10. all along.
Book of his Kingdom open in his Hand, and then Seven Thunders uttering their
Voices, And yet it is showed after All, that the Reformation would not Attain
its Effect, till Half Time fully Run out, which would be a Time of Delay, as we
visibly see with our Eyes; For neither is the Reformation perfect within it
self, nor has it extended to the Universal Roman Empire, and so to the Ends of
the Earth; Therefore were the Thunders sealed, and the Book closed in the
Bowels of the Apocalyptick Prophet, and Prophecy continued; and so the Seventh
Angel not sounding, nor the Mystery finished. This has yielded since it began
in Luther, 1517, 176 years of the last 180 of Half Time, and so to the End 1697.

Thus I have given a brief Landscape of the Prophetical Types, (which, were it
seasonable here* might be drawn much more full, and patticular) and the so
exact Adjustments of Times; which might in the very same manner be given from
the Resurrection; Nay, They might be derived down from Cyrus, throughout the
whole 2300 Eves, Morns. But I shall now endeavor the Additional Proof, That
these Types must needs be the Types to be adjusted to the Times I have all
along given, and am now properly upon.

Types signified by our Lord Jesus Christ to his Servant John, because there
are no other Types to be found, that can bear up the Course of Time from the
Resurrection of Christ; the Etoch of the Revelation, from which All its
Prophecies began, and have all along been coming swiftly to pass to this Day,
and so to his Kingdom, but only These So Great, within the Remains of the Roman
Empire, in so Just an Order, Series, and continued Succession of Events, and so
perfectly agreeing with the Types of Prophecy. This may be very plainly seen by
the Attempt of the so Learned Dr. Hammond, after Grotius; who, though he
endeavored to his utmost, and was as Able for it as any Man, yet how little he
could perform, is very Apparent. He was forced to pitch upon so many Events, so
very small, to be found only in Corners of History; Taking in but small
Portions of the Time, since the Revelation given, very Confused, backward and
forward, referring to Things before the Revelation it self given, placing the
Blessed State of the Thousand Years, where Antichristian and Mohammedan Tyranny
have had their principal Situation. Whereas, Those I rest upon, are the
Noblest Events, in the clearest Parts of History, and what any would most
desire to know, viz. the Western Roman Famous Empire, becoming Ten Kingdoms,
under the Papacy; the Mohammedan Imposture, the Saracens, the Turks; the long
Oppression of the Waldenses or Vaudois; the Eastern Empire, and its City seized
by Mahomet. Their Derivation from the Resurrection is Just and equal Supporting
Time to this Day; All within Daniel's Last, viz. the Roman Monarchy, as they
ought to be; makng Daniel's Prophecy and the Revelation-Prophecy one entire
Piece; setting the Blessed Thousand Years duly after the Antichristian
Apostasy, and the Mohammedan Tyranny ended, and not before it.

It is evident, There are no Events so Great and Comprehensive, to be found, as
to past Time, as these; the Reformation following close on them; since the
Empire became Christian, and Paganism utterly suppressed in it; to which Time
the Seven Seals of the Revelation lead, by as Remarkable and Justly Dated
Events, if it were seasonable here to Give Them, or not too Long.

If we should think, Greater Events may be yet to come, which may better Answer
these Types; We must run unavoidably upon this Rock, viz. the Supposition; so
Great a Prophecy has neglected these so Great, and of so Great Duration,
notwithstanding its Events were in Motion, at the very Time it was Given; or,
as it speaks in great Swiftness and Suddenness, to come to pass.

Again, These Events must be either very short, but of Three Years and a Half,
according to the Letter of the 1260 Days; And then this so Long Course of Time,
and Events, must be passed over for very short ones, which cannot be Great,
according to General Providence, because so short; or else they must be
supposed to take up as much Time as These have done; And then besides, the
Prophecies strange Silence of these, which came immediately to pass, from Time
to Time, since it was Given; which are therefore its proper Subject, as it self
has said; The Last Times, since Christ, must be prodigiously also swelled,
against all Reason and Affirmation of Scripture. From all which it may be
certainly concluded, These very Events, adjusted so to their Types, are the
very Types of this Prophecy of the Revelation.

Days of Years run parallel, must be Months, and Days of Years, which are yet
in Motion, but near run out; I Argue thus from Express Letter of Scripture, and
Matter of Fact compared:

First, Our Lord Categorically Asserts, Jerusalem shall be trodden under Foot
of the Gentiles, until the Times of the Gentiles shall be Fullfilled, Luke 21.
24.

Now that the Gentiles Times continued from the Destruction of Jerusalem, by
Titus, until the Christian Empire of Constantine, No One will deny: Nor, that,
when It Fell, and has been under the Hand of the Mahometans, first the
Saracens, and then the Turks (as It has done far the grea^er part of the Time,
since the Christian Empire) but that it might most Justly be said to have been
Trodden under Foot by the Gentiles; For such are All, who do not profess Faith
in Jesus Christ, and so are styled Infidels; This No One of the Christian Name
will Deny, and therefore that Gentiles Times must be still. But for the Time it
has been in the Power of Christians, so much as in Name, which has been but
Inconsiderable for now above these 1600 Years; either those short Intervals,
for their being so short, and surrounded on all sides with the Power of
Gentiles to Tread i^ under Foot, were overlooked by Christ, as not worthy to
make an Exception; or else, which is the much Truer Account, the Heathen Roman
Dragon, so without any Interruption of Death, but only of a Deadly Wound, gave
his Power to the Roman Antichristian Beast; that even in the Purest Time of the
Christian Empire, Jerusalem was in the Judgment of Christ, Trodden under Foot
by Gentiles, either Pagan or Antichristian, and so Pagan Times of the Gentiles
have still run on.

But take we either Opinion as we please, Lo here, even a Scripture Landmark of
Times, and even Demonstration that Gentiles Times are not yet fulfill*d; For if
we consider the Scope, and whole Context of our Lord's Assertion, it is plain,
that so long as Gentiles Times last, Jerusalem, in Round Account of the Matter,
however some Lucid Intervals (as we speak) there might be, must be so in the
Power of the Gentiles, as to be Trodden under Foot by them: And on the other
side, so long as Jerusalem is Trodden under Foot of Gentiles, Gentiles Times
must be in their Course; and whenever Gentiles Times end, after what Manner
soever, Jerusalem shall be Restored; it shall be no longer Trodden under Foot
by Gentiles; For there shall be Gentiles Times no longer for them to Do it in.

Let us now compare with this plain Text in Luke, that of Revel. 11. 1. and by
way of Resemblance, or Symbol, taken from the Outer Court of the Temple, and of
the Holy City Jerusalem, Trodden under Foot, by plain Gentiles, in the very
Letter; There is a Prophetical Signification, That the whole Breadth of the
Cbristian Name, Profession, and what is called, the Universal Church, as
Visible, and Appearing, shall be Trodden under Foot by Antichristian Gentiles.
And hereunto are Assigned 42 Months, Concurrent with which, as Mourners upon
such a Calamity, are the 1260 Days of the Witnesses prophesying in Sackcloth.

And by the Course of the Vision, as these Months must needs be Times of the
Gentiles; (For they are the Months of the Gentiles, and Gentiles Months must be
Gentiles Times;) So they must be the Last Course of Gentiles Times, because
when they, with 1260 Days of the Sackcloth Prophecy end, the Kingdoms of this
World will become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, and Gentiles
Times be no more, v. 12. v. 15.

It is therefore in the first place most certain, these 42 Months, and the 1260
Days parallel with them, must be Months, and Days of Years, seeing Jerusalem
has been for so many Hundreds of Years under the Power of Mahometans, which
All who own Christ will acknowledge deservedly styled Gentiles; and still it is
so Trodden under Foot by them. Gentiles Times must not therefore have ended
yet; For then Jerusalem had been no longer so Trodden under Foot, as yet it is:
And sure it is a very Remarkable Ordination of Providence, that Its Treading
under Foot has been by the Enemies of the Christian Name, that All might
herein Agree, that Gentiles Times are not yet fulfill*d, seeing,
notwithstanding All Attempts, and under such Title of Merit, and with so great
Noise and Pomp of Devotion, to Rescue them, those very Infidels have had the
Power of the Holy Land and Sepulcher, as it is so often styled, under their
Feet.

And with the very same Wisdom by the Figures of Propheoy, the Christian
Outward Court, and Holy City, or Visible Worship, and Church, are said to be
trodden under Foot by Antichristian Gentiles, however called Christian; that
both these might give Light one to another, and Antichristian Times and
Mohammedan Times run parallel, as has been hitherto Discoursed. For while
Jerusalem is so under the Power of Gentiles, we are sure, the Gentiles Months,
being the Last Course of Gentiles Times, are in their Motion; And while these
Months are in Motion, there is a Certainty Jerusalem shall be still so trodden
under Foot, even by those Gentiles, or Mohammedan Infidels, under whose Power It
now is. And by finding, when these Months, viz. of the Gentiles, and of the
Beast, both falling into one another, shall End, we know how long Jerusalem
shall be so trodden by Gentiles; even as by the so long having been trodden
under Foot, we knew these Months, and the paraliel, 1260 Days are of Years.

We Know therefore the Time from the Destruction of Jerusalem, by Titus, until
Constantine, were Gentiles Times, because so long Jerusalem was trodden under
Foot by Absolute Gentiles. But there might then be a Doubt, when Paganism was
by Him Desolated throughout the Empire, and such a Change particularly made at
Jerusalem, as History Records, by Constantine, there might be a Doubt, whether
Gentiles Times any longer continued, than till the Christian Empire. We receive
therefore Times rising up a New, Revel. 11. 1, etc. under the Character of
Gentiles Times; to show, that though they had so run under Ground, as to seem
discontinued, yet in truth they were not discontinued, Gentiles Times
continuing; but forced to run secretly, for fear of the Christian Empire, until
they appeared under another Character, not of Pagan, but of Antichristian*
Gentilism. And within Eight Years after, Antichristianism Appeared in a
Supremacy at A. D. 606. viz. A. D. 614. Jerusalem was trodden* first by
Persians, then by Saracens, and then by Turks; All acknowledged Gentiles ever
since (for almost the whole Time) to this Day; that All might be convinced, who
own Christ, of so long Gentiles Times. Now from that Antichristian Appearance,
they are limited to 42 Months. Seeing then Antichristian Gentilism was sprung
up to such a Height, as to tread the Outer Court, and Holy City; so many Years
ago (as All Protestants Acknowledge, viz. soon after 400) to have Amounted to
42 Months, or 1260 Days of Years, we might expect this present, or every next
Year, to see Jerusalem no longer trodden under Foot by Gentile Powers: For it
is made a sure Gauge of Time; Gentile Times cannot be Ended till then; and
whenever they end, they must have began 1260 Years before. But I shall
therefore in the next place offer Great Reason, That Gentile Times must not
have began till A. D. 437. and so end 1697.

Pagan Antichristianism, that had been much before in Gathering, was come to
such a Height, that the Judgments upon it (that had been preparing also some
Time before), did fall upon the Sin, as an Apostasy come to the Birth, or a
Mystery of Iniquity come into the Light, or Born.

This I Acknowledge, as newly made known to me. For Manifestations from God, on
such Dark Scriptures, come as by Stealth, secretly; and one's Ear Receives but
a Little at a Time, as Eliphaz speaks, Job 4. 12. But that Little is very
Admirable. I Humbly therefore say, He that has an Ear, let him Hear, and Weigh.

When Paganism made that Great Rally of it Self by Eugenius, and Argobastes,
under that Fore-nam'd Excellent Prince Theodosius, Styled the Great; It was
brought to a Decisive Battle; In the midst of which, That Pious Emperor,
Humanely Judging the Success Doubtful, Knelt down, even in the midst of the
Fight (as History Relates) in most Solemn manner, and with most forcible
Expressions, according to Scripture Precedents, Begged, and obtained the
Victory; But Dying of a Drop^y before the end of the Year; The Empire from his
Death manifestly Declined, Till it ceased in the West in Augustulus. The Battle
fore-nam'd, and the Death of Theodosius fell out, A. D. 395: Near the middle
Point of this Time lies A. 437. Upon this very Epoch of the 1260 years I
pitched 7 years ago, Led with other great Considerations; As, 1. By the just
Scripture Distributions of the 2300 Evs, Morns (of which the 1260 are a part) I
Find, and am able to make out; Their Lot falls to begin 437. 2. Again, That
particular Voice in the midst of the Rev. 6. 6.
Four living Creatures, in the Third Seal, Commands our great Attention; For it
divides under the Emblem of Just Weights and Measures, that the Roman Emperor,
so Renowned for Justice, Alexander Severus was so Austere concerning) the Time
of the Churches Just Weights and Measures of pure Worship, according to Ezekiel.
45. 10. etc. into two equal Halves; The first Half ended at the end of the
Third Seal with Alexander's Death at 235, 202 years from the Resurrection,
which we account A. D 33. And the other Half, or 202, at the beginning of the
Apostasy, 437. 3. Add to these two the Reformation, which I strongly urged,
could not be, before Half Time began after Time, and Times. Now this beginning
in Luther, at that famous A D. 1517. the 180 of which Half Time consists, must
end 1697, and lead back the Half Times with the Times and Time to begin 437.
These fully assured me by themselves.

But yet being often demanded, What remarkable Character of Providence
distinguished to my Thoughts 437 as the Epoch of the 1260 years? I set my self
to seek by Books of Scripture, and History, and by Humblest Prayer; And finding
the Mohammedan Times so certainly gave 1069 of those 1260; and that the lesser
Judgments on the Roman Empire began so early, that we might well Date the
beginning of the 1260 so early, as to begin 431, and so to end this 1691, Did
not the Events, that are so certainly to come to pass when ever they End, and
which are not come to pass, forbid us; For thereby the 1260 years are certainly
known not to be Ended.

I therefore Examined again, and again, If there was any thing that did
Illustrate 437. I first found (helped therein as I Trust by God) it stands
about the middle Point, between the year of the Death of that Emperor, of so
great Memory (from which the Empire began so manifestly to Decline) and the
very Cessation of the Western Empire: As it is very easy to be found; That 437
stands very near the middle Point between 395, and 476, when Augustulus Fell;
and so a New Course of Time, viz. Of the Bishop of Rome, being the only Supreme
Name in Rome after the Emperor Fallen; and the Ten Kings having No so much as
Pretended Name of Emperor above them, till they gave their Power as Horns to
the Beast; to which Ten, and One, to which it gives an Eminency, Prophecy has
greatest Respect; And that One, Daniel Styles The little Horn; but it has a
Look more Bold than his Fellows; And John in the Revelation calls the 7th Head,
or the Beast, and the Ten Kings are Horns to it; and It self is the 8th King,
as it were Absolute, in regard of Spiritual Supremacy over All, Dan. 7. 24. and
Rev. 17. 10, 11. compared.

Now this Change was so great, as very Reasonably to give a Reputation to the
Middle Point, between so Great and Victorious an Emperor as Theodosius, and the
utter Fall of Augustulus, the last Western Emperor; And then such a Ten Fold
Principality with a Spiritual Supreme rising out of the Empire, made so Great a
Change.

Moved yet further, as I have Reason to Hope, and Believe by the Grace of God
in Christ, I further Inquired, Wheth^r there was any Images of such a Remark on
the middle Point of this Time by Prophecy?

And behold to my Wonder and Astonishment, and to my greatest Satisfaction God
was pleased to Reveal even this to me.

I had upon my first Prophetical Researches been well assured, both by the
Course of the Seals, and the Times to which they Pointed, and the high
Agreement of the Types; That the truly Adequate, or full Spread Visum, or chief
Thing seen in the seventh Seal, was Theodosius his perfect Victory over
Heathenism in the Defeat of Eugenius. His forementioned Prayer, joined no
doubt, with the Prayers of All Saints in the Christian Churches at that time,
Incensed with the Intercession of Christ, brought down Vengeance on the Pagans,
as with the Fire of the Altar in the Censor cast down; and with Thundrings and
Lightnings upon them, and with the great Earthquake of the Dragon. of Paganism,
and the Devil Ruling in it cast down from Heaven; and from hence the Voices of
Thanksgivings and giving Glory to God; Now is the Kingdom of our God Come in so
great an Appearance and Pledge of it, Rev. 8. v. 5. and 12. v. 10. in compare.
Who can but say that the Types are Admirably Agreeable!

Herein also are the Types of the Church; not yet Judged by God, as under the
Apostasy. For the People Represented under All Saints, was waiting in the
Outward Court, not yet Trodden by Gentiles, while the Incense was in Offering,
showed the Worship yet pure in the Main; yet Contracting into retired
Incense-Service in the Temple.

There was now at the Opening of this Seal a silence of half an Hour; to let us
know, that it was but a short Time, till the daily Sacrifice would be taken
away, and the Abomination of Desolation set up in the Apostasy; according to
the silence in the Offering Incense, as the Learned Mr. Mede, ever to be
Remembered with Honor, has long ago Observed.

But further than this, In regard the Trumpets were making ready to sound the
Alarm of War from Heaven on the Western Roman Empire, that had so long
Paganiz'd, and n^w was ready to shift into Antichristianism; Then was the Space
of about half an hours Silence of these Trumpets; showing; There was some half
space of Time between the Victory over Heathenism immediately to be Declared,
and the Sounding against Paganism, Re-Appearing in Pagan-Antichristianism,
although the Judgments were Determined even at or before the Victory; as is shown
by the Trumpets being given to the Seven Angels standing before God, to Receive
the Charge of the Trumpets, Rev 8. 2.

Soon after the Victory, Theodosius Died; and from that Time the Angels
prepared themselves to sound. There were continual Gatherings of the Clouds for
the Storm of Hail, and Fire, by the First Trumpet. But the Silence of the Half
Hour was observed; till then they did not sound.

Now any one Rationally considering the Half Hour of Silence, and inquiring
when the other Half Hour, making up a whole Hour, might end, would in all
Reason Center on the Cessation of the Imperial Name in the Western Rome; and so
great a Change as of the Division of the Empire into Ten Kingdoms, and the
Advantage the Bishop of Rome took to make himself Supreme, by no Emperor, nor
King of Rome; there being a Fatal (if I may so speak) Prohibition on any to
take the Title of Emperor or King of Rome it self; that that City might be
carried aloft only by the Beast, the Pope of Rome; though Kings of Italy, and
Roman Emperors, and Kings of the Romans, there have since been, and Now.

Since then the About Half Hour, if It can be made Justly up with the whole
Hour, gives as Great Assurance of having found the True Prophetical Sense; as
the Two Parts of a Piece of Gold (the more for being unevenly broken, and)
Justly meeting, give Assurance of the True Piece, and is a su^e Pledge between
Friends; So the Not Half, but About Half an Hour, meeting in the whole Hour,
Gives me this Assurance. If I may be bold then to use so High an Expression,
God was pleased to Tell me, most Unworthy, as it were in my Ear, and to my
great Admiration; This Half Hour made up a whole Hour, is to be found, Rev. 17.
v 12. as will easily appear by Comparing the Types. The About Half Hour; not
exactly so; begins from the, that so often Celebrated Victory of Theodosius, at
One Hour, A.D 395. Before it the Silence of the Trumpets was decreed, for about
Half an Hour; but yet the Trumpets were given to the Angels, showing them, even
then decreed. After this Theodosius died, the same Year, and the Angels
prepared themselves to sound: The Heavens gathered on the Empire from thence.
Account then from the Year 395 to 437, there are 41 years. Account from 437 to
476, there are 39 years. At 437 the Angels Time of Sounding is fixed, in the
midst, between the Preparation, and its full Effect; In the Preparation; the
Empire was terribly threatened on all Hands; From 437 it suffered Dil^ceration,
or Rending into pieces; and the Full Effect was 476. When the Ten Kings, with
the Papacy, the Beast, at the Fall of Augustulus, (their Mr. Mede names Ten
Kingdoms soon after 455.
Master in God's Account, till Then) Rec^iv*d Power at One Hour, viz. the Half
Hour made then One Complete whole Hour; and so the Seventh Head and Eighth King
succeeded, viz. at the Cessation of that Christian Emperor, the Seventh King,
but no Head, by Abdication, Emblem'd by the Falling, as a Quenched Lamp into
the Waters; as I have abundantly made out ^n a Trcatise God's Call out of
Babylon.
, Published the Spring before K. James's Abdication. But I had then no
Knowledge of the Character of the Half Hour made the whole Hour. And in that,
the Division is somewhat unequal* and as 41 to 39 or 40. The Spirit of God has
been pleased to be so exact, as to give Notice It would be so by the (...), or
About Half an Hour. At the first, About Half Hour the Trumpets were given, but
had no Effect but of Preparation. At the End of the About Half Hour, and the
Beginning of the Last Half Hour, the Apostasy that had been working came into
Light; The Gentiles Months begin, the First Trumpet sounds, and goes on
shattering the Empire The Witnesses on all this put on Sackcloth, and their
1260 Days begin. At the End of the Last Half Hour, or its making up the One
Hour, the Empire is fallen, the Months of the Beast, the Seventh Head, and
Eighth King begin; into which the Gentiles Months merging, they together, as
Lunar Time agreeing with Solar, make the 1260 Days. The Ten Kings Receive Power
at the Two Half Hours made up One whole Hour, viz. at 476. Let Him that would
impute All this to Phantastry, take heed, lest he impute to the Holy Spirit*

And to conclude this so Weighty, and therefore Longer Argument; As the
Apostasy surpised the Pure Worship at a Half Hour, and cut it off in that
midst; So shall ^t Self be cut off at Half Time, viz at the End of the 180
Years from the Reformation, never able to become 360, or a whole Time for ever;
For Christ has sworn, There shall then be such Time no more.

Turkish Empire, That It is very near its End; For that it has plainly, since
the last War with the German Empire, been exposed by God, as a Potentacy that
has lost its Spirit, Puissance and Success, which it had, as such a Scourge
upon the Antichristian State, is obvious to every Observer: And, as Haman's
Wise Lady and Friends said, If Thou have begun to Fall before the Seed of the
Jews, Thou shall surely Fall. So seeing the Turkish Power has begun to Fall
before the Christian Name, It shall surely within a short Time Fall, and only
waits till that Christian Name be undisguis'd from Antichristianism,; The very
Beginning of so Long a Successful Tyranny to Fall, is in General Providence an
Earnest of Its utter End very near.

But I further observe from the Types given in the Imagery-work of the Prophet
Daniel, c. 11. 36: etc. Beginning with Antichristianism; The Worship of Angels
and Saints in imitation of the Tutelary Gods of the Heathen and their Images,
preserved as the Sacraments of their Defensive Power, has been to Admiration
Expounded by that Excellent Mr. Mede upon this Prophecy many years ago; which
Worship is enough known to have been growing up all along the 5th Century, or
from the year 400* The same Daniel Describing the Judgments of God upon such an
Idolatrous State of the Christian Profession under the Antichristian Prince,
foretells, The King of the South shall first push at Him, pointing to the
Saracenic Power, which arose from, and was most Formidable in the South, but
could only Push, and not Kill; and then the King of the North, or the Turkish
Power; that coming from the Scythian North, As Types of which, Two Southern and
Northern Kings. So much was said of the Greco-Syrian, and Egyptian Kingdoms,
under the Names of the King of the North, and of the South, c. 11. 5, etc.
pierced to the East; and I find these Great Agreements between this Prophetic
Portraicture, and all I had said on the Types, Rev. 9.

1. The Antichristian State, as the last Course of Gentile Times shall
continue, till the Indignation against Jerusalem treading it under Foot, shall
be accomplished, v. 36.

2. The Mohammedan, Southern or Saracenic, and the Northern, or Turkish Powers
are the First Judgments or Trumpets, on the Roman Antichristian Empire; but
making one Trumpet with the Last Woe Trumpet, v. last, called all Three, the
single Trumpet of the Three Angels, Rev. 8. ult. come in the last Course of
Judgment; so Daniel says at the Time of the End, v. 42.

3. The Turkish Power, as it began by Trangolipix in Persia, and seized Egypt
by Saladin, which, as it is said in Daniel, did not Escape, v. 42. so it came
to a Settlement in the Ottoman Family, which grew great above Any of the Former
Turkish Families: But it was in greatest Trouble by that so dreadful Impression
from the East-North, v. 44. by Tamerlane, who carried with him the Proud Sultan
Bajazet in a Cage of Iron, and held him in Fetters to his Death. After this the
Ottoman Princes went on with a Fury to Kill, and to Destroy, as the Prophecy
Speaks; and planted their Tabernacle, or Palace, between the Seas, viz. at that
Meeting of the Seas, a most Illustrious Character of Constantinople, on which
Account it is called, The Port; even as its Mountainous Site makes it called,
the Holy Glorious Mountain. It might be understood of Judea and Jerusalem,
which was soon after seized by Selymus, out of other Mohammedan Hands, viz the
Sultans of Egypt. But I rather understand it of Constantinople, called so by
way of Allusion to Jerusalem; because Constantine, the First Christian Emperor,
made it the Tower of the Christian Empire, and, as it were, a Jerusalem
Consecrated to God and to Christ, v. 45.

And how when All was thus settled; to show; The Turkish Potentacy would be then
in its last Stage of Time, It is said, This Northern King shall come to his
End, and None shall help Him. And it appears an Insinuation, That when he shall
be very near his End, he shall have some unaccountable, and unexpected Help,
such as at this Day he finds from the French Power; that by Diverting the
Imperial Arms, gives an Aid to the Continuance of this Turkish Power for a
small space. But this notwithstanding, He shall come to his End, and None shall
be Able, by Any Help whatever, to prevent it, even at this 1697. But because
the Knot of the Eclipse of Christianity Rests in the Antichristian State;
First, the Union of the Pope, and the Ten Kings, shall be fully Dissolved; And
then this Woe shall pass away.

I may in the Last Place Add; We must Understand the Prophecy of Daniel, and of
the Revelation, by their Types; or never Understand them, till the Time of the
Days Dawn, and the Day Star of the Kingdom of Christ it self Arising in our
Hearts. For that they shall not be understood, except in Eternity, sure Any One
will be ashamed to say. But that it is our Duty to understand them Now, is
plain, by what the Apostle says; We Do well to give heed to the Sure Word of
Prophecy, shining in the Dark Place, or Time of the 2 Pet. 1. 19.
Apostasy; and that Christ says, Let him, that has an Ear, hear; and here is
Wisdom; Let him that has it count. Now that the Types, and the Events Rev. 13.
8.
pitched upon, Answer with so Great Exactness, we may know, by comparing the
Events, which I have given, with the Events God has himself expounded
Prophetical Types into, that he might thereby give us an Example in Expounding
Prophetical Types; as that Nebuchadnezzar was the Head of Gold, etc. Dan. 2.
38. That the Ram was the King of Persia; that the He-Goat was the Dan. 8. 21.
King of Grecia; that the Kingdom was divided after the Death of the First King
of Grecia, by whom None doubt, Alexander the Great is Intended, putting an End
to the Persian Monarchy in Darius the Last King. These things then give us the
Key of Expounding Prophetic Types; 1. Agreement of the Types and of the Events.
2. In an Orderly Succession. 3. That they be Events of a High and Signal
Eminency in that Succession, 4. That they keep the Course of Time a-foot,
Within Dan's 4 Monarchies.
to the great End or Kingdom of Christ 5. That being rightly Hit, they are as
significant as plain Words. All which show the Necessity of the Types I have
insisted upon to be the True, and that there can no other be Expected; So that
I boldly conclude, whoever considers them must say, They are certainly the
True, or at least, most Rationally to be believed to be the True Prophetical
Types; and so that Christ's Kingdom must be so near.

And thus I have given such Arguments for the Great Change of the World at
1697, that as I most Humbly Appeal to the All-Knowing Spirit concerning their
Truth, in Agreement with what He has so long a-go spoken, and written; so I am
most Bold to say, Neither the Understanding of Angels, or Men, can Resist Them;
having so Great a Presence of Divine Manifestation in Them.

If any be persuaded, we are yet to expect that Slaying of the Witnesses before
this Happy Change, which must have its Three Years and a Half; I have given
Great Reasons against that Judgment, as founded on that Text, Rev. 11. 9* and
am sure it cannot be the Sense of a Prophecy, that requires a much longer space
to fulfill it self in; even of the whole 1260 Years of the Apostasy; yet with a
peculiar Respect to the Deepest Time of both the Pagan and Mohammedan Tyranny,
according to the Allusion to the Deep Part of our Lord's being in the Grave
those Three Days, so Famous in Evangelical History.

Yet I will not be so bold, as Absolutely to Deny, (there being just possible
Time before 97, to be so, and yet the Witnesses to Rise so soon) but there may
be some such Space, by way of Re-Capitulation, and Epitome of that Deep State
at the Last of the 1260 Years; Which if Decreed by God, may be insinuated, by
the Framing the whole Vision of the Witnesses, so, as to End in Three Days of
Years, and a Half; and then the wonderful Change at their Rising, by the Spirit
of Life entering into Them, to ensue. And hereunto it would much incline any
ones Judgment, to observe the Great Wickedness found at this Day among the
Protestants; their Vnpreparednefs, and deep Aversation to such a Kingdom of
Christ, as is so Near; and that therefore some very Dreadful, however Short
Course of Judgment, must winnow the Reformed (so call*d) Nations, and even
Churches for it. And if this be so, We must of Necessity be Just Entering into
so Trying a Time, and ought to prepare for it; and to take into deep
Consideration, All such Possible Fore-bodes of it in the Present Agitations in
the World, we now see; especially, if Tending to a Re-Revolution, the only
Possibility of such a Black State in Humane View, within these Kingdoms.

But though in Abundant Caution, and warned by the Last Summer's Suspension of
Decision, I thus speak, Yet I hope Better Things, and Things that have Fast
Hold of the Kingdom of Christ, which shall Reform the Age by an Unknown
(hitherto, since the Reformation) Multitude of Converts; and for all such
Rebels, as will yet Hate to be Reformed, and will not see; They shall see, and
be purged out by the Majesty of the Lord then Appearing.

And whether of th^se Two Judgments on this Prophecy is the Justest to it, I am
persuaded, the Next Summer's Action will give a certain Prospect. For Time is
so short to 97. that the Motion, in Relation to it, if there should be such a
Gloomy Three Years and Half, must be very quick.

If Any still think, The Time (Allow it All for Preparation, and No such Dark
Parenthesis or Time between) is too short, both in regard of so many of the Ten
Kings, and Kingdoms Remaining Popish; and even in regard of the Vn-Reformed
Protestancy; I say, for a Conclusion, Thus it ought to be, that Prophecy may be
Fulfilled. For this Blessed Change, and Re*Reformation, is to be at the End of
Half Time; And the very Nature of the End of Half Time requires, That All
Things should be Running on in a full Stream and Carier; as it were for a whole
Time; and then suddenly, and to Amazement, coming to an End in the very Half,
or Midst; as the Man, spoken of, Jerem. 17. 11. who is Cut off in the midst; or
(as the Hebrew Word is, even as of Half Time) in the Half of his Days, and at
his End proves a Fool, so shall the End of the Antichristian State be sudden,
surprising, and at an Instant; as a Line that Appears in full Length, but cut
off in the Midst. The Suddenness is expressed by the same Hour, the Surprisal
by Great Fear or Affrightment, Revel. 11. 13. And So Let it be, Oh Lord.

THE END.

