THE French King's DREAM, WHICH He had in His COACH Going to MARLY; Together
with its EXPLICATION.

By the Sieur Van Beuninghen, late Ambassador from the States General here in
England.

LICENSED November 22. 1689. J. F.

LONDON, Printed for R. B. and are to be sold by Richard Baldwin, in the Old
Baily, MDCLXXXIX.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
AMong others, who have entertained Us with their Reveries upon a late Dream of
the French Kings, Monsieur van Beuninghen has been very lately pleased to
publish at the Hague, his performances upon the same Subject both in French and
Dutch. To gratify the curious of our Nation, they are also now put into
English, and the rather, seeing He is a Man so eminent through the World, on the
account of his several Negotiations and long Ministry of Public Affairs, and
more especially at the Court of Great Britain, where he was Ambassador for many
Years: Though possibly this States-mans Friends will be sorry to find he has so
far outlived himself, That from Secrets he is come to Revelations.

An Interpretation Of The DREAM WHICH The French KING had in His Coach, going
to Marly.
PARIS, November the 11th. The KING being in his Coach at Marly, Dreamt He saw
the Heavens on a Flame; and that a very thich Smoke issued out of the Earth, of
which was formed a very Numerous Army of Men like to Black-Smiths.

And that the Person who Commanded them in chief was mounted upon a Horse half
gray, half green, and that He was clad in a Coat half Gold, half Iron, wearing
a Breast Plate of Lead, and Brass Boots, and having a Wooden-Sword, He fell a
Crying, Now must Men Fight, for the hour is come that they who will not Fight,
must Perish.

That then the KING heard two lamentable Screams, and that He afterward
perceived that the Earth trembled, and that all that Multitude of Smiths was
swallowed up.

That in a little time after there appeared a fair Forest full of Stags, and
other Animals for Chase, and that He called out to the Hunters who were
surrounding it, Kill, Kill, for the Game is good.

Whereupon he awaked, and told His Dream to the whole Court, and added, that He
would give Twenty Thousand Golden Louises to know its Interpretation, and then
became very Pensive.

If this Article of the Gazettier be true, as it is likely: it first seems to
me very remarkable, that the French King (who may be looked upon as the
Nebuchadonosor of our Time in Christendom) has had a Dream, or rather a Vision
in Dreaming, which He has taken so much to heart, as to have declared He would
pay so dear for its Interpretation: And that the Great Assyrian Monarch had the
same fondness, but with so much the more Passion, as that He had lost the
remembrance of his Vision, and that He stood in need of a new Manifestation,
which to know, could only come from God; whereas that to satisfy His Majesty,
there needs no more than a Man who understands the Interpretation of the
Prophecies to which His Vision does relate.

I believe that the Great and Good God has endued me with this Grace, and that
I shall not swerve from the Truth in affirming, That the King's said Dream is
come from Heaven, to let His Majesty know, that the last hour is come of the
Accomplishment of the Prophecies, grounded upon the Apparition of
Nebuchadonosor's Image or Statue, and of the second coming of our Savior the
Lord Jesus Christ, and of that Stone cut out without hand, which will break to
pieces and abolish all other Kingdoms, by Establishing this of God, and of the
Saints here upon Earth, will suddenly become manifest, to give the final
Conclusion to all the Prophecies.

I shall presuppose that they who shall read this, have already taken, or would
be willing to take the pains of reading my Remarks and Annotations on St.
John's Revelation, and what is writ in my first Letter to David Pina,
concerning the true sense of the Prophecies of Daniel, in the 2d. and 7th
Chapters, so far as they are applicable to the Promise of the Reign of God and
of the Saints upon Earth.

I moreover entreat them to read with attention the said 2d. and 7th Chapters
of Daniel, the last verse of the 8th, all the 9th, and the 11 last verses of
the 16th, and the 13th, and 14th of the 11th Chapter, and the 16th verse of the
17th of the Revelations.

And then most maturely to consider, whether the Heaven on a Fire does not
evidently signify the just Anger of God, denoted in the Revelations made by our
Savior to St. John, by the Seven Angels which should inflict the last Plagues,
and of whom the three last (which the King's Dream levels at) are to be the
most fatal; as is very clearly said in the said last verse of the 8th Chapter.

The thick Smoke issuing from the Earth, is doubtless that which the Gulf of
the Bottomless Pit vomits out of its Flaming Furnace, and which darkens the
Sun, and produces the strangely Monstrous and most pernicious Locusts, or the
most infamous and black Corrupters of Christian Morality, and of true Felicity;
and the most dangerous Disturbers of the Public Peace that have been in any
time since there has been Men: And who, as my said Annotations and Remarks do
make appear, by Diabolical Artifices, and the inconceiveable Blindness of those
they have deluded, have occasioned all the Wars and Inhumanities that have
afflicted Christendom for above these 160 Years, through the mad Disputes and
Differences in Matters of Religion.

And so much the more Credence is to be given to this my Interpretation, for
that, not only several of the Calvinist Writers have taken the Jesuits, and
such like Religious and Political Monks for the said Locusts: but, more
especially, because that my said Annotations have been communicated to those
they so grievously accuse, without any one having undertaken to Refute me,
among all the Prelates, Professors, Doctors, and Preachers of the Three Sects
now Ruling: Namely, of the Papal, Lutheran, and Calvinian Heresies, to whom
this horrible Crime is more especially imputed, than to all other Heretical
Assemblies that have swerved from the Union, which is not to be found or
procured, save by Preaching the Gospel all alone without Explication and humane
Doctrines, as was done in the Primitive Church, and by taking care that Charity
(which is the true Character of Christianity) be Christianly observed with all
the other Duties imposed upon us by the Precepts of the Gospel, for the being
Temporally and Eternally happy.

And as the said Locusts were changed into Froggs, in the Revelations, to make
up the Scene of the impure and diabolical Spirits that have excited the present
Wars, or the War of that great Day of the Almighty God, as is seen in the 14th.
and 15th. Verses of the said 16th. Chapter of the Revelations. It is in no wise
strange, that those same Children of Darkness have appeared to the King under
the Image of Darkness, that so their blackness might denote this Original; but
more especially, because that the great Slaughter in the present Wars, is to be
made according to the Prophecies, by Fire, and by Smoke, and by Sulphur, and
that the Smiths Trade is carried on by the Ministry of the Fire.

The General of this most numerous, black, and infernal Army which the King has
seen, is evidently the same, who in the 11th. verse of the said 9th. Chapter,
is called the King. The said Locusts and the Angel of the bottomless Pit, who
in the Hebrew Tongue is called Abaddon, and in the Greek has his Name Apollyon
or Destroyer.

The strange variety of Colors of his Horse denotes, That these Calamities
proceed from the Spirit of the Monks, and from that of false Christians who
resemble them, herein represented by the Gray, and for one part by the Secular
Spirit, which is the most shining, is denoted by the Green.

The Divinity and capricious mixture of the Metals, does doubtless signify,
that this Vision does refer to Nebuchadonosor's Statue; and tho we do not here
find the Potters Clay, and that the Gold which made the Head of the said Statue
is here joined to Iron, whereas the Iron was joined to the Potters Clay in the
Feet of the said Statue: And further, that the Gold is here combined to the
Iron in the Coat and not in the Feet.

Methinks that this transplacing is not without Mystery, by reason that what
was far off, or at the further end of the Body, or at the (...)
Nebuchadonosor's time, does now surround and wound us at present, as would do a
very heavy, rugged, and insupportable Coat of Gold and Iron.

In all the rest there is no notable Diversity, if the King saw Silver instead
of Lead, if the aforesaid Advice says true.

But this seems to me more especially note-worthy, That in the Kings Vision,
the Gold which formed the Head of the said Statue of Nebuchadonosor is mingled
with Iron, or rather is joined to the Iron instead of Clay, not only because
that Gold can no more be confounded or incorporated with Iron than with Clay.
But above all, because the present Ecclesiastical State, and specially in the
Church of Rome, is become very rich, principally because the diobolical Pride
of the Bishop of Rome, who has raised himself above all that is called God, and
is seated in the Temple of God as God, does very energically betoken the
Assyrian Monarchy, which was the greatest, the most pompous, and the most
superb of all.

Besides, that the Image or Statue of Nebuchadonosor which seems extreme high,
fair and terrible in the Description of the four Monarchies, signified the
Mammon, or the World perverted, which wrongfully, seems to us so great, so
fine, and in its turn so terrible in this short, silly and wretched Life of
worldly Men: And that the Gold is at the long run degenerated into Iron and
Clay, gives to understand the deterioration or growing worse of Ages, the Ages
of the World, which the Christian Religion, all divine, and all reasonable, and
all beautifying, as it is, has not been able to hinder, by reason of the deceit
and fraud of the Devil, and his Doctrine preached among Christians.

I am not the first that has shown, That Iron joined with Clay to form a Member
composed of those two unsociable Materials, signifies, the discording Concord
of the Secular and Ecclesiastical Powers, which compose one and the same Civil
Society.

And methinks there is nothing that ought to appear more strange, and serve
more to confirm this Exaltation, than the incredible things that is found by
observing, That in the time of Nebuchadnosor, an Assyrian Monarch could put all
those soothsayers to Death by one single Command. And that the Bishops of Rome
in a Religion which teaches the respecting and obeying of Sovereign and Secular
Powers, have been able to misuse Emperors, Kings, Princes and States, in such
manner as is well known.

The Wooden Sword must denote, That the Ecclesiastics, who are the principal
Actors in this Tragedy, have only a Staff of Command to put in action the Iron
of those that wear it.

But in all that the King has seen and heard, there is nothing more notable
than the cry of the said infernal General, that Men must fight or perish. To
express that the three ruling Sects at this day do banish out of civil Society,
and very often persecute, and horribly misuse them that will not side with
them, and become as many Antichristians and Heretics as they are, and partake
at least by applause in the Tyrannies, Inhumanities, and Wars they set on foot
and foment.

I have shown in my Annotations upon the Revelations, that the Calamities
occasioned by the fifth Angel are over, and that we live under the Plagues of
the sixth, of which the present War with the Turks and amongst Christians is
the first part, and that they are to be followed or interrupted suddenly, in my
Opinion, by the Earthquake, whereof mention is made in the 13th. verse of the
11th. Chapter of the Revelations; but the swallowing up of all the Multitude,
seen by the King, is more terrible than in the said 13th verse.

But what is still more remarkable than all that has been yet said, is, that
the King heard two lamentable Cries, and immediately after saw the said
Earthquake, is, that We are still to undergo part of the Calamities of the
sixth, and all the great Calamities of the seventh, which are to come very
suddenly.

The fair Forest afterward seen by the King, seems to denote the Face of
Christendom after the said Earthquake shall have ceased, in those that shall
survive it; the Repentance whereof mention is made in the said 13th. verse of
the said 11th. Chapter. And methinks, that the Orders which his Majesty has
given for the filling the Wild-beasts, give to understand the fulfilling of the
Prophecy, which says, That the ten Kings or secular Powers, shall be at the
long run undeceived, shall revenge themselves for the deceit and delusion of
the Infernal Doctors, who have so villaniously seduced them to the committing
such fatal Follies through the zeal of a Religion, which is as contrary to all
that is foolish, fatal, as it is the sincere, good and charitable Doctrine of
the Gospel; The said avenging Prophecy being described in the said 16th. verse
of the said Chapter, with these most memorable words, and the ten Horns which
thou saw upon the Beast, namely the ten Kings before mentioned, they shall
hate the Whore and make her desolate and naked.

Would to God that neither the Ecclesiastics nor the Seculars had bad the
boldness to regulate Religion, and that they had taken more care to observe its
Precepts, that so we might not have had occasion for such lamentable Remedies.

God grant Mercy to the King, and to all such as invoak him in Spirit and
Truth: This the Author wishes with all his Soul.

Hague, Nov. 19. 1689.
EXPLICATION DV SONG Que le Roy de France a eu en son Carosse allant a Marly.
DE Paris le 11. Novembre: Le Roy etant a Marli en Carosse songea qu'il voyoit
le Ciel en feu; and qu'une fumee tres-epaisse, sortoit de la Terre don't il
forma une tres-nombreuse armee d'hommes semblables a des forgerons.

Et que le Chef qui les commandoit etoit monte sur un cheval moitie gris,
moitie vert, and qu'il etoit vetu d'une casaque moitie or, moitie fer, portant
une cuirasse de plomb, and des bottes d'airain, and ayant une epee de bois, il
se mit a crier, il faut se battre presentement, car l'heure est venue, que ceux
qui ne se battront pas periront.

Que le Roy entendit ensuite deux lamentables cris, and qu'il vit apres que la
terre trembla, and que toute cette multitude de forgerons fut engloutie.

Que peu de temps apres il parut une belle forest pleine de cerfs and d'autres
bestes de chasse, and qu'il cria aux Chasseurs qui l'entouroient, tue, tue, car
la chasse est bonne.

Il s'eveilla la-dessus, and conta son song a toute la Cour, and ajouta qu'il
donneroit vint mill Louis d'or pour savoir son interpretation, il a paru
ensuite tout reveur.

Si l'avis de ce Gazettier est veritable, comme il y a quelque appearance: il me
paroit d'abord tres-remarquable, que le Roy de France, que l'on peut considerer
comme le Nebucadonosor de notre temps dans la Chretiente, a eu un song ou
plutot une vision en songeant, qu'il a pris si fort a coeur, que d'avoir
temoigne de vouloir acheter si cherement son interpretation; and que le grand
Monarque Assyrien ait eu le meme empressement, mais avec d'autant plus de
passion, qu'il avoit perdu le souvenir de sa vision, and qu'il avoit besoin
d'un nouvelle manifestation, qui devoit venir de Dieu, pour le savoir, au lieu
que pour satisfaire a sa Majeste il ne faut qu'un homme qui sache
l'interpretation des Propheties ausquelles sa vision se rapporte.

Je crois que le grand and bon Dieu m'a fait cette grace, and que je ne
m'eloignera pas de la verite, en disant, que ledit song du Roy est venu du
Ciel, pour saire savoir a sa Majeste que l'heure derniere est venue de
l'accomplissement des Propheties, fondees sur l'apparition de la statue de
Nebucadonosor and de la second venue de notre Seigneur Jesus Christ notre
Sauveur, and de cette pierre faite sans main, qui brisera and abolira tous les
autres Royaumes, en etablissant celui de Dieu, and des Saints sur la terre,
eclatera bien-tot, pour donner la finale conclusion a toutes les Propheties.

Je presupposera y que ceux qui liront ceci ont deja pris, ou voudront bien
prendre la peine de lire mes remarques, and mes annotations sur l'Apocalypse,
and ce que l'on trouve dans ma premiere lettre a David Pina, touchant le
veritable sens des Propheties de Daniel au Chapitre 2. and 7. entant qu'elles
sont applicables a la promise du Regne de Dieu and des Saints sur la terre.

Je les pry de plus, de lire avec attention lesdits 2. and 7. Chapitres de
Daniel, le dernier verset du VIII. tout le 9. and les 11. derniers versets du
XVI. and les 13. and 14. du Chapitre XI. and le 16. verse. du XVII. de
l'Apocalypse.

Et de considerer ensuite tresmeurement, si le Ciel en feu ne signify pas
evidemment la just colere de Dieu, denotee, dans les revelations faites par
notre Sauveur a St. Jean, par les 7. Anges qui infligeroient les dernieres
plays, and don't les 3. derniers, (ausquels le song du Roy vise) doivent estre
les plus funestes, comme est dit tresclairement audit dernier verset du 8. Chap.

La fumee tres-epaisse sortie de la terre, est sans doubt celle que le Puis de
l'Abysme vomit de sa fournaise ardente, and qui obscurcit le Soleil, and
produisit les etrangemens monstreuses, and entierement pernicieuses
Sauterelles, ou les plus infames and noirs Corrupteurs de la morale Chietienne,
and de la vraye felicite, and les plus dangereux Perturbateurs de la paix
public qui ayent ete en aucun tems, depuis qu'il y a des hommes: Et qui,
comme mesdites annotations and remarques, le font voir par des artifices
diaboliques, and par l'inconcevable aveuglement de ceux qu'ils ont trompes, ont
cause toutes les guerres and inhumanitez qui ont afflige la Chretiente depuis
plus de 160* ans, par des differens insenses sur la Religion.

Et l'on doit adjouter d'autant plus de foy a cette mienne interpretation,
non-seulement, parce que plusieurs d'entre les Ecrivains Calvinistes ont pris
les Jesuits, and semblables Religieux and Moines politiques, pour lesdites
Sauterelles: mais sur tout parce que mesdites annotations ont ete communiques a
ceux qu'elles accusent si grievement, sans que person ait entrepris de me
refuter d'entre tous les Prelates, Professeurs, Docteurs, and Predicateurs des
trois Sects aujourdhui dominantes: a savoir de l'heresie Papale. Lutherienne,
and Calvinienne, ausquelles cet horrible crime est plus specialement impute
qu'a toutes les autres assemblees heretics, qui se sont eloignees de l'union,
que l'on ne peut trouver ni conserver qu'en faisant precher l'Evangile tout
seul sans explication, and doctrines humaines, comme on faisoit dans la
Primitive Eglise, and en prennant soin que la charity, qui est le vray
charactere du Christianisme, fut Chretiennement observee avec tous les autres
devoirs que les precepts de l'Evangile nous imposent, pour etre temporellement
and eternellement heureux.

Et comme les sudites Sauterelles ont ete changees en Grenouilles dans
l'Apocalypse, pour fair la scene des Esprits impurs and diaboliques, qui ont
excite les presents guerres, ou la Guerre de ce grand jour-la du Dieu
Toutpuissant, comme cela se voit au 13 and 15 verset dudit XVI. Chap. de
l'Apoc. Il n'est nullement etrange que ces memes Enfans des tenebres, ayent
paru au Roy sous l'image des Forgerons, afin que leur noirceur marquat leur
origin; mais sur tout parce que la grande tuerie dans les guerres d'aujourdhui
se doit fair selon les Propheties Par le feu, and par la fumee, and par le
souphre, and que la forgerie se fait par le ministere du feu.

Le General de cette tres-nombreuse armee noire, infernale que le Roy a vu, est
evidemment le meme quidans l'XI. v. dudit IX. Chap. est nomme le Roy. Lesdites
Sauterelles and L'ANGE DE L'ABIME, qui a nom en Hebreu Abaddon, and duquel le
nom est en Grec Appollyon ou destructeur.

L'Etrange bigarrure des couleurs de son cheval marque que ces malheurs
viennent de l'Esprit des Moines, and de celuy des faux Chretiens qui leur
ressemblent, marque ici par le Gris, and pour une party par l'esprit seculier,
qui comme plus brillant, est denote par le Vert.

La diversite, and le bizarre melange des metaux signifient indubitablement que
cette vision se rapporte a la statue de Nebucadonosor; and quoy que l'on ne
trouve pas ici l'argille, and que l'or qui faisoit la tete de ladite statue est
joint ici au fer, au lieu que le fer etoit a l'Argille aux pieds: and de plus
que l'or est ici combine au fer dans la casaque, and non aux pieds.

Il me semble que ce transplacement n'est point sans mystere a cause que ce qui
etoit loin, and dans l'extremite du corpse, ou aux pieds tu temps de
Nebucadonosor, nous environne and nousblesse presentement comme feroit une tres
pesante, and tres dure, and insupportable casaque d'or and de fer.

Dans tout le rest il n'y a point de diversite notable, si le Roi a veu de
l'argent au lieu du plomb, si le sudit avis dit vray.

Mais il me paroit sur tout fort notable que dans la vision du Roy, l'or qui
formoit la tete de ladite statue de Nebucadonosor est mele avec le fer, ou
plutot se joint au fer au lieu d'argille, non seulement parce que l'or ne se
peut point confondre ni incorporer avec le fer non plus que l'argille. Mais sur
tout parce que l'Etat Ecclesiastique d'aujourd'hui, and specialement dans
l'Eglise Roman, est devenu fort rich, principalement par ce que le
Diabolique orgueil de l'Eveque de Rome, qui s'est eleve dessus tout ce qui
s'appelle Dieu, and est assis dans le Temple de Dieu comme Dieu, marque fort
energiquement la Monarchy Assyrienne la plus grande, and la plus pompeuse and
la plus superbe de toutes.

Outre que la statue de Nebucadonosor qui parut extremement haute, belle, and
terrible dans la description des quatre Monarchies, a signify le Mammon ou le
monde perverti, qui nous paroit a tort si grand, and si beau, and a son tour si
terrible dans cette court, sotte, and miserable vie des hommes mondains: and
que l'Or est degenere a la fin en fer and argille, fait entendre la
deterioration des ages du monde, que la Religion Chretienne toute divine, and
toute raisonnable, and toute beatifiante qu'elle est, n'a pas pu empecher, a
cause de la fraud du Diable, and de sa doctrine prechee parmi les Chretiens.

Je ne suis pas le premier, qui a fait voir, que le fer joint a l'argille pour
former un membre compose de ces deux materiaux insociables, signify la
concord discordante de la puissance Seculiere, and Ecclesiastique qui form
une meme societe civil.

Et il me semble, qu'il n'y a rien qui doive paroitre plus etrange, and qui
serve plus a confirmer cette exaltation, que l'incroyable changement que l'on
trouve en observant, que du temps de Nebucadonosor un monarque d'Assyrie
pouvoit fair tuer par un seul commendement tous ces Devins. Et que les Eveques
de Rome, dans une Religion qui enseigne de respecter and d'obeir aux Puissances
souveraines, and seculieres ont pu mal-traitter les plus grands Empereurs,
Rois, Princes, and Etats de la maniere qu'il est connu.

L'Epee de bois, doit denoter que les Ecclesiastiques, qui sont les principaux
acteurs en cette tragoedie, n'ont qu'un baton de commandment de bois pour
fair agir le fer de ceux qui le portent.

Mais dans tout ce que le Roi a veu; and entendu il n'y a rien de plus notable
que le cri dudit General infernal, il faut se battre, ou perir. Pour exprimer
que les trois Sects dominantes d'aujourdhui bannissent de la societe civil,
and bien souvent persecutent, and maltraittent horriblement ceux qui ne veulent
par prendre party, and devenir autant Antichretiens and heretics qu'ils sont,
and participer au moins par l'applaudissement dans les tyrannies, inhumanitez,
and guerres qu'elles exercent.

J'ay montre dans mes annotations sur l'Apocalypse que les malheurs causes par
le 5 Ange sont passez, and que nous vivons sous les plays du 6, don't la
present guerre avec les Turcs, and enter les Chretiens est la premiere party,
and qu'elles doivent etre suivies ou interrompues bientot, selon mon opinion,
par le tremblement de terre don't il est parle au 13. verset du XI. Chapitre de
l'Apoc. mais l'Englourissement de toute la multitude que le Roy a veu, se fait
plus terrible que le dit 13 verset.

Mais ce qui est de plus notable, que tout ce qui vient d'etre dit, c'est que
le Roi entendit deux lamentables cris, and vit incontinent apres le dit
tremblement, est que l'on ait encore a essuyer une party des malheurs du
septieme Ange qui seront fort subits.

La belle foret, que le Roy vit en suite, semble marquer la face de la
Chretiente apres que le dit tremblement de terre aura cause, dans ceux qui la
survivront; la repentance de laquelle il est parle au dit 13. verse, du dit XI.
Chap. Et il me semble que les ordres que Sa Majeste a done pour tuer des betes
feroces, font entendre l'accomplissement de la prophetie qui dit que les dix
Rois ou les Puissances seculieres seront a la fin detrompez, and se vengeront
de la fourberie des docteurs infernaux qui les ont si vilainement seduits pour
fair des sortises si funestes par le zele d'une Religion qui est si contraire
a tout ce qui est sot, and funeste, comme c'est la sincere, bonne, and
charitable doctrine de l'Evangile, cette Prophetie vengeresse etant d'ecritte
au dit 16. verset avec ces paroles tres-memorables, and les dix corns que tu
as veues a la Best; a savoir les dix Rois, don't il avoit parle auparavant,
sont ceux qui hairont la Paillarde and la rendrout desolee and nue.

Pleut a Dieu que ni les Ecclesiastiques ni les Seculiers n'eussent pas
eul'audace de regler la Religion, and qu'ils eussent pris plus de soin a en
observer les precepts, and que l'on n'eut pas eu besoin de si lamentables
remedes.

Dieu fasse misericorde au Roy, and a tous ceux qui l'invoquent en esprit and
verite; c'est ce qu'il souhaitte de toute son Ame.

A la Hay ce 19. Nov. 1689.
FINIS.

