The best News from YORK, That ever came to London and Westminster.

Containing, His Majesty's most gracious Resolution to return to his
Parliament; with his determination to be resident at at his Palace at
Whitehall, where he may the better comply with his two Houses of Peers and
Commons.

To the joy Of all the KINGS true hearted and Loyally disposed SVBJECTS.

With the Contents of a Letter lately sent from the Queens Majesty to the
King, concerning her desire, that his Majesty and the Parliament may concur
together.

Printed at London by I. H. for T. Powel. 1642. July 1.

The Best Nevvs from York, that ever came to the two Cities of London and
Westminster.
WHeareas some malignant Parties have (with specious shows and pretenses of
Loyalty) made the hearty and unfaigned love and fidelity of thi^ Honorable
City of London to the Kings Majesty not so well confided in as formerly, to
the withdrawing of the Kings sacred Person, whose presence did like the Sun in
the Celestial Orb, give radiant and vivificating splendour to this great
Metropolis: and seeing that in his Majesty's absence, there has been such a
general decay of Trading, and a cessation of all Manifactures, whereby the
common sort of People have been exposed to much necessity, and having wanted
means and maintenanee for their present subsisting, although this in it self
considered can have relation to no other cause, but from the Kings pleasure to
transport his Person to York, besides the impression of fears and iealousies
which have took possession not only in the mind of the weakest, but in the
cogitation of those of clear apprehensions and sound judgments, that the
alienation of mutual affection and confidence between the King and his great
Counsel can produce nothing but a distraction in the Kingdom, and such
effects as they are afraid to mention or behold with their understanding, but
through the prospect of precedent times, as in the Reign of Richard the Third,
when there was such a great disaffection and contestation between the King and
his Parliament. The face of the Times being grown pallid with care and
unutterable grief and discontent to discern with an Ataxie and disorder in
the harmonious concord of the happy Go^ernment of this Kingdom perturbed by
some malicious Machiavells, and pernicious Counselors: And whereas the King
has immured and clouded Himself from reflecting on his Southern Subjects
with his usual and comfortable beams of favor, to the discouragement of his
great and Honorable Counsel of PARLIAMENT, and the encouragement of the
bloody, superstitious, and execrable Rebels in Ireland, who daly commit most
inhumain massacres on the Protestants, and besides where there has been such
a continual intercourse of Declarations continually imprinted and published to
vindicate the Kings Majesty from all aspersions of any sinister intent in
raising any Arms in the North, or to have any Design against his loyal
People and Integrious Parliament, though his preparation of Ammunition and
Forces indeavored to persuade the hearts and affections of his People to the
contrary. It has now pleased God by whose divine providence the
Circumvolutions of all terrene sublunary matters is turned about to the
manifestation of his love and favor to this Nation, and to the expression of
his own mighty Power, to work an unexpected alteration in the Kings Heart and
Intentions.

For, whereas before he had been often solicited by many and sundry humble
Petitions that it would please his Majesty to accord with his Parliaments
proceedings, and to solicitate and make happy his Subjects by affording them
the gracious possession and fruition of his presence, by returning to his
loyal City of London disconsolate in his long discontinuance from thence, He
is now by the earnest advice and persuasion of some great Personages won and
inclined to prove and demonstrate by real actions that which so long and with
so many reiterated Declarations he has so often professed; namely, the
mainteining the true Protestant Religion and the peaceable Government of this
Kingdom, according to the Fundamental Laws thereof, and hereupon having
taken matters deeply into his consideration, and weighed in the Balance of
Justice and Judgment the great hazard he should runn by engaging this Land
into the combustions of a civil discord so much desired by the Malignant party
and now fully beleeveing that the Love of his loyal Subjects is the strongest
gu^rd of defense that can be raised both for security of his own Royal Person,
and the prosperity of his Realms and Dominions; His Majesty having duly
considered these aforesaid reasons, if fully and absolutely determined
forthwith to relinqish the the City of York, and all his former Intentions of
raising Arms, whereby his Loyal Southern Subjects were instigated nourish
many just fears and Iealousies of the event and pupose in raising such
unnecessary Forces, and to give their minds more Large and Satisfactory
contentment, he is graciously resolved to take off all disguises of war which
did so disanimate and affright his Loving Subjects, and make it appear by
actual Declarations that he will endeavor to assimilate his Royal Father of
blessed Memory, and to show himself as he is in his own gracious thoughts a
peaceable and pious King, and for the further conformation hereof, he is
purposed forthwith to renovate the Joy and happiness of this distracted
discontented City, and to give them a testimony to secure their present fears,
by his gracious returning and coming back to the City of London, that so the
rumors and reports of any Warrlik actions and designs may be extirpated and
suppressed, all matters settled in a quiet and peaceable condition by his
gracious and loving corespondence with his loyal Parliament and People who are
ready to hazard their lives and fortunes for his Majesty's safety and
protection; and this concurrence in affection with his Parliament and people
will no doubt be the impulsive cause to produce many happy and auspitious
effects: for as his Majesty's returning to London will be a great joy and
consolation to all his faithful and affectionate Subjects, so will it be a
disanimation to the malignant party, when they shall perceive that all their
evil counsels hatched with such profound policy, and grounded on nefarious
Principles cannot produce such a disturbance to the Commonwealth as they
coniectured, nor detain the Kings Majesty in the Northern parts by
irritating and provoking His gracious disposition to confront and oppose His
People and Parliament; who do and ever shall account it the Highest and
Noblest end of their endeavors, to show their willingness and alacrity in
obeying and serving the Kings Majesty's just and Legal commands, neither can
they conceive and imagine a greater and fuller joy, exhilirating and swelling
into an exultation of gladness, then when they apprehend what felicity the
Kings Majesty's most gracious Union and correspondent relation with his
Parliament may opperate in the affections of his Subject, and the felicitating
of many great Affairs, which now bleed for want of expedition and due
prosecution it being a verity as well in Political matters as Moral, that
where there is no progression in State matters, there must needs be a
regression.

And besides these aspicious effects, which would result by the Kings Majesty's
gracious conversion to his Parliament, and reversion, or returning again to his
City of London; what sublimated Speech or high expressions of the most refined
mellifluous Oratory, can delineate those earnest desires which do inflame the
affections of the Citizens to behold the animable and gracious aspect of his
Majesty, in whose countenance fierceness and Majesty are mixed together, to
attract good subjects to an humble familiarity, and to strike a terror into the
bad: If there be great demonstrations of joy and excessive rejoicing when
friends long divided and separated, do by the indulgence of Fortune occur
and meet again, or when friends are alienated in affection, if after their
reconciliation, their combination in love grow the stronger, may it not hence
much more be concluded, that the Kings Majesty's long absence from the City of
London, shall make the City more joyful for his return: while their hearts
make loud acclamations of rejoicing for his forsaking York, as he intends to
do, and coming to London.

For the Kings Majesty is (as it were) the C^ripheus and Sun of Majesty, that
does warn and cherish the hearts of his subjects with his presence, and
therefore it is no wonder that the City of London does with such ardency of
affection desire to be sensible of the animating beams of his favor, at a
mere distance; and that York might not surfeit with his liberal benignity,
and continual residence, while London the ancient Seat of the Kings and
Princes of this Land is left forsaken by his Majesty, then which there can be
no greater grief; for they knowing their loyal intentions to his Majesty, to
equiperate, if not exceed any of his loyal Subjects, cannot choose but be much
disanimated by the Kings Majesty's sequestring himself from his ancient Court
of residence; but now after m^ture deliberation and earnest persuasion, his
Majesty is fully resolved to give such countenance to his subjects of the City
of London, as their demerits in all age for their loyalty and fidelity has
deserved, and to show that his with drawing himself from London, was rather
the effect of evil counsel then any distrust or certainty conceived against
them grounded upon any apprehension fears, grounded upon any tumultuary
carriage or demeanor at Westminster, his Majesty, his Majesty, in token of
hearty reconciliation to his Parliament and People, and thereof is purposed
with all expedition possible to revisit the City of London. And thereby give
them ample testimony and confirmation, that regnantiam ira amoris redinte
gratio est, the absence of Kings renovates the affection of Subjects, and makes
their return more welcome, there being nothing more desired then His Majesty's
return to London.

The Queens Letter.
Royal SIR, Though I have been a long time absent from you in Person, yet am
I still and ever will be present with You in affection. No distance of place
can divide our hearts, nor any length of time can lessen the real and
unfaigned love that is equal between us. My hearts desire is to see You, and
once more to behold a happy Union between Your Majesty and your Parliament.


FINIS.

