A Loving Exhortation And WARNING TO SEAMEN, and all others whom it does
concern.
YOu that go down to the Sea in Ships, that do Business in great Waters, where
you see the Works of the Lord, and his Wonders in the deep; great cause have
you to fear and love the great God of Heaven and Earth, who gives you Life and
Being, who is the God of all your Mercies, who in Mercy has oftentimes
preserved you in great Danger and Peril, and delivered You when you have been
ready to perish: Oh forget not his Mercy toward you; but Repent speedily, and
Fear and Dread his great Name, and stand in Awe, and Sin no more against him,
whose Power is ^ver all, who commands the Winds and the Seas, and they obey
him: When sometimes you have been in Great Jeopardy of Your Lives, and the Lord
has ^n Mercy delivered you, how little have some of You Eyed the Mercy and
delivering Hand of the Lord therein; but have been Ready to asscribe the Honor
of your Deliverance to the Anchor, Cable and Manhood, more then to the Lord;
and when you have been in Great Danger of your Lives, and saw no Way, but you
must perish, have ye not then cried to the Lord to deliver you? (and (...)Guilt
of your Iniquities being heavy upon your Consciences) have you not been ready
to make Promises to the Lord in your Distress, that if he spared your Lives, ye
would repent, and turn unto him, and fear, and serve him, and forsake your Evil
Ways? And when the Lord has answered your Desires, and in Mercy has given
you your Lives for a Prey, when you came to Land, have you then performed your
Vows and Promises to the Lord? or have you not gone on in Sin and Evil still?
let God's Witness in every Conscience speak, for unto that I make my Appeal:
Consider how greatly it concerns you Seamen (and so it does all other
People) to mind their latter End, and to be ready for sudden Death; let every
particular One consider seriously how it stands between God and their own
Souls: Oh, it is a blessed Thing to be fit to dye, and to feel Peace with God;
it is their Sins and Iniquities that make People unfit for God's Kingdom; they
that dye in their Sins must perish, as Christ said unto some, Except you repent
you shall likewise perish; without Holiness and Purity none can see God: The
Soul of Man is Immortal, and can never dye, but must (when it leaves the Body)
be in a feeling Sense of Joy and Peace, or Woe and Misery forever; The Wicked
and all that forget God must be turned into Hell: Oh that all People, Young and
Old, may repent and return to the Lord with their whole Hearts, and he will
show them Mercy! Prize your time, for it is precious, and you know not how
short it is: Oh fear and dread the Eternal God that gives you Life and Being,
and can take it away when he pleases; It is not a talking of being saved and
redeemed by Christ, and of his dying for you, will stand you in any stead, that
live in Sin and Vanity; Christ said, A Man must be born again, or else he
cannot see the Kingdom of God: So Dear People, both Young and Old, mind the
Pure Divine Light of Christ Jesus in your own Consciences, that which Checketh
and Reproves you, when you speak or act that which is Evil, and come to Obey
it; for it is the Way of Life, and will Lead you, if you obey it, out of all
Sin, Ungodliness, and Worldly Lusts, into the Way of Life, and teach you to
live Soberly, Righteously and Godlily in this present Evil World; Then Peace
with God will be the Portion of your Souls.

Written in Tender Bowels of Unfeigned Love to your Souls, by a Friend to all
People. William Bennet.
The 15th of the 3 d Month 1675.

