A MESSAGE FROM THE Lord General Crumwel To the Communalty of the KINGDOM OF
SCOTLAND.

WITH The advance of Col. Hackers Regiment to the Borders. And a fight between
a party of the Parliaments horse, and some of the Scots forces, on the Borders
of SCOTLAND ALSO The Lord Generals Alarm to the Scots and a Proclamation made
at the Cross of Edinburgh touching the Coronation of their King.

LONDON Printed for J. J. and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange, 1650.

The last Proceedings of the Scots Army, under the Command of the Lord of
Rexbrough, and Col. Scot.
SIR,
AS for News, I have little at present to send, having as yet no action, but
that of most concernment is as follows, viz. That there are Orders from the
Parliament of Scotland, to have all their men, Foot and Horse, at Auchrombridge
on Thursday July 18. that are raised in the shiredom of Tiverdale. The Lord of
Rexbrough and Col. Scot is to Command them. The general Randezvous is to be at
Sterling, but these do not march there, but quarter in Tinedale, till further
Orders: they expect daily a return of him that was sent the last week into
England; there is a strange forwardness amongst the Nobles and Gentlemen of
England, but the poor Commons go on slowly with much fear; the number they are
raising, is 10000. and 3000. The people are much heightened at the Kings coming
into that Nation, since the time whereof there has been more Wine and Bear
drank (as some conceive) then was in half a year before, for in each Company
they carouse the Kings health 5 or 6 times, so that a man can go into no Town
or Village, but he shall espy the people drunk up and down streets: The
Ministers press the people to a forwardness to serve the King, telling them
that God will certainly blast the English Army, for it consists of none but
Sectaries, and such as had a hand in the Kings death, publishing it in their
Pulpits, that Cromwell has no men left in Ireland, but a few that is fled into
Garrisons; and that there is already 150 raised in Wales for the Kings service,
with many thousands more in other places. There was a Regiment of Foot and a
Troop of Horse, that came through Galloway, and marched betwixt Dunfrize and
Amand Eastward; it is reported that it was my Lord of Arg^les Regiment, and
that they were marching toward Duvolaw.

From Dunfrize the 7. instant, and he says that it is reported there, that old
Genesis Lesley, and Maj. Genesis Holburn, intends to march with their Foot toward
Dunflaw with all speed, and David Lesley is at Hume Castle ere this. They are
raising their new Leavies a pace, Galloway and Liddal, but want of Arms and
money hinders much; they brag much of supplies of money and Arms from France,
Denmark, Swethland, and Holland, but they are like to be but slenderly
furnished, there diverse Gentlemen of the South part of Scotland, are sending
their Plate to Starling, thinking it absolute secure there. Their King as we
hear, remains still at Starling, at the Kings house there, till such time as
more conveniences be made for him at Edinburgh, 10000 l. of the new Leavies is
thought to be completed within these eight days, then they say they hop^ they
shall not be long out of England, if our Army prevent them not, for they are
sensible enough, that it is easier to maintain 2 or 3 in England, then one in
Scotland.

Out of France they have intelligence by letters to this purpose. The Spanish
Army in Flanders is still about 6 miles from Guise, they being on the one side,
and ours on the other side, both Armies are strong, and are near equal,
therefore some conceive little expedition will be done by neither side, but
only spend the Summer in watching narrowly each other, and seek for some
furprisall.

The Scilly Shallops are busy about our Coasts, sheltering themselves in every
Cave and Creek, where they lurk for their prey, and catch up all the several
Vessels that float two and again: Those Islands are very strong they have cut
through Cersonessus, upon which the great Castle stands, which is now
environed with the Sea, and mainly fortified, so are other small Islands
thereabouts; our Militia is drawn into a very good Order, and we have good
cause to think that the Cavalier design upon this County, so studiously and
subtly carried on is very much crakt, and if the expected act for settling the
Militia be hastened, and thereby provision made for the arming and paying of
men, I am confident their hopes will be utterly broken.

Pendennis Castle, July 13. 1650.
July 15.
My Lord General marches toward Barwick, betwixt which place and Anwick will
be a randezvous of the Army, Wednesday or Thursday next.

The reason of our stay so long in this Town is, for that many of the
Foot-Regiments, and some Horse were not come up: There passed through this Town
this last week, viz. Col. Prides, Malivers Fairfax, and the late Generals,
Col. Daniels Foot-Regiment having a long march out of Cheshire, are not yet
come up, but expected this day at Durham, besides Provisions of Victuals, which
the Army must have of them of necessity, when they go into the barren Nation of
Scotland, are not yet ready, but will be at Barwick by that time we be there,
having been shipped this week from hence, I had sent you a Copy of the
Declaration of the Army, concerning their advance into Scotland, but I conceive
it will as soon come to your hands by the Copy sent up to the Parl. There are 3
Copies of it in writing, signed by Mr. Rushworth, Secretary to the Army, to be
sent this day into Scotland, viz. one to the Scotch General, one to the
Committee of Estates, and one to the Parliament.

We are informed that some Scottish Ministers, lately in their Prayers against
the Sectarian Army, expressed to this effect: that if God would not deliver
them from the Sectaries, they would not have him to be their God. Their Levies
go on a pace, and the Priests are to raise 2000. Horse, under the Command of
Major Strangham, and another on Bodnifield, they being jealous of the Committee
of Estates* so that on the Scottish part you may properly call this third War
Bellum Presbyteriale. And we hear further, that Aberdeen has presented their
King with 1000 l. which he distributed presently.

The City of Edinburgh has prepared a piece of plate to present to their King
upon his coming thither. The Nobility and Gentry of the North of Scotland,
presented their service to their King, and offered to ride as a Lifeguard to
his person. The Kirk perceive he begins to be very popular, and fear much he
will overtop their power, and thereupon there are high jealosies amongst them,
which is conceived will breed much distraction in that Kingdom. The Marq. of
Argile is an absolute Ryolist and has made a speech to their declared King to
this effect viz. 1. That to Kings was given absolute power to revenge injuries,
and tomaintaine the honor and reputation of his Councels. 2. That the
difference betwixt Kings and Tyrants is only this; The one takes care for the
Common good, the other studieth only for private and voluptuous living. 3. That
he should be wise and valiant, and give encouragement to the Army by his
personal presence, or otherwise, as he should from time to time, receive advice
from the Kirk and those that are about him.



Newcastle July. 16.
Sir, This day the Genesis and his Officers marched away to Morpeth, the Artillery
and most of the Army are beyond it, and intend to have a Randezvouz about
Alnwick; we hear some of the Scots horse are upon the borders, Col. Hackers
Regiment has the Van, and were ordered to go yesterday for the Borders to keep
guard there. There is a Message sent from the Genesis to the Kingdom of Scotland,
chiefly for the common sort of people persuading them to stay in their houses,
and they shall be preserved. Newcastle -- Sir, we are advertized by letters
from the Headquarters, That upon the Lord Generals advance toward Barwick,
the borders took the Alarm, and from thence to the whole Nation of Scots were
much startled; but they will have further cause shortly. And Capt. Hall has
sent a Scotch Vessel in hither which he took coming from Okeney, with 1000 Arms
and 500 Barrels of Butter going to Leeth. It is also reported that there has
been some dispute between a party of the Scots horse and some of ours, but the
resolute charge of our undaunted horse caused a sudden retreat. We have as yet
no credible relation of any action which has been to purpose, but the next I
hope will produce more. Sir I remain,

Your humble Servant, T. B.

EINIS.

