An Answer to a Discourse, entitled TRUTH IT IS MANIFEST, etc.
IN this time of scribbling when every man is bold to write a ^ print what he
please, some make use of this Liberty to ge^^ subsistence, and vent weekly News
to the people for a li^^ profit, wherein, sometimes with no less folly than
boldn^^ they will take upon them to write and make their own co^ments upon
several passages, and give their advises; Oth^ finding the people taken with
these Pamphlets, and so (...) happy as to suffer themselves oftentimes to be
transported by some of the before they have examined the truth of that which is
in them, or been so w^ ^dvised as to consider the end that those might have who
intended to abuse th ^hereby, have of late thought this a better and safer way
to carry on their de^igns and disguise them, than by sending another Cranford
to the Exchange to ^ent palpable lies there amongst the multitude, and start
another Hare for them ^o run after; that their eyes might thereby be taken off
from that which other^ise no Manifesto, Pamphlet, or Paper-practise, though
followed with never so much industry in the City, could so easily have given
an escape unto; which was that unhappy and unseasonable march of their Scottish
Army backwards into West^erland, with the consequents thereof: This being
resolved of, out comes a Pamphleter of another Port and Garb than ordinary, a
Zanzummim, who looks ^own upon the rest of his Companions as so many
Grasshoppers, and with a lord of disdain kicks them all out of his way as a
company of mercinary flatte^rs, or splenitive and scurilous detractours of men's
persons; For himself, if you ^ill take it upon his own word, he comes to set
before the people (Truth its ^anifest) a specious vizard, under which you shall
find upon the examination ^^at there is masked the most malicious, false and
seditious libell that yet has ^een offered to impone upon the people, either
from Oxford, or else where: so ^onfident are they now grown of the peoples
patience, credulity, and readiness ^o be abused by taking things upon trust
from them.

This man makes his entry through the great gate of a long Epistle to the
Rea^er, that he may make his way with more state than the common Pamphletters,
and be received with more credit. The first part of his Epistle is to that end
be^owed in a large commendation of himself* First for his personal endowments,
Se^ondly, for the competencie of his estate giving him some advantages, and
being ^b^^^vient to his resolutions of speaking to the point, as he says: The
qualitie^ (...) his mind he sets forth to be, such a calmness and freedom of
Spirit, void of ambition and covetousness, that no hopes nor fears can work
upon him; he can speak to the point, and tell truth downright, his tongue
indeed can run through the earth, and he is not afraid to offend the gods,
although thereby his hopes be crossed, and he may be hindered in his private
interest; as he says, it seems then the man has some hopes and private
interest, but sure they are in Scotland, not in England, and then in this
discourse of his he has secured them sufficiently. In a word, this man, as he
proves it, through his whole discourse is one of those who is not afraid to
speak evil of Dignities, having filled his mouth with the swelling words of
vanity and falsehood. Next his estate cooperates much to the continuance of
these virtues, he has Far modicum, a sufficient Viaticum which he prefers
to the glystering slavery of ambitious men. Here you have an ample Testimony
given of himself by himself, and certainly there is more than need of all this
if any man would believe it the sooner for his saying it, when you shall
compare his carriages in his discourse following with this profession in his
Epistle. In the second part of his Epistle he will give you evidence and
demonstration of his impartial proceeding, that you may not rest upon his bare
word alone; and therefore he will begin with his own Nation, the Kingdom of
Scotland (for no man that reads him will doubt of his being a Scot) the report
goes also that he has been a Schoolmaster, or a Tutor, who has been
accustomed to have Boys under his Rod; and this is very probable, considering
how Magisterially he carries himself all along, for we know your Pedagogue is
ever the only forward putting man; if you will make use of him, you may put
him upon any thing, as this man, who having wrapped his head up in his own
dream, like that bird, which uses to thrust her head into a bush, thinks he
shall never be discovered and flushed, and thereupon he goes on to threaten
Kingdoms, reprove Parliaments, counsel the Commissioners of another Kingdom to
stir up the people of this Kingdom to sedition, and appeal from the Parliament
wherein resides the Supreme power, unto the multitude, he traduceth the
Committee of both Kingdoms, casts the froth and falsehood of his brain upon
particular men of both Houses that are of greatest fidelity and integrity, he
does not name them indeed, that he tells you he will forbear, but so describes
them that he need not say there is a Nose in the midst of your face; could
you expect all this from any other but your Pedagogue? who in the mean time may
fancy himself walking with his serrula in his hand up and down in the midst
of his boys, elevated to the height of a supercilious gravity, as his phrase
and manner of speech shows. Yet let us hear what he will say of the Kingdom
of Scotland, it may be he has exceeded his Commission, and will have no thanks
for his labor, though his good intentions were only to flourish there, that
the better way might be made for him to give a home-thrust, where he intended
it, against the Kingdom of England.

He says, not few, but many, not small ones, but the chief and leaders of the
rest, not through infirmity and weakness, but with study and a high hand, upon
malice, had left their integrity and sincerity to the cause of God, and
followed the devises which pride and covetousness carried them unto, and for
their private interest fall to plotting and caballing how to supplant one
another, and increase their own factions, still busying their thoughts to bear
down their opposites, not sorry in their hearts at the Enemies success, hoping
thereby to make advantages for the setting up of their own party. This with
much more of the same kind, he scatters up and down in the Map presented to us
by him of his own Kingdom of Scotland, and the chief leaders therein. What
instruction would the man have the simpler sort and well meaning people (to
abuse whom is the end of this discourse) gather from all this? would he have
them think, and put them in fear, that what he affirms to have been the
practice of their chief and leading men, and most cried up for their zeal to
the good cause in hand in their own kingdom, where they had greatest
obligations, and no want of Oaths and Covenants, may fall out to be so in this?
we will hope better things, though this man's premises (the proof whereof we
leave to himself) look toward such a conclusion, in as good Logic or better
than he makes use of all along in this discourse to asperse others withal. He
complains further, that those, who were employed against the enemies, betrayed
their trust, omitted many fair opportunities and good occasions, which in
appearance might have made an end of the War, that others complied with the
Enemy and helped him secretly with advice; ill symptoms all in such a time as
this is: But because the man takes upon him to declare, in the name of the
Scots, what he pleases, as page 60. and to avow and disavow in their behalf,
(by what Commission, and by whom instructed, it were well worth the knowing) we
will suppose him also instructed to answer, any demands in their names, which
shall be made: he can tell us how it came to pass that such men were employed,
who brake their trust, and such entrusted, who did comply with the enemy for
the advancement of their own Factions: Did it arise from hence, that in all
their affairs and negotiations, they are an open hearted and plain dealing
people in whom there is no guile, no cunning, but measuring others by
themselves, they are the less cautious and more apt to be deceived, being not
at all suspicious? If this be a right character of them, as he sometimes will
have it, we have lighted very unhappily amongst so many plain hearts, upon such
a one as he is, and some others of them like himself, who with so much
industry, as the father of lies can hardly exceed it, study and endeavor
nothing more by their Pamphlets, Papers, and Emissaries for the carrying on of
their designs, than to raise jealousies, and suspicions in the minds of the
simpler sort of those persons, and for such things, as it is probable they that
raise them, do not themselves believe either the persons guilty thereof, or
the things true. Remember, the hidden things of darkness will one day be
brought to light. If you turn to the 118, 119, 120. pages of this discourse,
there you shall have himself very freely and liberally giving in unto you, the
cause why such men, by whom he says they have been betrayed, were entrusted.
In these late Troubles, which in humane reason had ended in the ruin both of
their Liberties, and that which this man so often calls their Religion, had not
their Brethren of England refused absolutely to assist or engage against them,
though all means were used both in Parliament and out of Parliament, by
threats, by promises, by oaths invented to ensnare them and oblige them
thereunto; which refusal proved an assistance unto them, enabling them to do
their work and cost them nothing, a thing that deserves much better to be
remembered than that which this man so often lays in our dish. Yea, when they
had done their own work by this means, this Nation was content to pay them
their wages in the brotherly assistance so freely given them: all this is
written in the Sands, and our ears are filled with nothing but the Miracles
done for us by the SCOTS; well, yet when we had put this advantage into their
hands, of Settling their own Affairs as they would themselves, what Peace did
they make? In the Conclusion to piece up all; this man's Friend, that man's
Kinsman, and the Allies of another must be spared; to facilitate which, Titles
of Honor, and Offices of profit must be conferred, and when this was done,
these men must be received into their societies, yea, into their Councils and
employments, though they had been found guilty, and declared Enemies to the
State, as this man tells you with regreet, for says he, What is there that the
Scots will not do for their Friends, Kindred, and Allies: by making up their
breaches in this manner, when so much had been discovered, as that they sent
the Examinations up to the Parliament in this Kingdom; they had gotten a Wolf
by the ears; if the men connived at wear not also confided in, but laid aside,
they would become Enemies again: if trusted and employed, they had opportunity
put into their hands, to strengthen their party, and increase their Faction,
that which the Schoolmaster says (and is much scandalized at it) they
altogether studied and aimed at, plotting, cabballing, and devising how to
supplant one another to that end: these are his own words, and it should seem
by him something is effected in regard of their Factions. The tables are
turned, the High men before are now become Low men. Let the Honest men
therefore amongst them look to themselves, and keep to their old friends,
notwithstanding the lessons this Schoolmaster would teach them. The man takes
this occasion to make ostentation of his Impartiallitie, Tros Tyriusque mihi,
nullo discrimine agetur; be he a Scot, or be he an English man, all is one, he
shall have his lesson taught him, and so he begins to read some lectures fit
for boys to hear, and the simpler sort to be cosened withal, every wise man
sees what is aimed at, he would gain some credit hereby to be the sooner
believed in those Scandals he desires to fix upon honester men than himself, to
take credit from them, that they may not keep his well meaning people from
being abused by him and those of his Council, which is the main end and drift
of this Pamphlet. But lay aside your Stage Play, your grave documents to those
of your own Nation, and let them take out this one lesson from their own
experience and learn it well, that will be to some purpose, all this is but
histrionicall, and you do but personam agere in it: Let them take heed in
respect to themselves, as well as of us, that they do not byas us into a Peace
which shall not be safe and well grounded. These are good words and often used,
let nothing be practiced which consists not with them, let them not be made use
of to bring about other men's ends (which it may be they see not into the depth
of) hoping to make use of such men again to effect their own, lest God who will
curss the one, do also justly cross the other. Let them not endeavor to make
their advantages of our foolish divisions amongst our selves, lest in the issue
they find themselves thereby divided from the true cause and end, which they
should only promote and aim at in their Coming into this Kingdom, at which God
being displeased, can easily lay open all to the world, and as easily crush
them in the closing of those divisions, which they would needs thrust
themselves between to hold up, and continue for their own ends. There needs
none of these carnal and fleshly devises (for such are all Divisions and
Contentions made use of) to carry on a good cause: neither does he like to be
helped by men's sinful devises, but rather delight to catch the crafty, and
entangle them in their own wiles.

Being thus fallen upon this subject of Peace, the present practices on foot
will require a little digression in discoursing of it, which I shall the rather
take liberty to do, because it is the continual practice of this Pamphleter
and others of his accomplices, who have his aims and ends, to buz into the
peoples ears, That there are some who would have no peace but keep them always
in war for their own ends and interest, the falsehood whereof I will stay a
little upon the discovering in this place, that I may not be put to further
trouble about it, and may prevent the mischief intended by the often
inculcating of these lies. In the first place let this be considered by those
who are apt to hearken to these false suggestions, that there is not a greater
mark of a seditious incendiary than this, to go about to possess the people
with an opinion that the Parliament would not most gladly put an end to their
troubles by a peace safe for them, and their posterity, if by any means it may
be obtained; For this is to alienate the hearts of the people from the
Parliament; that which is answered in this case, and accordingly made use of by
this man, that they speak not of the Parliament, but of some swaying parties in
the houses of Parliament, was Oxford language long ago, when they called the
Parliament Traitors, they said they meant it of a swaying party, or faction in
both houses: I wish these who now take up their language, do not drive on their
designs, and become the Heyfers amongst us, with whom they at Oxford plow. But
for the thing it self there is not a wise, nor an honest man in either house
that does not desire, endeavor and pray for a safe and well grounded peace.
Those men that are such do indeed take care that the Parliament be not cheated,
or forced into a peace which is neither safe, well grounded, nor likely
therefore to continue; but only carried on, and accommodated to the ends and
advantages of particular men who affect to be esteemed the contrivers thereof,
and to enjoy the rewards of making it such as may be acceptable at Oxford:
This, honest men watch to prevent according to the trust the people have
reposed in them, and this is it for which they suffer all these slanders,
calumnies, and false accusations, this subjects them to all the envy they ly
under; and we hope God in his time will so disabuse and open the eyes of the
people that they shall clearly see it. A demonstration of this, sufficient to
convince any that is not wilfully blind, is that course the Parliament has
now taken to select and choose out of the rest of the propositions those only
which are absolutely necessary for the present settlement, and future security
of the Kingdom, which if the King shall pass in Bills sent unto him, the War is
at end, he may come up to his Parliament and settle all other things in a
Parlamentary way afterward, Arms being laid down, and the Kingdom in peace:
But if the King shall refuse to do this until he first come to Westminster; or
if others shall refuse to consent to the setlement of a peace upon these
Propositions, though they only concern the safety of this Kingdom, and be by
both Houses (whose the judgment is) judged necessary thereunto, except they
may interest themselves in our Government, when they in the mean time require
that we should demand of the King for them, not only what ever their
Parliament, or Convention of Estates have agreed upon for their safety, but
that he grant all such further acts as they shall agree upon hereafter; If this
shall fall out, let all the World judge between us, whether there be true
meaning, or no, and whether it be not rather likely that there lies some pad
hid in the straw which we see not. This is a discovering time, God has made
great discoveries of late, and if men would be so wise as not to be
precipitated and hurried on blindfold into snares and pits which they will not
through prejudice suffer other men to keep them from falling into, they would,
before it be too late (suspending their judgments but for a little time) see
the danger they are in, and be contented that wise men, who foresee it should
deliver them out of it. To conclude this point, that I may not return to it,
and as I said, trouble my self again with it upon every occasion given, God
does know we would be glad of a safe peace, we would have the King come to the
Parliament; but we would first provide he might so come, as that he might not
be capable by making divisions and factions amongst us, and by being tempted
and misled as formerly by ambitious men (whereof we have here too many) to cast
himself and the Kingdom again into the same, or worse troubles. And yet we
would have the World to know th^s also, that there be some things which have
been whispered up and down (it may be this man has met with them in some of
his Cabals) that we will not have to make our peace; The one is, to set up the
Son, and depose the Father; we will none of this expedient: Every wise man
foreseeth what the issue of this must needs prove; Either the Son will embrace
it with a real intention to carry it on for himself, and then the war is
continued, or the Father must run Edward the seconds fortune to put an end to
it: or else he will dissemble his intentions in accepting the Crown, and hereby
enable himself to effect his Fathers designs by their means, who have opposed
them, and in their ruin. We love him too well and the Crown, to subject either
to parricidian guilt; we know what the success of it has been, Non gaudet
tertius haeres; and we love our selves and the Kingdom too well to dig a pit
with our own hands to bury our selves and our posterity in for perpetual
slaves. There is another we like as ill as this, and that is a total
alteration of the Government from a mixed Monarchy, duly bounded as this is,
into something else, they that fancy it and talk of it know not what
themselves; any thing so there be a change, though from the best to the worst
of all: we will none of this expedient neither, the fire is as bad and worse
than the frying pan, as we say: as we hate Tyranny in one, so we do factions in
a few equals, and as much, or more confusion in the many headed multitude. We
resolve therefore to keep the three estates coordinate equally to poyse and
balance each other; and by a due interposition to be a just boundary and limit
one to the other to prevent extremes. We need not, we will not, to gain a
peace, be without a King, no nor without this King: Only he himself has
brought this necessity upon us, not to trust him with that power whereby he may
do us and himself hurt; but with so much alone as shall be sufficient to enable
him to do us good: A mortal man as he is subject to failings, and considering
with himself what he has already done, might cheerfully, yea, thankfully close
with his people upon these terms. A third is that which we scorn to have
obtruded upon us, and I believe there is not any English heart amongst us but
rises against it, where ambition, envy, or some other fascination from the
Priests does not byas and squint the minds of men, and it is this, That if the
government according to the pattern in the North may be set up and established
amongst us for the Church; for our ancient English Government of the Kingdom
settled by mutual stipulations and Oaths; For our Judicatories fundamental to
this government, for our Laws and Liberties in and by them preserved, we shall
be l^ft to shift for our selves. This is the price the King must pay for a
peace, and if this be yielded, other things shall be accommodated to his
content, his prerogative and the maintaining thereof shall be made a matter of
conscience, and much tenderness pretended of touching upon the Kings power, for
fear of Oaths and Protestations. To meet with these things from Enemies is no
more than we had cause to expect, but contrary to our expectations we have met
with them also where we did little look for them: indeed this Agent for the
Scots, throughout his whole Pamphlet, would make us believe, our Brethren came
in for no other end; this was their Errant, the only Diana, great amongst
them, this is the Cause of God, of the Church, and State, with such like stuff.
But we expect that they themselves should make another interpretation of our
taking up Arms, which was our just defense in the things before specified, both
in respect to our selves and our posterity; and to assist us therein, it was
that we called them into the Kingdom for; their security in the same
particular, depending upon their defending us in the Vindication of our just
Rights, the cause being one and the same, and the quarrel about it as it began
with them, so would it certainly end in their ruin, if they should suffer us to
perish first: this is their advantage, they determine and preserve their own
Right at our Charge, and save their own house from being set on fire, by
quenching the fire that burns their neighbors. Some passages at the late
debates in the Conference about the propositions to be sent to the King at the
Isle of Wight, have been so strange and unexpected to us to come from the
Commissioners of Scotland, that they have called to rememberance things, before
either slighted, or suspended in men's minds, and have raised new jealousies,
these argumentations of theirs being compared with some former actions, and
late informations and discoveries. Yet we will hope the best, and deserve no
other, but confidently affirm this as the sense of every English heart, that we
will not bestow such vast sums of money, and endure those pressures, which
their Free Quarter and Plundering has occasioned in many parts of this
Kingdom, to obtain an assistance from our Brethren of Scotland, which shall
only end in this, that instead of one slavery, wherein they would leave us as
before, we shall by their means, be cast under another as bad or worse; That of
the Prince, this of the Priest; and so purchase to our selves at so dear a rate
this preferment, to become twofold more the children of slaverie than before,
by being made their Proselites. We know very well who they are that compass Sea
and Land to make these Proselites, what pains they take both in Press and
Pulpit, where they collegiate themselves, hold their Cabals, lay their Designs,
and issue out the results of their Consultations, and how they deceive men
otherways well affected, and make them their conduits, to convey through the
whole City, this imbittering water, whereby they leaven and sour the spirits
of men against those, to whom they ought to be most sweet and indeared; the end
and aim of this mystery is not discovered by many an honest man who acts in
it, and truly that is to be lamented, and it does sad the spirits of godly men,
that even those of the Ministry whom we believe not only to profess piety,
but to be truly godly, and whom we have and do still esteem and reverence as
such, yet these suffer themselves, with Barnabas, to be led into the same
dissimulation, not having Peter for their companion therein, which would not
excuse them, but men of a far differing spirit, such, who if they may attain to
their ends, regard not whether the means they use be such as becomes the
Ministers of the Gospel: how ill does it become them who are the Messengers of
Peace to be the occasions of dangerous divisions, how far distant from that
simplicity, which the Gospel requires in teaching, is this practicing with the
people to sow in them the seeds of Sedition by Sermons and written Discourses,
to the disparagement of the Parliament, whereby the people are inflamed and
imbittered against the highest Powers to whom they ought to be taught by the
Ministers all subjection? and what can in probability be the end of this, but
that they may be incited in a tumultuous way, to extort from the Supreme Power
what these men would have, or at the best be rendered disaffected to them whom
they ought to honor and obey? should not godly Ministers rather suffer wrong,
if it were so, than join with others to speak evil of Dignities? what man like
Job, as it is well said by El^hu, would make himself a companion with those who
blaspheme them that are called Gods, and fill his mouth with the North-blasting
wind? God will certainly abase those that are his for these practices; how much
better had it been to proceed so far as the Magistrate could be convinced, and
wait for what you think remains until God shall reveal it? Certainly
godliness had thereby been much more promoted, and the Gospel in your Ministry
would have had a freer passage and better acceptance in the minds of men, than
which nothing, not life it self should be dearer to you: it may be you will not
believe it, but it is too true that while you seem to men, to preach to get
power into your hands, the power of your Ministry is so weakened and withered in
the consciences of men, in respect of what it has formerly been, that if you
desist not from this teaching after an unlimited Power, and making the world
believe you have turned our Zeal for Religion into a Contestation for the
advancement of the Clergies power, as in the time of Popery, and now amongst
them, under the name of the Church, all Religion was made but a Stalking-horse
to the ambition of Clergy men; you will speedily contest your selves out of
the consciences of good men, and the power of godliness out of this Kingdom.
Men already begin to say, Where shall we go to hear Christ preached? others,
who care not much whether they go to a Sermon or not, say they had rather stay
at home than go to hear the Parliament railed upon. What I have here spoken of
these of the Ministry, is no way spoken with any desire to disgrace
Ministers, but with a sad heart in respect of those of them whom I believe to
be godly, desiring from my soul, that they would consider it and lay it to
heart, and not involve themselves in the guilt of other men's ambition, to the
prejudice of their own Ministeries, and to the casting of stumbling blocks and
offenses in the way of Gods people. This digression may be of use at this time,
and therefore born withal, since it is applied to take away from this
Incendiarie, the chief engine by which he works upon his simpler sort, and
well-meaning people, endeavoring to poison their affections, and incense them
against the Parliament, by infusing an opinion into them, that they intend no
Peace, but an alteration of the Government, thereby to disjoyn them from the
Parliament, and so prepare them for a conjunction which may put coercion upon
the same; and certainly to this end, if not in the intentions of the Agents,
yet in the effect of the work done, concur the practices of those men, whose
eyes hereby I would be glad I could open, that they might timely see what they
are doing and invited unto, though it may be many of them go as those whom
Absolon invited in the simplicity of their hearts: But to prevent this
mischief, and to stop the projects and practices of those men, who in their
meetings, whisper up and down, and make overtures privately of such things as
these whereof I have spoken to gain a Peace by, I have here clearly and truly
expressed what the two Houses of Parliament have in their intentions, as to
that which concerns the Peace of the Kingdom, which by their many
Declarations and constant Proceedings suitable thereunto they have made
manifest to all men.

But to proceed with this Pamphleter; after the man has played his part to gain
the credit of much zeal for the Church, as he calls it, and that without all
partiality, He falls upon the Kingdom of England, and makes his entry thus: If
judgment begin at the house of God (that is, Scotland whereof he had spoken)
then let England look to it, that is, where shall the wicked and ungodly
appear? I like not to enter into comparisons, but since the man will needs
begin, and make themselves Bethel, and us Beth-aven; I will appeal to the
conscience of every observing judicious man that has lived any time in both
these Kingdoms, and conversed with men of all ranks and professions both in the
one and the other, whether there be not an hundred in this Kingdom, for one in
your Bethel, that holds forth the power of Godliness in a holy life and
unblameable conversation, without Hypocrisy, cosenage, and deceiveable
unrighteousness, notwithstanding your Government and Stool of repentance, a
devise of as much spiritual use as our old white sheet? so undoubted a truth
was that lately preached before the House of Commons by Mr. Strong, now one of
the Assembly; this might have shut the door upon him, and whether he has been
taught his lesson better since his admission, he best knows? but certainly that
was a truth, which all experience of former and later times in all places
bears witness unto. The sins of Scotland, he says, are reigning in England,
bat besides that, there are many more which have not been seen in Scotland; and
of these many, when he comes to his instances, he names but only two, which
are two notorious slanders, laid upon the Government to no other end, but to
belly some particular men in Authority: Heresies, Errors, and Sects of all
sorts, he says are countenanced by some of those who are in Authority: black
mouthed man, instance in one that is countenanced, and by whom, Dolosus
versatur in generalibus, a Jugler keeps himself in generals: But this man's
Heresies, Errors, and Sects, what are they? Not to conform exactly to the
pattern in the North, as you may see by his second instance, which is all he
has to make us in comparison of Scotland, his house of God, to be Beth-aven,
the wicked and ungodly; There be some of power and credit, he says, who are so
far from furthering the Reformation of the Church, as they hinder it, not by
undermining plots alone, but by open profession against it; wherein consists
his Reformation which the man in all this Pamphlet of his so much cries out to
be opposed? Only in the alteration of the Government by Bishops, into the
Discipline set up in the Church of Scotland, and then no doubt all are
instantly Saints: and this he would make the World believe, we are bound to by
the Covenant, whereas there is no such thing, but Scotland is as much bound to
conform to us by the Covenant, as we to them, if we come nearer to the word of
God, then they, in our Reformation. But who, I pray, are those in power and
credit, That thus oppose your Reformation of Religion? You will very readily
answer, that they are the men whom you put the name of Independents upon in
both Houses; for now every one is an Independent who refuses the Altar you
would bring in according to the pattern which you have seen, though it should
fall out, and upon examination be found, that the Brazen and true Altar should
be laid aside for it.

We see the design you and those who set you on work, and that concur wit^ you,
drive on? you would cosen and deceive the simpler sort, and well me^^ing people
as you term them, by way of insinuation and flattery as you wo^^ have it
received, but with scorn and contempt enough, as they may well understand it,
when you would put out their eyes, and then become their guides, persuade them
by lies and slanders to entertain an ill opinion of those men, who are most
able to serve them, most faithful to them, and most watchful over them, to
prevent their being ensnared, and inslaved both spiritually, and civily, and
which is worst of all, irrecoverably at their own instance, and by their own
means, before they see what it is they are about to do; your way herein with
these well meaning people, is the same de^cribed by the Orator, to persuade
the silly sheep to fall out with, and banish all the dogs that watch the flock,
and then they shall have Peace; these be those that hinder their peace and good
agreement with the Wolves; stop their mouths, hearken no longer to them, and
all shall be well: you would have men so simple, as to take it upon trust from
you, and such emissaries as are sent about with your Pedlars pack and
deceitful wares, that these men oppose Reformation, and the settling of any
Government in the Church, because they desire all Heresies, Errors and Sects
may be tolerated: And that they oppose the Propositions for peace, and keep the
Kingdom in War, because they intend the alteration of the Government for their
own inte^ests and advancement; Whereas the truth is (and no conscientious in
either House can deny it) that these are the men in both Houses, by whose care
and endeavor the Ordinances for Church Government have been prepared, and the
passi^g of them pressed on until they were finished and passed, when by others
they were let to lie still, and stick in the birth, whether purposely to raise
a clamor, and hereby enforce the Parliament to yield what some are reaching
after, let their consciences answer, which being brought into the sight of God,
will find such a practice, neither acceptable to him nor justifiable before
men. They will not have their consciences pressed to act according to what is
settled, except the settlement be such as they like of: and will they, who
pretend conscience herein, press upon the Magistrate to act against conscience,
against the trust reposed in them, to maintain the Subjects Liberty from being
incroached upon under any pretense whatsoever, before light received sufficient
to convince them of a superior Authority and Divine right calling for the
same, and appointing it? and this to be effected in a seditious and tumultuous
manner by the seduced and inflamed multitude; will this be esteemed a practice
fit for conscientious men?

For the Propositions for peace, who were those that labored in composing of
them, that labored most for the passing of them that they might be speedily
sent, that moved and obtained that some few, such only as were absolutely
necessary for the settling of a peace that might be safe for the Subject and
well grounded, should be first sent away, that if the King would pass them by
Commission sent unto him, whereby it might appear he came up with clear and
fair intentions to agree with his Parliament, in that which was necessary for
the security of the Subjects just Right and Liberties, and the good of the
Kingdom; these Bills being passed he might come and settle other things in a
Parliamentary way, the Kingdom in the mean time enjoying peace, and Forces
disbanded: was not all this promoted, pressed on, and to their uttermost power
endeavored (...) those very men, whom this incendiary all along seeks to raise
jealousies of, and slandereth with having contrary intentions for their own
ends? No man, but he ^^t makes no conscience of speaking untruths for to
advance his plots, will deny it. Indeed where there are secret plots and
designs carried under ground, cloaked with pretenses of Religion, and Zeal for
Reformation, these fair Names and specious Titles being made Stalking-horses
for the ends of those men, who to obtain their designs, must cosen honester men
than themselves; there we have no hope to convince or satisfy such Contrivers;
for they seek their ends aimed at, not satisfaction to their reasons, whereof
those reasons that are patent they are not led by, they use them but as
Varnish, the latent reasons, which will not abide the light, those only sway
them; and therefore the most evincing arguments are cast away, and it were but
labor spent in vain to use any, were it not to disabuse those, who are
strangers to these Mysteries of iniquity, and yet so deluded by these
Jugglers, as to be made to play other men's games to their own utter undoing,
when they shall have made them winners. For their sakes therefore, and to
prevent that mischief which may arise to the Public, by men's being still
carried on in mistaking both of things and persons, I cannot forbear, but must
again take a little more liberty to insist upon these two heads of Church
Government, and Peace; the sp^cious pretenses which the same men, who were
formerly observed most to oppose, now find it necessary to seem very zealous
for, that thereby they may take the people and make use of them to gain and
compass their own designs by their help, which the people, blinded with these
fair vizards, are not able to discern: But what the designs of such men, who
thus abuse them, are like to prove, there have been of late strange Discoveries
made, yet who so blind as those that will not see?

The constant endeavors of honest men (whom it concerns these juggling
Contrivers, for the better attaining of their ends, to blast and blemish in the
opinion of the people) has been observed of late, to be so eviden^ and
apparent in promoting both th^se in the Houses, that being not able to deny
it, they now begin to accuse them, that they do it out of design; promoting the
Settlement of Church Government, bu^ such as they knew could not be yielded
unto, that so there might be none exercised, but all heresies and errors still
maintained; the Propositions for Peace agreed upon, such also as cannot be
admitted by our Brethren of Scotland, and so our Troubles continued. What will
not envy, malice and spite, pricked on by ambition, when it either is, or
fears to be crossed, say and do? Let us examine the rea^ons why the Church
Government, settled by O^dinance, cannot be yielded unto, nor the Propositions
for P^ace consented unto by our Brethren of Scotland. For the first it is
alleged, The Ministers will be enforced to admit such unto the Sacrament, who
are scandalous, and so sin against their consciences; and herein they are left
without remedy, the remedy provided by the Ordinance, being Commissioners, is
as much against their consciences to submit unto as the other. Both Houses of
Parliament have Declared, that ignorant and scandalous persons shall be kept
from the Sacrament, the question is, Who are these Ignorant and Scandalous
persons that shall be excluded Communion, and by whom they shall be judged to
be such? the Ministers will have it to be by themselves Arbitrarily without
limitation, without appeal to the civil Magistrate at all in any cause,
otherways their consciences cannot be satisfied: The Parliament wills them to
enumerate sins which they esteem to be scandalous, that they may thereby judge
how that Power will be exercised, which the Ministers will have them force the
subjects under, and that they may provide against giving into the Ministers
hands by a Law, such an Arbitrarie and unlimitted Power, as to exclude men from
the Sacrament, for whatsoever they will call Scandalous; for not paying their
Tithes it may be, as they think fit, and call for; for not making their
bargains as they please, nor letting their Lands to their Tenants as the
Ministers think reasonable, for this they will call, the one Sacrilege, the
other Oppression, and therefore both Scandalous; if a man obtain a Decree in a
Court of Justice, he must not have the execution thereof, if they shall judge
it hard and u^just; this has been practiced in Scotland, where they have
obtained this unlimited Independent Power into their hands, as one of their own
Contrymen writes. Now against this abuse and pressure upon the subjects by
an Arbitrarie and unlimited Power, the Parliament had reason according to the
trust reposed in them, to provide; yet they still offered to consider of any
other sins that may be thought scandalous, if the Ministers would present them,
and add those to such as were enumerated, if they should be made appear to be
of that nature: and further, because it was pretended, there might fall out to
be emergencies so circumstantiated as might make sins scandalous, which could
not be foreseen, and in such cases Ministers would be put to act against
conscience, until the case might be brought to the Parliament, and there
adjudged (for they would not directly seem to decline the judgment of
Parliament) the Parliament appointed Commissioners, who upon all occasions of
emergencie might be ready to judge of them, and be at hand to State them
rightly, and convey them to the Parliament as the case should require; that so
the subject might not be left without all remedy, and the Ministers be made
their own sole Judges over them in all sins, nay in all things, for by the old
hook of the Clergy, in Ordine ad spiritualia, they would draw all under their
net, this expedient was found out in their behalf, and for the more speedy
dispatch of business; otherways they might, if they would, have put the
Ordinance in execution before, when the Appeal lay only to the Parliament: But
this expedient could not in conscience be admitted, and the Pulpit and Press
were both full of strange language and expressions against it, when every wise
man and indifferent, saw clearly, that this had no one reason which lay against
it, that did not every whit as much lie against the Parliament it self being
judge, or determining in these cases, only the Parliament might be preached
against and spoken against through the sides of these Commissioners with less
danger and offense, than in direct terms. But wherein were these Comissioners
an offense to conscience? in that it would make the Reformation to be, not
according to the Word of God, nor according to the practices of other reformed
Churches, especially that of Scotland, and so be against the Covenant which we
have taken: where shall we find a Classis in the Word of God, where Triers,
where a Provincial Synod, or a National Assembly with Coercion in either, or
Subordination of other Churches to the Coercive power of any such? The two
later were, when ever they were called, for advice and counsel only: where
does the Word of God show any foot step of such an infallibility placed any
where since the Apostles times, as that thereupon a Coercive power was left in
any, or might by them be exercised over particular Churches? you must step a
step higher upon this Ladder of your own framing, and so do some of your
Ministers in their writings, and that is to an Oecumenicall Council, whereunto
add your Coercion, and you will in Ecclesiastical matters bring in Foreign
Power, and so fairly fall into Treason, which will prepare another Ladder for
such pragmaticks.

For that of Commissioners in other reformed Churches, that there are none
such, the people are merely abused therein; for there is not any Church where
the people are compelled under this Power of the Ministers, but there is either
Commissioners, or that which is equivalent thereunto, unto whom there may be
appeals, that the Subjects be not left without remedy under the tyranny of
the Clergy, a thing which this Nation, in the greatest height of Papal power,
would never endure. In the Church of Scotland it self, there are Commissioners
by name, who sit in the Supreamest Courts of their Ecclesiastical
Judicatories, their General Assemblies; one for the King with other Assessors,
and some for the Borough of Eden-borough, and others for the Universities; who
sit and Vote even in matters of Excommunication, quatenus Commissioners. In the
Palatinate the Appeal is to the Prince his Privy Council: In France and the
Low Countries no man is compelled under the power of the Presbytery by the
Magistrate, they exercise it over those alone, who willingly submit themselves
thereunto: these men, who reach after this Power here, should have asked no
more of the Magistrate, and much good might it have done them, and they done
with it. In Geneva, the Syndicks of that Town would not suffer this unlimited
Arbitrarie Power to be exercised over the people without Appeal,
notwithstanding all that Calvin could do at first, neither could he, when it
was referred, obtain with all his earnest solicitation, the adjoining Churches,
and Magistrates of the Protestant Cantons, to determine for him in that case,
that it was Jure divino, but only that it came near unto the Word of God; and
yet in his Epistles it appears how much he labored to have had it so determined
by them. The States of the Low Countries would never endure it. The Clergy
being sick in all times of this humor, have made assayes every where, but could
never prevail, much less here in England, when the blindness and tyranny of
Popery was at the highest, as I have said; and this will appear by diverse Laws
made in those times; what they may effect in this time I know not.
Commissioners we see then is no such stranger to other Reformed Churches, as
that men's Consciences, by reason of the Covenant should be troubled at it, or
the Pulpit cry out of it as a Monstrum horrendum: No, this is done but, by
abusing, to stir up the people. For the Word of God, it is certainly conform
thereunto, that the Magistrate should provide, The people be no way oppressed
by any Power which is called for from them, but that if they be required to
subject the people under any power, they likewise judge whether that power be
exercised over them without oppression; otherwise they do not bear the Sword
for their good, which is their office from God. The Ministers confess, that in
the case of male administration, the Magistrate may judge, and that must be not
only for the manner but the matter also, for otherwise a man may be
Excommunicated, as the use was in the Bishops times, for a Groat, or a Pig, or
an Apple not paid; and the proceedings for the manner being every way regular
and orderly, the Magistrate can give no relief, though this be an
administration of such a censure bad enough. Well then, if the Magistrate may
judge of Excommunication, when it is ill administered, to reprove and punish it
being done, is it not strange it should be held so great a transgression
against the Word, for him to judge of it before it be done, that being evil and
punishable if it should be done, it might thereby rather be prevented, and not
done at all. The truth is, respect to the Covenant need not to have made any
man's conscience to have stumbled, or been offended at Commissioners, and that
is apparent enough to every wise man; for had that offended conscience, the
changing of Comm^ssioners into a Committee of Parliament men, which mutato
nomine, is the same thing, would never have satisfied conscience: all that is
gained hereby is no more but this, The Ministers have had their wills of the
Parliament, and truly I fear that gain will add little to their comfort, when
they shall reflect upon what is gained, and by what means they have gained it,
what effects it has already had, and in the precedent may have hereafter;
when a Parliament must alter a Law before any obedience yielded unto it, or
inconvenience found by it, to satisfy those, who instead of yielding obedience
thereunto, oppose their judgments to the judgment of Parliament in the most
Sovereign power thereof, which is the Legislative, a precedent never before
practiced, but of the first edition, and may it be the last.

By this which has been said, let the indifferent Reader judge of all these
b^wlings, which he so often meets withal in this Pamphlet, against those men
which this incendiary will make to be opposers of the Church and the
Reformation of Religion. Now to that of Peace, that the Commissioners of
Scotland should not be satisfied with the Propositions, which this King^om
judges safe for them to settle Peace upon, we know no cause at all: for we are
neither to have their consent nor advise in framing and making (...) c^nditions
and terms, upon which this Kingdom is to be settled in Peace; the League and
Trea^ie between the two Kingdoms does not interest the one at all in the
Government of the other; or in a capacity and power to judge and determine of
the just Rights and Liberties belonging to the same, whether yielded to them,
or denied them. For those therefore who came into this Kingdom to help us to
defend that which of Right belongs unto us, in stead of giving assistance, to
take upon them to become Arbitrators and Judges, what they think fit for us to
dema^d, or the King to yield, whereupon a safe peace may be made consisting
with the Government of this Kingdom, and the security ^hereof according to the
right constitution of it, will appear to all understanding men so strange a
superstruction raised upon the Treaty between us and them, that it has neither
foundation therein, nor in reason, or justice: and this both Houses of
Parliament have resolved in their answer to the Scots Papers of the 16. of
March, and 6. of April 1646. concerning the Propositions to be sent to the
King, which Answer I will here insert.

Die Veneris, 10. Aprilis, 1646.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, having taken into consideration
your Paper of the 6. of April, concerning the Propositions to be sent to the
King, do return this answer, That we having communicated to you some of those
Propositions which we desired for the present should be sent unto his Majesty
for a safe and well grounded peace, and judging upon perusal of your Paper of
the 16. of March, your Lordships have not consented that those should be sent
that are desired by us for the good and security of the Kingdoms of England
and Ireland, with your reasons for the same.

After serious consideration thereof, we thought fit to adhere to our first
resolutions, and again to desire your concurrence for the sending them unto the
King, and although we clearly satisfied our own judgments therein, yet out of
our earnest desires to carry on all businesses in a brotherly way, we did
appoint our Committees to communicate those our Resolutions to show the grounds
thereof, and to remove any doubts that might stick therein with your Lordships:
all which being considered, and that we have never denied our consent that such
Propositions should be presented to the King, as your Lordships conceived to be
for the good and security of the Kingdom of Scotland; The matter in your Paper
of the 6. of April we did not expect, wherein you do desire, That the
resolutions of both Houses (after so long and mature deliberation) should be
subjected to the debates and alterations of a Committee of both Houses, to be
joined with you for that purpose; And that upon grounds which we can by no
means admit of, in regard that by the Treaty, both Kingdoms are not bound to a
joint advise and judgment in framing the Propositions as is affirmed in your
Paper; But that no cessation nor any pacification, or agreement for Peace
whatsoever is to be made by either Kingdom, or the Army of either Kingdom,
without the mutual consent of both Kingdoms, which is all in this particular
they are obliged to by the Treaty. And therefore out of our earnest desires to
make use of the present opportunity for settling the peace of the Kingdoms, and
that we may clear our selves before God and the World, that we have neglected
no means that may procure the same, especially since, as your Lordships well
remember, we have so often declared to the King, that they are speedily to be
sent, and the granting of them will be an effectual means to give satisfaction
to both Kingdoms; We do again desire your consent that those Propositions, as
we have sent them to your Lordships, may be sent to his Majesty: and we shall
speedily communicate to your Lordships the two other Propositions, concerning
Delinquents, and the City of London, that they may be sent with the others.

We hear what the judgment of both Houses is, and how earnest their desires
were for speeding away the Propositions, that such a Peace might be obtained as
would be safe for the Kingdom; will our brethren, or their Commissioners say to
us, Though you have fully satisfied your own judgments in that which
concerns your own Kingdom, for the setlement and peace thereof, wherein we
are not to be judges, and that you are ready also to insist upon any
Propositions, which we shall judge necessary for the Kingdom of Scotland,
wherein you pretend not to intermeddle, or have ought to do; yet we will not
agree you shall conclude a peace, though these things may be accorded and
granted both to you and us: we would not willingly believe this of those, who
we desire to hope, and that we may find cause to believe, came into this
Kingdom with fairer intentions; for this would be capable of no other
construction in the minds of all men, but that they intended we should still
keep their Army in the Kingdom at our charge, and they keep our Towns in their
hands, though there were no cause to be alleged for the same, that any
indifferent man could rest satisfied withal: for though the Treaty between the
two Kingdoms do require, that the one shall not conclude a Peace alone, and
leave the other to shift for it self (a usual clause in Treaties where two
States engage in a War to defend and maintain their just Rights respectively,
against those who invade them both therein) yet does it no way, as I have said,
interest either Kingdom in the matter of the Propositions of the other
whereupon peace is to be made, but that as they are the proper and only Judges
of what is necessary for the safety and good Government of either Kingdom, who
are of that Kingdom, and to that end assembled in Parliament; so if experience
in future times shall make it appear, that what is now desired and resolved
upon for either of the Kingdoms respecting themselves, prove not to be for the
safety and good Government thereof, they may alter and change the same as they
shall find it to be necessary for their several Governments respectively,
without any dependency one upon the other in that respect, and will do so; and
they who do not admit of this, by intermedling with that they have nothing to
do withal, instead of settling a firm Union and lasting peace between these two
Kingdoms, which they do so much pretend unto, do lay the foundation of certain
and continuing differences between them, which will be inavoidable; for neither
Kingdom will be bound to a dependency upon the other in the Sovereign power
thereof, which is the legislative, neither will they forbear in these
particulars which shall be now settled, to make new Laws and alter these, as it
shall be found necessary for the safety and good Government of either Kingdom:
and so often as they shall so do, by the foolish Tenent of these men, there is
the ground of a quarrel between the Kingdoms. To prevent this and clear it to
all men, the Houses before the sending of these Propositions to the King, saw
it fit to make this Declaration which I will here insert.

Die Veneris, 3. July 1646.
WHereas the Lords and Commons Assembled in the Parliament of England, in the
name and on the behalf of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and the
Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, in the name, and on the behalf of
the Kingdom of Scotland, have thought fit to send unto the King the humble
desires and Propositions for a safe, and well grounded peace, agreed upon by
the Parliaments of both Kingdoms respectively: The Lords and Commons of the
Parliament of England do declare, That it is not their intention, that any
construction should be made thereupon, as if either Kingdom had any interest in
the matter of each others Propositions; or in the legislative power of each
other concerning any of the said Propositions; But that it remains distinct
in each Kingdom respectively: And that notwithstanding any joint proceedings
upon the said Propositions, either Kingdom has power of themselves to
continue, repeal, or alter any Law that shall be made upon the said
Propositions, for the good and Government of either Kingdom respectively.

And it is hereby declared, that both Houses are fully resolved to maintain and
preserve inviolable the solemn League and Covenant, and the Treaties betwixt
the Kingdoms of England and Scotland.

Those who either do not, or will not understand the evil consequences of this
Tenent, That the Kingdoms now United, are mutually interressed in the matter of
the Propositions of each other to be offered unto the King, and what grounds of
present and future differences this must needs occasion, finding the Treaty
between the two Kingdoms will not make out what they would have herein, add the
Covenant to it in supply, and then, when they have once named the solemn
League and Covenant, they presume they have proof enough for their assertion:
Truly I should be very glad, these men who pretend it so much, would intend
that which might indeed conduce to the firmest conjunction of these two
Kingdoms in Unity for all future ages, and that will be when they shall
persuade them to join in this alone, to obtain for either Kingdom, that which
in the judgment of either respectively, is the just right thereof, without
intermedling, or affecting to make themselves Judges in aliena republica on
either side; and when this shall be once obtained, firmly and constantly to
adhere one to the other for the maintaining thereof; this will certainly
continue an Union, because their own ends and preservation will herein continue
them United; But to think to lay bounds, and put shakles one upon another, for
their own advantages, or to take upon them to be Judges, what is fit to be
asked of the King, or fit for him to grant to either, and hereby to put
themselves into the place of Arbitrators between the King and either Kingdom,
or for one of them to impose what sense they please upon those things which
have been passed and resolved in the Parliament of the other, and pretend
themselves interessed accordingly to require performance agreeable to such a
sense and Interpretation as they will put upon what has passed; all this can
have no other issue, but certain breaches and quarrels between the Kingdoms, a
thing the enemy waits for: and yet either ignorantly, or wilfully (for some
ends) these things have been most insisted upon, by those men who would be
thought most zealous for Union, and against any breach between the Kingdoms,
though every wise man knows, that the pressing and insisting upon these
things must needs end in breaches and differences, except they hope we will
leave to be English men and become their underlings: the carriage and arguments
of the Scotch Commissioners, at the conference about the Propositions to be
sent to the King to the Isle of Wight, which they had nothing to do withal,
nor to intermedle with, is to all that heard it, and will duly consider it, a
Demonstration of this that I have said, and what followed thereupon, confirms
it. For their arguments out of these two words, solemn League and Covenant,
either they are two names of one and the same thing; and then it is but a
Covenant still; or else they confound things that differ so much, to serve
their purpose; for if, by the League, they will mean the Treaty between the
two Kingdoms, and add that to the Covenant, as if both were of the same kind
and did bind alike in respect of persons interessed and things to be performed
and challenged by them, they will find themselves much mistaken; for the
Treaty is an obligation of the nations, one to perform to the other what is
therein agreed, and the one may challenge it from the other Kingdom, as
concluded by the representative body of either Kingdom, the name of the
Kingdom; But the Covenant is only an Obligation of every particular man that
takes it, to God, for the performance of what is therein contained, and no
bond, or stipulation between the Nations, that they may vindicate the breach
thereof one upon another; they are to leave the revenge of breach of Covenant
to the Lord, upon any particular person that shall therein perjure himself:
therefore Parliament men took it as particular men, not as representing the
Kingdom; for had that been the intention, the rest of the Subjects needed to
have been required to take it; so that every individual person lays a bond
upon his own conscience, according to the sense wherein he takes the Covenant,
for which he is answerable to God; but this does no way make one Kingdom
answerable to the other for nonperformance of what is contained in the
Covenant, much less according to such sense and interpretation as either shall
think fit for their ends, to put upon it, and then urge the same upon the
other; should this be granted, it would minister to them that sought it,
sufficient matter and grounds of quarrel between the Kingdoms; for if one
Kingdom did judge men in the other did not reform their lives, as by the
Covenant they have bound themselves to do, but continued Swearers, Drunkards,
Whor^ masters, Coseners, Liars, not withstanding the Covenant that they have
taken, here is a quarrel, for profaneness is a breach of the Covenant, as well
as tolerating Sects, Schism^, and Heresies; if one judge, that they do proceed
to the ^ooting out of Sects, Schisms, and Her^sies according to the Word of
God, that is, according ^o such rules as the Word of God in that case does
prescribe them ^o p^oceed by; and the other think, they do not root them out as
they should, and by ^he Covenant are bound to do, because they do not presently
banish all such the Land, as they think liable to these terms, and will call by
these names; there is another quarrel: and again for extirpating Episcopacie
according to their place and calling; for maintaining the Kings power in the
maintenance of Religion and Liberty; different judgments herein shall cause
a quarrel; nay, if this shall be made the sense of taking the Covenant, not
only quarrels and wars between the two Kingdoms might be occasioned by it, but
between parties in the same Kingdom, every one believing it belongs to him, and
he is bound to vindicate the breach of the Covenant; and this is likely to make
good work, as it has begun already to do; and this is the fruit of making
Oaths and Covenants stalking-Horses to obtain their worldly advantages, and
bring about their designs; and therefore when they have put upon them senses
that may serve their turns, then they urge them in their debates and Printed
Papers spread about to those ends: Let those therefore that truly desire a
firm and constant Union between the two Kingdoms, endeavor their Conjunction
in settling, and when they are settled, in maintaing the just Rights and
Liberties, and Government of either Kingdom, not interessing themselves not
intermedling in one another Government; such a mutual assistance appears to be
void of private interests and advantages sought after, and will root and
increase mutual affections, the surest bond of Union; the other breeds
jealousies, and will soon occasion quarrels and Divisions.

I have now discovered the false grounds and rotten foundations, upon which
this deceitful worker builds and carries on his whole design, which is by
these lies to poison the peoples affections, and to their own ruin (for that
would prove the issue) to alienate their hearts from the Parliament, that they
might be fitted to receive other Lords and Guides and serve their ends; a
design as mischievous, as the means used to abuse and cheat the honest meaning
simpler sort (as he calls them) into it, are false and malicious: as for the
Malignants and Court party, who now hold up their heads more than ever, they
fall in with it readily and promote it industriously, knowing a greater
advantage cannot be put into their hands, than this, whereby to attain their
ends, The overthrow of this Parliament, and thereby the destruction of all
honest and godly men in the Kingdom, and the ruin of the Famous City of
London, by whose means principaly, if not only they hope to effect what they
have projected; which being done, the City shall be called to an after
reckoning, for the Court will make use of it, to be enabled thereby to be
revenged upon it, and it is like enough not spare the Heyfers themselves
therein wherewith they now plow, how scarce soever they for the present esteem
their condition to be.

I expect I may fall under the censure, of transgressing these rules of making
an Answer, by these long digressions made upon occasion, which seem to be wholly
of another nature; but I weigh it not at all, so long as I may in any measure
obtain that which I chiefly aim at, which is to prevent the mischief and ill
consequences of this Lie-tell Pamphlet, if credit should be given unto it; to
show where the poison lies, and what will be the effect, if once it be
swallowed; to vindicate the two Houses of Parliament, and the honest men
therein in respect of their intentions and proceedings, from those lies and
slanders which this Incendiary endeavors to cast upon both, hoping thereby to
make that go down with the multitude and simpler sort more easily and without
examination, that may serve his turn, and those who set him on work: if herein
I follow him not step by step in this his wild-goose chase, it will be because
I think it not worth the labor; in those pieces I take in hand, I will show
his falsehood, malice and mischievous practices, whereby those who are not
willing to be deceived may make a judgment of the rest, being all Ejusdem
farinae, a bundle of Tales, some false, some true, but all falsely applied and
made use of to the same end, to poison the peoples affections (as I have said)
and prepare them for commotions and tumultuous proceedings against Supreme
Authority. One thing more he has before he comes to his Discourse (as he terms
it) which I will not omit, because I cannot much differ with him in it, such is
our unhappiness at present, and that is where he says, never was good cause so
ill handled, through the ignorance of some weak ones, and the malice of wicked
ones; he omits an ingredient, or two, and those which have greatest operation,
I will add them, and then we shall not differ about this matter; they are
Ambition, and Envy, wherewith some are ready to burst; the truth is, these have
cast our affairs into such a condition, what with tinckling Negotiations at
Court, and our own Factions and divisions here, that if God prevent it not,
even now in the winding up of all, we are in danger to be in a worse condition
than at any times before: when we consider what has fallen, or broken out now
of late by the practices of Montril the French Agent; what we find at home,
what we daily hear from abroad; we may well resolve, that if those that are
honest in both Kingdoms and have right aims and intentions (as I am persuaded
the generality in both have, and it is as certain there are those, who what
ever they pretend, are false in both) do not firmly Unite themselves together,
laying aside their differences for the present, (which are but concerning the
outside of Religion and Liberty, and may both stand without what is contested
about) that by their joint forces they may oppose and disapoint the secret
plots and designs of their common Adversaries, they are like to give themselves
up into their hands, to de laughed at first, and ruined afterward; Non putarem
being written upon their Tombs.

All this while we have stayed in the porch, discovering the rotten foundations
of this building, we will now go into the House, and see what wares there are
within; unraveling the pieces, and discovering the deceitful working, with the
false and rotten ground work it has throughout the whole piece; in doing of
which it may be we shall lay open to the view of the World some pieces worth
observation, in stead of his counterfeit slips.

He begins with a great complaint of the ill usage of our brethren of Scotland,
by slanders and false reports, spread abroad, as he says, by Athists,
Sectaries, Prelatists, etc. to abuse the simpler sort of people: in setting
forth this, and directing the Commissioners of Scotland what course they ought
to take to obviate this inconvenience, and in reproving of them for their great
mistakes and want of prudence, in that they had not used so much wisdom herein
as he thinks fit they should have done, he spends 14 pages of his discourse:
concerning this remedy, and wherein he thinks them failing with the manner of
his reproofs, we shall speak hereafter; first we will observe that both in this
place, and upon all occasions throughout this Pamphlet in many parts thereof,
he is large in making Invectives against the Parliament, as the truth is,
though in show and colourably against some parties, and leading men in both
Houses, for ill using of his Country men, and ill requiting their well
deserving; which to aggravate the more, he sets forth our low and lost
condition, as he would have men believe, when they come in to assist us, and
amplifieth their merit and services very hyperbolically: I have no desire to
detract ought from their merit; I wish their affections to us, and assistance
of us may by all be duly valued, but this man, who will make himself their
Agent, has dealt foolishly, and done them no good office, when to advance
their well deserving, he will needs charge us with ingratitude and ill
deserving of them, in that we spread a broad reports to their disgrace; forcing
us hereby upon a just defense, in a particular wherein we shall be able to
return the imputation, not only to our own clearing therein, but to the
reproach and shame of those, who charge us with it: Quis tulerit Gracchos de
seditione querentes?

What these sinister Reports spread abroad are, we hear not; generals serve his
turn, whose end is to deceive; but it is too true, there wanted not matter for
reports, had we been willing to spread them: the Letters taken in Digbies
cabinet, which were not written to be intercepted, as we may see by the brags
he makes of his care to keep them safe, though the King had lost his, these
being taken sometime after; In one of these letters, written from him to
Jermyne, he speaks plainly of a Treaty he had with the Scotch Commissioners,
he being the Kings principal Secretary; and he is very earnest with Jermyne,
to take care, that the Queen, when she shall leave off this Treaty between him
and them, do not misconstrue his intentions in it, as if he would yield to any
thing contrary to the directions left by her, and agreed on between her and the
King; willing him to assure her, that the offer of this Treaty was made to him
by them before ever he thought of it, and that the use of it should be only to
abuse them, and so being dexterously handled much advantage might be made of
it: another letter from Jermyne confirms the same thing. These be not Robin
Hoods tales, nor Robin Wrights, nor the unknown Knights, with descanting upon
which names you have endeavored to fence your selves against other informations
come from abroad, which sound ill enough; but secret intelligences, passing
between such who had no mind to deceive one another, nor could have no end in
framing such an untruth: did we Print these Letters with other passages, and
spread them about the City with Henry Elsigns name subscribed? no, nor the
many Letters written unto us out of the North, complaining of unheard of
abuses; nor the Reports made unto us by our Committees of Lords and Commons,
who were upon the place and heard the Examinations and Proofs of those horrid
abuses offered at Tickhil, and what little or no justice was done thereupon;
nor the Protestation of our Committees, by which, together with those of the
Kingdom of Scotland, as a joint Committee of both Kingdoms, by the Treaty and
League between the Kingdoms, the Scottish Army was to be ordered, when
notwithstanding that Army in taking in of Carlisle, and in marching into
Westmoreland to that end, so much to the prejudice of the public service, did
not only act this without their knowledge, but contrary to their consent,
yea, to their protesting against it: Nor the information of Sir John Haumar;
nor the confession of Audson, which who so will ask any Member of the House of
Commons, shall understand to be a confession of the Kings acting those very
things a week after, which Sir John Haumar informs, he was told by a Scotch
Commissioner and his brother, a week before, the King would do, both agreeing
very much in matter, manner and circumstances; neither these, nor diverse others
of like nature, which I delight not to reckon up, could provoke us to fall upon
such a course, as to take advantage thereupon to traduce our Brethren, to
spread abroad reports amongst the multitude, and stir up the people against
them, by filling their minds with fears and jealousies, which these things
being spread would quickly have done: Now therefore let the world judge what
honesty or conscience, nay rather what shameless impudency this man uses, in
endeavoring to make the people believe this has been our carriage toward the
Scots, when it is known, the House of Commons was content, upon a motion of one
of their friends, to Order, that all those Letters which did any way concern
the Scots, should be culled out from the rest, and not Printed in that respect,
when the rest were to be Printed, and Mr. John Chesley, I think, had the care
of it, and they were accordingly, or any passages in them reflecting upon the
Scots, suppressed: But on the other side, he knows very well and all men
else, that their Papers given into the Houses (so penned, as showed what use
they intended to make of them) being full of bitter expostulations, unjust
imputations, and little better than accusations to the greatest disadvantage of
the Parliament, were not only Printed, and spread, and cried about the
streets, but when that was ill taken and wondered at by all, insomuch as one of
their friends in the House, to excuse it, affirmed it was done without their
consent or knowledge, and that they disliked it as much as we did; the Printer
thereupon being questioned, and the matter enquired into, the Scotch
Commissioners were so far from disclaiming this practice, that they set forth
these invective Papers in Print again, with an Epistle to avow the
Communicating of them to the people, Mr. John Chesleys name (their Secretary)
subscribed; and this afterward they made a common practice: he that calls the
people to come and see a mote in another man's eye, may well be ashamed when
they shall find a beam in his own: but it is observed that usually the wrong
doers are the first complainers; and here the man has done it no less
foolishly than unjustly, thereby occasioning, and drawing forth this Reply,
which shows what reports we had to spread (as he that will take the pains to
satisfy himself, may at any time see them in the hands of Mr. Henry Elsinge
the Clerk of the Commons House of Parliament) and withal what our respect
showed to them was in suppressing them, contrary to this man's tales and lies,
and how unworthy their carriage on the other side was toward us in requital,
even in the same particular. Truly I am sorry, this Schoolmaster should find
his lessons so well learned, and his reproofs so effectual in their operation;
I will now show what his Lessons and reproofs are for matter and manner; For
manner first most suitable to Mr. Schoolmaster, as you shall hear; You have
mistaken the right way, Sirs, Sirs, herein you are hugely mistaken, and again
herein I value your goodness, yet in this I cannot esteem your prudence;
Excellent well for a pedantical Pedagogue, tutoring the Commissioners of the
Kingdom of Scotland in matters of State: Is not the Shoo-make^ here advanced
beyond his Last? and yet we shall find him hereafter very gravely (more suo)
reproving others (saving their wisdom) that they would fall into such an error,
as to put men into employments wherein (as he will have it) they had not been
experienced: belike this man was bred a great Statesman, and therefore may take
upon him to show the Commissioners of Scotland their ignorance and weakness in
mannaging affairs of State, for so he does sufficiently. For the matter,
whosoever weighs the scope and end aimed at, in what he would have done,
shall find, that in the result, it will be of the same nature with those two or
three desperate Remonstrances, which since the beginning of these troubles,
have been spread about, inviting the people to take notice of the proceedings
of Parliament, and if they be not such as give them content, to remonstrate
against them and enforce that which they approve of, or else let the Parliament
know, as they have entrusted them, so they can, when they please, reassume that
power which they gave them: This is a line drawn which meets in the same
center, for what is the end that this man has in pressing the Scotch
Commissioners (with so much impudency, as to befool them for that they had not
done it) that they must not content themselves in having delivered their Papers
into the Parliament, but must communicate them to the people? is it only to
tell the people a story? In their Papers, which were fitted for the purpose,
there are not only Apologies for themselves, but complaints in respect of
conditions not performed to them, and that sharp pointed enough; Now what can
be intended by this man, when he will have these complaints carried to the
people and spread about in the City, but that the Appeal must be made to them,
and they stirred up, by their Petitions and Remonstrances, to cause the
Parliament to do their duty, that is, to do that which this man and his
companions, and twenty others such like Jack Straws met together, shall judge
to be their duties, what ever they themselves upon mature consultation, being
therewith wholly entrusted by the established Government of this Kingdom, shall
have resolved of as fit for the Kingdom in the present condition thereof? had
this man been cured of the itching humor of Scribbling, and forborne until the
Conference between the Committees of Lords and Commons, and the Scotch
Commissioners, upon the Propositions to be sent to the King at the Isle of
weight, and there heard one of the Commissioners plead, with so much zeal, for
the Kings Prerogative to be upheld in this Kingdom, that a Lord could not
forbear to tell him; The Kings Attorney Herbert would not have enforced it
more, and the Commissioners for the King at Uxbridge, he was persuaded, did not
press it further, nor with other Arguments: since he might have feared, this
seditious counsel of his, which tends to the overthrow not only of
Monarchical, but of all Government, reducing all into the first Chaos of a
popular confusion, would not have been so well liked, much less hearkened unto
and followed by his Masters; the truth is, there was hardly any one thing that
did more unsatisfie wise men, than this, that the Commissioners of another
Kingdom, who were sent to the Parliament to keep unity between the two
Kingdoms, and who did so much pretend thereunto, should, by scattering papers
about the City, appeal from the Parliament, and cause a disaffection, and a
division between the Parliament and the people, who are included in the
Parliament, and their Votes and consents involved in what they shall resolve
upon: for this fellow, that does give the advice, there is little heed to be
taken, what such a pedant shall say in matters of State; but for Statesmen,
employed from one State to another, in a time of so much danger and liberty,
not to foresee the ill consequences of such a practice, and how ill it would
have been relished in their own Kingdom, or any other in like case, is not to
be excused: we are not to cut the very nerves and sinews of Government, that we
may serve a present turn; they that do so see not far before them, when to
serve their turn for the present time; they will do that which will be certain
to return upon them at another time to their greater prejudice, yea to the
overturning of all Government, whereunto such practices as these tend directly.

He has one instance, which you must take as a Demonstration of all this, he
says, such as will not only make you know it, but feel it to be according to
sense and reason; we did indeed feel that to our cost sufficiently, which
produced those Pape^s, he makes his instance, given in about the latter end of
May, when there were high murmurings (as he calls them) in both Houses and
elsewhere, upon their Armies marching unexpectedly clean another way, when they
should have come up to Darbie, according to the rendezvous set and agreed upon,
both here by their Commissioners at the Committee of both Kingdoms, and there
by their General with our Committee upon the place, and this when our
Committees there least thought of it: But for the satisfaction he speaks of,
given by those papers, they satisfied no man, but those who meant to be
satisfied with any thing; for could any man, that would not forfeit his reason,
and put out his own eyes, be satisfied for the overthrow of a Summers design,
as well laid as any ever was (had not this corner stone sunk away, and failed)
with such a tale as this, that a Scout of Sr. William Bruertons, and one come
to him from the enemy (it may be sent purposely) told him, the King meant to
send 500. Horses, by the way of Lancashire, into Scotland? What if this Scout
told a tale, he heard, or made under a hedge; was such a fellow likely to be
made acquainted with the Kings Counsels? We know well how apt Sr. William
Bruerton was to take Alarms, and upon how little ground; was this a ground for
the whole Army to March from the service appointed of greatest concernment, and
let all fall to the ground that was built upon their advancing Southward, and
instead thereof run Northward with such speed, as had they according to
direction (and as is reported their Generals desire) advanced but half so fast
Southward, neither Lecester had been taken, the Counties adjoining spoiled and
plundered, nor the Kings Army, or Oxford in probability escaped out of our
hands? behold the man's sensible Demonstration; yet I will not wrong him, there
is one thing more in the Manifests, which is, that there was want of draughts:
it must be want of draughts to go forward; for there was no want of them to go
backwards 14. miles in a day, before ever the Committee, by whom they were to
be directed, so much as heard of the Armies removing: the Committee was sure to
blame, too provide Carts with such wheels as could run Northward, but neither
go nor stir Southwards. He tells us, after some days a Copy of these papers
fell by chance into the hands of a well-willer of the Scots, and he printed it,
and gave a name to it, calling it [The Scots Manifest,] and then all the World
became satisfied, and this did them more good than all that ever they had done,
yea, as he was told, it flew over beyond the Seas, and did great matters there
for the Scots: do these men think, lying may not be enumerated for one of the
scandalous sins? were these papers printed by chance? did they so fall into
this man's hands who printed them? and take a journey over the Seas (if there
were any such thing) and all by chance, without the knowledge of the Scots?
even so just as this Pamphlet (lies manifest) had its birth, and travels beyond
the Seas (for the further from home, the easier credited) all was by chance:
most probable it is, this very man was the same, who has been made the
Midwife, to bring to the birth all those Gypsies, that have of late run up and
down, to cheat and cosen the people. But if you will have a true Character of
this Incendiary, who when he had endeavored to set all the Town on fire, takes
his heels and runs away; if you would see what flame it is he would kindle here
amongst us, take it from the 11 and 12 pages, where when he had reproved the
Scotch Commissioners for their want of stoutness, and for being (as he calls
it) Meal-mouthed both in the Assembly and other meetings (where likewise he
runs out and reviles those men that are much honester than himself, or those
who set him on this work, and approved of, both to sit in Parliament and in the
Assembly) he then falls into an admiration of Knox and Buchanan and the
carriage of businesses in those times, when he says, nothing did prevail or do
good to the cause, but resolution and zeal in Carrying things, not only
against the common Enemy, but against false friends; though the Lairds be new,
yet the Game, he says, is the same with that, their Fathers played in
Scotland: we may imagine what he would be at, the good cause in hand must be so
carried on now, as it was then; the multitude stirred up, by the Pulpit and the
Press, to rise against lawful Authority, and force what they think good to
call for, or shall be cosened and cheated into the desire of, under the
specious pretenses of Religion and Reformation; and if any, whom such a fellow
as this is will design out for opposers and false friends, because they shall
be found to stand for the preservation of the Government established, and the
Privileges, Liberty and Freedom of the Houses of Parliament according to the
Covenant (which part of it, by these men, is usually skipped over) then some
men, full of his zeal, must break into their chambers and cut their throats, of
their own Authority, that so they may carry on the good cause with stoutness,
for there is no way to make the wicked leave or grow weary of resisting and
oppressing goodness, he says, but by a vigorous and stout opposition; and what
that is, he tells you, in telling you what times, and whose examples in those
times you are to imitate; this will be indeed to play the old game in the same
manner, though with new cards: For my part, I should much rather have cast a
mantle upon the nakedness of those times, than affected to discover the same,
had not this desperate man proposed them to imitation in a time so
unseasonable, and in an ill conjuncture of affairs to produce such examples in:
I know the intentions of many were good and pious in those times, it may be
many things were done which those good men approved not of: besides the game
was not the same; they played for the kernel it self, we for the shell of
Religion; yet I never heard of any sober Divine, that would justify the
carrying on of Reformation in that manner, by private men, against the Laws and
Government established in a Kingdom: The removing of Idolatry out of a
Kingdom, and introducing the Truth of the Gospel, is a blessing to be desired
and preferred before all earthly things, but we must wait upon God for it, that
we may have what he promises, in his way, and in his time, and not think to
help him by our lies; he needs not the sin of man to help forwards that which
is for his glory and the good of his children; he will certainly (as Job
says) reprove it, as he does abhor it: but such men as these, whom we now deal
withal, if they make themselves, and can once make others believe, it is the
blessing which they seek, they care not what the means be they use to obtain
it, be it lying, cosening, or deceiving even their own Fathers.

After an Epistle of 16 pages, and 14 more of his Discourse, spent in
preparatorie tales and devises, at length he tells us he will now Thus begin;
and there begins a story, wherein are so many falsehoods mixed with some
truths, and the truths themselves so disguised, to serve his malice against
some, and magnify others beyond all belief, yea, beyond what is the known
truth; that it looks like those pieces of ancient story, which we endeavor to
gather out of Poets, who to advance some particular man or men, whom they
intend to make the principal subject of their Poem, destroy the History;
disgracing some men, to extol others, with so many fictions, and made-tales,
that no man knows what is truth: so here, the scope and end aimed at being to
advance and magnify his own Nation (for which this impartial man makes himself
throughout this whole Pamphlet an advocate) he makes such a Romance of it in
their behalf, and manifests, in stead of truth, so much falsehood against this
Nation in general, traducing both Parliament and Committees of Parliament, and
against particular men, who have deserved best, and for the most part all in
generals, ut Dolosus, neither instancing in things, nor persons particularly;
that no wise man will suffer himself to be abused by it, but regard it as a
Rattle, only fit to draw together, and lead children and fools.

I envy not the praise that the merit of the Scots shall duly acquire them, I
wish it were much more than it is, and would not detract from what is due in
the least degree, and it is my desire that now in the winding up of all, their
carriage may be found so fair, that they may thereby stop the mouths that have
been opened against them, and by real actions (which, where there has been so
much cause given, can only do it) root out all jealousies; but this I will
say, that where there is true worth, it needs not the disgracing of other men
to set it forth, and no generous spirit would do it, or endure it should be
done for him.

This man having with impudency enough reproched the Scots Commissioners, for
being Mealie-mouthed, as I have showed before, now begins his tale, in the
first entrance falls so foully upon the King, that you may be secure he means
not therein to be found guilty of that fault; The Design laid, he says, was
to overthrow Religion and the Civil Government, introducing spiritual and
temporal slaverie; for the King finding the Parliament not only to hinder, but
utterly destroy his Design, resolves to destroy his Parliament; to that end
practices first with his own Army to bring them up, to that purpose, offering
to them in reward the plunder of the City of London; this being discovered and
not taking, next he deals with the Scotch Army, to engage them in this good
work, making the same offer to them of the plunder of the City, and that it
might not fail, adds thereunto the four Northern Counties, to be given them and
adjoined to their Kingdom, of this, that they may be assured, jewels of great
value are offered to be pawned unto them; this failing also, in the third
place, that he might not always be disappointed, he takes by the hand the
Papists of Ireland, his good friends, and sends them Commission under the broad
Seal of the Kingdom of Scotland ( which was then, as he says in his own
keeping) to take up arms according ^o former agreement, which so soon as they
had the Commission, they did, and brake forth into that Rebellion, wherein so
many English men, so many Protestants, because such, have been so barbarously
murdered; this done by Agreement, by Commission under the broad Seal of
Scotland: then concludes, he will affirm, that in the latter end of King James
his time, and in King Charles, by their Commissions, approbations,
connivencies, and not forbidding, at home and a broad, there has been more
Christian blood shed, than in the time of the Roman Persecutions, all which
upon the matter they might have stopped, if it had been their pleasure. You
will believe in this particular the man's mouth was not stopped with meal: But
what is his meaning in all this? is it, that we might be the more careful, not
to diminish any thing of the Kings Power? to take care that the Militia might
not be taken out of his hands? but his prerogative maintained, and we taught
what the Oath of Allegiance, here in England, obliges us unto, by the Scots
Commissioners, for fear we should divest the King of any of that power which we
see, if we may believe what this man tells us, he is likely to employ so much
to our safety? is it to persuade the Parliament and City, that now the Army
may securely be disbanded, they need keep up no Forces whereby their safety may
be in their own hands and keeping, but put themselves wholly into the Kings
protection, and theirs, who carry on his designs here amongst us? we know this
has been contended for, in the late conference upon the Propositions, by the
Scots Commissioners, with long Orations, and elaborate penned speeches, read
out of a Paper and fitted for the Press, afterward Printed and spread about the
City; we know likewise what practices there have been, and still are to
disband this Army, though another Army be yet in the Kingdom, of strangers, our
Towns not delivered, and when the King was kept under a Guard in that Army in
our own Kingdom and refusing to grant our Propositions, but in stead thereof,
the Peace with the Rebels of Ireland, since his being in that Army, confirmed,
and the Rebels going on with all violence to root both Protestants and English
out of Ireland: The man certainly could not think these things, he would have
the World know and believe to have been the Kings practices, are requisite
precognita, to fit men to become idonei auditores hujus Philosophiae, which by
his masters, the Scots Commissioners (for whom he will make himself an Agent
all along) was taught and pressed with so much Zeal; and therefore he should
have advised better with those his Contrymen, who managed the Conference
about the Propositions, before he had suffered his Pen to lash out in this
manner in these particulars, the proof whereof I leave to himself, and the
credit to be given thereunto, to those who esteem him worthy to be believed;
but if they be truths, the City of London may now be warned, to have a more
watchful eye upon their Malignants, who drive on the Court designs amongst
them; for having cajoled and deceived the honest meaning men, by persuading
them, they are for Reformation of Religion, the Presbyterian Government, and
against Sects, Schisms and Heresies, (whereof they have no more care, than of
their old shoes, but as they may make these specious pretenses stalking-Horses
to compass their own ends) they, strengthened by the numbers of these, whom they
have drawn along with them (as the men of Israel, who went out of Jerusalem in
the simplicity of their hearts after Absalom, who intended treason) drive on
their designs now for the Court, like Jehu, the Son of Nimshi, sharp,
furiously, never so audacious, never so industrious as of late; and had not God
prevented them by making some discoveries unexpected to them, and very cross to
their contrivements, when the King came so near London and waited there, until
advertisement came unto him; that which lies under ground, and is the more
easily hid, because men will not see, had broken forth openly and showed it
self in its own colors: in the beginning of these troubles a Malignant, or
Court-partisan could not peep up and show his head, but the vigilance of the
well-affected was such, as they were presently nipped in the very bud of their
plots; but now forsooth they are become well-affected men themselves, such as
love Reformation, and are careful the King may receive no wrong, in his
Prerogative only, according to the Covenant; a strange alteration, God grant
it prove not an infection sent from Heaven, because God is not pleased with us,
nor with the contentions and divisions, which grow amongst us, and that if not
timely considered and looked unto, it endanger not this famous City to taste
of that cup, which this man says, has been twice prepared for them: they, who
being twice threatened, and warned the third time, shall yet suffer themselves
to be led into the ditch, are surely blind folded and worse than a beast. But
this I must observe before I leave this passage, that whatever else be true in
it, that is assuredly false which he says concerning the Scots giving
advertisements, of the Negotiations with their Army, to the Parliament and
City, at that time when it was in acting, that they might make their best use
of it: It was indeed generously done of them, to abhor such an overture, as
that was, which would have made them, or any other, infamous to all posterity;
neither will I say, that they were any way obliged, as things then stood, to
make an open discovery of it (which this man will needs figment for their
advantages) the truth being so far contrary to it, that one, who had been
employed a Commissioner to this Kingdom, out of Scotland, did long after, to an
English Commissioner sent into Scotland, accuse an English Peer, for having
dealt unfaithfully, in discovering to the King this great secret of Hendersons
Negotiation with their Army, when it was spoken of, as he said, only in the
presence of three, and no more; and they would needs have that Lord to be the
man of those three who did discover to the King, that it had been revealed here
in England; therefore you see what a secret it was at that time, and how far
from being revealed to the Parliament and City; for if both Parliament and
City had known it, would any man be so simple as to imagine the King should be
ignorant of its being revealed here in England, that he needed the discovery of
a secret, to know that which could be no secret, when once in such hands as
Parliament and City: but that Lord, whom I have heard they named, was unjustly
traduced in it, as he himself has since professed: the Scots Commissioner was
the Earl of Crafford, Linsey, the English Mr. Henry Darloe; and I believe the
Lord Linsey (for so he was then, being made an Earl afterward) to be so Noble
that he would not have done that Lord so much wrong, but that he was wronged
himself by some, that, it may be being of the Cabal, had informed the King, and
would excuse themselves, by accusing a man that was innocent: but this I
instance in, to show this man's falsehood: To over-do officiously in the
commendation, and setting forth of his Contrymen, this man takes to be no
sin; you must give him leave, in this Pamphlet of his, to be of the Popish
faith in that particular point.

Having cast dirt upon the King, and laid him low enough in the opinion of
those that will believe what he says (for I dare say, he cannot instance in
one of those whom he fills his cheeks continually and swells out in railing
against, when he meets with their names, as Independents, Sectaries,
Schismatics, or those hot headed men, who set wholly upon violence, as he says
in one place, could not like of the moderation of his Contrymen, who upon
all occasions desired to draw on a Treaty upon Propositions; there is not one
amongst them all, that sets forth the King and represents him so unfit to be
treated with, and trusted with Government, as this hot head here has done)
having thus begun with the head, he proceeds to lay the Kingdom also in a
condition as low as the dust; and all this he thinks little enough to advance
the potencie, and set forth the charity of his Contrymen: he tells us in the
first place, what a condition we were in, when the contest was between the King
and them about the Service Book, and will needs make the World believe, the
Kings Army was ready to starve for want of provisions, that had England at the
back of it; but theirs, that had Scotland behind it, so plentifully provided
of all things, that out of their abundance and charity they supplied the wants
of the English Army, which they might have undone if they would. This is known
to be such a falsehood, and, by any understanding man who knows their Nation,
will easily be believed to be so, that it may very well be coupled with that
which next follows, which is, that they had the flower of the Kings Army in
their power, and suffered them to return safe back; he means, he tells you, the
Party that went to Dunslaw; by which you may see the Pedant takes up things
upon trust, or in the streets as they are brought to him, for there was no such
party went to Dunslaw at all, but to Kelsoe, and these might have been taken
indeed, if they could (as we bid Children take Birds) have laid Salt upon their
tails; they were Horses, and that piece of the Scots Army, which was at Kelsoe,
were Foot, it is very likely, that Horse could not return from Foot, without
their leave: you must give the Gentelman liberty to speak of matters of War
according to his experience, for he will not be found to meddle in things he
has not been bred up to, that he is very severe against others for: base
fopperies; it is well enough known, that Lord, who commanded the party which
went to Kelsoe, was willing rather to return, than to be made the first man
that should engage these two Kingdoms in a war, and that was well enough known
to be the sense of all the Nobility and Gentry which were drawn thither, and of
this whole Kingdom, as appeared afterward in Parliament: To this alone, under
God, had you ingenuity enough to do it, you should attribute, not only the
saving of that party of yours at Kelsoe, but your whole Army and your Kingdom;
for the King knew he had power enough to effect what he desired, and you in
humane reason could not be thought able to resist it; but he had not the hearts
of these for this work, who were with him, and therefore he knew he could make
little use of their hands in it: this it was which gave you means both at
first, and the second time, to do your business to your content, yet we must be
told what favors we received the second bout, when by the wicked practices of
the Archbishop Laud, confederating himself with the Lieutenant of Ireland,
that he might the better carry on his design (which God brought upon their own
heads, to the severing of them from their bodies) the agreement between the
King and Scots, whereat all this Kingdom rejoiced, was broken, and preparations
for War renewed on both sides: he tells us, the Scots, not thinking it fit, the
seat of the War should be in their own Kingdom, invade England, and after they
had routed a party of their Enemies, they did not, as it was in their power,
pursue their victory, but staid at New Castle until an agreement was made
between the King and them: It is very true, they were too wise to pursue that
which he calls a victory, for after some of our Forces had received a ruffle,
which was not much considerable, if they had pressed upon the whole body of the
Army, which was much stronger than theirs and better Armed, they might not
only have lost their victory, which he brags of, but their Army, and been
constrained to go home without their Errant: they knew their staying in
New Castle would give their friends (who abhorred the dashing of the two
Kingdoms one against another in a causeless War, as much as Joab did the
commandment of the King to number the people) opportunity to make their peace,
and obtain their desires much better, sooner, and with more safety to them,
than if by showing forwardness to shed English blood, they should have incensed
them, and in stead of friends, made both them and the whole Kingdom real
Enemies unto them; he that wrings the Nose, will bring forth blood: it had been
too great folly for them, to fall into, to provoke this Kingdom and engage it
in earnest against them; the King would have desired no more (as he says) so
little did he, or indeed had cause to fear the power of the Scots, would the
Nobility and Power of England have engaged with him; but he quickly saw what he
might expect (and what the Scots knew well enough, and did prudently, to wait
for) by that Petition, which the Noble men sent from London to him, and which
was seconded by the desires of the City and whole Kingdom. This affection to
your peace, and good, manifested then, and afterward without parallel, by
giving you the brotherly assistance (things never to be forgotten by that
Kingdom) prevented your ruin, obtained your peace upon your own terms, and
made you rich; it was not any fear of your Army, which without these things
could have effected nothing but your own hurt: I speak to you Mr. Pamphleter in
the same person, you will needs at your pleasure assume; you will take upon
you, when you please, to personate the Scots Commissioners, sometimes again all
the Scots, another time the Estates of Scotland; you shall Sir, at my pleasure,
so receive your answers. But what notice does this pedant take of the Noble
men's Petition? No more than of a sign-post in his way, looks upon it only, and
rides on, though it was the very hinge upon which all our affairs for the good
of both Kingdoms at that time turned about; he says the incoming of the Scots
gave occasion and liberty to diverse of the Nobles of England to desire a
Parliament; what effect had that? nothing? all must be attributed unto the
Scots Army; whereas that, without this Petition, and the known sense of the
City and Kingdom concurring therewith, had been no more, than the fly upon the
wheel; and yet he will needs mark the granting of the Parliament, and the
continuance of it, to be done by the King for fear of the Scots Army, yea
further, the preservation thereof also from total destruction and ruin must be
put in to set forth the merit, and magnify the great works done by that Army;
a foppery so ridiculous, as is sufficient of it self to discover this Agent for
the Scots, and his work in this Pamphlet to all knowing men: what the deeds of
that Army were, which he attributes our preservation unto, I shall show
hereafter; in the mean time see the impudency of this spatterer, in casting
dirt upon those Noble men, whom posterity has cause to honor to all
generations, and that they might have this honor, in the beginning of this
Parliament the House of Peers publicly gave them thanks, and appointed
withal, that their names should be entered upon record in their Journal book,
with their thanks given unto them, as an acknowledgement of the service they
had done the Kingdom by that act of theirs? This fellow makes no other use of
it than to magnify the Scots Army, and asperse those Noble men, of whom he
says some have betrayed the cause of God and his people, what by open War, and
what by clandestine undermining; those, who by open War have opposed the
Parliament are known, and let them bear their shame; but for the other
aspersion of clandestine undermining, it is applicable to any of them being
left uncertain, and therefore none of them are free from it; The man has evil
thoughts against some of whom he can speak no ill, for if he could, you should
be sure to have it; it is a secret, that, the truth is, he himself was never
acquainted withal, only he has so little charity as to make himself a Judge
out of his own evil thoughts, and would very willingly have other men do so to,
hoping they may fix upon those persons his malice would render suspected, whose
worth dazels his eyes, and stirs his spleen the more, because he finds the
constant integrity of their carriage to be such that it muzzes up his soul
mouth.

(Poetica licentia)

Magne Pater divum Lippos punire bubones
Hand alia ratione velis, cum dira libido
Moverit Ingenium ferventi tincta veneno,
Virtutem ut videant, intabescantque relicta.
He comes now to the breaking forth of the Irish Rebellion, the occasion and
rise he gives the King the honor of, as has been observed, and that by his
Commission under the broad Seal of Scotland; but this is not sufficient to
serve his turn, except the King be made to have a plot, which neither came into
his head, and was as far from his heart, and all this to set forth how
formidable the Scots Army was; the plot was, by his Court Parasites and other
Emissaries, to possess the people with jealousies of the Scots Army, that they
may be sent home and disbanded, for until that were done, the Irish neither
would, nor durst enter upon any action, as before he had said, the fear of them
kept the English Army from doing what they had promised: the King did so little
fear this bugbear, of his setting up, that having prevailed with some of the
chief Officers of his own Army, and thereby put in hope to bring the Army to
his desires, he would have been glad rather of such an occasion to keep them
still on foot, than plotted the going of the Scots Army out of the Kingdom,
whereupon he knew his own must needs be disbanded; for he very well knew, if he
could master the Parliament and City by his own Army, he should easily bring
the Scots Army to what terms he pleased: But what may we gather out of this to
be their meaning? when we had given the Scots 300000 l. (a sum seldom, or never
heard of in that Kingdom) for an income, and paid them so well for doing their
own work; have they the confidence to expect, that we should besides have made
their Army a state for term of life within the Kingdom? belike it was our
silliness, that we did not disband our own Army, the War being ended, and keep
on foot theirs, which came in to invade us, for our safeguard: he intends not
sure to put us to so much charge, as to have kept both Armies when all was
agreed, but thinks it was very fit for us to put our trust under their shadow,
for there we are sure to be safe: I begin now to fear, that if they shall
perceive, we can by Pamphlets and Papers Printed to be spread about, be made
such Idiots as to believe this to be made manifest truth, that it was a great
silliness in us, not to keep their Army in our Kingdom for our Guard, when they
came in as Enemies to invade us, they may be encouraged to hope that in time,
fit means being used to abuse the people (as long tedious papers spread amongst
them, with long sentences, involving the sense that the silly ones will never
understand, and some specious arguments intermixed, lest all should be thought
nonsense and unintelligible) they may prevail to make us further sensible of
our own condition, and persuade us, we are indeed grown lunatic and not of a
disposing capacity; and as we are not fit to be trusted with disposing of the
Kings person within the Kingdom, so as unfit are we to dispose of our Towns, or
our selves without their care; and therefore to save charges we may do well to
disband our own Army (a thing that by many practices has been attempted, and
take theirs to be our Keepers, and to keep the King and our Towns for us: for
the case is much altered, and much fairer now; this Army came in as Friends
and Brethren, joined in the same cause with us, and by a holy League and
Covenant bound to take care of our safety and preservation, no less than of
the safety and preservation of the Kings person; and esteeming us so extremely
Scotomised of late and in the dark, that we are not able to discern the dangers
that may befall us, nor to defend our selves against them without their eyes to
see by, and their hands to help us, being also warned by former experience, as
this fellow shows, what danger befell us by their going out of the Kingdom
before with their Army, and how great a silliness it was, both in us and them,
to be so overreached by the Malignants at that time, as not to keep that Army
in the Kingdom; no doubt the Scots and this Army of theirs now will be so
acquainted with the height of mischief, which they were not then, as he says,
that they will not suffer us to fall into it again, for want of their help, and
the help of their Army; and we will be persuaded not to be so silly as to
trust our own Army, that consists of Schismatics, Heretics and independents,
and send theirs out of the Kingdom, who are all Orthodox, and all such as we
may take by the hand in the mist that is now cast before our eyes, and let them
lead us whither they please without fear: for the man tells us the Scots ever
did, and still do, pursue their point (that is his expression) I think he
means, that which is now worn threadbare by being so often spoken, and so
little minded, the ends contained in the Covenant; yet what point he means, I
leave to himself to explain; but what point has been pursued by them,
especially of late and still is, every wise man may easily discern; for the
Covenant, if that be the point, it serves and will stand (as it is now made
use of) to all the points of the Compass, made a very stalking-horse to
politic designs, made what every man pleases, and so the name of God is taken
in vain to a great provocation. I have cause to fear, by what I see expressed
by this Emissarie and Agent in his Pamphlet, and what I have observed elsewhere
since, that we may have some such point pursued as I have here spoken of, and
that by color of the Covenant; for we are grown not only dark and blind, but
sufficiently esteemed such; and truly if such things as these lately practiced
to be put upon us, and in such a manner put forward, as we have seen, will not
prove eye salve unto us, we are stark stone blind, and fit to be sent ad
Antyceras to recover their wits.

The King was in Scotland when this barbarous rebellion brake forth; the Scots
he says, offered him their service to repress it, before it grew worse; the
King refuses it by pretense of doing nothing without the advice of his
Parliament in England, whither he posteth; when he came there, he goes seldom
to the Parliament, said nothing of the Irish Rebellion, until he was
constrained to it, and then little, cold, and ambiguous: so this man here again
will make the King author of that Rebellion, and lay upon him the guilt of all
that blood of the Protestant and Englishmen so barbarously and inhumanely shed
by those cruel Rebels.

I wish with all my heart he had not contracted too much of the guilt thereof,
by that Peace he made with those barbarous beasts to advance his ill begun, and
worse prosecuted designs here: God from heaven, by the success, has made it
manifest, how detestable both were unto him; God grant the King may lay it to
his heart, and make his use of it, leaving to trust to new plots, least the
same hand be stretched out still against him, and cause a worse thing to befall
him, which yet he may prevent by repenting, by being plain, and clear in his
ways with his people, and cashiering Juglers, and so be happy yet in his latter
end. ^he Scots he says, follow the King to London with their Commissioners to
offer the assistance of 10000. men to be sent into Ireland: we no way doubt of
their willingness to settle 10000. men in Ireland; you may spare your labor in
endeavoring to prove it by their coming such a journey to promote it: he
complains, that both in Council and Parliament it met with opposition, and
was delaied by the corrupt and ignorant party then; belike it was a party that
has been better instructed since, and made more sound by such applications, as
have been used to recover them; you know it very well to be so, and how
effected by your Commissioners; but for the opposition, he spea^es of, which
was made to their proposition of 10000. men (for fewer they would not send) had
it been then believed, that it would have been so long before they had been
landed there, that we might have sent as many out of England that would have
been there before them, certainly not only a party, but every man would have
been against the sending of them; for nothing did sway with those, who were for
the admitting of their propositions, but the hope alone that men from those
parts might be so speedily put over into that Kingdom, that the rebellion
thereby might have been crushed in the bud, and first rise of it; but it proved
altogether otherways; for we could have sent as many from our own Kingdom as
soon, if not sooner, than they landed there to be of any use to us; and there
is none, who would not have been of that mind, that it was much better to use
our own than strangers; they would certainly have done our work as well, obeyed
our commands much better, and that Kingdom would have maintained them at as
cheap rates, and the reckoning, which they would have brought us in at last,
would have been as little and as easily discharged.

Though they came late, yet when they came, he brags they went on with such
success, that they quickly cleared the North country of Ireland, of the
rebels: I I wish the rebels do not clear it of them; I will not say what they
did when they came, but if we should believe the reports of those, who have
their estates there in the North of Ireland, and are employed here in England,
some of them in Parliament, and there constantly have gone along with those the
Scots take for their great friends at this time, and therefore they cannot be
thought to speak out of ill affection, they have said, that when there have
been fair opportunities offered, to clear the Country indeed of the Rebels,
and wholly break them; whereby there might have been made a speedy end of the
War, they have desired the Commander in Chief of the Scots there, to lay hold
of those advantages, and join with the British Forces to that end, and have
been not only refused that, but when they have desired to have leave to do it
themselves, they have been forbidden and hindered; I leave the proof hereof to
the speakers themselves, only I will say if this be true, here they did not
pursue their point, and for the truth thereof, ask Sr. John Clotworthie, your
great friend.

After many races run from one Kingdom to another, and many turnings from one
devise to another, to turn his story of the Scots and their Armies, both for
us and against us, into a silly Romance, to make it appear how they pursued
their point, notwithstanding all the hardship that befell them, and the great
adventures of cold and hunger they encountered with; he comes in the 22 page to
remember himself of returning to England, and there begins to show, how the
misled King, by the assistance of those Traitors that followed him (all other
devises and plots contrived by him and his to that end failing) sets this
design on foot, to make open war against his Parliament to destroy it: it is
true, it was not for a Service Book, or for abolishing Episcopacie, this War
was made; in this, by chance, he is stumbled upon a truth; it was indeed a War
made to destroy the Parliament of England, that is the Government of England in
the very root and foundation thereof; and hereby it appears, what it was that
we defended, and how just and necessary that defense was: we do not hold it
lawful to take up Arms, thereby to force the alteration of laws already made,
or the making of new; there are other ways and means to be used, whereby the
three Estates, who are Coordinate in this Legislative, which is the highest
Power, may come to agree and consent in that which shall appear to be for the
public good in the making and alteration of Laws; we took up Arms to defend
the two Houses of Parliament, which are the two estates coordinate with the
third, the King, in the Supreme power of this Kingdom, from being out-raged by
a company of Ruffi^ns gathered together in the Kings House, and keep there some
days for that purpose, and in the end led to the doors of the Commons House of
Parliament by the King, with Swords and Pistols, to pull out the Members
thereof by violence upon feigned and groundless pretenses, whereof there never
was so much alleged as the least show of proof to this day; and the World is
sufficiently satisfied, that there was nothing in it that had a color, or
shadow of truth; that this might not be effected another time, as it was then
attempted, we were necessitated to desire a Guard, which was denied, except we
would have it in such hands as we knew would be a Guard upon us, and not to
secure us; this demand was no more than what the entrusted power the King has,
must by constitution of this Government, be employed to provide for inferior
Courts of Judicature in the Kingdom, which are by Law established, for the
sworn Officer, which is the Sherieff, not any other whom the King please, must
raise the whole power of the County, if need require, to secure those Courts,
that Justice may be administered in them according to Law, without terror, and
that such judgments as they shall give, may be duly executed; for the Law is
the Rule of every such judgment, not the Kings will, and the Application of
this Rule must be in the Courts established by Law, not otherwise at the Kings
pleasure, and that by sworn Judges also, not by any other person whom the King
will think fit to appoint, neither is the execution to be left to whom the King
will send, but the sworn Officers to King and Kingdom must see it done, and may
raise power to that end by their Office, the power of the whole County, and
thereby suppress any power that shall oppose, or hinder the same, though
warranted by the Kings Command in word, or writing; and in doing this the
Sherieff shall do no more than main^ain the Kings Power in his politic
capacity, as King of England, against the passions and lusts of his person, as
a private man missed by the evil Counsels of Sycophants: Now if this be a
truth, according to the constitution of this Government, that the power, which
this Kingdom has invested the King thereof with, for the good and safety of
it, must be thus exercised, as concerning inferior Courts and subordinate,
that they may sit without terror, in giving judgments according to Law
without fear, or favor, or respect to persons: that Delinquents may not be
taken and kept by force from Justice in those judicatories, nor the execution
of their judgments, pronounced according to the Laws of the Land, by violency
be opposed, but that violence, if any be offered, must be suppressed by the
Kings legal power (which is all the power that of right he has) though it
should be countenanced by his personal Commands and presence, which as King he
cannot be supposed to do: how much more ought this Supreamest Court to have all
this performed to them, by the Posse, not of the County alone where they sit,
but of all the Counties, the Posse totius Regni, which they represent: and of
that assistance, this highest Court of the Kingdom and Supreamest judicatory
(wherein the two estates, in the very first constitution and Coalition of this
Government, are joined as coordinate with the third, not subordinate) stood in
need, yea, had been utterly subverted without it. This man has so much of
truth in his discourse as to say it was intended, and all men saw it was
practiced and pursued; Forces were raised under the shadow of vain and
frivolous pretenses to destroy them, and Traitors to the State and Kingdom by
force detained from their justice, yea, from trial by them. In such a case,
when one estate of three, that is entrusted with the executive power, will not
exercise the same, to the ends for which he has that trust, when necessarily
required so to do, but withdraw, or oppose, that failer must be supplied by the
other; for there must be an exercise of power entrusted, to the ends for which
it is entrusted, that the Kingdom suffer not destructive detriment: Common
reason will dictate to every man in such cases of wilful failer and desertion,
Coordinata supplent, and it is their duty so to do; subordinate indeed are
only subservient, and they ought all to be subservient, when necessity shall
require the Coordinata to supply the defect of that estate, which does wilfully
desert its trust and duty, to the unavoidable damage of the Kingdom otherwise.
I have been willing upon this occasion to insist a little upon this particular,
of the two Houses of Parliament taking up of Arms, not only to state the cause
and quarrel aright, that the people might not by this Pamphletter, and those
who set him on work, be abused, and misled into mistakes of it, as afterward
you shall see he endeavors, but also that I might open and clear to others
(who are strangers to our affairs and proceedings, in these late unhappy Wars,
and its probable to the Government of this Kingdom in the right and true
constitution of it) the necessity that the Houses of Parliament had to do it,
and the Justice that there was in that which they did; least being deceived by
the Court party, and such Remonstrances and Declarations as have been set forth
to that end, they may misjudge the Houses of Parliament, and think they rose up
disobediently against Authority, when they maintained and defended the lawful
Authority of this Kingdom against violence and manifest oppression, by which
otherwise it had been subverted: strangers of other Nations, ignorant of this
Government, may easily be led into such an error, and therefore I thought it
my part and duty, to take this occasion to vindicate the honor, integrity and
justice of the two Houses of Parliament in that action, at that time, and upon
that occasion done by them: what has been done by others since without them,
yea against them, can with no justice be imputed to them.

The man, before he was aware, states the quarrel right, the King makes open
War, with intent to destroy the Parliament, they are forced to take up Arms to
defend and preserve themselves, and in them the English Government from being
destroyed; and what they took up Arms for, that they called their brethren of
Scotland to assist them in: I believe this Zelot will find some of his ends
contained in the Covenant, as he would have it believed, and so often therefore
inculcates it, wanting in thus stating the quarrel; he would have that, which
he calls the Reformation of Religion, the thing we fight for, and therefore
batters the peoples ears, almost in every leaf, with standing for the cause of
God, the service of the Church, the ends contained in the Covenant, promoting
the cause of the Church, and such like; but what is all this in his intention?
Nothing else but the casting out of Bishops, and setting up in England the
Government of the Church of Scotland; this with him is Religion from top to
toe, head to foot, whereas were it what it ought to be, and what they would
have it believed to be, it is so far from that, that it is but the shell to the
kernel, the utmost mound Wall to the Temple, the Pins to the Tabernacle. Could
he say, and make it good, the Kings design was, to make open War to alter the
Laws established concerning Religion here in England, and by force to bring in
Popery against Law, he might well make it a part of the quarrel, and think and
say, we ought to defend Religion established by Law, against idolatry, by
opposing force to force (I mean the two Houses of Parliament, and so would
always be understood in this case of taking up of Arms in defense of the Laws,
and opposing force with force, not of private men when I say we) but men will
easily perceive, except they be some of those, you so often call your simpler
sort, how great a difference there is between fighting to maintain the Laws and
true Religion established by them against idolatry; and fighting against Law to
overthrow one Government thereby established, and set up another in the Church,
which has no Law for it; when true Religion may stand, though both those
should fall; neither the one, as you have framed it, and use it, no more than
the other, being better than a mere humane policy. You, and those who set you
on work, shall give us leave to state our own cause; in assisting us you must
take up what we avow; if you have any thing else of your own to promote, you
may be left to abound in your own sense, and do it in your own Kingdom, and
answer therein your own consciences: but you often urge, we are bound to make
good the ends contained in the Covenant, and that your Nation would not engage,
until that Covenant was framed, and entered into; and from hence you would
infer, that Reformation of Church Government, according to that sense you put
upon the Covenant, to serve your turn, is that we are bound to contend and
fight for: you are out of the way, a thing usual with you; we do acknowledge
the entering into a Covenant was proposed, for that must not be wanting with
you when you undertake things of this nature, and to give you satisfaction it
was agreed unto by us, and lastly framed here in England, but with these
limitations purposely (according to our place and calling:) we would have you
prove, that we are in our place, when we are in Arms, to force the alteration
of Laws already made, or the making of new; or show us what calling we have to
take up Arms, having no other cause but this alone for it: it is true, as has
been proved, that we have just cause to take up Arms to defend the Government
and Laws of the Kingdom, and our selves in the defense thereof, from violence,
Arms being taken up first, as you affirm, to destroy us: the Reformation of
these abuses in the Church, and preventing the disturbance of peace in the
Civil Government, occasioned thereby, through the never failing p^ide and
ambition of the Clergy, falls into our hands in a providen^ial way of Gods
ordering things for the good of Church and state, which price, as God has put
it into our hands, so shall we not want a heart to improve it by all good ways
and lawful means (that, we call, according to our place and calling) for the
extirpating of Hierachical Episcopacy, and Reformation of Religion according to
the word of God, and the example of the best Reformed Churches ( especially
that of Scotland.) This is your addition to the Covenant, there being no such
word in it, we find your skill in Addition and Substraction when it serves for
your turn, all your Pamphlet over, wherein you show little pity, or skill
therein, so far as these Reformed Churches make the word of God their pattern
and example; follow me, says the Apostle, as you see me follow Christ:
otherwise we have nothing to do with your example, or theirs: we shall also
keep to our Covenant for the extirpating of all Sects, Schisms and Heresies,
according to the word of God; which as it was particularly explained at the
debate that was at the framing of the Covenant, is to be understood, not only
in respect of the errors themselves, which are to be tried and examined by the
word of God, but of the proceedings to be had with those persons, who shall be
found to hold such errors, which proceedings also must be according to the
rules of the word of God; not presently to call for fire to come down from
Heaven and consume them, this fiery Zeal from the flesh, not from the Altar,
this will pull up Wheat, instead of Tares; but what the Spirit of Christ (for
these men know not of what Spirit they are) does in his word direct to be done
with such persons as being corrupted in judgment, endeavor to corrupt others,
and disturb the peace of the Church and of the state (for that will unavoydably
follow) and cause rents and divisions in both; we according to these rules,
shall keep to our Covenant in dealing with such, as faithfully and sincerely as
any hot head of them all. Thus much upon this occasion, for stating the
quarrel, aright, before we follow the man in his story of carrying on this
quarrel which was taken up against us, and has been prosecuted with so much
violence, practice and falsehood of all kinds; we would not have the people
abused and drawn into a mistake in that point, what it was, we took up Arms
for, and do justify, we may and must fight for, by his continual prattling of
the holy League and Covenant, as if all things contained therein were the
ground, and had been the cause of this quarrel; we shall not fight I think if
whoring, swearing, juggling, false dealing, drunkenness, and other abominable
profane practices open and secret be not reformed in our lives and
conversations; and yet we are as much bound by the Covenant to do this, and see
it done, as to reform those things this Pamphleter cries out so much for, and
does so frequently buze into the peoples ears: I would it might please God to
work men's hearts to a through repentance for these, you should not need then to
trouble your self much for the other you are so zealous against, for they would
quickly fall away of themselves, being the just judgments and punishments sent
of God for the forenamed abominations, he sends upon men strong delusions
because they receive not the truth in the love thereof, but delight in
unrighteousness; they have a show of godliness, but in their lives and
conversations with men, they deny the power of it: This makes some run into
abominable errors on the one hand, and others turn bloody persecutors on the
other hand, both receiving the just reward of their hypocisie.

But before I pass on further I will ask you one question, and it is this, by
what rule shall we know them, whom you call by the name of Independents,
Sectaries, Schismatics, and Heretics, against whom you would have the people
believe your bow is bent, and your arrows sharpened; and the persecution of
whom is, with you, the cause of God, and the end contained in your Covenant? I
suppose you will not say those who in Doctrine and Discipline refuse to conform
to what you and yours have set up in your fancies, and call the Cause of God,
and the good work in hand, the settling of the Church and such like? this were
too gross; I expect, if you be urged, you will rather say, you mean such as
refuse to be conformable in Doctrine and Discipline to the Word of God; but
what it is, that the Word of God does hold forth concerning these, must be
agreed upon by that Church and State where such men live, whom you would have
branded with these names; otherwise if no Rule be set, how can there be a
Separation from it? or the word Sectarie, or Heretic imputed to one man more
than to another? Now if we examine, when this Pamphleter did write, what it was
that was established here by the State and Church of England, it will be found
to have been Episcopacie and the Service Book; are not your fiercest
Presbyterians then as great Separists, Sectaries, and Schismatics, as
Independents? for I hope they will now pretend themselves to be as opposite to
these, as your greatest Independents; what ever they were in the Bishops times,
and what they did then, the most of them we know well enough; At this time
since the State has agreed upon the Directorie, and that Government, which
they think fit and meet to settle here in this Kingdom for the Churches
thereof, is there an Independent, nay a Schismatic, Sectarie, or Heretic
amongst them all, that will not conform to it as fully as any Presbyterian,
with that Explanation and Reservation which the Presbyterians in plain terms
tell the Parliament they will take to themselves in conforming, and conform no
further? they have had the confidence to give in papers, or at least to print
and spread about papers to this purpose, a Copy whereof you shall here see;
and let the same liberty be given to Independents or to the worst of Heretics
(which this Pamphleter and others to the disgrace of the English Churches
amongst foreign Nations, would make the world believe we swarm withal) and
there is none such amongst us who will not be as conformable as any of those
who by a rigid pressing of Conformity to their own wills and fancies,
overthrow that unity in what is the known will of God, which otherwise might
be carried on in love according to the Apostles rule, Phil. 2.1, 2, 3. and
3.16. notwithstanding difference of judgment in some particulars not
destructive to the foundation of Christian Religion.

Certain Considerations and Cautions agreed upon by the Ministers of London,
Westminster, and within the Lines of Communication, June 19. 1646. according to
which they resolve to put the Presbyterial Government in execution, upon the
Ordinances of PARLIAMENT heretofore published.
WE Ministers of Christ, residing within the Cities of London and Westminster,
and Lines of Communication, having seen and read an Order of the Honorable
House of Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT, bearing date June 9. 1646. Requiring
and Injoyning all the Ministers of the Province of London forthwith to put in
execution the Ordinances concerning Church Government, Hold it requisite humbly
and faithfully as in the sight of God to show our judgments and resolutions
about this weighty matter, for the clearing of our Integrities, and preserving
our Consciences void of offense both toward God and toward man.

We have seriously pondered the present state of things; and find our selves,
whether we act as is required, or act not, to be in a very great strait. On the
one hand, Prelacie, being justly pulled down, and the Church miserably groaning
under Disorder and Confusion, many things cry aloud upon us in our places to
put Church Government into actual execution; The glory of God, the edification
of his Church, the Duty of our Function, the Engagement of our solemn Covenant
with God, the command of the Civil Magistrate (which so far as we can with a
good Conscience, we are resolved and hold it our Duty to obey,) and the
present unspeakable miseries of the Church by woeful Divisions, Blasphemies,
Heresies, abominable Looseness, Libertinism, and Atheism, and the spiritual
Ruin of many Congregations through false Teachers, or want of faithful Pastors
for lack of Ordination. On the other hand, upon consideration of all the
Ordinances of Parliament about Church Government, we find many necessary
things not yet established, and some things wherein our Consciences are not so
full satisfied: And therefore in our beginning to act, we cannot but foresee,
how likely we are to be sinisterly interpreted by many, who are prone to
misconstrue all our actions of this nature. We thereupon hold it necessary to
express upon what Grounds we may proceed, to act upon the Ordinances already
established by Authority.

Although we conceive the power of Church Censures, and in particular the
keeping off Ignorant and Scandalous persons from the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, to be in Church Officers by the Will and Appointment of Jesus Christ,
and from him they receive their Office and Authority: Yet we acknowledge, it
belongs to the Magistrate to have his Conscience satisfied in the truth of that
Government of the Church which he will set up by his Authority, from whom the
Church Officers do receive Authority of the public exercise of their Offices
in his Dominions. And in case the Magistrate be not so fully informed, as to
set up a right and perfect Rule in every particular, the Church Officers may
yet act under that Rule; Provided, that they do not subscribe to, or otherwise
acknowledge that Rule to be entire and right in all points.

And therefore for these particular Ordinances, although we humbly conceive
that they do not hold forth a complete Rule, nor are in all points
satisfactorie to our Consciences: Yet because we find many things established
in them, agreeable to the Word of God (for which we desire heartily to bless
God, and to be thankful to the Honorable Houses,) Provision being made for
inabling the Elderships by their Authority, to keep away from the Lords Supper
all Ignorant persons, and many Scandalous persons, with a Declaration of their
Resolution, that all Notorious and Scandalous Offenders shall be kept from the
Sacrament, and that there shall be a further addition to the Scandalous
offenses formerly enumerated; We conceive it is our duty to begin to act in
reference to Church Government by Congregational, Classical, Provincial, and
National Assemblies; Resolving by the Grace of God to walk in all things
according to the Rule of the Word, and according to these Ordinances so far as
we conceive them correspondent to it; and to be accountable to the Magistrate
whenever he shall call us thereunto; Hoping so to carry our selves, as not
only to enjoy his concurrence with us on all occasions; but also that he will
supply what is lacking to make the Government entire, and likewise make
alterations in all things that shall appear to be amiss. And in thus doing, we
trust we shall not grieve the spirits of the truly godly either at home or
abroad; nor give any just occasion to them that are contrary minded, to blame
our proceedings.

Thus much that I may trouble my self the less hereafter with these names
which, ad faciendum Populum as your manner is, you stuff almost every page
withal; now to your long tale, the Fox has left such a scent behind him as he
goes along, that many have come out and barked at him, but were afraid to come
too near, close up to him for fear of being bitten; where any have discovered
him, I may save a labor, and endeavor to find him out in his other juggling
ways; he tells us first of the sending of a Commissioner to move the King and
Parliament to extirpate Bishops out of the Church, as they had cast them out
from Civil Government; this tale is told to make way for the aspersing of the
Parliament, by telling what the King answered the Commissioner concerning the
Parliaments favoring of Schisms and Sectaries; and that this was the end, you
may see by the addition of his judgment therein; belike the Parliament was too
favorable to you and your party, for as I have said before, Independents can
be no more said here to be Sectaries and differ from the Rule established, than
you and your party: But I will add this, that neither Independent (against
whom your stomach rises) nor any other, nay put them altogether, have made
such rents, divisions and distractions amongst us, as you and your party have
done and still are endeavoring to do, by Pamphlets, Papers, Emissaries, spread
and sent among the people to poison their affections by Manifest Lies, under
the name of Truths Manifest, witness this lying Pamphlet, and Cranford with his
notorious lies, sent by Mr. Bailyes a Scoth Minister: and Commissioner to
publish the same upon the Exchange, and all this to alienate the people from
the Parliament, which is to stir them up against Government, and cause them to
despise lawful Authority and dominion, and to murmur against, and speak evil
of dignities; this as you continually do your selves, so by these means you
plot and contrive to excite the people to do the same: take heed God in just
judgment do not give you up for this, to be found also those filthy dreamers
that defile the flesh. In the next place when things were grown to great height
between the King and Parliament, he says, the Scots sent Commissioners to
intermediate between them, and complains that the Court rulers and Malignants
spewed abroad reports (its his phrase though none be more subject to the
disease than himself) that this was dishonorable to the English Nation, for
them being Subjects, to come with their intermise between the King and
Parliament, the simpler sort he says, are taken with it, for all are simple
with him that are not as foolish as himself, and were he wiser than he is, he
would think as the Parliament has resolved, that neither Subjects of another
Kingdom, no nor any foreign states were fit to be used in this difference; but
the two Houses of Parliament being the great Council of the Kingdom, as
representing the whole body thereof, are to offer to the King, that which they,
who only are concerned, do conceive to be fit, for the good and safety
thereof, the preservation of the Laws, and their just Rights and Liberties;
which having done, their counsel is therein to be hearkened unto, none other
having right, or interest to intermeddle; neither should their mediation need
to move the King to hearken unto the great Council of his Kingdom in things
concerning the good thereof, nor ought any such thing to be admitted by that
great Council to their prejudice, who have entrusted them, and whom they
represent.

Now we have him entering upon the stage (for a very stage play) for posterity
to read and be abused by, he makes of it) and that the turn and Catastrophe in
our affrirs may be made more eminent and remarkable, the whole glory whereof
he intends to bestow upon his Contrymen (for that alone is his design
throughout his whole Pamphlet) we forsooth must be reduced into a condition of
utter despair, as if there were no hope left for us, but the incoming of the
Scots to be our Saviors; and the man here falls to his politic observations
very gravely, telling us, that the Parliament did well and wisely, to try what
they could do themselves, for what need a man call to his Neighbors for help,
when he can do his business himself; but yet he says, those, who dive more
deeply into things of this nature, do hold it dangerous, to stay till things be
too low, before you call for help: what depth is in this? such belike as the
Parliament could not fathom, but you found it out in Lillies politic, which
you are versed in; this poor passage, in which there is nothing that every
Idiot will not say, serves yet for your stage play, which since you will needs
turn your story into, you and others, who set you on work, and seek to make
your advantages of such fictions, must and shall be content to hear truth,
which will altogether spoil your play; and that is, that if God, by his
blessing alone and good providence, had not enabled us so to overcome our own
difficulties, in casting our Enemies upon sieges to break their own strength,
and give us thereby time to recover a blow we had received, and the sickness
that weakened our other Army, whereby we were able not only to defend our
selves, but send you help to bring you into our assistance; you had stuck in
the very birth, and in all probality never been delivered from the Lord of
New-Castles Armies, and the Country Forces joined with him, but by returning
the way you came, into your own Kingdom; and this kind of Catastrophe would
have suited very ill to your design, and spoiled all your play, made to magnify
the Scots and their Army: In the South we had beaten the Kings Forces at
Newberry, and possessed our selves of Reading, which we might have kept, and
followed the victory to the scattering of all the Kings Forces, that kept the
Fields, if a Committee sent from Parliament, whereof the Solicitor St. John's
was one, and Alderman Foulk and others sent from the City purposely to offer
the staying of the City Forces to that end, could have prevailed with the
General to stay in Reading and follow his advantages, which never was done,
witness Edge hill business; but nothing would be hearkened unto, but taking up
winter quarters in Windsor; however we were in no lost condition when the King
was beaten out of the Field, and we Masters of it. In the North the Lord
Manchester and Cromwell had beaten and routed all New-Castles horses, not far
from Horn-Castle, and for his Foot, he had broken them against Hull, from
whence he was driven, when he had wearied and wasted that part of his Army: all
this time, while we are recovering our losses by our own Forces, so that we had
brought our affairs into that condition that we have three Armies on Foot (the
Generals, the Lord Manchesters and Sr. William Wallers) where, in the play,
shall we find our deliverers in the time of despair? what are they doing? in
the tyring house all this while; yea, not stirring a foot, until the
conditions be made to their own content and advantage (at which they are good
and too hard for us) and herein so much time is spent in sending Commissioners
from one Kingdom to the other forwards and backwards, until their own demands
are yielded them, that the Lord of New Castle had thereby time and means to
recruit himself, and raise such a strength in those Northern parts, where the
people abhorred to hear of the coming in of the Scots, that, as I have said,
had not we been able to deliver them from him, which was our chief care at that
time, both by my Lord Fairfax pressing him behind, and by causing the Lord
Manchesters Army to be drawn down that way, our deliverers had certainly left
us to shift for our selves, and the Gentleman had been deprived of a pretense
to make the subject of his stage play, and set forth the Champions, he makes of
his Contrymen, in the following fictions and fables he tells; with which
main design, the better to garnish it forth, there are mixed many foolish
things not worth taking notice of, only their Zeal for Church Government must
not be forgotten, that he makes the condition, sine qua non; and to tha^ end,
he says, they must have a Covenant: we have by experience found the ends of
that Covenant, and uses made of it; some pieces of it are twisted as strong as
Cables, while other parts of it are made like Sampsons Coards by the same
persons; this is to mock that God, who in the end will make it appear, he is
not mocked, neither can any mist be cast before his eyes: to conclude this, let
no man be abused by this stage player, that acts his part in all this Pamphlet
(a stage players proper name is a Hypocrite, he does Personam agere) nor be
made believe we were in a desperate condition, and that made us send to call
for help from the Scots, the thing is altogether false. They have lately in
their Paper practices set forth some speeches, which they entitle speeches of
Independents, spoken at the Guild Hall in London, at that time when the City
was made acquainted with the reasons and motives, the Parliament had to desire
a conjunction with their brethren of Scotland in this cause, and call them into
their assistance; amongst these speeches, there is one of the Solicitor St.
John's, which is the largest, and contains the reasons which are of the
greatest weight; is there a word there of our lost and desperate condition, or
any thing that looks that way? that which he urged for it, and insisted upon
was this, that though we might settle our affairs our selves, yet nothing could
conduce so much to the security of both Kingdoms for future times, in what
should be settled, and would so well maintain their just Rights and Liberties
which they contended for, as to Unite themselves together in the settlement
thereof, which consequently would U^ite them in maintaining the same being
settled, that one Kingdom might never be made the instrument to inslave the
other, reserving for themselves th^reby no other privilege but to be the
latter in slavery: This one reason was that indeed which could only bear
weight in in the scales, against many which might have been urged on the other
side; and although things now through Gods blessing are so settled, as that the
Forces raised against the Parliament are broken, which might have been done
without calling in the Scots; only, as he then spoke, their calling in would
render it more certain; yet if we shall fail of that, which was the only end,
for which we had cause to desire their incoming, and bear those incoveniences
which were sure to accompany the same, much more if in the winding up of all,
we should fall into a quarrel; certainly much better had it been for us, to
have saved our charges, avoided our burdens, and trusted God with the justice
of our cause in the use of our own Forces, which in humane reason were
sufficient: But let us hope, our brethren, were it only in consideration of
their own good, being as they will find, as much concerned in this, as our
selves, will prove both wise and faithful, in keeping firmly that Union
between the Kingdoms, which may parta tueri, and cut off all occasions from
Kings in future times, to make their Kingdoms and themselves miserable, in
dashing them one against another; striving to recover into their hands, their
former encroachments upon the just Rights and Liberties of their Subjects, and
to set up the ambitious Clergy again, as fit instruments to be made use of for
such designs: they may remember what was done, in King James his time, in
Scotland, the story is late, and fresh in memory, solemn Covenants did not
avail then to keep the ambitious Clergy men from complying with the King (when
he had gotten power into his hands) to set up Episcopacy again, and subject the
Presbyteries unto those Bishops he restored; there were found enough amongst
your zealous Covenanters, who renouncing their Covenant, not only yielded to
power, but became the instruments of that power, and so subservient unto it,
that taking Bishoprics readily, they as eagerly persecuted their brethren, who
opposed the same: let this late experience teach us and our brethren, to keep
our selves united, to keep power in our hands, until things be well settled,
and not prove so void of understanding and mad, as to think we cannot make have
enough to divest our selves of all forces, which being done before any thing
settled, will as speedily and certainly reinvest the King with all: this is the
design now vigorously driven on; and such an infatuation is befallen us, that
the Court-party have the cunning, and of late the boldness, to drive us on
therein, and make us draw in the same yoke with them, advancing the Kings
prerogative and pleading for the same, as was done at the conference about the
Propositions, by the Scots Commissioners in such a manner, as was most strange
for them to do in another Kingdom, whether they were sent, not to direct, what
we should demand for our safety, and the security of our Government, but to
assist us in the obtaining thereof, which, what it is, in the right
constitution of it, the Parliament, not they were to be Judges and determine:
This to their conviction and condemnation, in acting with us in such a manner,
was made apparent by themselves, when they expected and demanded of us, that we
should insist upon for them in their own Kingdom, not what we should think fit
for the King to grant them, but that he should grant unto them a confirmation
of all that the Estates of that Kingdom had resolved upon and passed already,
and not that alone, but what they should agree upon and pass, as Acts
hereafter; a Proposition of a large extent for those, who at the same time
would take upon them, to limit and direct us in our demands. But I have before
observed this strange proceeding of theirs, and indeed hardly could there be a
stranger, or more unreasonable in such a case, as they handled it.

The man means not to be thus turned off the stage, no, he will instance in
particulars, the North he says was all lost but Hull, the West also almost
altogether gone by the loss of Exceter, the defeat at the Devizes, and the base
surrender of Bristol and Banbury: by giving it this Epithet, and placing his
Emphasis there, you may know the Gentleman's disease, he is sick of the
overflowing of the Gaul, and therefore takes a Pill of Presbyterian Spleen
(otherwise called Zeal by them) to ease his stomach, and up comes all, though
never so false; this ingredient is so quick and strong in working, that it will
turn the stomach many times, the more is the pity, though it be in the Pulpit.
I write it not to disgrace those men who are for Presbytery in their
judgments, many of whom I love and reverence as Godly men; but to bring such
of them, whose apparent known malice, envy, and uncharitableness, together with
a busy and pragmatical exercise of these vices, they use to cover over with
this pretense and title of Zeal for the cause of God, to see, and repent for
that scandal, they hereby cast upon the Gospel and the profession thereof in
the eyes of profane men, as may be seen in this man throughout this whole
Paper project of his, which is compiled to slander, and traduce most falsely
well deserving men, wherein no difference of times, or distance of place stops
the operation of his spleen and malice, as we may here observe, East shall
rather be made West; for what has Banbury to do with the loss of the West, or
the surrender of that (had any such thing been) with the surrender of Bristol
either in time, or place? But that he might vomit up that poysonfull humor
(which as appears all along his stomach is full of) upon those who did more,
and suffered more for his Contrymen in the beginning of their troubles, than
all those whom he flatters, fawns upon, and gives titles to; yea, at that time
when some of those were in Arms against them: this gross lie is dragged in, and
tied together with the rest, as we use to say with points. We hear him often
talking of an engagement by Covenant, he might remember who it was that stopped
a general engagement of this whole Kingdom by an Oath, framed and tendered to
that purpose at York against the Scottish Nation, when they were first to have
been invaded. He knows not, it may be, in the broken Parliament when the King
endeavored more to engage the Parliament to assist him against the Scots (whom
he then styled Rebels) by the grant of money to that end, then to get the money,
the Gentleman whom he here spits his venom at, though but a young Parliament
man then, was the first that made that motion, That if any money were granted,
it should be with a Declaration of Parliament, that they would not have it
employed against their brethren of Scotland; which being approved of by the
House, the King hearing of their intention to make such a Declaration, chose
rather to break up the Parliament and be without the money, than have the giving
of it so accompanied: gratitude does not grow in the Gardens and grounds of
these men: Omnia dixeris cum Ingratum dixeris.

But leave we him and his companions to be like themselves, and since this
Gentleman, in all the railings and lies that have been maliciously spread up
and down against him, has been silent, and committed the judgment to him who
judges righteously; yea, since the time that God and man has justified him
upon a providence from Heaven, pointing as it were, and as it has been by men
observed, at his vindication by suiting all circumstances thereunto in the late
regaining of Bristol; and withal working at the same instant in the hearts of
men to take that hint, and unanimously upon the occasion, to add their
approbation, the whole House of Commons, with expression of much satisfaction,
requiring his presence and attendance there: he notwithstanding, though still
provoked by these malicious and envious Spirits (who by his clearing are the
more vexed) as a man risen out of the grave, who has forgotten all that is
past, both in respect of persons, and things by them done so falsely against
him, has not showed the least desire of revenge, but continues his patience,
satisfying himself in the conscience of his own integrity; since I say so much
patience, with so much evidence of integrity and innocence in this case will
not stop the mouth of envy and malice; I will not be silent, nor wanting to
the truth which I know, but bear witness hereby unto it, which I think I am
bound to do, that lies may not be transmitted to posteririe by such malicious
spirits in their Pamphlets, as in this, and some others; which one of the
Authors, that his malice and bloud-thirstiness might be known to posterity,
has bound up with other of his invective Works, for such usually are all his
writings on which side soever he takes, and when he changes sides, and if we
may believe John Lilburn, whom he ill requited, his leaves use to be almost as
full of lies as lines, and if in any they will be found to be so, I am sure
most of all in this: his own silence amidst these base sl^nders, gives me the
more just cause to make that which I know to be true, appear to the world in
this case.

At first when that Town was lost, and the cry came up, according to the
bitterness of men's spirits, who had sustained loss in their private estates, no
great mervail if in the present Distemper men were violently transported by
their passions against Reason and Truth; and David, though never so innocent,
must be stoned, because Ziglag was taken and burned: the cry of the multitude,
who use to judge of all things by success, and so are hurried on without any
further consideration, might cause some men then to believe that for truth, and
act those things thereupon, which were it now to do, when the dust is laid, and
things appear fully as they were, happily would be far from either thinking as
then they did, or doing what was done: but for men now against that light and
evidence of truth, which convinces every man that was upon the place, and saw
it retaken, and all others who give credit to their reports; yea ev^n against
their own reason, when they hear men relate to them, what it was when they now
recovered it, in comparrison to what it then was when he surrendered it, what
was done at both times in the defense of it, and what difference there was in
the means for the doing thereof: Now, I say, after all this, to snarl and bite
still, is without excuse; and it shows those who do it, to be mad with envy,
a vice most provoked when truth and innocence is most cleared. Let us examine
that which these men cast up out of their foul mouths: Bristol and Banbury
were basely surrendered; well coupled together, not for your story, but for
your stomach-sake; the foolerie and falsehood of that concerning Banbury we
shall show afterward: To that of Bristol, in the first place let us observe
the impartialitie of this braggadochio, who vants himself of nothing more than
that in the beginning: belike there has been no Town in the North, nor Forces
in the West basely deserted, when neither were reduced to extremities, but
Bristol; if there had, this man's impartialitie could not have passed them by in
silence: O but you must know the man is blind, stark blind on the one side, and
therefore had this Gentleman gone into a Boat, and left the Town to shift for
it self without defending of it at all, or making any conditions for it, when
all the strength of his Garrison was broken at the Devizes, being left by Sir
William Waller and his horse, who run away, while they stood firm together in a
body, being 2000 Foot, a long time after, and thereupon, every man leaving him
in Bristol for lost (as Mr. John Ash first testified by his Letter to the
Council of War, and after before them upon Oath, having himself at the time
been an eye witness of what he deposed) surely he had done very worthily, and
no way basely; provided he would afterward (whatever he had done before) have
complied fully with the party who went according to the ends contained in the
solemn League and Covenant, which what it means we cannot be ignorant of: but
since he was not of that base temper, to make a Covenant a pretense to hold up
a Faction, and drive on a Design, it must be basely done in him, to hold a Town
of 4 miles line in Circuit, a storm so long, that 1200 of the Enemies men were
killed, 40 Officers, 4 Colonels, and some chief Gentlemen of Cornwall, when he
had (except some raw men suddenly taken up and armed) but 700 of his Garrison
left, 7000 being few enough to keep that place, for 5 days was all the time he
had, before not only that Army which beat our Forces at the Devizes, and there
brake the strength of his Garrison, but Prince Rupert, with forces from Oxford,
joined with them, came up to besiege him, presently, upon the discouragement
that our flying Forces brought into the City; he had not so much powder left
as had been spent in the time they stormed, wherein the Enemy was often beat
off with so much loss; for Sir William Waller and Sir Arthur Haslerig were so
ill provided of Ammunition for their Army, that he was necessitated to supply
them out of his Stores therewith, as well as with 1200 of his best Soldiers,
which they both earnestly pressing him to do, when they wrote unto him for it,
used this Argument, That if they were beaten in the Field, it was in vain for
him to think he could defend the City though all his Garrison remained with
him, this was their sense and writing then, however they carried themselves
afterward; and his Council of War being called, to whom he put that very
question, resolved the same, where were present many Gentlemen of the Country
and Townsmen, and this he did before he would send out a man; yet to defend the
place being left in such a condition, even after the Line was entered, and the
Suburbs possessed, until he had made as good or better conditions, both for the
Soldiers, Townsmen, and Gentlemen in the Town, who were friends to the
Parliament, than Prince Rupert did when he surrendered it again: This is the
business which this pedantical fellow asperseth him withal; the malicious
falsehood whereof will more appear by the consideration of that difference that
there was when the place was surrendered the first, and second time; which in
respect of the Fortifications (a Royal Fort being added) was much stronger than
that Town could be made, whereas before it had only an old rotten Castle, as
Mr. Hodges testified, not able to bear the discharging of the Ordinances that
were upon it, and which, as Cromwell said, he would lay his life was not tenable
24 hours after the Line entered: In respect of the work, at first it was rather
an intrenchment hastily cast up about the Town, and that not finished for want
of time, but where the Line was entered, left unperfected, than a Fortification
that such a place required, but when Retaken, made as strong as that place
could be made to make it tenable; the Works then made so high, as may appear by
the Letters sent to the House, that Ladders o^ ^o rounds were too short to
scale them: In respect of Soldiers, both Horse and Foot to man it, and of all
Ammunition and Provisions no want, nor of able Commanders under Prince Rupert,
as Tilliers and many others the best the King had: and lastly, in respect of
assurance to be relieved, which the King promised Prince Rupert; but the
General to this Gentleman gave assurance, he neither could relieve him for the
present, nor did think he ever should be able to do it, which latter part he
inserted in the letter with his own hand: All these things being well known,
even to the slanderers and liars themselves, yet they persist still to do the
devils work. But that it may appear to the world how basely indeed and
unworthily this Gentleman was dealt withal in this business, I will open some
of the carriages of this mystery of iniquity, which I have learned, all of
them I believe are not known but to themselves, and kept amongst themselves,
who were the prosecutors and actors therein: I shall therefore desire the
reader in the first place to take notice of a falsehood continually obtruded,
when the malice of these men spits out their venom against this Gentleman upon
this subject, and that is, that he was called in question for it at a Council
of War, this to men who know not the carriage of this business for the present,
much more will it do so to posterity hereafter (to whom they desire to
transmit this slander, knowing that they are likely to be ignorant of what now
justifies him) holds forth as if the General, or Parliament were so
unsatisfied with his rendition of that place upon the terms it was yielded,
that they called him in question for it, and put him upon trial by that Council
of War, which had the will to condemn him; whereas the truth is, when he gave
an account of it first to the Committee of Safety, when he came up, afterward
to the Parliament, then to the General, they all rested satisfied in it: only
he himself, out of the knowledge of his own integrity in that action, and that
he had done what could be done by a man left in that condition, not able to
bear the bawlings of some men who had suffered loss, and the malice of others,
who running away themselves, were as ready as any to cast blame upon him to
hide their own shame, and therefore joined with those who spoke and wrote to
his disgrace, though contrary to their own knowledge and hand writing
formerly, as was made appear at the Trial; he, I say, upon this, indiscreetly
and unwisely casts himself into the hands of his enemies, gave them the
occasion their malice and envy waited for, by not resting to importune the
General by himself, and his friends; and having gotten his consent to entreat
of the House of Commons (whereof he was a Member) that he might be cleared at a
Council of War, whereunto he desired he might be referred, and obtained it
only by his own importunity; so far was it from that which is constantly and
most falsely by them affirmed, that he was called in question for it by the
General or Parliament, and by them brought to trial at a Council of war: of
which Council of War, how they were composed and fitted, and how they acted,
have patience to hear a little: When this Gentleman had procured by his
endeavors for his vindication to have a Council of War to hear this business,
the two Hothams, Father and Son having friends near the General that could do
much with him, they moved the General and obtained it, that Summons might be
sent to the Hothams, Father and Son to be tried at the same time, and a Council
of War was fitted for that purpose; now though in the General, and in that
friend of theirs who put the General upon this, there was not an intention to
prejudice this Gentleman, but only to save the Hothams; and it is probable,
had that design taken, they had quitted all, hoping the clearness of this case
might have made the other pass with it the more easily; yet in the thing it
self there was much to his prejudice, first in reputation, that he should be
put (as hereby it would seem to the world) into an equal condition with those
whom all know to be guilty and imprisoned for the same, seeking this Trial
only to escape that which they knew the Parliament would bring them unto, as
afterward they did; Secondly, had this Plot taken and all been acquitted, his
acquitting with such company would have blemished him, and been cried out of
notwithstanding his own clearness; but that failing, the Parliament prohibiting
their trial at that time, well enough perceiving the design; the Council of War
chosen for their safety, were men fitted for his ruin, both in their
dispositions and affections, many of them toward him and his friends; and the
rather now being irritated by failing of their design in respect of the other
two; in so much that Sir William Balfore, a known able Commander of great
experience in the Wars as any, if not before any in these Kingdoms, who not
only cleared him, but said, if it had been in any other Kingdom he would have
been so far from being condemned for that service he had done, that he would
have been rewarded rather, he knew what belonged to War, and what grounds
Counsels of War should go upon in condemning and acquitting (the greater part
of the rest it is likely never sat in a Council of War before) he being by his
p^ace and appointment of the General to sit President of the Council, coming a
quarter, or half an hour later than usual, the Lord Roberts, a sure card for
that turn, thrust himself into the place of President, being a Soldier of the
first head, never knowing what belonged to a Soldier, Commander, or Council of
War before these late troubles, which were of one, or two years standing; of
the same standing and experience were the most of the rest of this Council of
War: This President, having taken the place upon him out of another man's hands
that was appointed, to whom by his place in the Army it appertained, begins to
order business according to his experience, admits the inward Barrister of
Lincolns Inn, William Prin a Lawyer to plead at a Council of War against this
Gentleman; a thing I think never before heard of; for matters of fact should
there be produced and proved by the testimony of fit witnesses, and the Judge
Advocate alone should be made use of in point of Law, or prosecution of the
party supposed Delinquent: Nay, this malicious bloodthirsty man, as
sufficiently appeared by his subsequent lying Pamphlets upon this subject, was
suffered by this President to plead and rail according to his usual known
manner; and to bring for proofs Paper-depositions (never to be admitted,
especially in case of life) instead of witnesses viva voce, who were capable of
being voice examined, and this was suffered for diverse days together, and in
the end upon such proofs, and some Tapsters, Children, and mean persons, and
some who before the siege ran away out of the Town themselves as Walker, and
other Soldiers and Officers who were there accused for not doing their duty at
the time, was this predetermined sentence given and grounded. I do not without
ground call it predetermined, for before ever he was heard to speak in his own
defense, or any word spoken against him, a Member of the House of Commons came
to him, who was so intimate with this good Council of War, that he knew their
intentions, and thereupon advised him not to trust to his in^^cencie, though he
were never so clear, for of his knowledge a major part of the Council of War
were resolved already to condemn him; an excellent major part of a Council of
War, and well prepared for the purpose, as by this you may see: it was indeed
carried, but by a major part who were resolved as it seems by this Gentleman,
before hand (the Lawyer might have spared his railing, and his declamations of
3 or 4 hours length, till many that heard him fell asleep; the rest, who came
not resolved, were satisfied with what they heard and did acquit him
thereupon.) I can name the Gentleman, or Knight rather, but without his
consent, I will not, least I make his friends who communicated their secrets to
him, angry with him for it. Notwithstanding things thus fitted and prepared,
when he was heard to speak for himself and the proofs and evidencies produced,
which showed his condition and his carriage therein; Holborn and Ennis, and
another Scots Officer who was afterward killed near Woodstock, and who at the
time he heard it, deteste, das he professed to Major Holms his Countryman,
that a deserving Gentleman should be so wronged, these being Soldiers and not
of the Caball, began to say that they could not condemn him, and therefore had
acquitted him with the rest, but for the practice used by those, who had
resolved what they would do in it; and had these fallen off, though they had
continued still the major part, yet it would have much blasted the design, they
being accounted Soldiers of another degree and standing, than the other whom I
need not name: hereupon they saw it necessary to put off the giving of their
Judgments in it for a week, which the President did accordingly, in which time
the business with these men was wrought about. Holburn and Ennis were dealt
withal, and dyning with the Lord Robert, who was President, Holburn was heard
to say they could not find any thing that might give a just ground to condemn
him for his carriage in that business, to which the Lord Roberts replied, they
must however condemn him for example sake, this being the first, least others
should be encouraged to give up Towns when there was no necessity, and that
there would be no danger in it to him, for they were sure the General would
pardon him: an excellent piece of Justice, a Gentleman's life and honor must be
cast away, who was in no fault, as they themselves knew and confessed, for fear
others might commit faults afterward. The Earl of Essex Geneneral, was heard
also to tell the Lord Say, that Holburn did say to him, Col. Fienne was in no
fault, but because he would not lay it upon his Officers, the Town being lost,
he must bear it himself; this I know to be true, for I heard it spoken my self:
good Justice still, it seems Roberts discourse prevailed. Cannot a Town left in
that condition, and without hope of relief, be surrendered upon such conditions
as this was, and yet neither Governor nor Officer to blame? or if Officers be
to blame, they should be called to account for it; and not a man condemned that
they knew had done his duty, and was no way faulty: yet he did at the time
accuse some Officers, who refused to obey commands, but it was not Langrige
whom they aimed at, and would have had him charge. By all this it appears, what
difficulties they were put upon, to effect and bring about this business; at
last they find out the Article of not holding out to the utmost extremity, to
do the feat, for as for treachery they cleared him; for Cowardice they could
object nothing; but forsooth he did not hold it out to the utmost extremity,
when there were five particulars all concurring in his case and condition,
either of which singly of it self, if it can be truly alleged and
sufficiently proved, as in this case all the five were, is to be accounted, and
would have been, and were so by those who understood, the grounds a Council of
War should proceed upon, a holding out to utmost extremity, and in which
cases, if a Governor shall neglect and omit to make the best conditions he can
for himself and those that are with him, he is worthy to be questioned and
censured for it. Want of Ammunition, want of men to man the Line, and many of
those that were, laying down Arms, and deserting their Colors, so that not
above five, or six in some Companies could be gotten together, as the Captains
affirmed, and upon promise of present money to be given unto them by himself, of
the 1700 which were all he had, or could in that time of five days make up his
broken Garrison unto, he could not get together above six-score, when the Line
was entered and the Suburbs; again these being entered, there was no
Intrenchment defencible within; and most of all considerable, though last
mentioned, an assurance that he could not be relieved, and this from the
General himself as has been showed. Now so soon as they had done this in this
unworthy manner, lest some of themselves might fall into the Net they had
contrived to catch this Gentleman in, they think it necessary to explain the
Articles of holding out to utmost extremity, and explain it thus, that if it be
proved the Soldiers refused to fight, it shall be interpreted to be a holding
out to the utmost extremity; and this they did presently after the Trial,
though in his case it prevailed not, being fully proved by diverse witnesses,
especially those Soldiers that were Townsmen newly raised after the loss of
his own Soldiers at the Devizes, being shop keepers, and fearing the Town
would be taken, laid down their Arms and would not be seen, nor come to their
Colors, but deserted him: could there be a more manifest conviction of
themselves in respect of this unjust sentence, than this that was done upon the
instant by themselves? But the giving up of Gainsborough when succors were at
hand; and the quitting of Lincoln with all the Ordinance and Ammunition left in
it, when no Enemy was in sight, nor within many miles of it (both by the Lord
Willowby a Chief man in that Council of War) where there was neither
extremity, nor nothing like a siege, and this being done before, made them
make this hole in their Net, so soon as they had used it, to serve their
present turn: for he could only allege for himself, as he did, that his
Soldiers told him, they would not fight, but whether they would be as bad as
their words, or no, he resolved to trust them, for he never staid to try them,
but left the Town and all that was in it, upon a report of the Enemies being
at, or about Newwark, many miles from thence; here was a holding out to the
utmost extremity, by one of the Chief and active Judges in this Council of
War; it was time to make an explanation: but, as I have said, how palpable a
conviction of themselves, and this unjust practice, it was, to do it presently
upon the wrong they had done this Gentleman, let the World judge, especialy
when this in particular was so fully proved before them in his case. If I
follow another (who was a Chief Agent and contriver in this business) into the
West, I shall show, how this unjust sentence, by Gods just judgment, followed
him, either to condemn him much more justly in all men's judgments, or make
him condemn himself, for giving and drawing others to join with him in this
unjust sentence upon no ground. When the Army went into the West (after the
Kings going out of Oxford, with such Horse and mounted Musketeers, as he could
make ready, that he might not be besieged) the Lord Roberts was made Lord
Marshall of the Field, that thereby there might be a reconciliation wrought
between him and the General, for before they were upon no good terms: the Lord
Roberts is a man of good parts, and he knows it, therefore he uses to think
his reasons too valid and strong to be contradicted by any, he must bear the
sway and rule all, or else he will make a party whereof he will be the head:
Friends to them both knowing this, and the General finding it by experience in
the Army, they persuade the General to use this expedient to make him his, and
draw him off from any other parties; but this being done, the General must so
far be at his dispose, as not to contradict him, but be ruled by him: as they
marched into the West, they understood, the King, with that force of Horse, and
mounted Musketeers he had with him, being a very considerable strength, turned
into the West also, to join the Forces he had with him with the Western Army
under Hopton, which was then the greatest strength he had in England, and would
be made much stronger by the addition of so many Horse and 2000 mounted
Musketeers; upon this advertisement it was debated at a Council of War, whether
it were not best for the General with his Army to interpose between these two,
and hinder their conjunction before he proceeded farther Westward, a thing the
King most feared, his Horse being laggered out and tired, and having neither
Foot nor Artillery with him, and the Generals Army being a brave Army, fully
furnished with all these; it was resolved by the major part of that Council of
War, that it was fit for the Army to fight the Kings Forces, which they might
have done with great advantage, and not suffered them to join with the other
Army in the West, and indeed it stood with all reason so to advise; But the
Lord Roberts, now Lord Marshal of the Field, was of another opinion, and that
must be yielded unto, though the greater number of the Council of War opposed
him in it, and advised the former; hereupon the Army was drawn into Cornwall
with such haste, and so improvidently, that they took not so much care, as to
make good the passes behind them, whereby they might safely make their retreat
if need were, or have succors and provisions sent them, being drawn into the
most Malignant County to them in England; and the King hereby also had means
without any opposition to join all those Forces be brought with him, to his
Western Army: this gave great discontent to the Army, and caused many to speak
very hardly of the Lord Roberts, as if he had brought the Army into all that
danger, to secure his own Houses, and Lands, that lay there about, and to be a
Convoy for Treasure, he had there, being concealed; but this might proceed
only out of their discontent, being exasperated to find themselves brought
into such a pinfold by his means, in prevailing with the General, contrary to
what was advised by the greater part of the Council of War: However this was,
or what were the motives, all the World knows what the issue was, the Army
being brought into difficulties for want of provisions, partly by the
malignancy of that Country, and especially by the great strength of Horse,
which the Enemy had by the addition of the Kings Horse to the former Army
(which should and might easily have been prevented) whereby they kept the
passes, which we might have secured, and thereby kept all provisions from the
Army, so that the Horse were not able to subsist for want of provisions and
fodder; the Horse first were constrained to break through, the Foot then were
drawn into a place of advantage, and there stood upon their defense, every
Regiment keeping to his post: while this was doing, the General and the Lord
Roberts, Lord Marshal of the Field, put themselves into a Boat, and leave the
Army, and the Major General of the Army, with all the Officers of the Army to
shift for themselves, without so much as ever acquaintaing them therewith, or
giving them the least notice thereof; insomuch that Major General Skippon,
Major General of the Army, understanding by one of the Officers of the Lord
Generals Regiment, that, that Regiment did not keep to their Post, as they
should, said, that is strange, that Regiment was not wont to do so, why do you
not acquaint the General with it? The Officer replied, the General is gone, and
the Lord Marshall, away in a Boat: What, said Major General Skippon, has our
General left us thus, and never so much as acquainted us therewith? Then indeed
it is time for us to make conditions for our selves, and he and the Officers
had it in consultation, before they would treat about conditions, to put that
down as the ground of their treating, their Generals deserting the Army in that
manner, wherein the Lord Roberts went along with him, who was the special
occasion of drawing the Army into that condition: that he was the Author of
that counsel, in such a fashion to withdraw and leave the Army to shift for
themselves (when they were in a posture to defend themselves, and refused not
to fight, but were, as it is known, more hardly drawn to yield to deliver up
their Arms, than to use them to fight in the defense of themselves) I will not
say; but he was companion in the action, being, after the General, the Chief
Commander in the Army: neither do I write it, as thinking the man to want
courage, for in all other actions during the Wars before, he never showed any
want thereof; and that which he did presently after this, in staying in
Plymouth, when it was very probable the King, upon the defeat of all our
Forces, would attempt to take so considerable a place, manifested courage
enough in him, as it was a great means to confirm and strenghthen the
Townsmen, to defend the same; but I write it, to observe a special providence
of God making him by an action, which all knowing Soldiers will judge worthy
to be much more condemned in a Chief Officer (as being far from holding out to
utmost extremity, but rather a deserting of a whole Army without their
knowledge, without making any conditions for them, when they were under his
charge) to condemn himself for that unjust sentence, which he was the special
actor in, if not the contriver and author of, whereby a Gentleman was
condemned, who by the judgment of the best Soldier amongst them, yea, in the
Army, or in the Kingdom, Sr. William Balfore, was rather thought worthy of
commendation and reward, for what he had done, in holding out to that which is
to be accounted utmost extremity, as I have showed before: yea, the very
Enemies themselves being Judges, as they have often, and diverse of them
expressed themselves in his case, both the Lord Hopton, the Lord Hawly, and
Colonel Busbridge with others. Thus does the just God often make them, who dig
pits for other men, fall into the pit themselves. If any man shall doubt of the
truth of this Relation, or any circumstance in it, he may satisfy himself by
asking Major General Skippon, an ancient experienced able Commander, and
withal (which is not usual) a pious religious man; or he may satisfy himself
if he will ask any of the Sub-Committee appointed at Darby house, to examine
Major General Skippon, Colonel Barkley, and other Officers about this business,
Mr. Pierpoint and Mr. St. John's the Solicitor (as I take it) being two of them;
any of these know, that when Major General Skippon was asked whether he spoke
those words above specified, upon hearing the Lord General, and Lord Marshals
being gone in a Boat, he said he did; and that it was very strange to him and
the rest of the Officers to hear that they were gone, it being demanded of him
further, whether they had it not in consultation, to make his leaving of them
in such a manner, the reason of their entertaining, or seeking a Treaty about
Conditions; he (as he is a very modest man) most humbly desired them not to
press him in that particular any further: so the Sub-Committee saw, that as it
was left and laid aside by the Officers, out of respect at that time when they
had it in consultation, in like manner they desired they might not be pressed
further to speak to it then, when they were examined; and there being some
friends of the Generals, who were of the Sub-Committee, that moved it might be
put on no further, it was passed over both by the Sub-Committee, the Committee,
and the House; to which friends of his he has since made an ill requital,
because they were for the new Moulding of the Army, as they had reason; and
although, out of respect to the General, this was for the present passed over,
and no further pressed, yet this with other things, then laid the foundation in
men's hearts of that resolution, which soon after was put in execution, to new
Model the Army, and put the Command into other hands: The Parliament dealt
prudently for the present, after the example of the Roman Senate, upon the
great defeat and loss of their Army at the Battle of Cannae; for they gave no
discouragement, but rather sent to the General being sick at Portsmouth to show
him a respect, that thereby they might the better recruit again that broken
Army which he had left, and make the best use of them that remained, against
the Kings coming up and following his advantage, which they had cause to
expect, and accordingly found to fall out; for he was taught by his experience,
in sitting down before Gloucester, what advantage he had then lost, and
therefore now, would not besiege Plymouth, but only Face it, and so without
staying, marched forwards with all speed: it was therefore necessary for the
Houses of Parliament, to make up that broken Army both Horse and foot with what
speed they could, and so make the best of a broken business; to which end they
wisely, for the present, sent an encouraging visit and message to the General
at Portsmouth, all being little enough: for if my Lord Manchesters Army under
Cromwell had not been so near London, that they were brought to join with the
remainder of this broken Army, so many of them as in so short a time could be
recruited; and also with what remained of Sir William Wallers Army, broken
likewise by lying still, about Abington, out of a mere pet, because the General
would not let him go into the West, which was his design, but went thither
himself; and had not this been done by that time, the King could advance so far
as Newbury, that he had been able to march up to London without resistance;
upon this defeat of our Army in the West, in all probability all had been
lost; which had it so fallen out, the true Cause, under God, had been the
private spleens, foolish pets, emulations and envy between our Commanders; The
only cause why Sir William Waller would follow the King no longer, when he
turned Westward, and thereby the Generals Army lost, and his own also with
lying still and doing nothing the while: This was a just cause of putting our
forces into a new Model, under another head, and into one hand, as would
sufficiently appear, were this miscarriage only laid open particularly, and in
all the passages and circumstances thereof; but to write that story is not my
design, here I only touch it thus far by the way; I have made this
Digression, and insisted the longer upon it, to make the truth appear, for the
clearing of this Gentleman from that dishonor, which was so unjustly, and so
unworthily cast upon him, by such a Major part of a Council of War, because not
only scurrilous Pamphlets, as this and some others of like nature (whose
railing and lying, showing them apparently to be byased by their malice, envy,
and other base false ends, every man will despise) but Mr. May, one that
pretends to write a Just and Full History of the Parliament of England, and in
his Preface makes profession of so much impartialitie, he likewise is drawn
(whether by false reports and ill information, or being jogged on the Elbow by
him that set him on work, or some of his party, he himself best knows) to
let his pen drop a blot upon the reputation of this Gentleman, and it seems
Bristol is purposely brought in, and made mention of in that place, that he
might give this dash with his pen in a parenthesis: I will not say, that the
party, by whom he was put upon writing this History, or any of his, plucked
him by the sleeve, while he was writing, and caused him to give this blur
needlessly, as any man that reads it may easily perceive, and therefore it may
be thought purposely; for I would not in this particular say and affirm
positively, that which I do not certainly know; This I do know, that they were
estranged, and ill affected at that time to the friends of this Gentleman, who
had done them greatest service to his own prejudice, and that when they were in
low esteem amongst the people in the City, their hatred unto him being only
in respect of promoting the new Modelling of the Army, as I have said before;
and who it was that put Mr. May upon the writing of his History, I very well
know by the General speeches, but I will not make an absolute judgment upon
conjectures: If it were ill information, he might easily have had better, had
he sought it, and I shall now better inform him, and show him the falsehood of
both parts of his parenthesis, not by saying alone they are false, but by
demonstrating it to be so by undeniable proofs, that when he continues his
History, he may reform his error, and not by transmitting it to posterity,
suffer it, the further it runs, the more to increase that guilt which ever
accompanies wrong doing: he brings in a discourse of the Surrender of Bristol
to the Kings Forces without any occasion; and then draws in his Parenthesis
thus ( which was more sudden than could be feared, and for which afterward the
Governor Mr. Fiennes was questioned and condemned by a Council of War) for the
first part, that it was more sudden than could be feared, whereby he would make
the world believe, he was too hasty in Surrendering the place which he might
and ought to have kept longer; what has been said to this already I shall not
need to repeat; but to the falsehood of it I shall say, that as the Enemy
sufficiently felt it before it was surrendered, by such a loss, as I my self
heard one of them who was there, a Colonel, since profess, that when they had
it Surrendered, they thought and said amongst themselves, they had better been
without it, than to have undergone that loss to obtain it; and as I remember
another of them, Col. Busbridge, who affirmed in the hearing of diverse
Parliament men, Col. James Temple being one, he would maintain it with his
sword, against any that should say the contrary, it was as well defended, and
they had as sharp a business in the Storming of it as he had known, either here
in England, or in the Low Countries, where he had been a Soldier; he said,
that after the Works were entered, and the Suburbs possessessed by them, there
was such a Sally made out upon them, that he saw 20 Officers brought into some
houses, and laid there upon the floors, or tables: The Enemy did not find such
over much haste made in the Surrendering of the Place, as Mr. May, by what he
writes, would have men conceive: and that it was before we feared it or heard
of it, is so false, that Mr. John Ash deposed at the Council of War, who was
there upon the place, that every one gave him and the Town for lost, after the
running away of the Horse at the Devizes, and the loss of the strength of his
Garrison there by that means, which was the loss of the Town; and Sir William
Waller, when he went out of Bristol with those Horse which he had remaining,
promising and saying, he hoped to bring him aid, and therefore he was willing
he should go, knowing that a few beaten Horse could do him no good without
Foot, but would rather spend the Provisions that were in the Town, than afford
him any assistance, which by going forth they might have procured; for when Sir
William Waller came near my Lord General, who lay about Buckingham, and he
about Banbury, some twelve miles off, he sent the General word, in what sad
condition Col. Fiennes was left at Bristol, and that without a supply of Forces
sent to him, he could not keep the Place; this was then Sir William Wallers
judgment, coming from the Place, what ever he manifested afterward; the
General, upon this Message, writ to Sir William Waller, To stay with his Horse
where he was, and he would send unto him a supply of Forces to join with his,
to go back to Bristol, for the strengthening of it, which had it been
accordingly done, the Place had been secured; but Sir William Waller had no
intention to return back thither with the Horse he had then with him, whether
he had no confidence in them, or what was the cause he knows, but in stead of
doing what the General required in his Letter, and he, when he left Col.
Fiennes, told him he hoped he should do, bring him succors, which had saved
the Town, not otherwise to be kept, as he had sent the General word, for his
defeat at the Devizes had indeed lost it, by breaking all the strength of the
Garrison; yet he made the General no answer to his Letter, but by his action,
and that was to go the next way as fast as he could to London; which when the
General understood, his forces being weakened by sickness, he returns also to
Kingston near London; and being again sent unto for a supply of forces
sufficient to keep the place, and acquainted in what condition the town was
left, he writes back, as has been related before, he neither could send the
Governor any forces for the present, nor thought he ever should be able to do
it. This Message of Sir William Wallers to the General, and the reports he made
of the condition the Town was left in, with the Generals offer to send Forces
to join with his, and go back to strengthen and save the place, desiring him to
stay where he was to that end, has been so often spoken of by the General,
where Mr. May was no stranger, that it is very probable Mr. May must needs be
acquainted with it, and it had suited very well with his profession of
impartialitie, not to have passed it over in silence, when he speaks of the
Generals intention, to have relieved the West, after the Defeat at the Devizes,
but that he was put from that intention, by what he understood of Sir William
Wallers forces, here he comes near it, but to do that Gentleman right (as his
impartialitie should have caused him to do, whomsoever it had concerned) he
will not come home to it, and lay the truth open fully as it was: But by all
this which I have showed, and which are things so known, that no honest man
will deny them, the falsehood of that first part of the Parenthesis clearly
appears; it was both feared, and that fear was heard of, and so timely, that
the danger might have been prevented, had it been so much regarded as to have
forces brought thither to defend it, by him who had them offered to him by the
General, and who had broken the Garrison, that should have defended the Town
immediately before, and was by the Generals Letters, upon his own report of the
condition the Town was in, desired to convey that supply of Forces unto it. For
the later part of his Parenthesis, that he was questioned for it, and condemned
by a Council of War; I have showed before, that this is the usual falsehood,
whereby strangers to the carriage of this business, and especially posterity,
are like to be abused; it is most false, that he was questioned for this,
either by the Parliament or by the General, as thinking him to have committed
any fault in what he had done, or testing any way unsatisfied with him for it,
and thereupon calling him in question at a Council of War; he was not
questioned, but, as has been said, with Importunity obtained, that the
slanders, spread abroad by base Libellers against him, might be questioned, and
he cleared from them: that only is true in it, that he was condemned by that
Council of War, and no mervail, they were resolved before hand, as you have
heard; and the whole carriage of it has been truly related, whereof there is
not bare affirmations only, but sufficient proofs. Mr. May, had his affections
lean that way, might much more justly and truly have brought in a parenthesis,
to commend this Gentleman's fidelity, wisdom, vigilance, and courage showed in
saving that Town (when Prince Rupert was without with 4000 Horse and 2000 Foot,
as himself says, and a conspiracy within to betray it unto him, of so many,
and those so powerful in the City, as one of them was Sherieff that year, or
the year before, and the Town at that time little better fortified than any
open Village in the Country) than here to draw in a parenthesis, purposely to
disgrace him; and yet of this, though he handle it in particular, he thinks not
fit to speak one word in his commendation. It is well enough known, that if the
General had not sent Colonel Fiennes down, having notice of this design of
Prince Ruperts upon the Town, by Mr. White, and commanded him to take care of
it, the Town had then been lost; and for his own particular, as he has been
since rewarded for his service, it had been better he had let it alone and gone
into Gloucestershire, whither at the request of Mr. Stephens, and other
Gentlemen of that Country, the Lord Say, being Lord Lieutenant thereof, he was
sent by the General, with some other Troops of Horse with him under his
Command; but at the instance of Mr. White, and upon his information of the
danger Bristol was in, by reason of this design upon it, whereof the General
had some notice before another way, and finding it confirmed by Mr. Whites
coming up purposely to inform him thereof; he commanded him to take that in his
way, and do his best to prevent that danger, if he should perceive any such
thing as was feared and reported to be in design upon the Town; and only by
his care and industry it was prevented, as all men know, and he afterward thus
rewarded: Mr. May, in all this, takes notice of nothing but Prince Ruperts
happiness, that he took it afterward, with more Honor and less bloodshed, so
all the commendation is given to Prince Ruperts good fortune; but mark this
falsehood with the rest, for it cost Prince Rupert afterward so much blood
before he took it, what ever Mr. May is pleased to report in his story of it,
that the purchase by themselves was not thought worth the price they were made
to pay for it: I have added this, that Mr. May himself, whom I have heard to be
an ingenuous man, may judge, whether in all these things he has used that
indifferency which is, suitable to his promises, considering with what Elogies
he follows other men, reserving discourses, as he says, purposely to be
handled for that end, apart by themselves; who indeed were the men that left
that Town, and by their own confession, under their hands, if they should be
beaten and lose the Field, when they pressed him that was Governor, to assist
them with 1200 of the best Soldiers of his Garrison, sent under the Command of
his Lieutenant Colonel, as the only way and means to save the Town, as it was
resolved, not by themselves alone, but at a Council of War, as I have showed,
before he would yield to part with any of his Guarrison to strengthen them in
the Field, for he made that Objection, that they might be beaten, and lose the
Field, as they did, and the strength of his Garrison thereby; and how did they
lose it? Mr. May will not tell us, when they had betwixt 2 or 3000 Horse, and
2000 stout and good Foot, as they showed themselves to be, and this against
1100 Horse only, without Foot, or Artillery, they being furnished with both,
for there came no more under Wilmot from Oxford; these things are well known,
and might easily have been known to Mr. May, had he been willing to know them;
but because he has no will to take notice of them (for they suit not well to
his panegyric reserved discourses) give me leave a little to discover the
truth of those Western businesses, which ended in this unhappy defeat at the
Devizes, and how that Army was there lost. Sir William Wallers being sent unto
the West, the place he desired to be employed in, offering to command in chief,
and not to be kept under the General in his Army, as all men know, and the sad
event, lately mentioned, of the loss of the Generals Army in the West, made it
too manifest; he being with his Forces at Bristol, as Mr. May tells us, the King
sent Prince Maurice and the Marquess of Hartford, with forces from Oxford into
the West, to join with Sir Ralph Hopton and his Western Forces drawn out of
Devonshire and Cornwall, that by that conjunction there might be an Army strong
enough to subdue all the West, and overthrow those Country Forces, which the
Gentlemen and Freeholders of those parts, well affected to the Parliament and
their own just Rights, had raised for the maintenance thereof; amongst whom,
the principal were Sir Francis Popham and his sons, with Sir John Horner and
others, this Mr. May touches, but tells not, how all their Forces, which were
considerable, were suffered to be lost, though so well affected to the
Parliament as none more; he tells indeed what Sir William Wallers was a doing,
while he suffered them to be lost and scattered by the Enemy, which he might
have prevented, and ought, by the Charge committed to him of those Countries,
and so have joined to his own forces so considerable a strength of the well
affected people of those Countries, raised and armed by the Gentlemen for the
Parliament: For had he, when he went out of Bristol, as all men expected, and
in all reason was fit to be done, gone to assist those Gentlemen, who had
raised the Forces of the Countries, to oppose Hoptons advance forwards, and
Prince Maurice and Marquis Hartfords joining their Forces with him, they had
overthrown them, and broken them severally, before ever they could have meet
and joined their Forces together, and all those Countries Forces, raised by
those worthy Gentlemen in the Western Countries, had been encouraged, assisted,
and preserved, (who had showed such constant affection to the Parliament) to be
joined to the Forces Commanded by Sr. William Waller, which would have made
that Army so strong, as all the West of England must needs in all probability
have submitted to the Parliament, there being no Forces left that could oppose
such a strength as hereby Sr. William Waller would have had: but in stead of
going about so necessary a service, as this then was, what does he? Contrary to
men's expectations, upon some intelligence coming to him, that Hereford, or
this, and that other Town in those parts might be surprised, out of Bristol he
goes, and flies (as Mr. May terms it) clean another way from giving assistance
to the Gentlemen, who expected him, and preventing the conjunction of the Kings
Forces, which could admit of no delay; and stays in taking and plundering
Hereford and some other Towns, until Prince Maurice and Marquis Hartford, in
the mean time, without any opposition, or interruption, unite all their Forces
together, fall upon those Gentlemen and their Forces, who waited for his coming
and assistance, break them and scatter them, to the great disservice and
prejudice of the Parliament at present, but especially as it proved afterward:
that which he in the mean time was running up and down after, far from the
place that then required his presence, and that which Mr. May reserves his
discourse to set forth, was a service which afforded himself plunder, and that,
as Mr. May says, much to his advantage, but neither profit nor advantage to
the Parliament at all, for the Towns being plundered, were left, and afterward
possessed by the Enemy again, fortified and kept against the Parliament, as is
known by the Siege of Hereford, where the whole Army of the Scots lay after
this a long time, and could not reduce it: When this plundering voyage was
past, which Mr. May sets forth at large, but putting things together, which, I
take it, differed in time (it may be, as they were brought unto him) Sir
William Waller returns, when it was too late, toward Bristol, finds Hopton
with his Western Army joined with the Forces brought by Prince Maurice and
Marquis Hartford, and by them the Country Gentlemen and their forces
dispersed, the Enemies Army grown so strong by their conjunction, and those
that came in unto them, upon the scattering of the Forces of the Gentlemen,
that in the Countries were well affected, for want of timely assistance, that
he with all his forces was not able to encounter them, but constrained to press
the Governor of Bristol to afford him both men and Ammunition, otherwise he
could not keep the field, and then both Town and Country would be lost: This
was the effect of that his rambling and running up and down from the service,
that required his presence and his Forces, by which, all this disservice and
prejudice that the Parliament received, might have been prevented; but this
plundering journey diverted him, that he neither gave timely assistance to
their friends, nor opposition to the Enemy. The Governor of Bristol, as has
been said, afforded him both Ammunition and 1200 Soldiers, the strength of
that Garrison, upon the resolution at a Council of War of his Officers (some of
the chief Gentlemen of the Countries retired in thither, and Townsmen being
present) that as things then stood, the only means to save that Town was, to
strengthen him, that he might not lose the Field: upon this addition of
strength, with Ammunition, sent him out of Bristol, they fight the Enemy, the
Fight continued till night without any considerable advantage appearing on
either side; that which seemed to give the advantage to Sir William Waller, was
Sir Ralph Hoptons drawing off the Field, and Marching away the next morning,
which it was thought was occasioned by want of Ammunition, some accident in the
Battle befalling him in that respect; and this is made the more probable, by
the Ammunition sent unto him from Oxford to the Devizes, which was intercepted;
whatever was the cause, he left the Field and marched away; Sir William Waller,
with his Army following, he retreated into the Devizes, and Prince Maurice and
Marquis Hartford went to Oxford, Sir William Waller with all his Forces, Horse
and Foot, blocks them up in this Town, intercepts Ammunition sent unto them
from Oxford, upon this they offer to treat and surrender the place upon
conditions, which had it been entertained, all those Cornish Forces and that
Army had disbanded, and gone home, and the West been in the Parliaments power,
but no Treaty would be hearkened unto; neither was there any Souldier-like
course taken, or attempt made to force and storm the place, no man in
particular, nor time appointed for that work, but there they stay about it,
doing nothing to any purpose, as some of the ablest Foot-Officers observed, and
afterward spoke of it, until Wilmot came from Oxford, with a matter of 1100
Horse, to their assistance that were blocked up within the Town; when he was
come, he could neither go into the Town to Hopton, nor be with his Foot come
out to him, Sir William Wallers whole Army being between them; this Party,
which Wilmot brought, seemed so inconsiderable, they having in their Army of
Horse double the number to them, that neglecting the help of their foot, they
drew up their Horse a Mile or two before their Foot, leaving them behind, and
took from the Foot, to carry along with their Horse, some pieces of
Artillery, and so, out of an overmuch confidence in the numbers of their
Horse, would not make any use of their Foot, nor draw them up with them, which
had they done, they must needs have beaten the Enemy out of the Field, for
they had neither Foot nor any Ordnance with them, but they will do the business
with their Horse, and when they came to do it, they charged not the whole body
of the Enemies Horse, nor with their own whole body of Horse, double in
number, as I have said, to the Enemies, but stood disputing a place of
advantage, the gaining of the top of a Hill, with one Regiment to one of the
Enemies, till at length thereby, two or three of their Regiments being broken,
all their Horse began to run and would not be stayed, nay they would not rally
themselves behind their Foot, being a Body of 2000 that stood firm behind them
in the Field, where they might have done it safely, and with their help (which
before they had despised) have recovered all, and bearen the Enemy out of the
Field certainly enough, notwithstanding that ruffle they had received upon the
dispute of that place, which was but some Regiments neither, but when ^hey set
a running, they would not be made to look behind them, until they came to
Bristol with the ill news, and shameful indeed, of having abandoned all their
Foot, and left them in the Field to shift for themselves; who not discouraged
by all this, stood to their Arms, firm in a Body, saying one to another, sure
our Horse will come to us again; and when the Enemies Horse came up to charge
them, they fired upon them in that manner, that they beat them off, and made
them run back in rout and disorder, at which time, if their own Horse had been
there and fallen on, they had wholly routed and broken them; and thus they kept
themselves together and beat off the Enemy, though so shamefully forsaken,
until their own Ordnance were turned upon them, which the Horse had drawn up
from them, when foolishly they neglected to make use of their assistance, and
running away had left in the Enemies hands, and until they saw Hopton with his
Foot marching up out of the Town to join with the Enemies Horse against them.
Here you have, in particulars, the whole carriage, or rather most unwise, and
most unhappie miscarriage of this Western business, from the beginning to the
end; in no piece of it so managed as deserved a Discourse apart and of purpose
to set forth the merit thereof, but rather to show the disservices that did
arise from the ill mannagement of this business from first to last. If those
Summersetshire Gentlemen, and others of the Western Counteys, constantly
faithful to the Parliament, who at that time were deserted, and altogether
failed of the assistance they expected from Sir William Waller, by his running
up and down to Hereford and other places, while they were left to the Enemy to
be lost, and such of them (as there were some) who were at the last Battle at
the Devizes, or Run away Hill, as they call it, and saw all; shall be asked of
these particulars, by Mr. May, and of the consequences which necessarily
followed thereupon; I assure my self, they will testify, that what I have
rela^ed is the truth, and Mr. May thereby will be better informed than he has
been: the truth is, this (which Mr. May styles usual celeritie, and activitie,
in running to Hereford and up and down to other places, to catch Towns and
plunder them, so far distant from the place where at that time these active
forces, as he terms them, were expected, and ought to have been employed, for
the prevention of these ill consequences, which their failer at that time
occasioned, and by their timely attending the business, might certainly have
been prevented) fell out also in such an unhappie conjuncture of affairs, that
in all probability of humane reason, the consequences of these miscarriages
had not only been the loss of the Western Counteys, the City of Bristol, and
what so many well affected Gentlemen in those Countries were exposed unto, but
the loss of all, Parliament, City of London, and the whole Kingdom, had the
King taken the advantage and followed it, marching up to London with that
numerous Army made up of all his Forces joined together, where he would at
that time have found the Generals Army so mouldred away by sickness, and lying
near London, into which they would drop as into a wood, that they were able to
make little resistance; and what they were in his own esteem at that time, his
answer shows, when he was desired to relieve Bristol; but God was pleased to
prevent this, by casting the King upon Sieges, till we could recover our
selves. It is very likely, this discourse will kindle coals, when truth is laid
open to the view of the world, and all vizards pulled off, those, whose foul
faces are thereby discovered, will begin to wince like galled b^cked horses,
when they are rubbed, and as you must expect their heels, so I may expect these
men's pens to be diped in gall and vinegar; but I value it not at all, rail and
lie as long as they list, all I desire both in this, and in all other
particu^ars, is to hold forth to the presentage, and transmit to posteri^ie ^he
naked truth of things without any dresses arising from faction, part-taking, o^
any other respect; which being done, I leave it to the God of truth o^ wo^k
m^ns hearts to embrace truth made known to them, or g^ve them over to believe
lies, because they love them better; in his just judgment, as shall se^m good
to himself. That I have done my duty, and that which in this tim^ I think my
part to do, shall satisfy me; only as Mr. May, in his Preface, has a request
to his Reader, so I will here request of him (being, as I before said I have
hea^d, a m^n of inge^uitie, otherwise I should not trouble my self about it)
that he, when he reads this, will not understand it, as intended to cast a
reproach upon him or his writings, but only better to inform him of the truth
of things, wherein, as in some other things which I could show him, so in this
particular I am sure, he has been misinformed. I will conclude with that which
I think will satisfy all men in this par^icular, but such whose malice, envy,
and prae^ngag^m^nts therein I will not suffer them to be satisfi^ with any
thing, and that is the Testimony of all the chief Officers of the Army, for
Col. Fiennes his clearing, which as they expressed presently upon the place
when ^t was retaken, being abundantly satisfied therein, and taking notice of a
special providence ordering things so, as seemed to point at the vindication of
his Honor, so they thought fit, and themselves bound in conscience, (upon the
coming forth of a printed Paper, containing a Catalogue of their services and
successes, whereunto their names were affixed, which paper, as others, cast a
slander upon this Gentleman) to set down their opinions therein, and subscribe
their names thereunto, in a Declaration which they writ to disavow that slander
in the printed Paper, and sent the writing so subscribed by them to the
Gentleman; and whether this be not more conducing to his honor, than such a
Sentence, of such a Council of War, so prepared, so contrived and carried, as I
have showed before, can prejudice the same, I leave to all indifferent men to
judge. I shall add also a Letter, written by Col. Fleetwood, to the Lord Say,
instantly after the taking of the Town again by Storm, Col. Fleetwood being
upon the place, and in the service, that thereby it may appear how the Officers
of the Army reflected upon this particular, and expressed themselves therein:
and what was the judgment also of the Officers under Prince Rupert, concerning
this unjust proceeding against Col. Nathaniel Fiennes, who were at the
surrender of the Town when Prince Rupert took it, and saw in what condition it
then was, and how notwithstanding by him defended, whereof certainly they were
better able to judge and give testimony, than a company of Tapsters, Women,
Boys, Run-aways, and Soldiers, who were accused by him for refusing to do
their duty in the action, with paper-Testimonies (the persons themselves not
being produced) which might be made in an Alehouse, or under an hedge: and
these were the proofs made use of against him, while Gentlemen of worth and
understanding, as Mr. John Ash, and Mr. Hodges, with others, testified the
truth in his behalf, and for his clearing; but any proofs would serve the turn,
the business being before determined. The original of both these Copies are to
be seen, that of the letter, in the Lord Says hand, the other, the Gentleman
has had long by him, but satisfying himself in the clearness of his own
conscience, and being cleared also otherwise, in the opinion of the House,
actually restified upon the same occasion, he has kept it by him, and would
not publish it: but for my part, considering the scandalous lies published by
this Incendiarie, and by other railing Pamphlets to his disgrace, which may
pass to posterity, and to others for the present, who may know as little as
posterity will do of the truth of things in this particular; as those worthy
men thought it fit to declare their opinions for his justification, and
vindication, so do I think it fit, and my self bound, having the true Copies of
both, to publish them to the world: Col. Fleetwood, and Major Harrison,
mentioned in this Letter, are Gentlemen that are known to be fide digni, and
such as would not speak or write that which were not truth.

A Copy of Colonel Fleetwoods Letter, written to the Lord Say from Bristol,
upon the taking of that Town by storm from Prince Rupert, by the Army under the
command of Sr. Thomas Fairfax.
My Lord,
THis unspeakable mercy of the Lord, in delivering up this City into our
hands, I doubt not will enlarge the hearts of all the Saints to praise his holy
name; that which to me much adds to the mercy, is that it has pleased God, in
this so much to vindicate the honor and innocence of that Noble Gentleman,
Colonel Fiennes, whose nearness of relation to your Lordship silences my Pen
from writing what my thoughts of him are, but this I must say, he is now, even
by all our Officers, that I speak with, mentioned with much honor and respect,
and acknowledged they could not imagine, how more should be done by any man,
than he did in this, considering the place, and the men he had to keep it:
what, My Lord Hawley and others of the Princes Army say, I shall acquaint you
with, that they ever judged the sentence upon Colonel Fiennes, as most unjust,
the Town being then so weakly fortified, and the number of men he had to keep
it withal, so few, his men being not half the number of what they had; we do
look upon this business in the whole procedure of it, as that wherein the Lord
did intend to clear Colonel Fiennes innocence: it is good, my Lord, to trust
all our affairs in Gods hands, and to wait his time, being assured of this,
that in every seeming frown there is a smile, Love is intended in all, if we do
not anticipate Providence we shall see all is best; in every dispensation there
is only this designed, to endear our hearts to Jesus Christ, I doubt not but
he has in this learned to know the mind of God, and has made such
improvement, as he rather rejoices, than repines at the hand of Providence;
Lieutenant General Cromwell intends to make a Relation of this business,
wherein he will endeavor to clear the whole business, I shall therefore not
further trouble your Lordship, than with this, that I am

Your most humble and Obliged servant Charles Fleetwood.
Bristol, 10 September, 1646. Major Harrison salutes your Lordship with his
humble service, he was the person to whom my Lord Hawley expressed, as is above
mentioned upon his questioning this particular.



A Copy of the Declaration made by the Chief Officers of the Army, under the
Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax (after the Storming of Bristol, and taking of it)
in vindication of the honor of Col. Nathaniel Fiennes, who surrendered it
before to Prince Rupert, by whom it was now surrendered to this Army.
WHereas in a Paper lately printed, containing a Catalogue of the Successes of
this Army, the City of Bristol is R^corded to have been cowardly and basely
lost, when Surrendered to the Enemis by Col. Nathaniel Fiennes, and we find the
name of the General and this Army prefixed thereunto; lest, by our silence,
that should be thought the sense and judgment of the Officers of this Army
(which is far otherwise) we therefore, to do right, as to that worthy
Gentleman, so to truth it self, held our selves bound in conscience, and in th
bond of Love, to declare, That the circuit of the Line and Works about that
City; being above four males, and the Works of little strength then, compared
with what they were a^^h last taking thereof; and considering how few men Col.
Fiennes had then to def^nd such a Circuit, the flower of his Garrison, having
so lately before been broken and lost by that unhappie blow given to the
Parliaments Army near the Devizes; and considering, notwithstanding all this,
how powerful and continued assaults were sustained b^ him upon a general
Storm, and how much blood, both of Soldiers and considerable Officers, that
place cost the Enemy, and that after the Line was entered, the Suburbs were
still disputed, till the Common Soldiers, in great numbers, deserted their
Colors, and quitted their Guards (of all which, by diverse Officers and others
that were eyewitnesses of the action, we have been fully assured) Upon all
these Considerations we are fully satisfied in our judgments and consciences,
That the defense of that place, by that Gentleman, was both faithful and
honorable; to which a far greater witness, than ours, seems to call for our
suffrage, even the Divine hand, eminently pointing at his vindication, in the
late happy reduction of that place; when, although it was made much more
defencible by the addition of several fortifications, and furnished with a
double proportion of all necessaries for a defense, especially of men, most of
them tried Soldiers, commanded by Prince Rupert himself, who the former time
took it, and many other great Officers under him, men of long experience, great
abilities, and known courage and fidelity to the service they were in, and a
body of 700 or 800 Horse, to scower within the Line, and beat our Foot when
entered; Nevertheless, against all these advantages, the Divine Providence,
clearing the former Governors Honor, and innocence, delivered the same Town by
Storm to this Army, and that with the six^h part of the loss of men, on our
part, the Enemy then suffered, when Col. Fiennes d fended it. Nex^ for his
Surrende^ing of it after the Enemy was enter^d the Line and Suburbs, and the
Soldiers deserted their Guards and Colors, we cannot but consider, that he
had in this case no intrenchment defencible with the small number h^ had then
left, except the Castle, which how unte^able it was, and is for any time
considerable, against an Army prepared for Battery and Ass^ult, all that have
seen it, and can judge, (will we think) witness with us; that, had he drawn in
thither with his Soldiers, he must have left that great City (one of the
Chief in the Kingdom) with the estates and lives of thousands of Inhabitants
(mo^^ of ^h m well aff cted, and indeed most of the chief friends the
Parliament had i^ the Count^ey round about, who were fled in thither for
shelter) exposed to spoil and destruction, or at least to the fury of the
Enemy; so that having in this case no rational hopes of timely relief (the
Parliaments Western Forces being then all wholly broken and beaten out of the
Field, in that blow at the Devizes, and other defeats further West, and the
Earl of Essex his Army then so low through sickness and weakness, as 't was
forced to retire out of the Field) we conceive that Col. Fiennes had good
reason to treat for Conditions, and make the best he could for the City, and
those that were with him in it, and the conditions he made in that case were
good and honorable; and wherein also we cannot but take notice of the same hand
of God pointing at his Vindication in the late Reduction of that place,
wherein, although Prince Rupert had (besides all the advantages before mentioned
for a defense, above Col Fiennes his case) the addition of a Royal Fort, not
Subject to battery, not assailable without much and long work of Aproaches,
and both that, and the Castle furnished plentifully with Victuals and
Ammunition for a long defense; and though by advantage of the Fort and Castle,
he had betwixt both such full command both of the Town, and of the Grounds
within the Line, as we could hardly find within the Line where to draw up our
men out of their annoyance, but were fain, for the present, to draw back much
of the Army out of the Line after our entrance; and though both his Souldierie
and the Townsmen for the most part stuck to him, after we were entered; yet
finding neither the Castle, nor Fort, nor both sufficient to relieve and secure
his whole number of Souldierie, and the rest depending on him (which was Col.
Fiennes his case much more clearly) he found reason enough, to make Conditions
for himself and them, and upon Treaty to Surrender, on terms not better, nor
more advantageous for his party or the City, than those Col. Fiennes
obtained, were, if as well kept. And therefore from all these considerations
(as the Council of war that censured him, did it without imputation of
Cowardice or unfaithfulness to him, and as the Lord General Essex in remitting
that sentence, and the House of Commons in his readmission thither, have led us
the way, so we do in discharge of our consciences before God, and unto men,
hereby testify unto the world, that our sense upon that whole astion of Col.
Fiennes, is far other than the said printed paper does import, and that we
neither have in our selves, nor do believe, that there is any cause for others
to entertain any such thoughts of dishonor toward him concerning that
business. In testimony whereof, we have hereunto subscribed this (...) of
(...) 1646.

Thomas Fairfax Oliver Cromwell Henry Ireton Ph. Skippon R. Hammon Char.
Fleetwood Th. Harrison Nath. Rich. Rich. Fortescue Rich. Dean. John Hewson W.
Stane Leon Watson


For the surrender of Banbury, which he couples with Bristol, it is a Taleso
ridiculous and false, as that the Reader may see, by this own instance, how
eagerly this man catches up a false report against his Neighbor, and carries
it up and down, making himself thereby the Devils Porter to vent his wares,
without ever examining, whether they be true, or false, so that they serve his
turn, to disgrace those, who will not be drawn into the factious proceedings of
his party; and this may be observed throughout this whole Pamphlet of his, as I
shall show when I meet with the particulars in it, and for that purpose it
seems he was set upon this work; how ill this becomes those, who have the cause
of God so often in their mouths, and how unsuitable it is to a man truly godly,
the 15 Psalm teaches us. It is well known that Banbury was never any Garrison
of the Parliaments, no more than any other open Village in the Country, for
such was that Town; neither was the Castle in it any other; than an old house
of the Lord Says, wherein he never inhabited; the King indeed afterward made
it a strong piece, as most in England, and put a Garrison into it, to the
spoiling of that Town, and drawing all the adjacent parts of the Countries
about it under contribution; and for this the Town may thank themselves, and
the parts adjacent had little cause to thank them; for the Parliament had twice
sent Forces (before the King meddled with it) to fortify it, once from
Coventrie 300 Soldiers, and a second time 200 from Northampton, both times the
Town desired they might not be put into the Castle, fearing it might bring the
Kings Forces upon them; and thereby what they feared, and might thus have
prevented, soon after befell them, the King sending Forces into that Castle,
and by Green the Enginier strongly fortifying it. By whom then was Banburie
surrendered to the prejudice of the Parliament? was it by the Kings Forces, for
never any other had a Garrison in it? Here you see one of his fine fables: but
that he may have no creeping hole, like a Fox, to get out at, I will not leave
unanswered, that which I can imagine could give any color to this tale told
him, or invented by him: At the first beginning of these unhappy troubles,
before any stroke struck, or War begun, when the settling of the Militia by
Ordinance of Parliament and Authority thereof, and the Commission of Array by
Warrant from the King, were in agitation in several Counties of the Kingdom,
there were several meetings, in the several parts of those Counties, upon the
putting in execution the one and the other of these Commissions, but as yet
without blows, or bloodshed: it fell out to be so in Warwickshire, the Earl
of Northampton, Lord Lieutenant of that County by Commission from the King,
endeavoring to execute the Commission of Array, and the Lord Brook on the
other side to put in execution the ordinance of Parliament for settling of the
Militia; so when the one sent out Warrants to call together the Train-band-men,
and Volunteers, to one side of the County, the other summoned them to another:
during this contention between them in the County, the Lord Brook, without
Warrant, either from the General, or the Parliament, (as is to be gathered from
his own words) conveys down 4 Pieces of Ordnance from London, to carry them to
his Castle at Warwick; when he had brought them to Banbury, the Gentlemen of
Warwickshire, who met the Lord Brook there, doubted they should not be strong
enough to go through with that business, and carry the Ordnance to Warwick, if
the Lord of Northampton should meet them upon the way, as they suspected he
would, having had notice of it; hereupon the Lord Brook sent unto Mr. John
Fiennes, and desired him to accompany them with so many as he could get to go
along with him, which he did, and had so many that voluntarily came unto them,
out of Banbury and other Towns adjoining, that when the Lord of Northamton met
them, as he did upon the edge of Warwickshire, after a little time that they
had stood facing one another, there were twice as many with the Lord Brook as
there were with him, in so much, that it was reported the Lord of Northampton
should say to those Gentlemen, who had put him upon this business, that they
had brought him there to lose his Honor; for it was thought if one of the
Pieces of Artillery, whereof they had four, besides a double number of men,
had been discharged upon them, they having none, they had all left the Field
presently, and, if I mistake not, some of themselves have confessed as much:
But the Lord Brook and Mr. Purefoy, who were the chief actors in that business,
thought it fitter at that time to treat, than fight, and to that end sent to my
Lord Northampton to treat with him, who stood stiffly upon this, that no Pieces
of Artillery should be brought into Warwickshire, to fortify any place in
that County, without the Kings Commission for it, and therefore they must carry
the Ordnance back again out of the County; which in conclusion, notwithstanding
the great advantage they had, they agreed unto, a thing wondered at, and the
Pieces were drawn back out of Warwickshire to Banburie, being asked by
friends, why they would do this, having a double number of men and Artillery
besides, the conditions also being dishonorable? they both gave this for the
reason (which I know to be true, for I heard it) that it was because they would
not be the first that should begin this unhappy War and strike the first blow
in it, and shed the first blood: it seems also they had no Warrant for what
they had done, in bringing of the Pieces down: for the Lord Brook, when they
came back again to Banburie, desired Mr. John Fiennes, that he might leave the
Pieces in the Castle of Banburie, until he went to London and got a Warrant
from the Parliament to carry them to his Castle at Warwick; whereby it is
evident, he had none before, but had done it of his own head without Authority;
he promised also Mr. Fiennes to return again within a week, but he neither came
himself, nor brought, nor sent any Warrant from the Parliament, or the General,
within a week, a fortnight, or three weeks, as I take it; in which time the
King being sent unto by the Lord of Northampton, sent a Warrant to him, to
demand the Ordnance in his name, and commanded the Earls of Darbie and
Barkshire, with the Chief Gentlemen in Office in Oxfordshire, to require the
delivery of them upon his Warrant; these came to Banburie with the Earl of
Northampton and Sr. Nicholas Biron, who was sent by the King with the Warrant
to require the Ordnance in the Kings name, and they altogether with the
Townsmen desired Mr. Fiennes, that he would not, by disobeding the Kings
Warrant, be the first that should begin a War, and make his own Country and
theirs, and that Town, the feat of it, and that for the Ordnance of a private
man which he had no Warrant to keep; there being the Kings Warrant requireing
the delivery of them, and challenging them to be his: at that time all Warrants
from the King, which were not by Parliament adjudged illegal (as that of the
Commission of Array) were obeyed as formerly, all Writs issued in his name, and
under his Seal: Mr. Fiennes upon this Warrant delivered the Ordinance, having
no Authority to keep them from the Parliament, or General, which might protect
him against that Authority which required the delivery of them, neither was
there any Authority for bringing them thither that he knew of, but he might
rather suspect it was not approved of, when he could hear nothing of the Lord
Brook (who promised to bring a Warrant from the Parliament within a week) in
two, or three weeks, and yet he knew he went up purposely for it, as himself
said: what wise man can think it fit, for him, without any Warrant, to justify
such an action, to be the beginner of such a quarrel as this, for another man,
who upon that very reason, and because he had no Warrant for what ^e had done,
deserts the action himself, and draws back the Ordnance out of Warwickshire,
being required in the Kings name not to bring them into it, without the Kings
Warrant for it, and this when no Warrant was showed un^o him from the King, as
there was to Mr. Fiennes? if Mr. Fiennes had been the first man that had shed
blood, and begun this War to keep these Ordnance without any Warrant for it,
nay, seeing a Warrant was not sent when purposely gone for, but so long delaid,
and he might thereupon well think denied; what could have excused him from
being a Murderer, a Traitor, the first kindler of this unhappy fire in the
Kingdom, and running most foolishly into all these crimes, by doing that
without all Obligation thereunto for another, who for fear of this, durst not,
or would not do it for himself? The Law would have condemned him justly, and he
had no ground to expect protection from the Parliament, having no Authority,
nor Warrant from them for such an action. Thus you have that which I think to
be the ground and only color for this Tale, which he dresses up, in this
Pamphlet, into a false slander, purposely to disgrace that Family, which it is
well known has not deserved ill of this Kingdom, nor of his own Nation,
however requited: If there be any other thing imaginable concerning Banburie
that has come to his ears, which are wide open to receive what ever may give
him the least pretense, or color to cast up his gorge against this Family, it
can be nothing but what befell Banburie after the Battle at Edgehill, some
five miles from that Town, which, in respect of that Family, is as idle and
ridiculous as the former, not one of them being there, or near the place when
the battle was fought: two of them were in the Generals Army when the fight
was, and did as good service there, as those who are taken notice of by name,
being of the same place and rank in the Army that they were, as Sr. William
Balfore and Sr. Philip Stapleton, in whose Regiments they were, could witness:
But upon this occasion, it not having been observed by others, I will lay open
the miscarriage of that business in particular, with the consequences thereof,
which will appear to be one of the most unsouldier-like, unreasonable, and
unhappy, that has fallen out in all these Wars. The Generals Army being, in
the beginning of the fight, in some danger, it pleased God yet in the end to
turn the day and give him the victory, though a considerable part of his Army
were not then come up to the rest, which invited the Enemy the rather to engage
in the fight: when all the Kings Foot were broken except two Regiments, and
those but pieces of Regiments which remained, their Horse coming up to them,
they withdrew out of the Field where the battle had been fought, leaving the
General and his Army upon the ground, and so retired up to the top of the Hill,
where the Horse standing sometime, until they could draw off their Ordnance,
the Horse also went away: At that time came in Colonel Hamden, with three fresh
Regiments of Foot, and ten Troops of Horse, and some Artillery, to the Generals
Army, these coming up after the fight was ended, a fresh supply not having been
at all in the battle, when it was expected, the Enemy being beaten out of the
Field, and this addition of fresh Forces come to the Army, they would have
advanced forward, having but five miles to go to Banburie, and make use of this
good success to the completing of the victory, which had they done, the King
had not had one of his Foot remaining, all his Ordnance, Ammunition and baggage
taken, and been forced himself to escape with his Horse, which would have been
difficult for him then to have done, for he himself afterward complains, that
the Countries thereabout were prepared and resolved to rise upon him: In stead
of doing this, which in all probability had made an end of this unhappy War in
the first beginning of it; The General with Merick and Ballard (it was thought
by their advise) suddenly rides back seven miles, to Warwick, a place destitute
of provisions to refresh the Army (which was the pretense of it) by their
having quartered about it as they came but a day, or two before, whereas had
they marched to Banburie, they had had all plenty of provisions, where the
Country expected them, and for their own safety, desired their coming; and
this was done so suddenly and unexpectedly to all the rest of the Officers,
that Sr. William Balfore, Colonel Hamden, Sr. Philip Stapleton, with diverse
others, admired at it, and were much grieved for it, as they testified in their
speeches one to another, and some of them expressed then, what they assured
themselves would be the sad effects thereof, which proved so, and quickly
appeared; for the King fearing nothing more than the Generals advancing with
his Army after him, was going away and passing by Banburie with what speed he
could; but when he understood the General was gone back to Warwick, Prince
Rupert with the Horse went to the place where the battle was fought, and the
Forces that were passing by Banburie, with the Artillery, were drawn back
thither, the Town being as I have said an open Village, having neither Walls,
Gates nor Bars, at any entrance into it, but having with Carts, Boards, and
such like other things stopped the passages into the Town as well as they
could, to prevent the Enemies straggling Horse from plundering the Town,
expecting the Generals Army for their defense, when they heard, after the fight
and victory, he had left them and was turned back to Warwick, twelve or
fourteen miles from them, and saw the Kings Forces thereupon returned to the
Town, the Townsmen presently pulled down those Barricadoes, which they had
stopped the entrance into the Town with, knowing the other Army having
deserted them, they could not hold it an hour against that force the King had
left with him, nor the Castle against the Kings Ordnance, being then without
any fortification, as has been said; and this they did, hoping to be better
dealt withal, when they made no resistance, which would have been to no
purpose; hereupon that Town was taken and plundered, and the whole Country of
Oxfordshire given up into the Enemies hands, which instantly before had
manifested as good affection to the Parliament as any, readily appearing with
their Train-bands, upon the settling of the Militia, for the Parliaments
assistance, and that on every side of the County, and all that were observed
thereby to have showed themselves well affected to the Parliament given up, by
this Countermarch backward, to be sufficiently plundered by the Enemy: but
this, though bad enough, was not all; for the King hereupon (as he had a very
good color given him) assumes the victory to himself, indeed all the
advantages of a victory were given him hereby, possesses himself of Oxford,
makes that the place of his residence, being in the heart of the Kingdom; also
by surprising some Forces of the Generals Army, as the Lord Peterboroughs
Regiment that accidentally quartered in Banburie, as they were going to the
Army, and some others, all which were given up into the Enemies hands, with
other Forces taken up in that County, thus given up as the rest to the Enemy;
and the Forces which came in unto him, upon the fame of his having obtained the
victory and beaten back the Parliaments Army, for which he caused a solemn
Thanksgiving to be kept in Oxford; he recruits his broken Army, and is put
into a capacity again and a fair probability to compass his first design, to
march up to London, possess himself of that City, and so destroy the
Parliament; how near he came unto the effecting of it, the business at Branford
makes evident to all men, who are acquainted with these passages from first to
last: Here is this Surrender of Banburie, if this be it he aims at, indeed it
was likely to have proved the Surrender of Parliament, City, and whole
Kingdom, and that by a victory thus given to the Enemy, when obtained by us;
for to redeem this oversight and prevent the mischiefs likely to follow
thereupon, the General was constrained to make such long marches, that the King
with his recruited Army might not be at London before him, that he brake and
weakened his Army very much, and then bringing them into the City, lost them as
in a Wood, so that when the King came to Branford, within seven miles of
London, with his whole Army, so few of the Generals could be gotten together,
that some of the Members of both Houses were necessitated to fit up all night
with the Major and the Committee of the Militia of London at Guild Hall, to
persuade them to send forth the Regiments of the Train-bands of London, under
Major Skippon to resist the Kings Army; making it appear to them, how much
safer it would be for the City, to oppose the Enemies coming into it, than to
fight with him in their streets, where he would find many friends to join with
him: with no little difficulty, at one of the Clock after-midnight, they were
persuaded to send forth a very good strength, which had they not done, all had
been endangered, as one, or two of the Regiments of the Generals Army, the Lord
Brooks and Mr. Hollis his were surprised and broken in Branford. These were the
foul failings, and great miscarriages of our first beginnings in War, when we
were but young Soldiers, and had little experience in military affairs in
respect of actions of War, or Councils of War, so that it had been better for
some, how able soever they were, or what good service soever they had
performed, that they had had nothing to do with either; the truth is, until
the new Modelling of the Army, no success was followed to any great advantage
of the Parliament, but if one action in a Summer were performed, then presently
Winter quarters were thought of, though in the midst of Summer, and in the next
Spring the Parliament was new to begin again, both in providing money and men,
and so the Wheel turned about, the King having time enough given him thereby,
upon any loss fully to recover himself; but when the Army was Molded anew
(occasioned in great part by the observation hereof, and some other things)
then the business went on in another manner, with good success, and that
followed to good purpose, and all well carried along, so long as the War
continued. This particular passage of Banburie, which has occasioned the
opening of this whole business fully, was such, that Mr. May in his History
cannot pass it by, but tells us that a Noble Gentleman of the Parliaments side,
expressed himself much to the same purpose, that I have here related, for the
substance of it; and it is likely it was some of those Officers, Members of the
House of Parliament, of whom I spoke before, that used these speeches to him,
for they all professed against it. If any man shall think I have insisted too
long upon these two particulars, let him know, that I have the rather done it,
that men may see the great difference that there is between things when they
are related nakedly, according to the truth of them, as they were acted,
without any factious dressings or vizards put upon them; and when they are
disguised with falsehood, to serve some men's ends, and carry on their designs:
I shall therefore do the like in other particulars, as I meet with them,
strangers and posterity being the persons most of all abused by these
paintings and daubings, malicious scratchings, and dashings, too much used by
Historians: besides, I have a good example and president to follow, in
vindicating the Honor of this Family, from the lies and slanders of malicious,
or ignorant Historians and Pamphleters, the same being formerly done by a
French Historian, showing the falsehood and ignorance, or malice of du-Serres,
in scandalizing Robert de Fiennes, Constable of France, and making his error
therein apparent out of authorities, which if he had had either care or
learning enough to have searched and considered, he had never transmitted such
a lie and slander to posterity, concerning a Noble man of worth, who had done
good service to the King and Kingdom, acknowledged by the King himself: but
these things we must expect from impudent and malicious Pamphleters, and
ignorant Historians, who will be writing whether true or false.

Frisart vol. 1. page 369. Anno 1370. * So the old manuscript in the Earl of
Arundels Library has it. Or fut advise and regard en France par l'aduis and
Counseil des Nobles and des Prelates and a la commune voix de tout le royaume
(que bien y' ayda) qu'il estoit de necessite qui les Francois eussent ung Chef
and Governeur nomme Connestable (car messire Moreau de Fiennes, qu' avoit este
valiant homme and entreprenant aux arms, se vouloit oster and departer de
l'office, etc. John Tillet Recueil des Traictes enter les Roys de France and
d'Angleterre, fol. 90. B. Guesclin, par la demission voluntaire de Messire
Moreau Sire de Fiennes, fut Cree connestable de France. Upon these Authorities,
the French Historian du Plex does put that in the Catalogue of du Serres his
errors (whereof he has compiled a whole book) that he affirms the Constable
Fiennes to have been deposed from his Office for diverse Crimes committed by
him. But I find in the life of Bertrand du Guesclin, bound together with a
book, called [Le Triumph de Neuf preux,] and printed at Paris, Ann. 1507. a
Discourse between the King of France, and Bertrand de Guesclin, when he offered
to him the Constables Sword in manner following:

History de Bertrand du Gueselin, imprimme a Paris 1507.Bertrand, dict le Roy,
nous scavons bien, que vous estes hardy aux arms, heurex en batail, and si
avez la grace du peuple de France; and pour ce que nous sommes plainement
informs de vostre loyaulte and prud hommie, nous vous voulons monter en
honneur and vous donner l'Office de Connestable de France, don't nous vous
liurons l'espee pour garder and defendre nostre royaume. Don't Bertrand remercia
fort le Roy, mais dict Bertrand, Sir, ne pas doncques Connestable le Seigneur
de Fiennes, qui est tant bon Chevallier? Bertrand, dict le Roy, Nostre Cousin
de Fiennes nous a bien servy, mais il est desormais mault-vieil and foible,
pourquoy il ne peult endurer la peine ny soustenir le travail que convient a
l'office, and si nous a rendue l'espee en vous recommendant par dessus tous les
Chevalliers de ce royaume, etc. This long digression I hope will offend no
honest man that loves truth, and desires to have it vindicated from the
slanders that malice and envy has cast upon it. I shall now return to the
chase of this Fox, who runs up and down in a Sheepskin, complaining of want of
Charity and disturbing the peace of the Church, pronouncing that those who
want Charity, what other gifts soever they have, of preaching, prayer, tongues
or sciences otherways, all is nothing; out of his own mouth let him be judged;
in all this Pamphlet what does he, but spread abroad, and cast lies and
slanders upon all, to advance his Contrymen? for when under the name of some
do thus, and some are practicing that, he leaves his lies to be fixed by every
man, according to his fancy, upon whom he will, like a deceiver keeping
himself in generals, no man is free; if he should name the men in particular,
his manifest-truths (as he calls them) would evidently appear to be manifest
lies, invented to carry on their design that set him on work; and who they
were, and what their work was, may appear by what he is so bold to blame them
for not doing themselves, that is, that they did not cast abroad Papers and
Manifestoes to stir up the multitude, and inflame the City and rabble thereof
against the Parliament, which, after this Incendiaries Pamphlet first made use
of, and Cranford sent upon the Exchange to publish a most notorious lie (which
he confessed, he was appointed by Mr. Bailey, one of the Scots Commissioners and
a Minister, to do openly upon the Exchange) was by them done sufficiently as
all men know, and may appear by the Answers, which thereupon the House of
Commons thought necessary to put forth to the Papers, which they had printed
and spread about the City, in which papers they pleaded as much for the Kings
usurped Prerogative, against the Subjects just rights in this Kingdom, as they
on the other side required we should for them insist upon it, that all they
demanded should be put into their hands, and taken out of the Kings, in their
own Kingdom: this was a very ill practice in Statesmen; a great deal more
suitable to the policy and charity of such a pedant as this; for them to
admit and suffer such a fellow to advise them to take such a course, to
practice it, after he had taken the boldness, and manifested the impudency to
reprove them for not doing it soon enough, was no way becoming their persons
and conditions, or present trust and employment, and so will every wise man
judge, that shall read in this Pamphlet, how they are Schooled and Tutored by
this Pedogogue, and consider and compare their practice with it afterward in
this particular. This I have here the rather insisted upon, that I may not be
troubled to take notice of every Lesson he reads them, as soon after he does,
for the company they admitted into privacie with them, for which, he says,
they were laughed at: for suffering such a fellow, or setting him on work to
write such a ridiculous story as this is, they might indeed be much more
worthy to be laughed at, and sure to gain neither credit nor advantage by such
tales.

But to come to some particulars, he instanceth in; For that of our low estate
things being almost, he says, in despair, a fiction of his own brain, which he
still dresseth up like a poor indigent beggar, and brings upon the stage, when
he would have it believed, that pure necessity and fear, made us call for the
help of the Scots, and make the world believe, what great assistance they gave
us, which what it was the world well knows, and we to our cost found; this I
will here pass, having given answer to it before, neither will I trouble my
self with showing what those wonders were, which he says, they did, and
strange encounters these resolute men (as he terms them) met withal at their
first coming into the Kingdom, and made their way through them all; I have
already showed, that if we had not been in a better condition than his
ignorance or falsehood reports us to be in, able not only to defend our selves
without them, but to bring them through those difficulties they met withal,
they had stuck in the birth, and not been delivered from the Lord Newcastles
Army and the Countries opposition. I will come to those passages, wherein
according to his custom under the name of some, he snarls and bites at
nameless persons, casting thereby aspersions upon whom he pleases, or you that
read him please to fix them; this is slander without limit, for it may be any
some you please to imagine; it is very likely, if you ask him whom he would have
you understand those to be, that he sets forth by the name of some, he will
tell you, those who will not fall down and worship his Diana, the Government of
the Kirk, as it is settled in Scotland, nor take that for the pattern showed in
the Mount, but dispute, whether that be in all things according to the Word of
God; these be the some which usually he would have to be understood, and
blasted by this general term, and by the many tales he tells of such, which if
he should apply to particular men, and name them, they would appear (as I have
said) tales so ridiculous and false, that his sheep-skin would be pulled over
his ears, and he appear, in his whole discourse, such as indeed he is, his ends
and aims in it being discovered. While the Parliament was thus low, he says,
many faint-hearted, yea Members of the two Houses run away to the Enemy: here
that which he adds (Members of the two Houses) is a sufficient Character to
make it appear who they were, and thereby make the assertion capable of trial,
whether true or false; had he done so in all the rest, he might have been
justified, if that he had spoken of them had been truth, and none could have
justly condemned him for it; but the cause he alleges of their going, was, as
before, to serve his own turn, being made our low estate and their
faint-heartedness thereupon: 'twas rather their ambition, hope of preferment,
or it may be, in some affection, or conscience not being rightly informed nor
satisfied, in respect of the cause of this War, and taking up of Arms thereupon
(for charity, whereof I would this discourser had one grain, ought to judge
and hope the best in things capable thereof) some of these, and not our low
estate and their fainting thereupon, is more truly to be made the cause, but
that serves not his turn to set forth his Countrey-mens high services, which he
must serve, and will in all; yet that this is so, appears by the staying of
many of them in the Houses long after that time, and therefore it was not fear
that drove the rest away: he adds others did withdraw to their eternal shame,
studying to make their peace more plausibly with the Enemy, and not to run
over to him, at discretion, as others had done: here he shoots his bolt, and it
may light upon whom you lift to place it; if you will be as void of charity as
this discourser is, any man, who at that time had occasion to go to his house,
and stay there for some time, for the disposing of his private business, he
shall be made one of these others, whom he brandeth with this uncharitable
censure, that they withdrew themselves for such an end, to trinckle with the
Enemy for making their p^ace; Let him produce the man or men that did so, and
his proofs, otherwise let him be taken, as he deserves, for a slanderer: would
he like it well, that other men should apply this trinckling with the Enemy to
make their Peace, to whomsoever they think fit, as he himself takes a liberty
to do, without any ground but his own evil thoughts? some men (to use his own
phrase) will apply it to the Scotch Commissioners, and believe they have better
ground for it, than any he can produce for this his slander, as appears by
Digbyes letter to Jermin, wherein he desires him to assure the Queen, that he
would manage the Treaty which he had entertained with some of the Scots
Commissioners, in such a manner as should be for the Kings advantage, and
desires that she would no way doubt of it; to this purpose, the Letters
themselves may be consulted, lying in the Committees hands; let this man, who
is so ready to judge others out of his own evil thoughts, bring forth such an
evidence as this, against any one of those others whom he thus asperseth: they
that shall be offended at this, may thank their Incendiarie, who leads the way
and provokes hereunto all along; had he better ruled his lying and malicious
pen, many things had been passed over in silence, which he has brought forth
to light, to their little advantage, who, it may be, set him on work; at least
to magnify whom, with disgracing others to that end, is the thing aimed at in
the whole work: I will pass over (as I have said) his vain history, of his
Countrey-mens coming into the Kingdom, their hinderance by Sectaries, and when
they had done such wonders, how some at London, not of the meaner sort, sought
by whispering against them to cloud their glory, and when Selbie was taken
(which he will needs attribute to the Scots coming in) some said we had now no
need of them; these things, with what he speaks also of some, who would not
have had Manchester join with them, and when he was joined, of one (but what
one? the man in the moon) sent, as he says, to sow the seeds of division
amongst them, and after a while the same design set on foot again by a Party,
some of those who are opposite to the settled Government of the Church, that is
forsooth, the Government of his Kirk; and now you have him beginning to
manifest who those some are he chiefly spits all his venom at: all these tales
and stories of men without name, of things without proof, I cast away, as every
wise and judicious Reader will do, easily perceiving by these, what was the
man's aim, and end in all the rest of those fictions, which he stuffeth his
pamphlet with; and indeed well may these give a light unto the rest, and
discover of what credit they are.

But there is one story here begun, and a little afterward taken up again by
him, which I will not pass by, the impudency and falsehood thereof is so
notorious to every one that knows the business and passages of that time; and
that is, of some men, (he calls them of that party which he indeed desires
most of all men, by his lies to blemish, and lessen the reputation of, if he
could) who at first, he says, did constantly and frequently court the Scots,
and thereby so take them up, that they alone were admitted to privacie with
them; for which he will needs make the Scots to be laughed at, and according to
his manner, begins to lesson, and school them for it: that which he will have
to be the cause, why these men made their application to the Scots
Commissioners, at their first coming into the Kingdom, must be the recoverie of
their credit, which he must therefore make to be diminished, and invent some
tale for that purpose, as the loss in the West; and this, he says, their
intimacie with the Scots, did greatly advantage them to do, because many gave
way unto them, when they saw them so intimate with the Scots whom they knew to
have no by-ends; by this complying with the Scots Commissioners (whom, he
says, they courted for their own ends, for had it been for the public, the
Scots always remaining constant to their point (though not with that vigor,
this Incendiarie could have wished) they would not have changed, but having
obtained their ends, they leave them, and point blank oppose them) by this help
(if his lies may be credited) they chiefly raised their height of reputation
and opin^on amongst men. Here you have, in his own words, put together out of
diverse places treating of this subject, this invention of his, wherein as there
are many particular falsehoods, so of the whole it may be truly said, Cujus
contrarium verum est; for this Gamester, to deceive, has turned the Tables;
turn them again and you shall have the game lie right before you. The Scotch
Commissioners at their first coming into England, find these men, whom this
fellow will make to be crestfallen in their reputations (one of his particular
falsehoods) to be in highest esteem and power in the Houses of Parliament, for
their known fidelity to the public, and ability to do service thereunto, so
little need had they of such props, as the Scots, to hold up their reputation;
hereupon the Scots apply themselves chiefly to them, and fall into intimacie
with them, as conceiving that to be the best means for them to prevail in what
they should desire in both Houses: This correspondencie they held with these
leading men, or rulers of affairs (as he sometimes names them, complaining
withal, that Sectaries prevailed too much with them) until they found, they
could by no means lead them from making The defense of the known just Rights,
and Liberties of the Subjects of England, and Privileges of Parliament (the
Supreme Court therein) the cause of their taking up of Arms; and in stead
thereof, change the state of the quarrel, into a contention about the
establshing of their Kirk Government here in England (as if the Parliament
either had, or could justify the taking up of Arms and fighting with the King,
upon such a ground) these worthy Patriots would never be drawn to this, to wave
the just quarrel, the Parliament had engaged the people and themselves in;
which was the defense of the Laws, and their own Liberties established by them,
with the Privileges of the Supreamest, and inferior Courts of Justice,
wherein those Laws were to be made, and Justice administered according to them,
and no Delinquent protected against them; all the compliance of the Scots
Commissioners and courting of them, till it was, as the Schoolmaster tells
them, ridiculous to others, would not prevail to bring them, in stead of this,
to make the setting up of their Church Government in this Kingdom, and the
taking of a Covenant, in such a sense as they would put upon it, the quarrel to
be insisted upon, and this Kingdom kept in troubles for, without settling a safe
peace, if all other things conducing thereunto should be granted, except this
Idol of theirs might also be advanced: that this was the true cause of the
falling off of the Scots Commissioners, from those men, whom at first they had
entertained with so much show of friendship and intimacie, this Discourser of
theirs does not deny, but calls it the first and main occasion; only to serve
his turn, he turns it upon the other side from his Masters, and then more suo
declaims against Sectaries, and Schismatics; as if all men were such, who will
not readily come and bow down before this Golden Image of his; then ignorantly,
or wilfully, still interprets the Covenant so, as if thereby we were obliged
so to do, and that the word of God were not the Rule. To clear this point a
little more fully, let it be observed, who they were that the Scots
Commissioners took by the hand and entered into privacy and intimacy with,
after they fell off from these good Patriots, men known to be faithful and
constant in their integrity, to maintain the just Rights and Liberties of the
Subjects, and to seek the public good of the Kingdom, the true cause in which
the Parliament was engaged; and it will be found, that they were those, who,
both in the two Houses of Parliament and in the City, carried on the Court
designs, such as had fallen off from a vigorous fierceness against the Court in
the Parliaments first engaging, and afterward manifested such a compliance
therewith, and such an alteration in their way, as was observed by all men;
with these now they had their private meetings, it was known when they were at
their Consultations, and Cabals, and the houses where they met; sometimes at
this Court-Ladies house, sometimes at that Court-Ladies Chamber, for their
meetings were often, and the active Ladies for the Court, the great Sempronia's
of the time, were admitted into Council, yea, sought after, together with my
Lord of Holland and others, who were of the same intelligence, and these were
seldom absent: these things being so known, that they cannot be denied without
impudent falsehood, let all unprejudiced men judge, who they were that for their
own private ends and interests, changed Company, and what those ends were
likely to be, which this Company, last made choice of, would better suit with
and promote, than the former company that were quitted and left; by this also
it may appear, at what an easy rate they would have been contented to pass
away into the Kings hands, and subjected to his usurped Prerogative, our just
Rights and Liberties, which we defended with the expense of so much Treasure
and blood, and they by their League were bound to assist us for the
establishment of, could they thereby but have been assured to settle things,
according to their own wills, in their own Kingdom, and their Kirk-Government
in this, by complying with the Court, and caballing with all the Court
partisans in Parliament and City; the former Company were fit indeed to be
left, when such designs were to be set on Foot. But that which of all other
things makes their intentions, in these particular carriages, and shifting of
Companies, most apparent, was their desire of a conference with the Houses of
Parliament, their carriage in that conference, and their subsequent actions in
pursuance thereof, at that time when the four Bills were to be sent to the King
at the Isle of Wight: The Houses of Parliament, though they had then advantage
enough, having all in their hands and under their power, yet that they might
make it appear to all the World, that they sought no other thing, but to enjoy
their just Rights and Liberties by the Laws established unto them, and that
they might be secured in the enjoyment of them, and justified in standing in
the defense of them, resolved to settle the Peace of the Kingdom, to bring the
King to his Throne and Parliament again with Honor, to put an end to War and
all the burdens and unhappy consequences thereof, if these substantial and
absolutely-necessary things alone might be granted; for other things in
difference, which were not essential to the enjoyment of our known Rights and
Liberties and security therein, the Houses resolved, these being first granted,
and the King thereupon come to his Parliament, they should be considered of and
transacted between the King and his two Houses of Parliament in a Parliamentary
way; upon this four Bills were drawn up, and passed both Houses, in which those
things only were contained, that might secure us for the future in our
Liberties (considering what we had before undergone) and justify our Lawful,
and necessary standing for them, that all questions for the time to come
concerning the same might hereby be taken away; these Bills passed and reduced
into Acts, upon the Kings giving his assent to them by Commission, he was
presently to come to London to his Parliament, an evidence to all posterity,
and to all the World, of the just and sincere intentions of the two Houses of
Parliament according to their Declarations and Protestations from the
beginning, and that no successes, or advantages put into their hands, could al
er them from the same: when this was thus concluded, the Scotch Commissioners
interpose and desire they may be heard, in a free conference between both
Houses and themselves, whereby first they spend a great deal of time, and
thereby retard the sending these Bills to the King; next they oppose what was
desired in the Bills, wherewith they had nothing to do, nor no right to
intermeddle with in this Kingdom, yet they did it with that violence, and in
that manner pleaded for the Kings usurped Prerogative against our just Rights
and Liberties (whereof they had no cognizance, nor capacity to judge, and ill
enough would they have taken it, if we should have made our selves Judges of
the Subjects Liberties and Rights in their Kingdom) that, as I have touched
before, they were told by a Noble man at the Conference, that the Commissioners
for the King at Uxbridge, or the Kings Attorney himself would not have spoken
more: all this will fully appear by the Answers, which the House of Commons
published to their printed Papers which they had spread about, which Answers,
it may be, I shall annex to the end of this Discourse, for the Readers fuller
satisfaction, and that the four Bills contained nothing but what I have
expressed, will therein appear; and indeed to every knowing man, the reading of
the Bills themselves will evidence it, and the answers of the Houses to the
Scotch Papers will show, that the only stay of the Kings coming to a personal
Treaty at London with his Parliament was, because he would not first give this
satifaction desired. For the Scotch Commissioners (after that Louden and
Lanerick, being newly come out of Scotland, had spoken privately with the King)
did vehemently press, by their Letters and Papers, that the King might come to
London to a Personal Treaty there, before any Propositions sent unto him, or
these Bills passed by him; though the same men before (whereby you may perceive
who did show themselves shifters and changers) had in their Orations and
Letters denied it to be just, or safe, for the King to be admitted to London,
or to any personal Treaty with the Parliament, until he had first given
satisfaction and security to the people. The Houses of Parliament would not
therefore, notwithstanding their Orations at the Conference, and their Papers
spread abroad about the City, consent to the Kings coming to London to a
personal Treaty, before any satisfaction, or security first given, in their
answers to the Scotch Papers giving their reasons for it; but drew up the four
Bills, as I have said, and sent them to the King, that, passing them, he might
come up and settle other things, being in person with his Parliament; and this
will more manifestly appear by their Declaration and Votes passed upon the 17
of January, after the King had sent his denial to pass those four Bills,
whereby some security might have been given of his coming, with intention to
agree with his Parliament, for the settling of the Rights and just Liberties of
the Subjects; which Declaration I will here set down.

The Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, after many addresses to his
Majesty, for the preventing and ending this unnatural War, raised by him
against the Parliament and Kingdom, having lately sent four Bills to his
Majesty, which did contain only matter of safety and security to the
Parliament and Kingdom, referring the Composure of other differences to a
personal Treaty with his Majesty; and having received an absolute Negative;
do hold themselves obliged to use their utmost endeavors, speedily to settle
the present Government, in such a way, as may bring the greatest security to
this Kingdom in the enjoyment of the Laws and Liberties thereof. And in order
thereunto, and that the Houses may receive no delay nor interruptions in so
great and necessary a work, they have taken these resolutions and passed these
Votes following, etc.

But their subsequent actions, in pursuance of this Conference, were worst of
all; for when they had printed their long Orations, made against the Subjects
just Rights, and to advance the Kings Prerogative, and spread them about the
City, that their Court-party, with whom they had their Cabals frequently,
might take notice of their activity this way, and the King himself also; not
content with this, when they saw the Houses would not be removed from their
resolution of sending these Bills, and making this offer unto the King, of an
agreement upon terms so just and reasonable (though, as I have said, all then
was in their hands, and the Kings own person) they go down into the Isle of
Wight unto the King, a little before the Houses send their Commissioners with
the Bills unto him; and he must needs be a very weak and simple man, that
cannot guess at their business, and imagine what errant they went upon,
considering their proceedings before they went with the Houses of Parliament,
and the answer the King returned to the Houses, which was a flat denial,
pretending it was meet for him first to consult with his Kingdom of Scotland:
For is it imaginable, that the King, in the condition he was, would have
refused to come to his Parliament and be set upon his Throne, and his Kingdom
settled in peace, upon no other terms, than such as might secure the Subjects,
to enjoy the Laws and be governed by them and not by will? whereas afterward
he yielded and condescended to grant those things, which were of a far higher
nature, than what these Bills required; had he not been encouraged thereunto by
the Scotch Commissioners, who went of purpose in the nick of time unto him, and
could let him know by their intelligences (kept from time to time, and
especially observed at that time, with the principal leaders of the
Court-party, in and about the City, as my Lord of Holland and others, and no
doubt with those in their own Kingdom, not being ignorant of proceedings there)
what assistance he might expect from Scotland, and from the City and Countries
adjacent; all which soon after appeared, by the coming in of an Army out of
Scotland under Hambleton, and by the risings of the Countries near London under
Holland and Goring, expecting the party in the City would rise and join with
them; the breaking forth of all these not long after may give us just ground to
suspect, it was the hope of this given unto him, which made the King so
peremptory at that time in refusing the just and moderate desires of his two
Houses of Parliament, and the Correspondencies, Consultations, and frequent
Cabals, which passed between the Scotch Commissioners and Holland, one of the
chief heads of the Insurrections, and with the rest of that party, most
observed (as I have said) at that time, may well make us think what Agents they
were in these businesses, when they went down purposely to oppose the passing
of those four Bills by the King, as they had before, all they could, the
sending of them unto him. This act of theirs, as it was one of the worst, so of
the last, wherewith they took their leaves, and time it was to be gone after an
action so unseasonable, so unhappy, for which this Kingdom, and their own, yea,
it may be the posterities of both will have just cause to wish (if no worse)
that they had never set foot on English ground; For had the King at that time
passed those four Bills, a Peace had been settled, safe and just to the
Subjects, as Honorable to himself, and all troubles and confusions ended,
which, when they will now end, the Lord only knows: these things being known
to all men who understand the affairs of that time, with the several passages
thereof, let the World judge, as I have said, who they were that shifted sides,
and for what ends they did it, and what were the principles and the point,
which he says the Scots kept themselves constant unto? if this were their
point, to oppose and overthrow the settlement of a Just Peace in this Kingdom,
except they might interest themselves and their Nation, in the Government
thereof, and strengthen and confirm the same once obtained, by bringing in
their Kirk-Government also, and enslaving us thereunto, which appeared to be
aimed at by some propositions they formerly made (as I take it) at Vxbridge
Conference, in the behalf of the Kingdom of Scotland, and opposing now this
Settlement, because the Kingdom of Scotland is not satisfied; Then, I say
again, let all men judge, whether this Discourser, to palliate and paint over
the by-ends and interests, and false juggling carriages and double dealings of
his Masters, have not taken up and prosecuted this Discourse, to asperse and
lessen, if he could, the reputation of those men, who could not be drawn to
quit the public interest of this Kingdom, and join in a Faction, to promote
the advantages that these men sought to make for their own Kingdom, upon the
condition, and present distraction they saw us in? The false colors, and
foolish tales, which he must invent for this purpose, as the loss of their
esteem with the people in respect of miscariages in the West, is known to be a
ridiculous Fiction of his fertile brain that way; for what had these men to do
in the bu^^ness of the Western parts, more than any other of the Parliament?
This is o^^ of his mysteries, a mystery of iniquity, whereof he has too
many; for such I account all lies and slanders cast upon honest men, to carry
on the better those designs, which his party had, for their own particular
interests to the prejudice of the public, that they knew and found these men
would oppose, and therefore the main endeavor all along is to blast them, and
lessen their esteem, as by these lies and devises they hope to do, at least (as
he uses to term them) with the simpler sort; A very simple sort of men indeed
they must be, in respect of the knowledge, not of the mysteries of the times,
which is his phrase, but of the ordinary affairs of the time, who cannot
discern the true face of things, from these false paintings and daubings of
his, whereby he seeks to abuse those, whom he would fit and prepare for Tumults
and insurrections against the Houses of Parliament, and the best affected men
therein, hoping by such a means his party may be advantaged to carry on their
designs, notwithstanding any opposition; and nothing discovers the man's mind
herein more clearly, than the mystery he tells you of in the 52 page (a
mystery framed in his own brain) that the removing of the Scots Commissioners
from the City to Worcester House, was not for their conveniencie, although so
given out, but by the cunning of some men, to weane them from the City, and
take away their intimacie with their friends there, because they feared they
could not carry on their businesses, if the Scots continued intimate and
familiar with the City. Where, I pray, was this business to be carried on? in
the two Houses of Parliament; and what use will the Scots make of their friends
in the City, to oppose and hinder that which shall be carried on in
Parliament, wherein the City and whole Kingdom are involved, and ought
therefore to acquiesce in their determinations? by this passage you may readily
find what the man would be at, and what in his intention was to be promoted and
practiced for the furtherance of the good Cause in hand, that is his
Kirk-Government, and how he is troubled that the opportunity should be taken
away; which I verily believe was never thought of by those that did it, but
merely the Scots conveniencie intended; for they had beter hopes then of their
fair carriage, than to think there was need of such a devise as this, to
prevent the contrary: here you may find the Fox by his scent.

He comes now to the Battle at Marston-moor, for he keeps no method, either in
respect of the order of things, or time wherein they were done, but takes them
up as in his opinion they may best serve and be made use of, to asperse and
calumniate those that are not of his Faction or oppose the same; and so we must
follow him to pull off his vizards, though therein we pass to and again, from
one end of the Pamphlet to the other. In this Relation he tells, how Prince
Rupert raised the Siege before York, and puffed up with that success, resolves
to fight the united Forces: then most foolishly, and most unseasonably (for it
could not be worse timed) he will needs here insert, that Prince Rupert
thought, if the Scots should be once routed (whom this man will have to be the
main Let to the Court-proceedings) then he should easily put an end to the
design in hand; he speaks of a blow given to those Forces, but the business is
put principally upon the Rout of the Scots, most foolishly, as I have said, in
this place of all others; for routed they were, and so wholly run away, that
except David Lesley, and some horse with him, which were placed behind the
Regiments of Horse under Cromwell, and the Lord Lindsie's Regiment of Foot,
which was joined with the Lord Manchesters Foot Regiments, there was very few,
if any one Scot left in the Field, that could tell what became of that days
Fight, they made such haste away; and their General, a man of great experience
and worth, gave the day for lost, in such manner, that it was the next day,
before he knew what became of the Battle; therefore you may be sure, the Scots
were routed, and sufficiently routed, so that if all had depended upon them, as
this foolish Braggadochio will still give it out, all had been lost, and an end
put indeed to the design in hand in all likelihood: I write not this out of a
design to disgrace any, but the folly of this fellow puts me necessarily upon
it, which otherwise I had not touched at all; his unseasonable Romance-like
extolling of the Scots, throughout this discourse, made for that purpose, turns
to their disadvantage: In speaking soon after, of their taking New Castle, he
confesses their running away at Marston-moor, when he hopes to make amends for
it, by relating what valor they showed there: In his story of this Battle
(which for his end, that is, the magnifying of his Countrymen, it had been
better for him to have skipped over) that he might extol David Lesley (a man
whose worth needs not his lies, and impudent shameless detractings from the
worth of other men, and their known services that day, to help set forth the
same, neither can a man, who knows true worth, endure it) he tells such an
infamous lie of Cromwell (for that is the man his Presbyterian spleen, in every
place where he comes near him, rises up and bursts forth against) as that I
think David Lesley himself has so much Honor in him, that he will give him the
lie in it, and rather spit in his face, than thank him for it. The thing is so
notoriously false, and known to be so to all that were present and not run away
before the turn of the day, that it is probable, he heard this tale of some of
his Contrymen, whose heels had carried them so far from the place, that they
could see neither man nor action upon the same, nor tell how the scales came to
be turned: his words are, that those of the party, he spoke of a little
before, to indear themselves to the people (poor fellow, they needed no lies
like his to do that) attributed to themselves the Honor of the day, and did not
stick to call one of theirs, THE SAVIOR OF THE THREE KINGDOMS, when God
knows (for he will take the name of God in vain to countenance a lie) he,
that they there did extol so much, did not at all appear in the heat of the
business, but having at first a little skar, kept off till the worst was
passed: then he adds, this had not been spoken at all, if some idle men, to
gull the world, had not given the honor of the day to those, who had but little
or no share in it. Can there be a more palpable gross lie than this, his own
Contrymen (those who staid in the Field) being Judges, whether we respect
Cromwell, the man he means, or the Regiments of Horse commanded by him, which
are those, he will have, to have little or no share in the honor of that day?
it is well known to all that were present, and by their report to all other,
who are not willing to believe lies, rather than receive what is true, that
both the General of the Scots Army, and also the Lord Fairfax, gave the day
for lost, and so lost, that the one stayed not till he came to Hull, the other,
as is said, went further from the place where the Battle was fought, before he
made a stay, and as it is reported by those that were present, at least 10000
ran away, most of the Scotch Army, if not all, but those I formerly mentioned,
were run out of the Field, and the day theirs in the Enemies opinion that were
on that side the Field, as also in the opinion of ours, both Generals and
Soldiers, who thereupon left the Field: when things were brought into this
condition, it pleased God to use, as instruments under him, Cromwell, who
Commanded them, and the Regiments of Horse that were in my Lord of Manchesters
Army, to give the turn, win the day, and take the Victory out of the enemies
hands. This was the Lords doing, to whom belong the issues of War, and it was
indeed a mervailous mercy; and these were the instruments he was pleased
chiefly to use therein, which he, that out of envy will not acknowledge, but
rather, as this man does, belie and disgrace, is not only false and injurious
toward man, but opposes God by disliking that choice which he thinks fit to
make of Instruments, by whom he will please to work and give deliverance. Now,
as for that which concerns Cromwell himself, that he did not appear at all in
the heat of the business, but for a little skar kept himself off, till the
worst was past; what man is there, English or Scot, that has either worth or
honesty in him, who was present, that will not abhor such an envious,
malicious falsehood as this, fit to be fathered by none but the father of lies
himself? for it is known, that Cromwell charged in the Head of those Regiments
of Horse in my Lord Manchesters Army, which Horse he Commanded, and with those
Regiments brake all the Regiments of the Enemies Army, first the Horse, and
after that the Foot, and that he continued with them, until the victory was
fully obtained (yea, and the Psalm of praise for it sung to God, to whom alone
the Glory was due) commanding all the while they charged, and taking special
care to see it observed, that the Regiments of Horse, when they had broken a
Regiment of the Enemies, should not divide, and, in pursuit of the Enemy,
break their order, but keep themselves still together in bodies, to charge the
other Regiments of the Enemy, which stood firm, and were in bodies both of
Horse and Foot; by this wise direction and order, which himself was present to
see observed, his Regiments at last brake the Enemies Regiments, all, first the
Horse, then the Foot; and herein indeed was the good service which David Lesley
did that day, with his little light Scotch Nags (for such they were then, and
not such as afterward they made them out of Sr. John Fennicks breed, and our
best Northern Horse, for which they at their pleasure would exchange their
Scotch little Coursers when they came into those parts) I say, in this he did
very good service, that when a Regiment of the Enemies was broken, he then fell
in, and followed the chase, doing execution upon them, and keeping them from
rallying again and getting into Bodies, whereby Cromwell with his Regiments had
the better means and opportunity, keeping firm together in Bodies, to fall upon
the other Regiments which remained, until they were, one after another, all
broken and routed both Horse and Foot: the Enemies Horse, being many of them,
if not the greatest part, Gentlemen, stood very firm along time, coming to a
close fight with the Sword, and standing like an Iron Wall, so that they were
not easily broken; if the Scots light, but weak Nags had undertaken that work,
they had never been able to stand a charge, or endure the shock of the Enemies
Horse, both Horse and men being very good, and fighting desperately enough. I
appeal to the consciences of those that were present, if this be not the true
Relation of that Battle for substance; and in these particulars, how God was
pleased to turn the Day, by what instruments principally, together with the
manner of it; which being so, let all men judge, whether in this, as all along
in other things throughout this Discourse of his, this man under the pretense
of Religion, and standing for Reformation, the good Cause in hand, and such
like specious terms and Titles, has not this for his end and aim, To advance
the name and reputation of some who deserved it not, and cast aspersions upon
others (though never so false and known to be so) who are men best deserving?
and where he has occasion to give due praise to one of his Countrymen, as
here to David Lesley, for doing good service, yet he cannot do it, but that he
must make advantage of it, to disgrace and most falsely disparage those, whom
David Lesley himself will confess, I believe, deserved at that time best: and
let men observe the end why this is constantly done by him, as they shall read
over his Pamphlet (if they mean to trouble themselves so much) and they will
find it to be, To weaken (if he could) the esteem of that party, as he calls
them, which will not comply with his factious (and as he thinks fit they should
prove) tumultuous and seditious party; the seeds whereof, to promote his good
Cause in hand, in these and other Papers spread abroad by him, he has been
very diligent in sowing: this I touch here again, that by pointing the Reader
to it once, or twice, I may leave it to himself, to observe hereafter in the
Discourse, as he shall find it scattered up and down throughout the same, and
started upon every occasion; wherewith though I would not trouble my self any
more, having sufficiently in that point discovered his intentions and pulled
off his goodly Vizards, yet his slanders and falsehoods are so gross, that I
shall hardly satisfy my self to pass them by in silence.

After this discourse of the Battle at Marston-moor, he comes to speak of the
siege and storming of New Castle, and this must not pass plainly without welt
and guard, but be set forth with Relations of the valor of his Contrymen in
taking the Town, and justice and fair carriage in the using of their success
and victory; indeed he may set a mark upon this exploit, and lace it over, and
bedaub it with his accustomed extolling and magnifying of all their actions;
for as it was the first, so it was the last and only Town that they stormed;
as this Battle before spoken of, was the first and the last and only
engagement of their whole Army, which it is known they never did, nor would
engage against an Army of the Enemies, without the conjunction of such a Force
of ours with them, as was sufficient to do the work without them, as in effect
was done here in this Battle. Two things concurring in the taking of this Town
of New Castle, the profit it yielded in respect of the Coals, and the
conveniencie thereof for their ends, put them upon doing more than was their
usual custom, or as it seemed their intention upon any other occasion, while
they were here in this Kingdom to assist us, as appeared when they were before
Hereford, and as will appear afterward in other things when we come to speak
of them: but let us hear his brags, they are so Romance-like, that they do his
Contrymen no advantage, but rather make men think all the rest are lies too,
and of the same stuff with these: First he tells us of eight men of theirs,
that of themselves alone routed two Troops of Horse; if he would have been a
little bolder, and said they had routed an Army of the Enemies, then we should
have thought the Knight of the Sun and his Brother Rosacleer with their
Companions had been alive again: after this he will needs have the very same
men, who ran away at Marston-more, to be the men who gave the assault, stormed
the Town, and take New Castle, that he may show his care and skill in binding
up the broken credit of his Contrymen; indeed if they all ran away at
Marston-more, it must needs be the same men. For their fair carriage in
wronging no Man, Woman, or Child, when they had taken the Town and made
themselves Masters of it, which he much inlargeth, I will leave it to the
relation of the men of those Northern parts, what their carriage and demeanor
was, both there and elsewhere amongst them, much whereof may be seen in that,
which came up to the Parliament in Petitions and complaints from those parts,
remaining with the Clark amongst the Papers in the House of Commons, which this
man it seems was not ignorant of, and therefore he provides a general and
universal remedy for this disease, which grew very common in those parts, and
amongst those Northern people, Epidemical, after some time that the Army had
been amongst them; his remedy is, to tell you, that these Northern people are
all Malignants, superstitious and prelatical, not only the common people, but
the chief of the Countries, yea, the Committee men whom the Parliament had
entrusted, therefore though complaints be sent up to the Parliament from the
people, that they are wronged in their persons, in their wives, in their own
houses, in their goods, and that most shamefully, you must believe no such
thing, although it be confirmed by the Testimony of the best Gentlemen in those
Counties, or recommended to the Parliament, in the behalf of the poor people,
by the men whom the Parliament have entrusted to take care of those Countries,
for they are all Malignants, and he is much troubled, that any of them should
find any favorers: here you have a Catholicon, a Salve that cures any of those
sores, if you will take it; let one of his Contrymen plunder, or commit any
villainy, the most shameful, as that at Tickhill about Nottingham, which, when
Mr. William Pierepoint with some others were sent thither by the Parliament,
was complained off, and the Officers of the Army by these Gentlemen made
acquainted with the complaint, the thing being very base, yet you must not
believe Malignants in any thing against the honest Scots, who still keep
themselves to their point, which point, if it were plundering, whatever he
brags of their fair carriage, those Northern Countries will out of their own
experience tell you it is too true.

The winter declining, he says, the Scots dispose themselves to Field s^rvic^;
for he will have the World believe they are very active, but the hindrances
are always from us, and therefore he tells how they were retarded by wont of
provisions coming to them, which they required in a very moderate proportion;
then he enumerates the causes, why the same came so late to them, that though
at length the Rendez-vous was appointed the 15 of April, yet they could not
stir till the first of May: it was likely we should hear of want of draughts
again, to draw them Southward, though they wanted none to run back Northward
fast enough; for here he comes to that business again, which he had touched
before, of the Scots Armies unexpected running Northward, when he told you of a
certain man (himself forsooth) that printed and spread abroad a Manifest by
chance falling into his hands, which satisfied all men concerning this
business; where I have given answer unto it fully, and showed the unworthiness
and ill consequences thereof: but because he will needs go to painting and
daubing it over again (whereof, it may well be, he knows there is need enough,
notwithstanding his papers spread abroad, which he intitles the Scots manifest,
as he tells you, for all the painting stuff in his shop will never be able so
to wash over this foul business, as to make it look with a fair face, in the
eyes of any understanding man who knows the true carriages of it) I will here
also go along with him a little, to observe his skill and art in laying
colors: In the first place, by thinking to set forth their great abilities, he
tells us what acts they would have done if they had been provided of draughts,
whose wheels would have run Southward as fast as Northward (as I have formerly
said) and by this he confesses, all the mischiefs and evils that were done by
the Enemy at Lecester and in the Countries there abouts, came to pass by their
not marching Southward according to the directions of those they received
Orders from so to do, and whose orders they ought to have obeyed, as the
Committees of both Kingdoms at West-minster, and the Committee with them upon
the place; for had they done so, these evils, he said, had been prevented; so
he makes them justly to be all charged upon them, as falling out because they
ran contrary to order, and disobeyed Authority therein: This line was nothing
skilfully drawn, not to their advantage; for why did they not obey commands and
follow directions? they said, old Lesley their General would have had them done
it; but they suddenly and unexpectedly run Northward, never calling for
draughts, nor staid for want of them; the Committee upon the place, who
expected their present advance to Darby, as was appointed, never so much as
knowing thereof, until they were gone from the place a days march, though
most falsely he says here, it was with their consent; the falsehood whereof the
foolish man himself in the same place sufficiently discovers, when he says,
news was sent to the Parliament, by those whom they trusted in those Counteys
with the management of their affairs, that the Scots were gone, no man knew
whither, and that the Parliament press to know what was become of them: will
any reasonable man think this could be so, if they had made this turn-about
with the consent of the Committees, who were the men the Parliament entrusted
with the management of their affairs in those parts? Oportet mendacem esse
memorem: yea, this retrograde motion of theirs, wherein they did Suscipere
gradum Simeonis, as they use to say in the Schools of Non Proficients, was so
contrary to order and unexpected, that the Scotch Commissioners themselves
professed, at the Committee of both Kingdoms sitting at Darby-house, that they
were as ignorant of it, as the rest of the Committee, and did as much wonder at
it; but desired that they would suspend their opinions, until they might send
to enquire the cause; which they did, and afterward went some of them
themselves, it is likely to consult how it might best be excused, whereupon
comes this Letter, which he Prints in his Pamphlet, from the General and two
others, wherein they say, their going into Westmerland was necessary, in
regard of the intelligence they had received; the same cause the man in this
place alleges, whereunto I have given answer before, a Tale, from I know not
whom, of a flying Army going through Lancashire into Scotland, which makes them
fly so fast backwards, that in four days, notwithstanding the difficulties of
the way and want of draughts, they are, he says, from Rippon, upon the borders
of Lancashire with the whole Army; and if they had made so much haste Southward
at that time, wherein they would have had much less troublesome ways, and many
more conveniences in the way, a design, laid to end the war in all
probability, besides the saving of Lecester, and the Countries adjacent, had
not been utterly overthrown, as I have formerly showed: when they came to the
borders of Lancashire, they had intelligence, he says, of the Enemies return
back Southward; it is not very probable, they should run so far for such an
intelligence, upon no other ground, than such a Tale, when no man knows of
any such Enemy that either went, or returned; he should, and certainly would,
if any such had been, upon such an occasion as this, have named the Forces, and
their Commander; but if the flying Army were returned, why did not the Stots
Army presently, seeing their error, return? what made them not stay upon the
Borders of Lancashire, when they find the cause of their going thither, as
they pretended, taken away, but go on still forwards till they came to Carlisle,
and not rather made the same haste back again, that they might make good the
expectation that there was of their coming Southward, upon occasions so
important, and when they had received orders so to do? Here, when they are to
return Southward, we shall hear of want of provisions and draughts again; but
where is that? not upon the Borders of Lancashire, where they know this foolish
Fable, of a flying Army to go into Scotland, is nothing; that stays them not,
but they ask it of the Committees of Cumberland and Westmerland, whom they
find very slow and unwilling to provide them thereof, he says; what make they
in Cumberland and Westmerland? the man touches it very tenderly, and quickly
passes from it; Carlisle was the business; and to help the matter, he would
make the World believe, the Committies were such malignants and so false, that
if the Scots had left Carlisle then, whereunto they were near (but why came they
so near, I pray?) the Enemy had kept it still: give me leave to deal with him,
in this particular, in his own way, and to use his own phrases; Those who look
(as he uses to say) a little more deeply into the mysteries of things, find
two causes of their not coming Southward to Darby, as they were ordered, at
that time, though of so great concernment, that in likelihood it had put an end
to all the business; and of their willingness, rather to take an occasion, but
especially such a one as this of Carlisle, to make such haste Northward: for the
first, (what ever this Advocate for the Scots, his Contrymen so often
inculcates of their fidelity in counsel, and activity in the field, Elogies
most ridiculously heaped upon them, in the eyes of all that knew and observed
their carriage in both, while they were in this Kingdom) it was observed that
their Custom was, and their Intentions from thence gathered to be such, That
they never would engage their Army singly alone, with any considerable Forces
of the Enemies, much less with his whole Army; except they might have such a
conjunction of our Forces with theirs, as were sufficient to do the work
without them; otherwise there would be a want of draughts, or some other
impediment lie in the way, that they could not advance; neither did they ever
engage with the Enemy in a set Battle without this, as I have touched before;
for that of my Lord New-Castles Forces at their first coming in, I have showed,
that he had his Army broken before, his Horse by my Lord Manchesters near
Horn-Castle in Lincolnshire, and his Foot worn out in besieging Hull; so that
with what he had left, and gathered together out of those Countries afterward,
he could only skirmish with them, and take the advantages to oppose their
advance forward into the Kingdom; which, had not our Forces come upon his back,
and put him in fear of being enclosed between both, and losing York also, he
had been likely enough to effect. Their intentions were observed to be, The
keeping of their Army entire and unfoiled, and therefore they never did, nor
would adventure the breaking of it, by engaging without our Forces joined with
them, especialy after they had run that hazard in the Battle of Marston-moor,
and saw by experience what had become of their whole Army, if our Forces had
not there been conjoined with them: This was made apparent at the Committies of
both Kingdoms sitting at Darby house, upon this very occasion I now speak to;
for when the speedy advancing of the Scots Army Southward was much pressed at
the Committee, considering the advantages we had then, if they accordingly
would march up with speed; the Scotch Commissioners allege against it, the
want and weakness of their Army in respect of Horse in comparison of the
Enemies Horse; thereupon the Committee, to take away this Objection, ordered
2500 Horse and Dragooners, under the Command of Vermuden, to march to meet
them, and come along with them, desiring the Scotch Commissioners to write to
them, to hasten their advance according to order, which they did; but when
these 2500 Horse had marched as far as Nottingham, to join with their Army,
they were gone, none knew whether, nor upon what errant: the same fear also, of
being put to engage with the Enemy alone, without the conjunction of our whole
Army, made the Scotch Commissioners dislike, and, as he says, (whence he has
it I know not) protest against our Armies besieging, or rather as the truth
was, lying before Oxford, to which I shall speak afterward, but their own Army
had freed them from this fear, for they were gone far enough out of danger: the
true cause therefore that took off their wheels, when they should come
Southward, and made them turn about so nimbly when they went Northward, was
observed to be this, They understood, that our Army at that time was to be cast
into a new model, which the Parliament, as this man confesses, had just reason
to do, though he like not the manner of doing it: they conceived that this was
likely to cause so much distraction, and such divisions, that if they should
march according to the orders they had received, and the agreement, that
thereupon they had made with our Committees in those parts; the King, who had
drawn his Forces out of Oxford, would have engaged their Army to fight a Battle
with him alone with their own Forces, before our Army could be in readiness to
take the Field, and march up to their assistance; now this they resolved to
prevent, and therefore suddenly and unexpectedly take this course of running
200 miles backward, whereby they were sure to be out of Gunshot, and have the
business (as indeed it was) determined before their return. Another thing which
might be used as an Argument to satisfy their party, especially those of
their own Country the better, in this unlooked for turn-about of theirs, was,
That the Town of Carlisle was then upon Treaty of Surrender to our Committees
in those parts; this being a strong Town upon the borders of their Kingdom, on
the one side, as Barwick was on the other, they intend to get it into their own
hands, and keep it when they had so done, and therefore make haste thither
where our Committees being in Treaty with the Governor about the Surrender of
the Town, they fall to Treat with him, and notwithstanding the protestations of
our Committees against the same, yet they grant them in the Town any conditions
they will demand, so that the Town may be delivered unto them, which being
done, they put a Garrison of their own into it, and kept it, contrary to the
express Articles of Agreement between the two Kingdoms, in the solemn League,
which this Discourser so often prattles of, and brags the Scots always kept
themselves constant unto? but what is become, I pray, of your solemn League and
Covenant now? was this the point your Scots keep themselves so constant unto,
to keep our Towns out of our hands for their own advantages, falsifying therein
their faith given in the Articles of Agreement between the Kingdoms, whereupon
they were to come in to our assistance? This business of Carlisle, the man
afterward makes a great deal of work to daub over, if it were possible,
wherein, when we come to it, I shall show his untempered mortar, wherewith he
would make up this breach of Faith, and heal the broken credit of his
Contrymen: In the mean time, these were conceived to be the true reasons of
this whirligig-business, so extremely prejudicial to the present affairs of
this Kingdom, as that it endangered all, but that the Lord in mercy stood by
us, and saved us at Nascbie Fight, when these our Deliverers (as this most
foolish fellow will still hold them forth to the world to be, in this Lying
Pamphlet made purposely for them) delivered us up to shift for our selves, and
into the Enemies hands, if we had not been able, without them, to defend our
selves, and maintain our cause against them: His Contrymen took care to
deliver themselves, and therefore would be sure to be far enough off, and near
their own kingdom, into which they might quickly have stepped, if the Lord
should in this Battle, which was likely to decide and determine all, have cast
the Dye of War on the other side against us; but blessed be his name for ever,
though man left us in greatest danger, he forsook us not. The 2500 Horse and
Dragoons, which were sent to the Scotch Army, to encourage them to advance
Southward and to assist them, when the Scotch Army was not to be heard of,
after they had marched as far as Nottingham to seek them, came back very
seasonably a day or two before the Battle, where they did good service; by
which it appears clearly to all men, that the Scots, had they marched according
to Orders given, and their own promises thereupon, might have been advanced
further, and enclosed the Enemies either in Oxford, or out of Oxford, between
the two Armies: here we have him at his usual trade again, painting and
coloring over these businesses, which had so sullied and cast dirt upon his
Contrymen and blasted their reputations, that he confeseth himself, great
murmurings did arise against them; and thus, says he, the Scots were
innocently traduced by Malignants; they that spoke truth of them and of their
carriages in these businesses, were indeed innocent, here by a mistake, before
he is aware, he spoke truth; he will have them Malignants, though they be
innocent, if they speak against the Scots; but it was indeed an innocent
traducing, to slander them with a matter of truth: Now he brings forth his
common salve, to which he flies when he has nothing else to say, that will
serve the turn to cure the sore, that is, they are all Malignants and traducers
that speak any thing against the honest Scots; before I answer in particular to
what he alleges in their defense, let it be observed, that this is a thread
which runs through the whole work, hardly a piece without it, the discourse for
the most part consisting all along of complaints made against his Contrymen,
and his purgations of them, which what are they, but railings and devised
tales, to slander those men whom he conceives to have reported, or do believe
the things complained of, though never so true and apparent; this you find
almost in every leaf; we use to say, So much smoke is not without some fire,
and certainly, they are reputed to be of no great innocence, whose fame is so
bad, that they stand in continual need of co^purgators. Let us now see what the
faults are, which they are charged with in these particulars, and how he clears
them; the House of Parliament, he says, press to know, what was become of the
Scots, and why they had gone this unexpected way, why after so many earnest
calls and Orders for it, they would not march Southward, the good of the
public service so much requiring it? He will not here hold up his common
buckler in defense, and say they are all Malignants, Heretics, Schismatics,
and such as love not the common cause of Religion; but when for the same things
objected against the Scots, he will say this of other men, that in so using the
Scots, they are to be ranked in the number of Malignants, and that they are
neither honest nor faithful to the cause; through their sides, that complained
but of the very same things the two Houses did, he strikes the two Houses of
Parliament as much, for their being unsatisfied with the carriage of the Scots
herein: he had said a little before, they were Malignants and traducers who
found fault with the Scots, for running backwards, and leaving the whole
burden of the War upon the Forces of the Parliament in the South; is not this
the very same complaint, which he here says the two Houses make against the
Scots for not coming Southward? therefore we see what, in his judgment, they
are to be accounted; indeed hereby it may appear what account is to be made of
those base slanders, and false imputations, he every where casts upon men of
more integrity and sincerity a great deal, both in respect of Religion, and
the common cause of just Liberty, than those he thereby labors to excuse: yet
the two Houses of Parliament shall have another way found out to give them
satisfaction, and to that end our comes his Scotch Manifest again, which, he
says, he had touched before; he had so, but this sore must have the salve
often applied, and all too little to cure it, except in the minds of those men
who are of his simpler sort, who understood nothing of the truth of their
carriage in this business; for whatsoever he boasts of the satisfaction these
Papers gave to the Members of the House, who would hearken unto them, (it may
well be many knew them not worth hearkening unto) it satisfied no man of
understanding, that knew, or had a true Relation made unto him of this
unexpected and strange countercourse of theirs, strange to the Houses, to the
Committees, yea to their own Commissioners, as they themselves professed. But I
have answered it already, where he before touched it, and whipped the Scotch
Commissioners most Magisterially, as there you may read, for not using this
practice of his, out of he knows not what prudential scrupulositie, as here he
says, which this pedantical Statesman accounts their simplicite and foolerie;
reproving them again for their fear to offend in Printing, and spreading abroad
amongst the multitude, those things they had by Papers acquainted the Houses
withal, whereas if any thing were to be said of them, although without ground,
they must hear of it on the deaf side of the ear, and it must be in every
bodies mouth: what does he mean? belike he would have them have a deaf side,
and a deaf ear, when any thing shall be spoken of them, though never so true;
but how false this is which he says, may appear to all men in the dealing of
the Houses of Parliament with them, when the Letters taken in Digbies cabinet
were to be Printed and divulged, for there being in some of those Letters a
relation (as I have said before) of the Scotch Comm ssioners trinckling with
Digbie, the Kings Secretary; The Houses ordered, that Mr. John Cheesley, their
Secretary, should have the perusal of all the Letters, and put out such
things, as any way might reflect upon the Scots Commissioners, as that
particular, and many other things, it may be, touched them to the quick, as we
use to say: This was the carriage of the two Houses toward them; on the other
side, for their modesty and fear to offend in Printing and publishing to the
people what they had delivered into the Houses of Parliament, though never so
bitter, and indeed scandalous complaints and invectives against their
proceedings, which this man would make the world believe they were too backward
in doing, out of that scrupulositie; the many Papers printed and published by
them, and afterward John Cheesley's name subscribed to them, to avow the act
to be theirs, will testify against them, to all that shall read those printed
Papers which they before had delivered into the Parliament, that there was
little modesty, fear or scrupulositie in them, in this particular: for the
Malignants he talks of, who sought to hinder the printing of these Papers, and
questioned the publishing of them, under the name of the Scotch manifest, or
rather that Libel (for so I may call a nameless Paper disowned, as he says
himself, by the Scotch Commissioners, which, he says, was a Copy of their
Papers given into the Houses of Parliament, (whether it was so or not, or with
what additions, made thereunto by him into whose hands it fell, which no doubt
was himself, he best knows) but the Malignants he speaks of, were the House of
Commons, who questioned the Printer, and the publishing of those Papers, and
afterward for this, and such otherlike Paper practices of his, printing and
spreading about Papers in the City, to abuse the people, and scandalize the
Parliament in a seditious way and manner, at last sought after him and made him
betake himself to his heels and run away: these also are those he tetms
lye-inventers, though he would have his simpler sort believe, he means not
them, but some other malignants? but the House it was, as I said, that
questioned the Printer, and this practice of his. Mr. Schoolmaster take the
title of Lye-inventer to your self, it sures you best, and that out of an
Author your boys are much versed in, tute Lepus es, and pulpamentum quaeris.

Next he tells us, that the House of Commons think fit to send some of their
number, to the Scotch Army, to see how things went, and to hasten them
Southward, who met them at Rippon, and came with them to Nottingham, from
whence returning to the House, they acquainted them, he says, with the truth
of all things: but you will be deceived, if you expect from him a true Relation
of all those things they then acquainted the House with; he has the art of
preterition, when it serves to conceal his Countrey-mens foul disorders, and
base usage of those Country people, therefore you shall hear nothing, in their
report to the Houses, from him, of the complaints of the people against the
Scotch Army, for plundering, or other soul abuses of men and their wives in
their own houses, as the business of Tickhil before spoken of; nor that when
these Gentlemen of the Committee, sent by the House, upon the complaints of the
people to them, informed the Officers of the Army of these shameful abuses,
nothing would be done thereupon; this is the strict and exact discipline he so
foolishly boasts of in other places; instead of this, he makes the Gentlemen's
report for them, setting forth what a gallant Army they had seen of brave
Commanders, lusty Soldiers, able and ready to do service: but let that
report made by these Gentlemen, whom the House of Commons sent, upon their
return to the House, be seen, and it will be found to be a report of another
nature, than what this Lye-teller frames for them out of his own brain, and
nothing to the Scotch Armies advantage, as has been before touched, though the
House of Commons would not divulge it: this painter by his overdaubing, draws
forth the true face of things, which they have little cause to thank him for,
for whom he works: it would indeed have pleased honest men, if they could have
found in the effects thereof for their assistance, any such thing as this
report, which he frames for the Gentlemen of the Committee, sent upon their
return; but this braverie, ability and readiness to do service, never appeared
afterward, and that the clean contrary appeared at that time, is manifest, it
being the occasion of the Parliaments complaint, and of the sending of these
Gentlemen of their own number unto them: it is true, that the Parliament,
though they were sensible enough of the overthrow and loss of a design so well
laid for that Summers service, and that such a disservice should be accompanied
with the taking of so considerable a frontier Town out of their hands, and
keeping it from them, contrary to all justice, and faith given, as if the
former had not been sufficient; yet thought it to stand with their wisdom, for
the present to dissemble their resentment of it, and pass it by, rather than
make a quarrel about it: for the Kingdom having undergone so great a burden,
by the coming in of that Army to our assistance, by the pay they received, and
specially by their Free Quarter and Plundering under pretense thereof, the
Parliament thought it fir, to try if they might be brought to give some
assistance answerable thereunto in the future, which might recompense the
little they had done for it before, and this disservice now done by them;
therefore they were silent, and forbore to expostulate with them about this
business, at the return of the Gentlemen, and upon their report, which what it
was, is well enough known to Parliament men: This prudential proceeding of the
Parliament, the man will needs interpret to be from a full satisfaction
received by them, and is very careful to make the world believe it, but he
must get a world of his simpler sort together, that can herein be abused by
him, for to others it is well known what sense the Parliament had of it: he
closes up all with his common note, which usually follows the excuses he
makes for his Contrymen, and his magnifying of them in such relations as he
frames for that purpose; that honest men were much contented and pleased with
it, but that it did gaul and vex malignants of all sorts; here you have the
burden of the song. After this, up starts again the unexpressible difficulties
this gallant Army struggles with, for want of provisions and carriages, (the
want of draughts, we know indeed, very good use has been formerly made of) and
this, he says, through the neglect of some, and malice of others, not of the
meanest sort, and so hereby he makes himself a way for his usual slanders,
invectives, and lies against honest men, endeavoring to make the world
believe, that all the service they have done, is nothing but a cloak to their
ambition and covetousness: here you have his charity, which this fardle of lies
that he has printed, is stuffed withal, and specially then brought forth,
when his Countrymen are to be excused: is it not fit that such a fardle be
ripped up, and the deceitful wares therein discovered? but he will leave off
complaining of those, who, he says, are neither faithful to the cause nor
honest; why what is the reason? He presently tells you his reason, because they
thus use the Scots: the Scots must leave off to do that which needs your
excuses, before you will leave off your slanderous false surmises and
invectives. Going on in his discourse, and leaving his complaints (a very
little while, as you will see) he will clear, he says, three things, first,
about the moneys, the Scots have received; secondly, provisions; thirdly, the
disorders committed by them: for the first, he begins with giving an assurance,
in the name of the Scots, which boldness in undertaking for the Scots, and in
their name, and for the whole estate of Scotland, what they will do, you may
see in the 60 page, he says there to all this the Scots do declare truly, etc.
and likewise in that foul business of Carlisle, while he is daubing it over, he
undertakes what the whole State of Scotland will oblige themselves unto: where
is this man's Commission, is he one of the Commissioners for the Kingdom of
Scotland? or rather a Commissioner parramount over them all, he does so often
school them, teach them their lessons, for the better carring on the good cause
in hand, and reprove them for their indiscreet mistakes, and scrupulosities,
and want of vigorous proceedings: Let him show his Commission, and his
undertakings may be considerd; otherways they are to be looked upon, as coming
from a Pedagogue, who always is, as I have said, the most forward, putting man
in the whole Parish: in this very business, wherein he does so confidently
undertake in the name of the Scots, afterward, he says, they are (or at least
should be) willing unto it; here is a fine undertaker, and hereby shows, what
Commission he has for his bold undertakings: for the things themselves, every
wise man knows, such a kind of man as this knew no more of them, nor could
speak no more certainly concerning them, than he does of the things he so
boldly presumes to undertake for; that is, either they were so, or at least
they should be so, as he would have them to be; and therefore he will tell you,
he says, in general; with his undertakings, and his generals I will trouble my
self no farther, they are of equal credit: only in this last particular,
concerning their disorders, he speaks that which all the places where they came
will give him credit in, that they were no Angels of light. The letter he sets
down from the General, and two others to the Committee, I have already showed,
how it is probable it was occasioned, and drawn up, upon the Scotch
Commissioners sending down some of their company to the Army, to see what
answer might be found out and given to the complaints of the Parliament, for
their irregular Northern voyage, wherein they ran counter so fast, and this
being then consulted upon between them, was afterward sent up in this letter:
After this letter of the Generals and two others, sent to the Committee, which
he sets down and makes theirs, but may make it what he will himself, for where
he should have it, or the Copy of it, who knows, the reason in it, for their
marching contrary to order* being no other, then his flying Army which they had
intelligence of, a tale I have formerly spoken to; he now comes to a
recapitulation, of what we have heard, and jumps from the midst of the business
back again to the beginning, and so must he that will follow him; that which he
has, in this part of his discourse, which is worth taking notice of, I have
before answered fully, as his invectives against those men, who, he says,
opposed the Scots, to whom they had formerly pretended friendship, for their
own ends, and the cause of it, which he will have to be, they liked not his
Kirk-Government, which falsely he still assumeth, and would have the world
believe, the covenant binds us unto, and as falsely, that these men had assented
thereunto and promised to promote the same: Enough has been said, to show the
falsehood of his continued slanders and lies cast upon these men: he has a
touch of some others, who he says, were averse to the incoming of the Scots at
first into the Kingdom, lest they should Eclipse their luster (indeed there was
little fear of that, as appeared by what was done by them, after their coming
in) but for these adversaries, you shall have him and the Scots, so soon as it
serves their turn, very readily take them by the hand, and grow intimate
friends with them, as he himself will show you afterward, that which concerns
the Committee of both Kingdoms, as the setting of it up, the opposing of it by
these men, and such other stories as he has been told about the managing of
businesses therein, he is willing to believe himself, and make the world
believe so much of it, as may give him opportunity to say something which he
thinks may advantage the Scots, though for that he cast false surmises,
suspicions, and lies upon other men; all which, in the issue will prove little
to his own credit, or the Scots, when by this means he provokes and gives
occasion to those who know the truth of things, to make them manifest to the
world, whom he endeavors to abuse: he instanceth in some particulars, one,
that the second men (he has his first and second, you may imagine them whom
you please) begin to grumble, that the Scots should be adjoined to the
Committee, and that there was a design to do businesses without the Scots by
naming a Sub-Committee without their knowledge, which made the Scots complain
to the Houses: there needed not much matter, to make them put in papers of
complaint to the Houses, which after wards they might Print and spread about to
disaffect the City to the Parliament, this was a usual course with them; but
what cause was there of complaint, if this had been so? If the Scots not being
there at the present, the rest of the Committee had appointed a Sub-Committee
to examine a business, and prepare it to be reported to the Committee,
consisting of English and Scots, who then are acquainted with it before any
thing be acted in it (for Sub-Committees acted nothing, but made report of what
they found upon examination, to the Committee for their determination therein)
how could this be a design to do business without the Scots, or any cause of
complaint to be made by them in that respect? and besides, what need had these
second men (as he calls them) or any other of the Committee, to find out and
prosecute any such design? For if the Scots, in any thing that the rest of the
Committee thought fit to be done, would refuse to consent and gave their
Negative, there was no more to be done by the rest, but to acquaint the Houses
with it, and leave it to their determination, which being done, they had
discharged their duty: but this man writes, as he is informed, and as he and
they that gave him his informations, think to make advantage of it, to carry on
their own good cause they have in hand, and who they were that in probability
gave him his informations and instructions, and set him on this good work, may
appear by these and other particular intelligences, which he relates done at
the Committee of both Kingdoms which must be made known by some there present.
His second instance will likewise manifest whence he has such particular
intelligences, and that is of a secret intelligence given for the surprising of
Oxford at a weak place, and provisions being then scant, and the Town
unfurnished of them, this was given by one Patrick Napier, to a Sub-Committee
of three, whereof there was one a Scot, and this is neglected, notwithstanding
the Scots did press it much that it might be attempted: You will make all men
think your Scots to be some of your simpler sort, and not fit to sit in such a
Committee, when they shall truly understand what this business was, if it had
been true that they had pressed the trial of it, for they must have been either
fools, or false, and such as were willing to ruin the new modeled Army unto
which indeed they had no great affection. The truth of the business was this;
the L. Lotherdale, who was the Scot he speaks of in the Sub-Committee of three,
and the cause of that Sub-Committee, informed the Committee of both Kingdoms,
that there was a man come from Oxford, a servant of a friend or Kinsman of his
there, who had somethings to inform the Committee of, which were worthy of
their knowledge, and because the man was not willing to come before the whole
Committee publicly, he desired that a small Committee might be appointed to
receive his intelligence and report it to the Committee; hereupon he himself
was appointed for one, and there was joined with him the Lord Say, and Mr.
William Pierepoint; who withdrawing into another Room, the man was brought by
the Lord Lotherdale before them, and being asked, what intelligence he could
give concerning Oxford; he began to tell of many ordinary things of no use, nor
worth regarding, amongst which he said they had no great store of provisions
laid in, and he spoke of one place which was not strongly fortified, but he
thought it might be there stormed, or somewhat to this effect: the other two
who were joined with the Lord Lotherdale in that Sub-Committee, asking him
other questions, of things more material, and of some consequence for their
satisfaction herein, that the intelligence might be more certain and worth
consideration; the man seeing these generals and ordinary things he had spoken
of gave no great satisfaction, answered, he could say no more for the present
to what they demanded, but if they would give him a little time, he would come
to them again and bring them a more certain and particular information of those
things he had spoken of, and they desired to be satisfied in: upon this he was
dismissed for that time, and the Sub-Committee went presently into the Chamber
where the Committee sat, and made report of what they had heard of this fellow,
whom he calls Patrick Napier, which was indeed of little consideration as he
then left it; ordinary things and generals, as no great store of provisions, a
thing fitter to ground a siege upon, which afterward his Scots complain so
much of, than a surprise, but it was known the Countries round about them lay
open to them, being the best Corn-Countries in England, and Corn was brought
into the Market twice a week, and when they pleased they might command out of
the Countries what they wanted; that there was a weak part in the Town, where
he thought it might be surprised, whereof, when he was demanded particulars, he
desired some more time to give satisfaction in them, this being presently
reported to the Committee, they saw little in it considerable, but expected
what his next coming would produce, and so the Sub Committee was continued: the
Lord Lotherdale after this was diverse times asked, when the man would come to
the Sub-Committee again? he answered, from one week to another, that be was not
yet ready, but would come as soon as he was ready to give them a fuller
satisfaction in his intelligence; so it was put off from time to time, till at
last it appeared there was no such man to be found or heard of. Neither did the
Sub-Committee, or the Committee of both Kingdoms after that time hear of him
any more: this was an excellent foundation to have laid a design upon, of such
consequence as the sending of a great part of the Army to attempt the
surprisal of Oxford, upon an intelligence so uncertain, coming from a man that
came from Oxford (it might be sent on purpose to draw the Forces, which should
make the attempt, into a trap) one that the Committee never saw before, and
when he had promised them to come again, to make out his intelligence more full
and satisfactorie, never appeared afterward, neither did the Committee know
what became of him. This being the truth of this business, which I believe none
of the Scotch Commissioners will deny, I am sure they cannot with truth; will
any wise man think, that they would upon such a ground as this, advise, much
less press the Committee to make a trial to surprise Oxford? for my part I
believe no such thing, but rather that this man thinking to asperse the whole
Committee, for so he does, the neglect which afterward he interprets to
proceed out of treachery and falsehood, must be theirs if any were, for the
whole matter was reported to them and to be ordered by them; in seeking, I say,
to disgrace the whole Committee, that he might thereby grace the Scotch
Commissioners in the opinion of men, as having more fidelity and sincerity,
than the rest (a practice usual with him) he puts that disgrace upon their
Commissioners in this, for folly and indiscretion, if not falsehood, should
they, as he says, have pressed the Committee to do so ridiculous and
unreasonable a thing, as I think they themselves, as they were not guilty of
it, so they will, as well as the rest of the Committee, give him the lie in it,
which he too often deserves: this contents him not, but he adds further, that
the Enemy is made acquainted with the secret advice, and that particularly,
and thereupon takes notice of the weakness of the place spoken of, which before
he had not done, and strengthens and fortifies it: and this is discovered by
intercepted Letters, which had not been communicated to the Scotch
Commissioners, notwithstanding the common Interest: How come you then Sr. Scot,
to know that there were any such Letters, or any such discovery made by them,
if such letters being intercepted were not communicated to the Scotch
Commissioners? from whom is it that you usually have your intelligence I pray?
they that know no such things themselves, how can they communicate it to you,
whose interest it seems is very common with them? But for the Letters and the
things discovered in them, they may both, for ought I know, be the fictions of
your fertile brain that way, to cast dirt upon the Committee; let any such
Letters appear, or if there were any such intercepted, that showed a discovery
was made to the Enemy of this intelligence given, why good Sir, may you not be
mistaken and it be the Scot that did give the Enemy notice of it, rather than
any of the English? who was it that brought the man to the Committee that made
this tale, or gave this secret intelligence you speak of, was it not the Scot?
who afterward, being often spoken unto to that end, would yet never bring him
to light again, but away he goes to Oxford, and the Committee can see him no
more: if therefore the Enemy had any such information given him, of a secret
intelligence given to encourage an enterprise upon a place that was weak, which
thereupon he better fortified, and that it be not one of your inventions, or
your Countrey-mens, I pray why may it not be your Countrey-mans action rather
in all probability, than any other man's? Let any indifferent man judge by all
the circumstances; we use to say, the Hound that first found: this man who, as
I have said, it may be, might be sent of purpose to give this intelligence to
catch our Forces, if we had been so simple as to send any upon such a tale,
when he had done his errant, might make haste back again, or be sent by those
to whom he came, to give notice, or carry intelligence about him what service
he had done here, that the Enemy might be prepared to make his advantage of
it. For the English that were of the Committee, I assure my self they so little
regarded what this fellow said, and so much neglected his Intelligence,
especially when they saw he would not appear again according to his promise
made to the Sub-Committee, that had any of them had any trinckling with the
Enemy (which it had been well if others had been as free from) yet they would
have found out things of more moment to acquaint the Enemy withal, than such
a ridiculous passage, and so carried as this was: but they are best acquainted
how it was discovered to the Enemy (if any such thing were) that can first
acquaint us there was such a Discovery made, which is this lye-inventer (to
return his own phrase to himself who best deserves it) or the men from whom he
receives his intelligences. If men would use that liberty of judging, which he
usually takes to himself upon the like or far less occasions, they would judge,
that all this was but an invention from the beginning, to take off the
suspicion that might be raised by this fellows coming from Oxford, and applying
himself to one of the Scotch Commissioners; and therefore the Commissioner,
that he might be with him with the more freedom, till the errant he came about
was dispatched here in Town, covers him with this cloak, of bringing
Intelligence to the Committee, and makes him tell at first a flimflam tale, and
then promise more particulars in a short time, that thereby more time might be
gained for him to stay in Town without suspicion, until the business he came
about were ended, and then be sent back to Oxford, as he was when the Scotch
Commissioner and he had thus befooled the Committee: this were a much more
likely conjecture, considering Digbies Letter, and a finer story, nearer the
truth a great deal, than many of those which this man's spleen, envy, and
malice against those some, and that party (as he terms them) his stomach still
rises at, makes him invent and cast up, when he can find any occasion so to
do, though drawn in by head and shoulders, as we use to say. In the next place
he falls upon the Parliament, in saying, the Army was molded according to the
mind of some few men, and that being done, they must be appointed to besiege
Oxford: by whom could either of these be done, but by the Parliament, and their
Order? for the Committee, in matters of such concernment usually acquainted the
Houses, and had their direction or approbation. But in the mean time he says,
the Enemy was suffered to run up and down, increase his Forces, spoil the
Countries, and hazard all: then he brings in his proverbial speech, which he
will needs fasten upon foreigners, that the Parliaments Forces were gnawing
the bones, while they suffer the Enemy to feed upon the flesh, and that there
was not, they said, fair dealing every where; they said in that very true,
there was not, but very foul dealing; for who was the cause of all this
mischief done by the Enemy? and of his running up and down to do it, but that
Army, who being ordered to advance up Southward to prevent it, and had
promised so to do, and thereupon was expected when this design was laid,
instead thereof, runs 200 miles Northward, and that they might be sure to keep
themselves far enough out of the Enemies teeth, that their flesh might not be
fed upon by him, they leave him at liberty, unexpectedly to all men, to run up
and down and devour the flesh of the Countries, and the Town of Leicester;
which all men knew, by their coming up Southward as was ordered and expected,
2500 Horse and Dragoons being to that end sent to join with them, would have
been prevented; either they would have given him Battle with a number far
exceeding his at his first going out of Oxford, before he was thus suffered to
increase his Forces (at least if they dealt not falsely with us, but were 21000
according to Articles, and as they required pay for so many) or else in stead
of plundering up and down the Countries (which they gave him fair way to do) he
must have endeavored to return again to Oxford, to avoid fighting with Forces
so far superior, by the conjunction of the 2500 Horse, to those which he had
with him, and Oxford he would have found blocked up, where the rest of his
Forces were, and all his Ammunition, and himself, by his return thither
enclosed between the two Armies; a design so well laid, that if the King
finding himself thus straitened on all sides, should have been forced to go
Westward to his Forces there, under Hopton and Goring, Oxford, as I have heard
themselves did report, had been taken within three weeks, not expecting a Siege
at that time, and therefore no way provided with victuals for it; an
Intelligence (had the man so much understanding in these things as to know it)
to be made use of only for a Siege, not for a surprise; but I ground it not at
all upon Napiers intelligence given to the Committee, nor did any wise man
regard that, only it shows this man's folly; and besides this, the King had
been followed into the West, by a conjunction of both Armies assisting each
other, a thing so much pressed by General Leven in his Letter before mentioned.
This that I have said was so apparent, and lay so open to the view of all men,
that the man here cannot pass it by, but must go to his box for some stuff ^o
paint it over, and excuse it if he could; for he says, it was then given out,
that the Scots not coming Southward, was the cause of all these mischiefs; and
well might it be given out, and all men believe it to be so, for had they come
Southward in the time they were ordered to do so, and had promised accordingly
to do it, with that conjunction of 2500 Horse and Dragoons which were sent to
meet them, all this mischief had been prevented, or else they were far from
being the gallant Army he will needs have them reported to be; and the man
himself says, when he thinks thereby he may set forth their worth and praises,
that had they come u^, the Enemy had not made that spoil he did at Leicester;
here we have his own confession, set down before in a brag: but why did they
not come up Southward, Let us see his daubing again here in this place; let
reason judge, says he, whether it were easier for an Army near at hand to
follow the En^mie, having all provisions, or an Army above 200 miles distant
that wanted provisions and could get no draughts. This ingredient indeed is
never wanting in your painting stuff; but the question is, why that Army would
not be as it ought, and timely enough might have been, so near the Enemy as to
follow him, disturb, and stop him from increasing his Forces, and doing that
mischief he did, while the other Army in expectation thereof, and upon their
promise not to frustrate their expectation, was employed in a design of best
advantage to that service in concurrence with them, had they marched Southward?
that they would run contrary to directions, and their own promises above 200
miles another way, which he would make their excuse, this was their fault, and
the cause of all the mischief: here the malicious, or at best uncharitable man
will suggest, that those who contrived the Siege of the Town of Oxford, had no
intention to take it by Siege, since they would not try to take it by Surprise
and secret enterprise; a very solid ground to cast such a base imputation upon
the Committee, by whose di^ection the Army lay before Oxford; if the Committee
had done that, the refusing whereof he makes the ground of this slander, I have
showed before they had been justly to be accounted either fools or betrayers of
their own Forces; but such base lies and slanders, whom soever it may concern,
are usual with him in this Pamphlet, as we may see in this that follows; the
Scots, he says, did not only openly dissent, but also protest against this
Siege; either this is a lie, which is no great wonder in his Discourse, or else
the Siege was directed by the Houses of Parliament, and then his charitable
judgment, that they were false in the Cause, lights upon the Houses; for if
the Scots, whom he will have to have a negative Vote in the Committee, had
dissented and protested against it, it could not be ordered by the Committee,
but must be directed in such cases by the Houses: to think to avoid it, by
saying, such a Party, or some men prevailed with the Houses to do it, as it is
to impute simplicity to them, so it is no other than the Court trick, when they
used, to scandalize the Parliament under such a cloak. The party of Horse, he
says, which was appointed to follow the Enemy, was called back, contrary to
the advice of the Scots; this Party which he here speaks of, were a Party of
Horse under Cromwell, with some Foot from Abbington joined with them, which
were employed in the Countries near about Oxford, and not far from the Army,
that by falling upon those Forces the King had there in several Garrisons, and
in those parts straggling up and down, and by hindering the bringing in of
Provisions into Oxford, the King to prevent the ruin of his Forces left about
Oxford, and to relieve Oxford it self, and those other Garrisons in the parts
adjoining thereto, might be drawn back; or if not, those Forces and Garrisons
lost and taken, as many of them were; but for the Scotch Commissioners to
desire that this Party should follow the Kings Army so far from the body of
their own, that the King might engage them apart from it, when the Kings Army
was such and so considerable in their esteem, that they desired 2500 Horse and
Dragoons to be sent to their Army to assist them, if the King should engage
them to fight, would show they had little care of our Forces and the hazard,
nay certain ruin of them, or very little confidence in their own Army, to
which the greatest part of this Party he speaks of, was sent, in the 2500
Horse and Dragoons sent them: the calling of this Party back, was upon a
Letter from both the Commanders, Cromwell and Major General Brown, who wrote to
the Committee, That if they should follow the Kings Army so far from the Body
of their own Army, that the King might turn back and engage them, it would in
all probability be the loss of that Party; upon which they were called back
to the Army, and the 2500 Horse and Dragoons sent to the Scotch Army; and the
Commissioners of Scotland, at whose request it was done, thereupon writ to then
to advance to Darby and so Southward; but they with their whole Army, to which
these 2500 Horse were to be added, would not come up near the Kings Army, and
yet the Sotch Commissioners will have the Kings Army followed with a small
party of our Army: now where lies the just cause of complaint? Let any man of
judgment and indifferency judge of it, the truth being thus laid open. Here
the pragmatick boutefeu finds fault again, that the Scotch Commissioners did
not publish their Papers concerning this to the whole world, that their simple
sincerity (as he calls it) might be known, and other man's faults sifted out. I
have set down the true relation of these things which this man labors thus
to disguise, that thereby it may appear, if these were the carriages of the
Scots which he holds forth, their sincerity, if it were sincerity was indeed
a very simple one. He concludes this piece of his story very confidently;
saying, let things be tried, and no longer carried in hugger-mugger to the
prejudice of the public service: I promise you I will do my best so to uncase
you, and pull off all your vizards, that you shall carry things no longer in
this deceitful way of yours, to the prejudice of the truth; and when you have
done so, make a show of simple sincerity, and cast your hugger-mugger upon
those men who are sincere indeed and plain hearted.

After this he comes to speak of that, which before I said, it would not be
long but that he himself would come out with it, and show how his first men, as
he ranks them ( who in the beginning were averse to the coming in of the Scots,
and therefore still opposed the setting up of a Committee to join with them in
the managing of businesses) now turned about to the Scots, and the Scots to
them, and as his manner is all a long in his discourse, he so dresseth it up,
that these men must be made to see their error, and the Scots set forth making
a declaration to all men, of their regarding no man's person, nor being
interessed in any man, but as they judged him to interest himself heartily in
the Common cause without by-ends; this they did from the beginning, and this
they continue still to do, and thus they will do to the end constant to their
principles: this fustian bumbasted Declaration, stuffed with so much other vain
ostentation of themselves, that I think they would be a shamed to own it, this
forward-putting Pedant takes upon him to put forth in their names, and once or
twice to tell you what the Scots do declare to all men; read him but in this
place, and you shall see Mr. Rhombus in his ruff, and yet for all this
ruffling, he finds this business will not come off so clear, but that he must
come in and be their compurgator, which good office he is very often put upon:
it seems this turn-about and change from one side to another, was so observed
in the Scots, that he says there was great murmurings against them for having
quite left off honest and well affected men, and taking by the hand
semi-malignants; here we have his own confession, how this was resented, and
generally spoken of amongst men; what they were whom they quitted, and who
those were whom they take by the hand in exchange, I have already upon other
occasions spoken unto, and therefore will not trouble my self with it ^ere
again; only by what I have there said, it may appear, the Scots were not so
averse from humoring and consulting with women, neither was that so unexpected
unto them, as this man in this vain, flaunting, foolish Declaration made in
their name very superciliously sets forth for them: At last he says, of this
enough for this time; yea, and too much a great deal, except truer and wiser:
but yet he remembers himself of one thing, which he cannot pass, though it
depend not upon what he had said before, and belong no more unto it, than the
Moon to a green Cheese, as we use to speak; but that is his usual custom, to
vent any thing as it falls into his fancy, which he thinks may excuse his
Scots, and besparter honester men: I confess there is cause enough to move him
not to pass it; for the Scots, for whom he makes himself Proctor, need a
Purgation in this particular, as much as in any; the thing is this, there are
hardly, he says, any divisions amongst these of this side, but the blame
thereof is laid upon the Scots, when as he will needs have it to be well known,
that the Scots assistance, faithful in counsel, and active in the Field,
serves not only to suppress the Enemy, but also to keep together those, who
would otherwise fall asunder: for his extolling their fideli^ie in counsel, and
activitie in the Field, were there truth in it, yet it is so continually
inculcated, and so grossly heaped upon them by him, that it is shameful, and
stinks in the nostrils of every wise man, as too much praise out of a man's own
mouth ever does; but for the thing it self, he will prove a Physician of no
value, when he comes to purge them of this disease; it will not be done with a
bare affirmation, for I shall say and prove it to, that it is well known what
divisions they have made, and what their endeavors have been to that end;
witness their changing parties, and turning from one side to another; as they
saw or thought it might conduce to the furthering of their designs, and
obtaining their ends: when there were Emulations, and from thence divisions
between the Commanders of the Parliament Forces, from whence did arise great
miscarriages of dangerous consequence in the management of the War, sometimes
they cry up Sir William Waller, and he is the only man with them, and the
Lord of Essex must be looked upon at a distance, with an evil eye; at another
time, especially when the new-modelling of the Army, and setting up of another
General, puts him into a discontent, that in opposition to this new-modelled
Army, which their stomachs could not well digest, he seems to fall in with
them, then they presently take him by the hand, and he and his Party are the
only intimate men with them; and this is that which the Pedant means, when he
speaks of the first men, who were averse to the Scots coming into the Kingdom,
for fear their luster should be diminished, who afterward he makes to see
their error, and then to go along with the Scots, whereupon, out comes his
foolish, ridiculous Declaration in the name of the Scots; the envy that both
had against this new modelled Army, brings them to agree In eodem tertio at
first, and afterward to grow better acquainted, and go on together in other
designs, and correspond in them also: these divisions ma^e, or fomented by
them, though they were of evil consequence, yet were they not considerable in
comparison of those mischievous and destructive divisions, endeavored by their
means to be brought to pass, between the Parliament and the City; and last of
all, but worst of all, between the King and the two Houses of Parliament,
witness their continual practice of putting in Papers full of invectives
against the proceedings of Parliament, and when they had so done, then causing
them to be printed and spread about the City, to alienate their affections
from the Parliament; then had they their Emissaries, as Cranford and such like,
to send to the Exchange, and up and down in the City to infuse lies into such
as were most likely to be wrought upon by them, and such beagles as this
Discourser, by Papers, Manifests, and slanderous Pamphlets, to follow the Chase
when they had set it on foot, and to poison the peoples affections, that they
might be fitted and prepared to help on their designs by commotions and
tumults; you have heard how this Incendiarie complains, that the opportunity
thereof was taken from them, when they were removed out of the City to
Worcester house, a thing done only out of respect unto them, and for their
conveniencie, but his complaint manifests sufficiently what was aimed at: for
the divisions and breach between the King and the two Houses of Parliament,
continued by their endeavors, of all other the most unhappie; I will bring for
witness their carriage at the Conference, in pleading for the Kings usurped
Prerogative (for that which was grounded upon Law, and exercised according to
Law was never denied) against the Subjects just and known Rights established by
the Laws, the thing defended by Arms, and the true sta^e of the Quarrel, which
they come to assist us in, yet they pleaded against it, and printed their
Pleadings, and prosecuted these practices of theirs at the Isle of Wight
afterward so effectually, that the King refused the four Bills sent unto him,
which had he then passed, he had been fully united to his two Houses of
Parliament again; but of this I have spoken before, here only I mention it, to
show what unhappie differences they have made, and how industriously they have
endeavored and pursued the same: by all which, I believe it will appear, this
Proctor of theirs, might more to their advantage, have passed by this one
thing: Notwitstanding he will needs add another, as little to the purpose as
the former, but so notoriously false, and with that shameless impudency
affirmed, that no man, who knows the truth of things, can with patience hear
it, without being moved to discover unto the world that truth, which will
manifest the shameful lies, and falsehood of these his brags and boastings of
his Contrymen: I will set down his words, which have no dependencie either
upon what goes before, or comes after, but a notorious lie brought in, in a
bragging way, to make men believe great matters of the Scots: then I add,
says he, that the Enemy, how low soever he seems to be at this instant,
desires to have no better game, than that the Scots would retire, and withdraw
their helping hand from the Service; for he that of nothing made a Party so
great as to carry all before it, until he was suppressed by the Scots, would
raise up his party again; but in despite of the devil and all opposition,
wheth^r clandestine or open, the Scots will stand firm and faithful for the
carrying on of the work of God and his people: first for the time he speaks of,
when the Enemy should seem either to himself or others to be so low, it can be
no other but after the Battle at Nasebie, for before we have him always
prattling of the Parliaments low and desperate condition, and that the Enemy,
as here, carried all before him, and in the Kings Letters to the Queen, taken
at that fight, he writes himself, that he can say his affairs were never in a
more hopeful way, therefore it must be that overthrow, and total rout of his
whole Army, which brought him so low: and I pray, was it here that your Scots
suppressed the Enemy? was it their Action at this time that made him desire no
better game, than that they would retire? truly then they gave him as fair a
game, as he could desire to play, for they did retire so fast from meeting him,
that very suddenly they were retired 200 miles and more from him, that they
might be sure to be far enough out of his way: but that no man being a stranger
and unacquainted with our affairs, may think this to be justly attributed to
them in respect of any thing done by them at any other times, I will affirm
this, and none with truth can deny it, that the Scots were so far from
repressing the Enemy, or causing any fear in him, that from their first coming
into the Kingdom, until they went out again (except what they did with my Lord
of New-Castles Forces, whereof I have spoken) they never would or did engage
their Army alone with any considerable force of the Enemies, much less with an
Army of his; they never took one Town of any strength by Storm, but
New Castle, where the profit of the place, and the conveniencie thereof to be
kept in their hands (which it seemed they intended) made them do more than they
ever did afterward, or as it seemed had resolved to do, witness Hereford: that
this may the better appear, let it be considered what they have done, either in
assisting of us, or opposing the Enemy from first to last, that this impudent
fellow (for in this give me leave so to term him) should brag, that the Enemy
carried all before him until h^ was su^pressed by them: after the Battle at
Marston-moor (where the Enemy had expe^^ence sufficient to make him know how
little cause he had to fear their rep^^^sing (...) him, or hindering his
designs in the Field, as a little after ^he Br^gg (...), they complain the
Scots only did) they take Newcastl^; and (...) put themselves upon the hazard
of Storming it, may appear by their (...) ^ing of (...) their hands after they
had taken it, as they did that other f^o^^ier Town Carl^^, when they had
snatched it out of the hands of our Committees, who were then treat^^g a^out
the surrender of it unto them by the Enemy: after this, I say, it was hoped,
they would have done some service the next Summer, which was accordingly
designed, and their assistance required by the Parliament, the Committee of
both Kingdoms, and by the particular Letters of their own Commissioners, when
they had obtained for them of the Committee so great an assistance of Horse and
Dragoons to join with them; but what disservice they did in stead thereof, by
overthrowing the designs laid for that Summers service, by the Enemies
plundering the Countries upon their running another way, and in the mean time,
by taking an opportunity, as to be far enough out of the Enemies way, so to
catch another of our Towns into their hands, and keep it contrary to agreement
and faith given, as they would needs do Newcastle when they had got that, has
been already showed; and how the Parliament passed all this by in silence,
upon expectation of some better service, but all their expectations were
frustrated, and as little done afterward, as before: indeed nothing done, but
instead of repressing the Enemy, oppressing the Countries by provisions made
for them; and by their plunderings of them; for when the Enemies Army was
totally routed at Nasebie Fight, the King going away and escaping out of the
Battle, only with some Horse, the Officers of the Parliaments Army were in
consultation amongst themselves, whether to follow the Party of Horse escaped
out of the Battle, and thereby prevent the Kings recruiting himself, and
raising a new Army in those Welsh Countries, or march to the relief of that
Part of their Army besieged in Taunton, and the saving of that Town, which had
suffered so much for their fidelity to the Parliament, knowing them both to be
in very great straits at that instant, and the consequence of their loss to be
the Enemies entire possession of all the West, except two or three Towns; in
this difficulty, not knowing well what to resolve on, as most conducing to the
service of the public, they send to the Parliament and the Committee of both
Kingdoms for their advice and direction therein, by which they would be guided,
yet not sitting still, but ordering their marching so as that they might be in
fit place and posture, either to follow the King into Hereford-shire or turn
Westward as they should receive directions; hereupon they receive Letters from
the Committee of both Kingdoms, letting them know, that they had the consent
and good liking of the Committee, and the House also, to march Westward; and
for the following of the Horse escaped out of the Battles, Letters were sent to
the Scotch Army, to march toward Worcester and undertake that service;
thereupon the Parliaments Army bent their course presently Westward, where the
strength, that the King had left after his overthrow at Nasebie, except a few
Horse escaped with himself, was; and indeed it was a great strength, and much
more considerable in respect of the disposition and affection of those Western
Counties: what success God was pleased to give that Army, and what great
services, by his blessing, they did in the Western parts, even to the ending of
the War, is very well known, and cannot be denied by this man, or such as he
is, though they burst for envy at it: This Army being thus employed by
Command, what in the mean time did these his repressers of the Enemy, the
Scotch Army do, in that which was left to them as their charge to prosecute?
which was no more but to follow such Horse as were escaped with the King, and
see that they did not increase Forces, nor run up and down plundering the
Countries well affected to the Parliament, and that their want, or weakness in
Horse might not be a hinderance unto them therein, considering they were to
follow Horse, a considerable Body of Horse again was sent to join with them;
but they, after they had marched according to their orders toward Hereford,
near about Worcester (as I take it) send word, the King was gone into Wales,
and their Army could not follow him into the Mountains; so he was left to run
up and down as he pleased, first to Wales, afterward to New-wark, then to
plunder Huntington, and exercise cruelties there, so toward Bedford, and then
to Oxford, with such increased Forces, as he could get up and recruite himself
withal, whereby he made with his Horse such excursions out of Oxford, that the
adjacent Countries under the Parliaments protection, were greatly annoyed and
harrased thereby, insomuch, that the Committee of both Kingdoms were enforced
to send to the General, being in the West, for Forces to be sent from his Army
there employed, to keep in those Horse and secure the Countries. Thus was the
service, left to the Scotch Army, performed by them, when the Parliaments
Army went into the West against all the remaining Forces of the Enemy, there
being left no more for the Scots to do, but to follow and dissipate a party of
Horse, escaped out of the Enemies Army, wholly routed and overthrown, which
Party did not stay upon inaccessible hills in Wales (a pretense of theirs not
to follow them) but run up and down without being followed by them (though
there were sent an addition of Horse to them to that end) and did mischief from
New^ark in the Northern parts, and so back again all the way, until they came
to Oxford: had they not been repressed, when they were sent from Newwark by the
King, under Digbie and Langdale, by others then these whom he makes the
repressers of the Enemy, who never followed them or came near them, they had
joined with Montross in York shire, which was the design, 1600 of the best of
those Horse being sent for that purpose, under the Commanders named, but
defeated by our Forces in those parts: those the King brought to Oxford, the
Parliaments Army was constrained to send Forces out of the West, to repress
and keep them in from breaking out of Oxford to plunder the Countries
thereabout, though at that time they were engaged against all the forces the
King had left, which were very considerable under the Prince, Hopton, and
Goring in the West, besides the expectation of ten Thousand Horse and Foot out
of France to be landed in those Western parts, and many out of Ireland, as
appeared by intercepted Letters sent purposely to the Prince, from France and
Ireland: let this suffice to show how the Scots suppressed the Enemy, stopped
and opposed all his designs in the field, and what assistance they gave us, and
what liberty and freedom our Army had thereby when engaged in the greatest
dangers, and opposing the greatest forces; they having no more in the mean time
to do, but to prevent the mischiefs that might be done by a broken discouraged
piece of an Army, overthrown and totally routed before by ours, and so to
attend their motions that they might not distract or divide our Army, then
employed in the main work of the War and against that Army the King had only
left him, and all those strong Garrisons in the West which they reduced: but of
all this, though a very small piece of service put upon an Army of 21000 men,
with a considerable strength of Horse sent to assist them, yet they did just
nothing, but returned answer the King was gone into Wales, and they could not
follow him, so they left him to run whether he would and do what he pleased:
when they had returned this answer that they might not be thought to lie upon
the Countries charge and expect their pay for doing just nothing, they think of
besieging a Town, and so sit down before Hereford with their whole Army, where
when they had lain entrenched a great while, the Countries bringing them in
provisions and all thing necessary for a siege, after a breach made by their
Canon sufficient for to storm the Town, had they had any mind so to do, they
raise their siege dishonourably, without ever making so much as an attempt to
take the Town at that breach, which by their battery they had made for that
end, and taking occasion upon the news they heard of Montrosse's proceedings in
Scotland, away they march without hazarding a man to gain the Town, which
afterward was gained by an inconsiderable party of our Country forces; they
marched Northward toward their own Country, their Horse being gone before them
under David Lesly, who coming into Scotland, and overthrowing the forces under
Mentross, which being not above 4000 or thereabouts, had mastered all Scotland;
when the news hereof came to the Army which was marching after them, they
staid, and that which then they set themselves about, was to join with our
Northern forces under Colonel Poynz a good active soldier, to besiege Newwark,
where while they lay (safe enough for any hazard they would put themselves
upon) the King fearing to be besieged in Oxford by our Army now returned
victorious out of the West, comes and delivers himself unto them, passing
thither disguised, the French agent Montril going thither before, and residing
in the Scotch Army about a week, to make way for his reception: upon the Kings
coming unto them, the Town by his command is delivered into our hands, he being
willing as it seemed the Scots should march away with him, which they did in
great haste to Newcastle (kept by them in their hands for any good purpose)
fearing lest we should dispute it with them, as well we might, their keeping
the King in their power in our Kingdom; and Poynz with the Northern forces
under his command feared them so little, that I have heard he would have done
it, and fought with them, before they should have carried the King away, had he
known the Parliaments mind therein, and been by them authorized so to do;
hereof it seems they had some apprehensions, which made them march away with so
much speed. Here you have all that was done by them worth the naming, from the
time they came into the Kingdom until they went out: and for this last
service, committed to their care, of pursuing this party of Horse escaped out
of the battle, when the whole Army was totally routed, and all the Foot
Regiments taken at Naseby fight, wherein it was hoped they would have done
something, when this their Proctor comes (as he sees there is need enough) to
make their purgation in respect of the murmurings that he says were against
them for it, indeed for doing nothing in it, you may perceive how he is put to
it, how he labors to piece and patch up an ill business, which passes his
skill to mend, or set any tolerable fair face upon. First we have him at his
general known ward, wherewith he uses to fence off all that his Scots are
charged with, the Committees must be Malignants, when they came into Worcester
sh. with great diligence intending to follow the Enemy into Wales, the
Committee of that shire (whom in derision he styles noble) lead them a great
circuit about out of the way he says; it is well known they can go out of the
way, when they are to come up to the enemy, without being led, as appeared when
they were appointed before to come to Darby; well notwithstanding this, yet
they will find the Enemy, but in the end he is gone into the hills of Wales,
yea, as I have showed you before to plunder Huntington, and do other mischiefs,
and at last to be so formidable unto them, that the very voice, or a devised
tale of his approaching, is the main reason, he gives of their dishonorable
raising the siege at Hereford, and not attempting to storm the Town; for before
he is aware, he tells us that here, which I showed before was observed, their
resolution to keep their Army entire, they will not therefore divide them to
follow the Enemy, though they say he had divided his few runaway Horse,
neither will they storm the Town but devise a tale of the Enemies Horse
approaching, that might fall upon them while they are in storming: then
unskilfully he discovers the reason of their resolution, to keep an Army here
in this Kingdom that shall hazard nothing to weaken it, or endanger the
breaking of any part of it, for they were far from home, and could not easily
make it up again; what service then we may expect from them every man may
hereby judge, yet we must have more Malignants brought in to mend this matter,
if it could be, the Committee of both Kingdoms must be Malignants, yea, the
Parliament it self, because upon such a tale as this, the Enemies Horse coming
toward them in a great body, they would not presently send away the Horse of
their own Army to them, who were then engaged in the besieging of Bristol; he
is hard put to it you see, when to excuse this ill carriage of his Scots, he
must make the Committee of both Kingdoms, and the Parliament also to be in the
number of Malignants to them. Many other such foolish fig leaves he makes use
of to cover over this foul business, not worth my trouble to answer, nor any
man's to read, only by his own confession, though they staid there long to do
nothing for the service of the Parliament, yet thereby diverse of them had time
enough to trinckle with the Enemy, what was the Subject thereof is best known
to themselves, neither will I judge, but that which appeared not long after,
was what I have showed before the Kings putting himself into their hands: we
have here his own confession, that the business the Parliament entrusted the
Scotch Army with at this time, and desired them to take care of, was to pursue
the broken Enemy, and to clear the field of him, that he might not recrute
himself, gather forces and do mischief, which they for all their readiness and
diligence, which he prattles of, for fear of dividing their Army, would not do,
but the Enemy with his Horse going into Wales, in which Countries he was most
likely to recruit himself and raise new forces, they let him go and resolve to
lie still with their whole Army, and wait till he would come to them, and find
them out, as that which they judge best for the service, and they had lain
still but for the murmures of men (whom therefore he calls simple ones) which
made them think of besieging Hereford: this was a likely way to clear the field
of the Enemy, and keep him from increasing his forces, which when they had
given him liberty to do, and heard but a rumor (if it were not one of his own
making) that the Enemy was coming toward them, they raise the siege, and away
they go; and had they not undertaken that siege, but lain still waiting at the
entry of the Country for the Enemies coming back, whom he says they could not
find, for the truth is they never sought after him, certainly when he had
raised forces and had come to find them and engage them, this their raising of
their siege upon such a report, and marching away, with what they did formerly,
gives us just cause to suspect what they would have done in that case; some
report of a flying Army going into their Country would in likelihood have
made them make haste Northward again, without staying for draughts: we have his
confession that the breach was sufficient for storming, and all things in that
readiness, that they had resolved, to storm the Town the next morning, at a
Council of War, there being not many forces in the Town: then comes the rumor
of the Enemies Horse approaching, and withal the consideration of hazarding
their Army, which they might have need of in their own Country, this turns
the storm resolved on into a raising of the siege: could a mornings work have
detained them so long, either for the Enemies Horse to come near them, or from
the relief of their own Country? But they resolve to hazard their honor,
rather than any part of their Army: we have his confession, that the Enemy came
by them but a great way off for fear of them: they were fearful bugbears
indeed it seems unto them; had they by following the Enemy made themsesves
fearful to him, he had never had the means and opportunity so to strengthen
himself, as to come by their noses, and afterward do all the mischief he did
at Huntington, and up and down those Countries, and then make them so afraid of
him as to rise and be gone: but David Lesly presently followed them with most
of their Horse, and went before them, he says, but why did he not rather go up
to them, but went so, that as he confesses, it was murmured, he was gone no
man knew whither, and the Enemy went whither he would for any opposition that
he received from him, to Newwark, then to Huntington and toward Bedford,
plundering up and down till he came to Oxford, without being followed at all by
these to whom that care was Committed: nay, he so little feared or cared for
their following of him, when once he saw himself secure and free from the
Parliaments Army, that going to Newwark without opposition or hinderance, he
sent from thence, as I have said, 1600 of his Horse under Digby and Langdale
into Yorkshire to join with Montross, who in many places, as they went by
Doncaster, beat up our quarters, and at Sherborn took 800 prisoners; where was
David Lesly and his Horse all this while, which he says were pursuing the
Enemy about Trent? had he done any thing in the pursuit of them, you should
have been sure to have heard of it, and had it in great Letters: but whereas he
says the Pamphlets at London were stuffed with what our forces did or would do
therein, the man (not afraid to use the name of God here) says God knows
they were far away from the Enemy, which is so false (as show me one Pamphlet
amongst them all stuffed with so many falsehoods as this) that it is well known,
this party of 1600 Horse going into Yorkshire (When David Lesly was gone they
knew not whether, for which, he says, they murmured) was encountered by our
Yorkshire forces under the command of of Colonel Copely and Colonel Lilburn,
and by them wholly routed, the 800 prisoners taken at Sherborn rescued, and
their Arms recoverd, 400 of the Enemy taken, 600 Horse, many Commanders and
men of quality, 40 slain, and Digbies coach with his Cabinet taken, having
therein the letters that tell such tales of the secret Treaty between him and
the Scotch Commissioners, the man would I believe have been glad, in that
respect, our forces had been, as he said, far enough off from the Enemy, when
their forces, by the trust reposed in them for that end, should have been as
near, but were indeed far enough off from doing any service at all against
them; had they been as near as ours were, and had had the same courage to do
the like service, they might have saved Mr. John Cheesly a labor in searching
out this letter of Digbies, and keeping it from being Printed and published,
when the rest of the letters were: I have insisted the longer, and been the
larger in this particular, that I may refer the Reader thereunto, as a true
Relation of all the services, for the assistance of the Parliament, that were
done by this Scotch Army, while they were in the Kingdom, for the great
charges they put the Kingdom unto in their pay, and pressures the Countries lay
under by their free quarter and plunder; all which being duly considered by
indifferent men, it will appear to have proved rather disservices, than
serviceable assistance given to the Parliament; therefore all his braggings and
boastings of them (which this foolish Romance set forth of purpose to delude
the world therein) is so stuffed wi^h, even ad nauseam to all that read it,
calling them our deliverers, the Enemies only repressors, and those that alone
give stop to his designs in the field, his fear and only terror, the causers,
continuers, and only preservers of this Parliament, with I know not how much
more of the like stuff; to all, I say, of this ridiculous boasting (so
Thrasonical and withal so false, in the knowledge of all that are acquainted
with our affairs in these unhappy times, that any ingenious man would be
ashamed of it) whenever the Reader shall meet with the same, I shall give no
other answer, but desire him to receive the answer from this true Relation of
all their carriages, and performances in this unhappy War, wherein to assist us
they came into the Kingdom: had there been the lest ingenuity or discretion in
this discourser of theirs, who undertakes to set forth their performances and
great acts, he had never done them that wrong as to force out the truth, in
answer to his base and most false slanders and calumnies, cast by him upon this
nation, and upon men of best desert, sometimes to excuse, and at other times to
set forth and extol the Scots: for by that means, thinking to cast a cloak upon
the same, he has occasioned their nakedness to be the more discovered to the
world. It may be he might think to abuse strangers and posterity, by these
Fables and fictions of his brains, and content himself with that, though he
were laughed at with indignation and scorn by all that truly understood the
carriage of things in respect of all parties, both in Council and in War: and
that which makes this the more probable, is his making this poor piece of his
march forth, as one says, in Roman Buff, taking the pains to turn it into
Latin, that thereby those, who are strangers to our affairs in this Kingdom,
and unacquainted both with persons and actions in these late troubles, might be
abused, and the more easily drawn to believe by this Romance of his, that out
of Scotland came Arthur and his Knights of the round Table to our assistance:
but it may be he shall be met withal in his own colors, and paid in his (...)

Having, upon their raising the Siege at Hereford, and making haste homewards
into their own Country, when they had done so little here, spoken somewhat of
what had befallen them in Scotland by a few Forces under Montross, who by those
few subjected to his power the whole Kingdom, and made those who then ruled
fly for their safety, which news was the occasion of calling David Lesley
thither for their succor by the Chancellors letter, as he says, and of the
Armies following after him: let me in this place likewise show the malicious
falsehood of this man in representing unto the world the sense wherewith this
disaster befallen Scotland, was entertained here in England; and I desire that
all the rest of his envious, malicious slanders and lies, when they are met
withal in this Pamphlet which is full of them, may be judged of by this, which
I shall make appear to be one of his manifest falsehoods: the news of what had
befallen them in Scotland, he says, was written hither by diverse from the
place and from Barwick, the effect it had was, that good, honest, and
well-affected men (and those must only be such who are of his party, and for
his turn) were much moved and afflicted at it, and he cannot but confess, that
the Houses of Parliament ordained a solemn Fast thereupon, for prayers and
supplications to be made in behalf of Scotland; but there were diverse others,
he says, that did laugh in their selves at this affliction, and were glad in
their souls of it, and amongst these (as you must ever expect when the
overflowing of the gall takes him, then these must be brought in) the prime of
the Faction of the Independents (as he terms them) did leap for joy of the
infortune of the Scots; and then runs on not only to take up and carry about
base lies concerning them, but to make and invent them, which he that does, the
15 Psalm shows his condition, and where his place will be, except he repent:
but as these later, which he runs out into, are known to be lies, the men whom
he means, under this term he puts upon them, being such, as are no turn-coats
for money or preferment, nor so little esteemed (which is his grief) as not to
dare appear in the streets, his own case, when he ran away being sought after
to be punished for these, and such other lying seditious practices; so I will
make it appear how false and full of malice the former is of their rejoicing at
the calamity of the Scots: it is clear enough, that when he talks of the prime
of the Faction of the Independents, he means some of those prime Officers of
the New-modelled Army, and that may appear by his descanting upon their Letters
in this Pamphlet, as we shall see afterward, and by many other passages,
whereby he endeavors to disgrace them, and lessen their esteem if he could
by many gross lies forged against them, and spread abroad to that end; now with
what brotherly affection and Christian compassion these very men, did express
themselves toward the Scots, upon the news of this sad accident befallen them
in their Country, yea, and that when they were marching away thereupon, and
leaving the whole burden of the War upon them, let all the World see by this
Letter sent unto them to manifest the same, and thereby judge of this, envious,
malicious man, and his writings as they deserve.

A Letter written from the General and Officers of the English Army, to the
Scotch Army, upon the report of the proceedings and success of Montross in
Scotland.
MAy it please your Excellency and the rest, honored friends, and beloved
brethren, we have not without much grief received the sad report of your
affairs in Scotland, how far God, for his best and secret ends, has been
pleased to suffer the Enemy to prevail there, and are (we speak unfeignedly)
not less sensible of your evils, than you have been and are of ours, nor than
we are of our own: and the greater cause of sympathy have we with you, and the
more do our bowels earn toward you, because what ever you now suffer your
selves in your own Kingdom, is chiefly occasioned by your assisting us in
ours, against the Power that was risen up against the Lord himself, and his
anointed ones. Wherefore we cannot forget your Labor of Love, but thought good,
at this season, even amongst our many occasions, to let you know, that when the
affairs of this Kingdom will possibly dispense with us, the Parliament
allowing, and you accepting of our assistance, we shall be most willing, if
need so require, to help and serve you faithfully in your own Kingdom, and to
engage our selves to suppress the Enemy th^re, and to establish you again in
peace: in the mean time we shall endeavor to help you by our prayers, and to
wrestle with God for one blessing of God upon both Nations, between whom,
besides many other strong relations and engagements, we hope the unity of
spirit shall be the surest bond of Peace: and this, what ever suggestions or
jealousies may have been to the contrary, we desire you would believe, as you
shall ever really find to proceed from integrity of heart, a sense of your
sufferings, and a full purpose to answer any call of God to your assistance, as
becomes

Your Christian Friends and Servants in the Lord, Thomas Fairfax Oliver
Cromwell Thomas Hammond Henry Ireton Edward Montague Richard Fortescue Richard
Ingolsbye John Pickering Christopher Bethel. Hardresse Waller William Herbert
Robert Hammond James Gray Thomas Pride Robert Pie Th. Rainsborough Thomas
Sheffield Charles Fleetwood Ralph Welden John Raymond Leon. Watson Arthur
Evelyn Richard Dean Thomas Jackson John Desborowe


I shall now return to find him out, and what he has next started, for up he
takes that which comes to his fancy, and as he thinks it may serve his turn,
without any respect of Order or time: that we find him now upon, is a treaty
between the Commissioners of the King, and those of the two Kingdoms; in which,
to set forth to the world the integrity of the Scotch Commissioners, their
constancy and firmness to their principles, he as his usual course is to do
throughout this Pamphlet, for that end invents lies, and casts slanders upon
the English Commissioners, insinuating their readiness to comply with the Kings
Commissioners, who he says, had felt their pulse, and thereupon promise to
themselves, that they could carry all things to their minds, were it not for
the rude and stiff-necked Scots, who were so firm to their principles, that
they resolve to carry on the work with honor and conscience, though with
hazard and danger, rather than to yield to a base agreement, to the prejudice
of Church and State: then he falls to tell how the Kings Commissioners cry out
upon them for this, as the only hinderers of their ends, and stoppers of their
designs, both in the Field and in Council; and ends with magnifying their
honesty, faithfulness, resolution, prudence, knowledge, and wishes both
Parties to tell you freely, if in the least point they were found failing in
any of these virtues and excellencies, wherewith he adorns them and sets them
forth: I express him in his own terms, that you may have a Character of him,
and see his perfect image throughout this whole partial lying Discourse, and
judge hereby for what end it was set out and published: well, I as one of the
Parties whom you call upon, will tell you freely, and all men whom you desire
to abuse, that the Scotch Commissioners themselves, without calling to any
parties to witness it for them, did so manifest what might be expected from
them, in Treaties with the Kings Commissioners, in respect of the King and for
his advantage, at the Conference which they desired to have with the two
Houses, that they might therein take liberty to plead for the Kings usurped
prerogative, before the Commissioners of both Houses were to go to the King,
that no man who then heard them, will doubt what their carriage would be at a
Treaty at any time, and what the Kings Commissioners, without further feeling
of their pulse, might promise to themselves in respect of them: For the Kings
Solicitor, and his Attorney General, in the case of Ship Money, did not more
rudely and stiff-neckedly (to use his own terms, and sure them to the truth)
plead for the Kings usurped power in exacting that money illegally, than they
pleaded for the Kings usurped prerogative against the 4 Bills to be sent to
him, which only contained the Subjects just Rights: I have touched this
before, and to this carriage of theirs both at the Conference, and afterward
at the Isle of ^ight in pursuance thereof, I will refer the Reader, thereby to
receive an answer, and to make his judgment of them, so often as this
Discourser shall speak of their inclinations to Treaties with the King, and of
their carriage and behaviors in them: I dare say, whosoever heard them, and
saw their carriage at the Conference, and observed all passages afterward the
time they stayed in the Kingdom, both at the Isle of Wight and after they came
from thence, could not read what this their Agent, their Solicitor in this
place speaks of them, and attributes to them, but with just indignation at it.

We have him now again at the new modelling of the Army, which a little before
he said was done according to the mind of some few men, imputing that weakness
to the Houses of Parliament, that a few men could impone upon them, and lead
them as they pleased; this lesson he was taught by the Court, and learned of
the Caveliers, as I have showed, thus would they do when they intended in any
particular, to traduce the proceedings of Parliament, and render them odious to
the people: he confesses the Parliament had just reason to do it, in respect
of the many and great miscarriages, which they could not by fair means redress,
and that this was by the fault of those employed in the service, whether for
want of skill, or care, or sincerity, he will not enquire; but had it been in
this new-modelled Army, he would certainly have been so inquisitive, as to
have found a fault where none was, which will appear afterward; only here he
will be modest, for it concerns those whom his Commissioners took so kindly by
the hand and embraced, when they quite left off and quitted honest men, at
which he acknowledges the people murmured. He takes up this business again, as
you may perceive by the ensuing discourse, chiefly to vent his spleen against
the new-modelled Army, for who can stand before envy? the better men deserve,
and the greater their services are, the more that disease is increased: Two
things he snarls at in them, the one, Insufficiency in such as were employed,
the other Independencie (for I told you here you should find the Butt he shoots
his bolt at, when before he spoke of the prime of the faction of the
Independents) this discourse of his he ushereth in by telling of an advice
given to the Parliament by the Scotch Commissioners, when they h^ard of their
resolution to reform their Army, first that they would made choice of
experienced Soldiers, secondly, none but such as would take the Covenant:
these advises, he says, were not so much regarded as was needful, therefore
many were put out that were of known worth and experience, and new men put in
their places, unknown for any Military virtue: before he had said the Scotch
Commissioners were informed, that by indirect means, and for by-ends, men were
preferred to places of Command, and such as favored Sects and Schisms, and
were professed Enemies to the Covenant, which is, and always with him must be
the common Cause in hand: here you have what he would asperse and disgrace this
Army with; and whether true or false in respect of any such advice given by
the Scotch Commissioners to the Parliament, or information received by them, or
in respect of the things themselves, all is one so it serve his turn, and
carry on the good cause he has in hand in this Discourse: he goes on with
admiring, why the Common Soldiers should not be pressed to take the Covenant:
then showing why some men are against the taking of the Covenant, and from
thence falls into two foolish discourses, which we shall take up one after
another; and last of all ends with a complaint, that so many gallant Scotch
Officers should be cashiered, in whose praises he expatiateth sufficiently:
this being done, out comes that envy, and appears, which stirs in him upon
any occasion of men's taking notice of Gods blessing upon the endeavors of
honest men in t^^ new Army. For the insufficiency of the Officers of this
Army, whereby he would insinuate the sufficiency and experience of the Scotch
Officers cashiered, and hold forth therefore the cashiering of them as a great
fault, being so many brave fellows, and that all in one day, when they had
carried themselves so gallantly and valliantly, and yet had no reward, or very
little, for which they were constrained to dance attendance a long time; hereby
lashing, not only the new-modelled Army and General thereof, whom yet
sometimes he will claw, but the Houses of Parliament; To all this, I say, let
Action, which is that that manifests ability and sufficiency in all things,
especially in Military affairs, be the trial, and give the judgment in this
comparison of Officers: let it be considered, what has been done by the one in
a Year, what by the other in diverse, what we lost when they were employed, what
Victories and places of strength we gained by the employment of these
unexperienced men, as he would have the world believe them to be. It is not
bragging and prating of brave fellows, which makes them such, but acting
bravely and wisely: it is true that there were some able and experienced
Commanders of the Scots, who did very good service, and if these would have
stayed and kept their Commands, it was that which was desired; but for the
generallitie of them, they were found to be such, as that before the
new-modelling of this Army, they were in great numbers left to walk (as in one
place he says of some of them) from the Ayle-horse at Westminster, from one
Tavern and Alehouse to another, and then to Westminster Hall; and this was
their march for a long time; yet for this these Reformadoes must have some pay
to send them home, and we were glad so to be rid of them; at our first taking
up of Arms in our own defense, there came store of them to London, under what
Titles they pleased to put upon themselves, in respect of the former services
they said they had been in; there were not then many experienced Officers and
Soldiers of the Parliaments side, so these were taken, and much was expected
from them, but when upon some trial it was found, a little experience in these
our unhappy Wars could make much more useful Soldiers, for our service, of our
own Nation, these, as I have said before, were left to walk the streets, except
it were some who indeed were men of worth, and they might have stayed if they
would, as himself confesses. For his long discourse how they were sought and
Courted by the Enemy, out of his great opinion of their ability, it is his
usual way to find out devises to magnify his Contrymen, through this whole
Pamphlet, as the Reader must needs observe, I will not trouble my self with it
in every place, it is so gross, that it renders it self sufficiently
ridiculous: what dealing there was between the Enemy and them, I leave to
themselves, they best know, but this I will say, as I have had cause to say
often, that this vanity and folly in thus bragging and boasting of the Scots
throughout the whole Pamphlet, and inventing long stories to that end, as here
concerning the Enemies courting of them, and the great exploits they did at
Leicester, does them no right nor advantage: he talks of the Pamphlets at
London, how they would have been filled if any such things had been done by
others; but show one Pamphlet amongst them all so farc'd and crambed with
suchlike stuff as this is, and that makes every understanding man who reads
it, look upon it as a framed thing, set forth for that purpose, and so give
little credit to it, as indeed it deserves no other. Let it likewise again be
considered, what has been done by this new-modelled Army, with the
unexperienced Commanders thereof in one Year or little more, wherein they alone
routed and wholly overthrew and dispersed both the Kings Armies, that at
Nasebie, and the other in the West under Hopton at Torrington, reduced all the
West with those many strong Towns and Castles under the obedience of the
Parliament, and afterward Oxford, and those other strong Garrisoned places in
other parts, and so finished that War; the particular relations whereof are
truly and faithfully set forth in that History called, Anglia Rediviva,
Englands Recoverie; and then compare this with what was done by the Scotch
Army in the mean time, which the man will have to consist of a fair number of
brave Commanders, lusty Soldiers, able, ready, and willing to do service, of
whose service he would be sure to tell you wonders, had he but the least
subject for it, but the truth is, they did none at all, as I have showed: this
so stirs the man's envy, as I said before, that he cannot pass it by, without
being vexed that it should be said God had blessed the honesty and piety of
some men extraordinarily in the New Army, so that great things are done by it:
He cannot but confess that great things are done indeed of late by this Army,
but his envy so over-powers his charity, that the profession of holiness in
them, he will call hypocrisy, and a cloak for Interest and Faction, rather
than be brought to acknowledge the Instruments God is pleased to use in these
great works he did by this Army; nay, he will rather affirm a manifest lie,
known to be so by all men, in saying, those men, who would make the world
believe, they are the doers of all, if things were tried, had little share in
the actions, though they be deep in the praises: this thing is so notoriously
false, that it needs no other trial and conviction, but only the knowledge of
the men whom his envy and malice cease not to pursue with such lies and
slanders, and unto that degree of impudency, that all men, who read and
observe it, cannot but abhor the title he puts upon the front of this his
Pamphlet, Truths Manifest. The Man whose known merits, his aim in this place,
is to detract from, and disgrace, together with those other Commanders who are
pious and religious men (whose piety his charity, will interpret to be
hypocrisy) is the same, whose just praises given him, according to the service
done by him at that time, did so sting him at Marstonmoor Fight, that there you
have him using the same lying language as here with little difference, and with
the same known falsehood, as in that place I have showed; where the Reader may
see, who the men are his spleen rises at, and that will be sufficient to
discover to him the falsehood, the scope and end of this slandering Pamphlet;
This man he so often snarls at, (viz. Oliver Cromwell) and the rest of the
Commanders whose profession of Religion he will have to be nothing but a cloak
for Faction, needed not indirect means to bring them into places of Command;
and for by-ends, they are known to be men of more worth and honesty, than to
suffer themselves to be made use of for any such ends; but belike the man takes
all to be by-ends, which lay-by his Idol, and the setting up of that in this
Kingdom, his Scottish Kirk-Government, which he still will have to be the
common cause contained in the Covenant, and to which the oath of the National
Covenant must tie us all; the quarrel of England (as he would make it) being
one and the same with that of Scotland, though not so well cleared to be so by
the Parliament as he could wish: that men will not take the Covenant with this
sense most falsely put upon it, makes him with open mouth thus fly out upon
them, and this is his second quarrel against the New-modelled Army, as also
against all those he terms Independents; after a great debate in the Houses, it
is resolved, he says, that all the Commanders should take the Covenant, upon
pain of cashiring, but he will not believe this order was observed, you must
give him leave to believe but what serves his turn; as for the Common
Soldiers, it was not to be pressed upon them, which first he will have to make
men admire, then next it astonished them, and for all this he gives a wise
reason, either out of ignorance or out of falsehood to keep those men he talks
of (if any such were and not rather men of straw set up by his own fiction) in
their admiration and astonishment; that is, that the Parliaments Soldiers
should not be put to take the Covenant, when the Enemies Soldiers, being
Prisoners, had an oath tendered to them, and those suspected to adhere to the
adverse Party, being brought before the Committee of Examination have an Oath
put to them, which if they refuse they are, as he phraseth it, censed
Malignants: his astonished men may be delivered out of their astonishment, into
which he will cast them, very easily when they shall know, The Covenant,
ordered not to be pressed upon the common Soldiers, was one thing, and these
Oaths he speaks of, tendered to the Enemies Soldiers that were Prisoners, and
to suspected persons, a clean other thing different from the same; for the
substance of this later Oath was only this, that they should swear, hereafter
to act nothing in prejudice of the Parliament, knowingly and willingly, which
men of meanest capacity must needs be able to understand what it meant, and
what thereby they bound themselves unto; but to press upon every ignorant
Soldier the taking of an oath, such as the Covenant (the true sense and meaning
whereof, though indeavored in the first drawing of it up to be made clear, was
grown so doubtful, so variously construed, and so much controverted at last
amongst men of best understanding, and that by means of such pragmaticks as
this, and other like him, putting senses upon the same subservient to their own
ends) had been no other than to cause a great many poor men to take the name of
God in vain by swearing they knew not what, whereas oaths are to be taken in
judgment: and the Parliament had sufficient experience of this, to teach them
to be more tender herein for the time to come, by being drawn by that common
custom in Scotland, of thrusting oaths upon the ignorant people through the
whole Kingdom, when they have any design to take in hand, and by their
persuasions to order the Covenant here in England, to be pressed upon the
people in every Parish, and this at their instance, as I have said, and after
their example; a devise of the Scots, no way standing with the care that should
be had of preventing the taking of Gods name in vain, and making use of so
sacred a thing as an oath, to serve turns and carry on designs, thereby
involving the whole Kingdom in that sin, which God will not hold him guiltless,
that is bold to commit: The Parliament had good reason in this respect, to
forbear the Ordering of every common Soldier to take this Oath. Now that he
might bring in one of his wise disputes, he tells us the reason why some men
are backward to take this oath; and that is because they are adverse to the
Government of the Church by Presbytery; which is a thing that has no truth in
it, but he will feed his fancy with it, because he has entertained this fancy
before, and is very industrious to make others believe it, that by the covenant
a man is bound to set up Presbyterian government, and such a Presbyterian
government as they have molded and framed and do exercise in Scocland; whereas
in the drawing up of the Covenant by the Assemby of Divines, and a Committee of
the Houses joined with them, that care was taken, that the Word of God should
be the Rule in all, and then such Cautions and Limitations were set down for
every man's proceeding according to that rule, that what he did should not
exceed the bounds of his place and calling; so that, as the sense of the
Covenant was then taken to be in the Debate about it, and agreed upon, there
was no Independent (as he distinguishes them) refused to take the Covenant,
more than a Presbyterian; even those of the Assembly whom he rails upon, and
sharpeneth his invenomed pen against (men for piety and learning, whose books,
he and such as he is, are not worthy to carry after them) took it as readily
as any; and so did his prime Independents, Officers of the Army, and Members
in the Houses (for such they must all be, that his hot Scotch Presbyterian
head, to serve his ends, will cast that term upon:) But if any afterward were
backward to take it, the chief reason of it was, that the Scots, and such as
desired to make use of it to serve their ends, and carry on their designs,
would put their senses upon it, and make such interpretations of it as served
their turns best, and accordingly urge and press some parts and pieces of it,
but for the rest regard it as little; this made many refuse the taking of it,
or the pressing of it upon others, when they saw such uses made of an Oath; and
good reason they had to show and testify their dislike of the abuses of Oaths
and Covenants wherein the name of God is interessed, when they saw men make
that use of them, to carry on their designs and compass their own ends the
better.

The Discourse he first falls into, he brings in thus, a prime man, he says,
amongst those who are adverse to the Government of the Church, spoke openly,
That though in his judgment, he did not approve of Presbyterial Government in
the Church, yet he at all times would submit to whatsoever Church Government
the Parliament should settle, either by active or passive obedience: This the
man will needs have to be a great absurdity, while the absurd man in the mean
time, either cannot for want of wit, or for want of ingenuitie will not
distinguish, between giving obedience to the thing commanded by doing of it,
and to the Authority that does command it; for to this, obedience is given by
submitting to what punishment such Authority shall inflict, in case that be
not done which is commanded, and that without resistance for conscience sake:
lawful Authority (which is not to be resisted but obeyed for conscience sake)
may command things unlawful, which are not to be done; in this case, as Dr
Amesius in his Theology says, page 391, Si Praeceptum fit Illegitimum, tum
teleratio poenae cum injuria inflictae, vim and locum habet obedientiae: and
for proof thereof, he brings that place in the 1 of Peter 2. verse. 19, 20. if
any suffer for doing well (which they do who suffer because they refuse to do
that which is evil) this, the Apostle says, is an obedience acceptable to God
in servants toward their masters; and so is it in all Inferiors to their
Superiors: and what does this man in denying it, but impute disobedience to
authority to all Martyrs of the primitive times, and all those who have
suffered in these modern times; for if obedience may not be performed to
authority, by patient undergoing what shall be inflicted by them who are in
authority, when men cannot lawfully do what is commanded, then necessarily they
all, and whosoever shall follow their example are to be accounted disobedient
to authority, and so resisters of the ordinance of God, whereby for their
Martyrdom they shall receive damnation. Here you have his Divinity; his
Philosophy is as good; all virtue consists in action, he says, obedience being
a virtue, cannot therefore be said to be passive: as if there were no action in
suffering, whereas the highest Act of virtue in a Christian is patient and
willing submission of himself to suffer persecution for righteousness sake; is
there no virtuous Act of the will, when it offers the body or state to suffer
what authority shall inflict though unjustly, because it will not resist
authority, tho it cannot do what is commanded thereby, being unlawful? but I
trouble my self too much in answering such a new device, and idle fancy, being
contrary to the known received truth by all, both Divines, and others of any
understanding; and therefore the Pedagogue should not have been so bold,
magisterially (as is his guise) to reprove him that first invented this
expression of passive obedience and those also that since have made use of it.
At last he remembers himself, that divines speak much of the passive obedience
of our Savior, and there being gravelled and at a nonplus, having before
denied any such thing as passive obedience, he has nothing else to answer, but
that this is of another condition, and belongs to another place: what place I
pray shall we find for that which is nothing? if there be no such thing as
passive obedience, then there is no obedience in the passion of our Savior
offered up to God, which were little short of blasphemy to affirm: his willing
laying down his life (John 10.18.) as he received Commandment from the Father,
and undergoing the wrath of God for our sins, though a passion, was as much an
Act of obedience as his doing all that was commanded in the law; and therefore
obedience to authority may be performed as truly, and as much, yea more in
suffering than in doing, but as I said, I have been too long in confuting such
an idle new up-start foolery, only it may be this may serve to make a
discovery of the man's spirit, and others like him, showing what they would be
at, if they can cloak any thing with the name of Religion; the carrying of it
on and the compassing of their ends in it, must be by action, though against
lawful authority, not by suffering, by which the ancient Martyrs spread
religion through the world, but with these men suffering is no virtue.

His second discourse which I now come unto, makes this the more probable
compared with that which I have noted before of his magnifying the zeal of
their ancestors in carrying on the work of religion so actively in Scotland,
which how they carried it on is well known: as he brought in, and had one for
his first discourse, so he has for this second another one, who is made to
speak publicly, that the main quarrel the Parliament stood for at first,
and for which they took up arms, was not religion: this in the first place he
says is a great wrong to the wisdom of the Parliament, for any to aver, and
publish, that the Parli^ment did not from the beginning intend a true
reformation of religion: his argumentations following are so little to the
purpose, so idle, and needless in this particular, that I will not touble my
self with the recital of them: but observe here again the spirit of this man,
he has no medium between intending reformation of religion, and forcing of it
by arms: as if the Parliament could not intend it and endeavor it also,
except they take up arms to force it; and as if there were no other way and
means for them to manifest their intentions by, but the sword of war, or to be
used by them to obtain their desires herein, but rising up in arms: as I
said, if they can cast the name of religion but upon the ou^most skirts of
religion, which is the religion this man pleads for in all this discourse of
his, the Scottish Kirk government, yet the Parliament is not wise in God,
because they have not his fear before their eyes, except they take up arms
and fight in this quarrel: you may hereby see, that as he would bring in his
Scottish Kirk-government amongst us here in England, so would he also bring in
their way and manner of riseing up in arms against Authority to force the
setting of it up, which zeal he so much extols before in the practices of
their predec^ssors; But we in England have not so learned religion: In the
second place he says, the thing is most false; for did not the Parliament
intend from the beginning the reformation of religion? which question he
answers by bringing in of diverse instances to prove they did, as pulling
down the High Commission Court, cu^bing the tyranny of Prelates, causing
sil^nced Ministers to preach, etc: it is true, these instances brought by him
do prove, the Parliament did intend, and not only so, but endeavor to
reform abuses in matters concerning religion; but these very instances do as
well prove him false and most false (to return his own phrase ino his own
bosom) when he says and would make the world believe they took up arms upon
this occ^sion, or ever intended so to do; neither could they ever have
justified such a deed; but as they intended and endeavored the reformation of
these abuses, so they obtained the same in a Parliamentary and peaceable way:
then he demands if the Parliament did not at first take up arms for religion;
when did the Parliament make the reformation of the church its main quarrel?
this question you must give him leave to make the answer unto himself, that it
was at the j yn^ng with the Scots in the National Covenant, and therefore the
Scots their poor distressed friends at this time for their sakes, and yet negl
cted by them, must have the thanks. But the true answer heereunto which we
will give is this, that neither before, nor then, nor since arms were taken
up, and a quarrel made upon any such occasion, or for any such ends; neither
could the Scots by the examples of their own practices and customs in like
cases, or by their desire of a covenant effect any such thing, that we would
call them into our asistance upon that ground, or upon any such terms, as was
made apparent in the drawing up of the Covenant and at the debate about it; as
also by all the Declarations of the Parliament, and Propositions for settling a
peace and good agreement by them, since tendered unto the King, especially the
four Bills so violently opposed by the Scots Commissioners: therefore we will
never thank the Scots, much less this pragmatick Incendiary of theirs, for
stating our quarrel for us to their own advantage, and for their own ends,
which we neither own, nor do, or can justify.

This does manifestly appear in the preface to that O^dinance of the Parliament
for a weekly assesment through the whole Kingdom, for the maintenance of the
Army, March 4th 1642. the words are these. The Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, fully satisfied in Conscience that they have lawfully taken up
Arms, for the nec^ssary defense of themselves and the Parliament from violence,
the Kingdom from foreign invasion, and the bringing notorious offenders to
condign punishment, which are the only causes for which they have raised and do
continue an Army and forces: here you see the Parliament it self convinces him
of manifest falsehood; but of this I have spoken fully before, upon the man's own
affirmation of that which put the Parliament to a necessity of taking up Arms
in their own defense, and that was the King seeing all other plots and devices
fail, set his design on foot to make open war upon the Parliament (though
under a hidden notion) to destroy it: these are his words, the man did not well
consider, how ill this g^ound laid by him of putting the Parliament to a
necessity of taking up Arms, or be destroyed, and the Government of the Kingdom
thereby subverted, would stand with this position of his, which for his Idol of
Kirk-Government he would here insinuate, and all along endeavors to persuade
men to believe, That the Parliament took up Arms, and by the Covenant were
bound so to do to introduce that Government and set it up in England: to this I
say I have spoken fully in that place, to which I refer the Reader, having
there showed what it was the Parliament took up Arms for, with the necessity
thereof, and the lawfulness in such a case, according to the true constitution
of this English Government.

I shl lenld my answer to these two discourses of his (made upon two men of
straw, set up by himself for that purpose for ought we know) by observing how
the humor of the man leads him, upon this or any other occasion, into his
common Road of disaffecting the people to the proceedings of Parliament,
laboring to make them think, That if this Idol of his, and the setting of it up
in this Kingdom were not made the quarrel, and that for which the two Houses of
Parliament took up Arms, but only the defense of themselves and the just Rights
and Liberties of the Subject therein, and the settling and preservation of those
Rights and Liberties to posterity; then the people were brought by this war
into a worse condition then they were in before it, and so reckons up some
pressures which they were delivered from, and then labors to show that they
were by the War subjected to far greater; and this the Incendiary (who is
seems would have it so) make to be vox populi: here you have his claw, by which
judge of the whole body of the discourse, and what he aims at: he might have
considered if his seditious humor would have permitted him, that which every
wise man will and does consider in such cases, that it is not to be avoided*
but that, as in the natural body when wounds are to be searched and dressed
that they may be healed, and bones dislocated set again in joint, here will be
greater pains felt for the present while the cure is in hand, then if you did
forbear to meddle at all with it; but in the one case, the body by enduring
some present pains, is recovered and made perfectly whole, in the other to
avoid a present and short pressure, the pain is made perpetual, and the part or
whole body endangered to loss and ruin; so it is in the body politic; and
therefore as the simplest man will be content to undergo some sharp pain to
have a bone rightly set, or a dangerous wound searched in order to the perfect
cure thereof; so every wise man will think it fit to undergo the charges, and
bear the troubles which do accompany the rectifying of those abuses and
oppressions, which by degrees a^e crept into a State or Government by
connivence and patience in some long tract of time, rather then like Isachars
Ass out of the love of present ease, and for fear of troubles and charge,
perpetual y bow down under their burdens, until in the end the back of that
State and Government be wholly broken, and it irrecoverably overthrown;
especially when they shall see things carried on to such a height, as does
unavoidably threaten as much, if not opposed and in time prevented. In the end
he comes in with an acknowledgement of this himself, and a kind or show of
excuse for speaking, as he had done against Taxes, to be imposed in such a case
of War as this, but it is after he had sufficiently enlarged and disgorged
himself against the proceedings of the Parliament, and the Committees thereof,
agravating as much as he can the pressures by them laid upon the people, and
extenuating or rather denying any benefits in respect of the recovery of their
Liberties, and settling them in their just Rights which they have, or are like
to receive, except in the end they may enjoy the happiness to be brought under
the slavery of his Priests and Kirk-Government: thus he spreads abroad his
poison, as his usual manner is, to disaffect the people to the Parliament, and
prepare them for tumultuous and seditious proceedings, which may be turned and
made use of to carry on his and the Scots common Cause (as he uses to call it)
contain^d in the Covenant; a Cause indeed only proper to themselves, and of
their own making: suffer me often to repeat this, for herein lies the poysen
wrapped up.

We find him next as far North as Carlisle, the taking of which out of the
hands of the Parliaments Committees in those parts, and, instead of delivering
the same when they had taken it, into the hands of such as the Parliament
should appoint, putting a Garrison of their own into it, and keeping it from the
Parliament in their own hands, was a thing so foul in the eyes of all men, and
so directly contrary to the Articles of Agreement made between the two
Kingdoms, when the Scots came in to assist the Parliament, that all his dawbing
(though he be well exercised therein, as we find throughout this discourse)
will never be able to cover and hide from the sight of men the foul face of
that unjust and false dealing: how often do you find the man talking of the
solemn league between the two Kingdoms, and making it a m tter of astonishment,
as a little before in speaking of the Soldiers of the new-modelled Army, that
any should refuse to take it, which he says, we are all bound to stand for,
being swo^n to it by so lawful and necessary an Oath; he means here (as I
conceive) the League between the Kingdom^ and the Articles thereof to be
observed by the one to the other, for of the Co^enant he had spoken before that
the Soldiers were not to be pressed to take that; ^ e therefore makes these
two distinct Oaths, and if so, then let him tell us how ^is Scots (herein did
stand) to maintain the Articles of this League which he dot^ so solemnize, and
what regard they had to so lawful and necessary an Oath, as he will make it to
be, when for their own ends they would so apparently in the eyes of all men
violate it, as they did by keeping this Town wi^h a Garrison in their own hands
in this Kingdom, and not delivering it to the Parliament, if they were sworn to
the Articles of the League, as he will have it, they then did this with
manifest perjury, which no pretenses that this their Proctor can bring w^ll
purge them of, but that they must come to the stool of repentance for it, and
that seriously, and not in a mere formality, which mak^s it ridiculous and
despised. Let us yet hear what he can say, and how he w^ll plead for them in
this case; there is a great stir, he says, about Carlisle, now in the hands of
the Scots for the service of the Parliam^nt, that was well added indeed; but
why I pray may not the Parliament be trusted with it in their own hands for
their service? was it therefore taken out of their hands by the Scots, because
they knew not how to make use of their own Towns themselves, as might be for
their best service? No* this shows for whose service it was that the Scotch
Army ran such a race backward to get this Town into their hands. Then for the
better understanding of these things, he says, he will take them at a farther
rise: he had need indeed draw even his simpler so^t (as he often styles them)
farther off from the view of this business, else the foul face of it is such,
as that he will not be able to abuse them in it, which is his practice and
endeavor both in this and other things; to carry their thoughts therefore far
enough off from the matter in question, he begins to tell a story of these two
Towns Barwick and Carlisle in the times when the Kingdoms were divided under two
several Princes, and so goes on to much purpose in his tale; the question being
in short this, whether Carlisle be not an English Town? and being so, whether by
the agreement between the two Kingdoms, when they did resolve to join together
to defend themselves in their just rights and liberties, against oppression,
this were not covenanted between them, that what Towns the Scots should take in
England, except such as the Parliament should assign unto them, which by the
agreement was only Barwick, they should deliver unto the Parliament, and into
such hands as the Parliament should appoint, and not put a Garrison into it
themselves, and keep it in their own hands, which is a thing so well known to
have been articled and agreed, that the taking and keeping of this Town, and to
that end putting a Garrison of their own Soldiers into it, contrary thereun^o,
does stamp so foul a blot of breach of faith upon their foreheads, that this
dauber will never be able to clear them of it: we will examine his untempered
mortar, which he brings to make up this breach withal if he could; you have
him here first at his old Guard, ^he N^^^hern Committees, and the Leaders of
the Parliaments forces that were at the siege, we^^ such Malignants that the
Scots did not think them fit to be trusted with the Town in their hands; is
this the reason that their Army must run twenty miles out of the right way
appointed them, to snatch this Town into their own hands, and keep it when they
had done? are the Scots to be Judges who are fit to be entrusted with Towns in
the Kingdom of England, or the Parliament? but suppose this to be a truth, and
that they were Malignants and carried themselves as he asperseth them; were the
two Houses of Parliament Malignants also, and not to be trusted with their own
Town, but that the Scots must keep it for them and from them? I believe not
these slanders he casts upon the Committees, and the Commanders and Officers of
our forces, knowing how familiar it is with him to do the like most fa^sly
against men of greatest integrity and merit when it may serve his turn; but if
it had been so, they should have sent to the Parliament, and advised them of
the danger that might have insued, if the Town should be put into such hands,
and therefore desired them to put it into the hands of men that might be
confided in; this would have served to keep the Town out of ill hands, and to
have kept their own faith also Had they had care and courage enough to have
taken Hereford, when they lay so long entrenched before it, I would know of the
man that makes this an excuse for them, whether if after the taking of that
Town they had put a Garrison of their Army into it, and kept it from the
Parliament in their own hands; it would have acquitted them of breach of faith
given to observe the Articles of Agreement between the Kingdoms, to say the
Committees of those Counties were Malignants, which you shall find him upon
that occasion, to say of them there, as he does here of the Northern
Committees. In the next place he undertakes to divine what the Parliament would
have done if Carlisle had been in their hands when they agreed to let the Scots
have Barwick, at their coming into England for their assistance; he will
undertake to tell us, from no ground but his own fancy, and because it would
serve well to help him out with this ill business, could he make any body
believe it, that the Parli^m nt would have delivered that to the Scots without
any more ado, as freely as Barwick: Nay you shall have more of his art in
telling you men's thoughts and purposes, such as they never had, nor ever
expressed; if it had been but required then, he says it had been promised to
the Scots: well undertaken upon your usual ground, which is none at all; but
what of all this? why therefore in his imagination, and upon these foregoing
mere imaginations of his own brain, for they are no other, the Scots may take
this Town from the Parliament, contrary to their faith gi^en, and w^^hou^ so
much as asking them, and keep it in their own hands without their consen^; were
there any truth in this, which the man will needs divine to be the Parliamen^s
mind and intention, the more shameful was this want of truth and faith in the
Scots, contrary to agreement to take it, possess and keep it, without so much
as first asking the Parliaments consent thereunto, since (as he will have it
believed) they might have had it for asking, and thereby kept both the Town and
their faith too: he proceeds to invent some reasons, why the enemy accepted of
the Conditions offered them by the Scots, rather then those which were offered
them by the Commanders of our forces and our Committees, which he says were
very great and more advantageous to the enemy, then those upon which they
surrendered the Town to the Scots; which is so false, that report came up from
them presently after the Scots had possessed themselves of the Town, how that
they knowing our Commanders and Committees were in treaty with the Governor for
the surrender of it, upon conditions much more for the advantage of the
Parliaments service, the Scots to get it into their hands yielded them any
conditions they would demand, as appears by those large conditions that were
granted them, having liberty to carry all their forces to the enemy, and be
safely conducted thither, whereas the Town was reduced to that condition that
it could not hold out, but must have surrendered both forces and Arms, and not
have brought to the enemy such an addition of strength; but all was one to
them, so they might get the Town into their hands; to make which the more sure,
they turn their Army into that flying army which they speak of going
Northward, for other then their own, that made such have, though they wanted
draughts there was none: and all this post have out of the right way they
should have taken acording to their orders, was that they night come time
enough to keep that town out of the English men's hands, and get it into their
own: one of his reasons is, the Governor could not trust them, because they
were so wicked and false to the Party they professed themselves to be of; how
ridiculous does this man make himself to any understanding man, by giving this
for a reason, why that Governor would not Surrender a town, which could not
be held longer, to those who so much favored his party, rather then to any
other? for if those wicked men (as he will term them) were false to the party
which they professed themselves to be of, that was the Parliament, as this man
makes them to be in all his discourse, then they were true to the enemy, and
is that a reason why the enemy should be unwilling to deliver the town into
their hands? being such friends unto them, as he would make them by his lies,
that they would shoot powder at them instead of bullets, and suffer provisions
to come in unto them; all which he had before affirmed; had this bin true, the
Governor had good cause to trust, that they would have given him good
conditions, and taken care to see them well performed: yea the Inconsidering
Schoolmaster, that minds his matter no better then one of his truanting boys
his lesson, but flings about every way to cast off this foul blot, which
cleaves so fast to his Country men, contradicts himself most apparently
afterward in saying that the enemies drift was since he could not keep the
Town against the Parl: to do his best to put it into the hands of Malignants
that were his friends: Now by his description of these men, where could the
enemy have found better friends, and greater malignants to deliver the town
unto? he will not say the scots; I am sure, therefore they either are all lies
and slanders which he casts upon the Commanders and Committees to excuse the
faithless proceedings of the Scots in this particular, which I believe to be
the truth; or else this can be no reason why the Governor should not trust
these most of any. Next, he says, it was because they had noe authority; for
the General of the Scotts army being there, except there had bin a Committy of
both kingdoms upon the place, by agreement things of consequence were to be
ordered by the General, and there was no such Committy residinge with the
army: but what makes the scotch General there at that time? when in the mean
time the Parliament expected to hear of him and his army at Darby, in
conjunction with the forces they had sent to join with him for preventing the
mischiefs done by the enemy about Lecester and the enclosing of him and his
forces between the two armies: was he sent to run 200 miles with his army,
from the service appointed them, and design for them, that this might be given
for a reason why our Commi^tees and Commanders might not be treated with, nor
order the business of Carlisle, but he being there, order it into the scots
hands? well, suppose him to have bin drawn upon this occasion to make such an
unexpected leap out of the way with his whole army, yet if he in such a case
being present, and no Committee of both kingdoms residing with that army, was
by agreement to have the ordering of business, by the same agreement he was
bound to order the towns taken in England, into the hands of such as the
Parliament should appoint, and not Garrison them with his own forces as here
he did; which if they had intended, as by their faith given they ought to have
performed, surely he would never have put the whole army to such a long march,
and besides have undergon the censu^e so justly laid upon them, for
overthrowing thereby the designs of the Parliament and occasioning all the
miischiefes done by the enemy, who in the mean time had fair way given him to
spoil and plunder the Countries; but of this unhappy, strange vigary I have
already spoken, and touch it again here upon this idle reason given by him why
the scots should keep the town in their hands, the fool y whereof I was
willing to make apeare: thus he says, Carlisle is put in obedience to the
Parliament for the public service according to the first agreement: strange
impudency when thus he rather should have said (if he would have spoken truth)
Carlisle is snatched out of the hands of the Parliament by the scots, and kept
under their own power; for their private ends, directly contrary to the first
agreement. After all this he says, the Scots were cried out upon by
Malignants; and there is enough in all this to cause not Malignants, but those
who are best affected to England to cry out of this their false dealing with
England contrary to agreement, so that there was not an Englishman in
Parliament, in the Committees of both kingdoms, or else were that understood
the agreement between the kingdoms and their carriage in this business so
contrary thereunto, that could find reason to be satisfied therewith, though
in prudence they might for the ti^e forbear to quarrel about it, as I have
showed before they thought fit to do: but all must be Malignants with him,
whether Parliament or Committees, that shall dislike what the scots do though
it be never so unjust. At length he will give a reason, why the Scots put a
garrison of their own men into Carlisle, and that was he says, from the
constitution of the present affairs of the two kingdoms, and the
consideration of the wicked and base dealing of some of the chief men in the
Northern Countyes, and unfaithfullnesse of those entrusted by the Parliament in
ordering businesses in those parts. Must such a fellow as this is, or all his
Scots with him, take upon them to be the Judges of such a constitution of
affairs as may judge our Towns in England out of our own hands, and fit to be
kept, in theirs, because the Parliament is not able to judge of fit men to be
employed in their businesses? must the Scots thereupon become our Gurdians? how
does his reaston of his aggravate the affront, rather then excuse it? if any of
these men, whom he asperseth, could have been proved unfaithful, upon the
information and proof thereof, the Parliament would have disposed the Town
(being delivered unto them as it ought to have bin) into other hands, whom they
knew to be faithful: but by this fellows argumentation, and his Countrymens
action which he defends, the Parliament is not judged to be of a disposing
capacity in respect of their own Towns, but they must be kept for them in the
hands of the Scots, till they come of age, and know how to dispose them into
the hands of men fit to be trusted; for when it shall be thought fit for the
common good af both Nations the Town will be radily left by the Scots, and this
he says, the State of Scotland will willingly engag it self for, by all the
assurances that can in reason be required: who can with patience bear the
ignorant impudent boldness of this pedantical fellow, which I shall observe in
this particular, and one more, which twice together he will needs inculcate in
this business, as he is dawbing it over: in this the Scots must by him be made
the Judges, when it shall be thought fit for the public good, that the
Parliament of England may have the disposing of their own Town^, till then they
must be in wardship; is there a dispute to be made about that, whether it will
stand with the public good of both Nations, for the Kingdom and Parliament of
England to have their Towns in their own hands and disposing. Then Mr.
Schoolmaster carries himself as if he were the public Agent for the State of
Scotland, taking upon him to tell us what the State of Scotland will engage
themselves unto: But where, is his Commission here again, as formerly? let this
be sufficient to make his ignorant, blind bagardly boldness appear to all men,
being joined to his former undertakings: the other particular is that which
besides what he has of it elsewhere, he twice repeats in this place, and one
of those times in different Letters, that he may be sure to have it observed
how vainly and falsely he can brag of his Countrymen; which it is likely those
amongst them of the wiser sort, knowing how false it is and ridiculous, are
ashamed of: I have had occasion to touch it before, it is this, mentioning the
Parliament now fitting, he says, that they were gathered together, continued
and preserved by the help and aid of the Scots, then adds as the most envious
must confess; a leaf or two afterward he has it up again, that the Scots
were the cause of the assembling the Parliament, continuing it, and preserving
it from a great plot, and upholding it when it was very low at their first
incoming: what little or no assistance the Parliament had by the coming in of
the Scots, or while they stayed in the Kingdom, I have fully showed, as also
the falsehood of that he speaks, concerning the low estate, when they came in;
the Parliament needing their help so little to continue, preserve and uphold
them, and they so little able to do any such thing, that had not the Parl* not
only bin able to preserve and continue themselves without them, but to preserve
them also from the opposition of the L Newcastles Army, and the forces of the
Northern Counties joining with him against them, these, whom he would have the
world believe, our preservers and upholders, would never in likelihood have
been able to come into the Kingdom; whether when we had brought them, what did
they more then lay burdens upon it? and I dare say, let all be duly
considered, and weighed in the balance of truth, what assistance we have had
from them, and on the other side what charge, what pressures upon the people,
and what disadvantages both in Council and in the field, (of the fidelities and
activities whereof he so often boasts) any man of Judgment and indifferency
will think, it had bin much better for England they had sat still at home, and
never come into this Kingdom to uphold and preserve us, which as I have said we
neither needed, nor as I have showed before, did they any thing toward it: if
there were any cause at all, or reason to move us to call them in to join with
us, it was to prevent their joining against us, which notwithstanding
afterward they did under H^milton; otherwise we had much more prejudice by
them, all things considered, then assistance; especially if the counsels they
gave at the Isle of Wigh^, against the Kings passing the four Bills sent unto
him (which being passed had closed up all the unhappy difference in a happy
peace and agreement) be remembered with the eonsequenses thereof; and many wise
men were of opinion, it would fall out to be so, when the debate was about
their calling into the Kingdom, whose opinion therein has since proved too
true; this for continuing, and preserving this Parliament for being the cause
of ass mbling it; it is true, that when the King seduced by the Counsels of
Land of Canterbury, and Str^fford, with others, who perceiving that the
counsels of those two men would prevail with him, were willing also to humor
him in the same way, was going to dash these two Kingdoms in pieces one against
another, and to that end had summoned the Nobility to give their attendance at
York, that he might engage them, and by them the more easily the whole Kingdom
in that war; diverse of the chief of the Nobility took occasion thereupon, out
of the care of this Kingdom, and being friends also to that of Scotland, to
petition the King that he would call a Parliament, and be advised by that great
Council of his Kingdom, before he did engage ^he two Kingdoms in so unnatura^ a
War, which might prove destructive to both; it was this Petition that caused
the Parliament, together with the knowledge that the King had, that both the
City of London, and the whole Kingdom had the same sense of it, which these
noble men, to their perpetual honor, then in their Petition expressed; had not
this been done, all that the Scots did, or could do, would have wr^ught very
little upon the King to bring him to think of calling a Parl^ament, and
therefore they neither cur^ed it, continued it, or p eserved it: if I say often
the very same things, it is because he will so often tell over the same lies,
for his so often inculcated bragg^ and boastings of this matter a^e (as most of
the rest) mere fals^hoods; and as for envy, truly there was nothing done by
them capable to be the subject of it while they were in the Kingdom to assist
us: he concludes this piece of his pl^a, made to excuse his Countrymen of so
soul a fact, with tell^ng or, that the comm n en^my did strive by his agents,
to make this ^n Apple of discord be^ween the two unit^d Nations; but it would
fail him, because the wisdom of b^^h States is such that the mistake will be
taken away shortly* and the state of England see clearly, that the Scots in
possessing themselves of Carlisle, and excluding those wi^ked ones above
mentioned, h^ve done a very good service: the shame be theirs, and to it will
be, that put such an Apple into the common enemies hands, to cast between the
Kingdoms; and had it not bin for the wisdom used by the state of England, to
pass it by in this conjuncture of affairs (for in the other state there was
neither wisdom nor honesty showed in what was done) the enemy would not have
needed to use Agents to stir up the English to vindicate their honor from such
an affront put upon them, contrary to agreement and faith given: for mistake
there was none, but the miss-taking, and as ill detaining and keeping the Town
out of our hands, the false dealing with us wherein was so apparent, that no
body could m stake it, nor clearly see any thing else in it but b^each of
says, except he would use this man's spectacles, and that will not serve the
^urn, for he must be sharper sighted for than this Scot eyed man or any other,
that can see a good service done in this false dea^ing with us: for what he
speaks of excluding those wicked ones, as he calls them, and to serve him
present even, must make them, it is a base shift, as all men may perceive; for
the Parliament were those, who by what was done were excluded, into whose h^nds
the Town ought ^o have been delivered, and and they alone Judges, who were fit
to be entrusted with their own Towns. Thus I have discovered the untempered
mortar whe^ewith h^ labors to p^aster over this foul carriage, and what stuff
the poor man is forced to bring to paint a good face upon it, but all in vain.
Now we must follow him to Sea, the Land is not large enough to contain his
invectives and false su^mises vented to stir up disaffection, and breed
discontent, for other use, there is none of this his groundless insinuating
connivence and false de^ing to be in those who were by the Parliament employed
for the Sea service; bu^ because his invention proves barren in this
particular, when he had spattered out something to show his good will, he
leaves and says, but to another business: this is the business indeed he now
comes unto, wherein his brain is never barren, but so fertile ^o inventing and
spreading abroad so many uncharitable, unchristian, and shameful lies, against
men of known integrity and honesty, in this his Discourse, that it may thereby
appear (if there were nothing else to show it) by what spirit the man was led
and possessed in writing, publishing, and spreading abroad this scandalous
Pamphlet. If I should say, in this piece wherei^ he spits forth the venom of
his heart against those he puts the nam^ of Independents upon, and so likewise
in other places where he flies out in slanders against them, there are as many
l^es as lines, I should it may be, be thought to pass the bounds and limits of
truth, but if I say the leaves do not equal the lies when he falls upon this
subject, I shall fall far short by that expression of what will be found to be
the truth; therefore to take up every one of those many slanders and falsehoods
he cha^ge^h upon th^^, and give answer to it in particular, will not be worth
the pains, considering what stuff it is for the most part: a great deal of
ado he says there has been in th ^ynod with some few men, and these he styles
factious, fantastical ^^ad st ong once, that we without love to the peace of
the Church; the business is, th y will not acknowledge the Government of the
Church by Paro^h at Presbyteries, subj^ct^d in Cl^ssical, and Classical to
Sy^odical, to be according to the word of God, and p^^ctise of the Apost^es,
and of the Churches in their times, all which he says, with patience,
godl^n^sse, and charity toward these men, was evidently demonst^ated in many
d^b^tes: I shall first speak to the matter; for concerning the men he follows
them af^erwards with many more base, vile and fal^e repro^che^, which I will
answer together: The subordina^ion of Congregational Churches (for I leave his
Parish and Town Churches to himself and his boys) with their Officers or
Presbyteries to Classical Presbyteries, and all to Synodical, it seems he
means to Synodical Presbyteries, for his words cannot bear another sense; and
that these two latter should have a power coercive over a particular
Congregation, walking in Church fellowship, being organical and comple^^ in
themselves, in respect of Officers and Members, was no way proved, much less
evidently demonstrated to be grounded upon the w^rd of God, and practice of the
Churches in the Apostles times, governed by them; it was not proved in the
Synod, it could never be proved by those who have indeavored it in their
writings, nor ever will be out of the word of God, I am most confident: Nay, as
these Cl^ssical and Synodical Presbyteries are framed and exercised in their
K^^k-Government in Scotland, where they usurp and exercise coercive power, even
unto excommunication, over the Members and Officers of particular Churches,
whereof they themselves are no Members, they are no other then a human^ device,
brought into the Church under the pretense of a necessity to prevent schism
and preserve order, as one speaks of the first usurpation of Bish^ps in the
primitive times, that it was In remedium schismatis, necessary to prev^nt
schism and keep order^ as if the Lord Christ, in his institution of
Church Government by himself and by his Apostles, had bin so defective, that
man must st^p in with his dev^ce, or order could not be preserved in the
Churches: here is the rise and root from whence it is humane device ha^h
sprung, which in all this discourse the man w ll needs cloth some times with
the name of Religion, then with the name of the cause of God, the Government of
the Church, and such like titles, and make himself so zealous for it, that he
casts off all Christian charity, yea moral civility; when as let it be
thoroughly looked into, and it will be found, that this Classis of his, with
such an usurped power over particular congregational Churches, is no other then
a Bishop with his usurpation of power over the Churches; his Synodical
Presbyteries, a Metropolitan; his general Assembly a Pope; the one exercising
their usurped power in a way Monarchical, the other the same, Aristocratically;
the one being, as by them used and maintained, as mere a humane device as the
other, which they seem so much to detest; yea, the Bishop, whom their stomach
rises so much against, has more to say for himself out of the Scripture and
practice of the Apostles, then they for this their Classis, the name and office
of a B shop being to be found in the Scripture, as of the Apostles ordination,
though not such as by their usurpation of power over the Churches (increasing
by deg^ees after the mystery of in^quity began to work) at last they had made
themselves, of Apostolical Bishops turning Popish P^elates: but for their
Classical Presbyteries, they will never be able in the Scriptures to find
either name or thing: this Controversy has bin handled pro and con, by men
much more able then the Schoolmaster, (though he usually takes himself to be
the ablest man in the Parish) or my self, therefore I shall speak no farther of
it, then to discover his want of charity and want of truth in it: he that will
take the pains to read that modest Reply of learned godly Mr. Hooker of New
England, unto Mr. Rutherford, and others upon this subject, may receive much
light and satisfaction therein. As concerning the goodness, patience and
charity used toward th se men, by the Presbyterians in their debates in the
Synod, this I know and saw that some of his Scotch Ministers, Mr. Hinderson by
name, one of the chiefest amongst them, and I believe Mr. Gilaspy knows it
too, were so far from this he talks of, that they would not have so much
patience as to hear them speak out their speeches, but interrupt them, contrary
to all order, in the midst of their discourse, and stop them, as Mr. Hinderson
used Mr. Nigh, a thing so uns^emly in such an Assembly, called to treat and
consult about matters of that nature, as a sober Divine and a modest man should
never do; freedom and liberty of speech is to be afforded to all that are
members of the Assembly; when a man has spoken, then is the time for another
to answer, if he like not of what has bin said: here was neither patience nor
charity showed, but a spirit much after the rate of this their Pam^hleter. Next
he brings in some men that have, he says, a shrewd guess at these men and
their ways, and they assure, that these m^n will not tell what absolutely and
positively they profess^, and would be at, they w ll never give a set model of
Government unto the public whereunto they mind to stand; he then gives two
very charitable Reasons hereof (for I take all to come from himself, the men he
brings in and sets up, being men of straw, serving to usher in his malicious
slanders) the one is, they cannot agree amongst themselves upon any one thing;
the second, they will not settle upon any thing at all, but upon continuing in
ph^^netical f^ncias: you would think, all this being v^mited up, his stomach
were pretty well cleared and disgorged, but there is a great deal of foul
stuff behind, for the man shows he has a very foul stomach, much overcharged
with this Presbyterian spleen: they had little encouragement to set down and
give in a set model of that Church Government, which they hold to be of Ch^ists
institution, as unanimously and constantly as Presbyterians in place thereof
stand for that humane device which they have set up out of humane policy to
prevent schism, and, as they pretend, confusion in the Churches; for they saw
plainly it was not desi ed for edification, that light and truth might be
imb^aced, if thereby it should be made appear, but only to be carped at, and
traduced by men prejudiced and preingaged to their own way and opinions, with
so much obstinacy therein, that what light soever should appear, their eyes
would be shut against it, and all that they desired this for, was but to find
means to disgrace it, and thereby lay stumbling blocks before the people, to
hinder them from embracing of it; knowing this, they had little reason
therefore to do it, yet they did that which sufficiently confutes the malicious
lies here set down, for they did (though not to give it into the public, as
his phrase is, that such an advantage and ill use might be made of it) set down
their tenants which they hold concerning Church Government, and printed the
same, subscribed by Mr. Thomas Goodw^^, and Mr. Philip Ny^, in the name of the
rest, wherein it may be seen they seek not confusion and Anarchy in the Church,
as th s man most falsely affirms of them, bu^ hold a Go^ernment to be in the
Churches, and such as is jure divino of Christ's institution: politic humane
devices, serving to ensnare and inslave the Brethren under the Priests, and
give them a Dominion over them, the same (though under other Lords) which the P
elates exercise over the people, that indeed they do not hold, but you hold it,
and exercise it, which may much more justly be called ph^^netical, being a
humane divice and fancy, then that Government which can be proved to be
instituted by Christ and his Apostles: besides this, what they did hold and
agree in was fully declared by them in the Assembly, in the reasons and answers
of the dissenting Brethren and the Assembly, and the transactions about
accommodation given in in writing: and that they are of one mind and one
judgment therein, contrary to these base lies, they that will read what ^hese
^wo have set forth in the n^me of the rest, and compare it wi h that platform
of Church Discipline set forth in N^w England 1649, agreed upon by all the
Churches there, will clearly see and be satisfied in: in this place, and
wheresoever else in this Pamphlet of his he brings in these men, ^o vent his
lies against them, this seldom or never fails, that th y are d stu bers of the
peace of the Church in the Syand, and those that are stickl rs for them
elsewhere, he means belike in Parliament, that they have no charity at all,
that they sacrifice the peace of the Church to the Idol of their imagination,
like those who caused ^h^^r Children to pass through the f^^e t^ Mol^ch: I see
I shall be put to fall often upon the same particulars, and thereby it is
likely repeat the same things, which may prove tedious to the R^ader, but the
man's repeating over hi^ sl^nders and reproaches, cast by him upon honest men,
so often and in so many p^aces, is the cause of it; for I am unw^lling to let
them pass without showing how false they are: let it be considered, and by the
word of God t^yed, who those be that sacrifice the peace of the Churches to the
Idol of their own ^magination, that break all bonds of charity, and walk
contrary to the C^mmands of our Savior, love one another as I have loved you,
and contrary to the Rule of the Apost e. Phil^p: 2. verse 1.2.3. and Phil. 3.16
To be of ou^ minds, and if there be difference in Judgeme^t, yet that for that
^here be no^ent in ^ff ction, but in that whereunto we have ar^^inae^ and are
come, walk together in love, and for what is ind^fference, wait until ^he Lo^^
shall reveal to all what is his mind, and will therein, and not fly out one
against another for it, but ke^p the unity of the spirit in the bond of love
and peace, and so wa^k together in those things wherein we agree, and whereunto
w^ h^ve all at^ained; this is the doctrine our Savior delivered by himself,
and all his Apostles, not in these places alone, but throughout the whole
Gospel; according to which if there shall be a true examination of men, and
their carriages one toward another in this respect, it w^ll be found that
these imputations cast by him upon those he terms Independents, whether in the
Synod or those he calls stricklers for them else where, may much more justly
and properly be imput^d to himself and his companions those of his complexion
and spirit, then charged upon any of these men; for who have more troubled the
peace of the Churches, and still continue so to do, and the peace of th^s
Kingdom upon that occassion since they came into it, then those who are of
this man's spirit, and who it may be finding him full of fire and fit to inflame
others in this cause, set him on work, or encouraged him thereunto? and what
is there in all this Pamphlet set forth by him, but that which tends to
divisions, to stir up people to seditious affictions first, and suitable
proceedings afterward, out of a discontent labored to be settled in them
against the proceeding^ of Parliament, as also by false tales invented to raise
scandalls upon some men employed in public services, that the multitude and
simpler sort, who cannot spy out this craft covered over with a show of
affection to Religion as they pretend it, may be stirred up to animosities and
ill affection against them, which are like to end in ill acting, but certain to
produce difference and division, with the overthrow of love and peace both in
the Churches and in the State? Let any man examine ^he stuff that is to be
found in this whole fardell of his sent abroad by him and his abetrors, and it
will appear to be all such as is fitted and prepared for this purpose: and what
is the only cause and ground of all this, but that an Idol of their making and
framing (for it wi l never be proved to be other) will not be worshipped? and
to this have they, and still do sacrifice the peace of the Churches and K
ngdomes, and disturb both as all men are witnesses ^amd most of all their own
actings, plots and endeavors by such scandalous writings as this, and many
other practices, though never so unjustifiable, to attain their ends therein;
i^ this agreeable with the former rules of Christian love and Charity? for
suppose, and let it be granted for the time, which never will be proved, that
this K^rke-government of theirs, about which they raise all this division and
dissension, were of Chr^sts Institution, and not the imagination of their own
brain and no other then a humane policy as by them framed and exercised; yet
is it so far from what the men would make the world believe it to be, by the
names they put upon it, of Religion and the cause of God and of his Church (as
if all religion consisted in setting up of this Government of theirs) that to
Religion it is but as the list^ hem or selvage to the garment, that keeps it
close together from ren^ing and continues it in that good order, which by he
wo^ke man that i^ bin framed into: therefore for some difference in jugement
about this, to cast out all Christian love and Brotherly affection, wherein
consists Religion, (for without this all is but vain^ tinckling and a mere
sound) to cast it out of their hearts, out of their mouths, their writings,
looke^ and conversaton^, so that if there appear never so much of the Im^ge of
Christ in a man, yet ^f he be of a different Judgment in this p^rticular, he
shall have neither good words, nor look, but instead thereof Reproaches, False
Surmises, and base Slanders cast upon him, which are known to be lies invented
and spread abroad; witness all this man's Discourse throughout, especially in
this place; is this to walk according to the Doctrine of out Savior, and his
Apostles? Is this to love one another as Christ loves us? would we have him
cast us off, because in this or that particular we are ignorant, and not as yet
convinced of that which is a truth of an inferior nature in respect of the
Fundamentals of Religion as this, suppose it were a truth, being also
contraverted and dlsputed about, as this is? what is this but to make it indeed
an Idol of their own imaginations, and forsake that, wherein consists the
power and truth of Religion, to fall down and worship this Idol which they
set up? where does this appear more manifestly then in this man's discourse and
by his railings; which you will see afterward to be such and so base and
false, as are unbeseeming not only a Christian, but any moral civil man: let
him therefore take the Idol of Imagination, with want of Charity, and
disturbance of the Churches peace, to himself and his fellows, he and they
may most justly Challenge them all, as their peculiar: I wish his Country men
more Charitable and Christian hearts, and then they will afford their
Brethren, though differing from them in judgment, better affections and
better language: I have showed what in truth the Government of the Churches is,
and of what consideration in respect of Fundamentals of Religion, that it is
but as the Hedge or Mound-wall thereunto, and that notwithstanding the want of
this, those who hold the foundation, and are truly built thereupon, may and
ought to grow up as living stones, knit and joynted fast together by love into
an holy Temple and Habitation for the Lord by his Spirit; though it is true
that this, where it is rightly understood, and accordingly used, is a great
help thereunto, and a means to preserve the Saints herein: yet that this has
bin practiced in many places, and by many people truly Godly, though not
agreeing in judgment in this particular, nor having as yet some of them
attained to the knowledge of what is the truth in it, experience makes
manifest; yet this man makes it the Ball of Strife and Contention throughout
his whole Pamphlet, which still I say shows clearly what spirit possessed
him in the writing of it: Let us a while further consider, how inconsiderable
the difference in this business will appear to be in the result of the debate
and dispute about it, being handled by sober and moderate men, who know how to
keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond love, though differing in judgment
in things of such a nature as this is, and not by such hotheaded and fiery
spirited men as this and his Companions, who for things of such inferior allay
cast out of their hearts, and banish out of their Societies all Charity,
Brotherly kindness and Love; is this beseeming Christians? no, it is a sad
thing, and the great sin of these times, for which we may well fear these
Judgments are fallen upon the Nations, and I could wish this man and all his
party had hearts duly and seriously to consider it, and repent for what they
have done in blowing this Coal so eagerly, and kindling this fire of division
and dissension by so many base, unworthy and unchristian practices: in the
issue of all this debate and dispute, the difference will grow to be no other
then this; Whether over particular Churches of Christ, there may be exercised
by one over another, or by many united over any one, a coercive power by
themselves, or by those whom they shall delegate for that purpose, as their
Classis and such like, whereof there will not be found in the Scripture any
example, or a shadow of solid ground to prove the same: or on the other side,
Whether that which we find in the practice of the primitive Churches in the
Apostles times, with their presence, and by their directions, were not in such
cases, as required the same done, and so still to be done, by one Church or
more, toward another, only by way of counsel, and after advice given by
brotherly exhortations, admonitions, and reproofs, as the case, and their
carriage thereupon required; and if any Church notwithstanding all these means
used with prayer and patience, yet shall persist obstinately in any scandalous
errors or offenses; then by consent, for the discharge of their duties, and
keeping their own societies pure from being corrupted by such examples, to
declare to such a Church a non-Communion with them, while they shall continue
obstinate in such scandalous sins, and not testify their repentance for them;
and this without any other power usurped, or exercised over them, or any of
their Members in Communion with them; but this being performed (which the
Communion of Churches, the band and duty of brotherly love to such an erring
Church, and to themselves that they be not leavened, and in all, the honor of
Christ requires) then to leave the success to the Lord, not thinking we need
supply a defect, in what the Scripture holds forth unto us, by any devices of
our own added thereunto: God will work in his own way, and by his own means
alone, when we have used them we are to go no farther: The grounds that
warrant a proceeding so far as this in such cases, I leave the Reader to see
and satisfy himself in at his pleasure, out of Mr. Hookers learned Treatise,
entitled, The ^urvey of Church Discipline, and in that platform of Church
Discipline set forth in New England 1649 which I spoke of before: for grounds
of any further usu^pation of power, by one Church or more over another, or over
the Members one of another Church, let thi^ Discourser or any of his party,
produce out of Scripture if they can; Mr. Rutherford, one of the learnedest
amongst them, has endeavored it, and withal to confute this other opinion
that opposes it; but let any judicious and unprejudiced man read Mr Hookers
Answers to him, and others therein, in his Survey of the sum of Church D
scipline, and he may be fully satisfied in these particula s, as I conceive.
That which has led me so far in the discourse hereof is this man's invenomed
pen, steeped in Gall and Vinegar, and with so much bitterness, and so much
falsehood dashing upon the reputation, honesty, and piety of those worthy
Divines in the Synod; of whom, and others who are of their judgments, you
shall see (for now I come to that which he casts upon their persons.) how
unchristianably, how uncharitably out of his own evil thoughts, how basely and
falsely he judges and speaks of them, although all that can be made of this
controversy wherein they dissent from him and his zealous party, comes to no
more in the issue then what I have said, that is, Whether a coercive power
(after which the Clergy have always had an itching humor) or a consultative
alone be in such cases to be exercised: Now for that which is of no greater
consequence to Religion it self in the fundamentals thereof, on which side
soever the truth lie, for those who profess themselves the Children of God, to
walk in the way of carnal men, even the worst of carnal men, laying aside
not Charity alone but Civility, Modesty and Truth; let them look unto it least
wrath break out upon them for it; and let this man and his Copartners walking
with him in this way of Strife, Envy, Malice, Uncharitableness, Slandering and
Backbiting, prevent the same by repenting them timely and truly of such
practices as these; let them remember what the Apostle says 1. Cor. 3.3. When
for such things they walk in Envy, Strife, and make divisions, and nourish
them amongst others, are they not carnal? let them take heed they be not found
like the Pharisees, that being zealous for, and placing all Religion in tithing
of mint, anise and cummine, neglect that, wherein true Religion indeed does
stand, Love, Justice, and Truth: if you were able to say truly of that you make
all this strife about, this ought to be done, yet for that these ought not to
be neglected and cast off, but preferred far before it; but your case rather is
that which our Savior reproves in those quarrelling Pharisees. Matthew. 15.2.
Who began to contend with him about his Disciples transgressing the Traditions
of the Elders; when he tells them they transgressed the Commandments of God,
that they might ^stab^ish their own traditiones; take heed the same may not be
as truly said of you; and my heart would be glad if the Lord would please to
give you all hearts to see this in your selves, and repent truly for it, that
your Zeal might be according to Knowledge, and then it would not be void of
Charity, and without truth. Comm^ng now o show the slanders and manif^st lies
he casts upon the persons of those men whom he terms Independents, I shall in
the first place speak a word to that name; the Devil in these unhappy times to
begin and carry on rents and divisions between Brethren, and those who do not
only profess Religion; but truly embrace it in the power thereof (to mislead
whom is his chief aim) has invented two names Presbyterian and Independent,
and these he sets up and carries along amongst men to cast a ball of
contention and division in all Companies, stirring animosities and ill
affections in them one against another hereby and some alienation of affection
and coldness even in the better sort; a diabolical device to eat out the very
heart of Relig^on, fervent love amongst Brethren; and so let this man and all
those who make themselves the Devils Agents herein, and promote his design in
the use of these names ^o such ends, know. These factious ones (as he terms
them) have acquired unto themselves this name of Independents, by rejecting all
dependency and subordination of inferior Presbyteries to superior in
Church Government; he might with as much Scripture^ ground and reason, as I
have said before, have cast that name upon them for rejecting Bishops,
Archbishops, and so forwards in Church Government: they do not deny a
dependency and subjection to that Authority which is set over them by God, as
the Magistracy, whose Authority in civil things, and in Ecclesiastical, so far
as to be Custos utriusque tabulae, they do acknowledge with much more
dependency and subjection thereunto, than those of this man's Kirk-Government
(as it is maintained and exercised in Scotland) do; for a more independent
thing, except it be the Pope again, let any man show, than their general
Assembly is, nay they therein will not give place to ^he Pope himself, for In
ordine ad spiritualia, they will draw in all things as well as He; an evidence
hereof, and of the power they have gained in that Kingdom over the people, and
thereby keep and exercise the same over the highest, not in things spiritual
alone, may appear by this, that lately when the Kingdom was invaded by a
foreign enemy, the States of Parliament were constrained to send to them to
know, Whether they might make use of such men for Soldiers to defend the
Kingdom against a foreign invasion: here is an Independency, yea a Papal
supremacy rather indeed over Magistrates, and the highest Powers, and that in
temporal and civil things properly belonging to their direction. I have
likewise read out of one of their Countrymen, writing of the power usurped by
them in their Church Government, especially by their general Assembly, diverse
instances thereof, amongst which one that he brings is, that after men have had
judgment given for them by the Judges in Courts of civil justice, upon
complaint made by the party cast in the suit, who had Judgment given against
him* unto these Kirk-Officers of his, they would take cognizance of the cause,
and if the Judgment did not appear just to them, they would require the party,
and enjoin him upon pain of Excommunication, to forbear to take the benefit of
the execution of such judgment, because they thought it unjust: these men are
not only Independent, but will have all that are called Gods here amongst men,
depend upon their pleasure; this occasion makes me remember this again, though
I touched it before, that the world may judge who they be upon whom this
nickname may most justly be cast: I suppose they may say, he that wrote this
was a Malignant Episcopal man, one that was an enemy to their
Church Government; be it so, fides sit penes Authorem, but it is matter of
fact, and as I remember, the fact not much denied by him that answers him,
however common experience amongst them will be sufficient to justify him, if
his affirmation be true; and common experience does sufficiently manifest to
all men, who know their proceedings in that Kingdom, that the independency
which their general Assembly would assume to themselves, and exercise there, is
so absolute, that it is Paramont to all: to whom then will this name agree so
properly as to themselves, and where can the men be found, that do assume so
much independency, even in respect of the highest civil Authority, as these men
do, to acquire thereby such a name? notwithstanding that this upon examination
will be found true, yet I would be far from fixing such base slanders and
manifest lies upon any of them as this man, out of no other ground then his own
evil heart, nor with any other proof then the bare affirmation of his own false
deceitful Tongue, charge these men withal whom he will have to be
Independents; factious, fantastical, headstrong ones, you have had before,
next he casts the name of Seekers upon them, alluding to a Company of men, that
these men have little to do with all, or little acquaintance with, as he
knows well enough, and therefore says that but a f^w of them go under that
name, but he will needs name them thus, because he says there never was a
Generation amongst men so nimble and active in seeking after preferment and
profit: one instance of the man, or of the thing he charge them withal,
amongst them all he never produces, nor can produce; Satis est Calumniari
fortiter, he hopes something may stick and turn to his advantage thereby; but
this in the mean time will stick close to him, and if he cast it not off by
true repentance, cast him out of the doors of Gods house, for without shall
every one he that makes or loves a lie; and lying lips are an abomination
to the Lord: let him not think to put it off by saying he could bring many
instances, but he forbeares names in all his discourse, as he says in another
place; This is a mere shift as I have said before, this whole Discourse
discovers sufficiently the man not to be of that modesty as to forbear Names
if he could with any probability fix his slanders upon the persons he did
name; as in this place; for let the persons he intends here and would hereby
discredit and defame, be named, and he would be thought worthy to be hissed or
whipped out of the Town, for a notorious Lier and Slanderer, let him therefore
either instance, in naming the persons that do such things, and prove it by
expressing where and when those things were done by them, or be accounted such,
as Justice requires he should be: he draws out his lies in length, and goes
on comparing them to Jesuits, but preferring them far before them, in running
up and down to lay hold on power and mouie, wherein they have, by their craft
and the silliness of other men, he says, sped well; diverse of all ranks he
brings in to side and cog with them for profit and employments, and amongst
them he will not except the h^gher amongst men: we know very well it is
familiar with him to speak evil of Digni^ies; he proceeds and says, on the
other side, they will receive none into their Societies, but men of means and
gifts, poor people and simple are profane in their account; they work hugely
with with Rich men's wives, Widows, and Daughters; stirri^g fellows in any
kind are good for them; that they may carry on their business the more
smoothly, they plead for Charity, that there might be a charitab e
interpretation of their Carriage and proceedings, and then (which is fearful
these being such known lies) he takes the name of God and attests his knowledge
of it, saying God knows they are destitute of all Charity toward the Church
or particular men, disturbing the Peace of the Church, and oppressing every
honest Man they can reach, in Hatred to Faithfulness unto the good of Church
and State, a^ seeking confusion in the one, and Anarchy in the other; then he
infinuates with the well-meaning people (as he terms them) who follow them and
says, there be many such honest people that where to Jesuits, but neither the
one nor the other are acquainted with their mysteries of iniquity, nor are of
their secret fiction, nor of the cabal; concluding with this unchristian
judging, that the profession they make of holiness, is no other then Capuchins
hypocrisy. I have here ripped up his fardel, and laid open all his st^ffe,
such as it is, which I thought I should not have put my self to the trouble to
do, but I am contented to take the pains, that the man might appear to all at
large in his right colors, and that it might thereby appear how little
conscience he makes of what he speaks or writes, so that it will serve for his
turn: for having reckoned up these base slanders of his in particular, I shall
willingly appeal to the consciences of any ingenuous men, to whom those Divines
in the Synod, upon whom he casts these invented lies of his, are known, if they
do not think them as far from the practicing or allowing of any such things, as
he is from truth and honesty in charging them therewith; and indeed, when these
things which his foul mouth, out of a cankered malicious stomach, belcheth
forth against these Divines (for of them he speaks as we see in the beginning
of his railing) shall be compared with their carriage and conversations, so
well and so long known to godly and pious men of both judgments in this
controversy, I do believe this man will be thought worthy to be brought to his
stool of repentance, and that in a serious manner, for such base slanders cast
upon the Ministers of God, without so much as the least shadow of truth: to go
them over in particular again to confute them is not worth my labor and
trouble, since the very knowledge of the men is a sufficient confutation of
such base ridiculous stuff, invented to defame them, which cannot but stink in
the nostrils of every good man that knows them: besides what should I confute,
when he only affi^ms of them manifest known lies, and brings no one proof or
instance of any one of the things he slandereth them withal? as they are all
lies, and known to be so, except he had offered something in proof of any of
them, to which I might have given answer, I will confute them altogether by
affirming barely as he does, but with much more truth, That they are all base
invented lies, and known to be so; and this is his way of carrying on his good
Cause in hand: matter of fact indeed will confute him in one thing most
apparently, which may serve to show the rest are all of the same stuff,
invented lies as this is known to be, that is, that they will admit of none
into their Societies but such as are rich, men of means, and parts; the poor
(he says) they account profane; the notorious shameless impudency of this
malicious lie will appear to all men, when they shall look into their
Congregations, the nearest and dearest Societies they have, and see them
consist most of the poorer sort, for they usually are rich in says, and
receive the Gospel; and such without other respect, these Ministers have
received into their Church-fellowships, as is apparent, not having the faith of
our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, with respect of persons, as he
falsely accuses them. Also for their exceeding Jesuits in the craft and
cunning of getting wealth and preferment, the little portion these have gotten
of either, will thrust that lie back again down his throat, by the consent of
all that know them and their Estates. But for that unchristian judging of his,
that their strictness in keeping themselves more closely in their
Conversations to the rule of the word then other men, is nothing but the
hypocrisy of the Capuchins, this is the same which here^ofore when the
distinguishing names which then were in use, were Protestant at large, and
Puritan, or Precisian (for the Devil will never he without his dividing names
to breed dissension) profane persons, and loose livers were wont to cast upon
godly men, whose religious walking discovered their loosnesse of life, they
used to say as he does here, that they were all Hypocrites, and made but a show
of greater holiness then other men: here he takes up the practice of those who
could not endure the light, but hated piety and Religion, judging others out of
their own evil thoughts and malice: but let this man, and all others who join
with him in these practices, remember what our Savior has commanded, and his
threatenings, Judge not least you be judged, for with what judgment you judge
others, you your selves shall be judged, and with what measure you meat, it
shall be meated unto you again; and this often times the Lord so orders, that
it is done here by men, but if true repentance prevent it not, never fails to
be done by himself. I shall end with bringing in one thing more, which he in
another place will needs fling upon these men (for wheresoever he meets with
them, his cholerlike fire boils up and bursts forth upon them) and that is a
Character which he says one gives to a certain people; and this must in
justice be attributed to them (such justice as he uses all along) arrogant,
inconstant, and extreme jealous of other men, they court and feast men for
their own profit, and when their turn is done, reject them and ca^e not for
them; to this I say no more, but could be glad it were not too true, that in
this Character he paints forth to the life, those who are nerer home to him,
and his Neighbors and Companions, in these his unchristian practices of
slandering men of best merit and desert; and I wish ingenuous, especially pious
men, who know not these men's conversations, not having been acquainted with
them, would but read some of their Books and Sermons which are in print, and
see what spirit speaks therein, and thereby judge what spirit this slanderer is
possessed withal. He proceeds to tell how the business concerning the
Church Government ^o no sooner concluded, maugre the Independents, but other d
fficulties aris^; such obstacles the enemy casts in the way to hinder the
building of the Temple; some will not allow it to b^ of Divine Right, others
make a great stir against the Power of the Presbytery, to cast out and receive
into the Church whom they will, and would have this power in the Magistrate;
upon this he falls into a discourse, that the power of the Magistrate, and that
pewer of the K yes, (as it is termed) which the Magistrate is not to medd^e
with, are two distract powers, the Chu^ch-Offi^ers likewise therefore are not
to meddle with what belongs to the civil Magistrate; in this last he is right
for the Doctrinal part, but let experience tell, how they in Scotland have
observed this toward the Magistrate, and walked answerable thereun^o in their
practice: Although this be a truth, he delivers in this part of his discourse,
concerning the distinction that ought to be observed, and kept between
Ministers of the civil State, who are not to administer the Ordinances of
Christ in his Churches, nor meddle with things merely spiritual, as the
sentence o^ Excommunication but only (as he rightly says) to oversee the
Ministers of these spiritual things, that they do their duty faithfully and
diligently in administering the O^dinances of Christ, committed to their
administration for the spiritual Government of his people, and not to meddle
far^her; although I say, he be right in his stating this difference, always to
be observed, that the one incroach not upon the office of the other; yet there
is just cause to deny the placing of any such power wholly in their
Presbyteries, as they have framed them, and as they do exercise this power
alone by them; or indeed in any Presbytery, how rightly soever constituted, or
Church Officers in any Congregation, without the consent of that Church,
wherein they are Officers, or a Presbytery as joined together, which is the
same; they are Praei^e in the whole business, and in the management and
ordering thereof in their Churches, and in pronouncing such sentence as the
Church shall agree upon; but without the consent of the Church, or contrary
thereunto, to place a power in the will of any Presbytery, to cast out and
receive in whom they please in the Church, is no other, if without prejudice it
be considered and examined, than what he here says of the Prelates, to make
themselves Lords and Masters of Ch^ists Flock and Heritage; for what difference
is there, whether this be done by one Pre^ate, or four or five Presbyters?
there justly might therefore be an opposit^on made (which he calls a stir)
against such an usurpation of power into their own hands alone, as the
Pre^byters sought after, over the flock or flocks of Christ, to Lord it over
them at their own wills; the Clergy, as I have said, and it is but too true,
have ever bin leaning this way, and are so still, even many of the best amongst
them, they can see this to be an unjust and unwarantable usurpation in a
Bishop, but not in themselves, though the difference be but what I have before
showed: Let every one keep within the Limits set by our Savior, who best
knows how to direct a Government for his Saints, and then there will be
neither Tyranny exercised by a Prelate, nor by Company of Priests, nor
Confusion and Anarchy in the Churches, which this man so much prattles of, and
seems to fear, if weak men (as he will fancy the Church Members to be) have
any hand or consent in the Government thereof, though it be that which
concerns their own Spiritual Communion, but what says the Apostle, these
Saints (which he calls weak men humorous and fancyfull, and therefore all must
be left in the hand and power of the Presbyteries to do what they please, as is
the Scotch custom and pattern,) shall judge the world, shall judge the bad
Angels, and must they be excluded from judging who are fit or unfit, to be
admitted into their Fellowship and spiritual Communion, or cast out of it; when
neither the one, nor the other is to be done without their consent, for by that
it is that they are joined and knit together into that spiritual Communion and
Fellowship amongst themselves? Wonder not therefore that men stir against such
a tyranny. Then, where as he says the Church Government was concluded, maugre
the Independents, I have showed before, that these upon whom he would cast that
name in the Houses, were the men who desired, and for that end promoted the
Ordinances for settling some Government in the Churches, when others sat still in
it, because their humors and fancies, or this power which they so eagerly
grasped after, were not complied with, and granted them by the Houses. To allow
that Government, which this man would have to be set up according to his Scotch
pattern, in this kingdom, to be of divine right, which neither was
demonstrated, nor ever will be, had bin not to set up and build a Temple, but
instead thereof a mere humane device and policy; and were this, you so stickle
and strive for, and make such divisions and rents about, the true Temple, we
should have it built with fewer knocks and much less noise.

In the next place he plays the Politick-would be, and runs out into a
discourse to show how the neighboring Nations, for their several ends, keep
the King in his obstinacy of going on in the way, which he says they have
engaged him in, and then tells you of the Pope, France, Spain, Holland, and
De^marke, with their several ends, aims and reasons of keeping us under these
troubles, and nourishing this division between the King and Parliament, as if
he were of the Cabinet Council to them all; for this discourse, I leave it as a
lecture to be read by him to his Boys; men of understanding know the man to be
beyond his Last, when he falls upon these businesses and would have you believe
he can discover the plots and projects of all Christendom unto you; he will
very gravely admonish others, when they take upon them to meddle with those
things, they have not bin bred up unto, nor have experience in; but the
Pedagogue is a man so well bred, that you must hear him in all things, and
what is there that he is not fit for, and experienced in, to direct and reprove
all sorts of men? for undertake it he will of what nature soever the things be,
as I have touched before upon occasion. Out of this discourse he falls into
another of the disaster befallen the good party in his own Country, by means
of Montrosse and the inconsiderable party joined with him; this, he says, he
knows will be expected from him; cannot tell whether the Scots d^d expect
such a Relation from him or will give him thanks for it, for he tak^s upon him
to school them very magisterially in this place, and soon after he says of
them that there is nothing that a Friend or a Kins-man will not make a Scot to
do. I leave this discourse also to be answered by the Scots his Count^ie-men,
whether it were by Treachery and the fals^hood in him who Commanded in chief,
with the falsehood of other inf^riour Offi ers and of men put into Employment,
who were not to be trusted, for which he reproves those that had the Government
of things in their hands; or whether it fell out otherways; I leave his
Countrie-men to give an account to Mr. Schoolmaster of all at their leasures.

He now returns to the Independents, and hunts hard to find out a fault to
fix upon them, which since he cannot do, he accounts it Wisdom to speak
freely and raise jealosies of them and suspicions, that so truth, he says, may
be found out? which because it cannot be found out by Math m^tical and
Metaphysical Demonstrations (to let you know he has some School terms)
therefore he runs into a discourse to show It is a part of Wisdom to suffer
men to vent their imaginations freely, as himself all a long does his lies,
and he gives this reason for it, If there be no ground for what is said, it
will fall of it self; but if there be, by these stirring speeches it will
appear and be b^ought to light; he farther finds fault, that some have
suffered for their f^^e expressions concerning these things, for he is
confident it had been g^eater wisdom to let go free speeches, and not examine
them to nicely when they proceed out of Zeal to the good cause, which may
perhaps make a man exceed the exact terms of moderation: a very good Doctrine
for to be delivered by a Christian, to find out truth by stirring lies and
slanders; it would have fitted a Jesuit much better, but in respect of himself
and this discourse of his, it is a very necessary advice given, and in respect
of his accomplices; for it may be here he means the sufferings of Cranford for
his lies vented upon the Exchange, which he when he was questioned for them,
said, Mr. Bayli^, the Scotch Minister and Commissioner, sent him thither to
divulge, which I have spoken of before. He forbeares (he says) instances, as
in all his d scourse, keeping himself in generals, though he could have
furnished diverse ex^mples upon every point he has touched; and though it be
said, He that speaks in general to all, and of all, speaks to none and of none;
yet all those that be guil^y, may app^y it to themselves: but what if none be
guilty of those lies that are spoken and spread abroad? oh then they will fall
of themselves, and there is no harm done; but are not you in the mean time, a
notorious uncharitable lier and slanderer, and is that no hurt to your self
and others? mark what an unchristian position is here laid down and maintained
by him, yea such as a moral man would be ash^med to own; to raise groundless
jealousies, spe^^ freely upon surmises only, and spread abroad slanders against
m^n, if you suspect them, though you have no p oofe, that by this means the
truth may be found out: this is the substance of what he has said; a good
means found out by a man who presently after professes to have writ n all this
in all sincerity, without the least ill meaning to any man, for the glory of
God and the good of the Church; I wish he did not bring in the name of God in
these his practices, God will not be honored by the Devils means; for such is
lying and slandering upon suspicion and groundless surmises, to bolt out
truth, which here he makes a part of wisdom, it is not that wisdom which a
from above, but altogether carnal, Sensual, and Devil sh, as appears Jam.
1.26. and 3.14.15. 1. Cor. 13. God needs not, nor will not be helped, or have
his Churches Cause promoted by the lying practices of men. Having laid open
this Unchristian dress of his, wherein he endeavors the more fairly to carry
on and bring in this slander, which upon mere evil surmise he desires to cast
upon Independents, and make men thereby jealous of them for false dealing, and
having Correspondency with the Enemy; I will now come to the matter it self;
and as he forbeares Names that he might not be convinced of manifest falsehood,
as he would, if he should name the men, in the judgments of all that know
them, so I will, that the truth may be the better tried and known in this
particular by any man that will examine it, name the men who can testify the
truth of what I shall say in answer to these jealousies, which his ill
affection makes him endeavor to raise in men's minds against the men his
corrupt stomach cannot brook. He begins this matter thus, there has been of
late great blusterings of some underhand secret dealings with the enemy by
some few men, without the knowledge of the public: here is the matter of his
slander which he would cast upon Independents, and root a jealousy thereby in
men's minds of them, for to take away or lessen their esteem he thinks to be
for the advantage of his good cause; that you may understand the thing more at
l^ngth, he says, he will call to mind the Kings sending Commissioners hither
the last winter to Cajeole; who according to their order, did C^jeole the Scots
and Independents: this is brought in, as he terms it, at length, that he might
take occasion thereupon to clear his Scots, and make the Independents more
liable to suspicion: how far they then prevailed with the Independents, he
cannot tell (if he could you should be sure to have it) but for the Scot^, he
is sure they did not gain the least point of any thing, no not of expression,
or of thought (for this undertaker will undertake for thoughts) or any thing
that might have so much as a doubtful interpretation, and so runs on in their
praise, till he be out of breath, as we use to say, both in respect of their
fair carriage, and also of their hearts: to all which I will only answer, as I
have formerly said I would, in respect of matters of treaty, that how far those
caieolers prevailed with the Scots, let their carriage at the Conference, and
af^erwards at the Isle of Wight, and the company they caballed with when they
quitted honest and well affected men, ( at which he confesses there were great
murmurings) bear witness, for all this fell out afterward. The Treaty being
ended without agreement, the Court (he says) sent one hither, who though he
said he stole away, yet this man will have him come with ^h^ir knowledge, and
not so only bu^ with express order and directions; for it is enough if he
one^y think so, he stands not in such things upon mathematical demonstration^;
if he suspect it, he will affirm it is so, to bring forth truth; and the other
affi^ms with a^ much proof, but with more knowledge, it is not so; for me, let
it stand between them: he gives him foul language enough; in the Court
language, he says, he is a greater cajeo^er, in his own plain language, he
calls him a mere cheater, this to do is no novelty with him, let it concern
whom it will; he says of him ^h t he has vowed to cosea those of his party if
he can by lies; if this were true, it were indeed something worse than to serve
those of his party with lies, as we see here done, though that he bad enough:
Now to the business, this Cajeol^r (as he will term him) first endeavors (he
says) to cajeole the Scots, but finding a cold coal there to blow, he leaves
that design, and makes his addresses to the Independents: what a cold coal he
met withal in the Scots, may appear by this, that the next morning after he
came to Town, the chiefest of them was at his bedside before he was out of his
bed, it seems he was not afraid to be cajeoled; of the truth of this report,
let him whom I mean to name be asked: for the Independents, here is the
misery, how he sped with them, the man does not know, he cannot hunt out that
which he would have to defame them with, yet that it may be in hope, he says,
things are not yet manifested: willingly would he keep up in men's minds an
expectation of some great matter against those, whom, though he burst with envy
at them, and malice, as appears throughout this Pamphlet, yet he is not able to
charge with any crime or falsehood, and prove it; all that he can produce is
but surmises, having no other ground than his own evil thoughts, endeavoring
thereby to nourish jealousies, and hold up suspicions in the minds of his
simpler sort, though without any ground at all. Some fidling business there
has been between him and them, he says, whether by the whole caball or some
prime of the faction it it unknown to the world; that there was some under hand
dealing by them with the enemy, he will at least bring some pretense, that he
may continue suspicions, though he can prove nothing; and two things he
alleges, wherein he says, there were shrewd proofs; one was Digbies
intercepted Letters to Leg, and the other, papers found in the Cajeolers
friends Closet, some written with his own hand, which point at things not so
fair: here be things spoken in general, fit to nourish jealousies and
suspicions in simple peoples minds, but nothing at all fit to prove what he
would asperse these men with; for why does he not tell the world what it was
that was contained in those letters, or what one particular in them did give
cause of suspicion, that there was any underhand dealing? and why does he not
speak out, what that was which was found in the papers that pointed at things
not so fair? either he knew the particulars, or not; if he knew them, why does
he not set them down that they might be judged of? would they not bear water if
produced, you should have them, if he knew not what was in those papers and
letters to this purpose, then is he a liar and deceiver, to offer them to
others as grounds of jealousies and suspicion, when he himself knows not any
ground for suspicion that may be gathered from them. But how can the man
without blushing speak of Digbies intercepted Letters, discovering an
underhand dealing with the enemy, when he shall call to mind what Dig^ies
intercepted Letters discovered of that kind concerning his Scotch
Commissioners? when these letters were formerly mentioned, it was not said,
there was something in them which gave a shrewd proof, but what was in them
was expressed, which was in plain terme^, That the Scotch Comm^ssioners were in
Treaty with Digby, being the Kings principal Secretary: this dealing was fair
and clear, and had the man such a thing in Digbies Letters, or any where else,
you should be sure to have had it in particular, and in great Letters. I shall
now clearly and fully in particular, without keeping my self deceitfully in
generals, as this Pamphleter does, declare what the matter of fact was in this
whole business, for it can come open faced into the view of any without shame;
and whereas the envious man cries out to have it fully and exactly tried,
hoping as he says, that then he shall have some light for his purpose, it was
exactly tried and fifted to the bottom, by a Committee appointed for that
purpose, in favor to a friend of his Scotch Commissioners, deeply concerned in
the business, and by the help and means of some of those whom his
Commissioners had (as you have heard) lately taken by the hand, as they had
done this man concerned, and with whom now their consultations and Caballs
were. The man to whom his foul mouth is so liberal of foul language, was the
Lord Savil, who coming from Oxford to London (as any might who would submit
them selves to the Parliament, and put themselves into their hands) lodged at
his first coming thither, in the house of the Lady Temple, one that was his
Daughter in Law, a Lady known to be well affected to the Parliament, and
Religious, but no Independent, during the time he lodged there, he expressed
himself, being now come to the Parliament, willing to do them the best service
he could, to manifest the reality of his intentions, and thereupon told the
Lady Temple, that having, a little before he came from Oxford, had conference
with the Lord Newport, who had that power with Leg then Governor of Oxford,
that he could do any thing with him, he was persuaded by what he had heard from
Newport, that upon some good conditions they would be a means to deliver
Oxford unto the Parliament, and desired he might but have liberty to send
thither, if it should be thought fit to make a trial thereof, and do his best
endeavor with Newport and Leg to bring it to pass, intimating farther, as I
remember, that at that time they were both in discontent: the Lady Temple
hereupon informs some of the Committee of both Kingdoms, of this which the Lord
Savil has told her, and they acquainted the Committee with it, and procure a
pass for him to send one to Oxford to make trial what my Lord Newport would do
herein: the Gentleman that was to go, before his going comes to one of those
whom the Lady Temple had first acquainted therewith, and demanded of him,
whether he would command him any thing to Oxford? who answered, he had nothing
to do with Oxford, and refused to entertain any speech with him about it: the
Gentleman who was sent, was Mr. Howard, one of the Brothers of the Earl of
Suffolk, who knows this to be a truth: when he came to Oxford, the Lord
Newport was not there, but gone into the West; so he delivered the Letters to
Leg, openly before others, who thereupon thinking it to be for his safety so
to do, (as it was afterward said) acquainted the Lord D^gby therewith, and he
the King; upon this, Leg has directions to entertain the business, and
carry on the Treaty, it may well be to draw us into a Trap, to which end, that
Napier h s Countryman also, of whom he speaks before, might be sent to tell
that tale which afterward he would never appear before the Committee to own
again: whether the delivery of the Letters so openly (which by the Lord Savil
wa^ made the cause of Legg^ a^q^ainting the Lord Digby with them) or the Lord
Savil^ confidence in him and N wpor^ without good ground, or the Lord Newports
absence were the occasion that the business was so carried when it came to
Oxford, I will not trouble my self withal, but the Committee would meddle no
more with it, though the Lord Savil said, he would however write again about it
to the Lord Newport; and to do him right in it, this is some evidence that he
had no ill meaning to the Parliament in the business, because when Leg would
have continued the Treaty about it, and he knew how it had been carried, he
fully acquainted the Committee with it, which had he bin of a plot in the
business he would never have done. Here you have the truth of this business,
upon which he would cast this false aspersion of underhand dealing with the
enemy, upon those he calls Independents: for Digbies Letters, if there were any
such to Leg intercepted, it is likely they were to wish him to continue the
Treaty with Savil, all which Savil acquainted the Committee with: but observe
herein the malice of this man, not caring what he says forward and backward,
so that by his lies he may raise jealousies of these men, whom he envies for
their integrity to the Public, and refusing, to the prejudice thereof, to go
along with his Countrymen for their ends; before you may see the same men whom
he aims at, both there and here, though indeed it falls upon the whole
Committee in both places, are traduced by him and slandered as false to the
cause, because upon that foolish tale of Napier, the relation whereof you have
heard before, they would not send forces to surprise Oxford; Now they must be
false and have underhand dealing with the enemy, because upon such an
information as this they thought it fit to make a trial what it would come
unto, which could be done without any danger or hazard at all in this case,
though not so in that; and here they had the person informing in their hands,
but in the other he that informed was sl^pped away, and would not appear to own
his Intelligence: Every understanding man, by these, and diverse other
particulars of the same kind in this Pamphlet to be observed, cannot but see
the scope of it to be, for base Scotch-serving ends, to slander and defame men
of honesty and integrity by lies, of what fashion, or color soever they be,
though never so inconsistent one with another, so that they may be drawn at
least to raise jealousies in the minds of men against them. I will leave
nothing behind in the relation of this business, that the integrity of those
men he is continually sna^ling at, and his falsehood therein may the more
appear: after this there came a Letter to the Lord Savil from Oxford, in
which, with other things discoursed of, there was this passage; The Parliament
man who keeps Intelligence with the King, and from whom be ha h all his
Intelligence, is such a Man, and sets down his Name in cipher, the key whereof
the Lord Savil had, and therewith presently decyphering of it, knew the name;
when he had received this letter, he acquaints the Lady Temple with it, and one
Mr. Gurdon a Parliament man, and an honest religions Gentleman, but a
Presbyterian throughout, though not of this man's fiery Zeal, that cannot
endure Godly men if they differ in judgment from him, his religion is more
pure and agreeable to the commands of our Savior, loving the members of Christ
where he sees them, and image of Christ in them, though in this particular
they differ from him in judgment: the Lady Temple and Mr. Gurdon acquaint the
former Parties herewith, and the Letter is produced and seen; upon this, those
of the Committee who were made acquainted with it, consider amongst themselves,
what was fit for them to do therein: the man named in the Letter had many
friends in the House, and at that time could sway very much therein by the
party he had there; and there being no other proof but a Letter from Oxford, it
might be thought a design purposely to disgrace him, and render him suspected;
on the other side, his carriage of late had been so different from what it had
formerly been in the beginning of the Parliament, and leaning so much toward
the Court upon all occasions, that it made such an advertisement the more
considerable: therefore after they had debated it amongst themselves some time,
they call some of their friends, who were members of the House, and judicious
men, whom they acquaint with it, and desire their advice; in the end it was
resolved by all, that it was fittest for Mr. Gurdon, to whom the Lord Savil had
first related it, to acquaint the House with it, and leave it to their
consideration; not thinking it to stand with their duty and fidelity, to
smother such a business brought to them without their seeking or thinking of
it; the house might judge of it as they pleased, and proceed to further
examination of it, as they thought fit, they having therein acquitted
themselves, and discharged their duty: when Mr. Gurdon had made the House
acquainted with it, the Gentleman first protested his Innocence therein with
much passion, even unto Tears; his Party thereupon made a great busling, which
were many, consisting not only of those who inclined to the Court, but much
augmented by the falling in of all those with them, who were disaffected and
stirred up with great animosity against such as they thought to be the Authors
or Instruments of the new modelling of the Army, whereby they, by the
self-denying Ordinance, were removed, both General and Officers, which both
resented sufficiently, and therefore when it came in their way, upon any
occasion they were ready to join to express their resentment of it, against
these men, though they joined with those for the doing of it, with whom before
they had been at greatest difference, and distance, as appeared in this
particular, and against those by whom they had before bin most obliged, as it
is well known, and who not out of dis-respect to them, but respect only to the
Public, did interest themselves in this service of new framing the Army, with
how much need let the world judge, and with how much success let the Lord
alone have the praise, who has pleased to make it manifest; and for the manner
of doing it, it was so carried, that it might be done without any disgrace or
reflection upon former miscarriages; that which was called the self-denying
Ordinance, requiring in general for the future, That no Member of either House
should be an Officer in the Army, and thereby withdrawn from attending the duty
of his place in Parliament, and discharging the trust reposed in him: by the
conjunction of these, with the friends of the Gentleman, and the sense the
House had of the passion he expressed (those from whom the information came,
having done thereby their part and duty, not at all speaking or stirring
farther in it) the House was moved to examine it, as if it had bin a design of
some, and a practice to wrong the Gentleman being a Member of the House, the
House therefore desired that there might be a Committee of both Houses to
examine it, because there were Members of both Houses, who had bin at first
made acq^ainted with the Letter, and whom it may be some of these dis^ffected
men upon the occasion I have mentioned, hoped to find somewhat against, though
their obligations unto them deserved more friendship, and a better requital,
than to wait for their halting; and which was most strange, the Gentleman
himself was made by the House of Commons one of the Committee, though he only
were concerned in the cause: a^l which I have the rather fully opened and
expressed, that it may appear the business was examined to the utmost, and if
any thing could have bin found out, that might have reflected upon these men he
would slander, he had his desire, for it was hunted after with eagerness
enough: the Lady Temple being examined, and Mr Gurdon, and then the rest of the
Committee of both Kingdoms, to whom they had given the information of the
business, which they had received from the Lord Savil; those of the Committee
refused not (though happily they might) when they were defied to speak what
they knew of it, and answer questions propou^^ (...) Authority, by Order of
both Houses, to examine or interrogate them, they might have made it a
question, but they told them clearly what Information they had received, and
that they thought it their duty in discharge of the trust reposed in them, to
advise Mr. Gurdon to make the House acquainted with it, and that it might
remain to their Justification, some of them would, and did put it in writing,
and so give it to the Committee; when nothing could be sound at all that could
in the least degree reflect upon those of the Committee, whom the man will make
his Independents, in the issue, for the clearing of the Gentleman, the Lord
Savill is flowen upon, who being examined, and justifying the Letter, and his
giving the Information to those of the Committee without their practicing with
him at all about any such matter, or knowing any such thing, until it came from
him unto them, as it is most certainly true that they did not, nor so much as
think of it, though their enemies, it may be, hoped, having such an occasion
to draw it at least to a suspicion of something against them; Savill hereupon
must be Banished the Town, and not live in London to do the like ill ^ffices.
If the Gentleman were innocent (as for my part I should desire it, and of
secret things w ll be no Judge) he that wrote the Letter did him a great deal
of wrong, and has much to answer for it; but I will maintain to all the
world, that those of the Committee of both Kingdoms considering how it came to
them, with all circumstances considered likewise, had failed in their du y, if
they had not advised Mr. Gurdon as they did: and could this Envious, Malicious
Man find out against them but any such thing don by them, as the smothering
and concealeing of such an information come unto them, concerning any man's
holding secret Intell gence with the King, and informing him of all things
being a Member of the Parliament, you should have had the man make half his
Volume of it, and rant it against them without measure, who does so much now,
when he is not able, do what hi^ little wirt and less honesty can, to squeese
out any thing that can reflect upon them. Here you have as I promised, at large
in particular, what passed between this Caieoler of the Court, and the
Independents as he is pleased to name them both, that you may as I have often
said, the better Judge of his impudent Falsehood, and their Integrity, whom for
his base ends, his aim and scope in all is to slander and belie: it may be
also that upon this occasion the truth of some things, which have not bin so
well understood, may be the better known, which is and shall be my End in all
this Answer to his lying Discourses. What he next comes unto I shall pass
having already fully an^wered it; as his endeavor to clear the Scotch Army
for not following the Forces escaped out of Newby Fight, their doing nothing
afterward at Hereford or else where, neither F^ghting, nor so much as seeking
the enemy that they might fight him and disperse his Forces; his excusing
David Lesley; h^s lies against Independents; to all these I have spoken
already: his idle Discourse in making objections and answering them again,
with ingrate that thou art, etc; brought in to make the world believe the Scots
had made themselves miserable to deliver us out of misery, and that it was not
our Money they fought f^r, or came for, it is not worthy the answering; that
they came not for our Money, let him believe it that lists, but that they
fought very little for what money of ours they had, that we all know: having
run out sufficiently in declaring against our ingratitude in not helping them,
nor pitying them in their misery (which I have showed to be most false) that
though they Crucified themselves for us, yet we (...) not, nor I think any man
else, but for him to Coin and invent to serve his turn is nothing strange:
then he says this will be blamed by posterity, when it shall be recorded what
Scotland has done and undergone for their Breath en, and what thanks they have
had for their pains; indeed if there should come no other Records to posterity
than this which you hope to transmit that they may be abused by it (for any
knowing man in this Age cannot) then it might prove so: but I shall prevent you
in that, for it is likely enough this Answer, which discovers the truth of
thing, may be as long-lived as your Romance, and then when posterity shall know
how little the Scots have done for our asistance at all, a^ I have made it
appear, and how much the K^ngdome has suffered and undergone by their coming
in and doing nothing, that which posterity will have cause to blame will be
your notorious Falsehood, where^y to set forth your Scots you would impone upon
and abuse them with Tales and Lies invented for that purpose. One passage that
he has here he will not have passed by, but calls upon us to take notice of it,
and it is worth the tak^ng notice of, both in respect of the matter and manner
of expression; Here let me tell you G^ntlemen (says he) this late Victory in
Scotland has given the c^mmon Enemy the g^eatest Blow, that h^ has received
since the b^ginning of th^se late troubles: First, for the mat^er; can there be
a more ridiculo^s thing than this Pedant call brag (to set forth the service of
his Countrymen) in the eyes of all understanding men, that such an ignorant
Pedant should undertake to hold forth the overthrow of a few in considerable
forces under Montross, by no great number of Horse under David Lesly, as the
greatest blow that the enemy has received since the beginning of these
troubles, whereas if he had received no grea^er blows then this, at N^seby and
afterward in the West, truly he would have regarded this, and would have had
cause so to do, no more then the paring of his nails, or the losing of one of
his old shoes? then in the manner of expression, he holds forth the
Schoolmaster so lively, as speaking to his young Gentlemen, whom he taught (for
being great Lords Sons, he might well use to call them Gentlemen, when he
gave any grave documents unto them, and from that use and custom come out with
it now thus, let me tell you Gentlemen) that it is Ipsissime dictum, he speaks
himself in it as fully as Luther used to say of Henry the 8th, it was
Henri^issime dictum; you have him at the same in the beginning of this
Pamphlet, when he takes upon him to school the Scotch Commissioners, for their
want of prudence, according to his manner with his young Gentlemen, you have
mistaken the right way Sirs; let any man read Mr. Rhombus in Sir Philip Sydnies
Pastoral acted before Queen Elizabeth, and see whether in many things he be not
here acted to life by this bold Pedant, who undertakes to direct, correct and
reprove all men of all Sorts, Ranks and Degrees, and that in all businesses: to
tell him of noble blood is but a toy, all blood is alike; for such a one to
talk of Nobility, or noble blood, and things of that nature, that he takes upon
him to read Lectures of, is as they use to say truly of it, Asinus ad Lyram.

He comes now to take notice of the retaking of Bristol, not with any intention
to acknowledge the remarkable services done by that Army in this year, a
dumb and deaf Spirit possesses him on all that side; but it is evident it
was done for no other cause, than that hereby he might again take occasion to
vent the malice that rancles in his heart against a Gentleman who has deserved
well both of this Kingdom and that of Scotland, and whom God has so (...)
different man cannot but in his Heart and Conscience acquit him; they only
rest unsatisfied who are sorry to find him Innocent, and hate and envy him
for his abilities. This man tells us, the world is astonished to see him sit in
Parliment; and why? because he lives Precario: will he say that every one who
has had hard measure, and bin unjustly condemned, not in the arbitrary
unlimited, and unknown way to our young Soldiers who did this, of Councels of
War, but in the ordinary legal way of Justice, and afterward bin pardoned
and acquitted from such Sentences, do live Precario, and are unfit, though men
of never so great Parts, to be employed? will such a thing turn this man and his
world into stones to behold it? he forgets that this lesson of his, which he
would willingly in this particular have his simple people take out, or take
upon trust from him, does little right to some of his good Friends who have had
this misfortune, and yet are thought fit to be employed in greatest affairs,
and very worthy of it: he might have looked upon that Noble Lord the Lord
Balmerino, at that very time employed here in greatest affairs and trust, as a
Commissioner, and worthy of that employment both for his abilities and
integrity, though known to have bin wronged in as high a degreeas this
Gentleman, and yet by honest men accounted Innocent; and this might have made
him ashamed to vent such a Position, when such an Example stared him in the
face while he was writing of it; but these pedants have no reflexe act, or ill
memories: Let us see his argumentations, the Gentleman did not continue still a
Member of the house, because he did not claim his Privilege, nor the House
vindicate the breach of their Privilege: he is a man of rare parts, fit to be
a Senator, a worse would have bin chosen in his place; what of that? yet if he
had bin hanged, in stead of being commanded by the House to come into his
place, neither you nor your world would have bin astonished at it, it seems;
excellently well desputed Mr. Rhombus; if he upon such an occasion, waved his
Privilege of Parliament, and at his instance and desire the House was content
to permit him so to do, this makes him not continue a Member of the House; a
man in a suit at Law, confident of his right, is content to wave his Privilege
of Parliament, and go to trial, and desires no Privilege from the House, but
that he may be left to the Law, is cast in his suit not withstanding his
confidence and good cause, by the ignorance or jniustice of the Judges; does
this make him cease to continue a Member of the House, because he clamed not
his Privilege in that case, nor the House vindicated theirs? Tell these things
to your Schoolboys, men of knowledge and understanding in Parliament
privileges and proceedings will laugh at them: it is true that confidence of
his integrity and clearness did make him desire the House to give him leave to
clear himself of the Slanders which the like Malice to this had cast upon him,
and the House did at his request, as also the General for his clearing, not
that either of them did at all accuse him, or were unsatisfied with him; and
this assurance of his own Innocence, for which he had ground enough as has bin
showed, made him cast himself into this misfortune, which this Pamphleter with
others like him make use of without any end of their Malice, and burst for
Envy to see him by such a Providence so cleared by the testimony both of the
enemies Officers and of those of our own Army, both being fully convinced of
his clearness heerin; and expressing as much; yea even such of them who before
this experience had bin much prejudiced against him, were abundantly satisfied
when they had bin at the regaining of that Place themselves, and observed the
diff^^en^ conditions it was in, when first surrendered and now ret^ken. But he
says the Sentence was judged to be just then, and has not bin judged
otherwise since, nor revoked, but he alone pardoned: who did judge the Sentence
just? they only who gave it, and but some of them neither, though p^oving the
Major part, and even those some condemning their own Sentence themselves
presently by explaining the Article of holding out to the utmost extremity so,
as that any one was to be accounted to hold out to utmost extremity in case the
Soldiers wi^hdrew and refused to fight, which in his case was manifestly
proved before them to be so; Here you may see, even those of the Council of
War that contrived his condemning (as has bin made appear) upon this Article
only, condemned their Sentence, presently after they had given it, of
injustice: what greater acquittance of him from this Sentence, and evidence
that the Parliament was no way persuaded of the Justice of it, could there be,
than their calling of him to sit with them, and commanding him to his former
service amongst them, which he only out modesty before, because of thi^
misfortune befallen him, not by their command, had forborne to do? and this
instantly upon ^he regaining of that place, which made his cleareness, and the
unjust and hard measure he had suffered, apparent to all men, but, as I have
said, those alone who would not see it, because out of Envy and Malice they
would not have had it so; but the Parliament thereupon declared their full
satisfaction actually in that matter: let him look back again to that
instance I gave of that Noble Lord, his Country man (whom I mention rather for
his honor than with any other intention, and to show how this pedantical
fellow does in these his silly argumentations not only wrong him, but many
other men of worth, who have had by contrivement unjust sentences given against
their lives) was that Sentence against him, or the like against many other
innocent men, therefore just, because it was not revoked or judged unjust
forensically, but he only pardoned? will this Schoolmaster teach that for a
general and universal lesson, that all men in such cases are not fit to sit in
Council, if thus wronged, nor be employed afterward in matters of State and
greatest trust? now this wise Politic in his own opinion, may see whether his
not politic, but splenetick Rules and Position will reach, and whom they do
blemish and strike at, as well as this Gentleman, whose innocence makes his
stomach rise. But the Politick-would be proceeds on very gravely, as if you
heard him reading a Lecture to his Pupils, and falls upon his Friends, as
having done both the Gentleman and the State wrong, in putting him upon
employments, whereunto he was neither fitted by nature nor breeding, nor of
himself inclined unto: belike this man is better acquainted with his Nature and
Inclination then his Friends; and for his Breeding, what would this bold
controler, and censurer of all things, and all men of all professions (though
his own breeding were only to be a Pedagogue) require? it may be he would not
think him fit to be made a Soldier, except he had worn a Buffe-Coat in Germany
or in Holland; if this be the scrutiny he would put his friends upon in respect
of him, to save their wisdom, they can answer, that he has bin there a
Soldier, at the siege and taking of a Town upon Surrender, not only stronger
then this, which at that time was known to be of no strength at all to resist
two Armies besieging it, but a Town stronger then any was in England: but let
him put the greatest part of those who condemned him, upon this Trial for their
experience, and breeding in matters of war, and by what he will find, he
will casheere them, as not fit to fit in a Council of War, to judge of men's
lives for matters of War, who never saw War, or a Council of War abroad,
or were at all bred up thereunto: what Inclination they had to War let him
examine; but that they had an inclination and purpose to condemn this
Gentleman, however he made it appear he had behaved himself, and what ill
condition the place was in, and how untenable, is clear enough; and if that
Knight be asked, who told him what they had resolved beforehand amongst
themselves, he can tell they meant not to consult their experience, had they
had any, about this matter: well upon this occasion, he lessons all men, and
gives rules to them, how they must behave themselves, they must not take upon
them such employments, whereunto nature and their inclinations has not fitted
them: I would ask this pedant, whether any body but himself will think him by
nature or breeding (for his inclination he makes it manifest enough, and such
bold forwardness is ever to be found in all pedantical men) fitted to control
Parliament, direct Councellers of State in State affairs, reprove and befoole
Commissioners of greatest quality, and employed in matters of greatest trust
and concernment from one Kingdom to another, and teach them what they should
do, as if he were teaching his boys, giving his judgment of their carriage
when they did well, when they did indiscreetly, wanting prudence and courage;
so in matters of War giving his judgment, when businesses were well managed,
and when otherwise, as is to be seen throughout this fool^sh factious
Discourse of his, which he was set about, or set himself about to serve other
men in their designs? surely you must needs take him to be one of those noble
Genies he talks of, who he says, are fitted for all employments, otherwise he
will fall under his own reproof here; for he makes himself a Judge and a
controller, and director in all, as if all knowledge were within the compass of
his round Cap, when he walks up and down in the midst of his Boys; who so bold
as blind Bayard.

After these Admonitions given to all men, he remembers himself, that the Scots
his Countrymen may happily hereby come under his Feru^a, and be lashed together
with other men; whereupon he takes occasion to set forth and make ostentation
of his impartiality; that you may believe his justness, he will respect
neither the one nor the other, he says, to favor this, o^ excuse that, if
they do offend, whether he be Engl sh or Scot, it is all one to him, he will
make no difference, which is a lie so gross and putid, that the whole
Discourse throughout makes it apparent, he was set on work, and eagerly carried
on to that work he was set about, by his own spleen and falsehood fitting him
hereunto, to no other end but to cry up the Scots contrary to all truth, and
for the setting forth of their merit to disgrace the English, and the best
deserving men amongst them with as much falsehood: indeed he there in the 119.
and 120. pages, tells a tale or story no way tending to the credit of his
Nation, as I have formerly said, it may be he exceeded his Commission in this
particular, to make ostentation of impartiality, and to gain thereby the more
credit in other things wherein that he might advance the Scots, he disgraceth,
and so shamefully besieth the English, and that in many parts of this most
Manifest Forgery of his, that I and every man that reads it, may much more
truly call it so, than he shamefully put the name of Manifest Truth upon it. I
repeat often the same things, for he often puts on the same Vizards and
Disguises to deceive, which I would as often pull off.

He closes up this Pamphlet of his ( till, as he says in the end of it, he
may have another occasion, that is to exercise his invention again in slandring
honest men, and lying more amply and fully) with a Discourse of Two
particulars; the first very clearly shows of what spirit the man is; the
second, what his design was in spreading abroad this seditious Pamphlet, and
other papers of the same kind, which was his practice until the incendary was
sought after for it, and made to betake himself to his heels: these last
days, he says, he met with a printed paper (that is his usual phrase, or it
fell into his hands, though he sought after it, as a Fox after his prey) which
was the later part of a Letter sent from Bristol: this he would make men
believe was concealed from the world; and that he, out of his zeal to Church
and State (and then comes in the solemn Covenant, which binds him so to do)
will give it to the view of the world: that it was kept from them (if there was
any such thing, and not invented by him, to make men the rather think and
suspect there was something in it) I know no reason at all; for the piece has
nothing in it but what exhorts to brotherly love and charity, though there be
difference in judgment between men in things of inferior allay, and smaller
consequence than to hinder them from keeping the unity of spirit in the band of
love and peace; and this exhortation he cannot endure; therefore let me return
upon himself, where it will be found most true, that gross lie which he ends
this passage withal, that in these few lines the malicious plot of factious
Independents is more discovered against Church and State, than by whatsoever
has been said or written by them to this day; and so says he, take up the
passive obedience of these men: to these last words, and the ignorant or wilful
folly of them out of mere malice, I have already said enough to discover the
same: But to his active malice in the former let me say, that in his discourse
upon this piece of a Letter, though it be hard for him to exceed himself in
what he has already done of this kind, yet he has here discovered such an
invenomed, imbittered spirit, void of all charity, and that unto such a height
as is hardly to be paralleled; for not only to harbor malice and
uncharitableness in the heart, and vent it, though full of lies, upon all
occasions, but besides to have the heart so deeply poisoned and corrupted, that
the desires of love and peace, and exhortations to unity cannot be endured,
this is a superlative wickedness, and like a stomach overcharged with choler,
and full of all ill humors, which turns all wholesome food into the increase of
that ill humor that is predominant in it; but what will not envy produce where
it is entertained and bears sway? that this may the more manifestly appear,
though he has set the same down in his Pamphlet, yet I will here insert that
part of the Letter, which his corrupted stomach so much rises against, and
then consider his most foolish, and most uncharitable exceptions against it.
The Letter was Cromwels, whose very Name is sufficient, as has appeared, to
turn the man's stomach, by stirring the spleen and choler lodged therein, and
these are the words:

Presbyterians, Independents, all have here the same spirit of faith and
prayer, the same presence and answers, they agree here, know no names of
difference; pity it is it should be otherwise any where; all that believe have
the real unity, which is most glorious, because inward and spiritual, in the
body and to the head; for being united in forms, commonly called uniformity,
every Christian will, for peace sake, study and do as far as Conscience will
permit; and from brethren, in things of the mind, we look for no compulsion,
but that of light and reason: in other things God has put the sword into the
Parliaments hand, for the terror of evil doers, and the praise of them that
do well; if any plead exemption from it, he knows not the Gospel; if any
would wring it out of your hands, or steal it from you, under what pretense
soever, I hope they shall do it without effect: that God will maintain it in
your hands, and direct you in the use of it, is the prayer, etc. What can a man
find in all this, but that his spirit will fully close withal, if his heart
have truly embraced the reiterated Commands of our blessed Savior in his dying
words, as I may say, and farewell Sermon, John 14, etc. or has his spirit
truly seasoned and sanctified by embracing, not in profession only, but in
power, the Doctrine of the Apostles thoroughout the Gospel, and received into
his heart that exhortation of the Apostle, Phillip 3.1, 2, 3. verses, pressed
by the Apostle with Arguments and Motives so powerful and effectual? only
such men as this, who are carried with a Pharisaicall Zeal to prefer their own
Traditions before the Commandments of God, and place Religion in the setting up
and maintaining the Idol of their own inventions (for which it is usual for
men to have a fiery preposterous Zeal) only such, I say, could put an ill
interpretation upon so christian an exhortation and desire, that all
Christians, as they are one body, under one head, and enlivened by one and the
same Spirit, might live and walk together in unfeigned love, without division in
affections, though in some outward things of government in the Churches they
differ in opinion; and that the names set up by Satan's policy to breed and
continue contentions between brethren, might not prevail to obtain his end
therein; the exhortati^n and desire are both pious. The man enters upon his
silly Observations (for such I may well term them) with this in the first
place, That the words are set down in such a way, that what they mean, he that
reads them can hardly reach unto, and that this seems to be done of purpose:
The words are so plain, and the meaning so clear to him that will understand,
that it may much rather be thought, this man is desirous to cast foggs and
mists upon them, that the simpler sort, whom he speaks of afterward, might be
the better prepared to entertain his false glosses upon them to their deluding.
That which he desires in this piece of his Letter is (as I have said) that
difference of judgment in things outward and of smaller consequence, and
distinguishing names, cast upon men to breed and hold up divisions, might not
cause difference in affection amongst brethren: To persuade to this, he first
shows it feiseable by their practices and example where he is; and then urges
that strong and undeniable reason for it, the real unity that there is between
those who are believers and true Christians, being members of one body, united
to one head, the Lord Christ, and this union being inward and spiritual is so
glorious as not to have breaches made in it: for outward forms, and uniformity
in them, for peace sake Christians will study to conform unto, so far as with a
good conscience preserved they may; but until their judgment and reasons have
light sufficient to convince them of the lawfulness of things, it is expected
(and well may be) from brethren, though in Authority, not to compel thereunto a
doubting unsatisfied conscience; the commands and laws of men bind the outward
man and reach to his conversation, but the mind and conscience must be left to
God to work upon, Cogi non potest fides; what is not done of faith is sin, and
to compel to sin is not the Magistrates part or duty: If therefore the things
be of such a nature, as that they be gross scandalous sins, and dangerous
errors in respect of infection of others, and seducement; the Magistrate may
and ought in such cases to proceed in the Negative, to forbid the outward
actings and practice of such things, being in their natures destructive to the
foundations of Christian Religion, and not suffer and permit men to hold them
forth in their conversations amongst others, to offend and leaven them to their
ruin; no more than he ought to suffer a man to run up and down, with a Plague
sore running upon him, to destroy others: But in the Affirmative to force men
outwardly to act that, and not forbear alone, but practice what is contrary to
their consciences, and the light which as yet they have attained to, this is
not to be done by a Christian Magistrate to any, much less to brethren; herein
he, as well as others, if he have faith, must have it to himself before God,
and not compel other men to sin, by forcing them to act and to do things
contrary unto, or with a doubting conscience, until they shall be better
informed; and if not by example in things of indifferency and inferior
consideration, how much less, in matters merely of outward form, by compulsion
and force is this to be done? and this is that which is meant by these words,
things of the mind, as is cleared by the reference of them to the conviction of
enlightened reason, and the opposition of them to outward and other things: In
the last place he acknowledges the authority of the Magistrate, with this
brand upon those who would exempt themselves from it, that they knew not the
doctrine of the Gospel, and this to muzzle the foul mouths of those, who cast
upon them the names of Anabaptists; and they that shall endeavor, either by
pretenses of Religion, or whatever else, to steal the sword out of the
Parliaments hands, or by force to wrest it from them (whom he acknowledges
hereby to be the lawful Authority over them and others) he hopes their
endeavors shall be without effect: Oh well spoken, with all my soul, I wish as
well practiced! Here is the sum and substance of all contained in this piece of
the Letter, which the man snarles so much at; and what could be more
christianly desired, or more clearly and plainly delivered? what more consonant
to the doctrine of the Apostles, witness Romans 13. and many other Scriptures?
and who, but he that will muzzle himself up still in his own malice, could find
any intricacy and perplexity in the expressions thereof.

To his 14 Observations upon this piece of the Letter, if I should answer no
more but these two words, false and foolish, it were sufficient to any
unprejudiced understanding man; but in respect of his simpler sort, and his
well meaning people whom he labors to abuse, I shall trouble my self farther
with them. His first Observation is this, If there be no difference between
Presbyterians and Independents where the Wtiter of the Letter is, how comes
this man to discern them one from another, then comes in scornfully with a may
be he can dive further into things, and understands more than others: The truth
is, he understands little more than a fool that understands not the folly of
this Observation, which only malice and falsehood could be capable to bring
forth from a man of any understanding: It is said in the Letter, Presbyterians,
Independents, all here have the same spirit of faith and prayer, the same
presence and answers, they agree here without taking notice, or so knowing
names of difference, as to be hindered thereby from such agreement: Every man
must needs acknowledge this to be his sense, neither can malice wrest out
another, but with greatest folly as this man here; for cannot there be a
difference in opinion between men in things of small consideration, in respect
of these great duties of piety and spiritual graces, which difference may be
discerned, but yet have so little operation in the minds of pious men, as not
to make the least breach in affection between them, nor give the least
interruption to their joining and sweetly closing together in all the duties of
piety, graces of the Spirit, and ordinances of the Gospel, with one heart,
being of one mind, and one spirit in all these things? what greater folly than
to make a question of this, which experience has so manifestly evinced to be a
truth, and that to the great commendation of the piety and charity of such
godly men, that they will not for such differences in opinion be hindered from
m^intaining the unity of the Spirit in the band of love and peace? heretofore
the Devil (as he will never be without them) had two other distinguishing
names, Conformist, and Nonconformist, when Surplice and other Ceremonies were
enjoined by the Prelates, wherein all men had not attained to the same measure
of light, but were of different judgments, so that their difference of
judgment and practice in these things of smaller consideration, and themselves
by these names could be discerned one from another very easily, without a
divining spirit; yet it might be truly said of many reverend and godly men
amongst them in those times, both Ministers and Christian brethren, that
notwithstanding such a difference, they prayed together, fasted together, had
the same gracious presence of God with them in their praying, and fasting, and
answers to their prayers offered up by the same spirit; and took so little
notice of these differences of opinion in things of this inferior nature, and
of those distinguishing names arising from thence; as that notwithstanding they
were of one heart and one soul, walking together in love as brethren, which is
the thing here affirmed in the Letter of those who were where the Writer was.
This I my self know to be a truth, and can testify the same, and could name
many of the men, having lived long with them, and seen and known their
conversations. I have been willing to insist the longer upon this, not only to
show how ridiculous his Observation is upon these words of unity in the Spirit
of Faith and Prayer, and not suffering names, and differing in opinion in some
things to breed difference in affection between those who have the same Faith,
the same Spirit, the same Lord and head, and the same God, but most of all,
because as he that writes it, so I with my soul desire that this unity of the
Spirit in the band of peace and brotherly love might be more observed and
practiced in all places, notwithstanding these names, and the things for which
they have been cast upon men: but I see now, as I did also observe in those
times, many hot headed men carried on with a fiery zeal, which comes not from
the Altar, so caught by Satan in this Mouse-trap of names, which he has set up
for that purpose, that they cannot endure to hear of a christian exhortation
hereunto, or desire thereof, without putting their own unchristian
interpretations and wrestings upon the same, as this man here, and so diverse
others of his Spirit.

His 2d Observation is no other than a false affirmation; let him bring one
instance to prove it if he can, and he shall not be thought altogether so false
in his affirmations as he will needs publish himself in print to be; let him
name the man whom he will have to be an Independent, that has with fierceness
opposed, or cannot brook, or by cunning sought to supplant and cast out of
employment any Presbyterian as such, if for other designs of theirs
prejudicial to the public, and the right and interest of this Kingdom they
have opposed them, and that constantly and unmovably, it is their
faithfulness, for which they deserve to be commended: it is hard to undertake
for all whom he may cast this name upon, but it is clear enough to them, who
read this railing Pamphlet of his, whom he aims at, those who oppose his Idol
and the setting of it up in this Kingdom, though many of them be Presbyterians
in judgment, in respect of that which in the issue will only fall out to be
the difference, whether Coercive power be to be exercised by Presbyteries
united or Consultative alone, as before I have expressed.

The 3d is of the same nature, as false, whether we respect the carriage of
Presbyterian or Independent, especially those in the Assembly, whom he, as
before and here, you may see principally shoots his bolt at (give me leave to
say it often, since he so often will deserve it) what meekness of mind and
patience the Presbyterians have used toward the Independents in the Assembly,
I have showed before, and those that know and did observe the carriages of both
in their debates there, and in their reasons and answers given in in writing
one to another, can testify; he does no more here than often in other places,
fortiter calumniari and impudenter: for the extravagarces the Presbyterians
would bring them from, and the truth of God (as he will have it) which they
would have them submit unto, what is this but foolishly to beg the question in
hand? that he would have them no longer born withal, and endured, but fire
come presently from heaven and deliver him and his from them, that is consonant
to all the rest which comes from his spirit; I would he knew of what spirit he
is therein, that he might repent for it.

His 4th Observation has such a pre-eminence in falsehood that all experience
can manifest the same to be false, whether you look into City, Town, or
Country; for those he will call Independents, whether at home, or abroad, in
old England or in New, they are so far from branding a Presbyterian, because
such, with the name of profaneness, or a thought thereof, or thinking them
unworthy of holy society with them, that they do not, nor will not, for that
difference in judgment only, knowing them otherwise to be truly godly, refuse
to admit them into their nearest and dearest Societies, their Church
fellowships, neither do they think they ought; and this common experience of
their practice herein will testify against this impudent falsehood of his
charged upon them.

In the 5th Observation he makes a riddle, and bids him to solve it who will;
it is as easily solved, as foolishly made and called a riddle; his riddle is
this, Presbyterians and Independents are said to have an inward unity, whence
is it then, that they agree not in things of the mind which are esteemed
inward? the conscience is a part of the mind, yet it suffers not Independents
to uniform with Presbyterians: Amongst all the riddles that in the riddle book
are taught children for sport, I think there is not to be found so childish a
one as this: can there be no inward and real unity, where, in any thing
whatever, there is any difference? for in the distinction that he himself makes
of things of the mind, he says, they are things that remain within the mind
and go no further, or things that proceed and come from the mind and are
outward, and this latter he extends afterward to all things; for the first,
those that remain in the mind, and come not out, nor go further, there can be
no compulsion of them he says; and so I say, if they never come forth of the
mind nor be discovered, in them there can be neither agreement nor
disagreement, for who can know what they are? therefore the agreement that is
between men must be in things that come out from the mind, and so are
discovered, not that abide and remain in the mind and cannot be known, and
these, in his acception of these words [things of the mind] are all things that
concern Church or State, all that are proper to men above merely natural and
sensible creatures, as in his eighth Observation he has it: then mark, I will
not say what a riddle he makes of this, but what a foolish position and false
he lays down, which no man of understanding would ever have done, if his
inconsidering Zeal had not transported him to say he neither knew, or cared
what; that is, if there be a difference between men in any one thing, so that
they do not uniform in all things, there can be no inward unity between them,
and it is a riddle to say there is: Will not any, who is acquainted with
Scripture, or I may say, that is above his merely natural and sensible
creatures, and has understanding to observe what has, and does daily pass
between men in the world, see the falsehood and willful folly herein expressed?
Paul and Barnabas had an inward unity, the same Spirit of faith and prayer, as
here is said, and were united inwardly and spiritually by the same Spirit to
one Head, and one to another, as members of the same mystical body, yet they
did not agree in all things of the mind, for one was of the mind that John Mark
should not go to visit that work which he had before deserted, and the other
was of opinion that it was fit to take him along with them notwithstanding, and
this difference continued between them, and was sufficiently discernable, and
yet will he say it is a riddle to affirm that there was an inward union between
them and spiritua^l unity at that time? So Paul and Peter differed, when Paul
reproves him in things concerning Religion: if he shall answer, these were
particular actions and passages falling out in their conversations, not
different opinions that they held and professed in matters of Religion, yet
they will fall under his acceptance and interpretation of the words, and
extending of them to all things in his eighth Observation, and then they make
for him this absurd conclusion, that between these Apostles it were a riddle to
say there was any inward spiritual unity. But in those times there were many
thousands of the believing Jews, who were zealous of the Ceremonies of the
Law, as the Elders at Jerusalem told Paul, not having yet light enough to
convince them, That the Substance being come, these Ceremonies were to cease;
the believing Gentiles, having more light in that particular, were of another
mind and judgment according to the truth; and this difference in matters of
Religion, and of far greater consideration and consequence than what I have
showed to be between Presbyterians and Independents, was held up and maintained
with too much strife and contention between them; conscience not permitting the
Jews to uniform with the Gentiles, as is clear by the directions given therein
by the Apostles, and by that 14th Chapter to the Romans; notwithstanding all
this, shall any man be said to speak riddles, that affirms there was a real
inward spiritual union between these believing Jews and Christian Gentiles,
who had embraced the Gospel? And that holding the head, they were, as the
Apostle says, Col. 2 19. knit together by joints and bands which are inward
and spiritual, and did increase and grow up together according to the measure
of every part with the increases of God: while we live here in this life we are
imperfect, and know but in part, and therefore being of different stature in
knowledge, there is and will be difference of opinion in some things of
Religion amongst Christians, who notwithstanding by an inward and spiritual
union, as the Apostle has it, Ephesians. 4.13, 15, 16. Grow up in him who is the
head, even Christ, according to the measure of every part, as many members, and
of several statures, united in one body, and increasing, and edifying one
another in love. I wish these Zealots for tithing of Mint, Anise and Cumin were
better acquainted with these great things of the Gospel, which they neglect for
such things as are not to be regarded so much, as this tithing in those times,
being a thing commanded; they would not then call what in this Letter is
affirmed, and, sutably to that example, desired to be practiced in other
places, a riddle, which their fiery fleshly Zeal and ignorance makes them do:
And, but that I am willing to insist upon this point, desiring it may be better
known, and better practiced amongst Christians, occasion being ministered unto
me by this ignorant or malicious Observation, I have indeed troubled my self
and the Reader too much in discovering the silliness and vanity of it.

His 6th Observation: I have answered in showing what the Wri^er meant by
Compulsion in things of the mind, as may be well enough understood by such as
have not a will to cavil; for the thing in question is uniformity in forms
with Presbyterians, that which he desires and expects from brethren, being
Magistrates, is, that men be not compelled thereunto until they have light
sufficient to convince their reasons of the lawfulness thereof; therefore to
wrest this to such a sense that men may have liberty to say, write, and do
whatsoever is in their minds, is either great ignorance, or wilful out of
malice; for by compulsion to keep men from saying, writing, and doing whatever
comes into their minds, is to put compulsion upon their outward actions in
restraining them, which he grants the Magistrate has power in; but to compel
men's minds to think this or that is lawful, and therefore to force them to act
accordingly, and practice it for uniformities sake, before they shall have
light sufficient to convince their reason of the lawfulness of it, which is
not in the power of man to give; this is a metropolitan and prelatical
practice, as we know in the compelling of Subscription; and this he expects
Christian Magistrates will not do, and well he may expect it, if they will
keep themselves to the rules of the Apostles doctrine: there is great
difference between restraining men from venting, publishing, and acting their
errors when they are gross, scandalous, and destructive to others, and
compelling and forcing men for to act and practice that, which they in their
consciences judge to be unlawful, for conformity sake: the one the Magistrate
may and ought to do, but not the other; he may, and ought to restrain sin; but
not to force men to sin against conscience, by practicing and acting what they
think to be unlawful, until they have light to convince them of the
lawfulness of such things, as they are required to conform unto: therefore
this conclusion, of his is a mere cavil arising from an ignorant, or wilful
mistake and wresting of the words.

In his 7th Observation he cavilleth at the words Light and Reason, and says,
that all the phanaticall phrensies, that have been broached, do pretend
thereunto, no men pleading so much for reason as the Socinians, and Arminians,
except our Independents. Because all heresies and phanatical men have made use
of the Scriptures, and pretended their heresies and phansies to be warranted
thereby, is this a good reason to object against the right use of the
Scriptures, or against those who mention the Scriptures? So if some falsely
pretend to light, and attribute too much to Reason, shall it be a fault in
others to desire to be guided by Reason enlightened out of the Scriptures, and
not compelled to act contrary to the same? For his preferring his Independents
(for so he calls them, and well may he, being such only of his own making)
before the Socinians and Arminians, in pleading for reason, it is well known,
that no men keep themselves more closely and exactly to the Word, without
admitting of any humane policies, or humane reason, in the very matters of
Church government, than these men do whom he would make Independents,
acknowledging the discipline and government of Churches to be instituted by
Christ and the Apostles, and nothing that is to be done therein, in the least
circumstance, to be left to the reason and policy of men, but ordered by the
Word, either in the express precepts thereof, or by the general rules of
order, decency, and edification, set down therein; and I am sure this Zealot
for his Kirk government cannot say so much for That, and prove it, if their
practice be examined, and proof out of the Scriptures be brought for it; and
that in respect of diverse particulars. How their Rabbis in the Synod have
proved their light to be clear, and their reasons to be true, it is well known,
he says: I agree with him, it is so well known by their reasons and answers
given in in writing, that by whom those shall be seen either now or hereafter,
it will appear how false that is which he affirms of their being convinced by
the Word of God, or their light proved thereby to be darkness, and their
reason erroneous; and therefore until that could be done, which will be found
to be far from being done at that time, they had reason to continue in that
judgment which they had warrant for out of the Word of God: for the practice
of the reformed Churches, that is no rule, farther than their practice is
agreeable to the Word of God, which is the only rule; and as they have
reformed many things, so there may be the same need yet to reform in some other
things, wherein they may be wanting, or have been mistaken: for the state of
the best and most reformed here in this life is a state short of perfection.

In his 8th Observation he comes in with, again he says, "We look for no
compulsion; the Writer says no such thing again, but this man will needs
cavil again, and to that end bring it in again; well let us see what he will
be at now again; though I have answered this; and many of the rest, by showing
the true meaning of the Writer in those words ["Compulsion for things of the
mind] then I pray thee, says he, is not the common Law of England a thing of
the mind; whom speaks he to, is he now turned to some Petty-fogger of the Law?
well, what then? why this man denies the Parliament to have any thing to do
with it, nor with the Church, nor with the State, seeing they have nothing to
do with things of the mind: Well argued and concluded once again Mr. Rhombus;
or wittingly and wilfully contrary to clear light: for in this sense, wherein
the man will take things of the mind, that is, which come forth from the mind,
as all actions proper: o men do, as he himself concludes in this 8th
Observation; as he says, the Common Law of England is a thing of the mind, so
he may as well (as himself confesses) say the same of any thing whatsoever
done by a man endued with reason, and not by a beast or unreasonable creature:
How can he then with any conscience or care of speaking truth, make this the
sense of the Writer, when in the very next words which he himself repeats, he
tells us what the Writer says concerning other things, that they are subjected
to the sword of the Parliament. To use his own manner of speech, wherewith I
am now so well acquainted, I pray thee then tell me what those other things
are, which in the Writers sense are subjected to the Parliaments authority,
since all things done by men, whatever they be, are things of the mind: was he
so b^utish, or will you be s^, to intend by those other things distinguished
from things of the mind in his Letter, the actions done by beasts? You would
make this his absurdity, but it is no other than your own most absu^d and
ridiculous cavilling against that, which as I have showed before, has a plain
and clear sense, which every understanding man that is ingenuous, will
acknowledge, yea, though an adve^sary.

His 9th. Ob ervation is of the same kind; bu^ he contradicts himself by
restraining ^he meaning of the words, now to the denying of the Parliament to
have to do with holy things, whereas before he would understand them of the
Common Law of England, and of all things: but he knows not what to do with
those other things, which the Writer acknowledges the Parliament to have the
Sword put into their hands to order and compel in, for the terror of those
that do ill, and the praise of those that do well, as his words are; and
therefore here he is constrained to interpret things of the mind to be holy
things, which the Parliament is not to meddle with; then in this, and his two
following Observations, he runs out from this foolish interpretation to draw
conclusions, and make consequences answerable thereunto, whereas he neither
does, nor can prove any such thing to be meant by the Writer, or intended in
those words, therefore both conclusions and consequences are nothing else bu^
fooleries and falsehoods, having no other foundation but his own malicious
fancy, that will have it so, to give him a pretense at least to rail against
the Writer, whose s^nse and meaning in the words I have sufficiently expressed
before to any who will understand truth; but bray a Fool in a Mortar and he
will still be the same; for what folly and malice does he show in all this?
that first he will have the words to be understood of all things that are
p^oper to a reasonable creature, then he will restrain them to holy things; and
whereas the writer speaks of other things separated and excepted from what he
intends by things of the mind, these he will have to be no things: so malice
and envy makes him turn this way and that way, and every way to make something
out of nothing rather than not to find a fault, for there can be nothing found
in those words, or that whole piece, that does not well stand with the
acknowledgement of the M^gistrates power in things civil, and also in things
of Religion so far forth, as to be Custos ucriusque tabulae: notwithstanding
which acknowledgement, there may well be an expectation that a Christian
Magistr^te will not force and compel any man to act contrary to his mind and
conscience, till light received sufficient to convince him, that what is
required of him is lawful: This being the duty of every Ch^istian Magistrate
that will walk charitab^y, and the true sense of the W^iters words: I shall not
need therefore to trouble my self any farther with his consequences drawn from
his own evil imaginations alone, in this 9th. Observation, or the 10th, and
11th. being nothing else but Castles built in the Air, without any foundation.
I will only observe his usual custom in speaking of the Covenant, and the
Parliaments Declarations at their first taking up of Arms, which is still to
leave out those words which purposely were put in to explain their meaning,
and this he does either out of ignorance (to judge the best of it) or purposely
to serve for his design, in mentioning the Covenant, where he still presses,
That by this Oath we are bound to reform the Church according to the Word of
God, etc. he will still omit these words ["according to our places and
callings] which is a Limitation that was purposely put in, that it might not be
thought we bound our selves to fight at all for Reformation of Church
Government, much less according to the example of the Church of Scotland,
which he would make men believe we bound our selves unto by this Oath, and are
fighting for that cause, though no such thing was ever meant, but pu^posely
provided against by this Caution: then when he mentions the maintaining of
the Doctrine, Discipline, and Government of the Church of Scotland in the
Covenant, he sets it down absolutely, omitting this which was purposely also
put into that clause [against Popery] not binding our selves any farther; and
in the Declaration of both Houses before their taking up of Arms, he leaves out
what the Houses only intended, and particularly expressed, the defense of the
true Protestant Religion, established by Law in England against Popery; and
therefore for him to say it is a lie to affirm the Parliment did not make
Religion in general its quarrel (especially understanding it to be the
Reformation of Church Government, and introducing his Church Government, and
setting of that up in the place of Prelates here in England, which is that he
all along takes for Reformation of Religion in this Pamphlet of his) is so
impudent, gross, known a lie, that at the first taking up of Arms, it was not
so much as thought of; But they declared, They would maintain the true
Protestant Religion established by Laws in this Kingdom against Popery, if
need should be, and would defend the Laws of the Kingdom in preservation
thereof, by Arms, as they might justly; but against the Laws then in force,
to take up Arms for the setting up of his Church Government, his Idol, and
casting out of Bishops, by the Sword, for that end; I dare say it was so far
from the thoughts of the two Houses of Parliament, who were constrained to take
up arms for their own defense only, against force prepared to ruin them,
that if any such thing had been then proposed, they would much sooner have
taken up Arms against it, and by the Laws of the Kingdom, as then they stood,
might much more lawfully have done it, if by force such a thing had been
endeavored to be obtruded upon the Kingdom. These omissions are usual with
him, for in speaking of these things they serve not for his turn, therefore he
has a Figure called Preterition always for them also.

The 12. Observation is a question made to no purpose that I know, Whether the
Uniformity between Presbyterian and Independent be not external, the inward
being already by this man's words, as he says; if it be external, then the
Parliament has power over it. And who denied the Parliaments having power over
it? I think the Writer, and every wise and good man, did and does desire that
the Parliament would use their power, there being an inward union in the maine
things of true Religion between them, to forbid and prevent strife,
contentions, and divisions among them, to the disturbance of the peace both of
Churches and the State, in respect of an external uniformity only in things
of form, which none are such eager sticklers in, and set on foot so much as
this hotheaded Presbyterian, and those of his spirit; and this were a right
use of their power in such things of outward forms, not to suffer contentions
to arise about them, to the prejudice of that inward unity and power of
godliness, which true Christians should grow up in, and hereunto tends the
Writers desire in what he said; but how foolishly and falsely does the man
gather and assume this, when he concludes what is sought for to be external,
because the inward was already, by the Writers words? when the Writer only
shows it was so amongst them where he was, but that it was not so elsewhere,
which is his grief, saying "it was pity it should be otherwise any where; but
for this man to be laboring to make something out of nothing, if he could, to
serve his turn, is usual with him, though he make himself ridiculous thereby.

In his 13. Observation, he says, it seems in that Army, that the external
uniformi^y is also, by this man's saying, between Presbyterian and Independent:
Mark how he tumbles up and down from one side to another to cavil; in that
which went but next before he had said, the External was sought for between
them, the Inward being already by this man's words, now in this Observation of
his, the External must be by this man's words, if the External be already by
this man's words, how can it be sought for? Will that be raised also from the
same words? that it is, and yet it is to seek; h^re indeed take your Riddle;
are not these grave and weighty Observations much worth observing? but he
brought this in by hook and crook, as we say, to have a jerke at some
Independent Officers for preaching, as he c^lls it, whereunto no Presbyterian
will give his consent, much less practice it, and therefore there can be no
uniformity, at least without difference: There can be no Uniformity, if there
be a D^fference in any thing; as before there could be no Union, if in any one
thing proper to a Man there were a difference; If one Man love Cheese, and
another will not eat it, there can be no Unity nor Uniformity between these
Men: I should be unwilling to send my Child to such a Schoolmaster: but to his
instance, suppose the Army or any part of it were necessitated to be in such
places upon the Lords day, where they could not enjoy the preaching of the Word
for their comfort and edification, if upon such an occasion some gifted man
amongst them (as there were many such, both Scholars from the Universities and
others) should handle a piece of Scripture for their mutual edifications, and
the better helping of themselves to employ the Lords day in holy exercises,
according to the Commandment; would any sober, modest, pious Presbyterian be
offended hereat? I believe no such thing, but rather that they would willingly
join therein, both to hear what should be profitably delivered by others,
and, being gifted, and thereby by fitted thereunto, take their turns to do
the like upon like occasion themselves: Has this man's malice so far
transported him, that he will be transformed thereby into a Popish or
Prelaticall garb, to suffer none to handle the Word for exhortation, and
edification one of another, except he be first made by them a Deacon, or have
added thereunto afterward the indeleble character of a Priest at large, a
Minister without a charge, a Pastor without a Flock, and an unfixed wandering
Star, as the Prelates to uphold and maintain their usu^ped power over the
Ministers, use to do? though they seem to be at a great distance and deadly
feud, yet examine things fully, and in the point of usurpation of power, under
pretense of Order, and preventing Confusion and Anarchy, which is that they use
to pretend and hold forth, you shall find Prelates and their classical
Presbyteries differ little or nothing: That Tyranny, which is used over
Churches and the Members thereof by the one in a Diocese, is exercised in a
Circuit containing many particular Churches by the other, the difference being
nothing at all in the things done, but in the persons by whom they are done,
here by O^e, there by a Few; the one, or few having neither of them any warrant
from the Word of God, for the power they usurp and exercise; this he has led
me into by being so perremptory in undertaking that no Presbyterian will
consent unto, much less practice the exercise of the gift of Prophecy, for
mutual edification by a Man being out of Office, which either for probation,
or mutual edification, may be done upon occasion, and I dare say, many Godly
men of Presbyterian judgment, will assent thereunto; let this general
undertaker undertake what he pleases, and best serves his present turn, what
his Scotch Classical meetings, which they call their Presbyterian Churches,
will do, I know not. Yet by this I have spoken, I intend not to justify all
that has been done of this kind in these times; for it may be upon pretense,
and under the name of a time of Liberty to all men, as many other things have
been done, which no good man or wise will justify; so in this particular, many
ignorant and yet conceited men of their own abiliti ^, it may very well be,
have too often taken upon them to handle the Word of God unskilfully, and
thereby taken the Name of God in vain, presuming above that which was meet for
men of their gifts and abilities; and this the weakest men are aptest to run
into, but the abuse (which often falls out of the best things) must not take
away and condemn the right use thereof.

In his l^st Observation, he speaks of w^inging or stealing the Sword out of
the Parliaments hands, and this he brings in, to take occasion to fall into his
so often reit^rated, and so notoriously false Discourse of the Scots
Presbyterians (as he here calls them) putting the Sword into the Parliaments
hands, and also keeping it there; but because they are the same things I have
so fully spoken to before, I will not trouble my selfe-here again with them,
there being nothing new in what he here says, but in the last particular of
stealing the Sword out of their hands, for which; he says, he knows none, nor
fears none, but those who deny them to have any power in Church affairs; and
I say, who those are, whether Independents, or their classical Presbyteries,
especially their general Assembly, let the world judge; for these are so far
from acknowledging the supreme civil Authority in their Church affairs, that
they do hold the supreme authority in the State, not only obliged to submit
to their determinations in their general Assembly, but also bound by civil
sanction to establish in the Kingdom, what they shall in the Assembly resolve
and determine in Church matters, which In ordine ad Spiritualia they will
extend far enough; here is an Independency not to be paralleled but by the
Pope, neither can He at this time, and in this age fly so high, his wings
having been of late clipped. Thus in respect to his simpler sort whom he would
abuse, I have put my self to the trouble to discover this simplicity, and
falsity of his multiplied Observations upon this piece of Cromw^lls Letter,
which he that reads without prejudice and malice, will find nothing to
observe in, but a Christian affection, and desire from thence, that Peace and
Love may be maintained between Breth^en, and the Magistrates power (which is
acknowledged) may be exercised rather for the preservation thereof, than, to
humor violent men, be employed in a rigid way of compelling Uniformity in
matters of outward fo^me, which always has been obse^ved to overthrow unity
of spirit in things of Religion which are substantial.

Having in this piece of a Letter, met with the name of Independents, his
spleen is so stirred, that he cannot give over till (as his usual manner is)
he has railed, slandered, and lied sufficiently, though very hardly can he
think any thing sufficient of this kind, and upon this occasion, till another
point fall into his fancy and put it out, and then you shall have him say as he
does here, no more of this now; but the next time enough, though the same
things over again, old lies rather than none in this case. The prime sticklers
of the Independents, he says, have scrued themselves in the service of the
Parliament, and elsewhere into employment, to make the world believe they are
the men that do ^ll, and the only Patriots, and for this end he says, they
have gained most of the scribbling Pamphleters in the City, to set forth lies
and tales for them, and they must be the only men named and proned (his own
term) in Churches, if they chance to be where any action is with success,
though they have but little hand in it: to set down In terminis these his
lies, to those who know the men he aims to disgrace thereby, is a sufficient
conviction of his falsehood, and manifestation of that envy, which gnaws and
eats out his stomach; for the known fidelity and ab^lity of those men, whom he
would cast these lies upon, having brought them into the Parliaments service
and employment, and God having pleased to answer their faithfulness and
diligence in doing service, with success, this so increases his disease, that
he is ready to burst for envy at it, and from thence come these slanders,
contrary to the known truth, not having the least shadow of any proof for any
of them; for let him instance in one of those men he flies our upon with these
lies, and makes it apparent enough he aims at in this scurrile Discourse of
his, who has not rather been sought after, than sought employment; and been
desired rather for the Parliaments service, than scrued themselves into it;
being put into employment in the Parliaments service, they have endeavored to
do the best they could to answer the trust reposed in them as good Patriots,
not to do little or nothing, and then, as he says, to be thought to do all,
but have done so much in the knowledge of all men, and confession of those, who
without envy and malice look upon it, that they need not Pamphleters to tell
lies and tales for them, nor proning in Churches (to use his Scotch phrase) the
things done, and services performed, speaking sufficiently for them without
these. But who can choose but observe here in this man, that which common
experience manifests to be true? Such as man are themselves, such they judge
other men to be; for has there been, or can there be found out amongst them
all such a practice of Pamphleting, to set forth the praises of men that have
indeed done little or nothing, and to make the world believe they are the men
who have done all, as this scriblers Pamphlet set forth to magnify the Scots?
I may well say this scribbling Pamphleter compared with all the Pamphleters
about the City, or in the Kingdom, is to them all like one of the Sons of
Anack, and they all but like Grasshoppers to him in this respect; therefore he
or they who set him about this work, being conscious to themselves of their
own practice, should have done much more wisely to have forborne to charge
others falsely, with that which they knew themselves so apparently guilty of;
for what man will not readily hereupon hold up this Pamphlet (which all men see
to be set forth for that purpose) before this scriblers eyes, and theirs he
scribles for, and bid them therein see their own faces as in a Glass? the
foolish man has very often brought forth such Glasses, thinking therein to
show the world an ugly face, which he would represent for theirs he scribles
against, when being brought forth into the light, it has too clearly held
forth the visage of those his Pamphlet is scribled for, I have formerly showed
how little right he has done them thereby; he goes on railing, and takes the
name of God in vain, saying, God knows those things, which indeed he does
know to be most falsely spoken of them he intends, by his Independents, that
they are the cause of disturbances, Blasphemies, damnable Heresies, and what
else his foul mouth belcheth out against them: the time will come, when if
this railing man prevent it not by his repentance, which I desire for him, he
will know to his cost, all these things to be as base slanders, as any wicked
man could cast abroad against the Children of God, and that these mad and
damnable Heresies, which have run about, have been much more hateful to the
men he intends to brand with them, than to himself and his fiery
Presbyterians, whose zeal is more for the Sc^tch kir^e government, as
appears by him, than for the truth. He now b ings in his hopes, and sh^weth
what his desires are by his assurance, Credimus quod cupimus; that is, That as
God is bringing low the public Enemy, so he will pull down erelong the
undermining Independents: Well look to it, that for your uncharitable wishes
and desires, the same things fall not upon you Zealots for an Idol of you s, a
humane device, and policy, which you wish and desire to befall those, who
endeavor to serve God in truth, according to his Will revealed in his Word,
both in respect of Doctrine and Discipline: let the remembrance of these words
bring you to r^pent for such unchristian and uncharitable hopes, desires, lies,
and slanders as this Pamphlet is full of, With what measure you mete, it shall
be measured again unto you.

That which follows is nothing else but a manifestation of the same spirit of
Malice, Falsehood, and Envy; for finding well-deserving in the men, and not
being able to deny the services performed by them, he will invent some matter
to detract from their merit, as Envy always does, though never so false and
foolish, and that here he does, beginning with nonsense: If it were against a
Foreign Enemy, he says, he would acknowledge the service done by the
Independents, to be the part of good Patriots; but the case is otherwise here,
we have a civil War for Religion and Liberty, both which, the declared
Enemy, though intestine, would subvert and spoil by any means, if he could,
and set up Tyranny; and what then? there he leaves, lest he should fall into
one of these two, either to praise the Independent as a good Patriot for his
service herein; or else say, that to help or assist against those that
endeavor to subvert Religion and Liberty, though by an intestine War and
Enemy, were not praiseworthy: what a foolish argumentation have we here? he
would make a difference, where, in respect of the good service done, there is
no difference, but this that is to their advantage, that assisting in the
later, (a Civil War against Religion and Liberty to overthrow both) makes
the service, in resisting thereof, to be of greater merit, because it
manifests greater sincerity to Religion and Liberty, from the defense whereof
no private relations could withdraw them, and so makes his Objection most idle,
therefore in the end he breaks off abruptly, and concludes just nothing from
the difference he had begun withal: the Man had run himself clean out of
breath with railing, and so sits down as one at a loss, who knew not where he
was, nor what he had said, and what to say next. The rest is all of the same
stuff, false, foolish, ridiculously foolish, as the Reader may observe, and
has been often before showed; therefore I will not take the pains to run
after him any farther, in this idle piece of the Discourse, which makes it
appear his malice can hardly end, no not when it grows to be ridiculous in the
eyes of any judicious man, if the subject of his Discourse be the men that he
thinks will never be brought to worship his Idol, for his spleen so blindes
him, that be sees not, this difference casts out his Scots with all their
great services from being good Patriots, as much as the Independents.

We are come at last to that wherewi^h he closes up this his Pamphlet, framed
for such a purpose, together with the extolling of his Countrymen, and making
excuses for them (whereof they had need enough) such at least as he could,
being the second particular I before spoke of, wherein the Reader may see what
has been hatching by this Pamphlet, the other Paper-practises, Manifesto's,
Libells, and such like, spread about the City by this Incendiary and his
accomplices, sent up and down the Town as fit Emissaries for such a design: the
Egg was brought forth, but miscarried in the hatching, therefore he would let
you see what it should have been, if the Parliament would have received it: A
Petition to be offered by a Company of his well-meaning people, prepared by
such artifices as these for that purpose; and the Petition, as is most
probable, prepared before hand for them; that the Parliament wanting wisdom in
the matte s of his Religion, that is, his Scotch Kirk Government, might be
better instructed by his simpler sort, stirred up by the seditious practices
used by him, and those of his counsel and party, whose Emissary he was The
Parliament wanting zeal also for his good cause in hand, and being neglectfull
of their Oath and Covenant, which he will interpret for them, as may serve his
turn, might be reproved for their slacknesse, and by his well-meaning people
directed and prescribed the time when to do these businesses they are entrusted
with, and also what they shall do therein; which if the like had come unto
them in the times of peace from the King himself, they would have accounted it
(as it is well known to be) so great a breach of the Privileges of the
Parliament, that they would have sat still, as they have done, in that case,
and meddled with no business until they had been righted therein: for by
Privilege of Parliament, None is to take notice of what is in agitation in the
Houses, until they themselves shall publish it: and this is to be observed
even between the two Houses one toward another, or they will, and constantly
do complain of breach of privilege, if either House shall offer to do any
such things to the other; how much less may such a thing be offered by private
men, who are all involved in the Houses that represent them, and therefore as
they have entrusted them wholly with the management of all businesses, so are
they to refer the same unto them, and wait their resolutions and determinations
therein, not so much as taking upon them to take any notice how they are
proceeded in, or stand in either House, until the Houses shall communicate
them one to another, and then declare them publicly to the King and Kingdom:
therefore the impuden: falsehood of this shameless Pedant may appear herein,
that he is bold to impute the Houses not receiving this Chicke of his hatching,
and his sitting on, as is most likely, unto the practice of Independents; when
as the house would rather have punished it, had it been offered, as a gross
breach of their Privileges, than entertained any Petition of that nature.
Next, as his manner is, he sets up Objections of his own framing, and then
frames Answers to them, like a bold Ignoramus, that will be meddling in things
he understands not, which wi^h him is very usual: He talks of other Petitions
offered to the Houses; not being able, or wilfully neglecting to distinguish
between such a Petition as this is, and Petitions that are usual and agreeable
to duty, as when by Petition men shall present their readiness upon all
occasions to obey and serve the Parliament, and this in testimony of their good
affections to them, which these times ministered occasions for, and whereof
consisted most of the Petitions he ignorantly compares with this, or otherwise
when men shall make known some to the Parliament grievances, and thereupon the
humble desires of some Counties or Towns, which before they had not been
acquainted with, not taken cognizance of; in these Petitions there is presented
in the one dutiful affections, with promise of obedience to the Houses, for to
encourage them in difficult times as these were; in the other there is offered
unto them some grievances not before known unto them, with desire that they
would take them into consideration, and so leaving them wholly to their
determination whom they have entrusted with all: but this Petition is of a far
other nature, taking notice of what lies in consideration before them, of their
slacknesse in proceeding in it, and directs what they are to do, and the time
when, that there be no longer delay in the business; then they come in with
their Reasons and Arguments to enforce the same, as if the Houses wanted such
men as these are to instruct them how, and when they should proceed in the
business that lay before them: had such a Petition been laid down, and drawn
in the fairest terms, and humblest manner, that a much modester, and beter pen
than this man's, could have expressed it in, yet could it not but have been
accounted worthy to be rejected as a very great and gross breach of privilege
of Parliament, as all men know, who are acquainted with privileges of
Parliament. For his farther prosecution of this business in justification of
the Petition, first by railing against Independents, and then by the silly
Objections nothing to the purpose made by himself, and as sillily and little
to the purpose in this case, answered by him; the first being but the same
wherein I have so often before discovered his malice and false-hood; and for
the other having showed the nature of this Petition, and the privileges of
Parliament with which is cannot consist, so that all he speaks of Petitions to
Princes, and of our Prayers to God and such like, in this case must needs be
idly and ignorantly spoken, quite besides the matter and to no purpose; I
shall not therefore trouble my self any farther with it: only I desire here
again, that every man that reads him would from this, with which he ends,
observe what was the maine design of those who set this Pedant on work, to
spread this seditious Pamphlet, and many such other Papers, Manifesto's, and
lying Libells from time to time about the Town, and not thinking that
sufficient, in sending their Emissaries also into the Town, and upon the
Exchange, to inflame the multitude, and abuse the ignorant people by tales and
lies, to fill their heads with jealousies and suspicions against the
Parliament, and Parliament Men of greatest fidelity, because they would not be
brought to comply with them to the prejudice of this Kingdom, as I before have
often touched; it was that which you may see here they indevoured to b^ing
about by these unworthy means, and courses, if they could, that the multi^ude
seduced by their lying tales, might have been sti^red up, contrary to the
authority and privilege of Parliament, to come with such directing and
enforcing Petitions to gain these men's ends, and wrest from that Parliament
what they would have, though the Parliament (the only Judge of what is for the
Kingdoms and Peoples good) did not judge it to be so: Now for men who pretend
to Religion, to set on foot such practices as these in another Kingdom (into
which they came to assist the Parliament in maintaining their Rights and
Privileges against the oppression and force of the King) as to stir up the
people to infringe the Liberties, and break the privileges of Parliament as
they have often done, though in a disguised way, by their appeals diverse times
made to the City, when after they had put in their Paper into the Houses of
Parliament, they would print them, publish them, and pu^posely spread them
about the City, to make the City Judges between the Parliament and them: Nay
they proceeded so far, as to procure the States of Scotland to address
themselves to the City by their Letetrs, the Parliament sitting, as if they had
not been involved in the Houses of Parliament, and to be wholly subjected to
their determination: these unworthy practices, and such other as I have spoken
of before, acted by this, and other Emissaries of theirs, sent up and down the
Town for that end, let the World, and all honest men in it, be Judges of,
whether they do agree with those Virtues, which for their praise, this
Trumpeter of their great acts and services, spreads abroad so often, so
vainly, indeed so much to their disgrace; and let every wise man amongst
themselves consider, whether it had nor been much more for their advantages,
the Schoolmaster had been left to his proper employment, Tutoring his Boys,
than set on work to bring forth such a Manifest as this proves, being truly
examined?

I cannot choose but observe one thing more here, which sticks so fast in his
teeth, that he cannot be rid of it nor get it down, and that is the murmur of
the people for the Scots marching Northward, which he will meet withal again
in this last leaf, and notwithstanding all that he had said before to excuse
it, it seems his simpler sort, as he here says, cannot be satisfied with it:
No mervaile, for it was a thing so unworthy, and so great a dis-service, that
he must be a very simple man indeed, and ignorant, that could not discern it,
and therefore justly rest unsatisfied with it: neither can all his braggs
afterward, of the Scotch Nation and their carriage in this business (a thing
usual with him) for which he gives us nothing more than his bare word, nor his
exclamations against us, for our ill requiting of them, which has no better
evidence, ever be able to wipe out this Blot of their marching in that manner,
and to that end, and at such a time, Northward; nor indeed many other blots
which they, especially some of them, have cast upon themselves in these
businesses, and this Pedant in thinking to wash them off, will needs do them
the ill service to set them upon the stage in the open view of all men, which
his Manifest lies for them, and slanders cast upon other men, has been the
only occasion of.

I Have now done with this Fox that ran up and down the Town, like one of
Sampson's, with a Firebrand in his Tail, endeavoring to inflame the people,
and possess them with an ill opinion of the Parliament and their Proceedings,
that so they might be the better fitted and prepared to be made use of, by
those who set him on work, and set on foot such other like practices amongst
the people in the City for the end, thinking thereby to compass their designs.

I shall end with making an Apology for my self, that I, who often reproach him
for Un^haritableness, may be thought my self failing therein, because my
Answer to this Discourse of his in many places is somewhat tart and sharp. I
confess my heart does no way approve of overmuch sharpness in Polemic
writings; but this man, to pass by his vain and foolish boastings and braggs
of his Countrymen the Scots, and that to the disgrace of this Nation, not
easily borne withal by an English man, has in many places besides so basely
and falsely, in mine own knowledge, traduced and slandered truly pious and
godly men, charging them with those things that they abhor to think of, much
more to p^actise; and all this to the end to create offenses and scandalls, and
lay stumbling blocks in the way of those, who being well-affected people, see
not into his Design, which he covers over with the show of Zeal for the
Church, which he calls Religion, and who are likely thereby to be turned out of
the right way and made a prey of, if by pulling off the vizard and clearly and
fully discovering the foul face that lies hid under it unto them, they be not
disabused and preserved from being taken in this Grinn laid to entrap them,
that I therefore think it necessary in such a case (to use his own words, but
with more reason and upon better ground) to answer a Fool according to his
folly, lest he seem both to himself and to others, to their hurt, wise in
what he has most falsely said, and to as ill an end. The Vizard of Zeal for
Religion p^evailes very much with well-meaning people, as he terms them, in an
insinuating way, whom he would abuse and bring to give credit to his lies and
slanders, thereby to draw them to have an ill opinion, both of men, and of
ways of truth; therefore it is not only lawful, but necessary in such cases,
to discover unto the people such men and their practices to the full, which
they use to mask under the specious Nam^s of Truth and Religion, pulling off
their Vailes and Masks, and making their practices appear such as indeed they
are, that the people may be the better and sooner hrought to discern them,
hate them, and be kept from being insna^ed by them: and in this respect we see
what the Prophet Elijah did, and what his carriage was in jeering the Priests
of Baal, that he might thereby discover them and their falsehood and madness
the more apparently to the people: this was in him, and in like cases will be
so in others, the exercise of Charity; and no breach of Charity, to have more
respect to the people, that they may not be abused to their hurt, than to
those, and their credits who seek to abuse them; where I therefore have
endeavored to do the same in this particular, having the same End, and doing
nothing out of malice to the Party, (for whom I can desire and pray that being
hereby the more convinced of his falsehood in things of great^st concernment,
and of his slanders so often reiterated against men truly godly and of greatest
worth and merit, he may be brought to prevent the judgments of God by true and
timely repentance) I hope I may rest satisfied that I have not broke the Rules
of Charity in this Answer; and that others also will so account of it.

To conclude, I now leave it to those who are Indifferent and Unprejudiced, to
judge, by Whom Truth is manifested.

HAving had just occasion, in this my Answer, more than once to mention the
sending of Emissaries into the City, and upon the Exchange, such as Cranford to
vent notorious lies and base devised slanders, against honest men; that it may
appear to all the world what G^ound I had for that my Assertion, I shall here,
as an APPENDIX to the foregoing Answer, set down what was witnessed by one
Abraham Babington a Citizen, concerning that base slander, which Cranford
published openly upon the Exchange, going thither on purpose for that end: This
which Babington certified with others, as I remember, against Cranford, at the
Bar in the House of Commons, when Cranford had there first denied the thing,
made him acknowledge it, and for his excuse, he had nothing to say, But that
Mr. Baylie, one of the Scotch Commissioners and Ministers, wished him to do
it; but the least Proof thereof, or the least ground of suspicion for such a
thing, he could not show, nor never was by any produced. Cranford was fined as
I remember 500 l, and Imprisoned for breach of the Privileges of the House.
The Lords would never take any farther notice of it, in respect of their
Members, but despised so base a practice in such a person, having been openly
in the House of Commons, convinced of it, and so censured for it; Spreta
vanescunt: But a Member of the House of Lords, did go to Alderman Langham's
House, being a friend of his, to be satisfied, whether his two Sons would
witness this, or not; which they did both much to this pu^pose, and as I
remember, set it also under their hands. All that I wish concerning Cranford
(to whom I bear no malice) is, that he may truly repent for so base and false
a slander cast upon men of that Place and Worth, and to such an End, in such a
Time and Place: whether it were a Lie of his own inventing, or that he would
carry it about being invented by another, the 15. Psalm may admonish him to
repent for it. And as there could not be a baser Lie, than that of the Plot,
whereof neither He, nor any Man in the world, as I have said, could ever show
the least color or shadow of proof; so that which he farther adds
concerning a Committee of seven Lords, and 14. Commons appointed to examine it,
who would not meet together, because some of themselves were Parties, is easily
to be manifested to be a notorious false invented Lie; for there never was any
such Committee, nor any such thing thought of in the Houses; or heard of, to
appoint a Committee about, till he (as he says) was sent to publish it upon
the Exchange, for which he was presently sent for, and censured in the House,
where, if there had been any such Committee appointed, he would certainly have
alleged that in excuse of himself.

Being lately at Mr. Bellamy 's Shop in Cornhill, about Exchange time, there
came hastily into the Shop the second Son of Alderman Langham (who came
immediately from the Exchange) and asked me, if I heard the news (speaking also
to those in the Shop) I answered, I heard no news; No? answered he, there is as
dangerous a Plot discovered as has been known, which was related by him to
this effect; that a Sub-Committ^e of the grand Committee, or Committee of both
Kingdoms had, and did hold correspondency with the Kings party, endeavoring
to secure to themselves, their Estates and Lives, and in answer hereof engaged
themselves to deliver up into the Kings hands all such Towns, Forts,
Magazines, etc. as were entrusted in their hands, or what else, in furtherance
of the Kings Designs: This he affirmed that Mr. Cranford the Minister should
make public upon the Exchange, in the hearing of many, wishing (I mean Mr.
Cranford) that those that heard him would make it more public, and say to this
effect, and he would make all good; and says Mr. Langham, Mr. Cranford is now
come from the House, and therefore you need not doubt of it, as Cranford
himself had related. But within three hours after, going to the Excise
Office, with one of the Officers of Excise, I met, in Broadstreet, both
Alderman Langhams Sons, who were giving a large description of this
aforementioned business to Alderman Cullam, and after they had made it known
to the full, it fell to my share again to demand, if he could justify what
before he had informed me concerning the great Plot; the Elder Gentleman, with
the second, answered, that their Father had sent them both to M^. Cranford, to
know farther of the great Plot that he had made so public upon the Exchange;
Mr. Cranford (as they told me) seemed very glad to hear that they were sent by
their Father, (for so he expressed) saying, your Father is a stirring man, and
I desire he should know the full of it, which, says Mr. Cranford is thus;
There is a Sub-Committe, of the grand Committee of both Kingdoms, and this
Sub-Committee have indeavored to betray us and the Kingdom to save their own
Lives and Estates: In what manner would they have betrayed the Kingdom,
demands the Eldest Son? Mr. Cranford answers, Sir, the Plot is as dangerous a
Plot of Treason, as has been known for a long time; for says Mr. Cranford,
this Sub-Committee have held correspondency with the Kings party, and have
engaged themselves to give the King notice of all our designs, and do what
lay in their power, to deliver up all Towns, Forts, Castles, Magazines, and
that they would assist him to the utmost, provided they might have security for
their own Lives and Estates. Mr. Langham farther desired Mr. Cranford to tell
him who they were that thus endeavored to betray the Kingdom? Sir, ( says Mr.
Cranford) I have a Bedroll of Ten of them in my pocket, and you shall know who
they are, for says he, I desire they may be known, and to make the business
as public as I may; their names are these, viz. the Lord Say, the Lord
Wharton, Sir Henry Vane Junior, Mr. Solicitor, these are freshest in my
memory, therefore I insert no other, only the Lord of Northumberland; yea
farther, says Mr. Cranford, (according to these Gentlemen's relation) there is
a Committee of seven Lords and fourteeen Commons chosen to examine this Plot,
and an Order, That unless all were present, it should not be examined; and
that these seven Lords and fourteen Commons would not be got together, many of
them being parties in the Plot. This that I have told you (says Mr. Cranford)
you may make it public, and I will make it good; every part hereof I question
not but will be made good by those two Gentlemen before inserted: This very
relation to the full did I hear from them a third time the same Evening upon
the Exchange in the hearing of many; it being Mr. Cranfords desire to make it
public. This is the sum of what I heard from them.

Abraham Babington.

FINIS.

