REMARKS, AND Animadversions, On Mr. Keith's Two Sermons, Being his First after
Ordiantion, Preached at the Parish Church of St. George's Butolphs-Lane,
London, May the 12th. 1700. On St. LVKE i. 6. Now Impartially compared with his
former Writings, SETTING George Against Keith. And Endeavoring to Reconcile
them, By showing what he should have said upon the Subject.

By W. B. a Communicant of the Church of England.

LONDON, Printed for the AUTHOR; and Sold by the Booksellers of London and
Westminster, 1700.

Remarks and Animadversions on Mr. Keith's Two Sermons.
SINCE I understand that the late Reverend, though as yet not Right Reverend
George Keith, has entered into the Church as Jackdaws into the Steeple to
build, and hatch there; entering almost undesired by any: so for ought I know
may dye unlamented: For I believe that the Church (as the Apostles did) will
not go to Prayers for such an other to succeed, and supply in his place; I
never heard that the present Church had, or used any such custom, though it was
common among the Churches of God in the days of old. I am not insensible that
that upstart Prelate, which whether out of fear, or trouble, or both, has done
that Outwardly, which I have some reason to think he Inwardly detests, since
this his Sermon was not a Recantation of his former Errors, which are
manifestly extant in his former Scriblings, which as I understand he has
neither Cried down in Church, nor Market, nor caused to be Burnt by the Hands
of the Common Hangman; but are left us still upon Record as Authentic: So that
it makes me, and some others think, that his Judgment differs from his present
Undertakings, having but clattered Gideons Rams-Horns and broken Pitchers
together, so as to affright his Conscience, and baisting it for being Scittish,
has made even an Ass of it, by causing the poor Jade to carry a Steeple which
it formerly hated: and all this because Brown Bread is better than no White.
All wise People do think that such an one should have given some Satisfaction
to the Church in general, which he had forsaken, and formerly so abused; he
might, and should then have told the People, that he came there to give
satisfaction more than to receive any; and showed himself there not for Worth,
or notorious Wickedness; but for Weakness, in not discerning and following all
the Commands and Ordinances which are Truths. If he had gone on, and humbly
craved a fair Construction, and favorable Acception; First of his Offenses
past, that his readiness to acknowledge them might pass for one degree of
Satisfaction, and his sudden Recantation for an other; so what was wanting in
Ripeness, should be supplied in Sincerity. But since none of this was heard to
come from his Mouth, but only the choice of a good Text, which he so mangled
and tore, that the sharpest Eye could not so discern as to know what it was
amongst all the Tautologies, and Impertinent, or Nonsensical stuff, which by
hard and long driving he forced from it; which made, it seems, some
well-meaning Christians to get some in Commission to send an Hue-and-Cry aftert
he forelorn Text, so as to overtake, arrest, and make the best of it; which I
am assured was done for the Honor and Reputation of the New Convert, and the
languishing Church which he pretends to be a Member of. But in my weak
judgment, any that forsakes his first or second Love, can, or will Never be
true to his Third.

So having seen the Post-Boy, May the 14th. which pretended to give the
Substance of the Sermons: And on May 16. meeting with an Advertisement, in
which the now Holderforth repayed not only the Post-Boy, but Mr. Brodford a
Printer also in the current Coin of Billingsgate; which made me the more
curious to inquire after his Former Pieces; the Post-Boy, and his Initiating
(which I judge should have been his Recantation) Sermons, not of some but all
his former Errors and Mistakes, whether wilfully, or ignorantly committed. So
having mustered so many as I could get together, I took the boldness upon me to
compare them, and so Remark on the Sermons: Now since the Printer has left us
Two Blank Pages, the reason of which, as I conjecture, is because the Post-Boy
has supplied us with Matter which they should have contained, being as was
observed such as did, and does naturally flow from the New Prophet: but like
the Bears young Ones (being now released from the Tautological I says) in time
Licked into Shape and Form. For if you read the Post-Boy, with his opening of
the Words, and compare them, they are the same; only some Additions are made,
which the Printer has forgot to tell us of, as he did in the Farewell Farce: For
page 6. he tells us by Tautologies, as the Post-Man does, That Hypocrites are
righteous before Men, though not righteous before God: and that walking signifies
journying, and traveling forward; only by a little Licking, he has changed the
Words, viz. (traveling forward) into that Phrase going forward, by progressive
motion, which amounts to a Tautology. And page 8. by Ordinances are understood
all the Ceremonial Precepts, etc. called in Heb. 9.1. Ordinances of Service
pertaining to the Temple: Which Text, and denomination, I suppose the Post-Boy
having only left out, being no Textuary, or caring to meddle with Holy Things.
Now the Observations he makes from the words thus opened are Three, from page
9. to 14. First, the State of the Jewish Church at that time to which the Text
relates, was very corrupt, for some did not believe one Fundamental Doctrine;
others put false glosses on the Scriptures, Matt. 15.3, 6, 7, 8, 9. Others had
Practices corrupt, and contrary to what they taught: there were Sons of Belial,
and Rebels, etc.

Alas this, and more has this self-same Demas said of the now established
Church, without any Recantation, as appears from his former Books, viz. The Way
cast up, page 36. I cannot, says he, in the least acknowledge that ever any
National Church can be a true Church of Christ (since they are a mixed and
confused rabble of Godless Atheists) it were wished that this, and all others
were true. But men should not make such preposterous haste to make National
Churches by mere humane Laws and Power: bare humane Laws, Edicts, and Decrees
will never do it; for indeed this has been the ground and rise of all
Persecutions, etc. For those that will have a National Church, will have all
others to bow and join with them; and is always a Persecuting Church, (its her
very Nature) so must always be exceeding Hypocritical, seeing she begets
Thousands to be her Children, and Members by mere Will and Power of Man, which
only makes Hypocrites. And for the Teachers, he further says, page 40, 41, 42.
That they have been generally, and for the most part, self-seeking,
worldly-minded, and covetous men, who loved Pleasure and Riches more than God;
and this the Magistrates did well know, and saw the best way to prevent, was to
Bribe them with Augmentations, and Benefices. The Preachers of the Waldenses
were Laymen most of them, and wrought with their Hands, as the Teachers of the
Primitive Church did, and had no Stipends, or Salleries, but Preached freely.
And Immed. Rev. page 30, 31. Although the Schoolmen and National Teachers
Doctrine, who generally being men void of all sense or feeling of God, have in
the blindness of their minds, and in the wisdom from below, which is carnal,
earthly, and devilish, framed and invented this perverse Doctrine for their own
gains and ends. And page 136. He tells us, That the Church is an Habitation for
Ravenous Beasts and Owls, etc. And down must all the proud lording, lofty
Clergy, with their many degrees of Doctorship, Lordship, and Mastership. And
assures us that it lay upon him from the Lord, and so bids all others To depart
from these Teachers which cannot point to the knowledge of the living God: Nay,
further, in his Rector Corrected, page 122, 123, 124. Is not the Popish Church
thy Grandmother? who has taught this destruction of Layick, and Clegy,
Secular, and Spiritual; for these she only calls Clergy, or Spiritual, who
are either Priests, or Bishops, or Popes, or in some such order the rest Laics
or Secular, whereas as the Apostle calls the whole Body of the People the
Clergy, or Inheritance of the Lord; have they less then of the Spiritual,
because they are Mechanics? And have ye (that call your selves the Clergy)
more, because ye understand the Tongues, and walk in Long Robes, and love the
chief Places in Assemblies, and are called Masters? Again, Are not such of the
Manmade Ministry ambitious? Do they not affect great Titles? Or if it be a sin
to affect them, is it not because they are vain, and sinful? Have not some of
the Clergy (so called) greater Titles now, than the Rabbis had of Old? as,
Your Grace, Your Holiness, Most Reverend Father in God, Right Reverend, etc.

Thus far George has been and is so possitive in the present State of our
National Church, that it is as corrupt both in Doctrine and Manners, as ever the
Jewish Church was in Zachariah's time.

Now comes Keith, and grants the same, making in page 13. only this
Supposition, If they be such, we must not forsake the Assembling our selves (as
Zacharias did) publicly with them. Whenas George says, We must depart from
them: Which is an Even and Equal Match, One against One; namely George against
Keith. But alas, to George's assistance comes without any blowing of his Horn,
the Noysie Post-Man with his Tautologies, and Impertinent Quotations of
Nonsense, and Texts of Scripture, as Isa. 29.13. and Nehem. 9.4, 5. which tells
us that these, even almost a Regiment of Foot, viz. Jeshua and Bani, Kadmiel,
Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani and Chenani, etc. stood upon the Stairs, etc.
-- Now Keith well knowing that two to one are odds at Football, so for
Peace-saith, as the rude Post-Man had said, as appears in page 14, 15. setting
down Isa. 29, 13. and Nehem. 9.4, and 5. only getting leave not to call over
all the Muster-Roll, but to stop with an etc. at Bani, and to sleep in an whole
Skin; he is content with Pottage thrice hot, provided he may but have so much
Meat as he can take out of the Pot with his Flesh-Fork; he cares not whether
out of Knowledge, Malice or Ignorance, if you call him Priest, as page 18. Though
George says, Its an odious and abominable Name; as Imed. Rev. p. 136. Now by
reason of the Aftertoon Harangue, the Fray begins again between George and
Keith, since the Rabbi has said, p. 21. That the Church under the Old
Testament was not carnal. Whenas George in the places before-cited, has
assured us, not only that under the Old Testament it was (but also all National
Churches whatsoever both were, and are) carnal, and not to be joined with. But
I find by our Young Master's words, that since there were some among the Jews,
who professed to have knowledge of the Law and divine Mysteries, so gathered
Disciples and Proselites to them, whom they taught apart; and for that were
called Rabbis, as page 11. This as he hints there, he has a mind to do; Nay,
further, since in p. 25. 26. he says, That as in the Jewish Church there were
great Faults both in the Rulers of it, and the People also, yet the true
Prophets did not separate from them, but reproved and represented them to the
Government, which established the Church. By which is covertly hinted, that he
being a true Prophet, designs fairly at some time or other, to represent the
Errors and Miscarriages of all the Church to the Supreme Governors; so that
here is fair Warning; Have at ye Sirs, for he is resolved to stick to the Church,
he will endeavor to have it cleansed. So in my judgment there is more danger of
Keith than of George: But since George, the Post-Boy, and some others, have
maliciously suggested and reported that Keith, as page 29. has put himself into
the Priests Office for a Piece of Bread. Now to pass over the rest of the
Fulsome and Impertinent Stuff, being weary of Remarking, I am at last resolved
to take poor Keith's part, and endeavor if possible to reconcile them; for I
am well informed, and assured, that he did not put himself into Orders for one
piece of Bread, but for whole Loaves; Lumps of Money, or Steeple upon Steeple.
George, I would and will not have my Friend Keith thus undervalued; and seeing
you were formerly Friends and Brethren in Iniquity, being false Prophets, as
Deuteronomy. 3. which taught the People to go astray, you now are punishable, as page
30. unless you make Satisfaction; for though you have a Tolleration by our Laws,
yet the Laws of God will not excuse you. So be sure that the next Oration you
make to the People, to stick to the Text, and tell them as I have, or if I had
time, sincerely for your and the Churches good, would have told what all the
Commands and Ordinances are to be so observed, as to be Blameless.

Afternoon Sermon.
LUKE i. 6. And they were both Righteous, walking in all the Commandments and
Ordinances of the Lord blameless.
HAving in my foregoing Discourse in the Words of the Text, first shown you
what the True Faith and Church is, and where found; secondly, what that
Righteousness is, which makes any Blameless. So 3dly, and lastly, I come now to
declare what the Commands and Ordinances were, and are. The Commands (besides
those 10 which are called the Moral Law, which our Lord and Savior came to
fulfill, as Matthew. 5.17.) are not many, however, whosoever shall shall break one
of the least Commandments, and shall teach Men so, he shall be the least, and
guilty of the breach of the whole, James 2.10. Our Lord, the wise and good
Lawgiver, to take the Scandal and Folly of the Old Law, which the Pharisees had
put upon it by their false glosses, the first of which he takes notice of, was
that mentioned by St. Matthew 5.43. where he says, It has been said, thou
shall love thy Neighbor, and hate thine Enemy: And verse. 44. But I say unto
you, love your Enemies: Which as St. John 13.34. tells us, our blessed Lord
calls a New Commandment; which same Evangelist tells us in his 1 Epist. John
3.7. was a Message even from the beginning, as old as either the Law of Nature
or Moses's: but as most of the Ancients conceive this Commandment of our
Savior's was termed New, being an Hebraism, it therefore must (as one of the
Fathers says) be accounted most excellent of all, or a rare, choice, and
special one, unum praeque omnibus unum (i. e.) One above all others; and as Mr.
Calvin Paraphrasing upon it, says, Christ would have us perpetually mindful of
that, as if it were a Law newly enacted: For we (says he) know that Laws at
the first making of them are carefully looked into, and diligently observed;
but by degrees wear out of Men's Memory, and in the end grows into disuse: And
for that end Christ recommended this as a New Commandment, and being also
propounded in a new Form. For in the Law it run thus, Love thy Neighbor as thy
self; but in the Gospel, Love one another as I have loved you; that is in some
case more than your selves. Now a Law may be said to be New, out of a double
consideration, first, either in respect of the thing commanded, if it be such a
thing as before never fell under any Law, which caused the Proverb, Novus Rex
nova lex, New Lords, New Laws; because or for the most part new Governors, or
Rulers, bring in New Customs, proclaim New Edicts, and settle New Orders in
Church or State: Or secondly, in respect of the New Act of Commanding: So an
Old Statute when its revived, an Old Book reprinted, an Old Fashion laid aside
for a long time and again taken up, may be called a New One. So that in both
these respects the Command may be said to be New. So to love our Enemies, is
first, to wish and desire; and 2dly, to do well to them: for to think well of
and toward another, to wish and desire their welfare is the Soul, and to do
them that Good which is wished them is all the Body, of real and true Love,
which must and will express it self variously according to the different
conditions of its object, and the diverse degres of its own power; for if the
thing loved be very good, then Love is to put on the Garment of Gladness, and
is delighted in it; if it be in very bad estate, and destitute of good, then
Love is to turn into Pity to commisserate: If it be unable to help, then it
stays in Desires and good Wishes: but if it has any power, it exerts it, and
goes into Action to be Blameless. Now its manifest that the Pharisees, or they
Pharasaically inclined, wholly adheared to the Traditions of the Elders, and
the Opinions of their Doctors and Rabbis; for their Carriage was such, as
showed they thought themselves not only permitted, but commanded to desire and
do Evil to their Enemies, and all were such in their esteem, who were not Jews
or Proselites: therefore they denied them common Offices of Civility; yea,
would not so much as direct a Stranger in his Way, if he were out of their
Religion; and besides, called them by most uncivil Names, such as Dogs, etc. in
paying them by Fraud or Violence: I could heartily wish that none of the Spawn
were to be found now amongst us; but to my Shame be it spoken, such was I
formerly, but now thanks be to God, I am washed and cleansed from such
Pollutions; and for the future will endeavor to observe and keep this New
Commandment to be Blameless, etc. The Substance then of that New Command, as I
humbly conceive is in my thoughts (to love our Enemies) not that we should love
any thing that is Evil to us, and tends to our Ruin as such; nor that we should
not endeavor and take the best and likeliest Ways to free our selves from a
bad estate; nor that we should not do and desire some Evil to Men, who may be
our Enemies, provided that it be in order to a greater Good than its
Depravation of to themselves, or others, and not inconsistent with their
Happiness: but that we desire, and do as much as we can of good to them, who
designs and does the worst Evils to us: For first, consider that though they are
our Enemies, yet by their evil design we may often be the better for them, though
they may intend no less than our ruin, as some did mine formerly, yet it often
proves our Advancement; yea, the very Blow by which they would kill, often
cures, so that the Sword becomes a Lancet; and the Enemy which designs to make
Wounds, proves a Surgeon, and heals them. True, this being besides their
Intention, we perhaps may think they do not merit our Love or Thanks the more:
but since they prove Instruments of Good to us, we should and must love the
Cause, as Joseph did: Why should not we then as well love those that do us good
against their Wills, as those that do it without any Will at all? though they
have many evil Designs, and mischievous Devices against us, yet these do but
make us more cautious and circumspect, more exact in what we say and do than
otherwise we would be; which is a Spur to make us do our best, etc. Friends are
often so blinded with Passion, that they can see nothing that is amiss in us;
nay, if some had fewer Friends, and more Enemies, they had been much better
then they are: Therefore we must love Enemies as we do Poisons that are mixed by
a learned and careful Physician, being made sovereign Medicines to cure our
Diseases. 2dly, Though they are our Enemies, and do evil to us, yet there is some
good in them; let us love them then for the sake of it, and imitate our Maker:
its but just that we prosecute and destroy the Wickedness of any, but let us
spare and save the Creature, for its God's Image. Physicians do never cut off
any part of the Body, which is so corrupted, until there is no hopes of a Cure:
And in the Body Politic, its certain that the relatives of an Offender are not
involved in his Sufferings, where the offense is not very great: nor then
unless it can be supposed that they were Partners with him; or it be necessary
for the Public, and greater Good, both to demonstrate a greater Severity
against such Crimes, as thereby to terrify Men, and also to engage all
Relations to concern themselves in one another well doing; like to this should
our carriage be to those that hate us. Pray are there no hopes that the Evils
may be removed from the Lives and Minds of the Person without their ruin? Try
if there are: Nay, it is hard to say that any are so much our Enemies, that they
will never be our Friends: God may and can turn their Hearts. 3dly, (...) must
never do any Evil which will make it impossible for our Enemies to be happy;
they are vital parts, which must in no wise be cut off, unless the case is very
desperate. True, they are Men liable to Errors, but yet (as I was) capable of
Information: they are God's Image, and our Flesh and Bone, let us not be angry
with them if they have hitherto loitered, and comes to be hired at the Ninth
Hour: Let us imitate our Lord and Master, and (as he has loved us) so love one
another; and reward them as well for one Hour, as if they had labored all the
Day. Yet what if our Enemies be Infidels, evil and foolish, or no Christians,
having put off common Civility and Humanity? verily the greater than is their
Misery: but since they are not Devils, being as I was, capable of a recovery,
the more compassionable are their case, therefore to be pitied; for its
unnatural Cruelty, monstrous Inhumanity and hellish Malice, to hate and
prosecute any in Misery; What if they be our Enemies? they are Friends to many
others as good if not better than our selves; and cannot we be satisfied with,
and love that which is our particular Interest, if others receive Advantage by
it: For if the Rain that overflows me, makes my Neighbors Field fruitful, I
ought not to (and must not) dislike it: or if the Sun warms thousands by its
heat, and scorches me, or the Season by which I suffer, favors many others, I
am not to be displeased: we are all God's People, and Sheep of his Pasture,
therefore we have the greatest engagement laid upon us to mutual Kindness and
Good Will; nay, that Christian Virtue is more innocent, and does less harm to
both our selves and others; and as we find by sweet experience, ordinarily
prevails upon others to lay aside all malicious thoughts: for we are naturally
prone to imitate, as with the Froward to learn Frowardness, and with the Loving
Love; and further, there is no reason imaginable to hate one that loves us,
because we only hate that which is evil to us; but if any Person love us, we
cannot think he does us evil, since he designs and will do us good: so that if
we hate such, we hate our own good. To conclude this Command, our returning
Love for Hatred, quenches the violence of it: for the common Observation is,
if the Sun shine upon the Fire, it will put it out: so Love takes away the Heat
and Fuel from those unnatural and consuming Fires, destroying both the Parent
and Nurse of Enmity, viz. Hatred and Evil, which would have propagated and
preserved it; yea, this is the firm Foundation of a lasting Peace, even that
which passes our Understanding, obtaining an answer to all our Petitions, by
forgiving as we would be forgiven; and as St. 1 John 3.22. says, Then
whatsoever we ask we shall receive of him, because we keep his Commandments,
and do those things that are pleasing in his sight: And these are his
Commandments, to believe on Jesus Christ, and love one another, even our
Enemies, as he gave us Commandment so as to be Blameless. The Second
Commandment which our Savior gave his Apostles, is mentioned by St. Mat.
28.18, 19, 20. All Power is given unto me in Heaven and Earth. Go ye therefore
and teach (that is to make Disciples) all Nations, Baptizing them, etc.
teaching them to observe all Things whatsoever I have commanded you, etc. In
which Words our Savior first Asserts, and Declares his own Commission, showing
his Apostles that what he did was not the result of his own private Judgment,
but the Exercise of Authority which was given him of his Father; who had
confirmed unto him a full Power of ordering, and disposing whatsoever belonged
to the Church. But since in his own Person he must Ascend and leave them: he
gave them their Deputation by sending the Holy Spirit the Comforter to be with,
and Comfort them to the end of the World: And since they were Mortal, he gave
them Power to Depute others to succeed them in them same Care, and to deliver
down the same Power successively to the end of the World; it is then without
doubt by that Promise that our Savior intended some Benefits to the Church,
which should be of no less continuance than it self: So the Apostles were to be
the first Dispensers of those Benefits: Now the Benefits as appears from the
Commission were these these, First, Teaching, Secondly, Baptising, and some
other Things which he had Commanded, as the Taking and Eating of the Bread, and
Drinking the Cup, which was to be a showing of his Death to the end of the
World: And the Exercising Censures against the Obstinate and Sinful, such as
Elimas the Sorcerer, as Act 13. etc. Now These were either to end with the
Apostles, or they were not, if they were then to end: The Church ever since
their Deaths has been without such, which amounts only to this, that there has
been no Church since their Decease. Or if they did not end with the Apostles,
but have always been, and are still to be exercised unto the end of the World:
then there ever must have been, and now must be fit Persons: Which like to the
Apostles, must have a just Power to dispense these Benefits, or exercise these
Offices; for no less can be conceived to have been intended by Christ in his
Promise, of being with his Church to the end. Now when the great Bishop of our
Souls ordained his Apostles, it was according to the Tenor of his own
Ordination, As my Father sent me so send I you, Luke 4.18. And said John 23.21,
22. Receive ye the Holy Ghost. The case is the fame in Matthias, Saul and
Barnabas, as Acts 1.24. and 13.2. and in those which the Church made Overseers
or Bishops, as Act. 20.28. and Ephesians. 4.11. and we have no reason at all to
doubt, but that the Spirit does as truly, though not so visibly assist at the
present Ordaining of Ministers, as then since the Church Prays for, and bids
them receive the Holy Ghost for the Office and Work of a Priest in the Church
of God, now committed to such by the Imposition of Hands. And since many say
that the Gospel-Priesthood is left open to all that will enter it without any
further Ceremony, than a geting up and Ride, or a jumping from the Shop-board
to the Pulpit or Desk. Now to the sober Consideration of such, I Humbly
recommend the ensuing Particulars, as First, Since St. Paul setting down the
Nature of a Church, Styles it the Body of Christ, where he means not a Similar
Body, such as Fire, Air, and Water, where all the parts are alike, and perform
the same Office: But a Body consisting of Diversity of Organs for several
Faculties, and Operations, such a Body as is not one Member, but many knit
together with Unity and Charity, as with a band of Health, as 1 Cor. 12.
designed to Manifest that in the Church of Christ; it is as Monstrous and
Impossible for all he Teachers or Governors, as for the Body to be all Tongue
or Eye: And that it is as Preposterous, and Destructive for all Promiscuously
to thrust themselves into the Ministry, when the Spirit moves as for the
Members of a Man's Body to desert their Natural Situation, and all to press
into the same Place; nay, besides if according to some Men's Fancies, Abilities,
be all that is requisite to make a Clergyman or Teacher, then it is highly
reasonable to make due inquiry into those, so as to be duly and truly informed
of their Nature and Reality. Now what Abilities soever any can pretend unto
must either be infused, or acquired: If any then assume the Office of a
Teacher, merely upon the pretense of infused Abilities, or extraordinary Gifts,
then it is just with the Apostles to put them upon the proving such by that sort
of Testimony, which was ever required in such a Case, to show them by working
some Miracles: For if such bold Pretenders are to be Credited upon their own
bare Word, how easily then will every confident Creature, only by rubbing their
Forehead with Brass, pretending extraordinary Gifts and Abilities; so by a mere
bellowing Cozen, the Silly and Ignorant; do belie the Holy Ghost, from whom all
real Gifts come, and consequently destroy all Order in the Church, but we are
commanded not to believe every Spirit, but to try them whether they be of God,
since the Charge which is undertaken is no less than the cure of Souls: For the
great Shepherd would not have his Sheep to wander up and down, (least they go
astray and be lost) without any to feed them: You know what a strict Command he
laid upon Peter to feed his Sheep and Lambs, and which he Faithfully Executed,
and Exhorted his fellow Elders or Ministers to do the like, as 1 Pet. 5 1, 2.
Feed the Flock of God, which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not
by constraint, but willingly: Not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready Mind. Now if
these who are so forward to take upon them the Ministerial Office, would
maturely revolve that it brings with it a charge of Souls, of which one Day
they must give an Account, etc. This might perhaps not a little Cool their
Heat, and the due Apprehension of the weightiness of the Burden would allay
the Presumption of their Abilities: Nor will it less deserve a serious
Consideration, that if all have a right to the Ministry, then all have a right
to be maintained by it, as Saint Paul proves from the Law of Moses, instancing
in the Ox and Labourer, the one not to be muzled, and the other worthy of his
Hire: So arguing from common Equity, that since Spirituals were Ministered unto
them, it is no great matter if they reap their Temporals; since as he concludes
those that Preach the Gospel must live by it: A double Portion both of respect
and maintenance being due to them, as 1 Timothy 5.19. to free them from the
distracting Troubles of the World, enabling them to the oblidging Offices of
Charity and Alms-Deeds, as to be not only apt to Teach, but given to
Hospitality, which Consideration, if the Pluralists will not have regard to,
it is hoped, and wished the Grand Council will, and make as good and wholesome
Provision for Pluralities of Parsonages as are for Wives, and put a restraint
upon the Overseers or Elders of the Church, to make them for the future more
Provident, as not to admit more to be ordained, than they are indeed bound
(though are not yet willing to maintain) and that an Eye be had toward Personal
Perfections, as well as Abilities, and Honesty of Descent, as well as Probity
of Manners, and not to make Priests of the lowest for Interest or Favor.
Thirdly, Nothing will serve some, but they must and will be Teachers, and
through either an Envious Faction, or a Mistaken Zeal, they will detain that
which is due, or be Fingering the hallowed Censor, and the Holy Fire. I leave
such to the Consideration of their Ancestors, viz. Corah, Dathan, Abiram, and
Vzziah; First for Instruction, and then for Afrightment, for diverse
Inconveniences have befallen: And consequently will unavoidably attend both
Church and State by this, as First, They let some Presumptuous of their
Abilities, to take upon them to become Teachers, has proved, and will again
make even Preaching it self; which many in this Age account the All of
Religion, to become Weak and Contemptable, by being exposed to all the
Incongruities, Follies, Dotages, and Imposters of the Ignorant, and Confident,
of the Crafty and Deceitful, making the Scripture it self our only Rule, to be
Hourly liable to such Freakish and Will Expositions, as will make it most
unlike it self, and least able to be that, which it was designed, viz. a
complete Rule of Faith, and Conversation, Truth, and Holiness. And that there
is more than a possibility of what I speak, those have sufficiently informed
us, who have Expounded the Scripture as their Humors and Wills would have it
speak; by Commenting Upon the Laws and Commands, till they left in them no
Obligation; making God's Word speak according to their Interest or Passions,
and so expose Religion to perpetual Corruptions. And Secondly such doings will
have but little influence upon the Peace, and safety of the State to God: For
when every one has a liberty to teach what, and whom he pleases: We may
conclude from the Natural Pride of Men, that each will desire to raise a Sect,
and become Head of a Party, over whose Consciences when they have once got a
competent Power, it will not be long till they have both their Persons, and
Fortunes at their Devotion; then their gathered Churches will be soon trained
into an Army: There being no fitter Materials of New Troops, than new
Proselites, who being employed in the first warmth and briskness of their Zeal,
will not stick at any attempt tending to the advancement of their Way, and to
the Removal of whatsoever obstructs their Design: And though the pretense of all
this be Conscience, and Zeal for the Lord, the removal of Abuses, and the
public Welfare: Yet every Malecontent will help to the increase of the Cry: So
that all the Sons of Ambition, Coveteousness, Envy, and Revenge will empty
themselves into the Faction; and those who least care for Religion, will then
make it their pretext to ruin that which is Established, and therewith the
State: The sad Truth of which Observation, dear bought Experience has and now
does every where attest, etc.

The Third Command or Ordinance, which the great Apostle places before the last
mentioned in Heb. 6.2. The Doctrine of Baptisms, which is an initial Principle,
and fundamental Point of Christian Religion: And since, as Mr. Dell says, p.
2. There are, and have been, many which have, and do maintain diverse Errors and
Opinions, even for some long time; some now taking such Opinions up only upon
trust, and without consulting or advising with the Learned, entertains them as
sure and certain: Now to free those from their former mistakes, and
consequently from their Errors; I know of no other way than wholly to forsake
these Doctrines, sucked in with their Mothers Milk, which are turned to natural
Food and Nourishment, and totally adhere to the Pure and Unerring Word of God,
and not bring Hearts to it preposest with Doctrines and Opinions learned of
their Grannums, but to come with Hearts and Consciences free, and not
pre-ingaged, in all Meekness, Uprightness, and Simplicity of Heart, to hear
what the Holy Jesus, with his faithful and true Witnesses, viz. the Apostles
have, and do say, touching the Point, and so receive and believe that alone,
though never so differing from the Opinions and Doctrines of some, nay, of many:
Though such are and may be offended at it; yet I have chose rather to build on
the clear Word, though alone, than on any blind Conjectures, though magnified and
embraced by many. Thus far Mr. Dell to p. 5. So as he further says, In my
inquiry, meeting with that place in Heb. 6.2. where the Apostle speaks of the
Doctrine not only of Baptism, but Baptisms in the plural number, which made me
think and conclude, that there belongs to every adult Christian, more than one
Baptism; and what these then were, being such necessary, principal and
fundamental Points: I thought it my bounden Duty to enquire out, and with Mr.
Dell, p. 8, 9. have gathered, and so concludes, that they are two distinct
Baptisms; the first by Water, to initiate and make us Members; the other by the
Spirit, to strengthen and confirm, so as to make us Children, and if Children,
as St. Paul argues, Romans 8.17. then Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ,
etc. The first called Water Baptism, from St. John; the other being
Fire-Baptism, from Christ, or his holy Spirit; both which are confirmed by St.
August. contra. liter. Petil. 2. c. 39. where he says, Alium fuisse Johannis
Baptismum alium Christi: And both absolutely necessary to the Salvation of the
Adult (though by reason of a dark and dim Glass, Mr. Dell could, or at least
would but see the one) for as our Savior argues about other things, and this
also; so may I withal observe, the one ought to be done, and the other not to
be left undone: John 3.5. Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a Man be Born
of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God: And 1
Pet. 3.20, 21. Eight Souls were saved by Water, the like Figure whereunto even
Baptism does now save us, etc. And since that the Learned and Eloquent Apollos,
being, as St. Paul tells us, Acts 18.25. instructed in the way of the Lord;
spoke and taught diligently the things of the Lord, knowing only the Baptism of
John: Some of which things was undoubtedly Water Baptism, and consequently the
Lord's, as well as John's: Nay further, when St. Paul, Acts 19.3, 4. found
certain Disciples which had only been Baptized with John's Baptism, he Baptized
them with the Holy Ghost, by laying his hands upon them, as verse 6. Now this
with Mr. Dell, p. 13. I must confess, being a second Baptism, was not, as the
Anabaptists fondly think, a Renewing, or Dipping them in Water, but only a
laying his hands upon them, that the Holy Spirit might come to empower them. I
think Mr. Dell, p. 14. has made an Objection, and drawn a Conclusion from it,
which no wise Man either did, or could, ever make, or draw, viz. That John 's
Doctrine was the same with Christ, therefore his Baptism the same: True, though
the Doctrines were the same, yet this forced conclusion could not follow, That
their Baptisms were: And p. 16. he says, That John 's Baptism was brought in
besides the rite and manner of the Law, and so a sign of a great Change to
follow: It Is but a mistake which proceeded either from Wilfulness or Ignorance;
for John's Baptism was brought in, not besides, but according to the rite and
manner of the Law, for the Jews admitted all their Proselites by it, and their
Children also were washed, as well as circumcised; neither was it a Sign, that
it should be changed, or left off, till the End; for only the intolerable and
burdensome Ceremonies of the Law; such as Circumcision, etc. were to be
abolished: For John's Baptism, as he tells us, p. 17. is, though Weak, and
Imperfect, yet very Honorable; was Evangelical as well as Legal, being from
Heaven, Luke 3.2. John 1.6, 33. so that God was, and is, the Author of this, as
well as the other, for (...) Publicans which received this Baptism, are said to
Justify God, when as the Pharisees and Lawyers that refused it, did then
reject against themselves, that is to their own hurt, the Counsel of God, Luke
7.29, 30. I wish there were none such now; nay, Christ himself, who was Born
under the Law, and so Circumcised, to fulfill it; was subject to this Divine
Institution, of being Baptized with Water, as Mat. 3.13. not that he had any
Sins to report of himself, but for us to imitate him in it, and for our Sins
that he might fulfill all Righteousness, Mat. 3.15. and though Jesus Baptized not
himself, but his Disciples more than John's, as John 4.1, 2. true our Lord the
chief Bishop of our Souls (as our chief Bishops now) Baptized none: It did not
become him, neither does it them, he had greater Work to do, so have they: He
left it to his Apostles which were Subordinate, so do our Bishops to the
Subordinate Curates, as a thing still needful to be done: No wonder then, if
the great Apostle in such a large Circuit or Diocese, as from Jerusalem to
Illiricum, Acts 15.9. Baptized no more than two or three Believing Families;
since he had a greater Work to do than lay that Foundation, which was laid by
Subordinate Ministers. So as (he says) Heb. 6.1. and 2. therefore leaving the
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto Perfection, not laying
again the Foundation of Repentance, Faith, the Doctrine of Baptisms, etc. Now
though Water Baptism gives not the, yet it initiates into the Church, and makes
Members in order to be Baptized by the Spirit, to become Children, as Acts 19.
and though it does not give Kepentance, and Remission to be Happy; yet it is in
order to these: Infants indeed having never committed any actual Sins, have no
need of Repentance, only of Remission for their Originnl Sin, which is done
away by the Blood of Christ, which the Water represents. So that if they Dye in
their Infancy, they are undoubtedly Happy: So that contrary to Mr. Dell's Ipse
dixit, in pages 26. 29. and 28. Water Baptism both was, and is absolutely
necessary, and to continue till the end, so to make Infants dying before they
commit actual Sins; and also the Adult, which is Born again of Water as well as
of the Spirit; yea, of both, to make I say, such Eternally Happy, as the Lord
himself has assured us, John 3.5. so to pass by his empty and frivilous
Objections; where in the 3d. he has showed himself a Pharisee, p. 29, 30. I Will
only take notice of the Weak and Impertinent Answers he makes to the 5th, etc.
That it is meant of Material Water, is Manifest from the Coplative and with the
Ensuing Verse. That which is Born of the Flesh is Flesh, to which the
Water Baptism belongs, but that which is Born of the Spirit is Spirit, which
is not improperly called a Second Baptism or New Birth, by the Spirit in the
Adult: But he further Objects, p. 34. Saying, Then upon the same ground
Material Fire, in Matthew. 3.11. as well as Material Water is meant in the
forecited Text, which is absurd. To which I Answer, To be Baptized with the
Holy Ghost and with Fire, as Matthew. 3.11. Being an Hebraism, denotes only the
Efficacy cy of the Holy Spirit, since at Penticost, the holy Spirit appeared
unto them in shape of Cloven Tongues, like as of Fire, as Acts 2.3. So Infants
which have committed no actual Sin, by being washed or baptized with Water, are
like to the eight Souls in Noah's Ark, saved, as it appears from 1 Pet. 3.20,
21. and p. 36. he says, That our Soviour, in that Commission, bid them not
Baptize or Dip them in cold Water, as John did, but into the Name of God. And
p. 38. That though their Lord had given them a Form, yet was not since as we ever
heard, or read of, any where else used by the Apostles; and that St. Paul
baptizing but two or three Families, yet established many Churches, whose
Members were never washed at all by Water. And p. 42. probably most Apostles
did the like; Seeing that Christ's Baptism included John's, and was sufficient
without it; and that there is but one Baptism, from Ephesians. 4.20.

All this is but an Ipse Dixit, without any Reason or Proof; the contrary ^^th
manifestly appear in every particular, for all which the Apostles baptized were
by the same Form in the Name of the Lord Jesus, etc. as Acts 19.5. Nor as we
read did they ever Lay their Hands upon any Member as to be Baptized by the
Spirit, but what were either before or after Baptized with Water, as Acts
10.43, 44. Can any forbid Water that these should not be Baptized which have
received the Holy Ghost as well as we; and he commanded them to be Baptized in
the Name of the Lord. So that you may understand that the Baptizing by the
Spirit was not sufficient; but the Baptism of the Water must be added. True,
St. Paul tells us. Ephesians. 1.5. That there is but one Baptism. Answ. No more
there is but one Man, but he consists of two necessary parts, viz. Flesh and
Spirit: so is Baptism said to be one, where our Savior explains it thus in
John 3.6. saying, That which is born of the Flesh is Flesh, and that which is
born of the Spirit is Spirit. Therefore to be Christians let us take the
Apostles advice to 2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these Promises by Water and the
Spirit to be found Members and Children, viz. Sons and Daughters, let us
cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, perfecting
Holiness in the Fear of God. And since as St. Peter, Acts 2.39. assures us,
That the Promise is to, us, and also to our Children, and to all that are afar
off, even to as many as the Lord our God shall call. And since there are others
which differing with (and dissenting from) our Church, do pretend to observe
and walk in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord, so as be thought
at least blameless; which alas I find being seduced with popular Examples, have
unwarily imbibed a groundless Prejudice against all the Children of Christian
Parents; which as I humbly conceive has been caused by not knowing, or want of
Ephod, and Terephim among them, so not understanding the Scriptures which they
have been apt to wrest, but yet I hope not to their Childrens, though it to their
own hurt: And that which they have grounded their Error on, is on Mat. 28.19.
and some others, which mentions Teaching before Baptizing; and that we have no
possitive Command for Initiaing Infants as under the Law; and that we have
neither Precept nor a Primitive President for so doing. -- To which I Answer,
That in that Commission, Christ had a more peculiar regard to the Persons to
whom the Apostles were sent, which were ignorant Superstitions and profane,
therefore he mentions such Qualifications antecedant to Baptism: for it was not
fit that such should be admitted to a Covenant of Grace, and Reconciliation
with God, till they with Abraham were converted and reclaimed, and understood
the Covenant, and then (as he was Circumcised) they to be Baptized. In short,
the matter was this; The Adult were first to be made Disciples by a saving
Faith, the case of the Children was distinct to be considered afterward; when
their Parents were not only Converted, but well grounded, or settled; and then
also the Church judged it safest to take Proxies or Sureties, viz. some Old,
and steady Converts, lest the Parents Apostatizing, as they often did, and so
the Children being under their Tuition, its presumed that they would have the
same Principles and Persuasion of the Parents Apostatized; then the Proxies
took care and trained them up in the Christian Faith: And thus Infants, as to
the Covenant and Privileges, are accounted in the state and right with their
Parents. Therefore as the Children of Unbelievers upon this account may in some
cases be said to be partakers of their Parents Infidelity, since they are like
to be brought up in it; and for that Reason they are denied Baptism; otherwise
they are capable, and may be admitted where there is sufficient Satisfaction
given to the Church, that they shall be educated in the Christian Religion; for
it would be preposterous to admit such into a Religion which they were never
likely to be instructed in afterward. Now when Circumcision was thrown off,
which was not at the first, then in all probability began the Jews to Start the
case of Infants admission, who by Circumcision were admitted, but that being
abolished, their privilege would be lo^^: And these Absurdities would have
naturally followed; as Frst, That Infants under the New Covenant were in a far
worse condition than those under the Old; for they were entered. Secondly, That
the Privileges under the Gospel were to Infants straiter and narrower than
those under the Law, which would be abominable. 3dly, If it was God's Will that
Infants under the Gospel should be reckoned as out of his Covenant, which
before were in it, then it must follow that our Savior was forgetful, and
unfaithful to his Church, in that he never acquainted her with this alteration,
which is also both base and absurd; Nay, and this might justly raise Clamours
and Complaints in the Jewish Children, so as to hinder the bringing in of their
Parents. Indeed I must confess that Believing and Repentance in the Adult, are
absolutely necessary, where Infidelity and Iniquity are found, as in Abraham;
yet this does not prove that the Infants of Believers were, and are to be
excluded, because they cannot actually believe; yea, they are rather to be
included and baptized, as Isaac was Circumcised: for the Scripture intimates
that the Innocence of harmless Babes (whose Original Guilt is done away by
Christ) who have not by actual Transgression offended: such innocence is as
pleasing to God, and as agreeable a Qualification for the admission of such to
a Covenant of Grace and Mercy, by sealing it with the not Intolerable, but
Easy Seal of Baptism, as either the Faith of an Actual Believer, or the
Repentance of the Penitent; this may be illustrated by Examples, which I shall
own omit. What if Infanss do not as under the Law understand the Covenant,
verily that is no bar: for if we were but as wise in Spirituals as in
Temporals, we find it in no wise disagreeable to Reason that Infants are bound
in Covenants to the future Performance of Conditions which they at present know
nothing of, nor can be capable of performing till they come to Age. This is
common in Wills, in settling Estates on Infant-Heirs, having Guardians, etc.
But you will say the Covenant is not the same. -- Answ. It Is the same in
Substance, though not in the Accidents. True, it differs in this; The first being
in Works, had Circumcision for its Seal: The last of Grace, which has Baptism
for its. Acts 2.39. For the Promises is to us and our Children, which that we
may embrace, God grant for Christ's sake: Amen.

FINIS.

