The Mystery of Phanaticism. OR, THE ARTIFICES OF DISSENTERS To Support their
SCHISM. Together with the Evil and Danger of them. Set forth in several Letters
to a FRIEND. Wherein is made appear, That nothing but the Subtilty and Cunning
of their Teachers, does now hinder the People from Conformity.

By a Divine of the Church of England.

2 Cor. 2.11. We are not ignorant of [their] Devices.

The SECOND EDITION Corrected.

LONDON, Printed for T. Leigh, at the Peacock in Fleetstreet; and R. Knaplock,
at the Angel and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard. School.

THE PREFACE.
THE DISSENTING Cause being in a great measure deserted in Point of Argument,
is now merely upheld by Artifice; and what it wants of Reason and Truth, is
supplied by Subtilty and Cunning. And because the Discovery hereof may help to
undeceive and open the Eyes of some well-meaning, but unwary People, it may not
be altogether an unprofitable Task, to lay open these Devices, that they may
the better see how they are gulled, and be the more aware of the Imposture.

Truth (we know) is willing to be seen with open Face, and has that Native
Beauty and Luster, that needs no Paint or Varnish to recommend it: But Error
has so foul and ugly a Complexion, that makes it need and covet a Vizor to
hide its Deformity, and can only be set forth by False and Artificial Colors.
We read of some men's Works, that they cannot bear the Light, and therefore come
not to it, lest their deeds should be reproved: Joh. 3.20.
Such as these do but act a Part in Religion, and only play the Zealous and
Devout; and are indeed to be shunned and detested of all Men, as the worst of
Impostors; for they at once mock God, and deceive the People, and prostitute
the Best Things to the worst and vilest Purposes.

And that too many such there are, our unhappy Age can sadly testify: For may
we not daily see the Sons of Craft acting under various. Disguises, and
wheedling the People with their Pious Frauds? Do they not work upon the
Weakness of some, the Wilfulness of others, and the Discontents of all, to
serve their own Ends upon them? And like Spiritual Mountebanks, cry up their
Infallible Medicines for the Cure of Souls, merely to draw in and deceive the
unthinking Multitude. They are sufficiently acquainted both with the Ignorance
and the Headiness of the Vulgar, and apply themselves to them accordingly;
following that known Rule, Si populus vult decipi, decipiatur. With this
untemper'd Mortar do the Architects of Schism build their Babel, laying Hay and
Stubble upon the Foundation of Christianity, which they at the same time
undermine by their Hollowness and Hypocrisy.

Our Blessed Savior forewarned his Followers of such false Teachers, that
should come to them in sheeps clothing, Mat. 7.15.
that is, with soft and smooth Pretenses, but inwardly were ravening wolves,
dividing the Flock, that they may the more easily devour them, and making a
Prey of them whom they pretend to feed. These he afterward described by their
divided Dialect, Matt. 24.23, 26,
one saying, Lo, here is Christ, and another, there. And when things come to
this pass, that one says, Behold, he is in the field; another, he is in the
secret chambers; a third, in the Conventicle; it is time to hearken to our
Savior's Advice, Believe them not, and go not after them.

The Apostle likewise foretold of such Seducers, that would arise in the latter
days, Acts. 20.29, 30,
speaking perverse things, to draw disciples after them: Describing them
sometimes by their despising dominions, Jude, v. 8. 2 Timothy 3.6.
and speaking evil of dignities: At other times more plainly pointing at them,
by their creeping into houses, and leading captive silly women laden with
diverse lusts; thus beguiling the Weaker Sex, who being lead more by their
Passions than Reason, are more easily seduced by them. And therefore we are
exhorted, Romans 16.17.
To mark them that cause divisions, and avoid them; for they serve not our Lord
Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and with good words and fair speeches
deceive the hearts of the simple.

And as Christ and his Apostles have thus forewarned us of false Teachers, who
by their subtle Insinuations would (if it were possible) deceive the very
elect; so have they foretold the Giddiness and Instability of some among the
People, who would hearken too much to their false Insinuations, and be easily
deluded by them. These are described by their Unwillingness to hear and endure
sound doctrine, 1 Timothy 4.3.
and heaping to themselves teachers, having itching ears; by which means they
would turn from the truth, and be turned unto Fables. Both these Predictions
are unhappily fulfilled in our Days, which affords too many sad Instances both
of the cunning Craftiness of some who lie in wait to deceive, and the too great
Easiness and Willingness of others to be deceived by them.

So that we are certainly fallen into those perilous Times, in which the
Apostle foretold, that men should be lovers of themselves, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, etc.
traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God;
having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof; of whom he wills all
wise men to beware, and to turn from them.

Indeed there has been no Age since the Apostles, wholly free from
Schismatics and Impostors; but perhaps none ever afforded such Swarms of them,
as our unhappy days, in which, like the Flies of Egypt, they are still buzzing
in the ears of the people, and like the Frogs croaking in all corners of the
Land.

It will not therefore be amiss, to expose to Public View the Frauds and
Fallacies of false Teachers, to lay open the Evil and Danger of them, that if
we cannot wholly cure the Schism, we may preserve as many as possible from the
Contagion of it.

Farewell.

The CONTENTS.
Letter I. THeir great Zeal in making Proselytes, Page 1 Letter II. Their
pretense to greater Light and Knowledge than other men, p. 11 Letter III. Their
pretense to greater Strictness and Sanctity than other men, p. 22 Letter IV.
Their pretense to Purer Ordinances, and a more Spiritual way of Worship, p. 32
Letter V. Of their crying up Peace and Unity, though all their Actions tend to
destroy and undermine them, p. 42 Letter VI. Their Censuring the Lives and
Actions of those within the Church, the better to commend theirs who Dissent
from it, p. 51 Letter VII. Of their calling the wise Injunctions of our
Superiors, by the odious Name of Impositions, p. 62 Letter VIII. Of their
keeping the People in Ignorance of the Nature and Danger of Schism, p. 70
Letter IX. Of their Misinterpreting and Wresting the Scriptures to serve their
own purpose, p. 81 Letter X. Their confining the Offices of Kindness and
Charity to those of their own Sect, p. 89 Letter XI. Their working upon the
Weakness, the Wilfulness, and Discontents of the People, to serve their own
Ends upon them, p. 97 Letter XII. Their pretense to Christian Liberty, p. 106
Letter XIII. Their pretense to better means of Edification, p. 117 Letter XIV.
Their setting up and encouraging little private Schools of Philosophy, p. 126
Postscript. Their settling and maintaining a secret Correspondence among
themselves; with a Copy of one of their late Letters, p. 135
The End of the CONTENTS.
LETTER I.
SIR,
I Remember my Promise of giving you some account of the Artifices of
Dissenters to support their Schism: And though this Mystery of Iniquity has
some depths and intriegues that are out of the reach of a vulgar eye; yet there
are other Devices that lie more open, and may be easily discerned by an
ordinary Observer.

And here the

First thing that occurs to our view, is their great zeal and diligence in
making Proselytes; in which they imitate, if not outdo, the zeal of the
Pharisees, Matt. 23.15.
who compass sea and land to make a proselyte.

This unwearied diligence of the Pharisees, is remarked by our Savior as an
instance of their Hypocrisy. And the Jewish Writers tell us how they used their
utmost endeavors in hunting after Proselytes, not for their good, but their
own gain; that they might some way or other drain their Purses after they had
drawn them into their Sect: They spared no pains among all sorts of persons,
but especially among the Richer Widows, whom by their subtle attractives they
despoiled of a great part of their Substance: The Scripture has recorded of
them; That they devoured widows houses, Matt. 23.14.
by their long Prayers; which they made to serve as a long Grace to hallow and
sanctify their Oppression. In a word, they fished for Proselytes every where,
and made a prey of all that they drew into their Net. And herein they are
equaled, if not exceeded by our Dissenting Brethren; the art and industry used
by them to this purpose, being too well known to need any proof.

The chief things to be remarked under this Head, are,

1st. The Persons of whom these Proselytes consist. 2dly. Whence they are
gathered: And 3dly. What they are Proselyted to.

For the Parties on whom this Game is played: They are not any Persons of
Education and Parts, who can see through the disguise, and discover the
Imposture; but the weak and illiterate Vulgar; whose want of Judgment renders
them the more easy and liable to seduction.

And here their great business is to flatter and humor the common People, who
are the sole Props and Members of the Conventicle; being fearful and tender of
displeasing them, lest they should fly off, and Dagon fall with them; and
therefore we are told by a wise Observer of their ways, That the People are
most truly the Guides, and that the Pastors must follow them whom they pretend
to Conduct; which shows them to be rather Men-pleasers than the Servants of God.

But whence are these Proselytes taken? Why, out of the Parochial Established
Churches, for they can be taken no where else; and we all know that the
Conventicle is made up of a few straggling Sheep gathered out of other Flocks,
and drawn from the true Fold of the Catholic Church.

Now these Parochial Churches, being by the Dissenters themselves acknowledged
to be true Churches of Christ; this can be no other than gathering Churches out
of Churches; a thing severely Condemned by the Puritans of old, in the
Brownists; and by the Presbyterians of late, in the Independents, and other
Sectaries. If you will peruse the Presbyterian Writings, and pirticularly the
Jus Divinum Regiminis Ecclesiastici, the exactest Book that has been written
by them, You will find this practice of gathering Churches out of Churches, and
setting up separate Meetings against an Established Church, bitterly inveighed
against as the Mother of Confusion, the Nurse of Schism, and the Step mother of
Edification.

How comes the case then to be thus altered, That gathering Churches out of
Churches, which was formerly a heinous Crime, should now become not only a
harmless thing, but a necessary Duty? And what was so fiercely disputed against
as a grievous Faction should now be so earnestly contended for, as if it were
the faith once delivered to the saints? What is it that has made this change?
Is Vice of a sudden turned into Virtue? Or has the Mother of Confusion changed
the Breed, and brought forth a purer way of Worship and Devotion? No; the
Mystery of it is, That the Presbyterians upon the dissolution of the
Government, which they had in a great measure occasioned, fed themselves with
hopes of being uppermost, and labored hard to bring the other Sects, that grew
up under them, to the lure of their Discipline; and then setting up Altar
against Altar, and gathering Churches out of Churches, were vile and abominable
things; but finding themselves opposed, and indeed overtop'd by the
Independents, and by the Re-establishment of the Church upon its ancient
Foundation, utterly defeated of all their hopes, they began then to play the
same game, and lest they should be left in the lurch, fell a gathering
Disciples as fast as the other Sectaries. And then all their own Arguments
taken from Peace and Unity, which were very strong whilst they made for Them,
of a sudden lost all their force when they were turned against them. Most rare
and well-grounded Divinity!

But what is it that these Industrious Men seek to make Proselytes to? Is it to
the embracing of Christianity, or the practice of real Piety and Virtue? No;
this were a very charitable and commendable Zeal indeed; but it is to a Party, a
Faction; to a Schism, or Separation from a true Church, which they themselves
have branded for the sink of Error, and the inlet of all Confusion. So that if
the People would but open their Eyes, they might easily see their Leaders
acting against their own Principles, and might condemn them out of their own
mouths.

But what is the end or design of this great diligence in making Proselytes?
Why, the plain design of it is the weakening the established Church by drawing
the Members from it; the strengthening their own Party by adding Followers to
it, and by degrees undermining the Government in Church and State, to draw the
Power and Interest of both into their own hands. Great and noble designs
indeed! not for the public Good, but their own private Interest and Ambition.
And yet these apparently lie at the bottom of these endeavors.

Now this will lead us to consider the evil and danger of such Practices, and
that as well to the Parties Proselyted, as those that Proselyte them.

St. Paul sharply rebuked this way of Proselyting, or Party-taking among the
Corinthians, though they made some of the Apostles, yea, Christ himself to be
one of the Heads of the Party; While one says, I am of Paul, another I am of
Apollos, another I am of Cephas, another I am of Christ; are ye not carnal, and
walk as men? Yes, as the worst sort of men; for ye divide Kingdoms, rend
Churches, and tear in pieces the very Body of Christ.

Our Blessed Savior was so far from commending the Zeal of the Pharisees in
making Proselytes to their Sect, that he pronounced a Woe against them for it;
and withal told them, That they made them twosold more the children of hell
than themselves. Matt. 23.15.
And Josephus tells us, that the Disciples outdid their Masters; for they not
only became worse than they were before, but exceeded the Pharisees themselves
in their Hypocrisy and Unbelief. The Imitation outwent the Original, and the
Disciples encouraged by their Doctrine and Example, became much more the
children of Wrath and Disobedience than they were before.

And has it not happened thus with many of the Dissenters Disciples, who like
apt Scholars have outgone their Masters? For when they had drawn them from the
Church, Have not others started up who have drawn them from their Conventicles?
Are not the several Heads of the Faction tugging hard to draw Disciples from
one another? And must not the People be mightily Edified (think you) to be thus
drawn about as with a Cart-rope, and led from one Sect to another by the Cords
of Vanity? Yea, Have not some by this means been drawn into Atheism and
Infidelity; and while the contending Parties have been striving for Proselytes,
have not many lost all their Religion in the scuffle? This is too well known by
woeful experience. So that these cannot be termed Proselytes of Righteousness;
nor are they initiated into a Mystery of Godliness, but Iniquity, being drawn
into a Schism; which if wilfully persisted in, must cut them off from the Body
of Christ, and not only deprive them of the Fellowship of the Christian Church
here, but for ever exclude them from the Community of the Saints hereafter?

Neither does the danger hereof affect only the Persons seduced by them, but
has a malign influence upon a whole Church and Kingdom, and is a public as
well as a private Mischief; for every one that is drawn into a Party, is in
effect listed against the Government; and he that is Proselyted to a Sect, does
thereby become an Enemy to the peace and welfare of his Country: For such as
these draw from the Church to support a Combination against it, and so weaken
the whole by strengthening a Party.

You know it must go ill with the Body, when the Blood and Spirits which should
cherish the Heart, and fortify all the other Members, leave their natural
course, and run only to feed a Disease, Excrescence, or corrupt Humor: Neither
can it fare better with public Bodies and Societies, when that strength which
should be united to preserve the whole, is carried off to support a Faction;
and the bond of Peace and Unity, which should hold the parts together, is
broken into several Sects and Divisions.

But what are the Arts that are made use of by Dissenters to gain Proselytes,
and thereby to uphold, increase, and propagate their Schism, the discovery of
these shall be the subject of the ensuing Letters, I am,

SIR, Your affectionate Friend, A. B.

LETTER II.
SIR,
I Gave you an account in my last, of the great diligence and industry of
Dissenters in making Proselytes, and drawing Disciples after them, together
with the evil and danger of their so doing. But

You are satisfied (you tell me) of this their great design in endeavoring to
increase and propagate their Party; but you would fain know by what arts and
methods they effect it; that is, how they thus lead the People by the Nose, and
draw so many after them. And here to omit some of their lesser arts of
inveigling the People, as by affected Tones, mimical Actions and Gestures, etc.
which, you know, have a mighty force to draw the Multitude; I say, to pass by
these, I shall give you an account of some of the principal Artifices they make
use of to compass their ends. And the

First I shall mention of these, is their pretense to greater Light and
Knowledge than other Men: And herein they are the followers of a Sect in the
Apostles days, known by the Name of Gnostics; who were so called from their
boasting of greater Light, and esteeming themselves the wisest and most knowing
of all Persons.

Now half an Eye may see how exactly they are imitated by the Sectaries of our
days, who talk much of higher Illuminations, and make frequent boasts of their
greater measures and degrees of Knowledge. Nothing is more common in their
Mouths, than Gospel-Discoveries, Gospel-Manifestations, new and clearer
Revelations; all which are made chiefly, if not only to them; when as others
(poor Souls!) are ignorant, and know nothing of these Glorious things. They
delight to speak of the Darkness of former times, and what a glorious
Meridian-Light is broke out in their days; which they make to shine with a
brighter luster upon them than any others. You shall often hear them pity the
Ignorance of some men, who, perhaps, know more than themselves; and please
themselves with the thoughts of their higher Seize, as if the Dayspring
from high had visited them, whereas others were merely be nighted, and left to
walk on still in darkness. Their Teachers too are willing enough to cherish in
them this vain conceit of their great Knowledge, that they may the more admire
them from whom they have it; this makes them talk of others as blind ignorant
Creatures, void of any Saving-Knowledge of Christ, and the Mysteries of the
Gospel; that they have Scales before their Eyes, that are never like to drop
off, till they Hear their Teachers, and Espouse their Party. Thus do they
applaud the clearness and perfection of their own Knowledge, and lament the
lack of it in other Men, though many times much Wiser than themselves.

Now how serviceable this is to uphold and increase the Party, is obvious to
observe; for the common People being incompetent Judges of true Wisdom, are
easily imposed upon by the bare semblance and appearance of it.

Besides, this so far gratifies the natural Pride and Vanity of Men's Minds, as
makes them willing to hearken to those that thus soothe and flatter them.

Yea, this Artifice has deceived many a well-meaning Man, who though willing
to know and embrace the Truth, have been unhappily misled by these false
Lights, out of the ways of Truth and Peace. So that this Wile has an easy and
natural tendency to deceive, and has done the Party great service.

But what has been the effect of this Stratagem? Why, the Evils that have been
produced by it are many and great.

As First; It has occasioned a great deal of Pride, and made many ignorant
People talk and look scornfully on those that are far above them, both in Parts
and Wisdom; Knowledge puffs up, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8.1. Yea, a vain
Conceit of it will have the same effect, though the reality be wanting: A small
matter will puff up a bubble; and some are so prone to this Evil, that a little
thing will make them look big, and apt to swell with a high opinion of their
great Wisdom. This makes them Heady, Confident, and Assuming, thinking
themsetves wiser than their Teachers, and taking upon them to instruct their
Betters, without any regard to their Learning or Office; yea, this vain conceit
of Knowledge has lifted some of them to that high degree of Arrogance, as to
set up their Light within them above the Holy Scriptures, and to prefer their
own Dreams before Divine Revelations. Again,

2dly. This pretense of greater Knowledge occasions great Contempt and
Disobedience to Authority; for these Opinionative Men soon become Wiser than
their Governors; they see farther into matters than all that are above them,
and so can espy the errors in the Administration of Affairs: Hence you shall
find them taxing the Actions of their Superiors, finding fault with their
Conduct, and quarrelling with all Orders and Constitutions, that are not drawn
up by their Model, and appointed as they in their great wisdom think best: They
talk much of a Judgment of Discretion, which they oppose to the Judgment of
their Superiors, and by the help of it can lay aside all Laws and Canons made
for public Peace and Order. And what a pernicious influence this must have,
not only the nature of the thing, but our daily and doleful Experience may
easily inform us. Moreover.

3dly. This overweaning conceit of great Knowledge, makes men pragmatical
medlers in things that belong not to them, invading the Office both of the King
and Bishop; prying into matters of State, as if they were all Privy
Counselors; and Expounding the most difficult places in Scripture with greater
confidence, than the most Learned Doctors. Hence you shall see them creeping
into Men's Parishes, as if none were able to Lead and Instruct their Flock,
without their Assistance, and thrusting themselves into other Folks business,
as if none had any understanding but themselves. Again,

4thly. This vain conceit of greater Light, makes men Obstinate and
Pertinacious in their private Fancies and Opinions, though never so False and
Erroneous: We know how difficult a thing it is to reclaim a Schismatic; the
conceit he has of his own Knowledge, makes him think he cannot be mistaken;
the Infallibility he denies to the Pope, he assumes to himself; and vainly
thinks, that if other Men did but see with his Eyes, they might soon discern
the Truth; and this would make them say and do even as he takes himself to be,
always in the Right; and that it is not possible for so enlightened a Person as
he to be in the Wrong; And what hope can there be of reclaiming such a one, who
is resolved and armed against Conviction? See thou a man wise in his own
conceit, (says Solomon) there is more hope of a fool than of him, Prove. 26.12.

Lastly, This vain opinion of greater Knowledge, makes them to despise,
censure, and condemn the Actions of other Men; for thinking themselves only in
the right, they take all others to be out of the way that go not with them; and
never so much as dreaming that they can be deceived, pity and sigh over others
as a company of ignorant, blind, and deiuded Wretches: Thus are they by this
means brought fondly to applaud and admire themselves, and to look down with
contempt and scorn on others, though much Wiser than themselves. These, and
many other are the sad effects of this Artifice, and plainly proceed from Men's
flattering themselves and others with an opinion of their greater Light and
knowledge.

Now to show the Vanity of this pretense, we may observe,

1st. That the greatest pretenders to Knowledge, have commonly the least share
of it; a smatterer in any Art or Science, that has scarce knowledge enough to
see his own ignorance, usually boasts of higher measures and degrees of it,
than a Wiser Man that sees much farther into it will pretend to, who being
sensible of his own defects, and how far short he comes of Perfection, is
commonly more humble and modest: A wise man (says Solomon) fears and
departs from evil; but the fool rages and is confident, Prove. 14.16. If any
man think he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know, 1
Cor. 8.2. We read of some that take upon them to be Teachers of others, when
themselves need to be Taught the first Principles of the Oracles of God; and of
others that are ever learning, but never come to the knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3.7. 'Twas well-observ'd by my Lord Bacon, That a little Knowledge is apt
to puff up, and make Men giddy, but a greater share of it will set them right,
and bring them to low and humble thoughts of themselves.

So that this pretense of greater Light, is but a covering for their deeds of
Darkness; and if the light within them be darkness, how great is that darkness?
Matthew. 6.23. Beside,

2dly. This boast of greater Knowledge is a great bar to all growth and
increase in it; For what need have they to labor for that, of which they think
they have so great a share already? This will breed not only a neglect, but
contempt of all the means of Knowledge; 'twill make them deaf to Instruction,
and to shut their Eyes against the Light, though it flashes in their Faces:
'Twas wisely observed by the Roman Orator, Multi ad Sapientiam pervenissent,
nisi se jam, pervenisse put assent: Many might have attained to Wisdom, were it
not for a vain conceit that they had attained it already. And indeed, there is
no such Ignorant, Arrogant, and Incurable Fop, as a Gifted Brother full of his
Visions and Revelations, who pretends to be above Ordinances, and to be Wise
above that which is Written.

Lastly. This vain conceit of greater Knowledge, often times leads to a judicial
Blindness: and they who are so apt to Reprobate others, are themselves given up
to a Reprobate sense; that in seeing, they should see, but not perceive; and in
hearing, they should hear, but not understand. We read of the Gnostics, That
when they professed themselves to be wise, they became fools; and being vain in
their imaginations, their foolish hearts were darkened, Romans 1.21, 22. God
Almighty put out that Light which they vainly pretended to, or wilfully abused,
and suffered them to grope on in thick darkness. And the same Apostle tells us
of others, who for not receiving the truth in the love of it, were given up to
believe a lie, and carried away with strong delusions, 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. And this,
it is to be feared, is the case of too many Sectaries in our Days, who withstand
the clearest evidence of Truth, and harden their hearts against all Conviction;
nothing can make them sensible of the error of their ways, though it never so
plainly appear to be so, but will obstinately persist in their evil course
against all the Commands of their Superiors, the Instructions of their
Teachers, and the Example of Wise and Holy Men in all Ages; as if they were
lulled asleep in a fatal Security, and sealed up under final Impenitence. Which
is much lamented by,

SIR, Yours, A. B.

LETTER III.
SIR,
I Find by your last, that you are sufficiently sensible what great service the
pretense of greater Light and Knowledge has done the Dissenters, and that you
plainly see the falsehood and malignity of that Artifice. I proceed now to a
second, and that is a pretense to greater Strictness and Sanctity than other
Men; and herein they are the successors of the Pharisees; who beside the
exacter Knowledge of the Law, pretended to the exactest Observance and
Obedience to it; hence we find them styled the strictest sect of their
Religion, Acts 26.5. and are said to teach and act according to the perfect
manner of the law, Acts 22.3. Our Savior himself brings in one of them
boasting of his greater Piety, and taking the boldness to tell God Almighty in
his Prayers, That he was not as other men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or
the like, Luke 18.11, 12. but had led a stricter life, and practiced a higher
sort of Righteousness than other Folk; and lest God and the world should doubt
of the truth of it, he proceeds to many particulars, viz. That he was frequent
in his fasts, punctual in his tithes, liberal in his alms-deeds, etc. And
elsewhere we read of other parts of the Pharisees Righteousness; That they were
strict observers of the Sabbath, careful of their Company for fear of being
defiled by them; long and loud in their Prayers; that they enlarged their
Philacteries, and garnished the Tombs of the Prophets, as if they detested the
Cruelty of their Forefathers in putting them to Death; with many other
instances recorded by the Four Evangelists.

How well they are imitated by Dissenters in making a fair and plausible show
of greater Holiness, a very slender Observation may inform us; for you may
easily observe them to look more Demurely, talk more Religiously, and seem to
Pray more Devoutly than other Men; their seeming Zeal shall carry them many a
Mile to a Conventicle, when they may hear a better Sermon at home in their own
Church; yea, and set them a Repeating Sermons too which were scarce worth the
first Hearing; and thereby incolcate some Doctrines, that were much better
doomed to eternal silence and oblivion. Thus do they seek to polish the outward
Garb with a fair and plausible show of Holiness; withdrawing from others as
Sinners, and not only pretending, but as to outward appearance practicing too a
greater Strictness.

Now how useful this Artifice is to uphold and increase a Party, is easy to
discern; for the common People being led more by their Senses and Imagination,
than any sound Principles of Reason, are often imposed upon by the outside of
Religion; which many times makes a more flanting and pompous show, than the
inward truth and reality of it, which residing in the Heart, lies more hid and
undiscovered: By this means the Pharisees got a wonderful interest and
influence upon the minds of the People, who by a show of greater Religion, so
drew the Hearts after them, that 'twas Proverbial among them to say, That if
but Two went to Heaven, the one would be a Scribe, and the other a Pharisee:
And any ordinary Eye may see our Dissenters drawing Disciples, and increasing
their Parties by the same method.

But have these great pretenders all this while any more Religion than other
Folk? No; they have more of the show, but not of the substance; having a form
of godliness, as the Apostle foretold of them, but denying the power thereof.
Our Blessed Savior declared of the Pharisees, That though they pretended to be
better, were yet worse than other men; for though they had the confidence to
thank God they were not extortioners, yet he who knew them better than they did
themselves, tells them that they devoured widows houses, and within were full
of extortion and excess; their Prayers were all made for Vanity and
Ostentation, and their Alms but so many Baits to fish for Honor and the
Applause of Men; like whited Sepulchers, they appeared fair and beautiful
without, but within were full of rottenness and corruption; and though they
Garnished the Sepulchers of the Prophets, as if they hated the Wickedness of
these that Killed them, yet they put to Death the Son of God, the great Propher
that was to come, and would have shed the blood of all that followed him: So
that all their Care and Zeal for the Memory of the Prophets, was only to hide
their Cruelty under a show of Kindness; and the garnished Tombs were but the
painted Monuments of their own Hypocrisy. In a word, as they were solicitous
about washing the outside of the Cup and Platter, without mattering how foul
and sluttish it was within; so were they more careful to reform their Looks
than their Lives; and under a disguise of greater Sanctity, contrived and acted
the vilest Enormities.

And are not the like Policies and Practices too visible in our Modern
Pharisees; who under a mask of Zeal and Reformation, have concealed and carried
on very bad Designs? Have they not a long time put fair Colors upon foul
Actions? And made Religion a stale and pander to the greatest Abominations? But
that Cloak, which has hitherto done them great service, begins now to be worn
out, long use has made it thredbare, and their Hypocrisy appears through the
thinness of the Covering; Counterfeit Coin seldom keeps its credit long, time
wears off the Gilt, and discovers the baseness of the Metal. Such is the
inconsistency of Falsehood and Hypocrisy, that it often betrays it self; and
when the paint and varnish is gone, nothing appears but the deformity; and then
the Hypocrite, like the Ass in the Fable stripped of the Lion's Skin, stands an
object of contempt and scorn. Thus it happened to the Pharisees at last; for
though they charmed the People awhile, and inveigled many into their Sect by a
show of Holiness, yet the Mask at length fell off, and they became vile and
despicable to the whole Nation.

But what is the evil and Mischief of this Device? Great every way. For,

First; This pretense of greater Holiness, is oft-times an Instrument of much
deceit, and helps to carry on very evil designs; thus if any have a mind to
disturb or overturn the Government, to move Sedition, or alter the Laws and
Constitutions, Religion must be pretended; and then a seeming Zeal for the
public Good, and Reformation of Abuses, shall go a great way to compass their
ends. If a Man would effectually Cheat his Neighbor, or put the Dice upon him,
he pretends to Piety to hide the Juggle, and under a cloak of Religion, acts
and covers the foulest Frauds. If he would wreek his Malice, or gratify his
Spleen against any Person, he puts on a show of great Meekness, looks Solemnly,
and pretends the greatest Love and Kindness, and thereby secretly wounds and
works his own Ends. Thus do Malice, Pride, Covetousness, Revenge, and other
vile Enormities, lurk under this disguise, and are carried on under a specious
show and pretense of Religion. Again,

2dly. This Device is a mocking of God, and a high affront offered to our
Maker; for he that only gilds and paints the outward Man, without any regard to
the Heart, shows indeed an Awe and Reverence to Men, who behold and judge only
by the outward appearance, but betrays an insolent contempt and slight of God,
who looks chiefly to the Heart, and requires Truth in the inner parts; he that
seeks only to recommend himself to the World by fair shows and pretenses,
without approving himself to God by the sincerity of the Heart, plainly bids
defiance to Heaven, and shows a greater fear of Men than God before his Eyes.

Lastly. This great pretense to Religion brings oft-times a scandal upon
Religion it self, and tends to destroy and undermine it; for when these appear
to be only Pretenses, and that these great shows of Holiness are void of all
reality and truth; it makes the Name of Religion odious, and the Profession of
it vile and despicable in the Eyes of the World: This at once debauches and
destroys Religion, by drawing out the life of it into mere show and appearance,
and making it evaporate into Air and Formality.

Yea, this naturally leads to Atheism and Infidelity; for when Men see so many
vile Tricks acted under a color of greater Holiness; when Faction and Sedition
are gilded over with a specious pretense of Zeal, and Men prosecute their
Ambition and Avarice under the ensigns of Holiness and Devotion; this makes too
many think Religion it self a Trick, and so cast it off as a device of Cunning
and Designing Men: And it is not to be doubted, but the Atheism and Infidelity
of the present Age, is in a great measure owing to the Hypocrisy of such
Pretenders.

SIR,

I suppose you plainly see the design and the danger of this Artifice so much
used by our Dissenters, which is indeed the Masterpiece of their Craft, and
the principal Engine to draw and deceive the People; they know the Vulgar are
easily imposed upon by fair Shows, and fair Speeches, and how willing they are
to embrace a Religion that is so favorable to their Pride, Lust, and Worldly
Interest, and puts them to no trouble about the mortifying of either; for it is
but to polish the outward Man, and make a plausible appearance of Holiness, and
they need not take care about purifying of the Heart, or rectifying any thing
that is amiss within; and it is no wonder if so easy a Religion finds many
Followers. I am,

SIR, Yours, A. B.

LETTER IV.
SIR,
I Showed in my last how serviceable a pretense of greater Holiness is to
increase a Party, and create Divisions, together with the vanity and mischief
of that Artifice. I proceed in this to a

Third Artifice used by Dissenters to that end; and that is, A pretense to
purer Ordinances, and a more Spiritual way of Worship; and herein they are the
Successors of the Cathari, and the Donatists of old, who pretended to a better
and purer way of serving God than other Men; and so Separated from them, as
Saints of a higher Form, and Men of a more raised and elevated Devotion.

And herein they are exactly imitated by our Dissenters, who talk of nothing
more than pure Worship, pure Ordinances, and pure Administrations; all which
they confine to themselves, and will not allow others any share in them; yea,
they speak contemptuously of others, as serving God after an old dead and dull
way of Forms, whereas They Pray in a more lively manner by their own Gifts, and
have a more Pure, Spiritual, and Evangelical way of Worship. They revile the
Church of England as Popish, and style its Worship Antichristian: Our excellent
Liturgy passes with them for Mass-service, and all its decent Ceremonies for
Idolatry and Superstition; the Surplice is a Rag of the Whore of Babylon;
Bowing at the Name of Jesus, is no better than Bowing to an Idol; and Kneeling
at the Holy Sacrament, as bad as falling down to a Graven Image; they interpret
the form of godliness, mentioned by the Apostle, to be a Form of Prayer; and
the Power of Godliness, to be Praying Extempore. One of them tells us, That the
reason why the world hates the Saints, is because they are a Praying People:
Now lest you should take this Malignity to be directed against Forms, he tells
you, no; Forms of Prayer they can bear well enough, but it is the Power of
Prayer (that is, Extempore Prayer) that they cannot endure; as if this were a
flight of Devotion above the reach of Worldly and Carnal Minds, and only suited
to the more Heavenly and Seraphical Spirit of the Saints.

Now how serviceable this Device is to promote the Party, is easy to conceive;
for it mightily gratifies the vanity of Men's Minds to think, that they are not
only more Holy than other Men, but that they serve God in a higher and better
manner than they; for this makes them believe, with the Pharisees, that God
rejoices in them, and is mightily pleased with them; that they are infinitely
dear to him, and that God is highly-delighted both with their Persons and their
Prayers. And who that had these thoughts, would not gladly enter into the Class
of such Worshippers?

Again; This makes them think well of themselves, and creates no small pleasure
and confidence in their ways, though never so False and Erroneous, to think
their Prayers are better and more acceptable to God, than other Men's: This
makes them infinitely pleased with their Service, and endears to them such a
Way of Worship: Yea, it not only tends to invite many into this way, but to
make them obstinate and pertinacious in it, to harden them in their Schism, and
render it very difficult to reclaim them from it.

But what is that great Purity our Dissenters thus boast of? Is it a greater
Purity of Doctrine? No; for herein they acknowledge we agree, and embrace the
same Faith. Is it a greater Purity of Life? This is indeed pretended, but
experience has abundantly consuted this pretense, and discovered the
Hypocrisy. Is it then a greater Purity of Worship? Yes, this is the great
Thing; for Ours (say they) is clogged with Ceremonies, and mixed and blended
with the Inventions of Men.

But are not their Prayers the Inventions of Men? Yea, Do they not proceed from
the present and sudden Conceptions of their own Brain? Which sure cannot be
half so Wise or Pure, as more deliberate and well-weigh'd Composures: And as
for Ceremonies, Are not their various and Antic Gestures in Prayer, which
serve but to expose the Worship of God, far more Improper and Impure too, than
the decent Ceremonies of the Church, which help to make it more Uniform and
Solemn? Is not hasty Speech delivered in Mimical Postures and Actions, much
more unbecoming Divine Service, than a Grave and well-ordered Devotion?

But their Worship is more Spiritual than others, for they Pray more by the
Spirit.

How so? Do their Prayers come more from the Heart and Spirit than other Men's?
For that is all the Praying by the Spirit, since the ceasing of Inspiration.
And who will presume to judge of that? Yea Is not the Heart more hindered and
called off in their Prayers, by the Invention of Matter and Words, than in
others where both these are prepared to their hands? I hope they do not pretend
to Pray by the immediate dictates and suggestions of the Holy Ghost, as the
Apostles did; if they do, they must work a Miracle that we may believe them,
and then we shall reckon all their Prayers of as great Authority as the Holy
Scripture; if they cannot, they must excuse us, if we condemn their depending
upon such divine and sudden Suggestions, of great Rashness and Presumption; and
that theirs is so far from a more Spiritual way of Worship, that it is rather
more Carnal, and scarce deserves the name of Divine Worship

And yet here lies the great mystery of this Artifice; for these Men take
Praying Extempore, or by present Conceptions, to be Praying by the Spirit, and
so call it a Spiritual way of Worship; whereas Praying by a Form, is styled
stinting of the Spirit, and so that must not be allowed to be Spiritual, but
Formal Worship; and by this device, they set the Ears of the People a itching
after the one, and turn them away, or make them deaf to the other.

Now this Falacy may be easily apparent to any, that considers that some of the
vilest Wretches, and greatest Monsters of Impiety that ever lived, have been
most famous for this talent of Extempore Prayer: We read of one actually in
League with the Devil, Vid. Raviliac Rodivivu-, Major Were.
who had such a Fluency this way, that he was admired by all, but could be
imitated by none that came near him; And will any ascribe the Prayers of such a
Wretch, made up of Sorceries and the vilest Abominations, to the Spirit of God?
Are they not rather the Diabolical suggestions of the Evil Spirit, and to be
ascribed to the true Author the Devil, who is the Father of all Lies and
Impostures? And certainly he that considers what bad things have been vented in
such Prayers, will plainly see it to be not only a Belying, but Blaspheming the
Holy Ghost, to entitle them to Him.

But it is time to show the evil and danger of this device. And,

First; This pretense of Purer Ordinances and purer Worship, has proved a
principle of great Instability and Giddiness in Religion; for when some Men
began to refine upon the Established Church, and set up Purer Ordinances, Have
not others risen up who thought them not pure enough, and refined again upon
them; yea, Does not one Sect continue still refining upon another, and God
knows when and where it will end? Have not these double and treble Refiners
almost refined away all their Religion, and left little more than the Name and
pretense of it? Is it not dwindled into Air and Speculation, and almost lost in
a crowd of endless scruples and disputes? How little of the life and spirit of
Religion appears in Men's lives, and how few can show their Faith by their
Works? Which are the sad effects of this Reforming and Refining Humor.

Again; This has made the generality of People despise all Godly Forms, though
far more conducing to the purity of Faith and Devotion, than other newfangled
Methods; for a Form of sound Words may preserve soundness in the matter of our
Prayers, and prevent indecencies in the manner of them; whereas Extemporary
Effusions can do neither, for there much unsound Matter, and many unseemly
Expressions may and do frequently drop from those that use them.

Moreover, many ignorant and wicked Persons, who have been eminent for this
Spiritual way of Praying, have encouraged themselves in their Wickedness upon
the account of this Gift, and too many still flatter themselves on the same
account, that they are the Children of God, and endowed with his Spirit;
notwithstanding all their Wickedness.

Others again, for lack of this Gift, have been apt to despond, as if they
wanted that which should chiefly recommend them unto God: And both of them have
thereby grievously deceived both themselves and others.

Besides, This pretense of greater Purity naturally leads to Schism and
Separation; for he that offers a Purer Model, shall be sure to draw Disciples
after him; and many Men being too much given to change, are apt to hearken to
any higher offers and degrees of Purity; there are some who dream of Purity and
Perfection here in this life, and these will easily listen to any tenders and
advances toward it: This will cause them to divide and separate from others,
vainly thinking themselves advanced to a higher Form in Christ's School, and to
have attained to greater measures of Perfection; which naturally leads not only
to Separating, but Vilifying one another; for they that take themselves to be
of a higher Class, will scorn to join or converse with those of a lower Form;
and as others swell in their thoughts and conceits above them, so will they
make them too the object of their contempt and scorn; hence we find the
Presbyterians, who had declaimed against the Church for making an Idol of the
Common Prayer, were by the Independents, and other Sectaries told, That they
made a greater and worse Idol of their Covenant; and they who had styled the
Liturgy and Episcopacy the Calves of Dan and Bethel, found after, the Directory
and Presbytery branded with the same names, and they too accounted the greatest
Calves that most admired them.

Thus you see to what pass declaiming against public Order, and pretending to
purer Ordinances, may bring matters to, which cannot but give great disturbance
to any Church or Kingdom; whereas the Wisdom that is from above, is not only
pure, but peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, free from pride, full of
good works, without partiality, and without hypocrisy, James 3.17, 18. If you
will bring the pretenses of Dissenters to this Test, it is to be feared Mean
Tekel may be written on them, they are weighed in the balance, and found
wanting in all these things. I am,

Yours, A. B.

LETTER V.
SIR,
I Find you sensible in your last, of the great mischief of some Men's pretenses
to greater Purity, and a more Spiritual way of Worship, and what great
advantage they have given to Sectaries to multiply and increase their Parties.
I shall proceed therefore to a

Fourth Artifice made use of to that purpose, and that is to cry up Peace and
Unity, though their Actions tend all the while to destroy and undermine them.
They know the Holy Scriptures abound every where with Precepts and Exhortations
to Peace and Unity, and what pressing Arguments and motives are made use of to
that end.

The First things proclaimed to the World, upon our Blessed Savior's coming
into it, next to the glory of God, were peace on earth, and good will toward
men: The whole course of his Life and Doctrine, whilst he continued in it, was
to promote and give the highest Instance and Example of them. The last Legacy
he bequeathed to his Disciples and Followers at his leaving the World, was
Peace, which he willed them above all things to keep firm and inviolable; and
his last Prayer was, they all might be one. Accordingly we find the first
Christians, upon Christ's departure from them, were all of one heart and one
mind. And when upon the spreading of the Gospel every where, this bond of Peace
and Unity began to be broken by the insinuations of False Teachers, we find the
Apostles using all diligence to arm and caution all their Converts against
them, willing them to endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace, to stand firm to the Truth of the Gospel, and to be perfectly joined
together in the same Mind, and the same Judgment. St. Paul strictly warned the
Corinthians against falling into Parties, and following of Factions, to the
prejudice of Peace and Unity; he heaped up many Arguments in his Epistle to the
Ephesians, to keep that bond inviolate; and because many false Teachers had
crept in among the Philippians, he beseeched them by all the endearments of
Christianity, to be like-minded, being of one accord and one mind.

Now the Dissenters knowing how much Peace and Unity are recommended and
inculcated in Holy Scripture, find it necessary to speak up for it; hence you
shall often hear them commending Peace, and seemingly very desirous to have
Love and Unity preserved and promoted among Christians; they frequently lament
the lack of Love in the World, and bewail the want of those due Tempers and
peaceable Dispositions that should unite us.

This gains them the reputation of Meek, Quiet, and Peaceable Men, and That
gains them Proselytes, who are made to believe, That to be followers of them,
is to be followers of Peace. They, Good Men! (say some of their deluded
Disciples) are all for Peace, they are sorry to find so much Hatred among Men;
they Preach up nothing more than Peace and Love, and are always Praying for the
Peace of Jerusalem.

But what truth is there in all these fair speeches and pretenses? Why, little
or none; For what peace, said Jehu, while the whoredoms of Jezebel, and her
witcherafts are so many? Quid verba audiam, facta dum Videam? What heed is to
be given to words, when deeds confute them? Their gathering Disciples, and
making Parties, are plain breaches of that Peace which they seem to cry up; and
their Schism and Separation a manifest breach of Unity; What Peace had Zimri
who slew his Master? Do not some speak much of Peace when they are making ready
for Battle? Do not many seem quiet and harmless Creatures, whilst it is not in
their power to be otherwise, who yet are all the while hoping and waiting for
advantages, and want nothing but opportunity to break out into open
Hostilities? These are not the Sons, but Enemies of Peace, who seek to supplant
what they would be thought to maintain; and it is but a false trick to cry
Peace, Peace, when their aims are Dominion, or Destruction.

But what is the Peace they thus speak up for? And what is the design or
meaning of it?

Why, it is an indulgence in their Schism, to be let alone to draw Disciples
after them, and increase their Party; to be allowed to fill their Conventicles,
and deceive the People without Molestation; this, like good peaceable Men, they
will be content with at present, till they can become strong enough to get more.

So that this is a false Peace, and is indeed no better than a fatal security,
whereby they endeavor to lull their Followers asleep in their Schism; and to
blind the Eyes of the World, that they may not discern the evil and danger of
their ways.

But there is another branch of this Artifice that must not be omitted; and
that is, their declaiming against differences and divisions, when the whole
course of their Actions tend all the while to promote them. This piece of
falsehood you may easily discover by an ordinary observation; they know well
enough that Love and Unity are necessarily destroyed by divisions; they are
aware likewise what advantage they give to the common Enemy, what trouble they
are to all Good Men, and what scandal they bring upon Religion it self; and
therefore they must not be thought to have any heart or hand in causing
Divisions, no, they are too sensible of the evil, to be found the Promoters of
them; they bewail the Distempers and Disorders of the Times: It Is a sad thing
(says one) that Unity, which is so good and pleasant a thing in the Eyes of God
and Man, should be so little regarded. It Is much to be lamented (says another)
that there should be such discord and Divisions found among Christians.

Whence then should these Divisions come? And who are the Authors of them? Not
They to be sure, for they, good men, are all for love and unity, though their
Actions proclaim the quite contrary, and betray the falsehood of their
Pretenses; they are only for healing our Breaches, though they are all the
while making of Parties to widen and increase them; they are for uniting of
Protestants, and at the same time draw as many into Schism and Separation as
they can.

But what have they to evade this guilt that lies so plainly at their doors?
Why, it is the Liturgy and the Ceremonies must bear the blame, though no
Christian Church was ever without the one, and no Divine Worship can be
decently or orderly performed without the other. It Is a sad thing (says a
gifted Brother) that such Bones of Contention should be thrown in the way of
Christians; surely if they that composed the Common Prayer had dreamt that it
would create so many Divisions, Tumults and Distractions, they would never have
found either heart or hand to lift up to the promoting of it. Alas poor Man! he
might have said as well, that the Penmen of the Holy Scriptures would never
have wrote as they did, if they had dreamt what bad use Heretics and
Schismatics would make of it, and what perverse Disputes and Divisions would
be raised about it: 'T was not the Composing, no nor yet the enjoining the
Common Prayer, which is a pious and excellent model of Devotion, but some men's
raising a dust before the eyes of the People, that they may not see the
usefulness and excellency of it, that have created all these distractions and
disputes about it.

But when these Men are pressed with their causing divisions, beyond a
possibility of a fair Reply, they tell us, that there must be Heresies and
Divisions, that they who are approved may be made manifest, 1 Cor. 10.

But must not the Authors and Abettors of divisions be made manifest too? Does
not the same Apostle bid us to mark them that cause divisions, and avoid them?
Signifying, that Heretics and Schismatics should have a Brand or Mark set
upon them, that they may be known and shunned by all Christians, as the Bane
and Pest of any Church and Kingdom.

And now I think this Artifice is pretty well detected, and a vulgar Eye may
plainly see the evil and danger of it; for if heaping up different Teachers be
not a breach of Unity, and drawing Men from an Established Church be not
causing Divisions, I know not what is: Does not the Apostle blame the divided
dialect of the Corinthians, when one said, I am of Paul, another I am of
Apollo, and another I am of Cephas, etc. though they proceeded not so far as to
break Communion? And if the bare crying up different Teachers in the same
Church, be there branded for Schism, How much wider must the breach be, when
they withdraw from the Communion of it, and set up separate Meetings, and
different ways of Worship in opposition to it?

This is plainly the case of our Dissenters; and if St. Paul rebuked those
lesser Schisms and Divisions, of preferring some Teachers before others within
in the Church, as signs of Carnality, and degrees of Apostasy; how much greater
must the fault be, to make a Schism from the Church, by dividing from the
Worship and Communion of it?

Neither is the danger hereof less apparent than the Sin; for this has a
pernicious influence, not only on the persons thus seduced from it, who are
thereby rent and torn from the Body of Christ, and hardened in a dangerous and
deadly Schism; but on the whole Church, whose Peace and Unity is thereby
broken, and being deprived of many of its Members, is thereby weakened and laid
open to the Assaults of its greatest Enemies.

These and many more are the sad effects of this Device, and must be charged on
those Craftsmen who talk much of Peace and Unity, the better to supplant both;
and declaim against Divisions, merely to promote and propagate them. I am,

SIR, Yours, A. B.

LETTER VI.
SIR,
I Showed in my last the Craft of Dissenters in crying up Unity, and decrying
Divisions; and how by that means they cunningly destroy the one, and promote
the other. I proceed now to a

Fifth Artifice of theirs to support their Schism, and that is, Their Censuring
the Lives and Actions of those within the Church, the better to commend theirs
who Dissent from it.

And herein, again, they are the followers of the Pharisees, a great part of
whose Religion consisted in Censuring the Lives, and Scorning the Persons of
other Men. Our Savior has observed of them, Matt. 7.3. that they were sharp
and quick in espying a mote in their brother's eye, when they could not discern
a beam in their own. They beheld the faults of others in a magnifying Glass,
which made them aggravate all their failings, when all the while they could see
nothing amiss in themselves, and easily overlooked their own Enormites.

A Learned Author has observed of them, That they had an Eye upon every Man's
Life except their own, and mightily concerned themselves in others Behavior;
they had a reproof for every Man's faults, great or small, but were still very
favorable and indulgent to themselves.

And herein they are exactly imitated, if not outdone by our Dissenters, who
delight in nothing more than censuring the Lives, and condemning the Actions of
other Men; Is there any thing more obvious than this in all their Discourse and
Conversation? With what pleasure do they insist upon and aggravate other Men's
failings? Hurting their Neighbors Credit, sometimes by open Calumnies, which
is the Arrow that flies by day; and sometimes by secret Whispers, which is the
Pestilence that walks in darkness, and wounds without being seen: How freely
shall you hear them taxing the Actions, and talking of the Miscarriages of
other Folk? How eloquent are they wont to be upon this Subject? With what heat
and concern! With what seeming zeal and warmth does this reviling Language drop
from them! Yea, Do they not place a great part of their Religion in censuring
the Wickedness of the times, crying out upon the Badness of Men's Lives, and
shaking their Empty Heads at the Naughtiness of their Ways?

Now you must not think that these bolts are shot at Them, or that any of the
Party are to be reckoned in the number of these Wicked ones; no, they are those
Righteous Souls in Sodom, who are vexed with the filthy Conversation of the
Wicked, and for whose sake the rest are spared. It Is the Churchmen, and they
that follow the Common Prayer, that are guilty of all these Enormities: We find
one of them telling us in Print, That they who like this kind of Worship, are
generally Ignorant, Profane, Superstitious, Time-servers, Fearful,
Unbelievers, Haters of those that are Good, Drunkards, Adulterers, etc. Well
said, thou Accuser of the Brethren! throw Dirt enough, and to be sure some will
stick. In another place he adds, That they are generally Persons much estranged
from the Life of God, and little acquainted with the Power of Godliness. Alas,
Good Man! he is grieved at the heart to see the deadness and formality of such
Worshippers. Another of these Godly Brethren tells us, That the Bishops are an
Earthly Generation, and savor not the things of God; and that there is more of
God and Religion in some one Congregation of a Silenced Minister, than in all
the Bishops Families in England. Are not these Charitable and Clean-mouth'd
Souls? Or rather, are not their Tongues set on Fire of Hell?

But what is the Design of all these rude Censures and Calumnies? Why, to draw
the People from the Established Church, and to persuade them to come out from
such an unsanctified Crew; and withal to invite them to the Conventicle, where
they will find better Company, and join with the Assembly of the Saints.

How serviceable this Stratagem has been to increase and keep up the Party, is
obvious to observe. For

This gratifies the natural Pride and Ambition of Men's Hearts, who are willing
to be thought better than other Men; and are easily persuaded to hearken to,
and believe those that tell them so. Again,

This gratifies the Spleen and Animosity that some have against their
Neighbors, thus to vent their malice in Censures and evil Reflections on their
Life and Manners; a Religion that allows and commends these things, must be
very grateful to Flesh and Blood, and cannot want many Followers. Moreover,

This cherishes in Men a mighty love and conceit of themselves, making them
think, that they hate and abhor those sins themselves, which they thus Censure
and Condemn in others.

Besides, all Men desire an easy Religion, and would willingly go to Heaven the
nearest and softest way that may be; now what can be more easy than to Saint
themselves by defaming others? And who would not embrace a Religion that will
indulge Men in their Vices, if they do but declaim against them, and censure
them in other People? Yea, it is a pleasing and delightful thing to some Persons
to find faults in other Men, for it gives a seeming satisfaction in their own
innocence, or at least gives them the reputation of their own freedom from them.

In short, this declaiming against Vice, and lamenting the Iniquity of the
times, gains them the reputation of being thought more Prous than other men,
and serves all those secular ends they propound in it: Our Savior tells us of
the Pharisees, that they had their reward; that is, they gained the Applause of
the world, and the Wealth of others; which were the things they aimed at in
their seeming Zeal; and this is such a plausible and profitable piece of
Religion, that it will be sure to have many Disciples.

But is it any part of true Religion to censure the Lives and Actions of
others? Or have they that use to do so, fewer faults and more Religion than
their Neighbors? No, in no wise. For

First; This is so far from being any part of Religion, that it is none at all;
yea, it is quite contrary to, and destructive of it; for Charity is the life of
Christianity, and the bond of perfectness, without which, he that lives is
counted dead before God. Now Charity, you know, covers a multitude of sins;
and is so far from Censuring, that it Excuses, what it may, the failings of
others, and rather hides than discloses another's nakedness: He that wants
this, may indeed have the show and appearance, but has nothing of the
substance and reality of true Religion; for that makes us to keep at home and
reform our own Lives, not send us abroad to pry into and condemn the Lives of
others; and certainly, if we can lay no claim to Charity, we have nothing to
show for the truth and sincerity of our Christianity.

Again 2dly. They that are so forward to Judge and Censure others, are commonly
so far from being better, that they are worse than other Men; their want of
Charity ranks them among the greatest of Sinners; we find the Pharisees, who
were Proud, Boasters of themselves, and likewise rigid Censurers of others,
were by our Savior condemned for the vilest Hypocrites; they laid heavy
burdens on others, which they themselves would not touch with the least of
their finger; And it is still the practice of their Followers, to Commend
themselves by Disparaging of others; and to raise the Trophies of their own
Honor, upon the Spoils and Ruins of their Neighbors.

Yea, this practice is frequently made a Cloak, not only to cover, but to act
under it the greatest Villainies: He that designs to undermine, or put a Cheat
upon his Neighbor, shall inveigh bitterly against the Iniquity of the times;
and complain much of the Lives and Manners of other Men; and by that means
seeks to gain the Credit of a Saint, that he may the better act the part of an
Impostor. They that have a mind to advance themselves, or to intrude into
places of Power and Profit, shall inveigh against the Persons, and find fault
with the Actions of those that are employed in them, and by this Art shall
oft-times Prefer themselves to the Hindering or Dispossessing of better Men.

Now this will lead us to consider the evil and danger of this Artifice: for
beside the many and great Injuries that are hereby done to Mankind; it is
usurping the Throne of God, and intruding into his Tribunal; Who made thee a
Judge? May be asked of all such insolent Censurers of other Men, who intrude
into this Office without any Commission. Judge nothing before the time, says
the Apostle; so that these Men forestal the Day of Judgment, and take God's
work out of his Hands, who thus presume to sit in Judgment upon their Brethren,
and pronounce Sentence in things that belong not to them; Who art thou (says
the same Apostle) that judge another man's servant; to his own master he
stands or falls? So that this is a high affront and indignity offered to God
thus to Arraign the Actions of our Fellow Creatures; and without any Authority
to Condemn and pass Sentence upon his Servants.

And as the guilt hereof is great, so is the danger of it no less; for the
Justice of God cannot suffer such an insolent invasion of his Authority to go
unpunished; Think thou, O man, that judge another, that thou shall escape
the judgment of God? No; they shall have judgment without mercy, who show no
mercy, and their damnation is just, who are so ready upon all occasions to
Condemn their Brethren. Our Blessed Savior's Advice is, Judge not, that ye be
not judged; for with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with what
measure ye mete, shall be measured to you again: Let him that is innocent cast
the first stone; and if we cannot justify our selves, we should not be so
forward to condemn others: Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, that judge;
for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self.

I shall conclude this Artifice, with that Advice given to the Pharisees; Thou
Hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thy own eye, and then shall thou see
clearly to cast out the mote out of thy Brothers eye. I am,

SIR, Yours, A.B.

LETTER VII.
SIR,
FInding that you have well considered the Last; I proceed now to a

Sixth Artifice of our Dissenters, and that is, to style the Lawful and Wise
Injunctions of our Superiors, by the odious name of Impositions; a term
importing more of fraud and doubledealing, than truth and justice in them. This
comes (says one) to justify the Impositions; as if it were a crime to
vindicate public Orders and Constitutions; and to speak up for them, were to
be an abetter of Fraud, and an encourager of Imposture: If we tell them of the
unreasonableness of Separation, they fly upon us with the mischief of
Impositions; and rather than own themselves Schismatics, will make their
Governors Impostors.

But what is the design of putting this ill name upon good Laws? Why, the plain
design is to keep the People from complying with them, and to hinder all
Conformity and Obedience to them: Should they suffer them to pass under the
ancient style of Laws, Ordinances, or Injunctions, they might put in a just
claim to an Observance of them, and the People be thereby tempted to yield due
Reverence and Obedience to them; and therefore to prevent this, which would be
the Ruin of their Cause, they must give them a bad name, which they know is the
ready way to make them despised. Nonconformity being a breach of wholesome
Orders and Establishments, is wholly supported by Disobedience to them; and
therefore they must not be called Laws or Statutes, lest the guilt of breaking
them should awaken their Consciences, and stare too much in their Face; but
they must be branded with the black Character of Impositions, that they may
with the better color and greater safety shake off the Observance of them.
This will serve to keep the People from the Church, where they are made to
believe, that they are only imposed upon; and keep them to the Conventicle,
where they are told they are more fairly and truly dealt with. And how useful
this is to preserve and propagate the Schism, is very easy to imagine.

Again; By this device the Dissenters can shift off all the blame of the
Divisions from themselves, and lay them at others doors; which is indeed a
great piece of Art, and stands them in good stead; for if they are charged with
the danger and evil consequents of our unchristian Divisions and Separations,
they presently throw off all the guilt of them from themselves, and lay it upon
the Impositions; they, good men! are in no fault, but they who have made the
yoke of Conformity intolerable, by laying too much upon the backs of their weak
Brethren, and making the Burden too heavy for their tender Consciences to
bear; by this Artifice they seek cunningly to discharge themselves of all the
troubles and commotions in these Kingdoms, which they put not upon their own
stubbornness and disobedience to good Laws, which is the true cause of them;
but upon their Governors for Imposing upon them, and making the yoke of
Government too heavy and hard to be born.

But what are those Laws which they fix this odious brand upon, and call by the
nickname of Impositions?

Why, they are the good Orders and Constitutions of the Church, appointed only
for the external Reverence and Decency of Divine Worship; it is the Liturgy and
Discipline of the Church that must go under this infamous Character, to keep
their Followers from all due Submission and Obedience to them. And as the first
Enemies of Christianity arrayed the ancient Christians in Bear-Skins and
Goat Skins, that they might be the more worried and baited by the Multitude; so
have the Architects of Schism put this vile Title on wholesome Orders, to make
them the more hated and abhorred by the People.

Hence we read, That when King Charles the First, out of a Pious Zeal for the
Unity and Uniformity of all the Churches in his Dominions, Ordered a Liturgy to
be Composed and Used in the Church of Scotland, which was no more than has
been practiced in all Christian Churches, and well enough became a Christian
Prince to do; What loud outcries against Impositions were raised by some
Turbulent and Factious Spirits in that Kingdom? Who thereupon brake out in an
unnatural War and Rebellion against their Lawful Sovereign; yea, and had the
Impudence too to charge all that Blood upon that Pious Prince, which was
wickedly shed by those Impious Traitors. By which we plainly see the mischief
of this Device.

And though abundantly enough has been written by our own and Foreign Divines,
to take off this false Imputation, yet the cry must still go on, to continue
and propagate the Schism.

But what is it that makes the Burden of Impositions (as they call them) so
heavy? Why

First; It Is the giving of Assent and Consent to all that is contained in, and
prescribed by the Book of Common Prayer. This they are continually buzzing in
the Ears of the People, though they are no way concerned in it, and so fright
them from the Communion of the Church by their feigned and imaginary
Scare-Crows; for this is no where required of them, and consequently there can
be no reason of frighting them with this Bugbear, but only to keep them from
the public Worship. The Minister indeed, who is to offer up the public
Prayers of the Church, is required to give his Assent to them: And can any
thing be more reasonable, than that he that is called to this Office, should be
satisfied in the Soundness of the public Devotion; Is it fit that any should
Officiate this way, who doubts of the Truth or Usefulness of the public
Service? Must not this occasion great Coldness and Hypocrisy in the Worship of
God? If they think the serving of God by the Common Prayer, be a Service
pleasing unto him, Why can they not Assent and Consent to it? If they do not,
How can they be fit to Officiate, or indeed at any time to join in the Use of
it? So that this, if well considered, will be found rather a needless Cavil,
than a just Exception against the prescribed Worship. But

2dly. The Imposing This, and no Other, adds to the weight of the Impositions,
and makes the Burden too heavy.

How so? Is not a standing Liturgy, containing all the Offices of Religion,
sufficient to all the ends of Piety and Devotion? Are not Peace, Unity, and
Order, best preserved by one Uniform Established way of Worship? Are Men
imposed upon, unless they are left free to what way of Worship they please,
which necessarily breeds Confusion and every Evil work? Of this our own sad
Experience may abundantly fatisfy us, and withal plainly show the fallacy of
this Artifice.

Now the mischief of this Device is too visible both in Church and State; for
the crying out upon Impositions, and branding good Laws with that odious Name,
has kept many from all Obedience to them. In short, this has bred a contempt
of Authority, and involved whole Kingdoms in Blood and Confusion.

But there is another branch of this Artifice, and that is, The stiling the
just Penalties of wholesome Laws, by the hareful Name of Persecution: This is a
plain consequent of the former; for when Men think themselves imposed upon by
public Orders and Constitutions, they will soon think themselves Persecuted
when they are Punished for the breach of them; hence we find the Dissenters
often setting up the cry of Persecution, by which they would have their
Governors to be thought Tyrants, and themselves the Saints that suffer under
them; yea, they compare their Condition to that of the Primitive Christians,
and would make the World believe, that when they are punished for the breach of
Unity, Peace, and Order, they are as much persecuted, as those first Christians
in all their Sufferings for the Truth of Christianity.

But this Artifice being already fully detected, I shall add no more here, but
refer you to it. I am,

SIR, Yours, A. B.

LETTER VIII.
SIR,
YOU see the Mischief of calling things by wrong Names, as stiling public Laws
by the Name of Impositions, and the Penalties annexed to the Breach of them, by
the Name of Persecution; which has made many too careless of the one, and
fearless of the other. I come now to

A Seventh Artifice of Dissenters, and that is, to keep the People in Ignorance
of the Nature and Danger of Schism, or else to feed them with wrong Notions and
Conceits of it.

Indeed the Romish Priests are not more studious to conceal the Corruptions of
their Church, than these Men are to disguise the Errors of the Conventicle.

This is evident in the Matter of Schism; for though it be one of the greatest
Sins that can be committed, being a tearing in pieces the Body of Christ; and
as far exceeds any other Vice, as rending one Limb from another is worse than a
Corrupt Humor; yet the People must not know so much, the guilt of it must be
hid from their Eyes; yea, it must be looked on rather as a Duty, than a Crime;
and Separation from the Communion of the Established Church, must be a
withdrawing from the Synagogue of Satan. If any Churchman shall presume to
set forth the heinousness of this Sin, or make so bold as to charge Dissenters
with it, they are taught to call it Railing; and instead of reforming the Evil
in their own Persons, must agree together to run down the Preacher; this is too
well known in experience to need any proof; for none ever reproved this Sin in
them, but they said he Railed; and though it be Zeal and Duty in them to
inveigh against the Faults of others, yet it is Malignity of Spirit, and Hatred
of the Power of Godliness, to lay open their Miscarriages.

But are these Men all this while free from the guilt of this Sin, which they
are so unwilling to hear of?

No, notoriously guilty of it; for a causeless Separation from a true Church,
is by the Confession of their own Teachers, acknowledged to be the Sin of
Schism, as they often declared in their Arguings against the Brownists of old,
and the Sectaries of later Days. Now the Wisest of them generally own the
Church of England to be a True Church, and none of them with all their skill
have ever showed any just cause for Separation from it; and therefore breaking
from the Worship and Communion of it, cannot possibly be excused from Schism.

How then comes it to pass, that their Teachers conceal this from them, and not
only suffer this guilt to lie upon them, but lead and encourage them too in
that evil, which themselves condemn in others?

Why, the plain Reason is to preserve and uphold the Party; for should the
People once know the nature and danger of Schism, and be sensible how guilty
they are of it, the Dissenting Cause will fall to the ground, and the whole
business of the Conventicle be soon at an end; and therefore to prevent that,
the People must be kept in ignorance of their Duty, lest they should return to
it; and not be permitted to know the evil of Separation, lest they should turn
from it. So that Ignorance too is the Mother of these Men's Devotion; and they
who speak so much of their great Light, are merely led on and kept in Darkness.

But by what Arts do these Men thus hoodwink and blind the Eyes of the People?
Why,

To hinder them from the knowledge of Schism, they keep them as much as
possible from hearing any Discourses of it; they permit them not to Read those
Books that would discover to them the Evil of it: If they hear of any Book
written to that purpose, or find it put into the hands of any of their
Followers, they caution them against it as a dangerous Piece, and tending to
subvert the Power of Godliness. Thus do they keep their Followers in Ignorance
by the same methods the Romish Priests do theirs.

If any of their Teachers publish any thing, though never so mean, to hide the
Schism, and harden their Followers in it, they send it about in Triumph,
Posting in up like Quack Bills in Marketplaces, and other places of resort;
thereby spreading it among the deluded Vulgar, who are apt to magnify the
Performance, to lessen the Sin.

But if, notwithstanding their endeavors, the Eyes of any begin to open, and
they come to see the Error of their ways, great care is taken to put out that
Light, and to stifle such Convictions: If by any means they smell out the
danger of Schism, they make them believe it to be only a Theological
Scarecrow, whereby Men in Power would enforce their own Dictates. But is
breaking the Peace and Unity of the Church a mere Scarecrow? Is the dividing
of Christ himself, and rending in sunder the Communion of Saints, which is the
nature of Schism, only a Bugbear to fright Fools and Children? Certainly they
can be no living Members of Christ's Body, who are so insensible of these
Convulsions.

But they tell them farther, That the Papists charge us with the same guilt,
and brand us as much for Schismatics as we do them. But

Is there the same reason? Have not the Terms of their Communion been plainly
proved to be Sinful, and such as we cannot safely join in? And has this been
ever proved of ours? Nay, Do not themselves own the contrary by their
Occasional Communion with us? And, I hope, there is some Difference between a
voluntary departing from the Church, and being driven from it.

But to keep them in their Schism, they add, That the Terms of Communion should
be only Scriptural and Unexceptionable; whereas Ours are Doubtful, and such
against which many have great Scruples and Exceptions.

But is there any thing, how wisely soever ordered, against which weak and
wilful Persons may not entertain some Scruples? May not cunning and designing
Men raise a mist before the Eyes of the People, and keep them from discerning
the clearest Truths? And must such artificial Doubts justle out a plain and
necessary Duty? I hope the Wisdom of Superiors may direct and overrule in case
of Doubts, and their Authority may carry weight enough to weigh down such
Scruples.

When they are beaten out of these Subterfuges, they tell the People, That
Schism is a falling off from the Communion of the Catholic Church, not of
This, or That particular Church; so that they may continue Members of Christ's
Church in general, though they divide from the National or Parish Church where
they live.

But is there any Communicating with the Catholic Church, without being in
Communion with some particular Church? Can a Member belong to the Body, that is
not joined to any part of it? No more can any be a Member of Christ's Body,
that is divided from that part of it where he lives: So that if the Church of
England be a sound Part of the Catholic Church, as is generally owned by all
sober Dissenters, we cannot divide from it, without dividing from the Whole,
and separating from the Catholic Church of Christ.

But farther, to palliate and propagate their Schism, they tell them, That it is
no unjust Separation, till it proceed so far as to deny the Faith; and whilst
they keep the Christian Faith, they cannot justly be charged with Schism.

But is there no difference beteween Apostasy and Schism? Is it not one thing
to deny the Faith, and another to forsake the Communion of the Church? May not
some be pretty sound, and tenacious too, of the Christian Faith, and so be
neither Heretics nor Apostates, who yet may Separate from the Worship and
Communion of the Church, and so be justly branded for Schismatics? Do not all
the ancient Fathers in their Disputes with the Heretics, carefully distinguish
between these Two? May we not see some breaking the Unity and Communion of the
Church, who yet do not renounce there Creed, or deny the Articles of the
Christian Faith? The confounding these Two, has not only confounded their
Notions, but brought great Confusion into the Church.

And yet at other times they would persuade them, That Schism is only a breach
of Love and Charity within the Church, and signifies no more than Divisions and
Contentions among the Members of the same Church, in crying up different
Teachers, as it happened in the Church of Corinth, when one said, I am of Paul,
another, I am of Apollo, etc. and this, say they, begot those Sidings and
Factions, which the Apostle there calls and reproves by the Name of Schisms.

Well; But if those lesser Differences and Sidings among the Members of the
same Church, be by the Apostle styled Schisms, and condemned as occasions of
great Heats and Animosities, How much more must those greater Variances of
breaking Communion, and setting up Separate Meetings and Ways of Worship
against each other be condemned for such? And how naturally these things tend
to destroy Love and Charity, is too plain, by those flames of Contention which
these sparks have already kindled.

But there is one thing more by which they mislead unwary People in this
matter, that must not be passed by, and that is, their making them believe,
That an Act of Parliament by granting a Toleration has taken off the Schism,
and removed the guilt of it; for we find the Ringleader of the Party venting
this wild Notion, Baxter's -- p. 32.
viz. If the Supreme Authority loosen our Obligation to the Parish Meeting, the
Iniquity upon this account is not to be found, and the Schism is gone; lo here!
says he, a way opened for the Parliament (if they please) to rid both the
trouble and scruple of Schism out of the Land.

But can they rid the Sin and Guilt of it too out of the Land? If not, it is fit
the Scruple and Trouble of it too should remain to keep Men from it; the Peace
and Unity of the Church is given in strict Charge by Christ and his Apostles to
all the Members of it; And is any Earthly Power able to loosen this Obligation?
Can Human Laws vacate the Authority and Obligation of Divine Laws? If so, we
might invert the Apostle's Question, and say, it is fitter to Obey men than God.
The Parliament indeed may take off the Temporal Penalties, which themselves
have annexed to the Sin of Schism; but the Guilt and Obligation to Eternal
Punishment, can be taken off by none but God only, who has laid it upon it.

And yet there is one way by which the Parliament may rid this evil out of the
Land, and that is, by Removing Schismatical Teachers, and Suppressing Seditious
Conventicles: And that way the Iniquity of it may not be found, and the Schism
may be gone. I am,

Yours, A. B.

LETTER IX.
SIR,
I Showed in my last, the Dissenters artificial concealing the nature and guilt
of Schism, and their feeding the People with false Notions of it, to continue
and increase their Party. I proceed now to

Another Artifice to this end, and that is, their mistaking or misinterpreting
sundry Passages of Holy Scripture, whereby they wrest it from the true sense,
and draw it in to serve their own purpose.

And herein again they are the Followers of the Pharisees, who by their false
Glosses, and perverse Interpretations, made void the Law of God. Of this many
Instances may be given; and that you may be the better satisfied of this
Device, I shall single out a few.

And the first I shall mention of these, shall be that of Deuteronomy. 4.2. Ye shall
not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from
it; that ye may keep the commandments of the Lord your God, which I command you.

From this Scripture they infer, That the Church of England has made several
Additions to the Word of God, and so turn the fault of the Schism upon her, by
clogging its Communion whith such uncommanded Conditions. Now the plain sense
of those Words is this, Ye shall not Transgress the Commandments of God, by
doing any thing contrary to them, which is to add to them; or by omitting any
thing required by them, which is to diminish from them. Now let the Wisest of
them show any one thing Appointed by the Church, that is forbidden by the Word
of God, or omitting any thing required by it, and then we shall own the Charge;
but if they cannot do this, which had been done long since, if it could have
been done at all, they must excuse us if we take them not only for false
Expositors of the Holy Scriptures, but false Accusers of the Holy Church.

The Additions there forbidden, are to the Substance of God's Word, by making
other and more Precepts and Prohibitions than that has made, and adding new
substantial Parts of Divine Worship; but cannot with any congruity of sense be
extended to the Circumstantials of it, as Time, Place, Habit, Gesture, and the
like; which though not particularly determined in Holy Scripture, are yet
necessarily implied in the general Rules of Order, Decency, and Edification
required in it.

And yet these Men will never leave asking that Question, Isa. 1.13.
Who has required these things at your hands? Though the nature of the Thing,
the general Rules of God's Word, and the Power set up by Christ in his Church,
to which we owe Obedience, have expressly required these things from us.

Yea, these rare Expositors have unwittingly fallen into that very Evil
themselves, which they condemn in others, by making more things Unlawful, than
God's Word has made so; and Forbidding many things which are no where
Forbidden by it; which is a plain Addition to the Substance of Religion.

But those words of Jeremy (say these Men), Jer. 7.31.19.5.
They built the high places of Tophet, to burn their sons and their daughters
in the fire, which I commanded them not, neither came it into my heart; lay the
stress of the Provocation, not upon doing what God had Forbidden, but in doing
what he had not Commanded them.

But how often must these Men be told, and by some of their own Party too, that
the meaning of those words, which I commanded them not, is the same with what I
had forbidden them; for so the thing there referred to expressly was, viz. their
offering their children unto Moloch: Yea, that Phrase, which I commanded them
not, is in the Old Testament generally applied to what God had Forbidden: They
offered strange fire which the Lord commanded not, Levit. 10.1. that is, which
he had forbidden them: They worshipped other Gods which I have not commanded,
i.e. which I have forbidden.

So that to make it necessary to have an express Command for every Circumstance
of Divine Worship, and to charge the doing any thing in it without such a
Command, for an Addition to God's Word, is it self a plain Addition to it,
where no such thing is either mentioned or required: Yea, the mistake hereof
has been so frequently and so fully laid open, that they must be past all
shame, that have the face to mention it any more.

Another Text perverted by these Artists, is that of Joshua 7.13. where Joshua
is commanded to Sanctify the People, because there was an Accursed thing among
them, which must be taken away, before Israel could have Peace, or stand before
their Enemies.

Now this Accursed thing was a goodly Babylonish garment, two hundred shekels
of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels; which Achan had stole, and hid
in the earth in the midst of his tent, ver. 21. which being done contrary to
the Covenant and Command of God, he troubled Israel, who could find no rest,
till Joshua, by God's Command, destroyed this Accursed thing, and Burnt Achan
who had purloined it.

But what use do these Expositors make of this Scripture? Why, a goodly one
indeed; the accursed thing, must be the Common Prayer; the Babylonish garment,
the Surplice; the wedge of gold, the Cross, and other Ceremonies; the shekels
of silver, the Consecrated Vessels of the Temple; and these being set up as so
many Idols in the Temple, must be all removed before there can be any Peace in
Israel. Is not this a rare Exposition? May not a pregnant Fancy interpret all
these in a different sense, calling the Covenant, the accursed thing, which
would give Three Nations no Peace till it was removed; may not the Babylonish
garment be the long Cloak, which has been made a Covering for much Rapine,
Oppression, and Dissimulation? May not the wedge of gold, be the great Idol of
Presbytery? And the silver shekels, the Silver Trumpets that sounded the Alarm
to War, and after cried up the great Diana of the Ephesians? All which being
set up as the abomination of desolation in the holy place, must be destroyed
before the Nation can be restored to Peace and Tranquillity. If they do not
like this Exposition, let them take heed how they offer at the like, since you
see an ordinary Wit may wrest such Passages to any purpose.

I shall mention but one Text more at present, that has been abused by these
Interpreters, and that is, that of St. Paul, in the 1 Cor. 10.32. Give no
offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Greeks, nor to the Church of God. In
which words the Apostle exhorted the first Christians to walk so warily and
inoffensively, as not to hinder the Conversion of any, that neither Jew nor
Gentile might be kept off from embracing Christianity, or hardened in their
enmity and opposition against it; and the plain sense and use we are to make of
it, is to beware that we do not lay any stumbling block in the way of
Christians, or be unto them an occasion of falling.

But what sense do these Learned Interpreters put upon these words? Why, they
take Offense there mentioned by the Apostle, not for an occasion of Sin, but
for any thing that discontents or displeases; and so would have Superiors take
heed of enjoining any thing that may grieve or displease the Godly Party,
meaning themselves; and indeed they are so tender, that a small matter will
grieve them; yea, if they have not their way, like froward Children, 'twill be
hard sometimes to keep them quiet; and so would have, not the Wisdom of
Superiors, but their own Fancies and Humors, the measure of Government. An
admirable Exposition to serve their purpose! and a singular Device to please
and propagate the Party; which is too well known to be farther insisted upon by

Yours, A. B.

LETTER X.
SIR,
ANother Artifice of Dissenters to uphold their Schism, is to promote the
Interest of the Party, and to confine the Offices of Kindness and Charity to
those of their own Sect. This was likewise the way of the Pharisees, of whom
our Savior observed, Mat. 5.46, 47. That they would only salute their own
brethren, and do good to none but such as did do good to them; meaning, that
they made those of their own Sect the sole Objects of their Courtesy and
Beneficence. We read of the Samaritans, that they would scarce show the way to
a Jew, or perform the common Offices of Humanity and Hospitality, but to those
of their own Party; and therefore we find, that when our Savior was passing
through a Village of the Samaritans, they denied him and his Disciples all
Entertainment, because his face was as though he would go to Jerusalem, Luke
9.52, 53.

A Learned Divine has observed of the Donatists of Old, Dr. Cave.
That they confined all acts of Benevolence and Civility to those of their
Sect; and upheld their Separation from the Catholic Church, by the Artifice of
Trade; for they would employ none to Till their ground, or to be their
Stewards, but such as espoused their Opinion; and so kept up their Party,
merely by Trading within themselves.

And has not this Device been made use of to the same purpose in our Days?
Has not Interest and Trade had a great hand in our Divisions? Have not some,
on whom others depend for their Work and Subsistence, employed none but those
of their own Faction? And have not many of the meaner sort been tempted to
Separate Meetings, merely to find encouragement from them? May we not see their
great diligence in promoting those of the Party to Places of Trust and Profit,
yea, in making Matches too, which they generally do within the Tribe, not only
to keep up the Old Stock, but to breed a new Race of Dissenters? These things
are too common and notorious to need any proof.

Now how serviceable this Stratagem is to support and increase the Party, is
easy to conceive; for Interest being the great Wheel that puts the World in
motion, that which best promotes and sets that a going, shall be sure to have
many Followers: We read of some that followed our Savior for the loaves, John
6.26, 66. and when they failed, walked no more with him; and there are many
still, that espouse a Party to get Bread; and enter into a seemingly Religious
Company, the better to carry on and advance their Trade. We are told of some,
whose gain is their greatest godliness; and though no man can serve God and
Mammon, yet these will be serving of Mammon, even when they appear the most
Zealous Servants of God. Their Teachers too are busy to promote the Interest
of their Followers, the better to promote their own; and labor hard to advance
their Trade, that they may have the richer Prize, and make the better
Merchandise of them. The Apostle makes mention of some unruly, vain talkers and
deceivers, who subvert whole houses, teaching things that they ought not, for
filthy lucres sake, Tit. 1.10, 11. and of those he declares, that whatever
pretenses they may make, they serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
belly, Romans 16.17. The love of money, says St. Paul, 1 Timothy 6.10. is the root
of all evil; and especially of the evils of Error and Divisions; for while some
have coveted it (says he) they have erred from the faith. This has made some
forward to vent, and others as ready to receive and be carried about with
strong delusions; and you need not doubt, but many will be still Coining New
Doctrines for their Disciples, whilst they can thereby Coin or Procure New
Money for themselves.

So that considering what a mighty influence worldly Interest has upon the
Minds of Men, it is no wonder that Seducers fish for Proselytes with this Bait,
and that so many are caught and led away by it.

But does Christianity allow the restraining our Charity to a Party? No; so far
from it, that it extends it to all Men; yea, to our very Enemies; for our
Blessed Savior has bid us, Matt. 5.44. to love our enemies, to do good to
them that hate us, and pray for them that despitefully use and persecute us;
this is to show our selves children of our Father which is in heaven; who
causes the Sun to shine upon all men, and sends rain promiscuously on the
good and bad, ver. 45. It Is a narrow and contracted Charity that is confined to
a Sect, which our Savior sharply rebuked in the Pharisees; If ye love them
(says he) that love you, what reward have you? do not even the Publicans the
same? And if you salute your brethren only, what do you more than others? do
not the very Publicans so? ver. 46, 47. This is a sort Mercenary and Hucstering
Love, that is to be found in the worst of Men, who place there Benefits there
where they may have them again with greater advantage; and serve a Party, only
to serve their own Honor and Interest; which is not to love our Neighbor but
our selves, and therefore Christ wills us to be perfect, as our heavenly Father
is perfect; meaning, that we should extend our Kindnesses, as God does his
Blessings, upon all Mankind, and avoid distinctions in the common Offices of
Humanity and Charity.

Indeed herein mainly consists the evil of this Artifice, that it naturally
tends to destroy Love, and to nourish Faction; for the contracting these Acts
and offices of Kindness to a Party, contracts the Heart and Affections too, and
shuts out others from any share in it, for none will admit them into their
Hearts, who find themselves excluded from theirs; mutual Conversation and
Kindness beget an universal Love and Good Will to Mankind; but restraining them
within the Limits of a Sect, restrains the Bowels too, and may beget indeed a
Love to some, but breeds a Hatred and Aversation from many more. This is too
evident in Towns, Countries, and Families, to need any proof; for Experience
(which is the plainest Argument) shows us how differences in Religion sour the
Minds, and alienate the Affections from one another. Men's withdrawing in their
Commerce, is soon followed with a withdrawing in their Communion; and they that
cannot meet together in God's House, can seldom meet together in their own. So
that confining the offices of Commerce and Charity to a Party, naturally
destroys the Love that is due to Mankind, and serves only to cherish a Faction.
Yea,

It tends to promote Hypocrisy as well as Division, for many needy Persons by
this means espouse a Sect, not to serve God, but the better to help themselves,
and become Proselytes, that they may become Favorites of the Party. Thus do
they make their Religion truckle to their worldly Interest; and under a color
of serving God, are all the while serving of Mammon; which is a mocking of God,
and one of the vilest pieces of Hypocrisy.

The Presbyterians highly blamed this of old, and proved Independency a
Faction, by their making use of this Stratagem, for they drew many Proud
Ambitious, and Covetous Persons into their Sect, by the hopes of Offices and
other places of Profit and Trust; they made many Proselytes of needy, decayed,
and broken Tradesmen, by helping them to live, and putting them in a way to get
something; they increased their Party, by befriending only such as turned to
them: This they condemned in the Independents, as the way to make Men
Hypocrites, and showed them to act not by any Principles of Duty and
Conscience, but by the wheels of Interest and Ambition. And may we not see them
daily playing the same Game? Do not the Sectaries increase and strengthen their
Parties, by promoting the Trade, procuring of Matches, and many other ways of
befriending such as come over to them?

I know you cannot be so great a stranger to the ways of those Men, as to be
ignorant of these things. I am,

SIR, Yours, A. B.

LETTER XI.
SIR,
ANother Artifice of Dissenters to support their Schism, is their working upon
the Weakness, the Wilfulness, and the Discontents of the People, to serve their
own Ends upon them. This Artifice has Three Branches, which must be
particularly laid open.

The First is, Their working upon the Weakness of the People, and making use of
their Ignorance to betray them: There are many among the Vulgar, who for want
of being trained up betimes in the way that they should go, have gone astray
ever after; and being never well settled in the Principles of Religion, have
been fickle and unstable in all their ways: Such as these lie open to the Craft
and Subtilty of Seducers, and are easily Perverted by them. It Is not to be
doubted, but that there are many wellmeaning Persons, who walk on in the ways
of Separation in the simplicity of their Hearts, that were first misled into
them through the simplicity of their Heads; for so St. Paul observes of some,
That by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans
15.18. Such Men for lack of timely Instruction, remain Children in
Understanding, and like them too, are tossed to and fro from Sect to Sect, and
carried about with every wind of Doctrine.

Now it is such as these that Dissenters work most upon, taking advantage of
their blind Zeal to mis-lead and impose upon them; hence you may observe their
Followers to consist chiefly of the Weaker Sex; who being led more by Fancy
than Judgment, are the easiest to be drawn into the snare, and the hardest to
be recovered out of it. A melting Tone, a whining Voice, affected Phrases,
vehement Gestures, and the like, have imposed upon the Weakness of many, who
have taken such false Fire for true Zeal, and thought That to be Religion,
which is nothing else but Phrenzy or Design.

Now the Evil of this Artifice must be obvious to any, that will observe the
dangerous Errors, and monstrous Opinions, that many have been drawn into by
this Sleight of Men, and cunning Craftiness, whereby they lay in wait to
Deceive; for these Men have strangely imposed upon the Credulity of the Vulgar,
and drawn them not only into bad Opinions, but the vilest Practices; and made
Treason, Murder, Oppression, and other gross Enormities, to appear abroad
under the Colors of Religion.

Such as these make their Markets of what is no way vendible, even the
Infirmities of their Brethren; and instead of pitying and assisting their
Weakness, work upon it to their Destruction; when they should be Eyes to the
Blind, they lead them out of the way, and carry them into Boggs and Ditches:
Which should make the common People more aware of these Craftsmen, and take
heed how they trust themselves in such hands.

2ly. Another Branch of this Artifice, is to work upon the Wilfulness of the
People, and to make use of their Headiness, as well as Ignorance, to confirm
them in their Schism. If you observe it, there are many among the Vulgar, who
though weak and ignorant enough, God knows, are yet very wilful and obstinate;
they are too wise to learn, and too stiff to stoop to the Wisdom of their
Betters. such as these the Dissenters work upon, knowing if they can but get
them into their Sect, they have them fast enough; their own Pride and
Obstinancy will hinder their return, and harden them against all Conviction;
hence the Leaders of the Schism are buisy to infuse Prejudices into them
against the Established Worship and Discipline, and to instill wrong Notions of
both, knowing if they are once entertained, they are fixed there, and 'twill be
hard to remove them; and therefore they endeavor to heat the Heads of such
Persons with a false Zeal, and that will harden their Hearts, and seal up their
Ears against Instruction. If these Artists can but draw the Vulgar into an
admiration of their Persons or Parts, they then attain their ends, and can lead
them where they please; their Errors then shall pass for Oracles; whatever
drops from them must be as true as the Gospel, and all their Dictates as
uncontrollable as those of the Infallible Chair.

Now the Mischief hereof is too open and visible to need any Discovery; for
Pertinaciae nullum dedit remedium Deus: Obstinacy is a Disease of the Mind, for
which there is no Cure; for it rejects the Use of all good Means, and renders
the Case of such as fall into it, desperate and remediless; he that is
obstinately addicted to an Error, wilfully shuts his Eyes against the Light,
and such a one must necessarily walk on in darkness, till he fall into the deep
Abyss of black and eternal Darkness; which should teach all Men to beware of
such Leaders, as thus darken the Minds, and harden the Hearts of their
Followers, and by both lead them on to the Gulf of Destruction. This will be
the Fate of such as receive not the Truth in the Love of it, but are led on to
believe a Lie, and carried away with strong Delusions. But there is,

3dly. Another Branch of this Artifice, and that is, Their working upon the
Discontents of People to draw them into the Schism. There are too many in the
World, of such peevish and perverse Tempers, that they take pet upon any slight
occasion, and, like Tinder, catch fire at every spark. One Man has not the
Honor he would have; another has missed such a Place or Preferment he
expected; a third has received some injury or Affront from his Neighbor; and
all these are put out of Humor, and grown Discontented: One Man's Greatness is
an Eyesore to another; some body or other has angered such a Choleric Man,
and he must be revenged. But the Misery is, they all seek their revenge upon
the Government; if any thing has disgusted them in the public Administration
of Affairs, they presently make it an occasion of Separation; and whatever
happens amiss in the State, makes them quarrel and fall out with the Church.

Now these Waspish and Choleric Persons, of which the World affords but too
many, are another sort of Men which our Dissenters mainly work on, lending an
Ear to their Complaints, and improving their Discontents into Separation, they
flatter them in the Justice of what they complain of, saying, What pity it is
that such good Men should not be employed in the Government; and crying shame
that such Worthy Persons should be neglected; and when by this means they have
inclined and prepared them for the Faction, they declare their readiness to
embrace them, and at their coming, with open arms receive them into it. Thus is
their Religion owing to the Ill Nature of the one, and the Subtilty of the
other, and the Profession of it, in both, made use of to Countenance what it
plainly forbids.

Now how serviceable this Stratagem is to increase the Party, is easy to
observe; for hereby great Numbers are drawn and invited into the Schism; and
all ignorant, wilful, and discontented Persons, run into the Faction, as into a
Common Sewer; if any become a Malecontent, or Disaffected in the State, he
shall soon be encouraged to be so in the Church, and his Religion shall receive
a Tincture from the Bitterness of his Spleen: If any has Falsified in his
Tithes, or been, Sued for them, he leaves his Minister, and away to the
Separate Meeting, where he is entertained with the pleasing Ditty, Why should
the Parson have One in Ten? And if he will not depend upon the Good Will and
Contributions of the Hearers, it is pity he should have any thing: If a Woman
has proved Unfaithful or Undutiful to her Husband, and thereby occasioned any
just Offense in the Family, away she goes to the Conventicle, where she is
received as a Saint, and the blame laid upon the innocent Husband at home.

In a word; If any for their Ill Behavior in the Church be justly
Excommunicated, or turned out of it, they presently betake themselves to the
Conventicle, where they who were rejected as great Sinners in the one, are
received as great Saints in the other. Thus is the Conventicle the Sink of the
Church, where the Refuse and Offscouring of the one, runs and empties it self
into the other.

Now is not this a vile and dangerous Stratagem, that leaves such an outlet
and encouragement to all manner of Vice? Must not this take away all the terror
of Discipline and Church Censures, to have such an easy way to be rid. of the
Fear and Trouble of both? What Check or Restraint can be put upon Immorality
and Vice, when there is such an artificial Method of evading the Shame and
Punishment of them?

This is a Matter well worthy of the Consideration of Superiors, to stop this
outlet of Impiety, and to shut the door that opens to so much Atheism and
Confusion. I am,

SIR, Yours, A. B.

LETTER XII.
SIR,
ANother Artifice of Dissenters to uphold their Schism, is a Pretense to
Christian Liberty: And herein they tread exactly in the very steps of the
Papists, who call for Liberty, though themselves will give none; yea, they
herein not only follow the steps, but act the part, and promote the very
Designs of the Papists; For did not the Roman Catholics struggle hard for this
Liberty, merely to bring about their own ends? And is it not well known how the
Dissenters joined with them, in their Endeavors of taking off the Penal Laws
and Test, which would have undermined the Reformation, and established Popery?

But what is that Christian Liberty these Men pretend to, and call so loudly
for? Why, it is a Freedom from the Observation of all Laws about Indifferent
things in the Worship of God; or their not being tied up to any other Rules in
these things, but such as they in their great Wisdom shall think fit; hence
they persuade the People, that to prescribe any thing in the Worship of God,
which he himself has not Commanded, is an invasion of his Prerogative, and an
infringement of Christian Liberty: But has God any where prescribed the
particular Times, Places, Habits, Gestures, and other Circumstances of Divine
Worship? Has he given any other than some general Rules for the more Decent
and Orderly performance hereof? No, it is certain he has not; why, then the
particular Determination of these Circumstances, wherein this Decency and Order
consists, must be left to that Power which Christ has set up in his Church:
For to leave every one to his own Liberty in these things, is a Principle of
Confusion, and must bring all manner of Indecency and Disorder into the Service
of God.

How then comes this to be called Christian Liberty? Has Christ any where
Commanded or Allowed any such Liberty in his Chuch, or exempted Christians from
Obedience to Authority in such Lawful and Indifferent things? No; he has given
both his Precept and Example to the contrary; for he was not only Obedient to
the Roman Power in all Lawful things, but paid all due Reverence and Obedience
to the Authority of the Jewish Church; he strictly observed the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Jewish Service, as well those of Human as Divine Appointment;
he kept to the Gesture used in Eating the Passover, Matthew. 26.20. and
punctually Conformed to all the Ceremonies of the Synagogue-Worship.

So that it is prevaricating with God, as well as deceiving the People, to tell
them, that Christ has dispensed with all Laws made for the external Order and
Decency of Public Worship, and given them a Liberty to behave themselves in it
as they please.

But does not the Apostle tell us, of a liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free; willing us, to stand fast in it, and not to be entangled again in the
yoke of bondage? Gal. 5.1. Yes; but that was a Liberty from the numerous and
burdensome Rites and Ceremonies of Moses's Law; which for the number and
uneasiness of them, are by St. Peter justly styled a Yoke, and such a one too,
as neither they nor their forefathers were able to bear, Acts 15.10. for their
Temples daily flowed with the Blood of their Flocks and Herds; their Altars
smoked with the most costly Incense and Perfumes; in a word, they were
prescribed to, almost in all the Punctilio's of Human Life, and few or no
things were left indifferent to them.

Now these things being for the most part Typical, and only shadows of good
things to come, were all to be done away when the Substance came; accordingly
at Christ's Coming all these Shadows vanished like darkness at the approach of
the Sun, and the cloudy Types of the Law were dispelled by the Brightness of
his Coming.

Now a freedom from those cumbersom Rites and Ceremonies of the Old Law, is the
Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free; and to return to the Observance of
them, is to be entangled again in the yoke of Bondage.

But what is this to Governors applying the general Rules of Scripture about
the Order and Decency of God's Worship to particular Laws about it? Here the
Ceremonies enjoined are not Typical, as the Jewish were; nor is the observing
of them a virtual denying that Christ is come in the Flesh, as the continuance
of the Jewish Rites would be; but are Appointed only for the more comely
Worshipping of God manifest in the flesh, and the more solemn Praifing of God
the Father, for that inestimable Blessing.

To observe such wholesome Orders made for this end, is so far from infringing
our Christian Liberty, that it would be a great Infringement of it to do
otherwise. For,

First; This would infringe the Liberty that Christ has left with Governors,
of Ordering such Indifferent things; this is the main, if not the only Branch
of their Ecclesiastical Power; for the Substantials of Divine Worship are
already Appointed by Christ, and the Spirit of God has left some general Rules
for the more orderly Performance of it; but the particular Rules of Order and
Decency being no where Prescribed, these are left to the determination of our
Governors, whom we are required to obey for the Lord's sake; and to deny them
this, is to divest them of all Power in Church Matters; yea, this will leave a
less Liberty to Ecclesiastical Governors under the Gospel, than the Governors
of the Jewish Church were invested with; who yet were bound up and determined
in far more particulars than ours now are.

Again; To take off our Obedience in these Indifferent things, is to infringe
the Liberty of the People, who must be thereby deprived of a better way of
serving God, and likewise subject them to the Punishment and Displeasure of the
Magistrate, for Disobeying him in things that are within his Power to Command.

But wherein then lies our Christian Liberty, if Governors may Impose what they
think fit upon us?

Why, the Governors Liberty consists in this, That they are not tied up to any
particular Modes or Circumstances of Divine Worship, but may establish in
Indifferent things, what they judge most expedient for Order and Comeliness.

The Peoples Liberty lies in this, That they do not look upon or use the things
contained in such Injunctions, as Essential Parts of Divine Worship, or Matters
necessary to Salvation, but merely for Discipline and Orders sake; they retain
still the Liberty of the Judgment about the Nature of the things, though the
Use of them be for wise and public Reasons restrained.

Whereas such a Liberty as sets Men free from all Laws and good Orders of this
kind, is a wild and extravagant Fancy, and lets them loose to all Disorder;
this is to use our Liberty as a Cloak of Maliciousness, and to make it a
Pretense or Covering for all Licentiousness.

But what is the Design of this false Pretense to Christian Liberty? Why, it is
to give the People Liberty to break the Laws at Pleasure, and leave them to the
Guidance of their own Humors without Control; by this means they teach them
to leave the Church, and go to Conventicles to assert their Christian Liberty;
and to encourage them therein, they pervert for them two or three Texts of
Scripture; as that of our Savior, Call no man master upon earth, Matthew. 23.10.
which is a Caution against receiving the corrupt Doctrines and Traditions of
the Pharisees, is by them Interpreted for rejecting the Lawful Commands of our
Superiors. That of the Apostle, Be not ye the servants of men, 1 Cor. 7.23.
which forbids the enslaving the Conscience to the Imperious Dictates of False
Teachers; is so expounded, as to take off all the Obligation of good Orders.
St. Peter's Lording it over God's heritage, 1 Pet. 5.3. they interpret of the
Tyranny of the Bishops, and thereby take off their Followers from all
Subjection to them. So rarely do they Expound their Christian Liberty, which
they make use of as a pretense to shake off the Yoke, and evade all Obedience
to Government.

Yea, they enlarge this Liberty so far as to think themselves obliged not to do
what is Commanded, and likewise to do what is Forbidden, in the Defense of it:
So that if the Magistrate should forbid what he would have done, and command
what he would not, these Men would be caught in their own Snare, and be obliged
by their own Principles, to do as he would have them.

And yet they style this humoursome and cross-grained sort of Liberty, a
Privilege purchased for them by Jesus Christ, and a Depositum committed to the
Care and Keeping of the Christian Church; as if Christ had given them a
Dispensation from Observing all good Order, and let them loose to all
Disobedience: Whereas such a Privilege is so far from being worth the
purchasing, that it is much better to be without it; for this would be an Engine
of perpetual Discord and Confusion; the Mischief whereof both to Church and
Kingdom is too visible to need laying open.

But did these Men who talk so much of Christian Liberty, allow that Liberty to
others when they were in Power, which they now claim to themselves?

No, quite otherwise; none were ever more rigid Imposers, and more notorious
Infringers of Christian Liberty than they; it is well known that they pressed
the Covenant upon Men's Consciences with far greater rigor, than any ever did
Conformity; yea, those very Men that alleged Christian Liberty against
Conforming to the Orders of the Church, Compelled others to take the Covenant
with Pike and Pistol, threatening Loss of Life, Goods, and Lands, on such as
refused it. I suppose you have heard with how severe and intolerable Penalties
they Prohibited the Common Prayer, and with what merciless rigor they were
executed on those that used it. When some put in their own Plea of Christian
Liberty for a little Mitigation, they were answered, 'Twas no Impeachment of
Christian Liberty to wear those Golden Chains about their Necks: And when they
had laid the most intolerable Bonds and Burdens upon Men's Consciences, they
told them, that 'twas Profaneness and Rebellion to say, Let us break their
bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us. We find one of them
commending the Parliament, for endeavoring to fence the Vineyard with a settled
Militia, to gather out the Malignants as Stones, and to make a Wine Press in it
for the squeezing of Delinquents.

But what shall we say of that barbarous Infringement of Christian Liberty, in
pressing the Directory upon the Conscience of their Sovereign King Charles the
First, which they knew was against it; they denied him the use of the Liturgy,
though he earnestly desired it; yea, they would not allow him to use any other
set Form of Prayer in his own House, though he declared it against his
Conscience to join in a way of Worship, where it was wholly uncertain what the
Minister would say to God, hoping (as he told them) that they would not offer
Violence to the Conscience of their Sovereign; yea, they denied him the
Attendance of his own Chaplains, to direct and comfort him in his Troubles; A
piece of Rigor and Barbarity (as himself styles it) greater than is ever used
by Christians to the meanest Prisoners, (...).
or greatest Malefactors. So that this Pretense to Christian Liberty, is a
Device made use of to serve their own turn, and to be denied to all others;
which plainly shows the Fallacy and Falsehood of it. I am,

SIR, Yours, A. B.

LETTER XIII.
SIR,
ANother Artifice of Dissenters to keep up their Schism, is a pretense to
better means of Edification; this is a Device-occasioned by the Ignorance of
the People, and cherished in them by the Subtilty of their Teachers. They
cannot Edify (they tell us) so well in the Church as in the Conventicle; and
they Profit more by the Sermons of the one, than they can by the other.

This is a plausible and popular Plea for Separation, and has helped much to
increase the Party; for it carries a fair show of Zeal and Care for their
Souls, to look out for the best means of Edification; none, they think, can
blame them if they hear those Sermons by which they Profit most, and follow
those Teachers that best promote their Eternal Welfare.

But let us examine what Truth there is in this Pretense; to this end we must
enquire, What it is to Profit by Sermons? And who are the most Edifying
Preachers? Because there are great and dangerous Mistakes in both.

To Edify then, or Profit by Sermons, is, First, To have our Judgments well
informed in the Knowledge of God, and the Mysteries of the Gospel. And 2ly. To
lead our lives according to it; so that they who most truly and plainly Expound
the Holy Scriptures, and best apply them to all the ends and purposes of a Holy
Life, are indeed the most Edifying Teachers; and they who most grow in Grace,
and the sound Knowledge of God, and abound most in all the Acts of Virtue and a
Good Life, are most Edified by the Prayers and Discourses they hear, and are
the best Proficients in Christ's School.

Now there is no Church in the Christian World that affords better means of
Edification to all these purposes, than that whereof we are Members: For there
the Word of God is faithfully Preached and Expounded, by which we may be
thoroughly Instructed in all Divine and Sacred Knowledge: There all the Articles
of the Creed, containing all that is necessary to be Believed, are plainly and
practically unfolded to us, by which we may be built up in our most Holy Faith:
There we have the Lord's Prayer, the most perfect of all Prayers, together with
other excellent and well-ordered Prayers composed by it, daily sounding in our
Ears, by which we are directed in all our Addresses unto God, to offer up a
Pious, Sober and Well-compos'd Devotion.

There, again, we hear the Ten Commandments frequently Read and Explained to
us, in the full latitude both of the Precepts and Prohibitions contained in
them; by which we may learn how to walk in the Whole course of our lives, so as
to Please God, and Profit our selves.

In a word; there is no Duty incumbent on us, either with relation to God, our
Neighbor, or our selves, but what is clearly opened, and by the most proper
and pressing Motives exhorted to: And there is no Sin or Transgression against
either, but what we are by the most convincing Arguments dehorted from in the
public Assemblies of the Established Church.

Whereas in the Separate Meetings of Sectaries, the Holy Scriptures are very
badly Expounded, and too often very sadly Perverted. The forementioned
excellent Models and Abridgments of the Christian Religion, I mean, the Creed,
the Lord's Prayer, and Ten Commandments, are seldom or never rehearsed in the
Ears of the People; by which neglect they are carried on and kept in Ignorance
of a great part of their Duty. The great Duties of Unity, Peace, and Order, in
the Church of Christ, can never be fairly explained or inculcated in those
places, where their very Meetings are a contradiction to them. The heinous
nature and guilt of Schism must not be laid open, since all their Conventicles
are founded upon it. The tender point of Divisions, so sharply rebuked by the
Apostle, must not be touched upon there, where so many love or live by them.

And now let any impartial Man judge, where we are like to find the best means
of Edification, either in the public Assemblies of the Church, where the whole
mind and will of God is truly and faithfully Revealed; or in the Separate
Meetings of Sectaries, where the bare upholding of them, tempts them to so much
Falsification.

But where then lies the Fallacy or Mistake in this Matter? Why the People are
imposed upon by false Notions of Edification. For,

First, Some take the fond Opinions and affected Phrases of a Party, for the
best means of Edification: Thus if they hear any discoursing of Election and
Reprobation, in which they commonly canonize themselves, and roprobate others;
if they saucily pry into and pass their Judgment in those secret things that
belong to God, and withal misinterpret the revealed things that belong to them,
they think themselves mightily edified, though they know nothing aright in
those matters. Again; if they hear them talking of Rolling upon Jesus Christ,
and Lying flat upon the Promises, with other such Mystical and Phrase-Divinity,
they prick up their Ears, and are wonderfully pleased with the unintelligible
Jargon. If they happen to go to the Church, and hear the plain Sense of the
Gospel laid open, and the true Notions of Justification, Regeneration,
Conversion, and Salvation explained to them, they think themselves unedified,
because they are not amused with some fine Conceits about these things. The
truth is, the less they understand, the more they are edified; which makes them
go to the Church with prejudice, where they are entertained with found
Doctrine, and the sober Notions of Religion; and to delight only in the
Mystical and Vain Talk of the Conventicle, whereby they mistake the true means
of Edification.

Again, 2ly, They mistake the false Heats of Fancy, for the true Warmth of the
Heart; and think they have profited by a Sermon, merely because they were
pleased. This is a frequent and fatal Delusion, for false Teachers commonly
work upon the Passions of their Hearers, without a right informing their
Judgment, and so make them think themselves edified, when they are all the
while merely deluded: To this end, a melting Tone, solemn Looks, vehement
Actions, are made use of; and having by these Arts warmed their Imaginations,
make them believe they are fired with a true Zeal, and so strangely edified, as
if they felt some extraordinary Impulses of the Holy Ghost stirring within
them, when all the while it is no other than the Motion of the Animal Spirits,
occasioned by the Heats of Fancy, and are chiefly owing to their Bodily Temper.
Now to cry up these for Edification, and going on to Perfection, is (as one
has observed) to betray the People into the power of every Impostor, who has
the knack to raise these Heats, and make them pass for Reason and Conviction of
Mind. These mortify no Sin, nor improve any Virtue, and so make men neither
wiser nor better than they were before, but rather more fickle and inconstant,
and apt to be carried about with every Wind of Doctrine. Whereas true
Edification helps men to grow in Grace and Knowledge, and leaves more firm and
lasting Impressions of Virtue upon the Soul.

Moreover, this pretense to better means of Edification, sets the common People
a judging between better and best, of which by reason of their Ignorance and
Instability they are incompetent Judges: Indeed there is so much of Humor and
Fancy in men's Comparisons between Teachers, that lays them open to Great
Mistakes and Inconveniences about it; it fills the best-meaning Persons among
them with endless Scruples whom to choose, and where to go, and is a Principle
of great Giddiness and Instability.

Yea, the mischief of it is to great to have any License or Countenance given
to it in any well-constituted Church; for it breaks the Order, Peace, and good
Government of it, and naturally creates Division and great Distractions; it
sets people a gadding after new Inventions and necessarily brings on the Guilt
of Schism.

So that this pretense confutes it self and proves a great hindrance to the
Edification it pretends to. He that constantly attends the Prayers and
Instructions of his Parochial Guide, shall learn and profit more than he that
hunts about for better means of Edification: A rolling Stone (we say) never
gets Moss: And he that runs after and heaps to himself Teachers, may have his
itching Ears tickled, but seldom has either his Heart renewed or his Life
reformed by such means.

Again, by keeping close to a settled Pastor, men may have all the Parts and
Duties of Religion one time or other explained and applied to them; and this
will tend more to true Edification, than the Oratory of loose and general
Discourses, which for the most part only enters into one Ear, and goes out at
the other.

Besides, this running after new Teachers, is a great Discouragement to a
Faithful Pastor, to see himself forsaken of his Flock, and find them following
Wolves in Sheeps clothing: This tends at once to hinder the Preparations of
the Minister, and the Proficiency of the People, who might have better,
Sermons, and profit more by them, if they would more frequently attend them.

In a word, This wanton Humor of leaving their own Minister, to go where they
can profit best, has been severely condemned by the Party that now cherish it
in their Followers: Mr. Edwards in his Gangraena mentions it as one of the
great Errors of the Times in which he lived: And both Presbyterians and
Independents have inveighed against it, as a Principle of great Looseness and
Vanity; as may be made appear, if need be. I am,

SIR, Yours, A. B.

LETTER XIV.
SIR,
THE last Artifice of Dissenters that I shall mention, is, Their setting up and
encouraging little private Schools of Philosophy, to prepare and qualify
Persons for the holding of Conventicles.

The Design of this Stratagem is to keep up a Succession of Factious Teachers,
and to propagate the Schism to future Generations: There are some Sects indeed
that take no Care about the Education or Commission of their Holdersforth, but
leave this Office entirely to the Natural Endowments and Volubility of Gifted
Brethren: But there are others, and particularly the Presbyterians, who being
many of them bred up in the Universities themselves, and thereby knowing
something of the Method and Benefit of that Education, erect private Schools,
wherein they do something to the like, though for the most part to very little
purpose: They are sensible of the Necessity and Usefulness of Human Learning to
qualify for the Ministry; and therefore fearing lest their Conventicles might
fall, through the gross Ignorance of those that must uphold them, something
must be taken care of this way, to fit them for this great Work; at least, some
smattering of Learning must be had or pretended to, to give some Countenance to
the Cause: And indeed, a little of it, with a great deal of Confidence, will go
a great way to deceive the Vulgar.

They know moreover, that the present Heads of the Party are all mortal, and
going off the Stage, and therefore lest the Faction should die with them, care
must be taken to raise up more, to preserve the Succession, and derive the
Imposture to future Ages.

Besides, the breeding up of these Emissaries, affords no small Gain to the
present Crafts-men, and the Leaders are like to get more by their Learning,
than the People to whom they are sent, who are in danger to be misled by them,
and merely beguiled by their vain Philosophy.

Thus do they erect private Seminaries against the most renowned Universities,
merely to qualify them to keep up private Conventicles against the best
established Church in the Christian World. Which is a very serviceable
Stratagem to uphold the Party, and propagate the Schism.

But for the better understanding of this Device, let us enquire into the
Masters and Scholars of these separate Academies, together with the Learning
professed and taught in them. And

First, For the Heads and Masters in these Seminaries: They are busy not only
in sowing Divisions themselves, but in planting of Tares, and watering of
Weeds, that may spring up when they are gone, to infest the Church, and choke
the good Seed of sound Doctrine preached in it: A Noble Employment indeed! and
worthy the Ambassadors of Christ, to be Teachers of Schism, and Promoters of
Faction; and not to be content only to divide the Church, and rend the Body of
Christ for their own time, but to breed up others to succeed them in this great
Work, and raise a new Race of Disturbers, for the Edification of Posterity:
They are unwilling the Church should be ever settled in Unity and Peace, and
therefore are hard at work to propagate Dissentions, to instill their Sophistry
into their Disciples, and to lay a foundation for Discord on future times.

But if any of these grand Teachers of Philosophy in private Schools have been
Graduates in the Universities, as we are told some of them are, How shall we
excuse them from Perjury, in violating the Oaths taken by them to the contrary?
And if any of them have been Episcopally Ordained, according to the Rites and
Orders of the Church of England, as it is well known some of them have been,
What can they say for acting thus contrary to the Declarations and
Subscriptions required in it, and training up others in Nonconformity and
opposition to it? I think it will not be a miss for these Men to consider,
whether that tenderness of Conscience, they so much pretend to, can consist
with the Violation of those Engagements; or whether it be not either the
Weakness of their Heads, or the Falseness of their Hearts, that gives them so
easy a Dispensation from observing of them.

As for the Scholars thus trained up by them, they are plainly nursed up in a
Schism, and not only taught to go themselves, but lead others in the ways of
Separation; whereby they are bred up Enemies to the Government, both in Church
and State, misled from the ways of truth and Peace, and so unhappily directed
out of the way that they should go.

But what are the Arts and Methods of instruction made use of in these
Seminaries to this purpose? Why,

First; They are taught all the little Scruples and Cavils that have been
raised against the Liturgy and Discipline of the Church, to beget in them the
greater aversion from both.

Next, They are furnished with Seditious Books written against them, to
heighten and increase this aversion.

Then they are taught not only to prefer, but to learn the Art of Extemporary
Effusions in Prayer, the great Idol and Support of all separate Meetings; to
this end they are sometimes put upon the practice, and trying their skill in
this Exercise with Directions to assist their Invention, and help their
Fluency.

After this they are taught to modulate the Tone of the Voice, sometimes
raising it to such a key or degree of Vehemence, at other times falling to such
a Cadence, as may best take and work upon the fancies of the People.

These and such like Arts, apt to deceive, are the great things that are taught
in these Seminaries: Devices never heard of or learned in any well-established
Church, and utterly destructive of all Order and Sobriety in Religion.

But what is it that moves the Dissenters thus to draw from the Two Famous
Universities of this Land, and to set up and encourage these private Nurseries
against them? Why,

First; They know that the Education and good Literature of those Places, breed
up Youth in a due Conformity to the Discipline and good Orders of the Church;
and all that are admitted to them, are by Oaths and all manner of Obligation
tied to a firm adherence and observance of them; the wise Instructions and
Examples of those Places train them up in the way that they should go, which
keeps them ever after from departing from it. So that they whose design it is
to promote and propagate Divisions, must keep as many as they can from those
places, where they are so well taught and armed against them.

Those Famous Seminaries of Learning and sound Religion, have ever brought
forth the stoutest Champions to defend the Truth, and confute the Errors of all
times; it is no wonder if Heretics and Schismatics bear no good will to those
Places and Persons that so expose and frustrate their evil Designs.

But the better to countenance these private Schools, the upholders of them
endeavor to fasten the blackest Calumnies upon our Renowned Seats of Learning
and Education; though for their Order and Discipline, together with all other
advantages and encouragements of good Literature, they far excel all the
Universities in the World, and are therefore resorted to and admired by all
Strangers; yet these Sons of Slander seek not only to lessen, but to blacken
them too by their foul and Unjust Aspersions; they delight to talk of the Vices
and Looseness of those Places, and call those Schools of the Prophets by no
better name, than Schools of Lewdness and Debauchery; which is done merely to
beget an ill Opinion of them, and to exalt their little Nurseries of Schism and
Sedition above them.

Thus do they serve the Universities, as they do the Church, throwing all the
dirt they can upon them, the better to serve their own ends on both.

Now the mischief of this Device may be easily guessed from its pernicious
influence both in Church and State; for if the Happiness of a Nation depends
upon the good Education and Wisdom of its Members, and the hopes of future
times are founded upon the well Training up of those that live to them; what
unspeakable evils must ensue from these private nurseries of Ignorance and
Disorder? Which is a matter well worthy the Care and Wisdom of Superiors to
prevent. For

Ever since the Foundation of the Church has been shaken, things in the State
have been out of course; and it is in vain to hope for Settlement in the Latter,
whilst the Former remains loose and unsettled: And therefore Christ's Vineyard
should be fenced and guarded, not only against the Wild Boar of the Forest,
that would lay it waste, but against all the little Foxes that would undermine
it.

To Conclude all; May the Church of England ever Continue in the Purity of its
Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline: May the Two Famous Universities of this
Kingdom still flourish, to supply it with Able, Faithful, and Learned Pastors:
And may Both be so Favored with the Providence of God, and the Protection of
Princes, that the Gates of Hell may never prevail against Either. Which are the
hearty Wishes and Prayer of,

SIR, Your Cordial Friend, A. B.

A POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
THERE is another serviceable Device of Dissenters, that must not be omitted,
and that is, Their settling and maintaining a secret Correspondence between
their Brethren in all Parts of this and the Neighboring Kingdom; whereby they
communicate to each other the Designs of the Party, and join in secret Methods
and Confederacies to promote them. By this they give and take-Measures in
Electing Members for Parliament and preparing Addresses and Petitions to them;
hereby they learn and agree in the same Arts of weakening the Church, and
strengthening the Conventicle, together with all other means of forming and
advancing their Designs.

And these are the more dangerous, because they are carried on in the dark, and
like invisible Darts, wound without being seen; as also because they are
colored over with a seeming Zeal for Religion and Reformation of Manners, and
carried on with Prayer, and a great show of Piety and Devotion.

These things are evident, not only by many former Intrigues managed and
promoted this way, but more plainly by a late Letter written to a Nonconformist
Teacher, Superscribed thus, To Mr. Saunders, Minister of the Gospel, in Oxford;
which by a mistake fell into the hands of another Person of the same Name; a
true Copy whereof is as follows:

Newbury, June 7. -- 98. Reverend Sir,
IHad a Letter last Week, by the Direction of the Committee of Ministers and
Gentlemen appointed at London, for settling a Correspondence of the Protestant
Dissenting Ministers and Congregations throughout this Kingdom, for the
Advancement of the Interest of Religion, and Reformation of Manners, with the
Articles there agreed upon in order thereunto, and a desire to Communicate them
speedily to the Brethren in these Parts, that (if possible) a general Meeting
might be had this Summer in London.

Pursuant whereunto, it is desired that you would not fail to come your self,
and bring with you one Prudent Person of your Congregation, chosen for that end
(according to the Method resolved on at London) to meet several of your
Brethren, and the Members of their respective Congregations, here at Newbury on
Wednesday the 22d Instant, to consider of the said Proposals which shall be
laid before you, and the proper Method to obtain so desirable an end.

You are desired to be here on Tuesday in the Evening, that we may enter on our
work on Wednesday Morning, resolving (God willing) to spend some time in Prayer
before we begin. I am,

SIR, Your Affectionate Brother, and Servant in the Lord, William Tailor.


FINIS.

