The Sentinels REMONSTRANCE,
OR, A Vindication of the Soldiers to the People of this Commonwealth, etc.
laying open the manifold wrongs, abuses, and cheats put upon them, and the
People who have duly paid their Taxes, to the enriching of some, the several
calamities and ruin both of people and Soldiery.
By W. B.
THe Souldery having since the beginning of these late unnanatural Wars (being
soothed up by long expected Liberty) hazarded their Blood and succeeding
Fortunes for promoting of Equity and Justice; and having from time to time
evidenced their unalterable Affections to these primitive Principles, Them.
turned statesman,
though by an unworthy matchivilian Pen* they are termed a changing and mutable
Crew, ready to embrace all Governments; and that their miscarriages are no ways
pardonable. Give us but leave in the plain language of Soldiers to publish our
Vindication to the known and unbiassed judgments of these Nations, to whom we
are willing to submit our Case, lest we be judged rash in rendering those that
are really culpable guilty without reason, and fools if we conceal what may
conduce to a general good.

At the beginning of these intestine and clandestine broils, men's minds and
consciences were so much abused for want of Liberty, that the godly of these
Nations were enforced to engage in an unanimous way, to petition first the
Almighty for those endeared promises of Soul-comforts; and thereafter the
lawful Power by him established; but seeing it pleased God either for the
punishment of the then power, their passing by the faults of Great Ones and men
in Authority, and oppressing the poor needy Subject, or the Nations in general
for their murmurings and back slidings, we dare not judge: But thus it fell
out, that the late King and Parliament did so far disagree, that Armies were
raised on both sides; the King to defend his Power and Laws by him established;
the Parliament to remove the iniquities then used by the Clergy, and
supercilious carriages of many high minded, and Bishop-oppressors, who to the
disgrace both of their Church, King and Country; engrossed not only the wealth
of the Land, but carried themselves above the gravity and dignity of their
Functions; as also the removal of bad Council from him, who were known some of
them, to be the most blaspeming and unworthy Atheists ever God (whose name
should and must be glorified by all men) suffered to live under Heaven. Albeit,
on the other hand (though Jesuitical and Hellish Pamphlels renders us incapable
of charity) we do really express the integrity of our Souls, that we apprehend
there were as good, sober, religious and pious men with him, as ever shall
succeed them, of the undoubtedly ancient Nobility and Gentry of Britain. But he
being obstinate and unwilling to curb those insolences which introduced these
untimely insurrections against him and his posterity; until he found his own
time, was so far from yiedling to the reasonable desires of the godly at that
time (whose integrities were as candid to the welfare of these now distracted
and impoverished nations, as to the salvations of their own souls) that he gave
way both to foreign and domestic Interests to blow the bellow and to inflame
all. But the Wars being bloody, inhumane, and barbarous in many respects,
seeing Country men murdered one another, nay more, the Father Warred against
the Son, and the Son against the Father, yea, and Brother against Brother.
After the loss of so many thousands of innocents, some Matchivilians must still
(to promote their hellish ends) prevent the King one while from his
condescendency to the Parliaments just demands; and the Parliaments in another
way to hear his reasons to the contrary: But thus Heaven frowning at the
unworthiness of such juggling brings things so to pass, that he is overthrown,
and we become Masters of the field: all which hazardous and hard encounters the
poor Soldiery were forced cheerfully to undergo; and did with loyal hearts and
hands endure. Then was it our expectation to see Liberty flourish, and all
corrupt Judicatories removed; but on the contrary, we now see (as we are fellow
sufferers) our poor Countries to be more cheated than before, and we slighted
in the highest nature; nor dare we solicit the Supreme Court of Justice to
enform them of the tyrannies committed against us and these Nations from time
to time, because of self-seeking-men set over us, who by our means were raised
from the meanest Mechanics to Lord-like Inheritances.

Nay, this is not enough, but when we offer in the least to commiserate our
conditions, or make known our Cases to our Masters the Parliament, for whom we
have expended our lives and fortunes, we are enjailed, beaten, and abused by
our Officers, in a most barbarous manner. All which we trust the Almighty will
consider, and empower us to redress both the injuries of you the good people of
these Nations, and our selves.

Thus have we lived to abolish the tyrannies and oppressions of past times, but
never expected to have erected and established worse, as their Successors,
whose maskt designs and specious pretenses, are not only made known to the
meanest of the Nation, but will appear more palpable every day. Now we beseech
the Lord of life to pardon both your and our sins, and to enable us more and
more to make discoveries of such Apostates, seeing Religion consists more in
the Practique, than in the Theorick.

LONDON, Printed 1659. June 8


