The TRAPPAN Trapt. OR The true Relation of a Cunning, Cogging, Confident,
Crafty, Counterfeit, Cosening and Cheating KNIGHT, alias KNAVE.

Wherein is Discovered his Mischievous and Machivillian matchless Mischeefs,
Plotted against an Honest Gentleman, a Merchant of good Repute, named Mr John
Marriot: Dwelling near LONDON BRIDGE.

Set forth for the benefit of Others, who else through Ignorance might easily
fall into the like snares of such Dissembling, Wicked, and Treacherous TRAPPANS.

By W. B.

LONDON. Printed by Joseph Moxon, and sold at his Shop on Cornhill, at the
Sign of Atlas. 1657.

The TRAPPAN Trapt.
IT is too apparently evidenced by sad experience, that a Civil War draws a
longer train or tail behind it, then any other inconvenience whatsoever, that
can come or happen on a Commonwealth; for the miserable consequences thereof,
are not sheathed with the bloody-drawn sword; nor do the effects cease, though
the cause matter and manner are withdrawn from the face and body of action, as
may plainly appear by the truths in the ensuing discourse, setting forth a
perfect relation of the Cheating or Trappanning courses, taken by the
pretenders to worth and honorable employment; as did this subject of our
History now in hand: One Francis Moor, an Irish man, who pretended that he had
been a Colonel, in the late King of England's service, an employment long
since cashiered the honor of memory; yet this Gallant continues himself in the
List; and does not only make that a Cloak to cover his specious pretenses of
undertaking action of great concernment; but to add a fair gloss to the glory
of his pretended engagements, Laces that Cloak about with a more glittering
cognizance, and in his own defense; dubbs himself Knight, under the notion and
title of Sir Francis Barker of Staffordshire, and under the shadow (together
with another shell to dress his Knighthood or knavery in viz. Dr. Barker
Doctor of physic, he not only deludes, cheats, and abuses the plainer sort of
honest people; but reaches to very dead (I mean in the late King) whose
judgment is in nothing more questionable then in the employment of such
ignoble spirits to act by his Commission, nor does it yet stick there; but as
it were a design laid on purpose to bring a perpetual ignominy on that sad and
enough abused family by such Villans, who will be sure to make the King of
Scots the Patron of their wickedness. There is scarce a notorious piece of
Debauchery acted; but the contrivers are reputed or reported (by themselves) to
be people employed for him; and indeed this is not all, but that which they
think will cover more Roguery, then all the Kings in the World, they are not
ashamed to stigmatize the Army, and Commonwealth of England; with pretenses of
having been, nay immediately to be Officers or Members of this now Army; to
carry on their divellish designs, as this Pseudo Cavalier, Sir Marmaduke many
forms has done; when (as formerly) he durst lie about the City of London;
sometimes pretending the receipt of great Arrears; sometimes a great imploiment
from the Lord Protector, to deceive and delude poor people, and make himself
seem the more creditable in the eye of the World; as he did some two years
since, at one Mr. Godbids an honest Tradesmans house in Red-Crosse street in
London; where one while he was one of the Armies Officers; another time (as he
found the disposition of people he had commerce withal a distressed Gentleman
a Cavalier, and one that had suffered very much loss in his estate by the
common enemy (Civil War) as being a Colonel for the King; but when these
Visards began to be pretty well worn out, and fearing lest his own face should
appear through in its proper colors, he takes on another more dark and full of
amazement than any of the rest. And said he was son to the Duke of Guise in
France; (which they might be the more apt to believe, because he had such an
incomparable use and benefit of his French tongue, which he spoke as absolutely
as a Native Frenchman) and says (which is always his great assilum in such
extremities, when nothing else will gloss his falsities) that he had fought a
Duel with a grand favorite of France, and was so persecuted in Law for his
presumption, and disobedience for the King, Orders (having then newly made and
set forth an Edict against Duels) that he was enforced to take England for his
shelter, and though for the present he seemed somewhat straightened for want of
due supplies of moneys (which he said was occasioned by his sudden flight) yet
his mother who (as he heard) endeavored with all her power and powerful
friends to procure his pardon from the King) would not fail to send him all the
speediest and necessary returns for supply, that should be imagined fit for a
person of his quality, as soon as she did understand where he was; and
therefore pretended often to write Letters of advice into France, and to
receive dispatches from thence, with promises of Bills for moneys very
suddenly; till at last with these and the like insinuations he had involved
himself so far into his honest Landlords pith and good opinion, that he became
a Faucilist, and at bed and board promising (at least proposing a cate of seven
shillings per week an easy cate for a young Duke, was entertained by his new
Host, as his brother or son, and then after a little time was visited by many
great Gallants of much seeming worth and quality, who (but I Will warrant you by
his own advice und order) for the most part stood always at great distance,
and all bare-headed, giving him as much observance and respect, as if he had
been the real Duke himself, which confirmed the honest people in their
mis-beleef, and himself in an imaginary Dukedom. Yet because he would not seem
to be what they thought he was would dismount himself from that garb of glory
which he seemed to be in, when the people held him in such adoration, and would
vouchsafe some of them to his familiarity, they must stay and keep him company,
dine with him and pass away the time after dinner with drinking a glass or
two of Wine, whereof there was no want; for the young Duke could scarcely drink
any thing but wine; which at first, himself would often send money for; but
afterward there was such an intimacy of friendship and familiarity between the
Host and his Guest, that it was no more but Landlord, I shall have such and
such friends come to dine with me to day, pray send for so many bottles of
Wine, which was without scruple performed; and thus by degrees increased his
credit, and his score very handsomely with his Landlord, and his whole family,
but not so fully as he thought fit, til he had possessed his good Creditor,
(remembering his hasty flight,) that he had left his Clothes behind, and
therefore desires his Credit and assistance to equip him in English A la mode
France; and this began to be the winding up of his bottom there. His Landlord
not doubting but his young Duke would prove a Prince in time, would not let him
want any thing he desired, Especially such things as might set him forth like
himself, and therefore with his purse and Credit furnished him with good store
of gold and silver lace, and other hansome furniture, till the summa totalis
amounted to 220 lb. all which the Duke was in his Landlords debt, and something
too from one squire Fisher of Gloucestershire who lay then in the same house.

But now to pay our Landlord and give a general satisfaction to all, one
Tuesday morning he comes to his Landlords bed side, Well Landlord (quoth he) I
am going to fetch money for you: (having often enough and sufficiently promised
it before.) I Sir replied his Landlord I hope you win. Nay says the young
Spark, I have received my Bills, and they being accepted, I am going to receive
my money but if I do not receive it (by God quoth he) I will sell this same to
pay you (showing him a very noble Diamond Ring, to any bodies thinking,) which
he wore on his finger, which seemed of an immense value: (as indeed it was,
being worth above half his Dukedom: and so taking a morning (or rather a
mourning farewell) of them away he goes, leaving in his Chamber his Trunks,
(which they doubted not was full of the rich clothes so lately made for his
Honor:) but in brief my Gentleman was so overladen with his money that he could
not come home again that night, nor indeed the next day: when in the
afternoon his Landlord and his wife fearing and doubting the Truth, made bold
to inquire into his Trunkes, where they found the Nest, but the Birds flowns
wherefore he must now bethink him what to do; and then remembering that surely
his mother would not be unmindfull of such a hopeful young gentelman as her
son, but had ere this procured his Pardon, which he having notice of, was gone
to take the benefit of: and therefore presently posts away his son after him,
who together with another friend of his, hasted by Gravesend, and that night
posted toward Dover; by the way often hearing of him: and to Dover they Pursue
him but there Ne plus ultra, for Monsieur was gone for Callis on wednesday by
noone, and so the youngster may return to Certify his freindes in London:
where we leave him to tell his strange adventures in the persuite, and his
father with time enough to sum up his books of his guests engagement, and
return to the Monsieur, whom we find in France glittering in his new Cloths
and honor, which will there stand him in no steed: wherefore he thinks it more
convenient to change his French Honor, for English Worship, and intitles
himself Sir Francis Barker of Staffordshire Knight, which now suites best to
his purpose. And so in May last, he makes a voyage to London, where we will
dispense with him for a while, and let him alone in his Inn, plotting and
Contriving diverse stratagems; and meet with one Mr William Marriot, living
near London Bridge, a Merchant of very good account among all men of his own
rank and dealing, a very honest, sober, quiet, just, religious, plain man in
all his dealings in the world and the general esteem of all that knew him; and
by this Character you may know him to be no Cunning snapp in worldly matters;
and therefore the less able to judge when he met with such an one; and this
honest simplicity rendered him the more easy to be betrayed by any such knave,
as sought to delude the honest: and what made him more liable to be wrought
upon, (though he were a man that dealt much abroad in the world,) Could neither
read nor write, but trusted all accounts for Trades, (of which he had many
beyond the seas) either to the records of other men's pens or his own Mark
and memory; and in this manner had Commerce with all sorts of people for a
long time: till at last this M. William Marriott having employed diverse Factors
in France, and chiefly in Roven, where lay the greatest part of his Trade, and
stock, and had often sent letters, to demand an account of his estate there, in
their hands; as being so Careful and provident, that his estate should not be
wasted and imbeziled by the improvidence of others, which he did endeavor to to
preserve and strengthen, for the future maintenance of himself and family.

But letters were but words, and words but wind, which blew no good to Mr
Mariott as he thought for they brought him no news of his Estate, nor account
from his Factors but delatory putt offs and nothing to the purpose Wherefore
(on good Consideration and advise of Friends.) Mr Marriot resolves that he will
himself take a Journey into France, to Compel them to give an account of their
Stewardship or at least to take into his own hands, what he should there find
belonging to him, before all was gone. And so on the 30 th. of May last 1656.
he took horse at the Spur in Southwark, intending to go for Rye in Suffex,
where at the same instant, he that Called himself Sir Francis Barker aforesaid,
took horse too; and pretending the same Journey, imediately rides out of the
Inn with him; telling him in the mean time, that he was bound for France, and
should be very glad of good Company; which to Mr Marriot seemed no less then a
blessing beyond Expectation, in regard Sir Francis (as he called himself)
promised by all probable Conjectures to be an absolute Gentleman, and nothing
Less then what that outward Garb had promised, and his inward parts (whereof
he had by this time given many graceful testimoneys,) to be such that might
have been a Cabinet for Concerns of the greatest Consequences. Besides his most
exellent knowledge and delivery of the French tongue, (the chiefest Jewel in
all his Treasury,) for Mr Marriotts use, who could neither speak nor understand
the least breath of the French Dialect. These noble endowments so wrought on Mr
Marriotts honest Judgment, that he presently thought his new acquaitance to be
a man fit to open his breast to: And to be short both being mounted,
acquainted, and resolved for the same Journey, away they ride; and already we
find them a Lighting at the sign of the Anchor in Rye, a little By-house of
Entertainment, where our Knight was well acquainted and respected, (having it
seems,) used this house for many years before; because he had frequently, (it
may be) on the like occasions passed between England and France: here the
courteous Knight gallantly welcome the Disconsolate Squire, and entertains him
with such a feast of his own good Company, that they were very freely merry,
and in that mirth had so Confirmed and Contracted their new acquaintance that
they must (as it were) go both under one hood; for Sir Francis must Call him
nothing but Father, and Mr Marriott from that time forward must Call him Son,
and a forfeiture under a certain penalty to be paid by him that should at any
time hereafter forget the duty or indulgency of Son, or Father. Thus this new
adopted Father and Son take Sea, and within few hours Landed at Deip in
France. By this time Sir Francis Like a dutiful Son was so diligent, and
indulgent that he had carefully dived into his Fathers debt 6. or 7. foot
(Pounds I should say) deep. But Deip they leave, and in short space arive at
Roven; where Sir Francis brings his Father to the Boon Foy, an Inn where the
Son was very well acquainted, and in the French tongue at large inquired all
affairs and news: but the Father seems more a Child, that sat all this while
and opened not his mouth, but minding his business he came about, more then the
Curiosities of France for the present, he desired his good Son Sir Francis
to ^ake the pains as to go with him, and inquire out his Factors, which the
Son most obediently condiscended to; and together they go to the Factors
where Mr Marriott demanding an account, they presently show what they have
received, and what moneys they have drawn upon those goods; as like wise the
residue as ^et not sold: all which Sir Francis Cast up, for Mr Marriott (as I
told you) could neither write nor read; but Committed all to memory: and by the
^ccount finds there was 1000 lb. good to Mr Marriot; 200. thereof was ready
(...) Bank, when Mr Marriot pleased so Command the same; which was very much to
his content. And now Mr Marriot (seeing all things were so well there,) would
needs have his wife and friends in England, (that were partakers of his former
doubts,) be shaters in his present satisfaction and content: and to that
purpose desires Sir Francis to be now his Secretary, and write some Letters
for him to his wife in London, to acquaint her and the rest of his friends
there, of his present Estate of health, and good success he had hitherto had in
his Journey; which was all Sir Francis desired, that he might the more easily
dive into his Fathers secrets; and unsuspected discover, what he resolves now
to be Master of; viz. his Estate.

But in some of these letters he informed them, that Mr Marriot (whom they knew
well enough to be an honest, Godly, plain man, but no disputant;) held high
disputes in discourse with the Papish Priests, and argued with them in
controversies of Religion; That he did fear they would do him some sudden
mischief, and therefore advised them that in their next letters to Mr Marriot,
they would Council him to forbear Speaking, or disputeing with those (as he
rightly enough termed them.) Bloody Revengers.

This was the first Scean of the Tragedy he intended to Plot on the stage or Mr
Marriots Ruin; and this was done that after he had performed the bloody
Tragady himself of his fathers Death and Ruin, that then the loss and mishap
that had fallen on Mr Marriot should have been laid to these Priests account:
for indeed no body knew any else to accuse. But herein we only give a guess at
his intent, and I think a shroud one too.

But to proceed to my story, after this loving Father and precious Son, had
stayed some 10 days in Roven, Sir Francis would needs persuade his Father
Marriot to some recreation, and to take so much pleasure of his Journey as to
go up to Paris, and to see so much of that City, that when he returned he might
report so much of the Country and place, that might reader him more like a
Traveler, then a messenger or Carryer, that could only say There I have been.

Well Mr Marriot Considering that his business was in a pretty good decorum, and
his friends in England had advertisement thereof, so that they need not be in
suspense of his welfare; and withal thinking himself a little engaged to Sir
Francis for his assistance in Roven, would not be such a Churl, as to deny him
so cheap a courtesy, and therefore condiscended to bear his Son company to
Paries And with this resolution away they go to Paris; where Sir Francis brings
his Father to his own house, in the Toubour Saint German, where there was a
French woman that lay with Sir Francis: and by whom he had formerly had a child
or a but was never married to her. Here Mr Marriot was very well respected for
some days, though at his own Cost, and nothing was wanting that might not make
him think, nay assure himself he was wellcom: For besides the general
observance that he had from all persons in or belonging to the house, his Son
Sir Francis would in no wise be thought flack, in his duty; but daily attended
on his Father up and down Paris, every where feeding his eye with several
varieties of houses Gardens walks and such pleasant prospects, whereof Paris is
plentifully full. But, that which is herein chiefly to be taken notice of, in
all these transactions, you must observe Sir Francis did not permit his Father
to come into any English Company, or to have any Converse with any that had but
a piece of an English tongue; except himself: neither did Mr Marriot distrust
any thing of danger, although he had all this while about him, a letter from a
Merchant in London, to deliver to an English Gentleman in Paris; which Mr
Marriot (in case he did not go to Paris himself) was to send thither from
Roven. But being now in Paris, at last he shows it to his Son Sir Francis,
desireing him to read the superscription, and direct him to find out the Gent.
which Sir Francis grants, but reads no more of the superscription then thus;
For Mounseur Bond in Paris: though the superscription was very large and
sufficient, (as shall hereafter in this discourse sufficiently appeate,) and
presently, Peugh (quoth he) is this all, what fool was he that wrote this
directions? he had as good have written, For Mounseur Bond in France, and as
soon they should have found him. So Sir Francis put the letter in his own
Pocket, with a kind of a slight put off, or indeed put up. But Mr Marriot
being loath to let it so slip, through his slippery fingers; repleyed, Nay,
(quoth he,) good Son give me the letter again; that so I may show it to the
party, and not only by his own eyes Convince him of his error; but laugh at him
for his folly, which Sir Francis could not with modesty deny, but with a
seeming willingness gave his Father Marriot the letter.

Thus having passed away some 10 days in Paris, Sir Francis comes to his
Father, tells him he has some very urgent business, at a Town Called Corbell,
some 7 or 8 leagues from Paris by water; there to meet with a Gentelman, a
special loving friend of his, who had lately fought (as he said) a Duel about
Paris, and therefore durst not yet come any nerer: however he was imediately
employed by the King of Scots, and that he had brought some letters from the
said King to Sir Francis; so that if Mr Marriot would go down with him to
Corbell, he should there hear all the News of affairs, with the said King;
and furnish himself with News enough to carry home with him, when he went;
which might be as soon as Mr Marriot pleased, for that (as Sir Francis told
him) they would come back again, either the same night, or the next morning at
furthest.

Mr Marriot (who was much delighted with his new sons good Company.) thought,
for so little a time it would be uncivil to leave him therefore would not give
his good Son a denial; but away presently they go, and without sword or
stick, or any other sort ^f A^mes, put themselves into a boat together: and
Sir Francis his pretended (...) in Law in their Company, which was the Father
of the forementioned (...) whom Sir Francis called wife, and with in short space
they land safe at Corbell but there was no such man there, as Sir Francis had
formerly spoken of. But Sir Francis (because he would not be much observed to
walk about the town with M. Marriot as he had formerly been at Paris,)
possesses the honest mistrustless Gentelman (Mr Marriot,) that the expected
Gentelman stayed for him at a private house, a matter of a mile and half, or 2
miles out of the town, whether he must go to speak with him: still persuading
Mr Marriot, that this Gentelman and himself carried on businesses of immence
concerments concerning the King of Scotts. Mr Marriot was easily induced to
believe all this; and as easily seduced to go along with them: and having taken
such a tedious Journey by water, would not stick now to walk a mile or two by
land; partly for his own recreation, and partly to satisfy the importunity of
his Son Sir Francis; who told him, that this was the period of all his business
in France; and this dispatched, he would then be at his Fathers dispose, if he
pleased, to wait on him back again, even into England: which Mr Marriot was not
a little glad of, in regard of the strangeness of the place, people and
language, (to him utterly unknown) and therefore, (without any great scruple)
went along with him to the promised place, which Mr Marriot found private
indeed; being a lone house, in the midst of many great Vinyards, and large Corn
fields, not any house near it by 2 miles at least, the nerest was Corbell;
Neither was here any accommodation, but what satisfied a poor old man and woman,
who merely dwelt there to look to the Vinyards: yet here they stayed till it was
now almost night, but no Gentelman from the King of Scots, to our brave Knight:
so says Mr Marriot, Come Son let us return to the Town, and lodge there this
night, for here is not any accommodation, but at the Town we may refresh our
selves at our pleasure, and be here again to morrow; but this advise suited not
with Sir Francis his stratagems: wherefore he replied, No No, Father, we will
even make as good shift as we can, with these honest folks this night, in this
house, (which though it seem very bad, I must tell you the King of England has
been contented with a worse) and my friend, will be with us betimes in the
morning. Mr Marriot (having no mind to stay,) considering the lonen-nes of the
place, the barreness of the house, and the strange and uncouth condition of the
people, would fain have persuaded his Son Francis to have gone to the Town: but
Mr Marriots mouth was quickly stopd again, with the King of England etc. and
the like put-offs till night came on, and there they must be forced to stay:
where at length there was a bed made where they both lay till day light next
morning; when on a sudden Sir Francis slides out of the bed, and was making
himself ready, which made Mr Marriot ask him what was the reason he rose up so
early, it being yet not past 3 of the Clock. Father (quoth Sir Francis) I was
loath to waken you, but I must rise to send a messenger for my friend to come
to me; and then we will be gone toward Paris. This new lodging pleased not Mr
Marriot so well, that he would ly and take a napp in the morning but (being
weary of his Quarters) up he gets, and as he was making himself ready, he
looked out at the window, where he saw his Son Sir Francis talking with 3
sturdy villains, (all standing bare headed before his worship,) but what they
said Mr Marriot Could not understand; for they spoke altogether in French. This
made Mr Marriot begin to distrust a little Villainy in his Son Franck; and
therefore began also to Consider with himself what to do. But to put those
troubles out of his thoughts at the very instant up stairs comes his dear Son,
and his three Godfathers, with each a good sower Cudgel in his hand, with him;
and then Sir Francis goes to embrace and kiss his Father Marriot, saying Good
Father be not afraid, there shall not an hair of your head be wronged; only
you must stay here as my Prisoner, till you have paid me 800 lb. either from
Roven or London; because I am to raise a Regiment for my Master the King of
Scots, (there is He brought in to father his damnable villainies) and I know you
are a man of such abilities that you may well spare him such a sum, he will
pay you again: and this you must do before you go. Nevertheless you shall not
want any accommodation befitting your Condition, for I will use you as a
Gentleman, therefore be not afraid. Mr Marriot knew not what answer to make him
at the present, but after a very little deliberation (quoth he) Sir Francis you
know very well how my estate lies at Roven, how the most part of my goods sold
are at 3 months and 5 months payment; and the greatest part of them are yet
unfold, insomuch that no money can be so speedily got in: you know there is 200
lb. ready in Roven, and if you will be contented with that and discharge me, I
will make it over to you, (quoth Mr Marriot.) This was nothing to Sir Francis
purpose, and therefore he took from his Father Marriot a Silver stamp of his
name, which he did use to set to all Letters, Acquittances, and Contracts of
dealing, and was ever known to be sufficient Testimony of his act and deed; and
so writ letters presently to Roven, to Mr Marriots Factors, affirming this his
mark to them to affirm the truth of their Contents, wherein he bids them go to
one Bromwells vessel that lay in Roven, who had brought diverse Goods of his in
her, from England, with a Box of wearing Clothes, which Sir Francis Commands to
be broken open, and a new suit and Cloak of Exellent good Cloth trimed richly
with Gold, and a Riding Coat all new, to be sent imediately for Paris, and
orders them and all letters, and the like concerning Mr Marriot to be directed
to Paris, in the Foubour Saint German to a Lute makers house: the like
direction he gives to his friends in England, so that now what ever letters
must come for Mr Marriot, must (unknown to him) be sent to Paris; and by these
means directly to Sir Francis his hands first: by which plott Sir Francis
receives and answers Mr Marriots letters without his knowledge or least manner
of suspicion: and this he had ordered a good while before he had secured Mr
Marriot. This happened on Satturday the 21 of June 1656. on which day Sir
Francis, had sent his pretended Father in law to Paris, to receive and bring to
him Letters that were that day to come from England and Roven to Mr Marriot, as
Sir Francis had appointed them. Then after 3 hours stay that the fellows had
made (still close attending on them,) Sir Francis bids them go to work in the
Vinyard, (which was just by the house) and to be within call, which they did;
Thereby presuming he kept Mr Marriot in aw enough: and then sends the woman of
the house to Corbell, to buy provision for the next day, (being Sunday) and to
bring Wine along with her. At length all being absent but the Father and Son.
Come says Sir Francis, Father let us go play at Cards to pass away the Time,
and so pulls a pair of new Cards out of his pockett, with which they played some
2. or. 3. hours, still expecting the return of the woman; for they were very
thirsty, and had no manner of drink in the house. So says Mr Marriot Come son,
Pray let us not sit stenching up our selves within doors, but walk abroad into
the Vineyard, and take the fresh air a little, for I am very weary with playing
at cards: which Sir Francis would feign have put off; for he was very unwilling
to trust himself with Mr Marriot abroad, there being many other people at work
in the Vineyard, beside the 3 Rogues that were his assistants: so that Sir
Francis told him they would walk into the fields toward Corbell to meet the
woman, and so come back again with her. Thus Sir Francis taking a good
Crabbtree Cudgel in his hand, (Mr Marriot having none) forth they go, Sir
Francis always Carrying the Cudgel in the Contray hand to Mr Marriot, who had
much to do to draw his graceless son a quarter of a mile from the house; at
length Mr Marriot staying behind to make water, overtakes Sir Francis but
seizing on that side where the Cudgel was, he wrested it out of his hands; and
before Mr Marriot could recover it to give him a blow therewith, was Sir
Francis on his knees, asking his Father blessing and pardon, confessing his
fault, and begging his life, desiring that he would not kill him: which made Mr
Marriot to forbear striking him: and told him that as he had saved his life in
the morning, so he would now give him his: but on this condition, that he Sir
Francis should return again to the house, and not follow him toward Corbell:
for if he did, he vowed he would kill him, and throw him into the Corn; of
which Conditions Sir Francis was so much overjoyed with; that he desired his
Father (as he still called him) to Pardon him, and seal it with a kiss, as he
was on his knees: which Mr Marriot did: and so they parted: wherefor this time
we must leave him to shift among his rogues, and follow Mr Marriot to the town,
where we find him Just entered.

Here Mr Marriot endeavors all he can to find out himself, for he was at an
Extreme loss, he knew not what to make of any body, and no body knew what to
make of him; for he could speak never a word of French; nor they could
understand nere a word of English: yet he Continued making of signs, and
crying out Angletorre, which he took to be French enough for one man to be
known by; so that some (perceiving him to be a stranger,) went and Called a
Cappuchine an Italian born, but one that understood English very well; To whom
Mr Marriot relates his sad Condition, and tells the whole story: who being a
man that wore not the habit only, but had the true spirit and Charity of a man
in Religious orders, not only stood in admiration at the impious villainy of
the treacherous knight, but like a pitiful and Compassionate Father,
Contrives which way to relieve the poor distressed Gentelman in his so
deplorable Condition, and preserve him from the future dangers he was incident
to, by the treachery of his wicked son, and his Accomplices: and therefore he
carries him first to his Convent, where the rest of the Fathers at the relation
of the story, are in no less wonder then their Brother, nor less
Compassionate. At length the good Italian got a boat for Mr Marriot, and
bargained with them for 14. shillings to set him safe on shore at Paris; which
carefully was performed by the 2 boat men. But being arived, he was in as
great a strait as he was at his coming to Corbell; for he knew not any person
there, neither could he speak to any to be understood; but getting up into the
high street, had recourse to his former helps at Corbell, viz. making signs,
and crying out Angleter Angleter; and all to as little purpose as before; till
at last a poor Irish man coming by, and hearing him to inquire for the English,
went to him and asked him what he would give him, and he would bring him to
some English? Mr Marriot was as ready to give, as the other to ask, and instead
of 12 d. which the Irish man asked, for his pains, Mr Marriot gave him a piece
of French money 15 d. piece with which being so well satisfied, he Carries him
to the house of the English Benedictines in the Foubour Saint Jaques. To whom
Mr Marriot (seeing they were men) again relate, the whole story of the
unfortunate Father, and unhappy son, from the first to the last, even till he
had brought himself in there amongst them, and now desires them to get him a
lodging amongst some English: which imediatly they do; and leave him that night
to his repose: but in the morning they send their servant to him, to bring him
to them again, there to be with them till some means might be found for his
safety, or some friend or acquaintance of his found out, that would take care
to reconvey him back to Roven to his factors or elsewhere, out of the danger of
his dangerous Son Francis, which yet in the ey of Good men seemed to threaten
him. Here Mr Marriot shows the forementioned letter directed to Mounseur Bond,
whose superscription they read to him, thus, For Mounseur Bond, Controuler of
the Queen of Englands house, in the Palace Royal in the Rue Saint Onory at
Paris. Although Sr Francis would have pocketed it with half that Complement.
This Mr Bond being a Gentelman generally beloved, and known all Paris over.
These Benedictines send their servant along with him to Mr Bond; to whom he
first delivers his Letter, and then his story and danger desiring Mr Bonds
advice and assistance: which Mr Bond (a very Courteous and Civil Gentelman)
readily contributed, and calling several friends of his together, consulted
what Course was best to be taken in this business: And first they get printed
300. Bills in the French Tongue, after this manner.

Mr William Marriott Merchant of England, at present in Paris; prays all
Factors of the said City, that if any shall bring them any Letters of Exchange
Drawn from London, or from Roven, payable to him, or else from Mris Iean
Marriott of London aforesaid, Wife of the said William Marriott, that they
would not pay them, and to detain those that shall bring them; The said Mr
Marriott having been surprised, (not understanding the French tongue,) by
persons of ill repute. If they bring such letters, or advise, to advertise Mr
Bond Controller of the Queen of Englands house at the Palace Royal thereof,
he will resolve them of the reasons: and the discoveries shall do an acceptable
service to the Republique.

These bills were (as it were) in an instant spread throughout all Paris, next
they go to search for Sir Francis, and with a special warrant, and a good
guard (which Mr Bond easily obtained) they find the house, and therein his
whore and man that waited on Sir Francis, whom they secure: and searching the
house farther for Sir Francis, Mr Marriott finds his own suit and cloak, and
the riding Coat before spoken of, which he takes away with him. And seeing Sir
Francis his Picture, takes that away likewise, but no personal or real Sir
Francis Could be found: therefore they secure his man in the Palace Royal,
where they detain him some 9 or 10 days; to see if he would discover his
master: But it was more then he could do, but he told that his Master was not
gone out of the house above half an hour before they came to search for him.
With that Sir Francis his Whore and her mother threatened to prosecute Mr
Marriott for the lives of their 2 husbands, because they went out of Town
together, and they swore they had never seen them since. But Mr Marriott having
the better end of the staff, and a friend in Court (Mr Bond who would not yet
forsake him) ceased not to prosecute them so close that if they had bin then
taken, they had both been hanged: however he was resolved to try the utmost
what law would do against them; and prosecuted so far, that he might have had
their pictures hung up in the market place, and then any man might kill them
and have 10 lb. for his pains. This struck such a terror in the women, and so
(by them) so frighted their husbands (as they called them,) that then they made
friends to Mr Bond, (who had the whole management of the business) to take up
the business, before the extremity of the law should pass upon them.

This was readily agreed unto by Mr Bond, in regard this Sir Francis was hereby
discovered to be what he really was not what he seemed to be, a Knight, but a
Knave, nay a very Rogue, being an Irish man born, his name More (as I said
before) and had been an officer in the wars; and had often acted such parts
before now, for he had been known twice before to have taken a Religious habit
to shroud his Villainy in the like Exigents.

Now as I said, having been a Colonel of the late Kings Army, and there being
many such in and about Paris, who threatened to be the Death of Mr Marriott, if
he did proceed thus to disgrace them; Mr Marriott was content, provided, that
Sir Francis should come and acknowledge his fault, and ask him forgiveness
before some friends of her Majesty's, whereof Mr Bond was to be one; and then
he would freely forgive him. This was agreed to on their part, and the day and
hour appointed at the Comissaryes house: but Sir Francis alias Coll. Moore came
not, but sent a messenger with his whore to beg his excuse, and desire them
not to require his presence at that business. But Mr Marriott would not consent
to it; either he must come himself, or else he would still prosecute him: so at
last after one or two put offs more, this Moore alias Barker comes to the
stake, and there before all the Company, did acknowledge all this that is
written to be true: desired Mr Marriott and Mr Bond to Pardon him; which they
did: and Mr Marriott not only pardoned these injuryes done against him, but
desiring God to pardon him too, forgave him the money which he had formerly lent
him from time to time: and so turned him going, to exercise the like plotts.

And so returns our story with Mr Marriott safe into England, who is here, and
will Justify all this to be true. And this story was written by a Gentleman,
that was an Ey and ear witness of all passages in this Relation, and personally
present in all, after Mr Marriots return to Paris: and set forth for a Caution
to all Merchants, Travelers, and others, that they may be armed and prepared
to withstand the treachery and falsehood of him, or any such dissembling
Sycophants.

FINIS.

