VVO to thee Town of Cambridge, thy wickedness surmounteth the wickedness of
Sodom; therefore repent whilst thou have time, lest I consume thee with fire,
as I have done it; therefore harden not your hearts, lest I consume you, and my
wrath burn like fire, and I consume you in my fierce anger, and so be brought
to naught; for thou have joined hands with thy sister Jerusalem; therefore will
I uncover thy nakedness, and thy shame will I unfold that the Beast in thee may
be discovered that sits on many waters; for thou art full of wickedness, thy
hands are full of deceit, the well-favoured harlot lodges in thee, the mother
of witchcraft; and now I am raising my swift witness to confound her ways: I am
the light of the world and do enlighten every one that comes into the world,
says Christ Jesus. I am the foundation, and he that builds upon me shall have
eternal life; I have mourned for you as one mourns for her first born, and
you would not come unto me that you might live; I have knocked and called, and
none would hear; therefore will I thunder out my judgments upon this wicked
generation which has not the fear of God; therefore the wicked shall see it
and tremble: horror and terror, and pain shall take hold upon them as upon a
woman in travel, and many shall cry, but there shall be none to deliver them;
therefore repent whilst I give you a day, lest you become as fruitless trees
which cumbers the ground; for every plant that my heavenly Father has not
planted, will be plucked up by the roots, and therefore repent whilst I give you
a day, for I gave Iesabel a day, and I gave Jerusalem a day, but they would
not; therefore mind what I shall say, and where I do speak be still, and low,
and wait in silence, and then you shall hear a voice saying, This is the way
walk in it, and if any have any desire to walk in this way, I will be with
them, and guide them, and there shall you find sweet paths, and plentious
redemption. Therefore for your souls health; for it was for the good of your
souls that I took upon me the seed of Abraham, and became the likeness of
sinful flesh, were it not that I loved the world; therefore I would not have
you go astray as sheep without a shepherd, scattered up and down upon every
Mountain and Valley, and carried away with every wind of doctrine; but now am I
a raising up my own seed which has been so long under Pharaoh the task-master.
Cambridge thou task-master, Pharaoh thou oppresser which opresseth the Just
seed within thee, in setting up thy own righteousness and wisdom, which shall
grow as ragged as an old garment that moths has eat, and I will make thee know
that my righteousness endures from generation to generation, and so for ever.
And now let hills be removed, and mountains be dashed to pieces, and the strong
hold be levelled; for a day there is coming that will make the keepers of the
house tremble; woeful and terrible will that day be to the wicked: whilst the
strong-man keeps the house all is at peace, but when a stronger than he comes,
he then must be turned out; I came not to bring peace but war, says Christ
Jesus, and now turn in your eyes from beholding vanity; for that eye looks
from Christ, and that nature is accursed from God, for Christ Jesus is pure,
and can behold no vain thing* Esau is accursed from God, Jacob have I loved and
Esau have I hated, for out of Abraham shall my name be called. Death reigns
over all men till they be regenerate and born again: and they that be born
again of God sin not, but their sins are forgiven them; therefore* repent that
your sins may be forgiven you also, the master has given you a talent to see
how you will improve it, that you may be found faithful Stewards, when the Lord
shall all for that which he has given you, that ^hen the Lord comes, He may
say, Come ye good and faithful Stewards, enter into your Masters joy but for
the wicked, go ye cursed and ye that forget God shall be cast into hell.
Praises, praises to the Lord, that he is raising up his ow(...)aints to judge
the earth: and many now do witness their judgments true, but to the wicked,
judgments are terrible: and none but them comes to see the fresh springs of
eternal life, but they that live in the life of them that gave them forth, and
there they will come to see the filthiness of these two wicked Cities, how they
ly wallowing in their blood, and their blood shall be required at their own
hands; for they that come forth of Cambridge and Oxford, they are such as
Isaiah was sent to, to cry woe against, greedy dumb-dogs that never have enough,
and love greeting in the Marketplaces, and long prayers in the Synagogues and
the upper seats at feasts, and be called of men Masters; they are filthy
bruit-beasts which makes my people to err, therefore the ground is cursed for
your sakes: thorns and thistles shall it bring forth for your sakes, until you
return to Adams first estate. And now I have shown you the way that you should
walk in, take heed to the light that shines in a dark place: light shines in
darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not; therefore repent that the
darkness may be taken away, and so become children of the light, and not
children of the night, but children of the day; for they that walk in the day
stumble not, because they have the light with them: but they that walk in the
night stumble, because they are in darkness; And now let the light search you,
for Christ Jesus is now searching Jerusalem with Candles, and not one corner of
it must go unsearched. Beware of seducers that comes in sheeps clothing, but
inwardly are ravenous wolves; for such Christ Jesus spoke of, that should come
in the latter days. Oh Cambr. thou art full of filth, thy Priests are all
corrupt as ^rass and iron is corrupted and cankered, so is this Town full of
hanious sins: thou art full of pride and covetousness, thou art polluted in thy
blood, and joins house to house, and field to field, until there is no place
left for the poor. God exalts the poor in spirit, but the rich ^e sends
empty away; it is the humble and lowly mind that trembles at my Word, that I
teach. And now see in you, and search in you whether you are in Cains ways,
murdering and killing the just in you, and whipping, and stocking them that the
Lord has sent to you; therefore repent and do so no more, take heed and do so
no more, lest I render my plagues double on thy head; and when the book of
^onscience is opened then shall thou witness this to be true; therefore
remember that thou wast forewarned in thy life time, therefore wait in silence
till the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts, then will you come to
witness sweet springs, fresh ones ^f eternal life; but for the wicked they be
like the raging Sea that tosseth to and fro, that casts up nothing but mire
and dirt: your ^earts are full of dirt, and filth, thy pride shall become as
filthy rags upon the dunghill; therefore sit down and bethink thee that thou
art, thou art but dust and ashes: and cannot I kill and make alive, cannot I
cast down and raise up, spread abroad and bring ^^gether? yea, my hands have
done all these things; I am gathering all my sheep together where they have
been scattered in this dark and cloudy day, I will bring them from under
Pharaoh that they may have one Master, one Shephard, and one sheepfold I. The
true Shep^ard will lay down his life for his sheep: but the hireling will fly
when persecution comes; and therefore will I gather my sheep out of their
mouths, and he that has an ear let him hear; and therefore will I pour out my
judgments upon them, to cut down and burn up, and to de^^roy; for it is to the
cutting down of pride, of filth, of covetousns, voluptuousns, and all wicked
ways, and what delight is in the pride of life? (...) thy conscience accuse
thee, what peace can thou have? therefore have I sent light into the world,
but men love darkness rather then ^^ght, and there is their condemnation.
Christ Jesus is the eternal life, and they that comes to witness him in power
and glory, comes (...) witness Christ Jesus the substance; and this light will
lead thee out of all forms and shaddows, and in it thou will come to see all
things ^ave an end but Christ Jesus, and he endures for ever: and therefore
build upon him that endures for ever, build not upon the sand, ^^r the waves
beating to and fro, they bring the sand into the Sea, and so the builder loses
his work, and he that waits upon me shall ^ot wait in vain, but have eternal
life: it is them that endures to the end shall be saved: it is not him that
cries Lord, Lord, but them that does the will of my Father which is in heaven
shall be saved; and see whose will thou art doing, and see if thou be not in
thy own will (...) man in his own will has never seen God at any time; for
Adam when he was in his fallen estate, he was driven out from God, and so
alie^ated from God and see if you be not vagabonds as Cain was, for Cain was a
vagabond and a runagate, he slew the just, and so do thou: ther^^ore thou
have run after other gods, and have cast my righteous Law behind thy back; and
therefore am I coming to rip up all hearts, it is I that tries the reins, it
is I that knows the thoughts long before, and how can you hide your selves
from such a God as I? I will render judgments upon the head of the wicked, and
all the world shall see the glory of God; for he is arising in his glory to
judge the earth, with righteous judgment and equity will he judge the earth,
and the wicked shall see it and tremble; and now am I looking for the corn and
wine and oil I gave to feed the poor, but you have spent it upon your lusts;
the whole Creation groans under you, for your evil deeds and corrupt language:
in Cains nature you are, and death speaks of the fame of God. Powerful,
powerful is the God of glory in all his works his ways past finding out, and to
them that live in Christ Jesus, they know the mind and will of God their guide
and keeper; but to the wicked he is a destroyer, to destroy their wicked ways
with fire and with a sword to cut down the fruitless branches; for what is the
wild grape-tree good for? men cannot make any Instruments of the wood;
therefore it is good for nothing but to be cast into the fire: so shall the
wicked; for Tophet is prepared of old for them that will not obey Gods Word,
and his servants, but obey sin and Satan; and therefore will I pour out my
seven vials upon the seat of the beast (the wicked beast is in every wicked
heart) and therefore sink down and wait and see how thy soul lies in death,
drowned in filth, smothered in wickedness; therefore repent that that which
presses down thy soul may be taken away, for the soul is mine, and I desire
nothing of any but my own, and that with advantage; for he is the sloathful
servant that improveth not his Masters goods; and therefore from him that has
a little, that little he has shall be taken away and given to him that has
most, and he that has an ear let him hear: and while you have time prize it;
Remember you are warned in your life time, and all left without excuse.

Hester Biddle.


