BIBLIOTHECA MILITVM: Or the SOLDIERS PUBLIC LIBRARY.

Lately Erected For the Benefit of all that love THE GOOD OLD CAUSE, At
WALLINGFORD-House: And already furnished with diverse excellent Treatises,
herein mentioned.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1659.

Bibliotheca Militum: Or the SOLDIERS PUBLIC LIBRARY.
1. THE City Compliance for gain without conscience, written by Rob. Tychborn.

2. The cares of the world satisfied: Or a Rest from labor, wherein is proved
a Rest for such souls as could find no Rest under the, old Government: written
by Henr. Da^^^, Executioner.

3. Religion in Bonds: Or the Saints Captivity and Persecution experienced: by
John Barkstead, Lieutenant of the Tower.

4. A new way to make Lords; Or new Lords already made; whereunto is added, The
other House, their Authority and Institution; also are included their noble
Acts and Achievements, with their fortunes inabling them for their services:
written by William Prynne, Esquire.

5. Perjury (in Folio) proved to be Jure Div^^^: By His late Highness deceased.

6. A Commonwealth expounded to be the ^afe way through this world, and the
most certain to that which is to come: whereunto is added, that Gain is great
Godliness: by Sr. Arthur Haslerig.

7. Verbum Doloris: Or England in mourning; Prophetically foretelling the
destruction of Protectors, as likewise of the succession of their Families; by
Richard Cromwell, Esquire.

8. Patience per force: Or a medicine for amad dog; treating of teh infallible
virtue of necessity: by the aforesaid Author.

9. the world in a maze, or wise men run mad: Also is added hereunto an
Exhortation, that those who have worn out Religions Cloak would get new ones,
or turn the old: written by Hugh Peter's, M. of Arts

10. Divide and impera: The art of supplanting or compassing ones ends, being a
subtle piece dedicated to the Lord Lambert, and written by Peter Talbot, Soc.
Jesu.

11. The Art of preaching and praying, with the right use of Religion: By that
incomparable Artist, Sr. Henry Vane. K.

12. Pucana de Scoto: Or Scots directory for all such as fortune shall
hereafter make Secretaries of State, showing their necessity of being
conversant in the secrets of both Sexes: most politickly handled, and written
by Thomas Scot, Secretacy.

13. Hey te Tyte, or to morrow morning I found in Horse-shoe; being an
excellent discourse concerning Government, with some sober and practical
expedients, modestly proposed, and written by James Harrington.

14. Defamatio Regum. Or the History of Ingratitude; I Burdachis experto; an
Italian translation: every thing and nothing, or the complete complier: by the
Lord Fines.

15. Apuleius in laudem Asini: or a Panegyric in Commendation of his late
Highnes's, singular virtues, and valor: by Pagan Fisher.

16. Well flown Buzard. Or an Holy Rapture of the court confessor, wherein the
made a new and incredible discovery of his late Highness, since his decease, at
the right hand of God: by Peter Sterry.

17. Superstition demolisht. Or the old Dagon pulled down and removed from
Westminster: by the Committee of safety.

18. A new gag for an old Goose: Or a reply to James Harringtons Oceana: by Mr.
Wrenn.

19. Asinus ad liram: Or a new way of improving the Gold finders Office,
proposed to the privy Council for the ease of the City, by a Person of a good
report, and one who petitions to be Duke of the dunghill, because he has much
insight into a business of this nature; the first letters of whose name is,
Alderman Atkinsd.

20. The rebels Catechisin, translated out of the Scottish directory; by Col.
Hewson.

21. Berecynthius Heroes: Wherein it is demonstrated, that Mr. Row is the
fittest Orator for his Auditors oxtended ears, his voice being as low as his
Rhetoric, and both as lean as his Person.

22. An owl in an Ivy-bush: or Gilbert Millington in the Chair; together with
the excellent improvement of scandalous Ministers.

23. A Curry-Comb for a Cox-Comb: Or Invisible John discovered: by Col. Overton.

These are the Gift of Charles Lord Fleetwood for the better encouragement of
future benefactors.

FINIS.

