BIBLIOTHECA FANATICA: OR, THE Phanatique Library: BEING A CATALOGUE OF Such
Books as have been lately made and by the AUTHORS presented to the College of
BEDLAM

Printed in the year 1660.

Bibliotheca Fanatica. OR, The Fanatic Library:
THe difference between Rogue and Robert, Titchburn and Tyburn, learnedly
stated in several Positions, in Answer to a late Libel, or University Queries;
By Robert Titchburn, Alderman. Canaan's Grapes; being a taste of the virtues
and fidelity of our Saints: By the same Author. Ochus Redevivus, Or a clear
demonstration that a Trapdore, or Gallows, is the best reward for Traitorous
Assistance, an excellent piece; Illustrated with variety of Figures, and
intended lately for public view; By the Parliament of England. A Manuscript
not yet printed. But lately married: Or a grave Reason why amongst other Wares
he has but for these two years traded in Horns: By Nicholas Gold,
Rump-Merchant. Ragionamenti d' Aretino; or, Pathetical and feeling Dialogues,
for the preparation and instruction of the sanctified Sisters: By Thomas Scot a
Brewer's Clark, and late Secretary of the Council of State. The Sword of the
Spirit the Devils surest Weapon; Or, Preaching and Praying, the most expedite
way to rule the Earth: By Sir Henry Vane, Knight. Vanitas Vanitatum, omnia
vanitas: Or Saint-like ejaculations against the vanity of Turbulency and
Ambition: By the same Vane Author. Corruption vnius generatio alterius: or, A
Treatise to prove that a Run-away-Prentice makes an excellent Statesman: By
Major Salwey: Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae: A complete Work, proposing to
the Parliament, That the best way to propage the Commonwealth, is to settle it
on the Ruins of its first Founders, Lambert, Vane, Desborow, Titchburn, etc.
By a Friend to the Commonwealth of England. Mercu^ius Acheronticus; or, The
infernal Post: being a way lately invented for more speedy and safe conveyance
to the Diabolical Regions: By Thomas Scot, now Postmaster General to the
Prince of Darkness. Hoylius Redevivus: or, A perfect demonstration, That the
easiest way to revenge a man of his Adversaries, is to make use of the help of
Alderman Hoyles Chain: A Manuscript intended shortly for public view: By Sir
Arthur Haslerigge, a crack-bain'd Knight. Solemn prayers for the destruction of
Babel, being very pithy ejaculations for the pulling down St. Pulchers Church,
lest he should never get money for the sale of his Horse: By Jeremy Ives, the
gifted Maggot-Monger. De antiquitate Typograph^ae, to show, that Printing or
Pressing was as ancient as Grandfather Adams, learnedly put home by Henry Hills
Printer, to the Tailors wife in Blackfriars. Tempora mutantur and nos mutamur
in illis, or a complete history of the life of Blind Hewson, from his Awle to
his Sword, and now to his Last, by his own hands. Ariana Arianissima divulgata,
or a plain discovery of those places and honors which are already by the Devil
provided for his best servants of the Rump. Utrum horum mavis accipe, or the
gracious proffer of a halter, or a hatchet, to the grand assertors of the Good
Old Cause, by a friend to the Commonwealth of England. The harmony of
Confessions, or the Fanatic Directory, compiled by Sir Henry Vaene, Mr.
Simpson, Mr. Feak, James Haylor and others; a piece wonderfully conducing to
the interest of the Saints, and destruction of that Antichristian thing called,
Settlement. Babylon is fallen, Babylon is fallen; or the true Relation of the
final overthrow, and utter destruction of the Rotten RUMP of a Parliamentary
Junto, by a friend to King Charles the Second. The RUMPS Seminary, or the best
way to find out the ablest Utopian Commonwealths men, by the Coffee Club at
Westminster. Lueri bonus est odor ex re qualibet; a Treatise written in defense
of his seizing on the Boie's Close-stool-pan, and reserving the contents for
his own profit, because the Lad was so profane to carry it on a Sunday, by
Alderman Atkins, Shit-breeches. A.T. is as good for a Sow as a Pancake; whereby
is clearly demonstrated, that the Rump would have carried on the business of
the Saints better then any Parliament chose according to the Laws of the Nation,
by Tim. Rogers, princeps fanaticorum. The Saints may fall away finally, proved
in Colonel Overtons delivery of Hull into the hands of the Wicked, when he had
resolved to keep it till the coming of the fifth Monarch; with sundry other
examples of the Brethrens Apostasy. No-beard, the true characteristical mark of
a pious brother, and a real assertor of the Good Old Cause, by John Ireton, and
Robert Tychburn. The Spirit in the shape of an Owl, howling upon the top of
the mountains, by Vavasor Powell. The repentance of a sinner, or paraphrastical
meditations upon the Rumps Lamentations, by Colonel John Streater. Sicut erat
in principio, As you were, Gentlemen; a serious exhortation to his brethren of
his Blade, to return to their former pitiful occupation, by John Desbrow,
plowman. Crispin and Crispianus, an excellent Romance, illustrated and
innobled, by Coll. John Hewson. E malis minimum eligendum, of two evils the
least is to be chosen; and then whether milk-purse Lawyers, or Cutthreat
Tyrants are the more tolerable, by Eugenius Philopater. Dapple groans under the
weight of Sancho Pancha, or the quondam miserable estate of the City-Ass, by
John Iteton then Lord Mayor of London. De tribus impostoribus; or, A perfect
History of those three notorious Cheats, Rogers, Feake, and Praisegod Barebone.
Animadversions and Corrections of St. Paul's Epistles, and specially of that
sentence, Godliness is great gain; whereas it should be, Gain is great
godliness; as is clearly proved by William Kiffin, Broaker of the Word. The Art
of pimping set forth to the life, for the benefit and instruction of all the
indigent Brethren: By Michael Oldsworth, Pimp-master-General to the late Earl
of Pembrooke. The Defect of a virtue is worse then the Excess; a Treatise
showing how much better it is to be hung like a Stallion with Henry Martin,
then with the Lord Mounson to want a Bauble. Diva Pecunia, a brief Discourse to
prove that there neither is, nor can be any other God which should, be adored
by the Saints, but the omnipotent Lady Money: By Marchamond Needham, the
Devil's half Crown News-monger. Fistula in ano, and the Ulcer of the Rump;
wherein is shown, that there is no better way to cure such distempers, then a
burning, or cauterising, by the Rump-confounding Boys of the City of London.
Lex Legum; or, A clear demonstration that there can be no better way for the
security of the Saints, then by quite abolishing the Laws of England, and
setting up in their stead the Canons of Beelzebub: By Miles Corbet, Lord chief
Justice of the infernal Commonwealth. The Saints shall possess the Earth;
proving, That it is lawful for the brethren to stab, cut the throats of, or any
way make an end of the Wicked of this World, if so be there will thereby any
profit accrue to themselves. By the Congregations at Paul's and elsewhere.
FINIS.

