A TRUMPET SOUNDING AN ALARVM FROM THE SPIRIT of LIFE Through an Inhabitant of
the City of GOD TO ALL The Inhabitants of the Earth.

But most especially, To the RULERS and Inhabitants of the CITY OF EXON: TO THE
END, The dead may be raised, the deaf hear, the dumb speak, the lame walk, and
the unclean spirit cast out, and the poor receive the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1662.

A Trumpet, sounding an Alarms from the Spirit of Life, through an inhabitant
of the City of God, to all the inhabitants of the Earth, etc.
AWake, awake, arise, arise, prepare, prepare, all you who are in, and under
sin; death and darkness have power over you; Oh! come away (stay not) to meet
the Lord of Life (who is a Spirit) by fasting, weeping and mourning, who is
come and coming to judge the quick and the dead, and this is the glad tidings
of the Gospel, which is the cross of Christ, the power of God, that convinces,
condemns and judges sin in your mortal flesh. Tremble and fear, and come
down all you proud, high and lofty, ambitious, wanton sons and daughters of
men; you that live in pleasures, are dead while you live, and cut off from the
Land of the living, except you speedily repent and forsake all your
abominations, by which you have provoked the Lord to pour down his judgments
upon you. Oh! alas, alas, I am filled with the sense of the wrath, anger and
indignation of the Lord of Hosts, whose dreadful day is at hand: Oh! howl and
lament, wail and weep bitterly, bow down, put your mouths in the dust, ren^
off your filthy, polluted Harlots attire, and cloth you with sackcloth, and
wallow in ashes, for Sodom's sins are multiplied in and amongst you, and you
are covered with a cloud of error, and the ignorance of Nineveh has
overshadowed you, who are wise to do evil, but to do good you know not how and
whilst you profess God, Christ, Faith and Scripture, you perish for want of the
knowledge of God, Christ, Faith and Scriptures. And Friends, this is the Word
of the Lord to you all, Rulers, Judges, and all Officers, Bishops, Deans,
Chapters, Curates, Priests, and all people small and great, high and low, rich
and poor, bond and free, Except you return unto, and believe in the true Light
of Jesus Christ the Son of the living God, you will perish and dye, and never
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Oh! come down ye uncircumcised in heart and
ears, and lend an ear to hear him who is the good Shepherd, and the Light of
the World, that lights every man that comes into the World; for it is he
only who destroys him that has the power of death (which is the Devil) who
is the new and living way to God out of the fall and separation which sin has
made between you and God, which you all are in until you return to him, believe
in, and follow him. Friends, this is no new nor strange thing but to them that
are alienated from the life and knowledge of God. Oh! Rebel no longer against
the light, as the generation of old did in Job's days, who said, God depart
from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways; for it is the true Light
that shines in your dark hearts, which you in the darkness cannot comprehend,
till you receive, and love it, and are led by it, that must bring you all to
the knowledge of God and his ways, if ever you come to know it; for there is
no man that knows the Father save the Son, and he to whom the Son shall
reveal him; and this revelation or inspiration gives to all mankind that
receive it, and wait in it, a right understanding, to know him that is true,
the beginning of the Creation of God. Oh Friends! consider betime, who say you
believe in God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; What are you come to
witness of the power and coming of Jesus Christ the holy and the just one? And
what comfort have you in the Holy Ghost in your own particulars? Is the Devil's
Work destroyed in you, which is the cause of God's Wrath and Indignation? these
branches as follows, (which sprung from the seed of the Serpent, and is
brought forth by the Dragons power, and encouraged by the Whore and Beast)
Murder, Whoredom, Theft, Swearing, Lying, Cursing, Drunkenness, Covetousness,
Pride, Idolatry, Heresy, Sedition, Strife, Envy, Fighting, Cheating, Cozening,
defrauding one another, greedily following lust, in Bull-baiting,
Cock-fighting, Hunting, Card-playing, Dice, Stage Plays, and other vain and
ungodly practices, which are all the Works of the flesh, brought forth under
the power of death and darkness: Oh Friends! if these things be not destroyed
in you by the power and coming of Jesus Christ, you are without salvation by
him, or comfort by the Holy Ghost, and dead to God, and crucify Christ a
fresh, and alive in your sins, posting on in the broad way, and are near
destruction, whose portion is the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone:
Oh! lament and bow down you tall Cedars, repent and forsake your sins, for the
great and terrible day of the Lord God hasteneth; yea, in the Name and Fear of
the Lord I proclaim it to you all, it is near at hand, a Day of fierce wrath,
blackness and thick darkness, distress, gloominess and desolation, is swiftly
and irresistably coming upon all the wicked and ungodly, that hate reproof, and
make a mock at sin, and will not take counsel of the Spirit of Life which has
long striven with you; then you that are strong and mighty, and trust in the
arm of flesh, and carnal Weapons, Swords, Guns, Clubs and Staves; Oh! alas,
alas, then fear, terror, weakness, amazement and astonishment shall seize upon
you all, and the carnal Weapons of every evil-doer shall be turned against his
fellow; then shall the Kings of the Earth, the great men and the mighty men,
the rich men and the chief Captains, cry unto the Rocks and to the Mountains
to fall upon them, and the clefts of the Rocks to hide them from the Wrath of
the Lord, and of the Lamb, whom your forefathers with bloody hands crucified
and killed the Prince of Life, and you their children are treading in the same
steps, by shedding the blood, and persecuting the Saints and faithful followers
of Jesus Christ; therefore you shall have blood to drink, and the cup of fury,
wrath and indignation, must be poured forth upon you without mixture, if you
repent not, and turn from all the evil of your ways, Oh Friends! why will you
dye? come to the beginning of the new Creation of God, and incline your ear to
hear the saving Light of Christ, the faithful and true Witness of God which he
has placed in your consciences, which never consented to your evil, and trust
not in lying vanities or precepts from the false Prophets, who have built you
up in vain hopes, and have long cried peace unto you, whilst the sword of the
Lord has reached unto your souls, and promise you life and salvation by Christ
after this life; be it known unto you all, you have no assurance of life,
peace, or salvation by Jesus Christ, until you are led by him, and saved from
your sins, which was (beforementioned) branched forth in many particulars.

So all come to the Witness of God in your consciences, that will give you all
a true and a certain evidence whether you are in the way of life or death, the
strait or the broad; and if the witness of God in your consciences condemn you,
you are not saved nor justified. Oh! Return, return to the true Light that will
discover the secrets of your evil corrupted hearts, and the sin and evil which
is conceived in the Womb of darkness, and receive, believe in, and follow it is
manifestation, that by it you may be led out of sin, death and darkness; that is
the way to peace, rest, and assurance of eternal life; for in him who is the
Light of the world; Life and Immortality dwells, and you cannot, nor shall not
find it in any other way. Oh! Rebel no longer against that Spirit which has,
and does reprove you in secret for your evil deeds, but receive its reproof,
that your sins may be mortified; this is the Spirit of God that is freely given
unto you that you should profit by it. And Friends, consider, if you are not
led by his Spirit to true repentance, love, goodness, godliness, holiness,
purity, soberness, charity, meekness, you are not the children of God, though
you may call God your Father, who is indeed the Father of the faithful and
upright in heart, because you have lost your first state, and are enemies to
God by reason of wicked works, and are not reconciled by Christ, and redeemed
out of the fall, and renewed again in his Image, but are led by the spirit of
Antichrist, which has reigned over all the world since the days of Christ and
his Apostles, in the dark night of Apostasy, and great perversion from the
right way; this spirit cries damnable Doctrine; the whole world has been
deceived with shadows without the substance; death has been set up instead of
life, the form of godliness without the power thereof. Oh! why will you always
go astray? Will you never think upon your latter end? Except you live the life
of righteousness, you cannot be blessed in your death: Oh! seek no longer the
living among the dead, for that which may be known of God is manifested in you;
the time of this great ignorance God winked at; but now he calls all men
every where to repentance, because he has appointed a day in which he will judge
the world in righteousness by that man Christ, who has convinced you of your
unrighteousness; oh! flight not this day of his tender visitation, who would
have gathered your forefathers who perished in their disobedience; the like
destruction will come upon you, if you go on in rebellion against him: Oh!
whilst he knocks at the doors of your hard hearts, with speed open unto him,
and receive him who is the Mediator of the New Covenant with God, that in this
your day and time you may know the things that concern your peace before they
be hid from your eyes, and your eye utterly darkened, never more to perceive,
and so to perish and dye with the uncircumcised: Oh! bow down, hear and feas
the living God who created all men, to the end he might be glorified in them,
and take delight in the work of his own hand.

Tremble all you who live in pride, lust, wantonness and fullness, who eat and
drink, and rise up to play; oh! you have forgot the Lord your Maker, you have
greatly dishonored him, and have and do spend, waste and consume his good
creatures upon your lusts, whereby you have greatly kindled the anger of the
just God against you; you are like the fatted Bullock who is going to the
slaughter, and knows not whither he is going; even so the day of the Lord (as
travel upon a woman) will overtake you, and when you cry to your selves peace
and safety, then destruction, woe and misery shall come rouling in upon you like
the irresistible waves of the sea; Oh then shall your greatest joys be your
greatest torments; the songs of your Temples turned into howlings, your
laughter into weeping, and all the glory, pleasure, beauty, friendship that you
have in the world, shall then depart from you: Alas, alas, what tongue can
express the sorrow, woe, grief and pain that the wicked and ungodly must then
partake of, out of it then there will be no redemption; a fire shall be kindled
in your lust, which will for ever burn, and none shall quench it, except you
speedily and unfeinedly repent, and forsake all your evil ways, which is the
cause of Gods, wrath against you; which never will depart from you, until you
receive the only begotten Son of God, whom he has freely given, to reconcile
the World unto himself: And Friends all this know, that all they who are
reconciled to God by Christ, do cease from sin, and can live no longer therein,
nor have fellowship with them that live therein; and so Gods wrath comes
thereby to be removed: and that is the way to Eternal Life and Peace. Oh
England, England, (but especially the City of Exon) what Lamentation shall I
take up? or how shall I bewail the Rulers, Governors, Judges, Magistrates,
Bishops, Deans, Doctors, Chapters, Curates, Priests of all sorts, who profess
your selves Christian Rulers, and Ministers of Justice; oh that ever you should
be so far degenerated from the just Precept, and holly Ordinance of sound
Judgment: Friends, the Ordinance of God I dearly own, and my soul is subject to
it, as it is brought forth, and executed in the power of God, which is the
highest power, which says, do justly, and love mercy, pass Right and sound
Judgment in every cause, without respect of persons, that your sword may be a
terror to every evil work, to suppress and weaken vice, and the hand of every
evil doer; and to encourage, and strengthen, and protect in peace all that do
well; which we whom you persecute, and shamefully entreat, reproach, and
scornfully call Quakers, do earnestly pray for, and greatly desire to see, the
Rulers, Governors, Judges, and all Magistrates to come into, and be
established in the highest power, that is, the Power of God, which was and is
ordained to that end, for the punishment of evil doers, and not against the
Righteous: and oh Friends, as you rule in this, you will honor the living God
in your time, and be truly honorable in your Generation: then the Nations
round about you will hear of your fame, and the Generations of the Righteous to
come, will call you the blessed of the Lord: But oh alas, alas I may say, as
the Prophet did, True judgment is turned away backwards, and justice stands
afar off; truth falls in the streets, and equity cannot enter: And he that
fears God, and departs from iniquity, is become a prey, to the men of this
Generation, and are afflicted, persecuted and imprisoned.

Come Bishops, Deans, Doctors, Chapters, Curates, Priests of all sorts, who
have long said, you are Ministers of Christ, Ministers of the Gospel; come
forth, and prove your Call and practice by your Life and conversations, to
concur and agree with the Life, Doctrine, and practice of Jesus Christ, and
his Ministers; for the day is come, that the day star is arisen, and the
glorious Light shines out of the darkness, which gives us who are raised in
it, a true and a right discerning, whereby we are come to try your spirits, and
have found it to be the spirit of Antichrist, and false Prophet in the sheeps
clothing, but in the woolvish nature, making havoc of the Flock of Christ,
and are this day found to have a hand in the persecution of the people of the
Living God, whom you scornfully call Quakers, by stirring up the Magistrates,
and incensing the Rulers against us, by many false Accusations, as your
Forefathers (the Chief Priests) did against the just one, Jesus Christ, and
his Apostles, and faithful Servants.

Come, where received you this Gospel, who preach up blood, strife, banishment,
and persecution? this does not concur, nor agree with the Gospel, and
Doctrine, and practice of Christ, and his Disciples, whose Gospel and Doctrine,
practice, and good Examples, brought, and wrought in the true Christans, in the
Primitive days, as it does now amongst us who are in the same faith, and
worship in the same way, Glory to God, peace on earth, and good will to all
men, which is the fruit and mark of a true Christian. Come let us reason a
little together in this particular, whether you could willingly receive such
measure of cruelty from us, or any other in Authority, to shed your blood, be
banished, shut up in close Prisons, spoiling of goods, not sufferring your
Friends to come to visit you, but whip, keep upon guard, retain in prison,
them, for so doing: Surely Christ never teacht you this thing; but this is the
Doctrine of the Devil, who is come in great rage, to destroy the workmanship of
God, that the spiritual wickedness may reign, without control; neither is it
agreeable with the Life, Doctrine, and Discipline of the Apostles, whose
weapons were not carnal, but spiritual, and mighty through God, to the breaking
down of the strong holds, and wrestled not with flesh and blood neither went
about to destroy the Creatures, neither compelled any by force to hear their
Gospel; but in all Godliness, gentleness, and meekness of spirit, wrestled
with the spiritual wickedness, which has, and does make the separation
between God and the Creature.

And Friends, think not in your minds to bring us, whom the Lord God by his
power has redeemed, and gathered out of your formal, dead, will-worships, by
the strength, force, and cruelty, by your carnal weapons, swords, guns, clubs,
whips, stocks, and stones, Banishment, nay verily, we can rather give up our
lives until we see a through Reformation, and Conversion, wrought by the power
of God in you, and separated from all your abomination; and the fruits of
Christ, and his holy Apostles, brought forth in you all; and verily, verily you
can no more bring us back to your dead Worships again; you may as well stop the
Sun in his line, or keep back the Waves of the Sea in its course, as bring us,
which you scornfully call Quakers, into Bondage again, who are raised up in the
knowledge of the living God, his holy ways and worship, which is in his own
Spirit and Truth, which makes free from sin and death: we can no longer go with
you, to seek the Living amongst the dead, which you are all in, who do not
believe in, and follow the the Light of Jesus Christ, and know not what spirit
you are of, though you profess your selves Christian Rulers, Christian
Ministers, and Christian People, and say, If you had been in the days of
Christ, and his Apostles, you would not have crucified Christ, and persecuted
his holy Apostles, and shamefully entreated the true Christians: Oh Friends,
seriously consider, whether you are not doing the very same thing to us, who
are members of Christ; you are at this day shedding our blood, whipping,
stocking, stoneing, scourging in your Synagogues, haleing before Magistrates,
casting into Prisons, not suffering our Friends freely to come unto us, but we
are retained in prison; and one Woman was whipped for coming to visit us, whereof
this City of Exon in the County of Devon, may witness: Oh hear, and be
instructed all you Rulers, judges, Governors, and Magistrates, Bishops, Deans,
Doctors, Chapters, Priests, and all People; but especially the Rulers, Bishop,
and Inhabitants of the City of Exon, in fear and with understanding read Matthew.
25. Oh what will you do in that day, when the King of Heaven and Earth shall
sit upon his Throne of Glory, who will make a separation between the blessed
and the cursed, and will say to the cursed on his left hand, I was hungry and
ye gave me no meat, thirsty, and ye gave me no drink, naked, and ye clothed me
not, a stranger, and ye took me not in, sick, and in prison, and ye visited me
not; therefore depart ye cursed into everlasting punishment, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. Oh Friends, betime, before your day is over, and
visitation past away, put a stop to your cruel Persecution, least you bring all
the blood of the righteous, from righteous Abel to this present day, upon your
heads; the cry thereof will remain unto the third and fourth Generation. Oh sit
down and consider, the blood-thirsty shall not escape the just judgment of the
Lord, neither the wicked Persecutors shall live out half their days: remember
the Sodomites, Pharaoh, and the rest of the Persecutors of old, whom the Lord
God destroyed by his Eternal power, which will assuredly overtake you, except
you repent: and take counsel of his Son, who says, Touch not mine anointed,
nor do my Prophets no wrong; he is the Fountain of all Wisdom; he is our
wonderful Counselor, and the author and finisher of our Faith, in which we
have and shall overcome the World, and outlive all our Persecutors; not by
carnal weapons, sword, spear, nor bow, nor strength by host of men, or arm of
flesh, but by our keeping the Word of God, the sword of the spirit, the armor
of Light, and the testimony of Jesus Christ, and in his faith and patience, we
have and shall suffer, and bear all things for his names sake, till he shall
arise, upon whom is laid, for us to plead our innocent cause; then shall all
our Enemies and Persecutors be ashamed, and condemned, be droven backwards, and
fall into the pit, which they have dug for the innocent: Oh, while you have
time, reform your ways, and glorify God, by bringing forth of fruit by a holy
life; or else he will be glorified in your destruction: Oh consider what you
are a doing; oh when will you sit down and remember your latter end, whiles the
spirit of the Living God strives with you! oh rebel no longer against it, lest
you perish in your gainsaying; oh arise, arise you that are asleep in the dust
of the earth; this is not your rest, because it is poluted: Oh the day of
account draws near, when the Lord God will plead with all flesh, by his sword,
and with fire, which proceeds out of his mouth, by which he will slay his
enemies in the valley of slaughter, and the slain of the Lord shall be many: Oh
then the Glory, the pleasure, the beauty, friendship, and riches, and delights
of this World shall soon come to an end, and shall be no more; and this is the
word of Truth, an account must you all give unto the impartial just God, when
the ancient of days shall sit and judge, from whose face the heavens and the
earth shall fly away, and all the wicked and ungodly shall be as a rolling
thing before a fierce whirlwinde, or as stubble fully dry for the unquenchable
fire, who will then without respect of persons, title, or name of greatness in
the earth, judge and reward every one according to their works; then the
righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the
wicked shall be upon him, and the soul that sins shall surely dye: Therefore
yet while you have the time, prize it, and return to the Light of Christ, which
is the new and the living way, that your souls may live in rest and peace,
(which is the desire of my heart) when this World shall be no more: And this to
you all, in the motion of Gods Spirit, and in bowels of tender love to your
souls, is written, one warning more, before the Decree of the Lord God is
sealed against you, when time shall be no longer.

From a Servant of the Lord, and a faithful follower of the Lamb, in the
tribulations; and who prays for good Governors, and Government, and a real
Friend to Justice, who now suffers in outward bonds for the Testimony of Jesus
Christ, and the Word of God, in the high Goal at Exon, known to you by the name
of CHRISTOPHER BACON. But I have a new Name, for which you persecute me.
The 19th of the 9th Month. 1662.
THE END.

