CERTAIN PROPOSITIONS Sent by the STATES OF HOLLAND, TO THE Lords Ambassadors
of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND: WHEREIN, They desire, that the ancient Amity
may be continued between both States; And that they may be aiding and assisting
to each other, against all persons whatsoever, that shall be disturbant to them.

Also, a discovery of several plots of diverse English and Scotch Cavaliers; And
their intentions to murder the Lord St John, Mr Fairfax, and young Dorislaus.

With, the States of Hollands Message to the Queen of Bohemia; Concerning the
uncivil behavior of her Son, Prince Edward, toward the Lords Ambassadors and
their Followers: And the States Order he should be tried by a Court of Justice.

Together with an exact Diurnal of each days Progress and Proceedings, from the
last of March, to the sixth of April. 1651.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Wood. 1651.

A Message sent by the States of Holland, to the Queen of Bohemia; Concerning
the uncivil behavior of her son Prince Edward, toward the Lords Ambassadors
of England, and their Attendants.
SIR,
MY last to you from hence, told you of the insolent carriage of the Cavaliers,
and diverse French Despera^oes; which is no whit abated: For lately, as two of
your Ambassadors Gentlemen were going home in the Evening, they happened to
light upon three Frenchmen, who taking occasion to justle them, without
speaking drew forth their Pistols and fired, but God be thanked they mist them;
whereupon my Lords Gentlemen drew, and then there arose a great tumult in the
street, and the people having separated them, demanded their cause of quar^el,
whereupon the French to justify their own actions, laid the blame upon the
Ambassadors Gentlemen, and so the business was hushed up. Young Dorislaus and a
cousin of my Lord Fairfax, likewise named Fairfax, are threatened above all
others. There are several Scotchmen likewise, that have taken a divelish Oath,
protesting the death of my Lord St. John; [threaten'd folk live long] but no
doubt, the wisdom of this State will take order to curb and quiet these ranting
humors. Many Scots and English Cavaliers come daily rushing into Town, as if
some Design were a brewing. And they report up and down here, that Cromwell is
dead, and that Massey has routed and killed two thousand of his men, and an
hundred such incredible stories, wherein the Royalists abound, even to the
making of themselves ridiculous. Yet this does effect so much, that it often
puts our cautious Statesmen to a stand, and makes some stagger, till they are
certified by the next week or the next fortnights Post of the contrary; and
then (perhaps) the Cavaliers have some other new story on foot, which takes off
their resolutions for another fortnight.

The Portugal Ambassador has given them a neat slip, and left good store of
debts behind him. Many of the English Cavalry are bound for Scotland, where
(they say) their King is gotten to be Master, and that all Lads whatsoever are
admitted into his Army; and many of them lie ready at Roterdam for a Wind to
transport them thither. I much wondered a long time, why the Blades made such
enquiry up and down, if all were quiet in England, it seems they had a plot in
conception which proved abortive.

Sir, I have likewise sent you a representation of our daily proceedings, which
are as follows:

The last of March, stylo novo, a Fast was kept at my Lord Ambassadors, to
implore a blessing upon our present proceedings; Mr. Dingley, Mr. Nigh, and Mr.
Goodwin exercised severally, and at supper we fell into an English mode of
diet, with great contentment and abundance; for then my Lords began the world
upon their own account.

The first of April, some of the Gentlemen went with my Lord St. John to the
new House, who was not very well for want of air; for the old House, was little
and close.

The second, being the Lords day, we had two sermons, the one preached by Mr.
Nigh, the other by Mr. Ding^ey; and that morning information came to my Lords,
desiring Mr. Dori^^aus to have a care of himself; for there were some threatened
his life.

The third in the morning, my Lords, and most of the Gentlemen, some on
horseback, the rest in coaches, went into the Wood set with many fine walks
and trees, to take the air; and as they entered, they met Prince Edward (one of
the Queen of ^ohemia's sons) walking on foot, with the Princess his sister, by
the hand. He called to my Lords Coach, and told them they were rogues, and
grinded his teeth at the rest, calling them dogs. But my Lord St. John's Groom
following on horseback, leading my Lords saddle-horse in his hand, the Prince
struck him on the back parts with his hat, but the horse flinging up his heels
had like to have laid his honor at his feet. My Lord rode about the Wood, and
returned to dinner.

After dinner he went abroad again, to take the air at Scheveling, and was much
pleased with the place, it lying a mile from the Hague, upon the Seashore. We
returned about five or six a clock.

The fourth, six of the States who were appointed Commissioners to treat with
their Lordships, (viz. Mr. Cemeren, Ereren Eoon, De Vett, Reinswood, Andree,
and Valfs,) came this day the first time. My Lords received them at the door,
and the Gentlemen went up stairs, and made a Lane for them to pass through:
they staid about half an hour with my Lords, gave them some complements, and
received some propositions, which they carried away with them.

It seems the Ambassadors complained to some of the States, of the ill
language which Prince Edward gave them yesterday; whereupon it was Ordered,
that three of them should go to the queen of Bohemia, to let her know how ill
they resented the business, and to know of her, whether they were not Masters
of their own Country? And to enquire how the Prince durst break any order they
had made? And withal, to certify her, that he should severely suffer for his
contempt: This Message being delivered to the Queen, in the presence of her son
E^ward, he would willingly have excused the business, and said; that some of
the Ambassadors followers gave him (as he was walking with a Lady) the first
affront, which was the occasion that he returned them that uncivil language.

It is reported, that the said Prince is going toward Franckendale, for the
Letters that came this Week from G^rmany inform us, that the King of Spain has
sent an express, for the re^to^ing of ^ranckenda^e to the Prince Elector. ^ut
the States are resolved [before he departeth] to bring him before a Court of
JUSTICE, to teach him to keep a better tongue in his head another time; and we
expect to have him severely dealt withal. The Queens Court is grown very mute
about this business, and Prince Edward is much startled at it.

The fifth of April, the Lords Ambassadors get up by seven a clock in the
morning, and rode on horseback with some of their Gentlemen, to the University
of Leyden, where having rode through the Town, and viewed the Academy and other
rarities, returned about midday.

In the afternoon, the Princess Royal came by my Lord Ambassadors house, in a
Coach with six horses, all in mourning, and two more coaches (in the same
equipage) attending her; it seems she is not gone with the Duke her brother, as
was reported: certain it is, she did resolve to go, but upon encouragements
from some, she staid. It is to be feared, that though her husband be dead,
too many of his creatures are alive: yet doubtless, the States see so much of
their own interest in ours, that we shall receive a quick and cordial dispatch.
Though I hear, that there came once hither a French Ambassador, about business
of a far less import, which he thought to have dispatched in a months time,
but was fain to stay thirteen, before he could make an end of it. But (we hope)
their goodness (perhaps) our own discretion, will not permit us to do so.

The States about three a clock this afternoon, sent the Commissioners
appointed to treat with our Ambassadors, who were entertained by their
Lordships with much respect; who delivered certain pap^rs from the States
directed to their Lordships, wherein they propose; First, that the old
Correspondencies and Amity between the two States may be preserved and renewed;
Secondly, that they may enter into a more strict Confederacy; And lastly, that
one should be aiding and assisting unto another, against all persons whatsoever
that should disturb them.

The States have referred Prince Edwards business to be determined speedily in
a Court of Justice; and without question it concerns them to see us have
Justice in this particular; For it was England received the affront done by
that petty Prince, whose Nursing was paid for out of the English Exchequer: And
therefore we are confident those in power here among the Dutch, cannot but
consult so far with their own honors, as to make a the Vindication, answerable
to the crime. The young P. of Orange has been much troubled with convulsion
fits, insomuch that it was commonly reported he departed in one of those fits;
but since he is recovered, and is now in health.

There is daily expected here, an Ambassador from the King of Scotland, whose
entertainment we desire to take a view of, for thereby we may guess whether
they are really affected to the Commonwealth of England or not. Take this from
the hand of

Your humble Servant, EDWARD BILL.

FINIS.

