BLACK MONDAY TURNED WHITE: OR, The ASTROLOGERS Knavery epitomized.

BEING An Answer to the great Prognostics, and gross Predictions of Mr.
Lilly, Mr. Culpeper, and the rest of the Society of Astrologers, concerning
the Eclipse of the Sun, on Monday last, which (according to their Calculation)
should have produced an Egyptian darkness, and the greatest that has been seen
in this latter Age.

Also, a Description of the glorious effects, and happy Times, that are to
proceed from the two famous Luminaries of the Sun and Moon, upon the aforesaid
Eclipse; prophetically deduced from the wonderful Dispensations of that Divine
Power, who drew back the Clouds like a Curtain, and caused the Sun to show its
pleasant Beams, to the memorable confutation of these great Astrologers.

London, Printed for G. Whiting, 1652.

Black Monday turned white: OR, A Whip for Star-Gazers, etc.
HAving perused certain non-sensical Almanacks and Prognostications (and those
written by no final fools, but by the Grandees of this Age) and finding them
full of falsities and contradictions, I have endeavored to confute their
errors, and divulge to the World their grand mistakes; and since Mr. Lilly is
accounted the Herculean Astrologer, and Prince of Prognosticators, I shall pass
by those of less repute, and quote some of those only which I find in his
Ephemeris, as he styles it.

First, his Cardinal Error (on which many other hang) concerns the Suns ingress
into the Vernal Equinox, or rather according to Copernicus, the Earths saluting
the first point of Libra; wherein some he presents us with such a face of
Heaven (with what face he can do it, I know not) in which the first of the
first decanate of Scorpio ascends; I verily believe the Scheam is right
according to the time limited; but he (like an unskilful Musician) has made a
discord by not keeping true time for the Suns entrance into Aries, by his
spoiling of the harmonious consent of the Spears music: for Booker, Wharton,
and Wing, all of them sound uniformly, and their several Scheams like so many
well tuned instruments make up a harmony: But Mr. Lilly (for want of tuning)
comes basely off, and makes a jar; and the reason is, because he has scru'd
his pegs too high; for whereas they differ some few scruples (and that is no
scruple in point of Art) from each other for time, Lilly is so singular, that
he has marred all in dissenting from them all by no less then an hour and 14
min. Whereas Mr. Culpeper held an opinion, That it should have begun 40 min.
after 9 in the forenoon, and likewise differs far in his Calculation from other
Astrologers; The truth whereof is evident by his own words, viz.

Solar Eclipses have been ever fatal to Kings and Magistrates, they cannot
agree, but only in one thing, and that is oppressing the people: O pure! they
are old dogs at that, and the poor grean under it. Arise o God and help them!
Lawyers and Clergymen are displaced and imprisoned, and some made shorter by
the head. A new sect of Heretics arise, which makes me admire how worse can be
invented then are already. Private murders and poysonings are like to be very
rife: look to it ye great ones in authority, have a care of your selves, lest
some of you be sent to take a supper apud inferos, before you are a ware of it:
It Is a scurvy fashion, I do not like it.

During the effects of this Eclipse in England, either at, or before the
beginning of the year 1655, (the wiser my brethren of the Communalty carry
themselves, for ought I know or believe, the sooner it may be effected) the
Government will come into the hands of the people, and everlasting peace shall
we enjoy, and never more War afflict us. And (if we may trust to a piece of Art
Caballistick) in August 1655, Rome falls. But Mr. Lilly says it only
threatens those places which have the sign of the said eclipse, and that this
Government shall stand, etc. But so various are they in their several
judgments, that all their (...) seem to be incredulous.

However, it is evident, that Mr Lilly is omnium horarum homo; and yet I much
wonder (since he can temporize so well) that he should be no better a time
observer. I will not tell him the 8 day of March is put down for the 9 in the
square, that may happen through the Printers mistake, sure I am the other 8
hours, 58 min. P. M. cannot (by reason of his position of the Heavens for that
moment) except for want of true Calculation, pass by his two figures (as truly
erected as the forementioned was) for the Suns entrance into both the
Tropicks, these (I say) shall be turned over in silence, because I would listen
to his judgments.

Page 24. His judgment (he pretends) to be balanced by the prudent advice
(comes falsely) of his Brother Reason. That they two should be Kin I see little
reason for it: He is not I suppose unacquainted with Dr. Simpleton, whose
Plumbiosity out-ballanceth all the reason he has. Sed perdere quos vult
Jupiter dementat. I know now who has made him so mad a Prognosticator, and
this is Jupiter in detriment; but he knows his Reputation can receive no great
detriment by it, though he should pay for his pleasure with a pox; else what
means that bald pate of his, if it were but unperiwigd.

Page 25. He says he will throw his Authors aside, (by what Authority I know
not) only we must take his ipse dixit to be a sufficient Warrant to command
our credence, notwithstanding which we will believe him when we list. I see he
is a Rebel to all Authority, and would assume a dominion in judging unto
himself; but before he is Judge in his Art, I would have him first proceed
Master of Art, only this, I Am afraid it is a degree beyond his Capacity,
though I am confident he already takes himself to be a man of degree.

Page 28. He has these unchristianlike words. O Heavens! What have men no more
wit, then to run after a company of prating Priests and Lawyers. What I pray
has he to do with Heaven? I Am afraid Heaven has little to do with him, since
he has so much to do with Hell, from whence he fetches such opprobrious and
caluminating terms; for his master (who sets him on work, and will one day
truly pay him his hire) was a Detractor from the beginning: But he is a Saint
forsooth for quoting a deal of Scripture; and so is the Devil, for he did as
much for his own advantage. Have men no more wit? Verily, had they no more then
he, they would have but a little; for what he had is here vented at once, and now
his Hogs-heads empty, we may expect it should sound, though there be nothing in
it. His vilification (as he thinks) in terming the Ministers Priests, is more
honorable then he is a ware, and therefore they are better company then for
himself.

But why prating Priests? I see he will discover himself to be of the Athenian
Sect, which counted Saint Paul but a babbler: But let him take heed, I advise
him, lest what he esteems prating, prove at the last more then an empty sound
against him: If the Word of GOD be of no better repute with him then Wind, it
shall prove such a Wind as shall scatter such Dust as he is from before the
face of the Almighty.

There are more things whereby some able Astronomers stand in need to be
Catechized: Me thinks he, and the rest, should have been better insighted in
the speculative part of his Star-gazing Tribe of their Science, e're they
adventured on the Practick, especially since they intended to make it known to
the World how little they know; for no Artist would commit such absurdities as
may be found them.

Also, whereas in January, all former Writers began with the letter A, and end
with it in December, at the end of the year; contrary to all Presidents, out of
a Pragmatick humor, Mr Lilly begins with G, overthrowing by this all ancient
Method; but what talk I of this which is a slender one to what follows, and
that is his putting down in this month C, for the Dominical letter in stead of
D. I suppose he considered it was Leap-year, and that made him skip over the
right. And therefore if he had not told Us aforehand, we might easily discern
that he had thrown his Authors aside: for had he in composing his Almanac
perused Master WINGS Practical Astronomy, he could not have so grossly mistook C
for D. If he is married, I would have his wife acquaint him more with the
Horn-book, for I see he must to his A, B, C.

I shall not need to quote any more of his ridiculous absurdities; but conclude
with his gross Predictions concerning the Eclipse on March 29. which (according
to his Calculation) should have been the greatest that ever eyes beheld in this
latter Age. Certainly, this argues a great want of faith, and a spiritual
darkness; for although there appeared enough to satisfy rational men that
there was an eclipse; yet we may observe, that he that made the two great
Luminaries, and orders their course sits in the Circle of the Heavens, and
will not give His honor unto any other; but drew back the Clouds like a
Curtain, and caused the Sun to show his pleasant Rays and comfortable Beams
during the whole time of the eclipse, to the confutation of these great
Astrologers, who by the help of Tycho were able to guess at the time of the
eclipse, yet could not tell whether the day would be clear or cloudy: However,
many of those Star-Gazers, who account themselves skilful in this conjectural
Science, went the same day to South-hampton house to take their observation,
and staid there during the whole time; where Mr Lilly found, That the Eclipse
began at 9 of the clock and 56 min. in the forenoon, and that the Sun was in a
Cardinal sign 7 degrees; affirming that the effects thereof will extend to the
cuting down and depopulating, those Cities which have the sign of the eclipse:
But where these are situated, I conceive he knows no more, then those of his
Society, who said, That there should be a kind of Egyptian darkness over the
face of the earth, upon the interception or obscuration of the Light of the
Sun, caused by interposition of the Moons body between the Sun and our sight.
Which how contrary it sell out to their Prognostication, we have all been
eyewitnesses; and I am consident, there will be as much difference in the
effects of it: And those Kingdoms, Cities, etc. by them threatened, will stand
and flourish, when they shall lie in the dust.

FINIS.

