A BILL for Uniting the Protestants.
WHereas there are many Jealousies risen about Popery, which makes it even
necessary to the Peace of the Nation, that the Protestant Interest be united
and strengthened by all good and lawful Means: And to this end, there being this
one proper Expedient, to wit, the removing the Occasion of Divisions, which
several Persons do find to themselves in those late In^unctions, which yet were
intended to the same purpose of Concord in the Nation: Be it Enacted, -- That
an Explanation of these Impositions, and such Alleviations, be al^owed to the
tenderly Considerate, and peaceably Scrupu^ous, as follows.

In the Act of Uniformity, By the Declaration of Assent and Consent to all
Things, and every Thing contained in, and pre^cribed by the Two Books, Of
Common Prayer, and Of Ordering Priests and Deacons, we under^tand not, These
Materials were provided, during the sitting of that Parliament, which passed
the Act of Uniformity, and other the like Rigorous Acts; and are therefore
drawn up in the Form of an Explanatory Bill, because it was supposed, they were
not like to Repeal their own Acts, though they might be got to Interpret them.
But now we have a New Parliament, and that after another also Dissolved, we may
expect quicker Work: Yet will the Proposing these Things still to view, have
their use, both for repressing such as have said, The Non-conformists know not
what they would have; and setting some Measure to our own Desires, and the
Parliaments Condescentions about the same.
that these Books are ^^n every Minute particular, in^allible, or free from
that Defect, which is incident to all Human Composure: but that they are in the
main Contents, to be sin^erely approved and used. And we do therefore allow
this Declaration to be sufficient, if it be made to the use of the Book, in the
Ordinary Constant Lord's- Day Service, notwithstanding any Exceptions some may
have against some Things in the By-Offices, and Occasional-Service, the
Rubric, and otherwise. And for the Ceremonies, which are made, and have been
always, and on all hands, held to be only indifferent Things we think fit that
they be left to the Consciences and P^^dence of Ministers, and People, every
where (excepting th^^ Cathedrals) to use them, or forbear them, as they judge
(...) most meet for their own and others Edification. Provide^ that if any
Person will have his Child Baptized with t^^ Sign of the Cross, or stands upon
any thing else, hither^^^ required by the Service Book, if the Minister himself
scr^ple the Performance, he shall have always some Assistan^^^ or Curate,
ready to do it.

In the same Act, By those Words in the Subscription, tha^ It is not lawful to
take Arms against the King, upon any Pretense whatsoever; we intend no new or
strange Thing, bu^ the rightful Maintenance only of the King's Authority
against Rebellion, Our Reasons for these Interpretations, appear in our
Arguments before, against the Oxford-Oath, and this Subscription; which we can
by no means submit to, without them. There is moreover this Clause [ And I will
conform to the Liturgy of the Church, as it is now by Law Established] we
desire may be spared; because upon our Declaration before of Assent and
Consent, (which must be the Bounds of our Sense thereof) it is needless
altogether, and can serve but for a Snare only to Men's Consciences.
according to the common Determination of Learned Writers, in the Case of
Subjection to Princes. By the Words, I abhor the Position of taking Arm^ by the
Authority of the King, against any Commissionated by him, we never thought of
Advancing the Arbitrary Commissions of the King, above Law; but by those
Commissionated by him, we understand such as are Legally Commissionated, and in
the Legal Pursuit of such Commissions. By the Clause which follows, that
requires a Renunciation of all Endeavor of any Alteration of Government in the
Church or State, we never meant to deny any Freeborn Subject his Right, of
Choosing Parliament Men, or Acting in his Place for the Common Good any way,
according to Law; but that he shall Renounce all such Endeavor, as is
Seditious, or not warranted by the Constitution of the Nation; and
particularly, such an Endeavor as was Assumed in the late ^mes, without, and
against the Consent of the King. And (...) the rest of the Subscription, which
is enjoined but to the ^ar 1682, Be it enacted, that it cease presently, and be
(...) longer enjoined.

And forasmuch as there is an Oath prescribed and re^^red of all Nonconformist
Preachers, that Reside in any ^rporate-Town, by a certain Act of this
Parliament, made (...) Oxford in the 17th. Year of His now Majesty's Reign,
En^^led, An Act for restraining Non-conformists, from inha^ng Corporations: We
do further declare, That it shall suf^any Man, for the Enjoyment of his
Freeborn Liberty, of ^abiting where he thinks best; (...) serve him also
instead of the ^e-mentioned Subscription; This Oath is of the same Contents
with the Subscription before; and to impose both, is nothing else but the
multiplying Wrath, and laying Load on the already Laden.
to ^e that Oath in this Form of ^ords following. I A. B. do ^^r, That I hold
it unlawful up^ny Pretense, to take Arms a^st the King, his Government or Laws:
And that I disclaim (...) dangerous Position, of taking Arms by his Authority,
against (...) Person, or any Legally Commissionated by him, in the Legal suit
of such Commissions: And that I will not Endeavor Alteration of Government in
the Church or State, in any way ^anner, not warranted by the Constitution of
the Kingdom, ^y otherwise than by Act of Parliament. And as soon as (...) Man
has taken the Oath thus, he shall be discharged ^ll Penalty for his Omission
before.

We do declare moreover, That whereas it is required al^^ the Act of
Uniformity, that every Minister who enjoys Living, or Ecclesiastical
Preferment, shall be Ordained (...) Bishop; and there are several Persons of
late, who in (...) of Necessity, for want of Bishops, took Presbyterian^ers:
Our Meaning is not in any wise to disgust the Re^ed-Churches beyond the Seas,
and make it necessary for such to be Re-ordained to the Office; but that they
r^ceive this Second Imposition (...) Hands, There is Reordinatio ad Officium,
which (we say) is generally decryed by Divines: or Re-ordinatio ad Exercitium
particulare, which may be irrefragably proved from Acts 13.2, 3. with Acts
14.26. and consequently allowed to serve this Occasion.
to the Exercise of the^^ Office in the new Charge, un^^ which they are, or
shall be called; and that the Bishop sh^^ frame his Words accordingly.

And whereas there is a S^scription also in the Canons, a^ the Canonical-Oath
of Obedience, imposed on most Ministe^ by the Bishops, that have given some of
the greatest Oc^sion to Nonconformity here^^fore; If the Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance be taken, and the Articles of the Church subscribed, and the
Declaration before to the Common Prayer, made; we see no need of boiling over
these Three Things again for us, in the Canons, unless it be for a Crambe
Repetita, on purpose to Kill us. Neither do we think the putting any Honest Men
who fear God, out of the Vineyard, to be so good a Thing for her, that our Wise
Church of England should use so much Care and Industry as She takes, that She
may not miss to do it.
which yet never passed to Law by any Act of Par^ment: We do further decla^
That nothing more of that k^^ shall be required of Minist^^ hence-forward, then
was ma^^ and held necessary, by the Ac^ the Thirteenth of Elizabeth.

And in regard there has b^ great Offense taken by Con^entious Ministers, at
the Bisho^ (or their Courts) command^^ them to read the Sentence (...)
Excomunication against some or other of their Parish, for^^ Faults as they
think not at all worthy of so great a Censu^ We declare it but a just Thi^^
that every Minister be first sa^ fyed in the Cause, As we think, there is no
Elder in the New Testament, who is not a Pastor, and that there is no
Lay-Pastor; so do we account, that there is no Pastor or Presbyter, but such as
have the Power both to Rule and Teach, committed to them by Christ: Yet do we
for all that, prehe^^d it not only Lawful, but Expedient, for the ordinary
Ministers of o^^ rochial-Congregations, (when the Church is National) to commit
part of Charge, (to wit, that of Ruling) in Actu Secundo, to some few among who
are more Eminently fitted for the Work, (that is, the (...)) and consequently
to the Bishop: So that, if this Fundamental Right of Governing their own
Flocks, be but acknowledged to Reside in every Presbyter, by granting so much
to us as this (and what has preceded) comes to, we shall be unwilling to fall
off from Episcopacy, upon the Points of Ordination and Jurisdiction.
or else exempted from the Execu^ of that Charge; and that the Bishop (or his
Court) provide some other Person, that is satis^yed about it, to do it.

And to the intent, that a free Search after Truth may not be discouraged in
the Pursuit of Concord, and many other Scruples avoided upon that Account: We
declare, That though an Authentic Interpretation be required, as to the
Substance of all Laws, yet in the Articles of the Church, (which are Theses for
Agreement, and not Laws) and the Homilies, a Doctrinal Interpretation shall be
held sufficient for an Assent or Subscription to them. The Authentic
Interpretation of an Article, is the Meaning of the Major Part of the
Convocation: A Doctrinal Interpretation, is the Meaning of any one of the
Doctors there present, (and consequently, of any other Learned Expositor) who
are supposed to have the Liberty to abound in their own Sense, so long as they
can agree in the Words of the Article Established. And this Clause therefore we
put in upon Mature Consideration, in regard more especially to the
Conscientious Latitudinarians, (which is a Name abused) who being some
Arminian, and some Calvinian, cannot otherwise Subscribe the Doctrine of the
same Theses; as the Reader may see more in such another Book as this, called
The Healing Paper, out of which this Bill for Union^. newly Collected.


And because the very Superintendency of Bishops, and that Subjection to them
which is required by the Constitution of the Realm, is or may be an Hinderance
to many sober Ministers, and other Protestants, of coming into the Church, who
are ready to consent to the Doctrine, but not to the Discipline or Government
of it: We do declare, That so long as any Person or Party do acknowledge the
King's Supremacy, as Head of the Church in this Nation, and obey their
Ordinary, or the Bishops, That is, Although there be some that cannot
acknowledge our Diocesan Prelates to be Christ's Officers, distinct from the
Elders in Scripture: Yet so long as they can live Peaceable Lives, in Obedience
to them, as Ecclesiastical Magistrates under His Majesty, for the keeping the
several Congregations, in their Precincts, to that Gospel Order, which
themselves allow, and for super-vising their Constitutions in Things
indifferent, that nothing be done, but in Subordination to the Peace of the
Kingdom, (which is a Notion wherein the Judicious of every Party may acquiesce,
and expressed by us therefore in these very Words before, p. 31.) it is
sufficient unto National-Church-Vnion.
in Licitis and Honestis, upon the Account of his Authority (committed to them
for the Exercise of that External Regiment Circa Sacra which is granted by all
our Divines, to the Higher Powers in every Nation), it is enough for the owning
Episcopal Jurisdiction (so far as they do own it, in the Declaration of Assent
and Consent, or in any other Part of Conformity), and shall serve them to all
Intents and Purposes in Law, no less than a professed Belief and Acknowledgment
of the immediate Divine Right of it.

Be it therefore Enacted by this Present Parliament, That if any Person be
willing to Conform to the Present Establishment of the Church of England, and
her Service appointed according to these Explanations, Alleviations,
Declarations, Lenitives, or Cautions, he shall be admitted to any
Ecclesiastical Preferment, and enjoy the use of his Ministry without any
Molestation: All Statutes, Canons, or Laws to the contrary notwithstanding.

And for the making this Act of better Signification to the Concerned, and the
Prevention of that Scandal which is raised on the Clergy, through the
Covetousness of some, in heaping up to themselves all the Preferments they can
get, when others have scarce Subsistence for their Families, and the Souls of
many People are thereby neglected: Be it farther Enacted, That no Clergyman
for the Three next Years ensuing, be suffered to Enjoy and more than one
Living, or Cure of Souls, We propose these Things, we confess, as we were in
Republica Platonis; but should be glad to see any Fruits of this kind, as those
who are in Faece Romuli may expect. What is Right and Just, and ought to be
done, is one thing, and to be sought; though what is like to be done, or will
be done, is another.
and one Dignity, (or other Ecclesiastical Preferment) at one Time; and that
every Man (without Exception) that has more than One of Either, shall
immediately give up the Rest to be distributed among those who shall be brought
off from their Nonconformity, upon the Terms of this Act into the Established
Order. Which that they may also be obtained, and possessed with a clean
Concience, and that grievous Corruption of Simony may be Extirpate out of the
Land: Be it Enacted moreover, That very Patron that shall henceforward present
his Clerk to my Living, shall have the Oath called The Simoniacal Oath, imposed
on himself, no less than on the Incumbent: And ^f he Refuses to take it, that
then the Bishop shall have ^mmediat Power (taking only the same Oath) of
Presenta^on in his Room.

And forasmuch, as there are some Ministers of a good ^ife, that cannot
(according to their Judgments) allow of our ^arochial Churches, nor a Book of
Liturgy; but do choose to Worship God, and Jesus Christ, in the way of their
Gathered or ^eparate Congregations; and crave the Protection and Cle^ency of
the King, upon their ^llegiance, as other Subjects: There are two Parts of this
Bill; One for Concord or Coalition with all such as can join in Parochial
Communion, in the Clauses before: The Other for Forbearance of those that
cannot, in this last Clause. For, What shall we do with such? We must not Knock
them on the Head: They must therefore have Time. If the Parliament will begin
with the Last first, that is, a Suspension of the Penal Statutes, and then let
us treat for a Composition after, we consent with all our Hearts, and like the
Method best. Then Abner called unto Joab,and said, Shall the Sword devour for
ever! Know thou not, that it will be Bitterness in the latter End! How long
shall it be, ere thou bid the People return from following of their Brethren.
^e it finally Enacted, for the ^appiness and Quiet of the Realm, and the
Reduction of these Men (...) other means than those which have hitherto proved
^nsuccessful, That every Chri^^an Subject throughout the and, that profess the
Reform^^ Religion, and be not Convict Popery, be pardoned all Faults ^^d
Penalties, incurred upon the Account of any Fore-passed N^^ conformity; and
that they sh^^ not, Until by a farther Act of Parliament, or a Convocation,
those that are (...) be Tolerated, and the Intolerable, be distinguished.
during these Seven Ye^ next ensuing, be prosecuted on any Penal Law for their
C^^sciences, in the Matter of Religion; They carrying themselves Innocently and
Peaceably, with Submission to the ^^vil, and without Disturbance to the
Ecclesiastical Gove^^ment, now settled in the Nation: All Statutes or Canons the
contrary notwithstanding.

In short,
A Repeal of all our Laws about Conformity unto the r^^ of Elizabeth, or, A New
Act of Uniformity, or, (...) King's Declaration concerning Ecclesiastical
Affairs at first Coming-in, turned into a Law, were Comprehension

His latter Declaration to all his Loving Subjects (s^ few Things in Both yet a
little considered) made so, w^ Indulgence.

A Bill for Comprehension with Indulgence, both toget^^^ will do our Business.
An Addition, or Clause in it, aga^^ Pluralities, will do it with Supererogation.

Deo Gloria.
Advertisement.
THis Bill (as appears by the Margin) is one Sheet of (or there-abouts)
Entitled, Materials for Union; fresh out, and humbly Presented to the
Consideration of P^^ (...) London.


