THE NATIVITY OF Mr. Will. Lilly

Astrologically performed; Showing how he has lived, and what Death he may
probably die.

For the Satisfaction of Astrologers and others.

Published to the world by James Blackwel, Student in Astrology and Physic.

Qui artemi aliquam destruit, long deterior est imperito, nec vacat men's illim
malitia, desidia, and ignorantia, Cardan. Seg. 3. Aphor. 146. He that destroys
any Art, is far worse than he that is unskilful; for his mind is empty neither
of malice, deceit, or ignorance. LONDON: Printed by Tho. Johnson, at the White
Cock in Rood-lane. 1660.

To the Honest Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Here present unto thy view, and friendly acceptance, the Nativity of Mr.
William Lilly, he might I confess, have saved me the pains, (and for the honor
of Astrology) published it himself. The Learned Cardan thought it not
unbecoming an Artist to publish his own Nativity; but Mr. Lilly I perceive had
much rather Phillipize than Cardonize, (i.e.) flatter, and play fast and loose
with others, than deal plainly with himself. And I finding him so negligent and
tardy in this, wherein he might have redeemed Astrologies honor, as much, as in
clawing Dick Cromwell, and the Swedish King, he forfeited it; have for
satisfaction of the world, and promotion of Art, adventured upon this somewhat
troublesome Task, That for one man's scandalous dealing with, and notoriously
abusing of an honored Science, the Art it self might not fall to the ground.
Nay, I here averr, the Syderal Science cannot receive greater dignity and
renown by any thing, than by the publication of this Nativity of Lilly's, who
has pretended himself, though falsely, the Stars chiefest Ambassador. Had not
Lilly set Astrology upon the Tenters, and wracked and tortured it so cruelly as
he has done, to the obscuring the Credit of the Stars, and those that study
them also, I should not have been so positive with him, as in some things here
published, I am; but if Mr. Lilly can so far forget his gratitude to them that
have eminently honored him, I can forget my pity, and shall not esteem it so
much as a venial Transgression, to retort his Ingratitude upon him, and publish
what the Stars portend to him, although his gray hairs and great spirit may
scorn a conjunction with the splendid Truth thereof.

J. B.
From my Study White-chappel in Bell-yard, near the Church.
The NATIVITY of William Lilly Artificially handled.
WILLIAM LILLY was born in Leichestershire, at a place called Diseworth, in the
Year of our Lord 1602. April 30. 14 h. 8 m. P. M. or more vulgarly at 8 m. past
2 a clock on May Day in the morning. The Elevation of the Pole-Artick above the
Horizon being there 25 38. Under which Elevation to the time given and
corrected, I set the Figure of heaven by the operations following.

The Planets places from the Rudolphine Tables, are thus:

Long Planets.
18 28 R. 13 05 6 32 20 05 19 16 05 05 13 47 14 53 Latitude Planets.
2 44 North. 1 56 1 27 0 40 Sout ^ 47 2 33 North.

The Right Asc. 47 37 R. A. Time 212 00 R. A. Med. Coel. 259 37 Add the
quadrante 90 00 Obl. A. Horiscope 349 37

The figure it self follows.

William Lilly, born 1602. April 30. 14 h. 8 m. P. M. Sub Eleavatione Poli, 52.
38. in ad.
diagram

HOw this Nativity was corrected and proved to be the true Geniture of William
Lilly, by these several Accidents following:

1. He being aged 16 and 17 years, he lived poorly and in great want, his
father so far decayed his estate, that he could not (by his own confession)
send him to Cambridge, he labored then under the Ascendant to the opposition of
with, and without latitude, and to the or, and the terms of: then directed to
the terms of, and the part of Fortune to the of with latitude, and to the terms
of also.

2. Aged 18 years he came to London, and was put an Apprentice to Pawlin a
Tailor, and the Sun was then directed to the of, and the Medium Coeli to the
of: and Pars fortuna to the terms of. And now William Lilly began to live
indifferently well.

3. Aged 25. he married with his Mistress, the Mid-heaven was then directed to
the of with and without latitude, and the Ascendant was then directed to the
of, who was Lord of the seventh in his Radix, and Pars fortuna to the terms of.

4. Being aged 30 years, he began to study Astrology, the Ascendant was then
directed to the of with latitude, and to the of, and the M. C. to the of: and
Pars-fortuna was then directed to the of, the grand reason perhaps of its
proving so gainful to him.

5. Aged 31 years, his old wife died, and he got a 1000 l. thereby. The was
then directed to the of and of: and pars-fortuna was under the of, and directed
to, a certain note of wealth, and increase of fortune.

6. Being aged 32 he married again, the Mid-heaven was then directed to the of,
and to the of also; and was then directed to the terms of, and pars fortuna to
the Antiscion of. He was then and the next year also sick of a Hypocondriack
Melancholy, the Ascendant was then directed to the of, and to a star of the
nature of: The was then directed to a of the, and the Ascendant to the of,
which aptly signified the same.

7. Aged 34. he removed (at the pleasure of his wife) into Surrey to live, the
Ascendant was then directed to the of with latitude.

8. He being aged 38, a violent Fever, the Ascendant was then directed to the
of with latitude, all that year in his Ascendant, and at the Revolution in that
year his grand Afflicter.

9. Aged 48 years, he had many contentions with his wife, and lost 200 l. per
annum by Mr. Frost's means, upon a quarrel had between him and Frost; the
Medium Coeli was then directed to the of Lord of the seventh in the Radix, and
a most unfortunate revolution that year.

10. Being aged 50 years, he disgraced himself about the Solar Ecclips in 1652.
the Ascendan^ was then directed to, and to the of, which aptly portended the
same.

11. He being aged 56 and 57, he basely befooled himself and Astroloy, by
flattering Oliver and Richard Cromwell, and the King of Sweden, yet he got a
Gold Chain; the Ascendant to the terms of and fourth house, and was then
directed to the of with latitude; but then to give him the Gold Chain he had
the Mid-heaven to the of

12. Aged 52. he was endicted at Sessions by Emme Spencer for a Cheat: was then
directed to the of without latitude, and still under the of, and the Ascendant
was then directed to the Contrantiscion of.

13. He being aged 58 years, was imprisoned for pretending to know who cut the
Kings head off, but being befriended, he quickly got off again: in to the
Ascendant of the Revolution, and his part of fortune there; but he being under
to the of, he got his liberty in a fortnights time. Fortune seldom favors
honest men at so easy and friendly a rate. Thus was this Nativity corrected.

A general Judgment of this Nativity.
I Shall not be very tedious in the general Judgment of this Nativity, because
it would be very painful, and unprofitable; and Lilly himself would never do
any thing without a reward. However, for Astrologers honor I shall remark the
most eminent and considerable things therein, and that in the form following.

Here we find ascending, which Lilly himself p. 99. of his Introduction,
terms, A Sign double bodied, idle, effeminate, and sickly, representing a party
of no action. Perhaps a main reason of his juggling, and his playing fast and
lose with all he has dealt with, and of being so lazy and ignorant in the Art
be pretends to, that he seldom did any thing true therein, unless he had the
assistance of other men, better acquainted with the Art than himself. But to
show that William Lilly was never like to make a good Artist, or be of any
admirable conception, we find that he has Mercury in Taurus, a dull, heavy,
earthly sign, and diminishing in light in another earthly sign. In his
Introduction p. 584. he says, Luna diminished in light, Mercury in Taurus,
signifies the Native will prove a very Ass or Widgeon. And I remember it is
nearly from the same reasons, that in his Epistle to his Almanac 1645. he
confesses his conceptions dull, and his speech and discourse, (and he might
have said writings also) defective. But I cannot devise what Configuration
should make Mr. Lilly drop this truth! The Moon to the quartile of Mercury
cannot I am confident, though Mercury be Lord of the ninth. It is very
probable, that in to might do it; for that sometimes makes the veriest Idiot
ingenious. If yet a little further we enquire into this Natives manners,
adhering still to his own Book, (because he shall have the less occasion to be
offended) we find in p. 538. That when the significator of Manners is in, as
is in this Nativity, it denotes one inconstant, crafty, a contemner of all
Arts, yet conceited of his own parts. But that I remember to have read this
Aphorism in several other Authors, I should have believed that Lilly had made
it from the experience he had of his own inclination and temperature; For how
exactly this hits him in every part, I leave all those to judge that know him,
by either his writings or actions. In p. 536. Lilly advises us to judge of the
Natives manners more particularly thus, If there be no Planet in the Ascendant
or joined to the or, or that the Lord of the Ascendant be not aspected of his
Depositer, then have recourse to that Planet that forcibly aspects the and with
a partil aspect; which in this Nativity is, and he ill dignified. And therefore
by Lilly's own rule, in p. 450. signifies a person cruel, quarrelsom, and
tyrannical, rash and headstrong, bloody-minded, unshamefac't, sumptuous; a
bragger, impious, a shedder of blood, impudent in provoking, but timorous when
it comes to action, a thief, author of dissentions, tumults, sedition. And thus
much of the man, and his manners and inclination.

2. Of his Riches: Venus is Lady of the second, and in page 543. he says, That
she signifies Riches by friends and women's gifts. And that way indeed has
Lilly been somewhat enriched. And in p. 561. When a benevolent Planet is
significator of Riches, and combust, the Native thrives by indirect and
unlawful means. And Venus Lady of the second, being in exact opposition of, the
means should be the more indirect. All men (almost) know how Lilly has got his
estate; some by wives, but most by somewhat else, but what I will not say, let
those that have a desire to know, ask the Swedes, and the Members of the
Long-Parliament, Oliver Cromwell, and Richards friends, and they perhaps can
inform them. If we enquire whether the estate shall continue, Lilly tells us in
page 563. the Sun in the second is ill, and it is very bad when ^he Lord of the
second is combust, and the pars fortuna unfortunate, it usually portends
confiscation of estate, banishment, etc. And he says page 564. Caput Medusae,
with pars fortuna, or joined to his Lord, expresses loss of Riches, and
threatens poverty; which positions exactly happen in this Nativity, and
something else to aggravate them, viz. Saturn being in exact opposition to Sol
and Venus; but I hear Lilly has made over his estate already, in hopes to
prevent these evils that his Nativity unhappily threatens.

3. He says page 567. the in the third, portends little agreement between the
Native and his brethren, or kindred; And this is true enough in his Nativity,
for although he has a poor Brother in the Country, and a poor Sister a
Washer-woman, in Milford-lane, he seldom gives them a penny; and besides has
passed away his estate to strangers.

4. If we enquire whether this honor shall continue, himself says, page 623.
the Hyades, Hercules cor, Scorpio, Lanx Australis, in Angles, in or of the
infortunes; whom they raise from the dunghill they at last cast down with a
vengeance. In this Nativity, although these Stars are not in Angles, yet Mars
casts a quartile to two of the eminentest of them, from an Angle; which is
every whit as forcible, as if they had been in Angles. If two and four make
six, then four and two makes the same number. Thus you see the demonstration is
familiar and easy.

5. If we make enquiry after the Natives imprisonment or restraint, it is
apparent he must suffer by such means: For in page 642. he says, If afflict or
with partil or platick Aspect, it denotes imprisonment to the Native. Here you
see Sol is most exactly opposed by Saturn, and he Lord of the twelfth, and
Retrograde in the eighth house. I hope better for him, than that he die in a
prison: but that I have made a promise to quote no Authority herein, but
Lillyes own, I could produce diverse that relate such a position to be most
cruel and ominous.

6. Having treated of the most material passages of Life, we come now to treat
of Death; And shall question first, whether it may be natural, or violent? In
page 644. Lilly says, If either the Sun or Moon be in violent signs, and the
other Light with a violent fixed star, it denotes a violent Death, chiefly if
any of the infortunes invest either Sun or Moon, or Lord of the eighth. This
Aphorism takes full place in this Nativity, for the Moon is in Capricorn, and
the Sun with Oculus Taurus, in opposition of Saturn; Ergo, it stands the Native
upon, to beware of a violent end. In page 645. he says, A malevolent in the
eighth, and either of the Lights afflicted, or in a violent sign, portends
violent death. He says also, The Lord of the first in a violent sign, and the
depositer of the Light of the time in a violent sign, or afflicted, intends
violent death. Lord of the first, is in, a sign violent, and disposer of the is
in, a sign violent; Ergo, the dint of the Aphorism is to be feared. The kind
or quality of death is known from Saturn, because he is in the eighth, thence
afflicting the Sun, the Fountain of Life. And the kind of death that Saturn in
this case signifies, Mr. Lilly says, page 646. is by drowning, shipwreck,
ruin of old buildings, poison. And Saturn being in Scorpio a poisonous sign,
it is the more likely to be by poison. In page 647. he says, Saturn in
opposition of the Sun from fixed signs, many times denotes stoning to death, or
suffocation by fire, or water, sometimes beheading, (that is if the person be
honorable) death by a Gun, or great instrument, or hanging, or strangling, etc.
But of all, I suppose the former, viz. poison, because it is so natural to
Saturn, and to the sign he is in. And perhaps it may so fall out, that the
native coming into danger to prevent a public shame, may turn his own
Executioner, and poison himself, But in this matter I leave Mr. Lilly to do
what he will, I will promise him beforehand it shall never trouble me. And
this shall serve for a general Judgment upon the Scheme of his Nativity.

I shall set the Figure of his next years Revolution, it being most probable to
prove a prodigious year unto him, and the most remarkable that ever he had, yea
far more notable than that in which he received a gold Chain from the King of
Sweden And I shall give a particular Judgment upon the same, with considering
the directions and other things that con-comitate it, and so end my intended
Task, and leave Mr. Lilly to shift for himself, and baffle if he can, his bad
fate, as he has done all he ever had to deal with.

Of his Revolution for the Year 1661. being the 59th year of his Age.
To find the true Revolutional Figure, I equate for the Suns true place, thus:

April 29 the Sun is 19 d. 14 m. 41 s Taurus 30 20 12 24 Difference 00 57 43

The Suns place is 20 05 00 Taurus. Next greater is 20 12 24 Taurus. Difference
00 07 24

Then I work b^ the Rule of proportion, and say, if 57 53 give 24 h. what shall
7 24 give? Answer 3 h. 4 m. which subtracted from Noon the 30 of April, leaves
the true time of the Revolution sought, April the 29 da^, at 20 h. 50 m P. M.
Astronomically, or more vulgarly, April the 30 at 56 mi^u^es past eight a Clock
in the morning; for then the Sun comes to his Radical place, viz 20. 5 in
Taurus.

The Figure of Heaven, is as follows.

The Planets places are as follows.

Long Planets. 20 43 R. 4 31 R. 6 13 20 05 05 03 09 46 R. 04 47 14 40 R.

The right Asc. 47 37 Right A. Time 313 30 Added, makes 361 07 The Circle sub.
360 00 Right Asc. M. C. 001 07 Add the quadrant 090 00 Ob. A. Horoscope 91 07

The Figure it self follows.

April 30. 1661. 20 h. 56 m. P. M. Revolution for the 59th year current. ad.
diagram

A general Judgment of this Revolution.
IN this Revolution the sign of the sixth house of the Radix ascends, and the
Moon Lady thereof, is in exact opposition of Lord of the eighth in the Radix.
To the first, Mr Lilly says, page 727. If the sign of the sixth ascends, in
that year the Native may fear sicknesses, imbecility of body, or other very
many casualties etc. but to the latter he says nothing. Howbeit, other Authors
say, it is many times fatal to Life, and truly it is the more to be feared,
because opposition happens from Angles, and Saturn in the return so near the
opposition of the Sun, (who is Lux temporis) and exactly returned to his
Radical place, and the Lord of the eighth wholly, in the Revolution. If Saturn
be naturally an enemy to Life, and accidentally Anareta or Lord of Death, then
must his influence be the more malignant and cruel. Sed verum prius, Ergo, etc.
the 59th year of his age, (a year more dangerous by reason of Saturns double
return, than either 42. or 63.) we may upon better grounds than himself
predicted Prince Roberts death, pronounce this year most fatal to him; And
seriously Lilly ought to thank me for my plain dealing with him, if he shall
but consider what a muster of cruel and ominous Directions are coming toward
him; for they are such as his own Book (whom all along you may see I have made
his Judge, and fairer play he cannot desire to have of any man) terms fatal, as
you shall largely hear from thence --

1. He has the Sun to the sixth house, whose Ark of direction is 59. 18. which
direction he says, page 668. signifies to the Native himself sickness, etc.

2. He has the Ascendant to the terms of Mars, whose Ark of direction is 60
23. And in page 660. he says, It inclines the temperature of the Native to
choler, and incites him to rash actions, and to have a hand in many idle and
wicked matters, all tending to a general distemper of the body, subject to
scandal, and not undeservedly.

3. He has the Medium Coeli directed to the quartile of Saturn, whose Ark of
direction is 61 14. And Lilly says p. 669. This direction discovers many
laborious, difficult and unfortunate mischances unto the Native, deprives him
of his Honor, Office, Magistracy, Employment, or Reputation, by means of
Saturnine and vulgar persons, or of sly dissembling Courtiers, Countrey-clowns,
Husbandmen, Colliers, Day laborers, who seem all to conspire and agree herein
against him. And as this portends to vulgar persons, beggary, poverty,
disgrace; so unto people, discredit, (surely he esteems vulgar persons not
worth the terming people) accusations, and treacherous informations, damage by
thefts. These are Mr. Lillies own words.

4. He has the Medium Coeli to the quartile of Venus by direction, which Ark
of direction is 62. 6. And he says, page 673. This direction is ever full of
scandal and ignominy, and detracts from the Natives fame and honor, by means of
women, and stirs up strife, hatred, and contentions against him; the Native
subject to be deluded by women, to woo many, and to be rejected by most, or
all women, they putting tricks upon the Native, scorning and deriding him, who
will be jealous of his Mistress upon every slight occasion: It shows death
many times to the mother or wife, and an unquiet and uncheerful life -- with
his wife, many times divorce, jealousies, and great discontents, sale, or loss
of much estate, or many costly Jewels. Now beware the Gold Chain!

5. He has Pars fortuna directed to the quartile of Jupiter, whose Ark of
direction is 61. 42. He says, page 704. Such a direction signifies -- Loss of
wealth by means of Gentlemen, or Lawsuits, and vexations by such, and against
such, much labor and difficulty to procure the preservation of his estate, loss
of Office, or less increase thereby than formerly.

6. He has the Medium Coeli also directed to the quartile of Sol, whose Ark of
direction is 62. 54. And he says, page6 672. That it renders the Native
obvious to many discommodities, makes him odious to great men, to loose his
offices, honor, or preferments upon a sudden, and changes and perverts all his
former good fortunes, a Trades man cracks his credit, or turns Bankrupt, etc.
For now he is in danger of being imprisoned, banished, and many times (if the
Nativity threaten, a here it does) he is sentenced to death by the judgment of
his Prince, or some of his Officers.

These are the dire directions that are coming toward Mr. Lilly apace; some of
which have partly seized on him already; and let Mr. Lilly tell me whether I
have not dealt like a faithful friend by him, and as truly as Damboyse, and the
Kings Brother did by each other in the Tragedy Here are no Sycophantique
towering strains, nor have we flattered Lilly in hopes of reward, as he has
done many to their ruin; Nor have we used any stick Heraldy, no clawing
Epithetes, nor charms to cheat his understanding; we have not consulted Mother
Shipton, the Sybills, or that crack-braind fellow Merlyn, etc. nor Dic mie, nor
any such like cheats and knaveries; we have kept close to Astrology, and
because we would not be adjudged partial, in that, to Lillies own book; a
civility, that young Merlyn never merited from any Artist in the world.

But perhaps Lilly will say, when he sees this, that some of these directions
come not yet a while, according to the measure of time allowed in a direction,
I shall easily concede thereunto they do not; two of them especially. But
nevertheless if Lilly remembers what Sir Christopher Heydon says, Fol. 412.
That events proper to men, may be both anticipated and continued before or
beyond a direction, as other things shall occur; the objection is clearly
invalidated, and Lillies dancing days nearer unto an end, then he is aware of.

Let Lilly or the best Astrologer of his acquaintance, tell me what they think
of July 1661. when is stationary upon the opposite place of the, and suddenly
after meeting with the by a quartile? And of his being stationary to
Retrogradation upon the degree Ascending in the Revolution, in November
following, a place that Mars so mischeivously hate; And presently meeting an
opposition of Venus, (Lillies best friend) and this in near the twelfth House
of the Radix? Nor will the four Eclipses in that year, in the Angles of his
Revolution speak better things unto him, that in September of the especially;
it happening so directly upon the place of the in the Revolution --

If Mr Lilly be unsatisfied in any thing herein written, let him publish his
doubts, and I hereby promise him In verba Astrologi, in the word of an Artist,
to dilucidate any thing to him that is therein contained. Or if he shall he
captious or quarrelsom (which is somewhat probable he may) at me, for my
serious pains in his Nativity taken, I shall then call back my civil offer, and
will undertake to justify what is here performed, either by dispute, or which
way that he shall think proper for to engage, provided it may be for the honor
of Astrology, unto which end alone I have published his Geniture.

FINIS.

