ENGLANDS DELIVERANCE OR, The Great and bloody Plot discovered, Contrived
against the Kings Majesty, the Queen, the Duke, and all the Royal Progeny,
Parliament, and Kingdom.

With a List of all their names now in the Tower of London and other Prisons,
their wicked Invention, with hand Grenades, to murder burn, and sl^ughter
which way they went, which far surpasses the Gunpowd^r-treason, or Spanish
Invasion.

TOGETHER. With the speedy Trial of Sir John Lenthal one of Olivers Kts now in
the Towers And also of one Tench which made the Engine to draw his late
Maj^sties head down to the Block in case of refusal, who will ere long have his
just reward for the same.

Printed for T. Vere, and W. Gilbertson. 1661

The great and bloody Plot Discovered against his Majesty, the Queen, the Duke*
and Royal Progeny, etc.
O England! stand amazed, and wonder, and see what base and notorious actions
spring from thy bowels: even enough to give a Kingdom a vomit, but however lest
my pen should slip, I here commit my mind in general unto you, and all which
was private in Traitors hearts, now will be seen obvious to the Kingdom.

That upon the fifth of December last one thousand six hundred and sixty, were
several Traitors assembled together, as we have had the true Relation from
those whom have been concerned in the discovery.

Notwithstanding the remarkable Execution of many of their Ancient Compettitors
at Charing Cross the thirteenth of October 1660: these persons whose names are
here underneath subscribed, have in a most G^and and H^rrid Conspiracy Acted,
Compassed and Invented the Basest, Barbarous, and Notorious Plot that ever
mortals could contrive: or rather ascri^e it to the Seed of the Devil, having
far surpassed the Gunpowder-treason.

The first who began this Horrid and Detestable Plot was one Major White,
formerly an Officer under Lamb^rt and Major General Overcon, under the same
Command, and once Governor of Hull, but a notorious Traitor both to King and
Kingdom, with thirty eight more of that cursed Gang, Viz.

Francis Elstone. John Hargrass. El. Hunt. Gabaiel Hopkins. Will. Kirk. Francis
Booth. C. Bagster. C. Babington. Will. Wright. Anthony Barnsh^w. Thomas Millard
Tobias Hill. Rich. Dillings. Peter Thompson. Tho. Simcock. Frederick Barnwel.
Rich. Daniel. Rich. Shoopel. John Lucan. Will. Howard. Tho. Nicols. Henry
Limpick. Francis Gavel. Tobias Hill. James E^^^field Ieffery Hookings. S^m.
Iepp. I^aac B^nton. Rich Young. John Steward. John Ward. Tho. Butler. Rich.
Glover. George Thomas. Iam. Sanford. Robert Harker. Rich. Burt. John Decks.
Owen Davis.
These with many more, did Compass and Contrive first to begin with fire upon
the Kings Stables then after to jump violently upon white hall on purpose to
murder his Majesty and all the Dukes, with the R^yal Progeny: To break upon the
Foundations of England, and make Law lawless, so to Reign like Wolves among a
flock of Shaep, and glut themselves with the ruins of a Nation.

For which they had seduced and enticed several numbers of the late Disbanded
Soldiers, who having neither house nor home to go to were easily incombred
amongst these Barbarous Traitors, which being acted the fifth of December kept
themselves private both in London and the near adjacent places, especially in
Holburn near the Filds Covent Garden, and innumerable back Allies having
provided Hand-Granadoes, and many other base and inhumane Instruments to kill,
burn, and slaughter which way they went, like cruel Tyg^rs, and merciless
Tyrants, whose bowels entertained not the least drop of compassion, but rather
like Bores to surfeit themselves with blood of Innocents and harmeless people.

So barbarous and unnatural were these bloody Tray^ors, in their horrid and
detestable desig^es, that even surpasses the Spanish Invasion, or the
Gunpowder-treason.

And the thirteenth of December was det^rmined the da^ or night for the
Executi^^ of their Bu^chery* and Massacre; But through the Providence of the
Almighty, like the Gunpowder-treason before that the match took fire, it was
discovered and publicly divulged by a strange and une^pected accident.

For this aforesaid Major White on the twelfth of December met with a Porter
which formerly had been a Soldier of his, in whom he reposed a great deal of
confidence, whereof he immediately told him, that if he would go along with him
to his Lodging where he lay, which was then in Horburn, he had some things to
relate to him, which accordingly agreed, and together they went; being come to
his Chamber, he told him that he had some necessary occasions for him, in which
he was able to perform, and that he should receive a great Reward if he would
be vigilant and keep his counsel.

The Porter in much duty promised him he would.

Whereupon this Major White related in this manner.

My friend. I have very many weighty matters, and things of concernm^nt wherein
you must be careful and dilligent, and before Christmas day I will make a m^n
of thee: For we are a confiderable number of friends in town, whereby we must
daily have r^courfe one to another, for we do intend the thirteenth of this
month to assemble our selves together, being well provided with Arms, and to
seize upon the Muse, and on all the Kings H^rses, then to set fire on (...) and
murder, and destroy the King and all his N^bility, to cut off Root and Branch,
and make a Mutenie in the City, which being done, we shall have help enough, so
raise up our selves to our former condition, and heartily revive up the good
old Cause; he then immediately drew up a Scroll of parchment wherein was a List
of all the names of the grand Traitors, and chief Actors in this horrid and
notorious treason: then he gave him some papers to carry unto Overton, and many
others of the traitors Lodgings.

Now when the Porter had been at several of these Traitors Lodgings, and seen
many of them face to face, he presently posts to White Hall and there
acquainted his Grace the Duke of Abermarle in full Relation of all the story in
general, who immediately preferred it to the Council who could no less wonder
and stand amazed to hear the hainousness of these Notorious bloody Traytor^s;
who presently drew up a W^rrant, and sent the Lifeguard, and on the 15th of
December, the very night before their wicked Conspiracy was to be effected the
chief of them were apprehended, and the rest disp^ersed, in a moment of time.

The names of these notorious traitors you have had mentioned before in a List,
but here is another grand traitor, the Major General Ludlow who made his narrow
escape from his Lodging in Westminster out of his bed, the sheets being warm
when the Guard came in for to search for him.

Colonel Okey a another grand traitor by Proclamation, made his escape from his
Lodging in Covent Garden, and all the rest of the Traitors that were excluded
out of the Act of Indemnity were concerned in this wicked and bloody design,
and supposed to be in town.

Whereupon, the Lord Mayor for the surest apprehending of them, has secured
all the Inns and Stables within the City of London, hearing a relatirn that
fifteen dundred of Disbanded Troopers lies up and down about the City, and
every man completely Armed: Something of which was specified in Major Whites
Confession being examined before his Grace the Duke of Abermacle, who requested
him to discover the rest of the Traitors,

Who answered, that if his Grace would sue out his pardon, he would reveal the
whole design in general, and give him a list of all their names.

Whereupon immediately his life was granted, then forth with he confessed, that
they were in number fixed for their Design five hundred Horse, and as many
Foot, whereof Ludlow, Oakie, Overton; and himself were to have been prime
Commanders and the fifteenth of December at midnight they were to execute their
barbarous intention, thinking to increase both in strength and number. having
so fit an opportunity now at the Disbanding of the Army, and that many of the
Sectary Phanaticks that are in London were ready to acquiesse in this Design
with them, and would surnish them with Arms of an hours warning.

So when he had ended his Confession, he was then immediately conveyed unto the
Tower, but he had his life granted him upon his Discovery, which was a great
deal more then the Porter could declare.

Colonel Overton was secured by the Constable and his Watch, with some few
more of the Life Guard; he lay at one Mr. Phelps in Leg. Alley near New-street,
this Phelps was one of the Clerks to the pretended High Court of Justice, and
one Broughton his fellow Clerk, both in the house with Overton, but not in the
same Chamber,

They denied the opening of the Door to the Constable, so that by force of
Arms they were forced to break open the Doors before they could get to
Overton, when that they came up one of the Life Guard with a Pistol to his
breast, asked him if he was Overton,

Who answered, yes.

Then said he, I apprehend you in the Ki^gs name.

Then Sir, said Overton, I am your prisoner.

So forthwith they carried him a^^y, and kep^ him on the Guard all night at
White Hall, and being examined on the morrow, h^ con^^st not any thing to the
purpose, so at six clock at night he was brought in a Coach strongly guarded
unto the Tower of London, Boys running about the Coach, and people in whole
multitudes with great Acclamation, crying hang him hang him all the way he went.

The same day there were several others brought to Newgate, who no sooner had
entered the Prison, but they began to rebuke and revile one another with lewd
and peremptory language for being seduced into so great an Error.

Many more were the same day taken and brought to the Gate House at
Westminster.

It is a great suspicion that some Disbanded Soldiers was linked in this
Conspiracy, yet some take it to be an aspertion cast on them.

Nevertheless, his Majesty has intended a Proclamation to this purpose.

That all Disbanded Soldiers shall depart the City twenty miles distant, and
not to stay within the Presincts of London at their peril, except they can show
some good sufficient reason, which may be justifiable for their residence.

Now these Prisons being sufficiently fortifyed with Grand and Notorious bloody
Traitors the Tower, Newgate, and the Gate House, there let us leave them till
the Sessions, and then bequeath them into the hands of Esquire Dun the Hangman,
who can better satisfy them then the ruins of a Kingdom.

We have done already with the Trators of October, now so much of this for the
Trators of December.

One thing more here I have, which is a remarkable piece to be noted, that is,
the carriage and behavior of one of Olivers late Knights, by name Sir John
Lenthal, son to the Grand Dee, Speak^r to the Rump, that is, not only to br^ak
his Allegiance, and prove Traitor to his Majesty, and slander the Kingdom with
lewd and profane carriage, but needs he must Countarfeit the Broad Seal of
England, and imitates the Office of High Chanselor besides, so to contrive and
make up his piece of policy, he sends for a Tobacco-Pipe ma^er, promising him
a great Reward if he would draw the Resemblance of the Kings Great Seal in a
piece of Clay, thinking the fellow had hi^ a second Shemei but he proved after
a second Mordecai, wherein he discovered the baseness of his mind, that Olivers
Knight was soon apprehended, and very gently brought to the Tower, where there
he remains for his speedy trial.

But we must not for get the grand ingenuity and crafty workman-ship of the
Hanibal Teanch who was pregnant in such a trade that never before was used in
England, being one of Peter's Congregation, and followed his Text, To bind his
King in Chains of Iron: But Dun will not be at such a charge for Teanch shall
be bound in a Hempen Rope, but as for the present he remains in the Gatehouse,
for the Fellons in Newgate scor us to be troubled with such a treacherous and
dirty companion.

October is gone,
December is come,
And brought more work for Esquire Dun.

FINIS.
a man, possibly the executioner


