A MORE PARTICVLAR AND EXACT RELATION OF The Victory obtained by the
Parliaments Forces under the Command of Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX.

WHEREIN Diverse things very considerable are mentioned, which before are
omitted in the several Relations formerly published.

Being two Letters, the one written by G. B. a Gentleman in the Army, unto
Lieutenant Colonel Roe* Scoutmaster General for the City of LONDON.

The other by Colonel Okey to a Citizen of LONDON.

With the true Copy of a Letter of the regaining of Leicester.

June 19th

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, 1645.

A more particular and exact Relation of the Victory obtained by the
Parliaments Forces under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax.
SIR,
YOu have heard at large I believe of the good success God has given unto us;
how he has raised us out of our graves, and caused our dead hopes to live
again, by that fearful overthrow he has given the Adversary; the particulars
of which Battle I could give you, but suppose you have heard it already,
therefore I forbear, only in short thus: About 11 of the clock we were drawn
both Armies into Battalia in Nasby fields, a place of little hills and vales,
in a direct line equal to both parts, the ground some ploughed, some Champion.
Our Battle was thus ordered; Lieutenant General Cromwell commanded all the
Horse, Major General Skippon the Foot; the General not in one place, but
every where as occasion required. In our right Wing of Horse were the
Generals, (sometimes Lieutenant General Cromwells,) Colonel Whaleys, Col.
Peys, Col. Rossiters, Col. Fines, and Col. Sheffields, Regiments. In the left
Wing were Colonel Iretons, (who was made Commissary General of the Horse in
the Field,) Colonel Fleetwoods, Col. Rich, Col. Butler, Col. Vermudens, and
the Suffolk Regiments, Dragoons equally divided on both parts. The Infantry
thus ordered; in the right Wing, the Generals, Colonel Mountagues, Col.
Pickerings, Col. Sir Herdus Wallers Regiments. In the left, Major General
Skippon's, Colonel Bartlets, Col. Rainsboroughs, Col. Hammons Regiments. The
wind was Northwest, and before we joined battle, blew stiff, equal on both
parts; only the Enemy had it somewhat more advantageous for them: in regard
the wind was that way; both Parties sought to get the wind, which occasioned
our left wing of Horse, and of Foot, and their right, first to engage; where
was a most terrible dispute; at length the fury of the Enemy caused two
Regiments of Horse to give ground a little, the rest stood, the retreat was
upon Major General Skippons Regiment, being the utmost of that Wing, and the
Regiment next to him; the Enemy pursued, and cam^ near the Train: In the mean
time Lieutenant General Cromwell routed the Kings left Wing, drove them clear
away from that side, having made not the least retreat; but was like a Torrant
driving all before them: In which the General charged valiantly, and lost his
Headpiece, who seeing the left scattered, he with Lieutenant General
Cromwell faced about to that Wing, with some Divisions of Horse, charged bare
headed within push of Pike, routed the Enemy; after this, both parts rallyed,
and stood very near each other, having silence for a short space, but ours
advancing to charge, the Enemy fled, ours pursued them for the space of 14
miles, within two miles of Leicester, cutting them off as they went; all their
Foot were cut off and taken, we have about 4 or 5000 Prisoners, of Horse at
least 2000. All the train and Coaches, except the Kings, and Digbies Coaches.
All their Arms, Provisions, Ordinance, etc. Bag and Baggage. Abundance of rich
plunder for the Soldiers, about 400 slain in the place, besides the chase;
about 50 of ours conceived to be slain: one slain that had a Plush Coat, with
a Star in Silver on it, conceived the Duke of Lenox, Sir Marmaduke, Langdale,
the Lord Grandenson, and many other Officers of Note, as we conceive, and are
informed, besides abundance wounded on the place, and 200 carried that night
wounded into Leicester; many Women slain that were in their Army, and many
taken, which are every one wounded. By a Waggoner of the Kings taken, we
understand that the King was wounded in the Arm, and that he saw it bleed, and
that at one time our horse were beyond him.

On our part slain, Captain Tomkins, Lieutenant General Cromwels Cornet,
Colonel Whaleys Cornet, and a few others, but many wounded: Viz. Major
General Skippon shot through the right side, Colonel Ireton wounded in four
place, but not mortal, Colonel Butler, Captain Blevin, and many others
wounded. Our men came on with brave valor and agility, as could be expected
from men, the best demonstration of the Officers valor is their wounds. I do
not hear of one but discharged his Duty: and cannot praise one above another,
least I should detract from any: Only, concerning the Generals. Sir Thomas
Fairfax never appeared with that alaerity of Spirit, and that pleasant
countenance, as then; greatly encouraging his Soldiers, and promised by his
countenance Victory; before the fight, his former looks were like a dead man,
to what he had when he went to engage: and the truth is, his very countenance
discovered an Emblem of true valor, as ever we saw; and had a spirit
heightened above the ordinary Spirit of man, he was to and again in the Front,
carrying Orders, bringing on Divisions in midst of Dangers, with gallant
bravery, and received not the least wound; though he engaged bare headed, and
routed the Enemy.

That Noble Lieutenant General Cromwell behaved himself to the utmost; routed
the Adversary as on Marston-Moore, and then relieved our Army on the other
Party which was like to be undone; whom God mightily honored. And now has
given Prince Rupert his other Iron-side.

And as for Major General Skippon, worthy to be continually in the best
thoughts of truest English: behaved himself with that Valor and Gallantry as
possibly a man could do: I heard the General speak wonderfully to him in his
praise; with great expressions. In the first charge he received his wound, shot
through the right side under the Ribs, through Armor, and Coat, but not
mortal, yet notwithstanding he kept his Horse, and discharged his place, and
would by no means be drawn off till the Field was won; for the space of two
hours and a half. Truly Sir, you would scarce believe that undauntednesse
that was in him. I helped him to a House, and carried him to his Chamber,
stripped him, and saw his wound dressed; and never beheld such a gallant-Spirit in
my life to bear such a wound. And when I said to him, Sir, your wound has
caused a little cloud on this glorious day; he answered, by no means let mine
Eclipse its glory, for it is my honor that I have received a wound, and it
was my God that strengthened me. Sir, these three Generals I suppose have not
their fellows in the world, all things considered.

Notwithstanding our wounded and weary men in this great Battle, which may be
the saving of the three Kingdoms, and is to us as life from the dead, yet we
marched on Lords day last to Great Glinne, where was our head Quarters the last
night, about four miles from Leicester. Lievtena. Gen Cromwell with our horse
faced it last night; we are at this instant drawing to a Rendezvous, and our
General is resolved to attempt, the Lord appear as formerly to us; and we
hope that he will so bless our poor despised Army, that he will make it a
Savior for this Nation. 2500 Horse of Derby and Nottingham, etc. are near to
join with us, now is the opportunity. The King went not into Leicester, nor any
of the Horse, save the wounded men, but marched through Elsen that night: Part
toward Litchfield, part toward Newarke: they left many Portmantles and tired
Horses beyond Leicester.

From the West by one that came from Bridgewater. I understand that our party
were safe there on Wednesday last, and have Encamped themselves on this side
Taunton, they have six miles Rainge, he heard from the Enemy that they were
lately releived from Lyme, and that they said, if relief came not within this
fortnight, all would be there own.

Sir, I had thought to have been short, yet I have made somewhat a large
Narration; you will pardon the prolixity of my lines, which cannot be so
digested in regard of our hasty march: I hope shortly to give you a good
account of Leicester: This is all at present.

June 16. 1645. Great Glinne. Your humble Servant George Bishop.

Another Letter from Colonel Okey to a Citizen of LONDON.
Noble Sir,
HAving little opportunity and good news through Gods goodness to send unto
you, I thought good to neglect no opportunity, but by the first convenient
messenger to send to you, that so you might receive true intellegence, and
might with the rest of Gods people join together in praises to the Lord for
his infinite Mercy to us in particular, and to all the whole Land in general,
I am not Ignorant that news will come to you of this great Victory before my
Letter comes to your hands; But it is my desire so near as I can to relate to
you the certainty of it. After many tedious houers night and day since I saw
you, and Watching every night with my Regiment upon there quarters, having the
forelorne guard every night, it pleased God that upon Saturday the 14. of this
instant month between 7 and 8 of the clock in the morning, we drew near to a
place called Nasby, unto Clypsome field a mile and half from our quarters,
where we had the guard the night before; and so soon as we came into the
field, the Enemy was drawn up into a Battalia ready to give us battle; and so
ready that had it not pleased the Lord of his infinite Mercy to show himself,
we had been all cut off, for they were ready to advance upon us, before we
were drawn up into a Battalia for to encounter with them; But our Noble
General and Leivtenant General, Cromwell, and major General Skippon were so
careful of the great work in hand; as that they soon drew us up into a Body,
in such a manner, as that we were presently ready to encounter with the Enemy,
as the Enemy was to fall upon us. For although they had marched in a very
stately way in a whole Body toward us, thinking thereby to daunt us, or at
least to take us before we were ready to give them entertainment; for they
had a very large Body both of Foot and Horse, but especially of Horse. I was
half a mile behind in a Meadow giving my men Ammunition, and had not the
Lieutenant Genesis come presently, and caused me with all speed to mount my men,
and flanck our left Wing, which was the Kings right Wing of horse; where was
Prince Maurice, who charged at the head of his Regiment, and the King himself
in the next reserve charged at the head of his men, but by that time I could
get my men to light, and deliver up their Horses, in a little close, the Enemy
drew toward us: which my men perceiving, they with shooting and rejoicing
received them, although they were encompassed on the one side with the Kings
Horse, and on the other side with Foot and Horse to get the Close; but it
pleased God that we beat off both the Horse and the Foot on the left, and the
right Wing, and cleared the Field, and kept our ground: When as the Kings Horse
had driven our men a mile before them on the left Wing at their first coming
on; then we discovered many of the Kings Regiment, by reason that they came
somewhat near unto us; before ever they discharged a Pistol at any Horse; and
had not we by Gods providence been there, there had been but few of Colonel
Butlers Regiment left, after this we gave up our selves for lost men, but we
resolved every man to stand to the last, and presently upon it, God of his
providence ordered it so, that our right Wing, which was Colonel Cromwell his
Regiment drove the Enemy before them; which I perceiving (after one hours
battle) caused all my men to mount and to charge into their Foot, which
accordingly they did; and took all their Colors, and 500 Prisoners, besides
what we killed, and all their Arms. After this the King his Horse drew up
into a body again: and then I drew up my Dragoons, and charged the Kings
Regiment of Horse, and they faced about and run away, and never made any stay
till they came to Leicester, and we pursued them within three miles and a half
of Leicester, which was about 15 miles from the place where we fought: we
took, as near as we can guess, between 4 and 5000 men, with many Horse, all
their Ordinance, Bag and Baggage; and there was as we were informed, but two
Foot men went into Leicester; the King himself very hardly escaped.

Now what remains, but that you and we should magnify the name of our God,
that did remember a poor handful of despised men, whom they had thought to
have swallowed up before them. And I desire you, that you would in our behalf
bless God that has made us any instruments for our Kingdoms good, and that
we may walk worthy of so great a Mercy and Deliverance. And I humbly desire
that Thanks may be given to Almighty God that did so miraculously deliver us. I
lost not one man, and had but three men wounded in all my Regiment. Thus in
have I rest, desiring the Lord to keep you and all yours. And remain

Your Friend to Command JOHN OKEY.

A copy of a Letter written from Northampton, the 18 of June, 1645. at 10 of
the clock in the Morning.
By the High Shreiffe of Northampton shiere.
Cozen,
THe greatness of the late Victory appears to us that are near it, every day
more and more; the Printed things out with you, being far short of it: we have
every day Knights and Colonells fresh brought in. But as an addition to all,
this morning we have the great goodness of the regaining Leicester; the
Officers so far as Majors, go away with their single Horses and Arms, all
under Majors, and the common Soldiers, only with staves in their hands; all
Arms, Ammunition, Ordnance, Bag and Buggage is the Parliaments; the Lord in
Heaven make us thankful. So rests

Northampton, 18 June, 1645. at 10 in the morning. Your very Loving Uncle
Edward Farmer.

FINIS.

