The Black and Terrible WARNING PIECE: OR, A SCOURGE TO Englands Rebellion.

Truly Representing, The horrible Iniquity of the Times; the dangerous
Proceedings of the Ranters, and the holding of no Resurrection by the Shakers,
in Yorkshire and elsewhere.

With the several Judgments of the most High and Eternal Lord God, upon all
Usurpers, who deny His Law, and His Truth; and the manner how 130 Children were
taken away by the Devil, and never seen no more; and diverse others taken, rent,
torn, and cast up and down from Room to Room, by strange and dreadful Spirits,
appearing in the shapes of, A Black Boar, A Roaring Lion, An English Statesman,
And a Roman Friar.


EXtracted out of the elaborate Works of Bishop Hall, and Sir Kenelm Digby; And
published for general satisfaction, to all Christian Princes, States, and
Commonwealths in Europe.

LONDON: Printed for George Horton, 1653.

The Black and Terrible WARNING PIECE
AMongst the rest of the strange and Infidel opinions, sprung up in these our
tottering and staggering times, there is a generation most erroniously c^ept
within the bounds of this Nation, who hold themselves to be above Ordinances,
and that they have walked through all dispensations; denying the sacred
Scriptures, the Resurrection of the Saints; and like the sons of Perdition,
contemn all Gospel promises, and Christian privileges, saying, that there is
no God* no Devil, no Heaven, no^ Hell, and that the soul is mortal: denying
likewise, that the Son of God comes with recovering Grace, and discoveries
and tenders of a spiritual and eternal Happiness and Glory. But to consute
them of their Errors and to evince and make forth unto the world, that there is
a God, we need look no further, then Justin Martirs Sermon ad Gentes, proving
the unity of the Godhead out of the Heathens themselves, Orpheus, the Sybils,
Sophocles, Homer, Plato, Pythagoras, etc. Nay further, hear what Seneca says,
if the Dev^ll be so diligent as to deceive men of eternal Happiness, and bring
them to unspeakable misery, then sure there is such a happiness and misery;
and the former being true, ergo the latter: for says he, as the joys of heaven
are beyond our conceiving; so also are the pains of Hell; everlasting torment
is unconceivable torment. Alas! does it not plainly tell us that there is a
Devil, laboring to deprive man of his Happiness, when men are drawn to
commit such monstrous sins? Such cruelty as the Romans used to the Jews at the
taking of Jerusalem, so many thousand Christians so barbarously murdered; such
bloody actions as those of Nero, Sylla, Calligula, Messala, Caracalla, the
Roman Pontiffs, the French massacre, the Gun powder plot, the Spanish
Inquisition, and their murdering of 50 millions of Indians in 42 years,
according to the testimony of Acosta their Jesuit. Men invading their own
neighbors and brethren, with an unquenchable thirst after their blood, and
merely because of their strictness in the common professed Religion, as the
late cruel wars in England have declared.

As touching the clear and frequent discovery of the verity of the Scriptures
(though many deformed Creatures in stead of reformed Christians, in this latter
Age, say, they are needless, and deny the Authority thereof) it is the Word of
God, as great Chamier calls i^, who likeneth it to the Revelations made to
the Prophets and Apostles. And, indeed, of what exceeding great necessity is
it, to the salvation of all true Believers, to be soundly persuaded of the
truth of Scripture? As Gods own veracity is the prime Foundation of our Faith,
from which particular Axioms receive their verity: so the Scripture is the
principal foundation quod patefactionem, Revealing to us, what is of God,
without which Revelation, it is impossible to believe. Therefore should not the
foundation be both surely and firmly laid, the Superstructure cannot be firm,
where the foundation is sandy; neither can the affections and actions of any be
sound or strong, where their Belief is unsound or infirm. Again, Learned Mr.
Pemble says, That the loose and unsettled Faith of many in these times, in
denying the Scripture, and eternal Rest, proceeds from the fiery Darts and
forcible Engines of Satan.

And whereas many of them deny, that the Soul of man remains and lives after
Death, because they see nothing go from him but his breath; it is undeniable,
but that the Saints do ascend to the most Highest Throne: And this every true
Believer ought to apply unto himself implicitly, Though many in this Age are
grown to that impiety, that they laugh at all that is said of another Life, and
say, that there is no such thing as a Devil, etc. But famous Zanchy affirms,
that it is as clear as the Sun, that the Air is full of Devils; because,
besides Gods Word, experience it self does teach it, and sundry arguments we
shall here recite to maintain it; to wit,

Luther affirmed of himself, that at Coburge he oftimes had an Apparition of
burning Torches, the sight whereof did so affright him, that he was near
swooning: Also in his own Garden the Devil appeared to him in the likeness of
a black Boar; but then hs made light of it. Sozomen, in his Ecclesiastical
History, writes of Apelles a Smith, famous in Egypt for working Miracles, who
in the night, while he was at work, was tempted to uncleanness by the Devil,
appearing in the shape of a beautiful Woman. And learned Cyprian says, that
one like a glorious young man (being the Apparition of a good Angel) stood by
one of his fellow Presbyters at his death, as he was afraid, and praying
against death, and said to him, Are you afraid to suffer? Are you afraid to go
forth? What shall I do with you? As chiding him for his lothness to suffer
death for Christ. Yea, Godly, sober Melancton affirms, that he had seen strange
sights and Apparition, and many credible persons of his acquaintance have told
him, that they have not only seen them, but had much talk with spirits: Among
the rest he mentions one of his Aunts, who sitting sad at the fire after the
death of her Husband, there appeared one unto her in the likeness of her
Husband, and another like a Franciscan Friar: The former told her, that he was
her Husband, and came to tell her somewhat; which was, that she must hire some
Priests to say certain Masses for him, which he earnestly besought her: Then he
took her by the hand, promising to do her no harm; yet his hand so burned hers,
that it remained black ever after, and so they vanished away.

Lavater also himself, who has writ a book wholly of Apparitions, a Learned,
Godly, Protestant Divine, tells us, That it was then an undeniable thing,
confirmed by the testimonnies of many honest and credible persons, that
sometime by night, and sometime by day, they have both seen and heard such
things; and that some going to bed, had their clothes plucked off them; others
heard somewhat lying down in the bed with them, others heard it walking in the
chamber by them; saying, they were the souls of such or such persons lately
departed, that they were in grievous torments; and if so many Masses were but
said for them, or so many Pilgrimages undertaken to the shrine of some Saint,
they should be delivered; these things with many such more, says pious
Lavater, were then frequently and undoubtedly done, and that where the doors
were fast locked, and the room searched, that there could be no deceit.

So Sleidan relates the story of Crescentius the Popes Legate, feared into a
deadly sickness by a fearful Apparition in his Chamber. Most credible and
Godly Writers tell us, That on the twentieth day of June, in the year of our
Lord 1484. many Blasphemous and abominable wretches (holding the same Tenants
with the Ranters, Shakers, etc. of our times) met together in great numbers,
both Men, Women, and Children at a Town called Hammel in Germany, where they
acted the Scene of Satan, reviling and Blaspheming, nay threatening the
Almighty and Omnipotent God: And not content with this, set their Children, to
the number of 130. on a high place within half a mile of the aforesaid Town, to
dare and defy the Lord of all spirits. But mark the Judgment that befell them
in a moment: while they were belching forth these Diabolical Imprecations, the
Lord thundered Vengeance upon them, the said 130 Children being carried away by
the Devil in a flame of fire, and were never seen again. But I need say no more
of this; there is enough written already, not only by Cirogna, Delus,
Paracelsus, and others of suspected credit; but also by godly and faithful
Writers, as Lavater Agricola, Moynus, and many others.

Zanchy thinks, it is the very substance of Devils that enters men, and that
they have bodies more subtle then the Air, by which they enter. But if any
doubt whether there be any such thing, credible History, and late experience
may sufficiently satisfy him; for in need, the History of the dispossession of
the Devil out of many persons together, in a room in Lancashire, at the prayers
of some godly Ministers, is very famous.

Luther thought that all Phrenetick persons, and Idiots, and all bereaved of
their Understanding had Devils, notwithstanding Physicians might ease them by
remedies. And indeed the presence of the Devil may consist with the presence of
a disease, and evil humor, and with the efficacy of Means. Saul's melancholy
Devil would be gone when David played on the Harp. So that learned Physicians
think, that the Devil is frequently mixed with such distempers, and has a main
hand in many of their symptoms.

Forestus mentions a Country man that being cast into melancholy through
discontent at some injuries that he had received, the Devil appeared unto him
in the likeness of a man, and persuaded him to make away himself rather then
to bear such indignities; and to that end advised him to send for Arsenick to
poison himself. But the Apothecary would not let him have it, except he would
bring one to promise that he should not abuse it; whereupon the Devil went with
him as his Voucher, and so he took a dram, but though it tormented him, yet it
did not presently kill him; wherefore the Devil brought him afterward a rope,
and after that a knife to have destroyed himself; at which sight the man being
affrighted was most miraculously recovered unto his right mind again.

And lastly, to prove that man has a future happiness or misery, is drawn from
the argument of the Devils compact with Witches. It cannot be only his design,
of hurting their bodies that makes him enter into these contracts with them;
for that he might procure by other means as likely. It is a childish thing to
conceit that the Devil cares so much for a few drops of their blood, is not the
blood of a beast or other creature as sweet? neither can it be only the
acknowledgement of his power that he aims at; nor a mere desire of being
honored or worshipped in the world, as Porphirius and other Pagans have
thought: for he is most truly served, where he is least discerned, and most
abhorred, when he most appears. His Apparitions are so powerful to convince
the Ranters of our times, who believe not that there is either God, or Devil,
or Heaven, or Hell, that I am persuaded he would far rather keep out of sight,
and that for the most part he is constrained by GOD to appear against his will.

So that by these attempts of Satan, to deceive and destroy souls, it is
evident, That there is an estate of Happiness or misery to every man after this
life. See Sir Kenelm Digby, of the Immortality of the Soul: And Mr. Ross his
Philosophical Touchstone, in Answer to it. And indeed, all those Arguments
which every Common Play Book, and Philosopher almost can afford you, to prove
the immortality of the Soul, will also serve to prove the point in hand. But
many can apprehend these Arguments from sense, who cannot yet reach, and will
not be convinced by other Demonstrations: As Temptations, Apparitions,
Possessions dispossessions, and Witches, are most excellent means to convince a
Ranting Sadduce, that there are Angels and Spirits; so also by consequence,
that there is a Resurrection, and eternal Life.

From whence, be pleased to observe, how long did the most learned Philosophers
study, before they could know those few, rude, imperfect notions, which some of
them did attain to, concerning Eternity? They were gray with age and study,
before they could come to know that which a Child of seven years old may now
know by the benefit of Scripture.

FINIS.

