THE FELICITY OF QUEEN ELIZABETH: And Her Times, With other Things; By the
RIGHT HONORABLE FRANCIS Ld BACON Viscount St Alban,

LONDON, Printed by T. Newcomb, for George Latham at the Bishops Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1651.

TO the READER.
Reader,
HERE is presented to thy view certain Tracts, containing diverse Arcana
Imperii; by two in their times eminent Counselors of Estate.

The one is the Felicity of Queen ELIZABETH, and her Times, by that Noble and
learned Gentleman, the Lord BACON, Viscount St. Alban; one of the standing
Honors of the Law in general, and of Grayes Inn in particular.

The other is the Advices to Queen ELIZABETH, by that well weighed Statesman
the Lord BURLIEGH, then Lord Treasurer, a man beyond expression excellent, whom
it much availed Queen Elizabeth to have for Minister, as appears by that Favor
showed to him, the Queen always making him to sit in the presence (by reason
of the Gout in his Feet) and telling him, My Lord, We make much of you, not for
your bad Legs, but for your good Head.

And as for the Lord Bacon, (certain of whose Epistles are annexed to this
book) if it were expected, we must heap up abundant Testimonies; We will select
some few out of many, omitting the for-rain of Mersennus, and Mr. Pierre
D'Amboise, and others, who have Translated and Commented upon him, and confine
our selves to those worthy men that are of our own Nation; and begin with the
Testimony of Sir Hennry Wotton.

The Lord Bacon has done a great and everliving Benefit to the Children of
Nature, and to Nature her self, in her uttermost Latitude and Extent, who never
before had so Noble and True an Interpreter; (and as I am ready to style his
Lordship) never so inward a Secretary of her Majesty's Cabinet; and he did
determine to have his Lordships work of Novum Organon, read, piece by piece, at
certain hours in his Domestic College, (Eaton) as an Ancient Page 412. of
Wotton's Letters.
Author.

Mr. George Sands, in his Coment on Ovid, professes himself to be much assisted
by our Author, whom he calls, The Crown of the latter Age, the Lord Viscount
St. ALBAN.

Mr. Howel, in his Vocal Forest, of him thus -- The Flexanimous and Golden
Tongued Orator, and Chancellor of the Kings Conscience.

The Prefacer to Lessius Hygiasticon:

The Lo. Bacon, the great Lo. Chancellor, of Learning, as well as Law.

Dr. Gilbert Watts: The L. Bacon, a learned man, happily, the learned that
ever lived since the decay of the Grecian and Roman Empires, when learning was
at an high pitch.

And for a further testimony, we refer you to those Copious and Elegant Verses,
made by M. Geo. Herbert, sometime Orator of the University of Cambridg, upon
this Author, and lately Printed in a Book, called, Herberts Remains.

THE FELICITY Of Queen ELIZABETH: Writ, By Sir Francis Bacon.
QUEEN Elizabeth in regard both of Nature and Fortune, the Pattern of Princes,
and wonder of her Sex, of whose virtues and glories thereof Monks that live in
the shade of Cloisters, tart in style, loose in judgment, and not forgetful of
themselves, would be no sufficient avowchers; this testimony belongs to men of
note, such as have stood at the helm of State, and been acquainted with the
depth and tides of Civil affairs: In all Antiquity the rule of a woman has
been very rare, in that rule the Felicity rarer, and the continuance of that
Felicity rarest of all; yet this Lady reigned full four and forty years, and
overlived not her Felicity; of which happiness I purpose to speak a little
without running into praises, for praises are given by men, but happiness is
the gift of God.

I say the first stepped of her Felicity, in that she was raised to the top of
all from a private fortune, for customarily so run the opinions of men, to
esteem that most happy, which happens most beyond hope and expectation. But
this is not all I mean, my aim reaches further, that Princes brought up in
Regal houses, to hope of succession not uncertain, are often depraved with soft
and licentious breeding, and become immoderate in their reign. From hence we
find the best and most excellent Kings were taught in Schools of either
fortune, such as with us was Henry the seventh, and Lewis the twelfth among the
French, both of which about the same time (as the memory yet remains)
obtained a Kingdom, not from privacy only, but only from adversity, whereof
the latter flourished in justice, and the former in wisdom. Like to theirs was
the condition of this Prince, whose hopes and beginnings Fortune brauled, but
was thence forward constant to her till her ending.

For first, By birth she had her turn by succession, then she was disinherited,
and at last laid aside, and forgotten; in the reign of her brother her fortune
was propitious and fair, which in her Sisters grew dark and dangerous: But yet
she was not suddenly taken from prison to the Crown, least that fret of
remembrance might perhaps make her swell, but being first restored to liberty,
she afterward obtained her claim without stir or competition, of whom God
intending to make so rare a Prince, it seems he prepared her mind, and made
her ascend by the steps of her discipline to the Crown of her own inheritance:
neither ought the calamity of her mother blast the dignity of her birth,
especially it being certain, that Henry the eight was rather led with love
toward another, then indignation against her: The nature of which King, light
in his loves, apt to suspicion, and in them hasty to blood, cannot avoid the
note of posterity. As for the accusations made against her person in themselves
improbable, and leaning upon slight conjectures, they were not only detested
by the silent murmurers of those times, but by Queen Anne her self in that
memorable and heroical speech which she used at the instant of her death;
whereas preparing her self to leave this world, and having gotten as she
thought a loving and trusty messenger, she bids him deliver this message to the
King, that well she saw his Majesty would not give over his old wont in heaping
new honors upon her: First, from a Gentlewoman he had made her a Marquess,
from thence his consort and a Queen, and now finding no higher pitch of honor
upon the earth, he was pleased to advance her in her innocence to the Crown of
Martyrdom; which though that messenger durst not relate to the King burning in
new desires, yet Fame (preserver of truth) has kept it safe for after ages.

Moreover, I put no small part of her Felicity in the measure and compass of
her reign, not so much for being long, as beeause it took up that space of age,
which is most fit to hold the raynes of public government, for at five and
twenty years (when tuition begins to cease) she began and reigned till
threescore, and whereby she neither felt the wrongs of a pupil under another
arbitration, nor yet the inconveniences of an old decrepit age, private men
feel miseries enough in old age; but usually it brings to Princes (besides
those common griefs) ends void of glory, and diminution of estate, few
attaining an old and unwealdy age without some loss of reputation and state.
Take one example in Philip the second King of Spain, a most puissant Prince,
and coming in swaying a Kingdom, who in his latter days feeling the burden
and feebleness of age, helped weakness with wisdom, submitting himself to the
course of mortal things; thereupon he restored such places as had been won in,
there he established a Peace, and attempted the same elsewhere; that his
affairs being all compounded he might leavethem entire and illetigious to his
heirs. The contrary in all things happened to Q. Elizabeth to whom fortune was so
firm, that she never suffered in flourishing or declining years any
declination. And to seal up her rare Felicity, she departed not this world till
the Rebellions in Ireland were decided by stroke of an happy battle, that
there might be no blemish nor imperfection in her glory.

That is not also to be forgotten what kind of People she governed; had she
reigned in Palmgrevis, or over the milk sops of Asia, it would have been no
marvel that a female Prince should command effeminate Nations: But that in
England, so Warlike and stout a People should stir and stop at the beck of a
woman, cannot be without great admiration; yet, for all this inclination of her
people longing for war, and of their rest impatient, she was never hindered from
loving and keeping of peace, which will of hers was seconded with success, I
reckon among her chiefest praises, for it not only became her sex, and eased
her age, but was certainly a great comfort to her conscience; indeed about the
tenth of her reign some tumults were attempted in the North, but they were
quickly quenched, and she enjoyed ever after deep peace and security: which
inward peace of her times, I judge was most glorious for two respects; the one
that it shone the better by the flames and combustions of her neighbors; the
other that notwithstanding the easiness of Peace, Arms wanted not their
honor; whereby the prowess of the English Name was not only kept up, but
increased; hence many supplies were sent into Scotland, France, and the
Netherlands, diverse expeditions by Sea into the Indies, some whereof gave the
world a girdle, Fleets were rigged to infest the Coasts of Spain and Portugal.
The Rebels in Ireland were often tamed and suppressed, so that she took a
special care, that neither the courage of the people should rest, nor their
fame suffer any diminution.

To this glory the weight of desert was added; for by her reasonable reliefs
neighboring Princes were preserved in the Kingdom; and afflicted people
(exposed by their Lords, badly counseled to the cruelty of their Ministers,
and devoted to the Shambles) received petition in their miseries, whereof they
feel the benefit at this day.

In her councels she was no less kind and helpful then in her supplies,
whereby she persuaded the King of Spain to assuage his anger toward his
subjects of the Netherlands, and reduce them to obedience upon tolerable
terms, and often solicited the Kings of France to keep their faith, by not
infringing the edicts granted to public peace; in the first whereof, she had
regard to the state of Europe in general, lest the boundless ambition of Spain
once broken out should fuse it self over the Christian world, and endanger the
common liberty. In the second she had compassion of so many innocents that
suffered fire and sword with their wives and children; among whom the scum of
the people armed and animated with public power, were let loose like wild
beasts to devour them, whose blood called for vengeance, and expiation upon
that Kingdom which had made a league to commit inhumane murders and savage
Laniations; in both which she omitted not do the office of a kind, wise, and
considerate Prince.

There is yet another cause which makes the piece of her reign more admirable,
namely, that it proceeded from her own wisdom and contriving against the
disposition of the times; for if we consider her kingdom either cut into
factions at home by difference of religion, or abroad standing as the strength
and bulwork of Christendom against the monstrous designs and overflowing power
of Spain, we shall find that there was no fuel wanting for a war, but she had
provided for all, and gotten the reach both in Force and Council; as that
memorable event well declared, which for the happiness thereof surpassed all
the actions of our age; for when that Navy called Invincible, whose sails
swelled with pride, and secure of victory, had entered the narrow Seas, to the
fear and astonishment of Europe; it neither took a cock-boat at Sea, nor burnt
a Cottage at Land, nor once touched upon the Coasts; but was miserably
scattered and put to flight, and at last dashed upon against the Rocks, whist
peace remained in her confines, and no commotion was seen in the Land.

No less happy was she in escaping the plot of Traitors, then defeating the
power of her enemies, for though diverse conspiracies were hatched against her
life, yet all were either discovered or failed, neither did they work any
jealousies or distrust in her mind, for she kept not the more within, nor went
the less abroad, nor increased the number of her guard, but secure and
confident, and mindful more of her deliverance from danger, then of the danger
it self, she changed nothing from the wonted course of her life.

It is not also unworthy to be marked the quality of those times wherein she
flourished, for some ages fall out to be so barbarous and silly, that it were
no harder matter to rule a Nation of men, then to lead a flock of sheep, but
she was eminent in learned and refined times, wherein it was not easy to excel
without singular parts of Nature, habituation of Virtue, and extraordinary
indowments of Wit and Temper.

Besides, the reign of Women use to be obscured with marriage, whose worth and
actions are commonly smothered up under the names and covert of their husbands:
Those only that live unmarried have no partner in their glory, such was she,
and this praise she deserved the more, because she was supported by no props
but her own; no half brother, nor uncle, nor Prince of the blood was remaining
to whom she might impart her cares, and receive assistance in her governing;
yea, those who she advanced to highest honors, she kept in such a balance and
restraint, that every one labored most to please her will, whilst she remained
mistress of her self.

Barren indeed she was, left no child behind her, which also happened to many
fortunate Princes, Alexander the great, Julius Caesar, and Trojaen the Emperor;
but this may be a diverse construction, and be disputed on either part, some
call it diminishment of happiness, as if those men were blessed above the
conditions of men, who prove as well happy in their propagation as in themselves.

Others make it the pitch of happiness, which, say they, is then only
complete, when it is exempted from the wheel of fortune, and out of danger to
be blemished by a degenerating issue.

She wanted not also those outward adjuncts of happiness, she was tall of
stature, of comely limbs and excellent feature in her countenance, Majesty sat
under the vail of sweetness, her health was sound and prosperous, and so
drawing to her last without sense of age or misfortune, she had that which
Augustus so much desired, a gentle and happy departure. The which is likewise
recorded of Antonius Pius that good Emperor, whose death was like a dream or
some sweet imagination: In all her sickness was nothing ominous, nor
lamentable, nor uncouth to her kind, no Symptom was seen strange or noisome,
but all of such a frame, as rather showed the frailty of the corruption of
humane nature; for some few days before her death finding her body (seldom
moistened with wine, or a larger diet) to shrink up with dryness and cares
which attend a crown, she suffered some convulsion in her nerves, still keeping
(though in a slow and weaker measure) her speech, motion and understanding,
which is not ordinary in that disease: But this estate not long abiding,
seeming rather the first steps to death, then last act of life; for when the
powers of life are wasted, it is a wretched thing to remain in life; but by the
slumber of sense to haste insensibly to death, is a clement and easy close of
life.

Add this to the hap of her felicity, that she was not only happy in her own,
but also in the abilities of her servants; for she had such gifted men about
her as perhaps this Island had rarely brought forth before.

But God when he favors Kings enlarges the hearts of their ministers.

Two felicities yet remain that may be called Post humus, which are indeed
higher and happier then all these that adorned her life: One of her successor,
the other of her memory; such a successor she had, who albeit in regard of his
masculine virtue and fair progeny, and access of a new Kingdom, might somewhat
shadow or exceed her glory, yet he always honored her name, and gave a kind
of perpetuity to her deeds, for he made so small alteration in the orders he
found established, or persons she had chosen, that so the son could succeed his
father with greater silence, or less danger or disturbance of estate.

And concerning the fame and happiness of her memory, that is yet so fresh in
the minds and mouths of men, as taking life from her ashes wherein all envy is
raked up; it seems to contend with the happiness of her life, for if any
factious humor raised from dissent in Religion be yet buzzing abroad (though it
seems by this time conjured down by consent of truth) as it is most foul and
false; so it cannot be long lived, and truly I have gathered these notes of
Gods favor and her felicity for this special end; that malicious men should be
afraid to mingle their cursings (amongst so many blessings of God.)

After all this, if any should say as one did of Caesar, We hear of things
whereat we wonder, but look for things which we might commend; I verily think
that true admiration is certain excess of praise, and verily these felicities
here described, cannot befall to any who are not visibly sustained with divine
favors, and in some sort have not set their lives in aim of glory;
nevertheless, I will recount some few things concerning her manners, and of
those only which might seem to lend occasion unto base speeches of
contumelious men.

In her religion she was pious, constant, moderate, and could not away with
innovations, her piety chiefly appeared in her works and actions, but it was
also seen in the ordinary course, and conversation of her life; she was seldom
absent from prayers in her closet, or at sermons and solemn service abroad;
diligent in reading the Scriptures, well versed in the Fathers, and above all
in St. Augustine; upon diverse occasions she composed sundry prayers: when she
mentioned God (though in common talk) added for the most part of Creator,
casting, as I have often observed, her face and eyes into a reverend form of
humility: and whereat some have published, that she put off the thought of
mortality, nor could abide to hear of old age or death. It is most untrue, for
many years before her end she was not nice, often, and with much grace to call
her self old woman, and used to discourse of her Tomb, and what inscription
would most please her, saying, She delighted not in long Titles, or shadows of
glory, a line or two would be enough for her memory, which in few words should
only express her name in her virginity, the time of her reign, the restoring of
religion, and establishment of Peace: True it is, that being once importuned to
declare her successor whilst she was yet in her full strength, not unfit to
bear children, she would not endure her winding sheet to be spread before her
eyes, and yet not long before her death, sitting pensive, and, as it were,
musing of mortality, as one came and told her, that diverse places stood too
long vacant in the State; she rose up somewhat offended, and said, She knew well
enough that her place would not stand an instant empty. Her moderation may
perchance be doubted in matter of Religion, considering the severity of those
Laws she made against the Papists: But herein we will produce such only
things whereof we have certain knowledge, and made diligent search; out of all
question, the meaning of this Princess mind, was this, neither to offer
violence to the consciences of men, nor to suffer her State to be disquieted
under pretext of conscience; out of which foundation she judged, first of all,
that the toleration of two Religions in one hot heartburning people, who from
differenc in mind) might break out into blows, might be of pernicious
consequence to the State; thereupon at her entrance upon the Crown, when all
things were full of suspicion, she used the power of the Law, and committed some
of the busiest, and most factious Prelates for the rest of their Coat: so far
was she from vexing them with severe inquisitions, that she winked at their
faults, and took them into her protection; This was the first state of things:
and although the interdiction of Pius the fifth might have stirred up her anger,
and made her resolve of a sharper course, yet she departed not from her nature,
and changed little from her mildness; for, like a most wise and heroical Lady,
secure of her peoples love, and that the Popish Faction could not stir at home
without far assistance, she passed little for the claps of the Popes thunder:
But about the three and twentieth of her reign things received an alteration,
which change of time, was not complotted by design, but recorded in public
Acts, and cut as it were, in brass for perpetuity; Till that year, no great or
heavy punishment was laid upon her Popish Subjects by the Laws precedent; but
now the vast projects and ambitions of Spain for subduing of this Kingdom,
began to be detected, whereof a principal part was, that a new fangled Faction
should be raised in the bowels of this State; which should not only be ready
to receive a foreign invader, but also, (under pretense of the Roman Religion,
and power of the Popes Bull,) should absolve her Subjects from their Faith and
Allegiance, and prepare their Spirits for dangerous innovasions. About that
time Ireland was assaulted with open Arms, scandalous Libels were cast out
against the fame, and government, and the Queen; and all things seemed to swell
up in presage of greater motions. I would rather think, that many of the
Priests were made wicked instruments of other men's malice, then that all were
privy to their Council; yet this is true, and verified by sundry confessions,
That almost all the Priests that were sent over into this Kingdom, from the
three and twentieth to the thirtieth of this Queens reign (in which year that
Popish and Spanish design was put in execution) had private instructions to
divulge abroad, that this Estate could stand thus no longer; that within a
while they should see a new face of things, and notable alterations; That the
good of England was cared for by the Pope, and popish Princes, if they would
not be wanting to themselves; yea, some of the Priests were manifestly found
guilty of those Plots and Machinations, which tended to the subversion of the
State. And that which moved most the carriage of their secret Councels, was
disclosed by letters intercepted, importing, that all the watchfulness of the
Queen and Council over the Papists, would be utterly deluded; for, albeit they
labored much, that no man of note or nobility should be head of the Faction;
yet, a course was taken to effect the work by men of meaner and inferior
rancks, whose minds (though they knew not one another) should be linked
together by secret confessions, without need of Assembly.

Such arts were then used, and, of late in a case (not unlike) resumed; which
(it seems) are familiar with those men: Thus clangor approaching, like a
storm, put a Law of necessity upon the Queen.

It being now high time, that such part of her subjects as were estranged from
her love, impoisoned without hope of cure, and yet grew rich withal in a
private life, which freed them from public charge, should be kept under and
restrained with Laws of a more heavy nature: The course of all this misery
still increasing, was imputed to the Priests, who carried into foreign
Countries, and fed by the crumbs of stranger Princes (professed enemies to this
State) were brought up only in such places where the name of the Queen their
Sovereign was never heard of, but as an heretic and excommunicate person, torn
with curses and excommunications; If these men were not enticed with
treacherous designs, they were surely known to be familiar with such as were;
who with the venom of their arts, had pernitiously depraved the minds of many
Papists, and sowred their whole Lump with a new malignant livery, which was
sweeter and less timorous before.

Now therefore, no safer reremedy could be found, then to debar these unnatural
men from all entrance into this Kingdom; which was likewise decreed under
penalty of their lives, in the seven and twentieth of her reign.

Not long after when the tempest rose and fell upon this land; the event well
declared what love remained in these men's breasts toward their dearest Country;
for, so were they blinded with hate and envy, that they rested neither night
nor day, binding themselves with Vows and Sacraments, to bring it into bondage
of a foreign Enemy.

Hereupon, albeit the clouds of Spain (which caused this severity) were blown
over, and vanished; yet, the remembrance of danger passed, struck deep in the
minds of men; and, because it would have been accounted levity to have
repealed those Laws, and unfaithfulness to neglect them once established; The
Queen was so drawn with weight of affairs, that it was no more in her power to
set them in that former estate wherein they were before, in the twenty third of
her reign.

Hereunto may be added, that although there was not wanting the industry of
diverse Ministers to increase her exchequer; and justice of others to urge
exemption of the Laws, wherein they only saw the public safety to consist;
yet, constant to her natural clemency, she debated the keenness of their edge,
that the Priests who suffered death were very few in regard of their exceeding
number.

These things I rehearse, not, as points of her defense, this cause needs no
justification; whereas both the safety of this Kingdom required no less, and
the whole course of this severity, fell far short of the bloody examples
amongst the Papists; which rather flowed from pride and malice, then any
necessity: But I am not forgetful of my first affection, having by this time
sufficiently shown that this Prince was moderate in cause of Religion, and if
any sharpness happened therein, that it proceeded not from her nature, but from
the iniquity of the times.

Of her great care and constancy in true religion, this may be a certain
Argument, that albeit popery had been established by much power and study in
her sisters reign, and had taken deep root by time, and was still confirmed by
the writ and assent of all in Authority; yet, since that it neither agreed with
the word of God, nor the primitive pureness, nor her own conscience, she
plucked it up, with little help, and abolished it with great courage and
resolution; which was not done upon a rash impetuous fancy, but with maturity
and advice; whereof (among many other things) we may take a conjecture by an
answer so made upon a by-occasion.

In the beginning of her reign, when Prisoners (as the manner is) were
released, for a boon of her new inauguration; A certain Courtier, who by
custom had taken up a boldness of speech, and jestingly waited for her as she
went to Chapel, when, either of himself, or set on by wiser men, he put an
humble petition, crying out aloud withal, That yet there remained four or five
honest Prisoners, who were unjustly detained; beseeching he Majesty to set them
at Liberty; and they were the four Evangelists, and Saint Paul the Apostle, who
had been long shut up in a strange language, as in a Prison, and kept from
conversing among the people; to whom she wisely answered, That full inquiry
should be made of themselves, whether they would be released, yea, or no:
whereby she put off a sudden question, with a suspended answer; and still
reserved the interest of things in her own freedom and decision.

In which business, she proceeded not by pieces, or with trepidation, but in a
grave and settled order: First, calling the Synods to conference, and the States
to Parliament; and then within compass of one year, so reformed Ecclesiastical
affairs, that till her dying day she departed not a whit from the constitution
then determined; yea, ever after her custom was to warn almost every
Parliament when it sat, that nothing should be changed in the right, and
discipline of the Church; and thus far concerning Religion.

Now to leave these sadder things; if any man should think it a lightness that
she suffered her self to be courted and wooed, and refused not to be seen upon
the scene of Love, even beyond the condition of her Age; this, if it be gently
construed, wanted not also a share in admiration; for it sounds unlike those
old Stories of a Maiden Queen living in Elizian Islands, from whose Court none
was debarred that used fair accostment, and no lasciviousness in love; But if
it be severely scanned, then greater is the wonder; for, albeit that we often
see, that a State is loosened by the looseness of the Prince; yet, these
delights she used with such a curb, that they little dimmed her fame, less her
Majesty, and softened the vigor and dispensation of her State nothing at all.

But to shut up my discourse; the Prince was certainly good and virtuous, and
so she desired to seem, she hated vices, and took the way to fame, by that of
honor: Whilst I am upon her virtues, I cannot forget one passage, when letters
were written to her Ambassadors in France, to deliver some private message to
the Queen Mother then of Valois; wherein her Secretary, as it were, to curry
favor, had inserted this clause, that the Ambassador should say, They two were
two such Queens, so versed in Sovereign Arts, and seen in politic affairs, as
no Kings nor men in the world went beyond them; She misliked the assotiation,
and commanded it to be blotted out, saying, The Arts she had learned were of a
better stamp, and the principles of a far higher nature, whereby she ruled her
people.

She was not puffed up with the length of her reign, although she was long a
Queen; for, if any had told her fitly in discourse, That the world would have
taken notice of her admirable parts, though she had lived in some mean estate;
she would have been well pleased with such insinuations; so much she desired
that her virtue should stand alone unbeholding to her fortune for praise.

But if I should enter into her moral or regal commendations, or recite the
Roll of her virtue, and rank them in their proper place and light, befitting so
rare a Prince, which should slide into the story of her life, it would require
greater leisure and a larger vein. I have only summoned up these two parcels
briefly, and sincerely, as I could; for, it must be confessed, That no
Commender can be found sufficient for this Prince, but only time, which, from
the first beginning, never produced in all her sex any one like to her for
Civil Government and Administration of Affairs.

FINIS.
THE APOLOGY OF Sr FRANCIS BACON; In, Certain IMPUTATIONS concerning the late
Earl of ESSEX. Written to the Right Honorable his very good Lord, the Earl of
Devonshire, Lord Lieutenant of IRELAND.

London, Printed 1651.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HIS very good Lord, the Earl of Devonshire, Lord
Lieutenant of IRELAND.
IT may please your good Lordship: I cannot be ignorant, and ought to be
sensible of the wrong which I sustain in common speech, as if I had been false,
or unthankful to that noble, but unfortunate Earl the Earl of Essex: and for
satisfying the vulgar sort, I do not so much regard it; though I love a good
name, but yet as an handmaid and attendant of honesty and virtue. For I am of
his opinion that said pleasantly, That it was a shame to him that was a suter
to the mistress, to make love to the waiting woman; and therefore to woo or
court common fame otherwise then it follows on honest courses, I for my part,
find not my self fit nor disposed. But on the other side, there is no worldly
thing that concerns my self, which I hold more dear, then the good opinion of
certain persons; amongst which there is none I would more willingly give
satisfaction unto, then to your Lordship. First, because you loved my L. of
Essex, and therefore will not be partial toward me; which is part of that I
desire, next, because it has ever pleased you to show your self to me an
honorable friend; and so no baseness in me to seek to satisfy you: and lastly,
because I know your Lordship is excellently grounded in the true rules and
habits of duties and moralities; which must be they which shall decide this
matter: wherein (my L.) my defense needs to be but simple and brief: namely,
that whatsoever I did concering that action and proceeding, was done in my duty
and service to the Queen and the State; in which I would not show my self false
hearted, nor faint hearted for any man's sake living. For every honest man that
has his heart well planted, will forsake his King rather then forsake God, and
forsake his friend rather then forsake his King; and yet will forsake any
earthly commodity, yea, and his own life in some cases, rather then forsake his
friend. I hope the world has not forgotten these degrees, else the heathen,
saying; Amicus usque ad aras, shall judge them.

And if any man shall say, I did officiously intrude my self into that
business, because I had no ordinary place; the like may be said of all the
business in effect that passed the hands of the learned Council, either of
State or Revenues these many years, wherein I was continually used. For, as
your Lordship may remember, the Queen knew her strength so well as she looked
her word should be a warrant; and after the manner of the choicest Princes
before her, did not always tie her trust to place, but did sometime divide
private favor from office. And I for my part, though I was not so unseen in the
world, but I knew the condition was subject to envy and peril; yet because I
knew again she was constant in her favors, and made an end where she began,
and especially, because she upheld me with extraordinary access, and other
demonstrations of confidence and grace, I resolved to endure it, in expectation
of better. But my scope and desire is, that your Lordship would be pleased to
have the honorable patience, to know the truth, in some particularity, of all
that passed in this cause, wherein I had any part, that you may perceive how
honest a heart I ever bear to my Sovereign and to my Country, and to that Noble
man, who had so well deserved of me, and so well accepted of my deservings;
whose fortune I cannot remember without much grief. But for any action of mine
toward him, there is nothing that passed me in my life time, that comes to my
remembrance with more clearness, and less check of conscience: for it will
appear to your Lordship, that I was not only not opposite to my Lord of Essex,
but that I did occupy the utmost of my wits, and adventure my fortune with the
Queen to have reintegrated his, and so continued faithfully and industriously
till his last fatal impatience (for so I will call it) after which day there was
not time to work for him, though the same, my affection, when it could not work
on the subject proper, went to the next, with no ill effect toward some others,
who I think do rather not know it, then not acknowledge it. And this I will
assure your Lordsh. I will leave nothing untold, that is truth for any enemy
that I have to add; and on the other side, I must reserve much which makes for
me, in many respects of duty, which I esteem above my credit: and what I have
here set down to your Lordsh. I protest, as I hope to have any part in God's
favor, is true.

It is well known, how I did many years since dedicate my travels and studies
to the use and (as I may term it) service of my Lord of Essex, which I protest
before God, I did not, making election of him as the likeliest mean of mine own
advancement, but out of the humor of a man, that ever, from the time I had any
use of reason (whether it were reading upon good books, or upon the example of
a good father, or by nature) I loved my Country more then was answerable to my
fortune, and I held at that time, my L. to be the fitter instrument to do good
to the State: and therefore I applied my self to him, in a manner which I think
happens rarely among men: for I did not only labor carefully and
industriously in that he set me about, whether it were matter of advice or
otherwise, but neglecting the Queens service, mine own fortune, and in a sort
my vocation, I did nothing but advise and ruminate with my self to the best of
my understanding, propositions and memorials, of any thing that might concern
his Lordships honor, fortune, or service. And when not long after I entered into
this course, my brother Mr. Anthony Bacon came from beyond the Seas, being a
Gentleman whose ability the world takes knowledge of for matters of State,
specially foreign; I did likewise knit his service to be at my Lds disposing.
And on the otherside, I must and will ever acknowledge my Lords love, trust,
and favor toward me, last of all his liberality, having infeofed me of land
which I sold for eighteen hundred pounds to Master Reynold Nicholas, and I
think was more worth, and that at such a time, and with so kind and noble
circumstances, as the manner was as much as the matter: which though it be but
an idle digression, yet because I am not willing to be short in commemoration
of his benefits, I will presume to trouble your Lordship with the relating to
you the manner of it. After the Queen had denied me the Solicitors place, for
the which his Lordship had been a long and earnest suitor on my behalf, it
pleased him to come to me from Richmond to Twicknam Park, and brake with me,
and said: Mr. Bacon, the Queen has denied me the place for you, and has
placed another; I know you are the least part of your own matter, but, you fare
ill because you have chosen me for your mean and dependence: you have spent
your time and thoughts in my matters; I die (these were his very words) if I do
not somewhat toward your fortune, you shall not deny to accept a piece of
Land, which I will bestow upon you. My answer I remember was, that for my
fortune it was no great matter: but that his Lordships offer made me call to
mind what was wont to be said when I was in France of the Duke of Guise, that
he was the greatest usurer in France because he had turned all his Estate into
obligations; meaning that he had left himself nothing, but only had bound
numbers of persons to him. Now my Lo. (said I) I would not have you immitate his
course, nor turn your state thus by great gifts into obligations, for you will
find many bad debtors. He bad me take no care for that, and pressed it:
whereupon I said my Lor. I see I must be your homager, and hold land of your
gift: but do you know the manner of doing homage in law? Always it is with a
saving of his faith to the King and his other Lords, and therefore my L. (said
I) I can be no more yours then I was, and it may be with the ancient savings:
and if I grow to be a rich man, you will give me leave to give it back to some
of your unrewarded followers. But to return, sure I am (though I can arrogate
nothing to my self, but that I was a faithful remembrance to his Lordship) that
while I had most credit with him, his fortune went on best. And yet in two main
points we always directly and contradictorily differed, which I will mention
to your Lordship, because it gives light to all that followed. The one was, I
ever set this down, and that the only course to be held with the Queen, was by
obsequiousness and observance; and I remember I would usually engage
confidently, that if he would take that course constantly, and with choice of
good particulars to express it, the Queen would be brought in time to Assuerus
question, to ask, What should be done to the man, that the King would honor:
meaning, that her goodness was without limit, where there was a true
concurrence, which I knew in her nature to be true. My Lord on the otherside
had a settled opinion, that the Queen could be brought to nothing, but by a
kind of necessity and authority; and I will remember, when by violent courses
at any time he had got his will he would ask me. Now Sir: whose principles be
true? And I would again say to him: My Lord, these courses be like to hot
waters, they will help at a pang: but if you use them, you shall spoil the
stomach, and you shall be fain still to make them stronger and stronger, and
yet in the end they will less their operation: with much other variety,
wherewith I used to touch that string. Another point was, that I always
vehemently dissuaded him from seeking greatness by a military dependence, or by
a popular dependence, as that which would breed in the Queen jealousy, in
himself presumption, and in the State perturbation: and I did usually compare
them to Icarus two wings which were joined on with wax, and would make him
venture to soar too high, and then fail him at the height. And I would further
say unto him: My Lord, stand upon two feet, and fly not upon two wings. The two
feet, are the two kinds of Justice, Commutative and Distributive: use your
greatness for advancing of merit and virtue, and relieving wrongs and burdens,
you shall need no other art or fineness: but he would tell me, that opinion
came not from my mind, but from my robe. But it is very true, that I that
never meant to inthral my self to my Lord of Essex, nor any other man, more
then stood with the public good, did (though I could little prevail) divert
him by all means possible from courses of the wars and popularity: for I saw
plainly the Queen must either live or die; if she lived, then the times would
be as in the declination of an old Prince, if she died, the times would be as
in the beginning of a new: and that if his Lordship did rise too fast in these
courses, the times might be dangerous for him, and he for them: Nay, I remember
I was thus plain with him upon his voyage to the Islands, when I saw every
spring put forth such actions of charge and provocation, that I said to him, my
Lord, when I came first unto you, I took you for a Physician that desired to
cure the diseases of the State; but now I doubt you will be like those
Physicians, which can be content to keep their Patients low, because they would
always be in request: which plainness he nevertheless took very well, as he
had an excellent ^ar, and was patientissimus very, and assured me the case of
the Realm required it: and I think this speech of mine, and the like renewed
afterward, pricked him to write that Apology which is in many men's hands.

But this difference in two points so main and material, bred in process of
time a discontinuance of privateness (as it is the manner of men feldom to
communicate where they think their courses not approved) between his Lordship
and my self; so as I was not called nor advised with, for some year and a half
before his Lordships going into Ireland as in former time: yet nevertheless
touching his going into Ireland, it pleased him expressly and in a set manner to
desire mine opinion and counsel. At which time I did not only dissuade, but
protest against his, going telling him with as much vehemence and asseveration
as I could, that absence in that kind would exulcerate the Queens mind,
whereby it would not be possible for him to carry himself so, as to give her
sufficient contentment: nor for her to carry her self so, as to give him
sufficient countenance, which would be ill for her, ill for him, and ill for
the State. And because I would omit no argument, I remember I stood also upon
the difficulty of the action: setting before him out of Histories, that the
Irish was such an enemy as the ancient Gauls or Britons, or Germans were, and
that we saw how the Romans, who had such discipline to govern their soldiers,
and such donatives to encourage them, and the whole world in a manner to levy
them; yet when they came to deal with enemies which placed their felicity only
in liberty, and the sharpness of their sword, and had the natural and elemental
advantages of woods, and boggs, and hardness of bodies, they ever found they
had their hands full of them: and therefore concluded that going over with such
expectation as he did, and through the churlishness of the enterprise not like
to answer it, would mightily diminish his reputation; and many other reasons I
used, so as I am sure I never in any thing in my life time dealt with him in
like earnestness by speech, by writing, and by all the means I could devise.
For I did as plainly see his overthrow chained as it were by destiny to that
journey, as it is possible for a man to ground a judgment upon future
contingents. But my Lord, howsoever his ear was open, yet his heart and
resolution was shut against that advise, whereby his ruin might have been
prevented. After my Lords going, I saw then how true a Prophet I was, in regard
of the evident alteration which naturally succeeded in the Queens mind; and
thereupon I was still in watch to find the best occasion that in the weakness
of my power I could either take or minister, to pull him out of the fire if it
had been possible: and not long after, me thought I saw some overture thereof,
which I apprehended readily; a particularity I think be-known to very few, and
the which I do the rather relate unto your Lordship, because I hear it should
be talked, that while my Lord was in Ireland, I revealed some matters against
him, or I cannot tell what; which if it were not a mere slander as the rest is,
but had any, though never so little color, was surely upon this occasion. The
Queen one day at Nonesuch, a little (as I remember) before Cuffes coming over,
I attending on her, showed a passionate distaste of my Lords proceeding in
Ireland, as if they were unfortunate, without judgment, contemptuous, and not
without some private end of his own, and all that might be, and was pleased, as
she spoke of it to many that she trusted least, so to fall into the like speech
with me; whereupon I who was still awake, and true to my grounds which I
thought surest for my Lords good, said to this effect: Madam, I know not the
particulars of Estate, and I know this, that princes actions must have no
abrupt periods or conclusions, but otherwise I would think, that if you had my
Lord of Essex here with a white staff in his hand, as my Lord of Leicester had,
and continued him still about you for society to your self, and for an honor
and ornament to your attendance and Court in the eyes of your people, and in
the eyes of foreign Ambassadors, then were he in his right element: for, to
discontent him as you do, and yet to put arms and power into his hands, may be
a kind of temptation to make him prove combersome and unruly. And therefore if
you would imponere bonum clausulam, and send for him and satisfy him with
honor here near you, if your affairs which (as I have said) I am not acquainted
with, will permit it, I think were the best way. Which course your Lordship
knows, if it had been taken then all had been well, and no contempt in my
Lords coming over, nor continuance of these jealousies, which that employment
of Ireland bred, and my Lord here in his former greatness. Well, the next news
that I heard, was, that my Lord was came over, and that he was committed to his
Chamber for leaving Ireland without the Queens license: this was at Nonesuch,
where (as my duty was) I come to his Lorship, and talked with him privately
about a quarter of an hour, and he asked mine opinion of the course was taken
with him; I told him: My Lord, Nubecula est, cito transibit: it is but a mist:
but shall I tell your Lordship, it is as mists are, if it go upwards, it may haps
cause a shower, if downwards it will clear up. And therefore good my Lo. carry
it so, as you take away by all means all ombrages and distasts from the Queen,
and especially if I were worthy to advise you, (as I have been by your self
thought, and now your question imports the continuance of that opinion) observe
3. points: First, make not this cessation or peace which is concluded with
Tyrone, as a service wherein you glory, but as a shuffling up of a prosecution
which was not very fortunate. Next, represent not to the Queen any necessity of
estate, whereby as by a coercion or wrench, she should think her self enforced
to send you back into Ireland; but leave it to her. Thirdly, seek access
importune, oportune, seriously, sportingly every way. I remember my Lord was
willing to hear me, but spoke very few words, and shaked his head sometimes, as
if he thought I was in the wrong; but sure I am, he did just contrary in every
one of these three points. After this, during the while since my Lord was
committed to my Lord Keepers, I came diverse times to the Queen, as I had used
to do, about causes of her revenue and law business, as is well known: by
reason of which accesses, according to the ordinary charities of Court, it was
given out, that I was one of them that incensed the Queen against my Lord of
Essex. These speeches I cannot tell, nor I will not think that they grew any
way from her Majesty's own speeches, whose memory I will ever honor: if they
did, she is with God, and miserum est ab illis laedi, de quibus non possis
queri. But I must give this testimony to my Lord Cecil, that one time in his
house at the Savoy he dealt with me directly, and said to me; Cousin, I hear
it, but I believe it not, that you should do some ill office to my Lord of
Essex: for my part I am merely passive and not active in this action, and I
follow the Q. and that heavily, and I lead her not; my Lord of Essex is one
that in nature I could consent with as well as with any one living; the Queen
indeed is my Sovereign, and I am her creature, I may not lose her, and the same
course I would wish you to take: whereupon I satisfied him how far I was from
any such mind. And as sometimes it comes to pass, that men's inclinations are
opened more in a toy, then in a serious matter: A little before that time,
being about the middle of Michaelmas term, her Majesty had a purpose to dine
at my lodge at Twicknam Park, at which time I had (though I profess not to be a
Poet) prepared a Sonnet directly tending and alluding to draw on her Majesty's
reconcilement to my Lord, which I remember also I showed to a great person, and
one of my Lords nearest friends, who commended it: this, though it be (as I
said) but a toy, yet it showed plainly in what spirit I proceeded, and that I
was ready not only to do my L. good offices, but to publish and declare my self
for him; and never was so ambitious of any thing in my life time, as I was to
have carried some token or favor from her Majesty to my Lord, using all the
art I had, both to procure her Majesty to send, and my self to be the
messenger: for as to the former I feared not to allege to her, that this
proceeding toward my Lord, was a thing toward the people very implausible, and
therefore wished her Majesty however she did, yet to discharge her self of it;
and to lay it upon others, and therefore that she should intermix her
proceeding with some immediate graces from her self, that the world might take
knowledge of her Princely nature and goodness, lest it should alienate the
hearts of her people from her, which I did stand upon, knowing well that if she
once relented to send or visit, those demonstrations would prove matter of
substance for my Lords good. And to draw that employment upon my self, I
advised her Majesty, that whenever God should move her to turn the light of
her favors toward my Lord, to make signification to him thereof: that her
Majesty if she did it not in person, would at the least use some such mean as
might not entitle themselves to any part of the thanks, as persons that were
thought mighty with her, to work her, or to bring her about; but to use some
such as could not be thought but a mere conduct of her own goodness: but I
could never prevail with her, though I am persuaded she saw plainly whereat I
levelled: but she plainly had me in jealousy, that I was not hers entirely,
but still had inward and deep respects toward my Lord, more then stood at that
time with her will and pleasure. About the same time I remember an answer of
mine in a matter which had some affinity with my Lords cause, which though it
grew from me, went after about in others names. For her Majesty being mightily
incensed with that book which was dedicated to my Lord of Essex being a story
of the first year of King Henry the fourth, thinking it a seditious prelude to
put into the peoples head boldness and faction, said, She had an opinion, that
there was treason in it, and asked me if I could not find any places in it,
that might be drawn within case of treason: whereto I answered; for treason
surely I found none, but for felony very many. And when her Majesty hastily
asked me wherein; I told her, the Author had committed, very apparent theft, for
he had taken most of the sentences of Cornelius Tacitus, and translated them
into English, and put them into his text. And another time when the Qu. would
not be persuaded, that it was his writing whose name was to it, but that it had
some more mischievous Author, and said with great indignation, that she would
have him racked to produce his Author; I replied, Nay, Madam, he is a Doctor,
never rack his person, but rack his style; let him have pen, ink, and paper,
and help of books, and be enjoined to continue the Story where it breaks off,
and I will undertake by collecting the styles, to judge whether he were the
Author or no. But for the main matter, sure I am, when the Qu. at any time
asked mine opinion of my Lords case, I ever in one tenor, said unto her: that
they were faults which the Law might term Contempts, because they were the
transgression of her particular directions and instructions: but then what
defense might be made of them, in regard of the great interest the person had
in her Majesty's favor, in regard of the greatness of his place, and the
ampleness of his Commission; in regard of the nature of the business being
action of war, which in common cases cannot be tied to strictness of
instructions, in regard of the distance of the place, having also a sea
between, that demands and commands, must be subject to wind and weather; in
regard of a council of State in Ireland which he had at his back to avow his
actions upon, and lastly in regard of a good intention that he would allege
for himself, which I told her in some religions was held to be a sufficient
dispensation for Gods commandments, much more for Princes. In all these
regards, I besought her Majesty to be advised again and again, how she brought
the cause into any public question: nay, I went further, for I told her, my
Lord was an eloquent and well spoken man, and besides his eloquence of nature or
art, he had an eloquence of accident which passed them both, which was the pity
and benevolence of his hearers; and therefore that when he should come to his
answer for himself, I doubted his words would have so unequal passage above
theirs that should charge him, as would not be for her Majesty's honor; and
therefore wished the conclusion might be, that they might wrap it up privately
between themselves, and that she would restore my Lord to his former
attendance, with some addition of honor to take away discontent. But this I
will never deny, that I did show no approbation generally of his being sent back
again into Ireland, both because it would have carried a repugnancy with my
former discourse, and because I was in mine own heart fully persuaded, that it
was not good neither for the Queen, nor for the State, nor for himself: and yet
I did not dissuade it neither, but left it ever as locus lubricus. For this
particularity I do well remember that after your Lordship was named for the
place in Ireland, and not long before your going, it pleased her Majesty at
White Hall to speak to me of that nomination: at which time I said to her:
Surely, Madam, if you mean not to employ my Lord of Essex thither again, your
Majesty cannot make a better choice, and was going on to show some reason, and
her Majesty interrupted me with great passion: Essex! (said she) whenever I
send Essex back again into Ireland, I will marry you, claim it of me: whereunto
I said; Well, Madam, I will release that contract if his going be for the good
of your State. Immediately after the Queen had thought of a course (which was
also executed to have somewhat published in the Star Chamber, for the
satisfaction of the world touching my Lord of Essex his restraint, and my Lord
of Essex not to be called to it, but occasion to be taken by reason of some
Libels then dispersed; which when her Majesty propounded unto me, I was utterly
against it; and told her plainly; that the people would say, that my Lord was
wounded upon his back, and that justice had her balance taken from her, which
ever consisted of an accusation and defense, with many other quick and
significant terms to that purpose: insomuch that I remember I sad, that my
Lord in foro famae was too hard for her; and therefore wished her as I had done
before, to wrap it up privately. And certainly I offended her at that time,
which was rare with me: for I call to mind that both the Christmas, Lent, and
Easter Term following, though I came diverse times to her upon Law business yet
me thought her face and manner was not so clear and open to me, as it was at the
first. And she did directly charge me, that I was absent that day at the
Star Chamber, which was very true; but I alleged some in disposition of body to
excuse it: and during all the time aforesaid, there was altum silentium from
her to me touching my Lord of Essex causes.

But toward the end of Easter term, her Majesty brake with me, and told me
that she had found my words true, for that the proceeding in the Star Chamber
had done no good, but rather kindled factious bruits (as she termed them) then
quenched them, and therefore that she was determined now for the satisfaction
of the world, to proceed against my-Lord in the Star Chamber by an information
ore tenus, and to have my Lo. brought to his answer: howbeit she said, she
would assure me that whatsoever she did, should be toward my L. ad
castigationem, and non ad destructionem, as indeed she had often repeated the
same phrase before: whereunto I said (to the end utterly to divert her:) Madam,
if you will have me speak to you in this argument, I must speak to you as Friar
Bacons head spoke, that said first, Time is, and then, Time was, and Time would
never be; for certainly (said I) it is now far to late, the matter is cold and
has taken too much wind; where at she seemed again offended, and rose from me,
and that resolution for a while continued; and after, in the beginning of
Midsomer term, I attending her, and finding her settled in that resolution
(which I heard of also otherwise) she falling upon the like speech, it is true,
that seeing no other remedy, I said to her slightly, Why, Madam, if you will
needs have a proceeding, you were best have it in some such sort as Ovid spoke
of his mistress, Est aliquid luce patente minus, to make a counsel table matter
of it, and there an end; which speech again she seemed to take in ill part, but
yet I think it did good at that time, and helped to divert that course of
proceeding by information in the Star Chamber. Nevertheless afterward it
pleased her to make a more solemn matter of the proceeding, and some few days
after when order was given that the matter should be heard at York house, before
an assembly of Councellers, Peers, and Judges, and some audience of men of
quality to be admitted: and then did some principal Councellers send for us of
the learned Council, and notify her Majesty's pleasure unto us, save that it
was said to me openly by one of them, that her Majesty was not yet resolved
whether she would have me forborne in the business or no. And hereupon might
arise that other sinister and untrue speech that I hear is raised of me, how I
was a suter to be used against my Lo. of Essex at that time: for it is very
true, that I that knew well what had passed between the Queen and me, and what
occasion I had given her both of distaste and distrust, in crossing her
disposition, by standing steadfastly for my L. of Essex, and suspecting it also
to be a stratagem arising from some particular emulation, I writ to her two or
three words of complement, signifying to her Majesty, that if she would be
pleased to spare me in my Lord of Essex cause, out of the consideration she
took of my obligation toward him, I should reckon it for own of her greatest
favors: but otherwise desiring her Majesty to think that I knew the degrees of
duties, and that no particular obligation whatsoever to any subject could
supplant or weaken that entireness of duty that I did ow and bear to her and
her service; and this was the goodly suit I made, being a respect no man that
had his wits could have omitted: but nevertheless I had a further reach in it,
for I judged that days work would be a full period of any bitterness or
harshness between the Queen and my Lord, and therefore if I declared my self
fully according to her mind at that time, which could not do my Lord any
manner of prejudice, I should keep my credit with her ever after, whereby to do
my Lord service. Hereupon the next news that I heard, was, that we were all
sent for again, and that her Majesty's pleasure was, we all should have parts
in the business; and the Lords falling into distribution of our parts, it was
allotted to me, that I should set forth some undutiful carriages of my Lord, in
giving occasion and countenance to a seditious Pamphlet, as it was termed,
which was dedicated unto him, which was the book before mentioned of K. Henry
the fourth. Whereupon I replied to that allotment, and said to their Lordships,
that it was an old matter, and had no manner of coherence with the rest of the
charge, being matters of Ireland, and therefore that I having been wronged by
bruits before, this would expose me to them more; and it would be said, I gave
in evidence mine own tales. It was answered again with good show, that because
it was considered how I stood tied to my Lord of Essex, therefore that part was
thought fittest for me, which did him least hurt: for that whereas all the rest
was matter of charge and accusation, this only was but matter of caveat and
admonition. Wherewith though I was in mine one mind little satisfied, because
I knew well a man were better to be charged with some faults, then admonished
of some others: yet the conclusion binding upon the Queens pleasure directly,
volens nolens, I could not avoid that part that was laid upon me; which part if
in the delivery I did handle not tenderly (though no man before me did in so
clear terms free my Lord from all disloyalty as I did) that your Lordship
knows, must be ascribed to the superior duty I did ow to the Queens fame and
honor in a public proceeding, and partly to the intention I had to uphold my
self in credit and strength with the Queen, the better to be able to do my Lord
good offices afterward: for as soon as this day was past, I lost no time, but
the very next day following (as I remember) I attended her Majesty, fully
resolved to try and put in ure my utmost endeavor (so far as I in my weakness
could give furtherance) to bring my Lord again speedily into Court and favor,
and knowing (as I supposed at least) how the Queen was to be used, I thought
that to make her conceive that the matter went well then, was the way to make
her leave off there; and I remember well, I said to her, you have now Madam
obtained victory over two things which the greatest Princes in the world cannot
at their wills subdue: the one is over Fame, the other is over a great mind:
for surely the world is now (I hope) reasonably well satisfied; and for my
Lord, he did show that humiliation toward your Majesty, as I am persuaded he
was never in his life time more fit for your favor then he is now: therefore if
your Majesty will not mar it by lingering, but give over at the best, and now
you have made so good a full point, receive him again with tenderness, I shall
then think that all that is past, is for the best. Whereat I remember she took
exceeding great contentment, and did often iterate and put me in mind, that
she had ever said, that her proceedings should be ad reparationem, and not
adruinam, as who says, that now was the time I should well perceive, that that
saying of hers should prove true. And further she willed me to set down in
writing all that passed that day. I obeyed her commandment, and within some few
days brought her again the narration, which I did read unto her at 2 several
afternoons: and when I came to that part that set forth my Lords own answer,
(which was my principal care) I do well bear in mind, that she was
extrordinarily moved with it, in kindness and relenting toward my Lord, and
told me afterward (speaking how well I had expressed my Lords part) that she
perceived old love would not easily be forgotten: whereto I answered suddenly,
that I hoped she meant that by her self. But in conclusion I did advise her,
that now she had taken a representation of the matter to her self, that she
would let it go no further: for, Madam, (said I) the fire blazeth well already,
what should you tumble it: and besides it may please you keep a convenienc with
your self in this case: for since your express direction was, there should be
no register nor clarke to take this sentence, nor no record or memorial made up
of the proceeding, why should you now do that popularly, which you would not
admit to be done judicially? Whereupon she did agree, that that writing should
be suppressed, and I think there were not* persons that ever saw it. But from
this time forth during the whole latter end of that summer while the Court was
at Nonsuch and Otlands, I made it my task and scope to take and give occasions
for my Lords reintegration in his fortune: which my intention I did also
signify to my Lord, as soon as ever he was at his liberty; whereby I might
without peril of the Queens indignation write to him, and having received from
his Lordship a courteous and loving acceptance of my good will and endeavors,
I did apply it in all my accesses to the Queen, which were very many at that
time, and purposely sought and wrought upon other variable pretenses, but only
and chiefly for that purpose. And on the otherside, I did not forbear to give
my Lord from time to time faithful advertisement what I found, and what I
wished. And I drew for him by his appointment some letters to her Majesty,
which though I knew well his Lordships gift and style was far better then mine
own, yet because he required it, alleging that by his long restraint he was
grown almost a stranger to the Queens present conceits, I was ready to perform
it: and sure I am, that for the space of six weeks, or two months it prospered
so well, as I expected continually his restoring to his attendance. And I was
never better welcome to the Queen, nor more made of, then when I spoke fullest
and boldest for him: in which kind the particulars were exceeding many,
whereof for an example I will remember to your Lordship one or two; as at one
time I call to mind, her Majesty was speaking of a fellow that undertook to
cure, or at least to ease my brother of his gout, and asked me how it went
forwards; and I told her Majesty, that at the first he received good by it, but
after in the course of his cure he found himself at a stay or rather worse: the
Queen said again, I will tell you Bacon the error of it, the manner of these
Physicians, and especially these Empericks is to continue one kind of
medicine, which at the first is proper, being to draw out the ill humor, but
after they have not the discretion to change their medicine, but apply still
drawing medicines, when they should rather intend to cure and corroborate the
part. Good Lord, Madam, (said I) how wisely and aptly can you speak and discern
of Physic ministered to the body, and consider not that there is the like
occasion of Physic ministered to the mind: as now in the case of my Lord of
Essex, your Princely word ever was, that you intended ever to reform his mind,
and not ruin his fortune: I know well you cannot but think that you have drawn
the humor sufficiently, and therefore it were more then time, and it were but
for doubt of mortifying or exulcerating, that you did apply and minister
strength and comfort unto him: for these same gradations of yours are fitter to
corrupt then correct any mind of greatness* And another time I remember she
told me for news, that my Lord had written unto her some very dutiful letters,
and that she had been moved by them, and when she took it to be the abundance
of the heart, she found it to be but a preparative to a suit for the renewing of
his farm of sweet wines: whereunto I replied; O Madam, how does your Majesty
consture these things, as if these two could not stand well together, which
indeed nature has planted in all creatures. For there are but two sympathies,
the one toward Perfection, the other toward Preservation. That to Perfection,
as the Iron con^e^deth to the Loadstone: that to Preservation, as the Vine will
creep toward a stake or prop that stands by it, not for any love to the stake,
but to uphold it self. And therefore, Madam, you must distinguish my Lords
desire to do you service, is as to his perfection, that which he thinks himself
to be born for: whereas his desire to obtain this thing of you, is but for a
sustentation. And not to trouble your Lordship with many other particulars like
unto these, it was at the self same time that I did draw with my Lords privity,
and by his appointment, two letters, the one written as from my brother, the
other as an answer returned from my Lord, both to be by me in secret manner
showed to the Queen, which it pleased my Lord very strangely to mention at the
bar: the scope of which were but to represent and picture forth unto her
Majesty my Lords mind to be such, as I knew her Majesty would fainest have had
it, which letters whosoever shall see, (for they cannot now be retracted or
altered, being by reason of my brothers, or his Lordships servants delivery,
long since come into diverse hands) let him judge, especially if he knew the
Queen, and do remember those times, whether they were not the labors of one
that sought to bring the Queen about for my Lord of Essex his good. The troth
is, that the issue of all his dealing grew to this, that the Queen by some
slackness of my Lords, as I imagine, liked him worse and worse, and grew more
incensed toward him. Then, she remembering belike the continual, and incessant,
and confident speeches and courses that I had held on my Lords side, became
utterly alienated from me, and for the space of (at least) three months, which
was between Michaelmas and Newyears tide following, would not so much as look
on me, but turned away from me with express and purpose-like discountenance
wheresoever she saw me: and at such time as I desired to speak with her about
Law business, ever sent me forth very slight refusals, insomuch as it is most
true, that immediately after Newyears tide I desired to speak with her; and
being admitted to her, I dealt with her plainly, and said: Madam, I see you
withdraw your favor from me and now I have lost many friends for your sake, I
shall lose you too: you have put me like one of those that the Frenchmen call
Enfans perdus, that serve on foot before horsemen, so have you put me into
matters of envy without place, or without strength: and I know at Chess a pawn
before the King, is ever much played upon: a great many love me not, because
they think I have been against my Lord of Essex; and you love me not, because
you know I have been for him: yet will I never repent me, that I have dealt in
simplicity of heart toward you both, without respect of cautions to my self:
and therefore vivus vidensque pereo. If I do break my neck, I shall do it in a
manner as Master Dorrington did it, which walked on the battlements of the
Church many days, and took a view and survey where he should fall: and so,
Madam, (said I) I am not so simple, but that I take a prospect of mine
overthrow, only I thought I would tell you so much, that you may know that it
was faith, and not folly that brought me into it, and so I will pray for you.
Upon which speeches of mine uttered with some passion, it is true her Majesty
was exceedingly moved; and accumulated a number of kind and gracious words upon
me, and willed me to rest upon this, Gratia mea sufficit, and a number of other
sensible and tender words and demonstrations, such as more could not be; but as
touching my Lord of Essex, ne verbum quidem. Whereupon I departed, resting then
determined to meddle no more in the matter; as that, that I saw would overthrow
me, and not be able to do him any good. And thus I made mine own peace with
mine own confidence at that time; and this was the last time I saw her Majesty,
before the eight of February, which was the day of my Lord of Essex his
misfortune, after which time for that I perform at the bar in my public
service, your Lordship knows by the rules of duty, that I was to do it
honestly and without prevarication: but for any putting my self into it, I
protest before God, I never moved neither the Queen, nor any person living
concerning my being used in the service, either of evidence or examination: but
it was merely laid upon me with the rest of my fellows. And for the time which
passed, I mean between the arraignment and my Lords suffering, I well remember
but I was once with the Qu. at what time though I durst not deal directly for
my Lord as things then stood; yet generally I did both commend her Majesty's
mercy, terming it to her as an excellent balm that did continually distill from
her Sovereign hands, and made an excellent odor in the senses of her people:
and not only so, but I took hardiness to extenuate, not the fact, for that I
durst not; but the danger, telling her that if some base or cruel minded
persons had entered into such an action, it might have caused much blood and
combustion: but it appeared well they were such as knew not how to play the
Malefactors, and some other words which I now omit. And as for the rest of the
carriage of my self in that service, I have many honorable witnesses that can
tell, that the next day after my Lords arraignment, by my diligence and
information touching the quality and nature of the offenders, six of nine were
stayed, which otherwise had been attainted, I bringing their Lordships letter
for their stay, after the Jury was sworn to pass upon them; so near it went:
and how careful I was, and made it my part, that whosoever was in trouble about
that matter, as soon as ever his case was sufficiently known and defined of,
might not continue in restraint, but be set at liberty: and many other parts,
which I am well assured of stood with the duty of an honest man. But indeed I
will not deny for the case of Sir Thomas Smith of London, the Q. demanding my
opinion of it, I told her, I thought it was as hard as many of the rest: but
what was the reason? because at that time I had seen only his accusation, and
had never been present at any examination of his: and the matter so standing, I
had been very untrue to my service, if I had not delivered that opinion. But
afterward upon a re-examination of some that charged him, who weakened their own
testimony; and especially hearing himself viva voce, I went instantly to the Q.
out of the soundness of my conscience, and not regarding what opinion I had
formerly delivered, told her Majesty, I was satisfied and resolved in my
conscience, that for the reputation of the action, the plot was to countenance
the action further by him in respect of his place, then they had indeed any
interest or intelligence with him. It is very true also, about that time her
Majesty taking a liking of my pen, upon that which I had done before concerning
the proceeding at York house, and likewise upon some other declarations, which
in former times by her appointment I put in writing, commanded me to pen that
book, which was published for the better satisfaction of the world: which I
did, but so, as never Secretary had more particular, and express directions and
instructions in every point how to guide my hand in it: and not only so, but
after that I had made a first draught thereof and propounded it to certain
principal Counselors, by her Majesty's appointment, it was perused, weighed,
censured, altered, and and made almost anew, writing according to their
Lordships better consideration, wherein their Lordships and my self both were
as religious and curious of truth, as desirous of satisfaction: and my self
indeed gave only words and form of style in pursuing their direction. And
after it had passed their allowance, it was again exactly perused by the Queen
her self, and some alterations made again by her appointment: nay, and after it
was set to print, the Queen, who as your Lordship knows, as she was excellent
in great matters, so she was exquisite in small: and noted that I could not
forget my ancient respect to my Lord of Essex interming him ever my Lo. of
Essex, my Lord of Essex almost in every page of the Book, which she thought not
fit, but would have it made, Essex, or the late Earl of Essex: whereupon of
force it was printed de novo, and the first copies suppressed by her peremptory
commandment. And this my good Lord, to my furthest remembrance, is all that
passed wherein I had part, which I have set down as near as I could in the very
words and speeches that were used, not because they are worthy the repetition,
I mean those of mine own; but to the end your Lordship may lively and plainly
discern between the face of truth, and a smooth tale. And the rather also
because in things that passed a good while since, the very words and phrases
did sometimes bring to my remembrance the matters, wherein I report me to your
honorable judgment, whether you do not see the traces of an honest man: and
had I been as well believed either by the Queen or by my Lord, as I was well
heard by them both, both. my Lord had been fortunate, and so had my self in his
fortune.

To conclude therefore, I humbly pray your Lordship to pardon me for troubling
you with this long Narration, and that you will vouchsafe to hold me in your
good opinion, till you know I have deserved, or find that I shall deserve the
contrary; and even so I continue

At your Lordships Honorable commandments very humbly.

THE Ld. BACON HIS LETTER TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS, AND most Excellent Prince
CHARLES, Prince of Wales, Duke of Corn-Wal, Earl of Chester, etc.
It may please your Highness,
IN part of my acknowledgement to your highness, I have endeavored to do honor
to the memory of the last King of England that was Ancestor to the King your
Father and your self, and was that King to whom both unions may in a sort
refer, that of the Roses being in him consummate, and that of the Kingdoms by
him begun: besides his times deserve it, for he was a wise man, and an
Excellent King; and yet the times very rough and full of mutations and rare
accidents: and it is with times, as it is with ways, some are more up hill and
down hill, and some are more flat and plain, and the one is better for the
liver, and the other for the writer: I have not flattered him, but took him to
life as well as I could, sitting so far of, and having no better light; it is
true your Highness has a living pattern, incomparable of the King your Father,
but is not amiss for you also to see it one of these Ancient Pieces: God
preserve your Highness.

Your Highness most humble and devoted Servant, Francis St Alban.

FINIS.
THE Lord Treasurer BUR LEIGH HIS Advice to Queen ELIZABETH in matters of
Religion and State.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
CARE (one of the true bred Children of my unfeigned affection) awaked with the
late wicked and barbarous attempts, would needs exercise my pen to your sacred
Majesty, not only encouraging me, that it would take the whole fault of
boldness upon it self; but, also, that even the world should not doubt to
appear in your Highness presence in their kindly rudeness. For that if your
Majesty with your voice did but read them, your very reading would grace them
with eloquence.

Therefore laying aside all self guilty conceits of ignorance (knowing that the
Sign is not angry with the well meaning Astronomer, though he hap to miss his
course; I will with the same sincerity display my humble conceits) wherewith my
life shall be amongst the foremost to defend the blessings which God (in you)
has bestowed upon us.

So far then as can be perceived by my humane judgment, Dread Sovereign, you
may judge, that the happiness of your present Estate, can no ways be encumbred
with one of these two means, (viz)

Either by your 1 Factious Subjects, or 2 Foreign Enemies.


Your strong and Factious Subjects are the Papists, strong I account them, both
in number and nature; for by number they are able to raise a great Army, and by
their natural and mutual confidence, and intelligence, they may soon bring to
pass an uniting with Foreign Enemies; Factious I call them, because they are
discontented, Of whom in all reason of State your Majesty must determine; if
you will suffer them to be strong to make them the better content, or if you
will discontent them, by making them weaker; for what the mixture of strength
and discontent are in genders, there needs no Syllogism to prove.

To suffer them to be strong with hope, that with reason they will be
contented, carries with it in my opinion, but a fairer enamling of a terrible
danger.

For first, men's natures are not only to strive against a present smart, but to
revenge bypast injury, though they be never so well contented hereafter, which
cannot be so sufficient a pledge to your Majesty, but that when opportunity shall
flatter them, they will remem.+ber, not the after slacking, but the former
binding, and so much the more when they shall imagine this relenting rather to
proceed from fear, the which is the poison of all Government, when the Subject
thinks the Prince does any thing more out of fear then favor. And therefore
the Romans would rather abide the uttermost extremities, then by their Subjects
to be brought to any conditions. Again, for to make them contented absolutely,
I do not see how your Majesty either in Conscience will do or in policy may do
it, since you cannot thoroughly discontent your faithful Subjects, and to fasten
an unreconciled love, with the losing of certain love, is to build a house with
the sale of lands; so much the more in that your Majesty is imbarqued in the
Protestant cause, as in many respects by your Majesty it cannot be with any
safety abandoned, they having been so long time the only instruments both of
your Council and Power; and to make them half content, and half discontent,
methinks carries with it as deceitful a shadow of reason as can be, since there
is no pain so small, but if we can cast it off, we will; and no man loves one
the better for giving him the Bastinado though with never so little a Cudgel.

But the course of the most Wise, most Politic, and best grounded Estate, has
ever been to make an assuredness of friendship, or to take away all power of
enmity.

Yet, here must I distingiush between discontent and despair, for it suffices
to waken the discontented; but there is no way but to kill desperates (which in
such a number as they are) were as hard and difficult, as impious and ungodly.

And therefore, though they must be discontented, yet, I would not have them
desperate; for among many desperate men, it is like some one will bring forth
some desperate attemps.

Therefore, considering that the urging of the oath, must needs in some degree
beget despair, since therein he must either think (as without the special grace
of God he cannot think otherwise) or else become a Traitor, which before some
hurt done seems hard: I humbly submit this to your Excellent consideration,
whether with as much sincerity of your Majesty's Person and State, and more
satisfaction for them, it were not better to leav the oath to this sense, That
whosoever would not bear Arms against all foreign Princes, and namely, the
Pope, that should any way invade your Majesty's Dominions, he should be a
Traitor; for hereof this commodity will ensue; that those Papists (as I think
most Papists would that should take this oath) would be divided from the great
mutual confidence which now is betwixt the Pope and them, by reason of their
afflictions for him: And such Priests as would refuse that oath then no tongue
could say for shame, that they suffer for Religion, if they did suffer.

But here it may be objected, they would dissemble and equivocate with this
oath; and that the oath would dispense with them in that case. Even so may they
with the present oath both dissemble and equivocate, and also have the Popes
dispensation for the present oath, as well as for the other.

But this is certain, that whomsoever the conscience, or fear of breaking an
oath does bind, him would that oath bind.

And that they make conscience of an oath, the troubles, losses, and disgraces,
that they suffer for refusing the same, do sufficiently testify: and you know
that the perjury of either oath is equal.

So then the farthest point to be sought for their contentment is but to avoid
their despair. How to weaken their contentment is the next consideration.

Weakened they may be, by two means.

First, By lessening their number.

Secondly, By taking away from their force, their number will easily be
lessened, by the means of careful and diligent Preachers in each Parish to that
end appointed; And especially, by good Schoolmasters, and bringers up of their
youth; the former by converting them after their fall; and the latter, by
preventing them from falling into their errors. For Preachers (because their
own) grows a great question; I am provoked to lay at your Highness feet my
opinion touching the preciser sort.

First, Protesting to God Almighty, and your sacred Majesty, that I am not
given over, no, nor so much as addicted to their preciseness; therefore till I
think, that you think otherwise, I am bold to think, that the Bishops in these
dangerous times, take a very ill and unadvised course in driving them from
their cures; and this I think, for two causes.

First, because it does discredit the reputation and estimation of your power;
when the Princes shall perceive, and know; that even in your Protestant Subjects
(in whom consists all your force, strength, and power) there is so great, and
heart burning a division, and how much reputation swayeth in these, and all
other worldly actions; there is none so simple, as to be ignorant: and the
Papists themselves (though there be most manifest, and apparent discord between
the Franciscans and Dominicans, the Jesuits, and other Orders or Religious
persons, especially the Benedictims:) Yet will they shake off none of them,
because in the maine point of Popery they all agree, and hold together: And so
far they may freely brag and vaunt of their unity.

The other reason is, because in truth, (in their opinions) though they are
oversqueamish, and nice, and more scrupulous then they need; yet with their
careful catechizing, and diligent Preaching, they bring forth that fruit which
your most Excellent Majesty is to desire, and wish, namely, the lessning and
diminishing the Papistical numbers.

And therefore in this time your Majesty has especial cause to use and employ
them, if it were but as Frederick the second (that excellent Emperor) did use
and employ the Sarazens soldiers against the Pope, because he was well
assured, and certainly knew, that they only would not spare his sanctity.

And for those objections what they would do, if once they got a full and
entire Authority in the Church, methinks they are inter remota and in certa
mala, and therefore, vicinia and certa, to be first considered.

As for Schoolmasters (they may be a principal means of diminishing their
number) the lamentable and pitiful abuses of them are easy to be seen, since
the greatest number of Papists is of very young men; but your Majesty may
prevent that bud, and may use therein not only a Pious and Godly means, in
making the Parents of every Shire to send their children to be virtuously
brought up at a certain place, for that end appointed; but you shall also (if
it please your Majesty) put in practice a notable stratagem, used by Certories
in Spain, by choosing such fit and convenient places for the same, as may
surely be at your devotion; and by this means you shall under color of
education, have them as hostages of the Parents fidelities, that have any power
in England: and by this way their number will quickly be lessned; for I account
death does no ways lessen them, since we find by experince, that death works
no such effect; but that like Hydra's heads, upon cutting off one, seven grows
up; persecution being accounted as the badg of the Church; and therefore they
should never have the honor to take any pretense of Martyrdom in England,
where the fullness of blood, and greatness of heart is such, that they will even
for shameful things go bravely to death; much more when they think themselves
to climb Heaven, and that vice of obstinacy seems to the common people a divine
constancy.

But for my part I wish no lessning of their number, but by preaching, and of
the youngers education under good Schoolmasters; there taking away of their
forces, is as well by Peace's Authority, as of War provision.

Their Peace's Authority stands, either in Offices, or Tenantries.

For their Offices, their credit w^ll seem available, if order be taken, that
from the highest Councellor to the lowest Constable, none to have any charge or
office, but such as will really pray and communicate in their congregation
according to the doctrine received generally into this Realm.

For their Tenantries, this conceit I have thought upon, (which I submit to
your farther piercing judgment) That your Majesty in every Shire should give
strict order, to some that are indeed trusty and religious Gentlemen; That
whereas your Majesty is given to understand that diverse Popish Landlords, do
hardly use all such of your people and subjects, (as being their tenants) do
embrace and live after the authorized and true Religion; that therefore you do
constitute and appoint to deal both with entreaty and authority, (paying as
others do) that they be not thrust out of their living, nor otherwise
unreasonably molested.

This would greatly bind the Commons hearts unto you (on whom indeed consists
the power and strength of your Realm) and it will make them much the less, or
nothing at all depend upon their Landlords.

And although there may hereby grow some wrong, which the Tenants upon that
confidence may offer to their Landlords; yet, those wrongs are very easily,
even, with one wink of your Majesty redressed; and are nothing comparable, to
the danger, of having many thousands depending upon the adverse party.

Their Wars provision, I account men and munition, of whom in some, I could
wish no man, either great or small, should so much as be trained up in any
Musters; except his ^arishioners would answer for him, that he orderly and duly
receives the Communion; and for munition, that not one should keep in his
house, or have at command, so much as a Halbert, without he were conformable to
the Church, and of the condition aforesaid.

And if such order were taken, that considering they were not put to the labor
and charge of mustering and training; therefore their contribution should be
more and more narrowly looked into: This would breed a chilness unto their
fervor of superstition; especially in popular resolutions, who if they love
Egypt, is chiefly for the flesh pots, so that methinks this temper should well
agree with your wisdom, and the mercifulness of your nature.

For to compel them you would not; kill them you would not; so in reason to
trust them you should not; trust being in no case to be used, but where the
trust is of one mind, with the trusting reason, which ever commands every
wise man to fly and avoid that shamefacedness with the Greeks; which is, not to
seem to doubt them, which give just occasion of doubt.

This ruined Hercules the son of Great Alexander; for, although he had most
manifest reasons, and evident arguments to induce him to suspect his ill
servant Poliperchon, yet, out of the confidence he had of him, and the
experience he had of his former Loyalty, he would make provision accordingly,
because, he would not seem so much as to misdoubt or suspect him; and so by
that means he was murdered by him.

But the knot of this discourse is; That if your Majesty find it reasonable of
the one side, by relenting the rigor of the oath, and of the other by
disabling the unsound Subjects, you shall neither execute any, but very
Traitors, in all men's opinions and constructions; nor yet put faith and
confidence in those, even for their own sakes which must be faithful.

The second point of the general part of my discourse, is, the consideration of
your foreign enemies, which may prove either able or willing to hurt you; and
those are Scotland, for his pretense and neighborhood, and Spain, for his
religion and power; as for France, I see not why it should not rather be made a
friend, not an enemy; for though he agree not with your Majesty, in matters of
Conscience and Religion; yet, in hoc termino, he does agree, that he fears
the greatness of Spain, and therefore, that may soder the link which Religion
has broken, and make him hope by your Majesty's friendship, to secure himself
of so potent an Adversary.

And though he were evilly affected toward your Majesty, yet, I do not think
it greatly to be feared, the pres^^^ condition of his estate, himself being a
Prince who has given an assurance to the world, that he loves his ease much
better then victories, and a Prince, that is neither beloved nor feared of his
people: And the people themselves being of a very light, and unconstant
disposition; and besides, they are altogether unexperienced, and undisciplined
how to do their duties, either in war or peace; they are ready to begin and
undertake any enterprise before they enter into consideration thereof, and yet
weary of it before it be well begun, they are generally poor and weak, and
subject to sickness at Sea, divided and subdivided into sundry heads, and
several f^^tions, not only between Hugonites and Papists, but also between the
Memorancis, Guises, and Migonominies; the people being opressed by all due
hate; so that for a well settled and established Government, and commonwealth,
as your Majesty's is, I see no grounds why to misdoubt or fear them, but only
fo farforth as the Guisars hap to serve for Boutefeus in Scotland; and while it
shall please your Majesty, but with reasonable favor to support the King of
Navar, I do not think the French King will ever suffer you to be from thence
anoyed.

Therefore, for France, your Majesty may assure your self of one of these two;
either to make with him a good aliance, in respect of the common enemy of both
Kingdoms, or at the least so to muzle him, as that he shall have little power
to bite you.

As for Scotland, if your Majesty assist and help those Noble men there, which
are by him suspected, your Majesty may be sure of this, that those will keep at
home. And also whilst he is a Protestant, no foreign Prince will take part
with him against your Majesty: and of himself he is not able to do much harm,
the better part of his nobles being for your Majesty; and if in time he should
grow to be a Papist, your Majesty shall always have a strong party at his own
doors, in his own Kingdom, to restrain his malice; who since they depend upon
your Majesty, they are in all Policy never to be abandoned; for by this
resolution the Romans anciently, and the Spaniards presently, have most of all
prevailed: and on the contrary, the Macedonians in times past, and the French
men in our age, have lost all their foreign friends, because of their aptness
to neglect them who depended upon them; but if your Majesty could by any means
possible devise to bring in again the Hamiltons, he should then be beaten with
his own weapons, and should have more cause to look to his own succession then
to be too busy abroad. But Spain, yea, Spain it is, in which (as I conceive)
all causes do concur, to give a just alarm to your Excellent Highness judgment.

First; because in Religion, he is so much the Popes, and the Pope in Policy so
much his, as that the mind of Pope Gregory, and the power of King Philip,
will, nor can compass, or bring us in all probability to be expected, himself
being a Prince, whose closet has brought forth geater victories, then all his
Fathers journies, absolutely by ruling his subjects; a people all one hearted
in Religion, constantly ambitious, politic, and valiant; the King rich and
liberal, and (which of all I like worst) greatly beloved amongst all the
discontented party of your highness subjects; a more lively proof whereof one
could never see, then in the poor Don Anthonio, who when he was here, was as
much at Mass, as any man living, yet there did not so much as one Papist in
England give him any good countenance; so factious an affection is born the
Spaniards. Now, as of him is the chief cause of doubt, so of him the chief care
must be had of providence.

But this offers a great question, whether it bebetter to procure his Amity, or
stop the course of his Enmity; as of a great Lion, whether it be more wisdom,
to trust to the taming of him, or tying of him.

I confess, this requires a longer and larger discourse, and a better
discourser then my self; and therefore I will stay my self from roaving over so
large a field, but only with the usual presumption of love, yield this to your
gracious consideration.

First, If you have any intention of League, you see upon what assurance, or at
least what likelihood you may have, that he will observe the same.

Secondly, that in a Parlying season it it be not as a Countenance unto him the
sooner to overthrow the low Countries, which hitherto has been as a
counter-scarff to your Majesty's Kingdom.

But if you do not league, then your Majesty is to think upon means for
strengthening your self and weakening of him, and therein your own strength is
to be tendered both at home and abroad.

For your home strength in all reverence I leave it as the thing which contains
in effect the universal consideration of Government.

For your strength abroad, it it must be in joining in good Confederacy, or at
least intelligence with those that would willingly embrace the same.

Truly, not so much as the Turk and Morocco, but at some time they may serve
your Majesty to great purpose, but from Florence, Ferrara, and especially
Venice, I think your Majesty might reap great assurance and service, for
undoubtedly they fear his frauds, and abhor his greatness.

And for the Dutch and Nothern Princes being in Effect of your Majesty's
Religion, I cannot think but their alliance may be firm, and their power not to
be contemned, even the Countenance of united powers does much in matters of
State.

For the weakening of him, I would (I must confess from my heart) wish that your
Majesty did not spare thoroughly and manifestly both upon the Indies, and the
Low Countries, which would give themselves unto you; and rather take him while
he has one hand free and at liberty, then both of them sharply weaponed.

But if this seem foolish hardiness to your Majesty's wisdom, yet I dare not
presume to Council (but beseech) your Majesty, that what, I say, your Majesty
(without war) can give to the Low Countries, you would vouchfafe to do it,
since as King of Spain without the low Countries, he may trouble our skirts of
Ireland, but can never come to grasp with you; but if he once reduce the
Low Countries to an absolute subjection, I know not what limit any man of
judgment can set unto his greatness: diverse ways are to be tried, among the
rest one, (not the worst) in my opinion, might be to seek either the winning of
the Prince of Parma from the King of Spain, or at the least to have the matter
so handled, so as the jealousy thereof may arise betwixt them, as Pope Clement
did by the notable Marquess of Pescara, for he practiced, with him for offering
the Kingdom of Naples, not so much with whom to join him, as to make his master
suspect him, for when I confider that Parma is a Roman by blood, a Prince born,
placed in the place he has by Don John, and maintained in it by the
malcontents; whereunto the King has rather yielded of necessity then any
other way.

Lastly, When I remember the Citadel of Pierensa, kept by the Spaniards, and
the apparent title of his Son Remutio to the Crown of Portugal, things hardly
to be digested by an Italian stomach, I cannot see how such a mind in such a
fortune can sell it self to a Foreign servitude.

The manner of dealing with him, should be by some man of spirit, with the
Venetian Ambassadors at Paris, and afterward with his own father in Italy,
both which are in their hearts mortal Enemies of the greatness of Spain.

But these sheets of Paper bare witness against me, of having offered too
tedious a discourse to your Majesty, diverse of which points, yet, as of
mittigating the oath, the School hostages, the heartning of tennants, and the
dealing with the Prince of Parma, would require a more ample handling; but it
is first, reason to know whether your Majesty like of the stuff before it be
otherwise trimmed.

For my self, as I will then only love my opinions, when your Majesty likes
them; so will I daily pray, That all opinions may be guided with as much Faith,
as I have Zeal to your Majesty's Service, and that they may be followed with
infinite success.

Finis.
TO THE Ld. BACON THEN FALING FROM FAVOR.
DAZEL'D thus with height of place,
Whilst our hopes our wits beguile;
No man marks the narrow space
'Twixt a Prison and a smile:
Then since Fortune's favors fade,
You that in her Arms do sleep,
Learn to swim and not to wade,
For, the hearts of Kings are deep.
But if greatness be so blind,
As to trust in Towers of Air;
Let it be with goodness lined,
That at least the fall be fair:
Then though darkened you shall say,
When friends fail and Princes frown,
Virtue is the roughest way,
But proves at night a bed of down.
To my Reverend Friend; Doctor A.
SIR,
AMongst consolations, it is not the least to represent to a man's self; like
examples of Calamity in others. For examples give a quicker impression then
Arguments, and besides, they certify us that which the Scripture also tenders
for satisfaction; That no new thing is happened unto us: This they do the better,
by how much the examples are liker in circumstances to our own case, and more
especially, if they fall upon persons that are greater and worthier then our
selves: For as it savoureth of vanity to match our selves highly in our own
conceit; so on the other side, it is a good sound conclusion, That if our
betters have sustained the like events, we have the less cause to be grieved.

In this kind of consolation I have not been wanting to my self, though as a
Christian I have tasted (through Gods great goodness) of higher remedies.
Having therefore through the variety of my reading, set before me many
examples, both of ancient and latter times; my thoughts I confess have chiefly
staid upon three particulars, as the most eminent and the most resembling All
three persons that had held chief places of Authority in their Countries, all
three ruined, not by war, or by any other disaster, but by justice and
sentence, as Delinquents and Criminals: All three famous Writers, insomuch as
the remembrance of their calamity is now as to posterity, but as a little
picture of Nightwork, remaining amongst the fair and excellent Tables of their
Acts and Works: And all three (if that were any thing to the matter) fit
examples to quench any man's ambition of rising again; for that they were every
one of them restored with great glory, but to their further ruin and
destruction, ending in a violent death. The men were Demosthenes, Cicero, and
Seneca, persons that I durst not claim affinity with, except the similitude of
our fortunes had contracted it. When I had cast mine eyes upon these examples,
I was carried on further to observe, how they did bear their fortunes, and
principally how they did employ their times, being banished and disabled for
public business, to the end that I might learn by them, and that they might
be as well my Counselors as my Comforters. Whereupon I h^pned to note, how
diversely their Fortunes wrought upon them, especially in that point at which I
did most aim, which was the employing of their times and pens. In Cicero I saw,
that during his banishment (which was almost two years) he was so softened and
dejected, that he wrote nothing but a few Womanish Epistles. And yet in mine
own opinion, he had least reason of the three, to be discouraged: For that
although it was judged, and judged by the highest kind of judgment, in form of
a Statute, or Law, that he should be banished, and his whole Estate
confiscated and seized, and his houses pulled down; and that it should be highly
penal for any man to propound his Repeal: Yet his Case even then had no great
blot of ignominy, but it was thought but a tempest of popularity which
overthrew him. Demost henes contrariwise, though his case was foul, being
condemned for bribery, and not simple bribery, but bribery in the nature of
Treason and Disloyalty; yet nevertheles took so little knowledge of his
Fortune, as during his banishment, he did much busy himself, and entermedle
with matters of State, and took upon him to counsel the State (as if he had
been still at the helm) by letters, as appears by some Epistles of his, which
are extant. Seneca indeed, who was condemned for many Corruptions and crimes,
and banished into a solitary Island, kept a mean; and though his pen did not
freeze, yet he abstained from intruding into matters of business; but spent his
time in writing Books of excellent argument and use for all Ages, though he
might have made better choice (sometimes) of his Dedications.

These Examples confirmed me much in a resolution (whereunto I was otherwise
inclined) to spend my time wholly in writing, and to put forth that poor
talent, or half talent or what it is that God has given me. But revolving with
my self my Writings as well those which I have published, as those I have in
hand, me thought they all went into the City and none into the Temple; where,
because I found so great consolation, I desire to make some poor oblation:
Therefore I have chosen an Argument mixed of Reliligious and Civil
Considerations; and likewise mixed between Contemplative and Active. This work,
because I was ever an enemy to flattering Dedications, I have dedicated to you,
in respect of our ancient and private acquaintance. And because amongst the men
of our times, I held you in especial Reverence.

Your loving Friend, Fra. St. Alban.

IN Obitum Incomparabilis FRANSCI DE VERULAMIO, etc.
DUM moriens tantam nostris Verulamius Heroes
Tristitiam Musis, luminaque uda facit:
Credimus heu nullu^ fieri post fata beatum,
Credimus and Samium desipuisse senem.
Scilicet hic miseris, felix nequit esse Camaenis
Nec se quam Musas plus amat iste suas.
At luctante^ anima^ Clotho imperiosa coegit
Ad coelum, invitos traxit in astra pedes.
Ergone Phoebeias jacuisse putabimus arts?
Atque herbas Clarii nil valuisse Dei?
Phoebus ide^ potuit, nec virtus abfuit herbis
Hunc artem atque illas vim retinere putes:
At Phoebu^ (ut metuit ne Rex foret iste Camaenis)
Rivali medicam creed negasse manum.
Hinc dolor est; quod cum Phoebo Verulamius Heroes
Major erat reliquis, hac foret art minor.
Vos tame^, o tantu^ manes atque umbra, Camaenae
Et poenae inferni pallida turba Jovis,
Si spiratis adhuc, and non lucistis ocellos,
Sed neque post illum vos superesse putem:
Si vos ergo aliquis de morte reduxerit Orpheus,
Istaque non aciem fallit imago meam:
Discite nunc gemitus, and lamentabile carmen,
Exoculis vestris Lacryma multa fluat.
En quam multa fluit? Veras agnosco Camaenas
Et lacrymas, Helicon vix satis unus erit;
Deucalionaeis and qui non mersus inundis
Pernassus (mirum est) hisce latebit aquis.
Scilicet hic periit, per que^ vos vivitis, and qui
Multa Pierias nutriit arts Deas.
Vidit ut hic arts nulla radice retentas,
Languere ut summo semina sparsa solo;
Crescere Pegaseas docuit, velut Hasta Quirini
Crevit, and exiguo tempore Laurus erat.
Ergo Heliconiadas docuit cu^ crescere divas,
Diminuent hujus secula nulla decus.
Nec far ulterius generosi pectoris aestus
Contemptu^ potuit, Diva Minerva, tuum,
Restituit calamus solitu^ divinus honorem,
Dispulit and nubes alter Apollo tuas.
Dispulit and tenebras sed quas obsusca vetustas,
Temporis and prisci lippasenecta tulit;
Atque alias methodos sacrum instauravit acumen,
Gnossiaque eripuit, sed sua fili dedit.
Scilicet antiquo sapientum vulgus in aevo
Tam claros oculos non habuisse liquet;
Hi velut Eoo surgens de littore Phoebus,
Hic velut in media fulget Apollo die:
Hi veluti Typhis tentarunt aequora primum,
At vix deseruit littora prima ratis,
Pleiadas hic Hyadasque atque omnia sydera noscens,
Syrtes, atque tuos, improba Sylla, canes;
Scit quod vitandum est, quo dirigat aequore navem,
Certius and cursum nautica monstrat acus;
Infantes illi Musas, hic gignit adultas;
Mortales illi, gignit at iste Deas.
Palman ideo reliquis Magna instauratio libris
Abstulet, and cedunt squalida turba sophi,
Et vestita novo Pallas modo prodit amictu
Anguis depositis ut nitet exuviis.
Sic Phoenix cineres spectat modo nata paternos,
Aesonis and rediit prima juventa senis.
Instaurata suos and sic Verulamia muros
Jactat, and antiquum sperat ab inde decus
Sed qua^ta effulge^t plus qua^ mortalis ocelli
Lumina, dum regni mystica sacra canat?
Dum sic naturae leges, arcanaque Regum,
Tanquam a secretis esset utrisque can^t:
Du^ canat Henricu^, qui Rex, idemque sacerdos
Connubio stabili junxitutramque Rosam.
Arqui haec sunt nostris long majora Camaenis,
Non haec infaelix Granta sed Aula sciat:
Sed cum Granta labris admoverit ube^a tantis
Jus habet in lauds (maxim Alumne) tuas
Jus habet, ut moestos Lacrymis extingueret ignes,
Posset ut e medio diripuisse rogo.
At nostrae tibi nulla ferant encomia Musae,
Ipse canis, lauds and canis inde tuas.
Nos tamen and lauds, qua possumus art, canemus,
Si tamen ars desit, laus erit iste dolor.
FINIS.

