Gods Glory Vindicated AND Blasphemy Confuted: Being a brief and plain ANSWER
to that Blasphemous Book Entitled Twelve Arguments against the Deity of the
Holy Ghost, Written by THO. BIDLE Master of Arts, and now burnt by special
Command from the Parliament on Wednesday the 8 of this present September, by
the common Hangman.

Wherein the Arguments of the said Book are set down together with proper
Answers thereto.

And twelve Anti-Arguments proving the Deity of the Holy Ghost.

MAT. 12.31, Wherefore I say unto you, all manner of sin and Blasphemy shall be
forgiven unto men, but the Blasphemy against the holy ghost shall not be for
given unto men. LONDON, Printed for William Ley, and are to be sold at his
shop, at Paul's Chain. 1647.

A CONFVTATION of twelve ARGVMENTS draw^ up against the Deity of the HOLY GHOST.
Christian Reader*
WE may truly say with that good King, This is a day of trouble and of rebuke
and blasphemy: now the accuser of the brethren has but a short time, he rages
against all that is called God, accusing and impeaching them for that dignity,
to be called Gods John 10.34, 35. and not only to men, but they also aspire to
the throne of God, and there accuse the Holy Ghost, as they say, for a supposed
Deity: witness Master Bidle in his letter to a certain knight, and Member of
the Honorable house of Commons, where he seeks to degrade the blessed Spirit of
his Godhead, saying, He is but one principle spirit among the Angels, called
the Advocate, the holy Spirit, the good Spirit, the Spirit of God by way of
eminence, see page 2. line 3. so that it seems he thinks the holy Ghost to be
but one of the created Angels, therefore but a supposed Deity: now for thy
satisfaction I shall lay down some Scripture Arguments to prove the Deity of
the holy ghost, and then briefly Answer his Arguments, and falls Exposition of
Scripture, whereby he would prove the contrary.

First, if the Spirit of God had its being before any creature was made, from
all eternity, when there was nothing but God, then it cannot be a created
Angel, but God himself; but all the creatures were made in six days Exodus
20.11. And before that any creature was formed, while they were without form,
the Spirit of God moved upon that deformed Chaos, Genesis 1.2. He is called the
eternal spirit, Heb. 9.14 Ergo, the holy ghost is no created Angel but God
himself.

Secondly, if the blessed Spirit of God made all the Creatures, it cannot be an
Angel or creature it self, it must needs be God; but in the place before
quoted the Spirit of God moved all the creatures to their perfect form, Genesis
1.2. David says of all the creatures, Thou sendest forth thy spirit, and they
are created, Psalm. 104.30. and says Job, The Spirit of God made me, and gave
me life, Job 33.4. and God said to the Son, and holy ghost, let us make man, so
God created man, Genesis 1.26, 27. Ergo, the holy ghost is God.

Thirdly, If the Spirit of God raised up Jesus Christ from the dead, and shall
again quicken our mortal bodies at the last day, then the holy ghost is God;
but the Spirit of God raised up Jesus Christ from the dead, and shall also
quicken our mortal bodies at the last day, Romans 8.11. 1 Pet. 3.18. Ergo, the
holy ghost is God.

Fourthly, if the Spirit of God be omni-present in all places, then it cannot
be a creature, it must needs be God: But says David, Whither shall I go from
thy Spirit, if I ascend to heaven, or descend to hell, or flee to the bottom
of the Sea, behold thou art there, Psalm. 139.7, 8, 9. Ergo, the holy ghost is
God.

Fifthly, If it be peculiar to God alone to search the heart, and to know the
thoughts of men, and yet the holy ghost does this, then the holy gho^t is God,
but it is peculiar to God to search the heart, I the Lord search the heart,
Jer. 17.9.10. The Lord knows the thoughts of men, Psalm. 94.11. Yet the holy
ghost does this, Thou know my thoughts a far off, whither shall I go from
thy Spirit, Psalm. 139.2.7. The day of judgment is hid from all the Angels,
Mat. 24 36. But the spirit of God searches and knows all the deep things of
God, 1 Cor. 3.10, 11. Ergo, the Spirit of God is not a created Angel, but is
God himself.

Sixthly, If all good and perfect gifts come down from the Father of lights,
and yet all proceed from the same Spirit, Then that Spirit is God: but every
good and perfect gift comes down from the Father of lights, Jam. 1.17. and yet
all the several gifts come from the same spirit, 1 Cor. 12.8, Ergo, that
Spirit is God, that shall supply all our need, Phil. 4.20. and not a creature.

Seventhly, if the holy ghost has as great a hand in governing the Church of
God, as either the Father or the Son, then the holy ghost is God: but the
Father sends forth laborers into his Vineyard, Mat. 9.37. and the Son gave
some Apostles and some Prophets and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. and the holy ghost made them overseers, Acts 20.28 now it
is God that set all those in the Church. 1 Cor. 12, 28. Ergo, the holy ghost is
God.

Eighthly, If Redemption, Sanctification, and preservation be sometimes given to
the father, and sometimes to the son, and sometimes to the holy ghost, then the
holy ghost is God, as the the father and the son: but it is said that God
purchased his Church. Psalm. 74.2. And Jesus Christ bought them. 2 Pet 2.1.
compared with Jude 4. and the holy ghost purchased them with his blood. Acts
20.28. and sanctified by God the father. Jude 1. and sanctified by Jesus
Christ. Ephesians. 5.26. and sanctified by the holy ghost, Romans 15.16. so the Lord
keeps his Church, Esa. 27, 3. And the son keeps it that none of them are lost,
and the spirit of God shall keep them and lead them into al trut^: therefore the
holy ghost is God.

Ninthly, If God will not give his glory to another, and yet will have all
Christians baptized as well in the name of the holy ghost, as in the name of the
father and the son; and if the Apostle bless the Church, as well in the name of
the holy ghost, as in the name of the father and the son, then the holy ghost
is God; but God will not give his glory to another, for says he, there is no
God besides me. Isa. 45.5. Yet all Christians shall be baptized in the name of
the holy ghost, as well as in the name of the father and the son, Mat. 28.19.
And Paul blessed the Christians thus, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
the love of God, and the Communion of the holy ghost be with you all Amen. 2
Cor. 13.14. therefore the holy ghost is God.

Tenthly, If the scripture affirm that the father, the word, and the holy
ghost, these three are one, then the holy ghost is God, as the father and the
word; but says John, there are three that bear record in heaven, the father,
the word, and the holy ghost, and these three are one, Ergo, the holy ghost is
God.

11. Paul says, Thus says the holy Ghost, if ye will hear his voice: and David
says, For he is the Lord our God, and we are his people, harden not your
hearts, Heb. 3.7. Psalm. 95.7. and says Peter, Holy men of God spoke as they
were moved by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. Acts 28.25. and says Luke, It was
the Lord God of Israel, that spoke by the mouth of all his Prophets, since the
world began, Luke 1.68, 70. Ergo, the holy ghost is the Lord God of Israel.

12. Lastly, because I will not exceed his number of Arguments; if when Ananias
lied to the holy ghost, he is said to lie unto God, then the holy ghost is God;
But, says Peter, Ananias, why has Satan filled thine heart to lie to the holy
ghost? thou have not lied unto men, but unto God; Acts 5.3, 4. Ergo, the holy
ghost is God: and now I shall briefly Answer Mr Bidles twelve Arguments, by
which he would prove the contrary.

First, he that is distinguished from God is not God* the holy Spirit is
distinguished from God, Ergo. To the Majo^ (...), if he should be both God, and
yet distinguished from God, this would imply a contradiction to himself; I
grant it, but let us see his proof, that the Spirit of God is distinguished
from God, and all his proof is this, he is called the spirit of God, and is
sent of God, and searches the depths of God.

I Answer to the two first, if there were any truth in them, it would as well
take off the Deity of the Son, as of the holy ghost, who is called the Son of
God, and was sent of God, Mat. 14.33. Gal. 4.4. and the last clearly proves him
to be God. For what creature is able to search the depths of an infinite,
omnipotent creator, but his own Spirit, which is God, as I have showed, 1 Cor.
2.10, 11. But then he says, it is impossible to distinguish the person from
the essence of God, secondly he says, to distinguish the person from the
essence of God, were either to make something in him finite, or else two
infinites; thirdly, to talk of God taken essentially is ridiculous, for none
but a person can rule others.

To these I answer, we can distinguish the heat from the light, and both from
the body of the sun, and yet all make but one sun; so we can distinguish the
actions of the several persons of the Godhead, as the Father, must beget the
Son, and not the Son beget the Father, and the Son to be begotten, and the holy
ghost to proceed from both, and neither to beget nor be begotten, unless we
should not only deny the Deity of the holy ghost, but also the Deity of the
Father and the Son: and to the second I say, all things in God are infinite,
yet this does not make so many infinites as he has Attributes, nor so many
infinites as persons in Trinity: thirdly, to talk of the essence of God is not
ridiculous; but rather on the contrary, it were ridiculous to say, that only
the heat, or only the light, or only the body of the sun were useful, and
not all three jointly together; so for God to reign personally as Father, or as
Son, and not all three jointly and essentially: but it seems by this, that
although he said in the letter, that he would wave his judgment concerning the
Diety of Christ, yet he seems to deny the Deity of Christ also, and only
allows of a God as the Turks do, out of the Trinity, and out of Christ.

His second Argument; If he that gave the holy Spirit to the Israelites to
instruct them, be alone Jehovah, then the holy Spirit is not Jehovah or God;
but says Nehemiah, Thou art Lord alone, thou gave also thy good Spirit to
instruct them, Nehem. 9.6, 20. Now if he that gave the holy Spirit be Jehovah
alone, and the Spirit given be also Jehovah, it would be a contradiction,
therefore the holy Spirit is not Jehovah or God.

I Answer, first by this Argument he denies the Son as well as the holy ghost,
and as the Turks allow only of a God both out of the Trinity and out of
Christ. Secondly, God may give both himself and his Son and his Spirit, and yet
not degrade himself nor his son, nor his Spirit of their Godhead, when he
brings man into covenant with himself. Thirdly, although it be said, thou art
God alone; yet this is to be understood in the Unity of the Trinity, and though
the Father be Lord, the Son Lord and the holy ghost be Lord, yet not three
Lords but one Lord: as I said before, the heat is the sun, and the light is the
sun, and the body is the sun, and yet not three suns but one sun; and although
all three be equal, yet equals may one send another by consent, and yet not
degrade him of his Deity, then notwithstanding this Argument, the holy ghost is
God.

His third Argument, He that speaks not of himself is not God, but when the
spirit of truth is come, he shall not speak of himself, But whatsoever he shall
hear that he shall speak, John 16.13.

I Answer as before, in this he denies the Godhead of the Son, as well as the
Godhead of the holy ghost, for he came not to do his own will, but the will of
him that sent him, John 5, 30. Not to be ministered unto, but to minister, Mat.
20.28. And to do his Fathers business, Luke 2.49. he says not my will but thy
will be done Mat. 26 39. yet this word was God, Joh. 1.1. For although the
Spirit speak not from it self, yet this does not degrade him of his Deity, but
rather on the contrary, this shows it to be God in the Unity of the Trinity:
which if they were divided, then indeed he could not be God; although this man
without ground or scripture, affirms the contrary; then although he said he
would not show his judgment touching the Godhead of the Son yet plainly denies
it also from many texts, because he was sent likewise not to do his own will
but, his that sent him, John 5.19.30. c. 7.16.28. c. 8.28.42.12.49.50.14.10.24.

His fourth Argument, He that hears from another what he shall speak is not
God, the holy Spirit does so; Ergo, it is not God.

I answ. as before, in this he denies the Deity of the Son, who says, mine
ears have thou opened Psa. 40.6. and he seems to press it from John 8.26.28.
the truth is, he that denies the Deity of one, will be constrained to deny the
Godhead of the other; although he dares not show his judgment touching the
Deity of Christ, till he see how people will take his blasphemy, to deny the
Deity of the Holy Ghost: but one thing in this Argument is remarkable, to show
the wilful blindness of this man; and that is by comparing two texts together
Isa. 40.13, 14. Romans 11.33.34. in the latter the Apostle admires at the wisdom
and knowledge of God, saying, his ways and judgments are unsearchable, and past
finding out: the other place says as much of the Spirit of the Lord, saying,
who taught him judgment or knowledge or the way of understanding? Hence I gather
two things: first, what is said of God in one place is said of the Spirit in
the other, ergo, the Spirit is God; and if all creatures are excluded as unable
to search out Gods wisdom and knowledge, and yet the Spirit of God can without
teaching, then the Spirit of God is God. Then he says without proof, that
Christ taught the Spirit as a King does an Ambassador; but I say again with
Paul: Gods ways of wisdom and knowledge are unsearchable and past finding out of
all Angels and creatures: although he is pleased to say, the Spirit of God is
but an Angel.

His fifth Argument, He that receives of another is not God, but the Spirit
does so Ergo, it is not God.

I answ. as before; if there were any truth in this argument, it would prove
that Christ was not God, as soon as the Holy Ghost; and besides none has
taught the Spirit of God; debated in answer to his last argument from Isa,
40.13, 14.

His sixth argument, He that is sent by another is not God; the holy Spirit is
sent by another, Ergo it is not GOD.

But to this also I have answered, that it denies the Godhead of Christ as well
as the Godhead of the Holy Ghost, and that equals may one send another, and
that this could neither degrade the Godhead of the Son or of the Holy Ghost.

His seventh argument; He that is the gift of GOD is not GOD; but the holy
Spirit is the gift of GOD: Act. 11.17. therefore not GOD.

I ans. That gift there spoken of, is but the operation of God or the work of
Gods Spirit in the soul; how much more shall your heavenly Father give his
Spirit to them that ask him; Luke 11.13. that is, your Father which is in
heaven will give good things to them that ask him; Mat. 7.11. but the Spirit
of God cannot be things in the plural number; unless they should affirm that
God would give many Spirits nor is the person of that one spirit where it was
not before, when as it fills all places; nor as an angel: for then if one had
that angel or creature, others must be without him at the same time: so then
the holy Ghost who can work and create and give gifts in many places, and to
many persons at once, is God.

His 8. argument He that changes place is not GOD: but the holy Spirit
changes place: he came upon Christ in a bodily shape Luke 3.21, 32. therefore
it is not GOD. I ans. God has often manifested his presence Exodus 24.10. the
Lord said, I will send mine Angel, this grieved them: then said the Lord, my
presence shall go with thee Exodus 23.2, 4, 14, then the Spirit of God is God
notwithstanding this argument.

His Ninth argument: He that prays unto Christ to come to judgment is not
GOD: the holy Spirit does so Rev, 22.17, Ergo it is not God.

I ans. the spirit there is not said to be Gods Spirit, but the Spirit of the
bride: but he says: we have received the Spirit of adoption, by whom we cry
Abba Father: Romans 8.15. it is true the Spirit of God moves the spirit of the
bride to cry and to say, come from: for the Holy ghost moves all things and
yet it self is not moved, therefore it is God and no created Angel.

His tenth argument: He in whom men have not believed and yet have been
disciples is not GOD: but men have not so much as heard whether there were any
holy Ghost, yet have been Disciples and Believers Act. 19.2. therefore the Holy
Ghost is not God. I ans. they might be believers and disciples and yet not hear
nor know whether there were any holy Ghost: for the Apostles themselves who had
true grace in their souls were ignorant both of the death and resurrection
asscension and coming of Christ to Judgment: although Christ had often told
them of it: then must we either exclude these from being disciples and
believers, or else degrade the holy Ghost of his Godhead. what horrible
divinity is this? Again, many a dear child of God may have the Holy Ghost given
to him, whether it be taken to be God himself in Covenant, or the graces of God
infused: the best of us see but darkly, and sometimes those that fear the Lord
walk in darkness and see no light Isa. 50.10. the Holy ghost is GOD, although
we had none of us all ever heard of him.

His eleventh argument: He that has an understanding distinct from that of God
is not God: the holy Spirit has an understanding distinct from God: When the
Spirit of truth is come, he shall not speak of himself, but whatever he shall
hear that he shall speak Joh, 16 13. he shall glorify me, for he shall receive of
mine and take of mine and show it you v. 14.15. Ergo the holy ghost is not God.
I ans. that which the Son receives of the Father, and the holy Ghost of both,
the father and the son, does not degrade either Son or holy Ghost of their
Godhead: for the Father is the fountain of all actions: the Son the worker, and
the holy Ghost the finisher: or thus; the Father works, by the Son, through the
holy ghost; the Son works from the Father by the holy ghost: the holy ghost
works both from the Father and the Son: as distinct subsistances in the same
Godhead.

His twelfth Argument; He that has a will distinct in number from God is not
God, the spirit has a will distinct in number from God, therefore the spirit is
not God. Here I might show how this man denis the diety of Christ, who says,
not my will, but thy will be done, Mat. 26. But let us see his proof, how the
spirit has a will distinct in number from God, and that is from Romans 8.26.27.
the spirit helps our infirmities, for we know not for what to pray as we
ought: but the spirit himself makes intercession for us with sighs and groans
unutterable: but he that searches the heart, and knows the mind of the spirit,
makes intercession for the Saints according to the will of God; here says he
is an impregnable argument, of the spirits being inferior to God, because he
makes intercession: and tha^ conformably, or according to the will of God,
therefore the spirit is not God.

I answer, It is true the spirit of God inditeth, frames or makes
intercession for us, and we take up those words and turn to the Lord, Hosea
14.2. but will it follow, because the spirit inditeth our prayers, and so
teaches us to pray according to the will of God, that therefore the spirit
makes intercession? no, it is the spirit that inditeth or makes our requests
according to the will of God, but it is Christ our only mediator that presents
our Petitions to the father, and so they are accepted as from the hand of
Christ, Revel. 8.3. Then the holy Ghost does not make intercession to God for
us, that is the work of Christ, only he indites our requests in us and for us:
and while this man affirms that the holy Ghost is but an Angel, and yet an
advocate to make intercession for us, in this he agrees with Papists, who make
Angels their advocates, whereas God charge them with folly, Job 4.18. They
cover their faces an their feet, because they are asham^^ that God should
behold their imperfection, Isa. 6.2. And the holy Lord Go^, who there said to
the Prophet, make their ears out of hearing, Paul says, it was the holy
Ghost, Acts 28.25. Ergo, the holy Ghost is God, and not an Angel, who durst not
behold his holiness, and the scripture is plain, That Jesus Christ alone is our
Advocate, 1 John. 2.1. He ever lives to make Intercession for us. Heb. 7.25.
But the truth is, no Saint or Angel can make Intercession for us, they know not
our want, Isa. 63.16. And the Angels know no more about the work of our
Redemption, then is made known to them by the Church, Ephe. 3.10. Although they
stoop down and desire to look into it, 1 Pet. 1.12. But here is one thing in
this text that might satisfy this man, the holy Ghost is God, if he were not
wilfully blinded; mark, he that searches the heart and knows the mind of the
spirit, who is that? The heart is deceitful above the reach of all things or
creatures, Ergo, no Angel can know it, then who can know it? answer is made, I
the Lord search the heart. Jer. 17.9, 10. Then I may say with him that was
restored to his sight, this is a mervielous thing that ye know not who it is,
and yet he searches the heart, and knows the mind of the spirit: Then I say
the Lord is that spirit, and where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.
2 Cor. 3.17. Then if the spirit search the heart, and the Lord is that spirit,
then it is clear that the holy Ghost is God, and so his Imprognable Argument is
demolished and not able to defend his blasphemy against the d^ety of the holy
Ghost. Again, this Argument is rather framed against the Godhead of Christ
because he makes Intercession: Ergo, he is not God, but inferior to God, but
the ^^^d is God, the son that was given is the mighty God, my God and my Lord,
as I have showed. Again, if the spirit is not God for making request for us,
then the son is not God who taught us to pray, Mat. 6.9. Nor the father who
gave us the spirit of grace and supplication. Zac. 12.10. But enough of this.

Now I shall briefly answer his false exposition of some texts of Scripture: I
begin with Mat. 28.19: this text he would corrupt thus, saying, to be baptized
in the name of the holy Ghost, is no more but to be baptized unto the guidance
of the spirit, or Angel to guide them, as the Jews are said to be baptized unto
Moses. 1 Cor. 10.2. which place he corrupts also, saying, they were baptized
into Moses, but he that is baptized into Christ has put on Christ by
profession, he is a Christian, Gal. 3.27. As when Joseph's sons took upon them,
Isreal's name, they were called Israelites Genesis 48.16. Then because Paul says,
there is but one God and one Jesus Christ, and no man speaking by the spirit of
God, calls Jesus accursed, neither can they say that Jesus is the Lord but by
the holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 8.5, 6. 1 Cor. 12.3, And there is one body and one
spirit, one God and father of all. Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5, 6. From these places he
would degrad the holy Ghost of his Godhead, when as, if but one spirit act all
the mystical body of Christ, it must needs be God; for how should a creature
act all the Saints in heaven and earth, all are joined to the Lord by one
spirit. 1 Cor. 6.17. Now by this spirit none can curse Jesus Christ, nor can
any truly say Christ is their Lord, but by this spirit of God, who only makes
them obedient to father son and holy Ghost, for these three are one, 1 John
5.7. But let us a little view his exposition of that text, who says the
father, word, and holy Ghost are one by agreement only; but have we not all one
father, has not one God created us, Mal. 2.10? My father and your father is my
God and your God Mat. 20.17. and the word was God Joh. 1.1. unto us a son is
given; the mighty GOD Isa. 9.6. Jesus Christ is my Lord and my GOD Ioh. 20.28.
and the Spirit of God is omnipotent; for says John, the Spirit works where
it lists, John 3.8. a title peculiar to God, who does whatsoever pleases him
Psa. 135.6. so he is omniscient and omnipresent, and so infinite as the Father
and the Son; which could not stand with them, if they were only one by
agreement: but as I said of the sun; the heat is the sun, and the light is the
sun, and the body of it is the sun; yet not three suns but one sun: so the
Father is God, the Son is God, the Holy ghost is God, yet not three Gods but
one God.

FINIS.

