BLACK MONDAY: OR, A full and exact description of that great and terrible
Eclipse of the Sun which will happen on the 29. day of March 1652. beginning
48. minutes after 8. a clock in the forenoon, and ending 17. minutes after 11.
in which time the Sun will be almost totally darkened (as at the Passion of our
Savior) and the Stars appear in the Firmament in the day time.

Also an Astrologicall conjecture of the terrible Effects that will probably
follow thereupon, according to the judgment of the best Astrologers: It
threatens the fall of some famous Kings or Princes, and Men in authority*
Malice, Hatred, Uncharitableness, cruel Wars and Bloodshed* House-burnings,
great Robberies, Thefts, Plundering and Pillaging, Rapes, Depopulation, violent
and unexpected Deaths, Famine, Plague, etc.

Joel 2.3. A day of darkness and of gloominesse, a day of clouds and of thick
darkness -- there has not been ever the like, neither shall be any more after
it, even to the years of many generations.

The true Figure of the Eclipse.
North.

South.

East.

West.

depiction of the solar eclipse (supposed to occur on 29 March 1652) including
a sword, withered plant, skull, and crossed bones, all symbols of the death and
destruction occasioned by the solar eclipse

December 5th London: Printed for William Ley, at PAUL'S Chain. 1651.

A description of that great Eclipse of the Sun, which will be on the 29. of
March next ensuing, 1652.
TAking into consideration this notable Eclipse, which will be of the Sun, when
I considered with my self the dire and fearful accidents which may happen unto
this Nation, it struck me with astonishment; yet to give the world
satisfaction, I thought good to write (as near as I can) the true description
of this grand Eclipse. You have heard of that remarkable dark Saturday, which
was on the 25. of February, 1598. 'twas much about the same time of the day
that this happens with us in 1652, though many remember that, yet I am
confident not any man living ever saw a greater then this.

And we may well call it Black-Munday. First, in regard it happens upon a
Monday. Secondly, in regard of the effects it brings along with it: for this
dismal day (wherein the Sun shall suffer a total Eclipse to our imagination)
so dark and terrible it will be, that the Stars will be seen at noon day. It
shall happen on the 29. day of March next, beginning at eight of the clock, and
indore till after eleven.

Now I have showed you the time, give me leave to tell you of the sad events
that come thereby: it is the Precursor of great calamities and mischiefs that
shall happen to the people and places concerned in it, especially all Europe,
and more particularly England; this Eclipse falls out in the fiery triplicity
in Aries, (the ascendent of England) and the very degree of his Exaltation,
Mars having principal government and dominion their, and in the Angle
following the Eclipse, and so is Lord thereof, so that the effects must
necessarily be of his quality (evil) Mars being an enemy to mankind, and to all
things that are good: it is the terriblest Eclipse that has been seen in our
days; yea it will be a greater then that ominous Eclipse of the Sun that will
fall out in the year 1654. howbeit never since the eldest man born did there
appear two such Eclipses in England in so short a time; and as they are great
and terrible, so it is as miraculous an Eclipse, as that was at the time of our
Saviors Passion, for that in many remarkable respects too sadly agrees with
this; and cast back your eyes upon the Scripture, how dismal a sight was there,
when there was darkness on all the Land, from the sixth hour till the ninth,
and the Veil of the Temple was rent in twain, and what horrid calamities
happened to the Jews after that? how were they destroyed by Titus Vespasian?
their Temples destroyed, defaced, and themselves led into captivity? what
alterations of government did there not happen? what bloodshed, what murders
were there not perpetrated? how did they embroil their hands in one another
bowels, Father against the son, and son against the Father, till there was
none left? pray God avert those calamities from these Nations, that are under
the predominancy of these ruling Planets; for they presage (if we may believe
Origanus, and the best and most learned Astrologers most sad and dire aspects;
for it threatens exile, captivity, or slaughter of some famous King, or great
Potentate, and men in Authority, etc. and great heart-burning between the
common people and their Magistrates and Governors, with loss to both: what
events have blazing stars produced formerly? the death of Kings and Princes,
great Plagues and Earthquakes; we have seen it plentifully fullfill'd in our
time, to the great terror and amazement of this Kingdom, and other Nations
adjacent; and although there may be a cause in nature, yet do they (by the will
and appointment of God) foretell such things as are the forerunners of the
wrath of God; as the signs in the Air, which Josephus mentions immediately
before the destruction of Jerusalem, and the horrible signs preceding the day
of Judgment: do but peruse the Astrologers, and you find the sad effects of
Comets, etc. did not there happen in 1631. a great Eclipse of the Sun, and in
45. another Lunar Eclipse, most of them happening in the eighth house, termed by
Astrologers, domus mortis; Mars being (for the most part) predominant. In such
Eclpses, surely if we would observe Gods threatening hand over us, we might see
how God forewarns us by his instruments; nay we may expect military acts of
great and fearful consequences in most parts of Europe, which shall produce
scarsity of Doves and beasts, destruction amongst men, and the ruin of most
stately Fabrics, and a great desiciency of the fruits of the earth; that there
will be great things managed in the world is most certain, as to the infinite
honor and fame of some, so to the great prejudice, if not consumption of some
other people and Nations: Affairs shall be acted under the notion of Religion,
yet not without dissimulation, and that has been the pest and bane of all
undertakings, when Religion is made the stalking horse to all designs and
purposes. Mars his position is in Taurus, as his detriment does testify, and
under the banner of conscientious reformation shall the sword bear sway, which
is and will be paramount: if it should be demanded the time when, I answer, as
those precurrent messingers which usher in the beginning of these effects, we
may expect them in June or July this year, according to Hermes in his 33.
Aphorism, Saturno quidem transeunte ab uno signo in aliud, fiunt in coelo
signa de natura ignis, coruscations and fiery apparitions in the Air: this
Conjunctions does denote unto us, that the common people in most Countries will
usurp Authority, and spurn at their Superiors; but some mitigation does Jupiter
promise, that though the Sword rule, it shall seem rather justly to divide,
then ravenously destroy: good grounds will be pretended, Justice as well as
revenge intended in all the quarrels of the sword, and vicissitudes of things:
Let me not be misunderstood, since nothing promises any support to the
tottering time-serving Levite: the Farmer (I am certain) envies his tithes, and
eats his pigs at home; the general part of the pretended Clergy are
male-conlent at the course of things, and do not yet see the overruling hand
of God, nor will they teach men to aquiesce, but sullenly stir up discontent,
pretending religious superlative ends.

Some begin to be ashamed of their Scotch Covenant, which bound them to promote
the honor and dignity of the King and his Successors, subintelligitur, if they
could not sell him for money to promote their own.

Sol (the Prince regent of heaven) who has naturally the signification of
regality, worldly pomp and glory, is ecclipsed in the very degree of his
exaltation, and in the regal house of heaven likewise.

Let those tyrannical powers of the world, who are limited with a non ultra
possumus, who now culminate in their pride and power, expect so sure an
obscuration accompanied with mutation, as not to be avoided: the Moon (the Lady
of the ascendent) eclipsing the Sun in his own house, exaltation and triplicy:
does not this show and declare, that inferiors, and men of men quality shall
usurp and eclipse the glory of the great and mighty? Let me not be
misunderstood, but let this be a caveat to all those supreams whom this Eclipse
finds with the knotty Scepters of tyranny in their hands, be they Kings or
otherwise.

We cannot deny but England is as much, if not more then any other Nation of
Europe concerned in the effects of this solar Eclipse. Lord of heaven and earth
what will thou do with us, we are in thy hands as a ball to be tossed to and
fro: and as the clay in the hands of the Potter, thou can break us, and
bruise us at thy pleasure, if thou do take from us those that sit at the helm
to guide our poor ship of the Commonwealth, I mean our Members of Parliament,
of our Nobles, of our Gentry, of such as commanded and governed, and such as
have not obeyed; but God thou know best what is fittest for us, and teach us
to obey thy will, and be content with our Governors set over us; for regal
Government is very nigh a period in all Nations, by the production of this
Eclipse a grandee falls to nothing: many grand Potentates are eclipsed, their
glory shall be taken from them, and their honor laid in the dust: the first,
second, or third most principal or greatest Prince in Europe shall die e're
1654. or (during the continuance of the effects of this Eclipse) shall suffer
or be sensible of great calamities, intudes and devastations in a most
miserable way, or else the loss of all, or the greatest part of his ancient
patrimony. I much fear, e're time limited for termination of this Eclipses
effects, too many will be sensible of our judgment, for all the evils, the
sword, sedition, famine, pestilence, can do to Europe, may be expected from the
effects of this Eclipse. Oh that the Princes of Europe would learn to be wise
from the book of the creatures, what the will of their God is, before their
houses be left desolate before destruction comes as an armed man. What Kings
and Governors are threatened by this Eclipse, which will be so formidable to
Europe? it is so, that all the Princes in Europe are threatened by it, yea all
those of the world where it is visible and angular, together with Hogens
Moghens, Illustrisimos, and Titilado's, I can hardly sing a quietus est to the
present times, I wish I could, I cannot flatter, neither dare I write what I
think.

This puts me in mind of that miraculous Eclipse of the Sun at the Passion of
our Savior, which in many remarkable respects too sadly agrees with this: For
(as to the Position of Jerusalem) Cancer then ascended, and the very degree
wherein Saturn is at the time of this Eclipse, he also then Rising with the
Horoscope, and in square to both the Luminaries as at this time; the Sun being
then in Aries directly Culminating, and the Moon in Libra opposing him: A heavy
and dreadful Position, it threatens the Exile, Captivity, or slaughter of some
famous King or Prince, and Men in authority, etc. Hatred, Malice, and all
uncharitableness betwixt the Common People and their Magistrates or Governors,
with Detriment, or Ruin to both; the motion of a great Army, cruel Wars,
much bloodshed, and pestilent seditions, the sacking of Cities and Towns,
House-burnings, Robberies, Thefts, Plundering and Pillaging, Rapes,
Depopulations, violent and unexpected deaths, corruption of the Air,
putrefaction and scarcity of Fruits, Abortive Births, Acute Fevers, Famine,
the Plague, and general Murrain amongst Cattle; Pyracies, Ship-wrecks, and
great fights by Sea as well as by Land, discontents, murmurings, and
insurrections, new Governments, new Religions, new Customs, new Laws. In a
word, this Eclipse, premonstrates a general madness and confusion to all such
Kingdoms, Commonwealths, Countries, Cities and Towns as are under the division
of Aries, Libra, Cancer, and Capricorn, viz. England, Scotland, France,
Germany, Denmark, Holland, Zeland, Suevia, Polonia, Granado, Burgundia the
lower, Macedonia, Austria, Alsatia, Thracia, Greece, Saxony, and diverse other
Nations, (more particularly) the Cities and Towns of Naples, Tetraria,
Florence, Padua, Brunswick, Lisbone, Franckford, Vienna in Austria, Antwerp,
Oxford, Brandenburg, Constantinople, Tunis, Venice, Genoa, Pisa, Millain,
Vincentia, Berne, Lubeck, Magdeberge, Wittenberge, Gotlick, York, S. Andrews,
and the Islands of Orcades, and many more, too large for my limits.

The continuance of the effects of this Eclipse, is two years, 25. weeks, odd
hours, from the 4th. day of August, 1652. until the 6th. day of Ian. Anno Dom.
1954.

The quality of the events is known from the nature and quality of the sign, in
which the place of the Eclipse is, from the place and nature of the sign where
any stationary superior Planet is, and from the quality of the sign and places
of the Planets, that hath-most dominion in the sign of the Eclipse, and the
sign of the Angle preceding the Eclipse.

Mars generally signifies or threatens mischief to all in general, which
shall happen through extremity of drought; particularly, he causes much war,
quarrels and bloodshed, amongst men of that life or kind of profession:
therefore I expect little peace here, (nor in any other part of the world
(where there is war) where the Eclipse shall extend its influence) by fair
means or treaty: He excites men also to many robberies, spoiling, sacking, and
inslaving each other, the wrath of Kings and great men, and troubles in
general to all manner or kinds of men: As also sudden death, sicknesses, and
these chiefly, Tertian agues, or Fevers, and this shall be chiefly incident
unto these of younger years, or in their prime or strength of youth; there
shall happen much choler and anger amongst men, and from men of small repute,
they shall commit unlawful things, and transgress the Law; there shall also
happen many combustions, man-slaughters, rapines, thefts and robberies.

His events in the Air shall be extreme heat, and very warm winds, lightning
and little rain.

In the Sea he shall cause destruction very often to ships, by mixed winds, or
lightning, or such like.

In Rivers he shall cause a scarcity of waters, and the drought of fountains.

And in things appertaining to the use of man, viz. beasts and vegetables, he
shall cause a scarcity, there shall be much destruction or want of fruit, by
reason they shall be scorched up with extremity of heat, or eaten with Locusts
and Caterpillars, or they shall be destroyed by winds, or nipt in the bud.

One word more in general, Be wise therefore O ye Kings, be instructed O ye
Judges of the earth; serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice in him with
trembling: for the Sun being in his seat of Majesty, is Eclipsed of his glory:
therefore O ye Kings and Emperors be ye not puffed up with high conceits of your
dignities and honors, for your Scepters are gone, and Democarcy takes place:
your mighty Hosts shall be consumed by the Sword, it is not your Kingdoms nor
your highborn blood can prevent Gods revenging hand that is upon you,
therefore repent in time, lest his Judgments fall upon you, and utterly
eradicate you.

A word to England; Oh England repent thee of thy sins also, lest God take away
the flourishing Gospel, and remove the golden Candlestick from among you, and
give it to a more deserving Nation.

Soli Deo gloria.
FINIS.

