May 22d, 1689.
A Bill Read to Compel the Creditors of Bankrupts to Accept of such a
Composition as the Major Part of the Creditors shall agree to, and Ordered a
Second Reading.
28 Junij Read a 2d time and Com^itted

IF such a Bill pass, It will absolutely discourage all Public Commerce. And
encourage Cheating. For the Bankrupts, either by means of Friends and
Relations, or by pretended Debts, or by private Contrivances with some of the
Creditors, will find out ways to Act Villainy at pleasure.

Sir Robert Vyner in June, 1685, got a Bill brought in to the same effect as
this Bill is, which was Read a Second time and Committed, and the Committee
were pleased to stop it.

Sir Robert Vyner and his Son are both since Dead, and Sir Robert's Executor is
supposed to be concerned in bringing in this Bill. But if any such Bill is
passed, It is Humbly Prayed, that the Concerns of Sir Robert may be excepted,
for Sir Robert was a great Gainer by the late King Charles the Second, and not
a Looser as he pretended, and Sir Robert Died possessed of a great Estate,
although by his Will he has given but 30 l. per Cent of the Principal to his
Creditors in Money, and the remaining Principal and Interest to be taken by
Assignment in the Exchequer. And the rest of his Estate he has given amongst
several of his Relations and Hospitals. But the Creditors are in hopes of being
preferred before such Legacies, there being a sufficient Estate left to Pay
them which have Signed the Proposals their Composition. And to the other
Creditors their whole Debts, and many of the Creditors having Judgments, and
some having already extended his Lands. And if the Executor did not design to
make great Advantage to himself, he would not Attempt these things, any Person
being a fitter Trustee for the Creditors then he.


