NAVIGATION RECTIFIED: OR, THE COMMON CHART Proved to be the only TRUE CHART.
By Peter Blackborow.

LONDON: Printed by John Playford, and are to be Sold by Joseph Hindmarsh,
Bookseller to His Royal Highness, at the Black Bull in Cornhill. 1684.

TO ALL MEN That are Studious in NAVIGATION THIS TREATISE (Upon the Three
Principal Kinds of Sailing, so called, wherein there is so great disproportion,
that the Question may be asked, what is Truth in Navigation? Wherein is proved
by Observation and Demonstration, that there is but one Truth in Navigation,
and that is the Common Chart which is so much rejected by all Writers, so that
all other Positions in Navigation must be rejected; if you will follow that
which is Truth)

Is DEDICATED By Peter Blackborow.

TO THE READER.
NAVIGATION must depend upon the Magnetic Compass, and the Latitude of places
by Observation, otherwise you cannot shape your Course to any place in the
World, by the Rumb, and the Right Lines of the Magnetic Compass, and whereas
you have three principal kinds of Sailing so called: The Common Chart,
Mercator, and the Arch of a Great Circle, wherein it will appear there is so
great disproportion between the one and the other, that the Question may be
asked, which of the three is Truth? There is but one Truth in Navigation, and
tha^ may be always Demonstrated to be so^ so that although the Earth and Se^
are Spherical, I shall prove by Observation, and Demonstration, that the
Magnetic Compass, as it is Horizontal, measures the Superficies of the Earth
and Sea by Right Lines, a^ if the Superficies of the Globe were a Plain to the
Horizon: Therefore ^ shall first resolve the Question by the Rumb and the Right
Lines of the Magnetic Compass, in a Right line^ Triangle, which is in
proportion to the Common Chart.

Then I shall show you how the Meridians and Parallels of places in the Common
Chart, are transferred into the Meridians and Parallels of the Globe.

Then I shall resolve the same Question by Mercator as is given in the Common
Chart, wherein I shall show you how great the disproportion is between the
Meridians of Mercator and the Meridians of the Common Chart: And last of all, I
shall show you wherein the disproportion appears to be a gross error in
Mercator, in mistaking the Meridians of the Magnetic Compass.

Then I shall resolve the same Question by the Arch of a Great Circle, wherein
it will appear the Arch of a Great Circle gives a nearer distance than is
contained in the Parallels of Latitude, which alters the Angles of Position in
the Arch of a Great Circle from the Angles of Position by the Magnetic
Compass, that you cannot give the Question from the Practical part of the Sea,
but you must alter the Meridians and Parallels of places upon the Globe, so the
the Work of Navigation cannot b^ performed by the Arch of a Great Circle, in
proportion to the Rum^ and the Right-lines of the Magnetic^ Compass.

In the Conclusion it will appear by Observation and Demonstration, that the
Common Chart that has been so much rejected by all Writers, is the only Truth
in Navigation. All which I would desire you to accept with the same Candor and
Integrity, as it is offered by him, who is,

A Lover of the MATHEMATICS, Peter Blackborow.

NAVIGATION RECTIFIED.
ALL the known part of the World has been discovered by the Magnetic Compass,
and the Latitude of Places by Observation, which does produce the difference of
Longtitude, and the distance of places in a Right-lined Triangle: Therefore the
Magnetic Compass is of that singular use in Navigation, that all Questions
must be resolved in proportion to the Rumb and the Right-lines of the Magnetic
Compass, otherwise you have no Geometrical Demonstration in Navigation: So that
all the known parts of the World are laid down in the Common Chart in
proportion to the Rumb and the Right Lines of the Magnetic Compass.

Then observe, the Superficies of the Earth and Sea being Spherical, the Lines
of the Globe must be Oblique, which differ from the Rumb and the Right-lines of
the Magnetic Compass and of the Common Chart, therefore there is an absolute
necessity to find such proportions from the Globe, as may be in proportion to
the Meridians and Parallels of the Common Chart; otherwise the Meridians and
Parallels of places in the Common Chart, cannot be transferred into the Globe
according to the Meridians and Parallels of the Globe: So that all the known
part of the World is laid down in the Meridians and Parallels of the Globe from
the Meridians and Parallels of the Common Chart, for the difference of
Longitude in the Common Chart between places differing in Longitude and
Latitude, is proportional to the difference of Meridians in the middle Parallel
between such places differing in Longitude and Latitude upon the Globe: And
where places in the Common Chart differ in Longitude, being in one and the same
Parallel, their distance is the same in the Globe as it is in the Common Chart,
for the distance is transferred from the Common Chart, to the Globe,
notwithstanding it will appear by the following demonstrations, that you cannot
perform the Work of Navigation by the Oblique-lines of the Globe, in regard the
Oblique-lines of the Globe differ from the Rumb, and the Right-lines of the
Magnetic Compass, so that the Angles of Position in all Oblique-angles differ
from the Angles of Position by the Magnetic Compass. Therefore I shall take
this method: First, I shall resolve the Question by the Common Chart: Then I
shall show you how the Meridians and Parallels of places in the Common Chart
are transferred into the Meridians and Parallels of the Globe, and in the next
place I shall resolve the same Question by Mercator: And last of all I shall
resolve the same Question by the Arch of a Great Circle; all which are the
three principal kinds of Sailing so called by all Writers; from whence I shall
prove the Common Chart, that has been so much rejected by all Writers to be
the only Truth in Navigation, for you must Sail by the Rumb and the Right-lines
of the Magnetic Compass, or the Magnetic Compass is of little use in
Navigation.

First, I shall resolve the Question by the Common Chart.

Example. I sail from the Meridian and Parallel of the Lyzard, in the Latitude
of 50 d. 00 m. in an Angle of 71 d. 10 m. Southwestward into the Meridian and
Parallel of Bermudas, in the Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. I demand the difference
geometrical diagram Page: 5.
of Longitude, and the distance between the Meridian and the Parallel of the
Lyzard, and the Meridian and Parallel of Bermudas.

The Angle following being a Right-lined Triangle, and is in the like protion
in the Common Chart, so is L, the Meridian and Parallel of the Lyzard, and B is
the Meridian and Parallel of Bermudas: Then is L, A, the difference of
Latitude, 1055 Miles, and C L D, is the Rumb or Angle of Position between the
Meridian and Parallel of the Lyzard and the Meridian and Parallel of Bermudas
71 d. 10 m. and A B is the difference of Longitude, and L B is the distance
between the Meridian and Parallel of the Lyzard and the Meridian and Parallel
of Bermudas.

In the following demonstration, an Inch divided into ten equal parts is to be
accounted for 1000 Miles, in regard the distance is great, and so many equal
parts cannot be discerned in so small a space.

By the Geometrical measure, the difference of Longitude is A B, 3093 Miles,
and the distance is L B, 3268 Miles, all which is in like proportion to the
Common Chart.

To find the difference of Longitude, the proportions Arithmetical, As the
Radius 90 d. A B N, 1000000; is to the Logarithm of the difference of Latitude
1055 Miles, L A, 302325: so is the Tangent of the Rumb 71 d. 10 m. A, L, B,
1046714. to the Logarithm of the difference of Longitude 349039, A B, 3093
Miles. Add the Logarithm of the difference of Latitude, to the Tangent of the
Rumb, and Subtract the Radius, and you have the Logarithm of the difference of
Longitude 349039, A B, 3093 Miles; so that the difference of Latitude and the
Rumb by the Magnetic Compass, is in proportion in a Right-lined Triangle to
the difference of Longitude in the Common Chart.

To find the distance, the proportions Arithmetical: As the Cosine of the Rumb
71d. 10 m. A, B, L, 950895; Is to the Logarithm of the difference of Latitude
1055 m. L A, 302325: So is the Radius 90 d. L, A, B, 1000000; to the Logarithm
of the distance 351430, L B, 3268 Miles. Add the Logarithm of the difference of
Latitude to the Radius, and Subtract the Cosine of the Rumb, and you have the
Logarithm of the distance 351430, L, B, 3268 Miles; so that the difference of
Latitude and the Rumb by the Magnetic Compass, is in proportion in a
Right-lined Triangle, to the distance in the Common Chart.

Secondly, I shall give the Rumb 71 d. 10 m. A L B; and the difference of
Longitude 3093 m. A B; and demand the difference of Latitude L A, and the
distance L B.

I have already given you the demonstration of the Geometrical part of all
Questions, that are to be resolved between the Meridian and Parallel of the
Lyzard, and the Meridian and Parallel of Bermudas, for as it stands in the
foregoing demonstration it is in the like proportion in the Common Chart,
therefore I shall procee^ to the Arithmetical proportion.

To find the difference of Latitude the proportions Arithmetical; As the
Tangent of the Rumb 71 d. 10 m. A L B, 1046714; Is to the Logarithm of the
difference of Longitude 3093 m. A B, 349037: So is the Radius 90 d. A B N,
13000000; To the Logarithm of the difference of Latitude 302323, L A, 1055 m
Add the Logarithm of the difference of Longitude to the Radius, and Subtract
the Tangent of the Rumb, and you have the Logarithm of the difference of
Latitude 302323, LA, 1055: So that the Rumb, by the Magnetic Compass, and the
difference of Longitude is in proportion in a Right-lined Triangle, to the
difference of Latitude in the Common Chart.

To find the distance, the proportions Arithmetical: As the Sine of the Rumb 71
d. 10 m. A L B, 997610; Is to the Logarithm of the difference of Longitude
3093, L A, 349037: So is the Radius 90 d. L A B, 1000000; to the Logarithm of
the distance 351427, L B; 3268 m. Add the Logarithm of ^he difference of
Longitude to the Radius, and Subtract the Sine of the Rumb, and you have the
Logarithm of the distance 351427, L B; 3268 Miles: So that the difference of
Longitude, and the Rumb by the Magnetic Compass, is in proportion in a
Right-lined Triangle, to the distance in the Common Chart.

Third^y, I shall give you the Rumb A L B, 71 d. 10 m. and the distance L B,
3268 m. and demand the difference of Longitude A B, and the difference of
Latitude L A.

To find the difference of Longitude, the proportions Arithmetical: As the
Radius 90 d. L A B, 1000000; is to the Logarithm of the distance, 3268 m. L B,
351428: So is the Sine of the Rumb 71 d. 10 m. A L B, 997610; to the Logarithm
of the difference of Longitude 349038, A B, 3093 m. Add the Logarithm of the
distance to the Sine of the Rumb, and Subtract the Radius, and you have the
Logarithm of the difference of Longitude, 349038, A B, 3093 m. so that the Rumb
and the distance by the Magnetic Compass, is in proportion in a Right-lined
Triangle, to the difference of Longitude in the Common Chart.

To find the difference of Latitude, the proportions Arithmetical: As the
Radius 90 d. L A B, 1000000, is to the Logarithm of the Distance 3268 m. L B,
351428: So is the Cosine of the Rumb 71 d. 10 m. A B L, 950896, to the
Logarithm of the difference of Latitude, 302323, L A, 1055 m. Add the
Longarithm of the distance to the Cosine of the Rumb, and Subtract the Radius,
and you have the Logarithm of the difference of Latitude 302323, L A, 1055 m.
So that the Rumb, and the distance by the Magnetic Compass, is in proportion
to the difference of Latitude in the Common Chart.

Fourthly, I shall give the difference of Latitude L A, 1055 m. and the
difference of Longitude A B, 3093 m. and demand the Rumb by the Magnetic
Compass A L B.

To find the Rumb by the Magnetic Compass, the proportions Arithmetical: As
the Logarithm of the difference of Latitude 1055 m. L A, 302325, is to the
Radius 90 d. A B N, 1000000; so is the Logarithm of the difference of Longitude
3093 m. A B, 349037; to the Tangent of the Rumb 1046712; A L B, 71 d. 10 m. Add
the Radius to the Logarithm of the difference of Longitude, and Subtract the
Logarithm of the difference of Latitude, and you have the Tangent of the Rumb,
1046712; A L B, 71 d. 10 m. So that the difference of Latitude, and the
difference of Longitude, is in proportion to the Rumb, by the Magnetic Compss,
in the Common Chart.

Fifthly, I shall give the difference of Latitude L A, 1055 m. and the distance
L B, 3268 Miles, and demand the Rumb by the Magnetic^ Compass.

To find the Rumb by the Magnetic^ Compass, the proportions Arithmetical: As
the Logarithm of the distance 326^ m. L B, 351428, is to the Radius 90 d* L A
B, 1000000; so is the Logarithm of the difference of Latitude 1055 m* L A,
302325; to the Cosine of the Rumb 950897, A B L, 18 d. 50 m whose Complement
is 71 d. 10 m. A L B* So that the difference of Latitude an^ distance of
places, is in proportion t^ the Rumb, by the Magnetic Compas^ in the Common
Chart. Add the Logarithm of the difference of Latitude to the Radius, and
Subtrac^ the Logarithm of the distance, and you have the Cosine of the Rumb
950897, A B L, 18 d. 50 m. whose complement is 71 d. 10 m. A L B, demanded.

Sixthly, I shall give the difference of Longitude 3093 m. A B; and the
distance 3268 m. L B. and demand the Rumb by the Magnetic Compass.

To find the Rumb by the Magnetic Compass, the proportions Arithmetical: As
the Logarithm of the distance 3268 m. L B, 351428; is to the Radius 90 d. L A
B, 1000000: So is the Logarithm of the difference of Longitude 3093 m. A B,
349037; to the Sine of the Rumb 997609, A L B, 71 d. 10 m. Add the Radius to
the Logarithm of the difference of Longitude, and Subtract the Logarithm of the
distance, and you have the Sine of the Rumb 997609, A L B, 71 d. 10 m. So that
the difference of Longitude, and the distance is in proportion to the Rumb in
the Common Chart.

Seventhly, I shall give the difference of Longitude 3093 m. A B, and the
distance 3268 m. L B, and demand the difference of Latitude L A.

To find the difference of Latitude, the proportions Arithmetical: Add the
difference of Longitude 3093 m. to the distance 3268 m. and you have 6361 Mil.
for the sum of the sides; then Subtract the difference of Longitude from the
distance, and you have 175 Miles for the difference of the sides; so take the
Logarithm of the sum of the sides A B, L B, 6361 Mile^ 380352; and the
Logarithm of the difference of the sides 175 Miles 224303: Add them together,
an^ you have 604655, the half is 302327* which is the Logarithm of the
difference of Latitude 1055 m. L A. S^ that the difference of Longitude, an^
the distance is in proportion in a Right lined Triangle, in the Common Chart*

Eighthly, I shall give the differenc^ of Latitude L A, 1055 m. and the distance
L B, 3268 m. and demand the difference of Longitude.

To find the difference of Longitude the proportions Arithmetical; Ad^ the
difference of Latitude 1055 m. to the distance 3268 m. and you have 4323 Miles
for the sum of the sides then Subtract the difference of Latitude from the
distance, and you have 2213 Miles for the difference of the sides: So take the
Logarithm of the sum of the sides 4323 Miles, L A, L B, 363578; and the
Logarithm of the difference of the sides, 2213, 334498: Add them together, and
you have 698076, the half is 349038, which is the Logarithm of the difference
of Longitude 3093 Miles, A B: So that the difference of Latitude, and the
distance is in proportion in a Right-lined Triangle, in the Common Chart.

I have proved by the foregoing Questions, that the Rumb and the Right-lines of
the Magnetic Compass, agree with the Rumb and the Right-lines of the Common
Chart, from hence may arise an objection, how the Right-lines of the Magnetic
Compass can measure the Superficies of the Globe, which is spherical? To answer
this objection, I will grant you to be in any Meridian and Parallel of the
World, wherein you must see 180 d. of Heaven, for it is 90 d. from your Zenith
every way to the Horizon, then the Circulation of the Horizon must contain 360
d. To this I compare t^^ Magnetic Compass, which contai^ 360 d. and is
Horizontal to the H^rizon always, in all Meridians an^ Parallels of the World;
So that the North and South, and the East an^ West Points of the Magnetic
Compass, point to the Celestial Poles o^ North and South, and to the Celestia^
Poles of East and West, in all Meridians and Parallels of the Earth and Sea,
without giving any difference of observation for the SemiDiameter of the Earth
and Sea; the^ the Meridians of the Magnetic Compass, must run parallel to the
Poles of East and West, as the parallels of Latitude run parallel to the Poles
of North and South; therefore the Magnetic Compass being of Right-lines,
measures the Superficies of the Globe by Right-lines, as if the Superficies of
the Globe was always a Plain to the Horizon; so that whatever position does
disagree with the Rumb and the Right-lines of the Magnetic Compass must be a
false position in Navigation, for the work of ^avigation must be performed by
the ^agnetick Compass, and the Latitude ^ places by observation, by which ^eans
all the known parts of the ^orld have been discovered, and laid ^own in a Plain
in the Common Chart: Therefore I shall show you ^ow the difference of Latitude
and the ^ifference of Longitude, and the distance of places in the Common Chart
is transferred, in proportion to the difference of Latitude, and the distance
of places upon the Globe; wherein I shall prove by demonstration, that the
Meridian of the Magnetic Compass does differ from the Meridians of the Globe,
as they are drawn.

To prove how the difference of Latitude, and the distance of places, and the
difference of Longitude in the Common Chart, is transferred from the Common
Chart, to be in proportion by Demonstration to the difference of Latitude, and
the distance of places upon the Globe:

In the foregoing Question, by the Common Chart, the Lizard is in the Latitude
of 50 d. 00 m. the Bermudu^ is in the Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. their difference
of Latitude is 1055 m or 17 d. 35 m. and the difference o^ Longitude is 3093 m.
or 51 d. 33 m. and the distance is 3268 m. or 54 d. 28 m. before I proceed to
the demonstration upon the Globe, you may observe the difference of Longitude
in all Right-lined Triangles, is in proportion to the difference of Longitude
in the middle parallel of the Globe, between such place differing in Longitude
and Latitude, in all Meridians and parallels of the World.

The Demonstration follows, P the North Pole, D A the Latitude of Bermudus, A B
a parallel of the Latitude of Bermudus, A P of the complement of the Latitude
of Bermudus, E F the difference of Longitude, found by the foregoing
Right-lined Triangle, which is in proportion to the middle parallel upon the
Globe; D L the geometrical diagram Page: 19
Latitude of the Lyzard, L G a parallel of the Latitude of the Lyzard L P, the
complement of the Latitude of the Lyzard, P D is the Meridian of the Lyzard, P
C is the Meridian of Bermudus, D P C is the difference of Longitude of the
Aequinoctial.

TO prove how the difference of Latitude, and the distance of places, and the
difference of Longitude in the Common Chart is transferred by demonstration, to
be in proportion to the difference of Latitude, and the distance of places upon
the Globe.

EXAMPLE. The Lyzard is in the Latitude of 50 d. 00 m. L. Bermudus is in the
Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. B, their difference of Latitude is A L, 17 d. 35 m. the
half thereof is 08 d. 47 m. 30 sec. which being added to D A, 32 d. 25 m. the
Latitude of Bermudus, you have D E, 41 d. 12 m. 30 sec. the Latitude of the
middle parallel between the Lizard and Bermudus, then reduce the di^rence of
Longitude found by the for going Right-lined Triangle, betwe^ the Meridian and
parallel of the Lyza^ and the Meridian and parallel of B^mudus, 3093 m. into
Degrees of t^ Aequinoctial, by dividing 3093 by 60 m. and you have 51 d. 33
which distance being taken by you Compass, from the Aequinoctial pa^ of the
Globe, and measuring the distance in the middle parallel E ^ 41 d. 12 m. 30
sec. you will find tha^ distance 51 d. 33 m. to reach from the Meridian of the
Lyzard, to the Mer^dian of the Bermudus, in the paralle^ of 41 d. 12 m. 30 sec.
which is the same distance in the Common Chart so that the Lyzard must be laid
down upon the Globe, in the Meridian o^ the middle parallel D E P, and in the
Latitude of 50 d. 00 m. at L, and Bermudus must be laid down upon the Globe in
the Meridian of the middle parallel C E P, and in the Latitude of 32 d. 25 m.
at B.

In the next place, I shall show you ^w to find the distance by the Geo^etrical
part of the Globe, to be in ^oportion to the distance found by a ^ght-lined
Triangle between the Me^dian and parallel of the Lyzard, and the Meridian and
parallel of ^ermudus.

EXAMPLE. Reduce the distance found by a ^ight-lined Triangle 3268 m. by 60 m.
unto degrees of the Aequinoctial, by ^ividing 3268 m. by 60 m. and you ^ave 54
d. 28 m. which distance being taken by your Compass, from the Aequinoctial part
of the Globe, that distance will reach from the Meridian and parallel of the
Lyzard L, to the Meridian and parallel of Bermudus B, so that the distance
between the Meridian and parallel of the Lyzard, and the Meridian and parallel
of Bermudus, is the same in the Globe as it is in a Right-lined Triangle.

Having proved how the difference of Latitude, and the distance of places, and
the difference of Longitude in the Common Chart, is transferred from the Common
Chart, to be in propotio^ by demonstration to the difference o^ Latitude, and
the difference of Longitude in the middle parallel, and the distance of places
on the Globe:

In the next place, you may observ^ the difference of Longitude in the Globe,
between the Meridians of the middle parallel 41 d. 12. m. 30 sec E F, is 3093
m. or 51 d. 33 m. And the difference of Longitude in the Aequinoctial part of
the Globe, between those Meridians D C is 4200 m. or 70 d. 00 m. and the
difference of Longitude between those Meridians, in the parallel of Bermudus, A
B, is 3545 m. or 59 d. 05 m. and the difference of Longitude, between those
Meridians in the parallel of the Lyzard L G is 2700 Miles, or 45 d. 00 m. all
which distances may be measured upon the Globe; from whence you may make this
observation, that the difference of Longitude in the Globe, between the
Meridian and Parallel of Bermudus B, and the Meridian of the Lyzard A B, is
^545 m. 59 d. 05 m. and the distance ^y the Common Chart, between the Meridian
and Parallel of the Lyzard, and the Meridian and parallel of Bermudus, is 3268
m. or 54 d. 28 m. So that the difference of Longitude in the Globe, between the
Meridian and parallel of Bermudus, and the Meridian of the Lyzard is 277 m. or
04 d. 37 m. more than the distance between the Meridian and parallel of the
Lyzard, and the Meridian and Parallel of Bermudus, which is out of all
proportion to the Rumb, and the difference of Longitude and the distance of
places in a Right-lined Triangle; for the difference of Longitude in
Navigation, by the Magnetic Compass cannot be greater than the distance: So
that the work of Navigation cannot be performed by the Globe, before you have
found such proportions upon the Globe, which are in proportion to the Rumb, and
the Right-lines of the Magnetic Compass, as the Question has b^ transferred
to the Globe from Common Chart.

In the next place I shall give (...) the Arithmetical proportions of Globe,
which are in proportion the Geometrical part.

The Lyzard is in the Latitude 50 d. 00 m. L, Bermudus is in Latitude of 32 d.
25 m. B, their di^rence of Longitude in the Aequinoct^ part of the Globe is 70
d. 00 m D I demand the difference of Longitu^ in the middle parallel E F.

To find the Logarithm of the diff^rence of Longitude, between the M^ridian and
Parallel of the Lyzard, ar^ the Meridian of Bermudus L G, t^^ proportion
Arithmetical: As the R^dius 90 d. P D, 1000000, is to the L^garithm of the
d^fference of Longitu^ in the Aequinoctial, 70 d. 00 m. 4200 m. D C, 362324; so
is the C^ sine of the Latitude of the Lyzard 40 ^ 00 m. P L, 980806, to the
Logarithm of L G, 343130. Add the Logarithm of the difference of Longitude in
^e Aequinoctial to the Cosine of the ^atitude, and Subtract the Radius, and
^ou have the Logarithm of the diffe^^nce of Longitude between the Me^^dian and
parallel of the Lyzard, and ^e Meridiad of Bermudus, L G, 43130, or 2700 m.

To find the Logarithm of the diffe^ence of Longitude between the Meri^ian and
parallel of Bermudus, and the Meridian of the Lyzard, B A, the pro^ortions
Arithmetical: As the Radius ^0 d. 00 m. P D, 1000000; is to the ^ogarithm of
the difference of Longitude ^n the Aequinoctial, 70 d. 00 m. or ^200 m. D C,
362324: So is the Co^ine of the Latitude of Bermudus 57 d. ^5 m. A P, 992643;
to the Logarithm of A B, 354967: Add the Logarithm of the difference of
Longitude in the Aequinoctial, to the Cosine of the Latitude, and Subtract the
Radius, and you have the Logarithm of the difference of Longitude, between the
Meridian and parallel of Bermudus, and the Meridian of the Lyzard, A B, 354967,
or 3545 m.

Then add the Logarithm of 34^ found in proportion, to 70 d. 00 ^ Longitude, in
the parallel of 00 m. to the Logarithm of 354 found in proportion to 70 d. 00 ^
Longitude, in the parallel of 25 m. and you have 698097, the in 3490481/2^
which is the Logari^^ of the difference of Longitude in middle parallel,
between the Meri^ and parallel of the Lyzard and the ^^ridian and parallel of
Bermudus, 3093 m. or 51 d. 33 m. So that the portions Arithmetical do agree w^
the proportions Geometrical, where you have the middle parallel 3093 the proper
difference of Longitude, which the difference of Latitude, a^ the distance upon
the Globe, is in li^ proportion in the common Chart.

Last of all, I shall give the Questi^^ from the difference of Longitu^^ in a
Right-lined Triangle, and the L^titude of the Lyzard and Bermudu^ and demand
the difference of Lo^gitude in the Aequinoctial part of the Globe.

EXAMPLE. Sail from the Lyzard in the Lati^e of 50 d. 00 m. L, between the ^ith
and the West, in the Latitude 32 d. 25 m. B, I find my difference Longitude in
a Right-lined Tri^^gle, 3093 m. I demand the diffe^^^ce of Longitude in the
Aequinoctial ^t of the Globe, between the Me^^^ian of the Lyzard and the
Meri^^^n of Bermudus.

To find the difference of Longitude the Aequinoctial, the proportions
^^ithmetical: As the Cosine of the ^^titude of the Lyzard, 40 d. 00 m. L,
980806; is to the Logarithm of ^^e difference of Longitude in the middle
^^rallel of the Globe, 3093 m E F, 49037: So is the Radius 90 d. 00 m. D,
1000000; to the Logarithm of 68231: Add the Logarithm of the ^ifference of
Longitude in the middle ^arallel to the Radius, and Subtract ^^e Cosine of the
Latitude, and you ^ave the Logarithm of 368231, which must be added to the n^
proportion.

Then, As the Cosine of the Latitu^^ of Bermudus, 57 d. 35 m. P A, 99264 is to
the Logarithm of the differe^^ of Longitude in the parallel of (...) Globe,
3093 m. E F, 349037: So the Radius 90 d. oo m. P D, 100000^ to the Logarithm of
356394: A^ the Logarithm of the difference Longitude in the middle parallel,
the Radius, and Subtract the Co-si^^ of the Latitude, and you have t^^
Logarithm of 356394:

Then add the Logarithm of 36823 (found in proportion to 3093 m. Longitude in
the parallel of 50 d. 00 m to the Logarithm of 356394, (found (...) proportion
to 3093 m. of Longitude, (...) the parallel of 32 d. 25 m.) and yo^ have
724625; the half is 362312 which is the Logarithm of the difference of
Longitude in the Aequinoctia^ part of the Globe, 4200 m. D C demanded: So that
the proportions Arithmetical agree with the proportions Geometrical, therefore
the difference of Longitude in the middle ^arallel of the Globe, is the proper
^ifference of Longitude 3093 m. in ^roportion to the Rumb, by the Mag^etick
Compass.

I have done with first Questionn in the Common Chart between places differing
in Longitude and Latitude, wherein I have proved how the Meridians and
parallels of the common Chart differing in Longitude and Latitude, are
transferred by Demonstration, in proportion to the difference of Latitude, and
the distance of places upon the Globe.

Last of all, I shall show you how to transferr the difference of Longitude in
one and the same Latitude in the Common Chart, into the Meridians and parallels
of the Globe.

EXAMPLE. In the Common Chart in the Latitude of 50 d. 00 m. the difference of
Longitude is 3093 m. L T, I demand the difference of Meridians in t^
Aequinoctial part of the Globe.

To find the difference of Longitu^^ in the Aequinoctial part of the Glo^^ the
proportions Arithmetrical: As t^ Cosine of the Latitude 40 d. 00 m. P 980806,
is to the Logarithm of the diff^rence of Longitude, in the parallel 50 d. 00 m.
L T, 3093 m. 349037 so is the Radius 90 d. P D, 1000000 to the Logarithm of
368231; which the Logarithm of D H, 4812 Miles, ^ 80 d. 12 m. the difference of
Meridian in the Aequinoctial part of the Glob^ being oblique, do differ from
the Meridians of the Common Chart tha^ are Right-lined; but the distance o^
places in the Globe are the same in the Common Chart, in regard the distance of
places is transferred from the Common Chart to the Globe, therefore the
superficies of the Common Chart in all Meridians and parallels, is in
proportion to the superficies of the Globe in all Meridians and Parallels.

AND whereas all Writers in Navigation, have condemned the ^ommon Chart to be
pestered with ^otorious errors, it proves a great ^istake; therefore I shall
answer the ^rincipal objection, and in that I ^nswer all the rest.

Mr. Edward Wright in his Correction of Errors in the Common Chart, Fol. 5.
^aith, In showing the distance of places, there is as great an error committed
as in any of the former.

For Example,If you imagine two Ships to be under the Aequinoctial 100 Leagues
asunder, and that each of them should Sail from thence due North or South,
under his Meridian, until they come to the parallel of 60 d. Latitude, they
should be there but only 50 Leagues distant, because at that Parallel, the
Meridians are distant but half so much one from another, as they were at the
Aequinoctial, as it may most manifestly appear by the Globe, and y^ the Chart
will show, that those t^^ Ships have the self-same distance 100 Leagues, being
under the P^rallel of 60 degrees, which they ha^ before when they were under
t^^ Aequinoctial.

It is granted, that the difference (...) Meridians in the Common Chart, 100
Leagues in the Equinoctial, an^ 100 Leagues in the Parallel of 6^ Degrees.

In regard it appears by observatio^ by the Magnetic Compass, that the East
and West point of the Magnetic^ Compass as it is Horizontal, does always point
to the Poles of East and W. in the Celestial Sphere, likewise the North and
South point of the Magnetic Compass, as it is Horizontal, does always point to
the Poles of North and South in the Celestial Sphere, in all Meridians and
Parallels of the Terrestial Sphere, without making any difference of
observation for the Semi-Diameter of the Earth: And whereas it appears by
observation, that the ^agnetick Compass in its true Poles ^ill direct your the
Circulation of the ^arth and Sea, in any Parallel of ^atitude, keeping an equal
distance ^om the Poles of North and South; ^ likewise it must be granted that
the Meridians of the Magnetic Compass, ^ust run Parallel to the Poles of ^ast
and West, the Circulation of the ^arth in all Parallel Meridians, in ^egard the
Magnetic Compass as it is Horizontal, makes the same position to the Poles of
North and South in the Celestial Sphere, and to the ^oles of East and West in
the Celestial Sphere, in all Meridians and Parallels of the Terrestial Sphere,
without making any difference of observation for the Semi-Diameter of the
Earth; So that the Meridians do cross the Parallels of the Magnetic Compass at
Right-Angles, in all Meridians and Parallels of the Earth and Sea, as it is by
demonstration in the Common Chart. Therefore the Magnetic Compass as it is
Horizontal, must measure the superficies of the Terrestial Sphere by
Right-lines, as if t^ Superficies of the Terrestial Sphe^^ was a plain to the
Horizon; so that you imagine two Ships to be under t^^ Aequinoctial 100 Leagues
asunder, a^ that each of them should Sail from thence due North, or due South,
und^^ his Meridian, until they come to the Parallel of 60 d. Latitude, they
mu^^ be 100 Leagues distant; in regard the Meridians of the Magnetic Compas^
must run Parallel to the Poles o^ East and West, as the East and We^^ points of
the Magnetic Compass ru^^ Parallel to the Poles of North an^ South, I shall
treat more at large o^ this in its due place.

I have given you the Geometrica^ demonstration, and the Arithmetical rules,
how all places in the Common Chart are transferred into the Meridians and
Parallels of the Globe; therefore you cannot resolve any Question in Navigaton
from the Globe, without you have such proportions from the Globe as are in
proportion to the Rumb, and the Right-lines of the Magnetic Compass.

The same Question resolved by Mercator's Projection.
MR. Edward Wright in his Projection of Mercators Plain-Sphere, does make the
superficies of the Globe as a ^lain to the Horizon, and does measure ^l the
Parallels of the Globe, in propor^ion to the degrees of the Aequinoctial ^o the
North and South Poles; so that ^ll the Parallels in Mercator's Plain-^phere,
are of equal Diameter to the Poles. Then Mercator divides the Meridian Line
into unequal parts, and does increase the degrees and minutes of Latitude from
the Aequinoctial to the Poles, to almost an endless proportion: Therefore at
every point of Latitude in his Plain-Sphere, the difference of Meridians does
so increase, that taking half a degree above a point of Latitude, and half a
degree below the Latitude, that distance is to be a degree of Longitude in that
Latitude; so that the design of Mercator's Plain-Sphere is to measure the
difference of Meridians, in proportion to the di^^^rence of Meridians upon the
Glo^^

The Question to be resolved Mercator. The Lyzard, Latitude 50 ^ 00 m.
Bermudus, Latitude 32 d. 25 ^ their difference of Longitude in t^ Aequinoctial
70 d. 00 m. I demand t^ Rumb by the Magnetic Compass.

This Question cannot be resolved any Geometrical demonstration, regard I have
not the difference Longitude in proportion to the Rum^ by the Magnetic
Compass, for Right-lined Triangle must be of equ^ parts, otherwise the
difference of L^titude and the difference of Longitud^ cannot be in proportion
to the distance of places upon the Rum^ by the Magnetic Compass, neithe^ can
this Question be resolved by the Arch of a great Circle, in regar^ the Angles
of Position in all obliqu^ Angles, differ from the Angles of position by the
Magnetic Compass; s^ that Mercator has no way to find the Rumb from the
Question given, but brief Rules in Arithmetic, which are ^ear a proportion to
the Rumb by ^he Magnetic Compass, but when the ^istance between the Meridian
and Parallel of the Lyzard, and the Meridi^n and Parallel of Bermudus, and the
difference of Longitude is required in a Right-lined Triangle, to be in
proportion to the Rumb, by the Magnetic Compass, and the difference of
Latitude then all Mercator's brief Rules in Meridional parts, and the
difference of Longitude in the Aequinoctial are rejected.

TO resolve the Question by Mercators brief Rules, you must first find the
Meridional parts contained between the difference of Latitudes.

EXAMPLE. The meridional parts contained in the Latitude of 50 d. 00 m. are
3475, the meridional parts contained in the Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. are 2058,
then Subtract the lesser from the greater and you have 1417, the Meridional
parts contained in the difference of Latitude; then multiply 70 d. 00 m. of
Longitude by 60 m. and you have 4200 m. the difference of Longitude in the
Aequinoctial. To find ^ Rumb by Mercators brief Rules, ^ As the Logarithm of
the difference Latitude in Meridional parts, 1417 315136, is to the Radius 90
1000000; So is the Logarithm the difference of Longitude in the Aeq^^noctial
4200 m. 362324, to the Ta^gent of the Rumb 71 d. 21 m. 104718^ So that Bermudus
does bear from the Lyzard in an Angle of 71 ^ 21 m. South-Westwards: Add the
Radius to the difference of Longitud^ in the Aequinoctial, and Subtract the
Meridional parts contained in the difference of Latitude, and you have the
Tangent of the Rumb 71 d. 21 m^ 1047188.

The second Question to be resolved by Mercators brief Rules; the difference of
Latitude between the Lyzard and Bermudus, in Meridional parts is 1417, and the
Rumb is an Angle of 71 d. 21 m. South-Westwards, I demand the difference of
Longitude in the Aequinoctial.

To find the difference of Longitude the Aequinoctial, say, As the Radius ^0 d.
1000000, is to the Logarithm of ^e difference of Latitude in Meridional ^^rts
1417, 315136; so is the Tangent ^ the Rumb 71 d. 21 m. 1047171, to ^he
Logarithm of the difference of Longi^ude in the Aequinoctial 4198 Miles,
^62307: Add the Logarithm of the ^eridional parts contained in the diffe^ence
of Latitude, to the Tangent of ^he Rumb, and Subtract the Radius, and you have
the Logarithm of the ^ifference of Longitude in the Aequi^octial, 4198 m.
362307 demanded.

The third Question to be resolved ^y Mercators brief Rules; the difference of
Longitude in the Aequinoctial, between the Meridian of the Lyzard, and the
Meridian of Bermudus, 4200 m. The Rumb is an Angle of 71 d. 21 m.
South-Westwards, I demand the difference of Latitude in Meridional parts.

To find the difference of Latitude in Meridional parts, say, As the Tangent of
the Rumb 71 d. 21 m. 1047171, is to the Logarithm of the difference Longitude
in the Aequinoctial 4200 ^ 362324; so is the Radius 90d. 100000^ to the
Logarithm of the difference ^ Latitude in Meridional parts, 1417 315153: Add
the Logarithm of the difference of Longitude in the Aequ^noctial, to the
Radius, and Subtrac^ the Tangent of the Rumb, and yo^ have the Logarithm of the
differenc^ of Latitude in Meridional parts, 1417 315153 demanded.

The Fourth Question to be resolved by Mercator's brief Rules. The difference
of Latitude as it is upon the Globe 1055 m. and the difference of Latitude in
Meridional parts 1417; and the difference of Longitude in a Right-lined
Triangle, according to the Rumb found by these brief Rules, 3126 m. I demand
the difference of Longitude in the Aequinoctial.

To find the difference of Longitude in the Aequinoctial, Say, As the Logarithm
of the difference of Latitude upon the Globe 1055 m. 302325; is to the
Logarithm of the difference of Longitude in a Right-lined Triangle, 3126 m.
^9498; so is the Logarithm of the diffe^^nce of Latitude in Meridional parts,
^17, 315136; to the Logarithm of the ^^fference of Longitude in the
Aequinoctial ^98, 362309: Add the Logarithm the difference of Longitude in a
^^ght-lined Triangle, to the Logarithm ^ the difference of Latitude in
Me^^dional parts, and Subtract the Lo^arithm of the difference of Latitude upon
the Globe, and you have the ^ogarithm of the difference of Lon^^tude in the
Aequinoctial, 4198 m. ^62309, demanded.

The fifth Question to be resolved by Mercator's brief Rules; The difference ^f
Longitude in the Aequinoctial ^ 200 m. and the difference of Latitude ^s it is
upon the Globe 1055 m. and the difference of Latitude in Meridional parts 1417;
I demand the difference of Longitude in a Right-lined Triangle. To find the
difference of Longitude in a Right-lined Triangle, by Mercators brief Rules:
Say, As the Logarithm of the difference of Latitude in Meridional parts 1417,
31513 ^ to the Logarithm of the difference of ^^^gitude in the Aequinoctial 420
^ 362324; So is the Logarithm of difference of Latitude upon the (^ 1055 m.
302325; to the Logarith^ the difference of Longitude in a Ri^^^-lined Triangle,
3127, 349513: ^ the Logarithm of the differenc^ Longitude in the Aequinoctial,
to ^ Logarithm of the difference of L^^^tude upon the Globe, and Subtract ^
Logarithm of the difference of L^^gitude in the Aequinoctial, ^ you have the
Logarithm of the di^^^rence of Longitude in a Right-li^^ Triangle, 3127,
349513; deman^^

In the next place Mercator d^ borrow the Rules of the Globe, find the
difference of Meridians any one Parallel.

EXAMPLE. There are two Meridians differi^^ in Longitude 70 d. 00 m. in the
^^quinoctial, Bermudus, Latitude 32 25 m. I demand the difference of ^^^idians
in the Latitude of 32 d. ^ m.

^o find the difference of Meridians ^^^ween 70 d. 00 m. of Longitude, in
Latitude of 32 d. 25. m. Say, As Radius 90 d. 00 m. 1000000; is the Logarithm
of 70 d. 00 m. or 00 m. 362324; So is the Cosine ^he Latitude of Bermudus 57
d. 35 m. ^2643; to the Logarithm of 354967, ^545 m. or 59 d. 05 m. Add the
Lo^^rithm of the difference of Longi^^de in the Aequinoctial, to the Co^^^e of
the Latitude, and Subtract the ^adius, and you have the Logarithm the
difference of Meridians, in the ^^titude of Bermudus, 32 d. 25 m. ^4967; or
3545 m. or 59 d. 05 m. ^emanded.

Last of all, there are two Meridians ^iffering in Longitude 70 d. 00 m. in ^he
Aequinoctial; the Lyzard Latitude ^0 d. 00 m. I demand the difference ^f
Longitude in the Latitude of 50 d.

To find the difference of Meridians ^etween 70 d. 00 m. of Longitude, in the
Latitude of 50 d. oo m. Say the Radius 90 d. oo m. 1000000 to the Logarithm of
70 d. oo m 4200 m. 362324: So is the Co-sin^ the Latitude of the Lyzard 40 d.
oo 980806; to the Logarithm of 3431 or 2700 m. or 45 d. oo m. Add Logarithm of
the difference of L^^gitude in the Aequinoctial, to the C^sine of the
difference of Latitude, a^ Subtract the Radius, and your ha^ the Logarithm of
the difference Merdians in the Latitude of the ^zard, 50 d. oo m. 343130; or
2700 or 45 d. oo m.

I have given you a full account all the brief Rules, by which Mercat^^^ does
pretend to perform the work Navigation, wherein you may observ^ there is not
one Question in all Merc^tors brief Rules, that is in proportion to the
distance between the Meridia^ and Parallel of the Lyzard, and the Meridian and
Parallel of Bermudus therefore Mercators brief Rules are o^ no further use in
Navigation, in regard the brief Rules are not in proportion the distance of
places; so that the ^^rk of Navigation cannot be per^^^med without those Rules
are in ^^^portion to a Geometrical demon^^^ation.

Then observe you cannot measure ^e distance of places, differing in ^^ngitude
and Latitude in Mercators ^ani-Sphere, in proportion to the ^^stance of places
upon the Globe: therefore Mr. Edward Wright in his ^orrection of Errors in
Navigation, page 59. says, if two places differ so in Longitude as well as in
Latitude, ^ok how many degrees the difference of ^atitude contains; so many
degrees of ^he Aequinoctial take with your Compass, and leading one foot in the
Aequinoctial, love forward the other also Parallel-wise, ^eeping always that
distance, till it cross the Rumb of those two places, in such sort, that one
Foot resting in that crossing, the other carried about may but touch the
AEquinoctial, then take with your Compass the Segment or part of the Rumb,
between that crossing, and the Aequinoctial, set both Feet in the Aequinoctial,
and see how many degrees are contained be^ them, for so many score Leagues
distance of those two places. So you are to take with your Com^ the difference
of Latitude from Aequinoctial, which is of equal p^ and run that Parallel to
the Ae^^^noctial, until the other point ^ cross the Rumb, then take the dista^
from the point that crosses the Ru^^ to the place where the Rumb ^ cross the
Aeqinoctial, and meas that distance in the Aequinoct^^^ which is of equal parts
for the dista^^^ between the Lyzard and Bermud^^ Therefore Mercator does grant
t^ the difference of Latitude, and distance of Places, must be measu^^ by a
Scale of equal parts, to be in p^^portion to the Rumb by the Magneti^^ Compass;
this position agrees w^ the Common Chart: Then in t^ plainest Rules of Art, the
differen^^ of Latitude and the distance of Place being measured by a Scale of
equ^ parts, the difference of Longitude mu^^ be of equal parts, in proportion
to the difference of Latitude, and the distance places, in a Right-lined
Triangle, ^^^erwise you must alter the Rumb the Magnetic Compass, and the
^ance of places.

But Mercator opposes this position his Plani-Sphere, and from the
^^ithmetical Rules of the Globe, ^erein the difference of Meridians ^^^ween the
Meridian and Parallel of ^ermudus, and the Meridian of the ^^zard is 59 d. 05
m. likewise Mer^^tor proves the difference of Meridians his Plani-Sphere,
between the Me^^dian and Parallel of Bermudus, and ^he Meridian of the Lyzard,
to be in ^roportion to the difference of Meri^ians upon the Globe, by taking
half degree above the Latitude of Bermu^us, 32 d. 25 m. and half a degree below
the Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. which distance is a degree of Longitude in the
Latitude of Bermudus, therefore so often as you can have that distance between
the Meridian of Bermudus, and the Meridian of the Lyzard, such is the
difference of Longitude 59 d. 05 m. Do the like, and you sha^^ have the
difference of Meridian between places in any other Paralle^ upon Mercators
Plani-Sphere, in proportion to the difference of Meridian between places in any
Parallel of the Globe, so that the difference of Longitude between the Meridian
an^ parallel of Bermudus, and the Meridian of the Lyzard, is greater tha^ the
distance, which is out of all proportion in a Right-lined Triangle^ Therefore
Mercator has no Geometrical Demonstration, either in oblique Angles or by
Right-lined Angles, to prove the difference of Meridians, as it is upon the
Globe, to be in proportion to the difference of Latitude and the distance of
places, and the Rumb by the Magnetic Compass.

I have proved how the difference of Latitude, and the difference of Longitude,
and the distance of places in the Common Chart, is transferred to be in
proportion upon the Globe.

I have proved how the difference of Longitude in all Right-lined Triangles, is
in proportion to the middle Parallel of all places upon the Globe, therefore
the Meridians of the Globe, as they are drawn, must differ from the Meridians
of the Magnetic Compass; so that it is the principal point in Navigation, to
enquire whether the North and South Points of the Magnetic Compass, run in the
Meridians of the Globe, as they are drawn, or whether the North and South
points of the Magnetic Compass, run parallel to the Poles of East and West, as
the East and West points of the Magnetic Compass, run parallel to the Poles of
North and South: Therefore I shall proceed to lay a Foundation in Navigation,
that men may no longer halt between three opinions, wherein I shall prove by
observation and demonstration from the Magnetic Compass, as it is Horizontal,
that the North and South Points of the Magnetic Compass, run Parallel to the
Poles of East and West, as the East and West points of the Magnetic Compass
run Parallel to the Poles of North and South; so that the Common Chart that is
so much rejected, is the only Truth in Navigation.

In the first place, I shall prove the East and West Points of the Magnetic
Compass, point to the Poles of East and West in the Celestial Sphere, in all
Meridians and Parallels of the Terrestial Sphere; then I shall prove the East
and West Points of the Magnetic Compass run Parallel to the Poles of North and
South, in all Meridians and Parallels of the Terrestial Sphere.

EXAMPLE. By Observation, if the Sun be upon the Horizon in the Aequinoctial,
the Suns-Amplitude shall be East or West of you, by the Magnetic Compass, as
it is Horizontal, in all Meridians and Parallels of the Terrestial Sphere; but
if I was in the Latitude, 32 d. 25 m. or in any other Latitude, and I was to
Sail by the Magnetic Compass East or West, the Circulation of the Earth and
Sea, I shall find I have not altered my Latitude by observation; therefore the
East and West course of the Magnetic Compass agrees with the Parallels of
Latitude upon the Terrestial Sphere by observation; this position cannot be
proved, but from the Latitude of Places by observation, which agrees with the
East and West course of the Magnetic Compass; so that the Parallels of
Latitude upon the Globe, are of equal distance from the Poles of North and
South, and in proportion to the Rumb by the Magnetic Compass.

In the next place, I shall prove the North and South Points of the Magnetic
Compass, point to the Poles of North and South in the Celestial Sphere, in all
Meridians and Parallels of the Terrestial Sphere. Then I shall prove the North
and South Points of the Magnetic Compass, must run parallel to the Poles of
East and West, in all Meridians and Parallels of the Terrestial Sphere.

EXAMPLE. By Observation, If the Sun or Star be upon their Meridian in my
Meridian and Parallel of the Terrestia^ Sphere, the Sun's or Stars Azimuth mus^
be North or South, by the Horizonta^ bearing of the Magnetic Compass to the
Celestial Poles; so that the Magnetic Compass, as it is Horizontal, points to
the Celestial Poles of North and South, and to the Celestial Poles of East and
West, in all Meridians and Parallels of the Earth and Sea; without giving any
difference of observation for the Semi-Diameter of the Earth and Sea, and
notwithstanding the Magnetic Compass points to the Celestial Poles of North
and South, and to the Celestial Poles of East and West, in all Meridians and
Parallels of the Terrestial Sphere, it is proved by observation, that you may
run the Circulation of the Earth by the Magnetic Compass, in any Parallel of
Latitude; therefore the Magnetic Compass must run Parallel to the Poles of
East and West, as the Magnetic Compass runs Parallel to the Poles of North and
South in the Terrestial Sphere, in regard the Magnetic Compass makes the same
position to the Poles of East and West, and to the Poles of North and South, in
the Celestial Sphere; so that the difference of Meridians by the Magnetic
Compass, as it is Horrizontal upon the Terrestial Sphere, is of equal distance
from the Poles of East and West, as the difference of the Parallels of Latitude
by the Magnetic Compass, as it is Horizontal, is of equal distance from the
Poles of North and South.

This position must be infallible; for by observation, the Magnetic Compass,
as it is Horizontal, points to the Celestial Poles; so that the North and South
points of the Magnetic Compass, do cross the East and West points of the
Magnetic Compass, at Right-Angles, in all Meridians and Parallels of the Earth
and Sea: Therefore the Magnetic Compass, does measure the superficies of the
Glob^ by Right-lines, as if the superficies o^ the Globe was a Plain to the
Horizon^

In the next place, if the Sun be i^ the Aequinoctial, and that you were i^ the
Latitude of 60 d. or 70 d. or 80 d of North or South Latitude, the Su^ upon the
Horizon shall be East of you in the Morning, and West of you i^ the Afternoon,
by the Magnetic Compass, in its true Poles, as if you were in the Aequinoctial
part of the Earth or Sea: The reason of this observation is this, the
Terrestial Sphere is spacious to us that are upon it, but it appears to be no
other than a Center to the body of the Sun or Stars, in regard the Magnetic
Compass runs atwhart the Parallels of Latitude in the Terrestial Sphere, to the
Poles of East and West in the Celestial Sphere, without giving any difference
of observation for the Semi-Diameter of the Earth and Sea: Therefore it had
been impossible to find the Magnetic Compass should run Parallel to the Poles
of North and South in the Terrestial Sphere, if the Meridian Altitude of the
Sun or Stars, by observation, did not produce the same Latitude or Parallel
with the Magnetic Compass, the Circulation of the Earth, in regard the
Magnetic Compass, as it is Horinzontal, points to the Poles of East and West
in the Celestial Sphere, as the Magnetic Compass points to the Poles of North
and South in the Celestial Sphere.

Then observe, there is no reason in Navigation to suppose the Meridian, or the
North and South Points of the Magnetic Compass, as it is Horizontal, to the
Meridian Altitude of the Sun or Stars, in the Celestial Sphere, to run to the
North and South Poles, as it is in the Terrestial Sphere; but that you may
likewise suppose Meridians, or the East and West points of the Magnetic
Compass, as it is Horizontal, to the Suns Amplitude in the Aequinoctial, to run
to the Poles of East and West in the Terrestial Sphere; in regard the Magnetic
Compass makes the same position, to the Poles of East and West, as it has to
the Poles of North and South in the Celestial Sphere.

In the next place it must be granted if the East and West points of the
Magnetic Compass, in the Parallel o^ 80 d. point to the Poles of East and West
in the Celestial Sphere; without giving any difference of observation, for
almost the Semi-Diameter of the Earth, in the Terrestial Sphere, then the North
and South Points of the Magnetic Compass, in the Meridian of 80 d. must point
to the Poles of North and South in the Celestial Sphere, without giving any
difference of observation, for almost the Semi-Diameter of the Earth, in the
Terrestial Sphere: Therefore the Meridians of the Magnetic Compass, has the
same position in the Terrestial Sphere, and must run Parallel to the Poles of
East and West, as the Parallels of Latitude run Parallel by the Magnetic
Compass, to the Poles of North and South.

Then observe the Magnetic Compass, being always Horizontal to the Horizon, it
does measure the Superficies of the Earth and Sea by Right-lines, in the
Parallel Meridians to the Poles of East and West, and in the Parallels to the
Poles of North and South, as if the Superficies of the Globe was a plain to the
Horizon; this position you have at large in the Common Chart, wherein you have
the difference of Meridians, and the difference of Latitude, and the distance
of places in proportion to the Rumb, and the Right-lines of the Magnetic
Compass.

If the position of the Common Chart be not the only truth in Navigation, there
is no Geometrical Demonstration in proportion to the Rumb, and the Right-lines
of the Magnetic Compass.

Therefore it has been a great mistake in all Writers, to suppose the
Magnetic Compass to agree with the Meridians of the Globe as they are drawn;
whereas, there is no observation or demonstration to prove i^ only the
Meridians of the Magnetic^ Compass, as it is Horizontal to the Meridians of the
Sun and Stars, poin^ to the Poles of the Celestial Sphere ^ To this I must
reply, that the Ea^^ and West points of the Magnetic^ Compass, as it is
Horizontal, poin^ to the East and West Poles of the Celestial Sphere, from all
Meridians an^ Parallels of the Terrestial Sphere; s^ that you may as well draw
Meridian^ in Navigation by the Magnetic Compass, from the Poles of East and
West as from the Poles of North and South in the Terrestial Sphere; therefore
the work of Navigation cannot be performed by the oblique Lines of the Globe.

I have proved by observation, that the East and West points of the Magnetic
Compass, run Parallel to the Poles of North and South in the Terrestial Sphere,
therefore the North and South points of the Magnetic Compass, must run
Parallel to the Poles of East and West in the Terrestial Sphere; in regard
those Poles do cross at Right-Angles, in all Meridians and Parallels of the
Earth and Sea.

Last of all, I shall show you the errors that attend Mercator.

I have proved that Mercator does grant the difference of Latitude, and the
distance of places to be of equal parts, and to be in proportion to the Rumb by
the Magnetic Compass in a Right-lined Triangle; so that Mercator has granted
three parts in four in a Right-lined Triangle; then if the difference of
Longitude in a Right-lined Triangle, be not the true difference of Meridians,
according to the Rumb by the Magnetic Compass, we have no Geometrical
Demonstration in Navigation, therefore I shall proceed to find the distance
between the Meridian and Parallel of Bermudus, and the Meridian and Parallel of
the Lyzard, in a Right-lined Triangle, from the Rumb sound by the brief Rules
of Mercator, and the difference of Latitude.

And last of all, I shall show you the disproportion between the Meridians of
the Common Chart, and the Meridians of Mercator and the Globe, as they are
drawn; so that whoever pretends to keep account of the Ships way, according to
the difference of Meridians in Mercator's Plani-Sphere, or according to the
difference of Meridians upon the Globe, they must commit gross errors.

EXAMPLE. I Sail from the Meridian and Parallel of the Lyzard, in the Latitude
of 50 d. 00 m. in an Angle of 71 d. 21 m. South-Westward: As the Rumb is found
by the brief Rules of Mercator, into the Meridian and Parallel of Bermudus, in
the Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. I demand the distance and the difference of
Longitude between the Meridian and Parallel of Bermudus, and the Meridian and
Parallel of the Lyzard, in a Right-lined Triangle.

geometrical diagram Page: 61


The Angles of position by Mercators brief Rules, do differ from the Angles of
position by the Common Chart 11 m. however the distance between the Lyzard and
Bermudus cannot be known, but by a Right-lined Triangle.

The Angle following being a Right-lined Triangle, is in like proportion to the
Common Chart, so is L the Meridian and Parallel of the Lyzard, and B is the
Meridian and Parallel of Bermudus: Then is L A the difference of Latitude 1055
m. and C L D is the Rumb or Angle of position, between the Meridian and
Parallel of the Lyzard, and the Meridian and Parallel of Bermudus, then is A B
and L T the difference of Longitude between the Meridian of the Lyzard, and the
Meridian of Bermudus, and L B is the distance between the Lyzard and Bermudus,
then is B H and L Q the difference of Longitude in Mercators Plani-Sphere, and
upon the Globe, which differs from the Meridians of the Common Chart 419 m. and
426 Miles.

To find the distance between the Meridian and Parallel of the Lyzard and
Bermudus, L B, the proportions Arithmetical: As the Cosine of the Rumb 71 d.
21 m. A B L, 950485; is to the Logarithm of the difference of Latitude 1055 m.
L A, 302325: So is the Radius 90 d. LAB, 1000000; to the Logarithm of the
distance 3299 m. L B; 351840 demanded: Add the Logarithm of the difference of
Latitude to the Radius, and Subtract the Cosine of the Rumb, and you have the
Logarithm of the distance 351840, L B, 3299 m.

Thus you see when Mercator has wearied himself with finding brief Rules, to
be in proportion between the difference of Longitude in the Aequinoctial, and
the difference of Latitude in Meridional parts, to find the Rumb by the
Magnetic Compass: Then Mercator does grant that the distance of places
differing in Longitude and Latitude, cannot be found by any Geometrical
Demonstration, to be in proportion to the Rumb by the Magnetic Compass, and
the difference of Latitude, but by a Right-lined Triangle; therefore Mercator
does grant three parts in four in a Right-lined Triangle; then if the
difference of Longitude in a Right-lined Triangle, be not the true difference
of Meridians, there is no Geometrical Demonstration in Navigation, to find the
difference of Meridians in proportion to the Rumb by the Magnetic Compass.

In the next place I shall proceed to find the difference of Longitude in a
Right-lined Triangle, from the difference of Latitude, and the Rumb found by
Mercators brief Rules.

EXAMPLE. I Sail from the Meridian and Parallel of the Lyzard, in the Latitude
of 50 d. 00 m. in an Angle of 71 d. 21 m. South-Westward: As the Rumb is found
by the brief Rules of Mercator, into the Meridian and Parallel of Bermudus, in
the Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. I demand the difference of Longitude in a
Right-lined Triangle.

To find the difference of Longitude the proportions Arithmetical: As the
Radius 90 d. A B L, 1000000; is to the Logarithm of the difference of Latitude
1055 m. L A, 302325: So is the Tangent of the Rumb 71 d. 21 m. A L B, 1047171;
to the Logarithm of the difference of Longitude 349496, A B, 3126 m. Add the
Logarithm of the difference of Latitude to the Tangent of the Rumb, and
Subtract the Radius, and you have the Logarithm of the difference of Longitude,
in proportion to the Rumb by the Magnetic Compass, and the difference of
Latitude in a Right-lined Triangle.

In the practical part of the Sea, the Rumb is always given, as in the first
Question in the Common Chart, 71 d. 10 m. So that the brief Rules of Mercator
do alter the Rumb 11 m. which alters the difference of Longitude 33 m. and the
distance 30 m. otherwise this latter Right-lined Triangle would agree with the
former. I shall pass by these small errors, and proceed to the greater in
Mercators Plani-Sphere, and upon the Globe, the difference of Longitude between
the Meridian and Parallel of Bermudus, and the Meridian of the Lyzard, is
proved to be 3545 m. B H, or 59 d. 05 m. and the difference of Longitude is
proved to be 3126 m. B A, according to the Common Chart; so that the difference
of Longitude in Mercator's Plani-Sphere, and upon the Globe, is more than the
difference of Longitude in the Common Chart, by 419 m. A H; therefore, if I was
to Sail from B to H, I must outrun the Meridian of the Lyzard in the Common
Chart 419 m. before I can expect to arrive in the Meridian of Mercator, or the
Meridian of the Globe: Then if I was to Sail from L to H by the Magnetic
Compass, I must Sail in an Angle of 21 d. 40 m South-Eastward by the Magnetic
Compass, to arrive in the Meridian of the Globe or Mercator; so that I have
showed you how great the disproportion is between the Meridians of the Common
Chart, and the Meridians of Mercator, or the Meridians of the Globe; therefore
the Meridians of the Magnetic Compass were never rightly understood.

Likewise in Mercators Plani-Sphere, and upon the Globe, the difference of
Longitude between the Meridian and Parallel of the Lyzard, and the Meridian of
Bermudus, is proved to be 2711 m. L Q, or 45 d. and the difference of Longitude
is proved to be 3126, L T, according to the Common Chart; so that the
difference of Longitude is Mercator's Plani-Sphere, and upon the Globe is less
than the difference of Longitude in the Common Chart, by 426 m. Q T; so that if
I was to Sail from L to T, I must run 426 m. before I can arrive in the
Meridian of Bermudus, in the Common Chart: Then if I was to Sail from B to Q,
by the Magnetic Compass, I must Sail in an Angle of 21 d. 59 m.
North-Eastward, before I can arrive in the Meridian of the Globe or Mercator;
so that I have showed you how great the disproportion is between the Meridians
of the Common Chart, and the Meridians of Mercator, or the Meridians of the
Globe; therefore the Meridians of the Magnetic Compass were never rightly
understood, in regard there are such various opinions in Navigation, and the
disproportion between one position and the other is so great, insomuch that the
Question may be asked, what is truth in Navigation?

I have proved by Demonstration and Observation, that the Magnetic Compass, as
it is Horizontal, does point to the Poles of East and West in the Celestial
Sphere, in all Meridians and Parallels of the Earth and Sea, without giving any
difference of observation for the Semi-Diameter of the Earth: But by
observation from the Meridian Altitude of the Sun and Stars, the Magnetic
Compass does run Parallel to the Poles of North and South in the Terrestial
Sphere, the Circulation of the Earth; therefore it had been impossible to prove
the Magnetic Compass should run Parallel to the Poles of North and South, in
the Terrestial Sphere; if the Magnetic Compass did not run Parallel to the
Latitude of places by observation.

Likewise, I have proved by Observation and Demonstration, that the Magnetic
Compass, as it is Horizontal, does point to the Poles of North and South in the
Terrestial Sphere, in all Meridians and Parallels of the Earth and Sea, which
Meridians do cross the East and West Poles of the Magnetic Compass, as it is
Horizontal to the Celestial Sphere, at Right-Angles, in all Meridians and
Parallels in the World: Therefore the Meridians of the Magnetic Compass being
Horizontal, must run Parallel to the Poles of East and West in the Terrestial
Sphere, as the Magnetic Compass, being Horizontal, does run Parallel to the
Poles of North and South in the Terrestial Sphere.

Last of all, the Magnetic Compass being of Right-lines, does measure the
Superficies of the Globe by Right-lines, as if the superficies of the Globe was
always a plain to the Horizon ^ so that whatever projection disagree^ with the
Rumb, and the difference o^ Latitude, and the difference of Longitude, and the
distance of places, as it is in proportion in a Right-lined Triangle, must be a
false position in Navigation: therefore there is but one truth in Navigation,
and that is the Common Chart, that has been so much rejected by all Writers,
for the Meridians and Parallels of places cannot be known upon the Globe or
Mercators projection, but as it is transferred from the Common Chart, which is
in proportion to a Right-lined Triangle.

I shall proceed to the Arch of a great Circle, which is the third position, or
principal kind of Sailing so called, wherein I shall show you, that the
Question cannot be given from the practical part of the Sea, but must alter the
Meridian and Parallel of all places upon the Globe.

SAILING by the Arch of a great Circle.
The true distance between two places in the Arch of a great Circle, as in the
following Rules.
1. IF both places have no Latitude, as being under the Aequinoctial, and one
of them no Longitude, then the Longitude of the other place is the distance: If
it be not above 180 d. but if it be above 180 d. then Subtract it out of 360 d.
the remainder is the distance.

2. If both places have Longitude under the Aequinoctial, the difference of
Longitude is the distance, so it be under 180 d. but if it be above 180 d. then
Subtract it out of 360 d. and the remainder is the difference of Longitude.

3. If both places have one and the same Meridian, and one of them have
Latitude, then the Latitude is the distance.

4. If both places have Latitude, as both Northerly or both Southerly, being
under the same Meridian, the difference is the distance.

5. If one place have North Latitude, and the other South Latitude, being under
the same Meridian, the sum of both is the distance.

The Arch of a great Circle in the Terrestial Globe, does give a nearer
distance of places than the Common Chart; so that the Arch of a great Circle
does not run in the Parallels of the Globe, without it be in the Aequinoctial:
Likewise the Angles of position in the Arch of a great Circle, do differ from
the Angles of position by the Magnetic Compass; insomuch that the Question
cannot be given from the Rumb by the Magnetic Compass, in the practical part
of the Sea, but you must alter the Meridian and Parallel of all places in the
Globe.

EXAMPLE. There are two places in the Parallel of 50 d. that differ in
Longitude 70 d. in the Aequinoctial, I demand the Angle of position, and the
distance.

The Demonstration follows, E F D the Aequinoctial, L C B the Paralle^ of
Latitude 50 d. L Q B the nearest distance, L Q half the nearest distance, E L
the Latitude 50 d. L P the Complement of the Latitude 40 d. E P D the Angle at
the Pole, or the difference of Longitude in the Aequinoctial, 70 d. E P F the
Angle of half the difference of Longitude 35 d.

To find the distance.
As the Radius 90 d. P E, 1000000; is to the Sine of 35 d. E F, 975859; So is
the Sine of 40 d. P L, 980806; to the Sine of 21 d. 38 m. L Q, 956665. Add the
Sine of 35 d. E F, to the Sine of 40 d. P L; and Subtract the Radius
geometrical diagrams Page: 72.
90 d. P E, and you have the Sine of half the distance 956665, L Q, 21 d. 38 m.
the double of L Q, 21 d. 38 m. is 43 d 16 m. L Q B, or 2596 M. the distance or
the difference of Longitude, in the Latitude of 50 d. demanded.

From hence you may observe that the Arch of a great Circle does not run in the
Parallel of Latitude by Observation, L C B, but does run in an Arch of a nearer
distance, as L Q B, for it is proved the difference of Longitude upon the
Globe, in the Parallel of 50 d. L C B, is 45 d. or 2700 M. and by the Arch of a
great Circle, the distance L Q B, is 43 d. 16 m. or 2596 m. So that the Arch of
a great Circle does differ from the distance of places in the Parallels of the
Globe, I d. 44 m. or 104 Miles, which must alter the Latitude by observation,
and the Rumb by the Magnetic Compass.

In the next place I shall find the Angle of position by the Arch of a great
Circle, the Question requires another demonstration, before I can resolve the
Question as in the adjacent figure.

To find the Angle of position.
As the Sine of 50 d. L E, 988425; is to the Tangent of 55 d. E G, 1015477; So
is the Radius 90 d. L H, 1000000; to the Tangent of 1027052, H L A, 61 d, 48 m.
and is equal to the Angle B L P, 61 d. 48 m. which is the Angle of position, to
the Arch of a great Circle L Q B. Add the Tangent 55 d. E G, to the Radius 90
d. L H, and Subtract the Sine of 50 d. L E, and you have the Tangent of the
Angle H L A, 1037052, 61 d. 48 m. demanded.

Then Observe, if you Sail in an Angle of 61 d. 48 m. North-West-ward, by the
Magnetic Compass, from L, you cannot arrive at Q or B, in regard you cannot
Sail from one place to another in the same Parallel, without you Sail East or
West by the Magnetic Compass; so that the Arch of a great Circle runs in a
nearer distance than the Parallel of Latitude: Therefore you cannot Sail by the
Magnetic Compass from the Latitude of 50 d. L, into the Latitude of 50 d. B,
in an Angle of 61 d. 48 m. in the Arch of a great Circle L Q B.

But it may be Objected, that I may alter my Course to arrive at B. If so, then
I must alter the Question. Therefore suppose the Question to be this, I have
Sailed from the Latitude of 50 d. L, in angle of 61 d. 48 m. North-West-ward,
400 m. I demand in what Meridian and Parallel of the Globe I am in. I have
proved I cannot Sail in an Angle of 61 d. 48 m. from the Latitude of 50 d. L,
by the Magnetic Compass, and in the Arch of a great Circle LQB, so as to
arrive in the Latitude of 50 d. at B; then is it impossible for me to know in
what Meridian and Parallel of the Globe I am, in regard the Magnetic Compass
does not run in the Arch of a great Circle: Therefore I must resolve the
Question by a Rightlined Triangle, and transferr the Meridian and Parallel of
places found in a Right-lined Triangle, into the Meridian and Parallel of the
Globe; so that you cannot perform the work of Navigation by the Oblique Lines
of the Globe, in the Arch of a great Circle: In regard the Oblique Lines of the
Globe differ from the Rumb, and the Right-Lines of the Magnetic Compass,
insomuch that you cannot give the Question from the practical part of the Sea,
to be in proportion to the Angles of position, and the distance of places in
the Arch of a great Circle, but you must alter the Meridian and Parallel of
places in the Globe.

I shall add one Example more from the foregoing Question, between the Lyzard
and Bermudus.
The Lyzard in the Latitude of 50 d. E L, B^rmudus in the Latitude of 32 d. 25
m. F B; their difference of Longitude in the Aequinoctial 70 d. E P F. I demand
the Angles of position E L B, and L B P, and their distance L B, in an Arch of
a great Circle.

The demonstration follows, E F the Aequinoctial, C B the Parallel of the
Latitude of Bermudus, L A the Parallel of the Latitude of the Lyzard, E P F the
Angle at the Pole, or the difference of Longitude in the Aequinoctial 70 d. L P
the Complement of the Latitude of the Lyzard 40 d. B P the Complement of the
Latitude of B^rmudus 37 d. 35. m. L B the distance between the Meridian and
Parallel of the Lyzard, and the Meridian and Parallel of Bermudus, then is the
Angle E L B, the Angle of position between the Lyzard and Bermudus, and the
Angle L B P, is the Angle of position between Bermudus and the Lyzard.

This Question requires a further Demonstration, before we can find
Arithmetical proportion, as in the adjacent figure, and in the first place we
are to find the side P A; then say, As the Sine of 20 d. G E, 953405; is to the
Tangent of 50 d. E L, 1007618: So is the Radius 90 d. G F. 1000000; to the
Tangent of 1054213, F A, 73 d. 59 m. whose Complement is 16 d. 01 m. A P: Then
Subtract A P, 16 d. 01 m. out of P B, 57 d. 35 m. and you have 41 d. 34 m. A B.
Add the Tangent of 50 d. E L, to the Radius 90 d. G F, and Subtract the Sine of
the 20 d. G E, and you have the Tangent of 73 d. 59 m. F A, whose Complement is
A P, 16 d. 01 m. demanded.

Now to find the distance you have the side A P, 16 d. 01 m. and the side L P,
40 d. and the side A B, 41 d. 34 m. I demand the distance L B.

As the Cosine of 16 d. 01 m. A P, 998280; is to the Cosine of 40 d. L P,
988425: So is the Cosine of 41 d. 34 m. A B, 987400; to the Cosine of 977545,
L B, 53 d. 24 m. the distance between the Meridian and Parallel of the Lyzard,
and the Meridian and Parallel of Bermudus by the Arch of a great Circle, but by
the Common Chart the distance is 3268 m. or 54 d. 28 m. which is 64 m. or 01 d.
04 m. more than the distance by the Arch of a great Circle.

Now to find the Angle of position from the Lyzard to Bermudus C L B, the side
L B is 53 d. 24 m. the Angle L P B is 70 d. the side P B is 57 d. 35 m.
geometrical diagrams Page: 78
I demand the Angle of position from the Lyzard to Bermudus C L B.

As the Sine of the side LB, 53 d. 24 m. 990461; is to the Sine of the Angle
LPB, 70 d. 00 m. 997298: So is the Sine of the side P B, 57 d. 35 m. 992643; to
the Sine of the Angle of position between the Lyzard and Bermudus 999480, C L
B, 81 d. 10 m. South-Westwards. So that the Angle of position in the Arch of a
great Circle, does differ from the Angle of position by the Magnetic Compass
in the Common Chart 10 d. 00 m. Then if I should Sail in the Angle of 80 d. 10
m. by the Magnetic Compass, from the Lyzard L, toward Bermudus B, I cannot
arrive at Bermudus, in regard the Angle of position by the Arch of a great
Circle, does differ from the Angle of position by the Magnetic Compass 10 d.
00 m.

Last of all, I shall find the Angle of position from Bermudus to the Lyzard, P
B L, the side P B is 57 d 35 m. the Angle C L B is 81 d. 10 m. the side P L is
40 d. 00 m. I demand the Angle of position from Bermudus to the Lyzard P B L.

As the sine of the side P B, 57 d. 35 m. 992643; is to the Sine of the Angle C
L B, 81 d. 10 m. 999481: So is the Sine of the side L P, 40 d. 980806; to the
Sine of the Angle of position from Bermudus to the Lyzard 987644, P B L, 48 d.
48 m. North-Eastwards. Add the Sine of the Angle C L B, 81 d. 10 m. to the Sine
of the side L P, 40 d. and Subtract the Sine of the side P B, 57 d. 35 m. and
you have the Sine of the Angle of position from Bermudus to the Lyzard, in the
Arch of a great Circle 987644, P B L, 48 d. 48 m. North-Eastwards; so that the
Angle of position in the Arch of a great Circle, differs from the opposite
Angle of position by the Magnetic Compass, in the same Question 39 d. 58 m.
for the Angle of position from the Lyzard to Bermudus is 81 d. 10 m.
South-Westward, and the Angles of position from Bermudus to the Lyzard is 48 d.
48 m. North-Eastward; then by the Common Rules in Navigation, if I Sail by the
Magnetic Compass from the Lyzard to Bermudus, in an Angle of 81 d. 10 m.
South-Westward, 3204 M. and was to return to the Lyzard, I must Sail in an
Angle of 08 d. 50 m. East-Northwards by the Magnetic Compass, in regard 08 d.
50 m. is the opposite point to 81 d. 10 m. Likewise if I Sail by the Magnetic
Compass from Bermudus to the Lyzard, in an Angle of 48 d. 48 m. North-Eastward
3204 M. and was to return to Bermudus, I must Sail in an Angle of 41 d. 12 m.
West-Southward.

Then Observe, such is the disproportion in the Angles of position in the Arch
of a great Circle, that it is impossible to Sail by the Magnetic Compass in
the Arch of a great Circle, and in the Angles of position found in the Arch of
a great Circle, into the same Meridian and Parallel of places upon the Globe,
in regard the Angles of position in the Arch of a great Circle, does differ
from the Angles of position by the Magnetic Compass.

But it may be Objected, that I may alter my Course to arrive at my Port. If
so, you must alter the Question, for by the Angles of position in the Arch of a
great Circle, you cannot tell where you are upon the Globe; in regard the
Angles of position in the Arch of a great Circle, does differ from the Angles
of position by the Magnetic Compass, for the Angle of position in the Arch of
a great Circle, is 81 d. 10 m. South-Westward from the Lyzard to Bermudus, and
it is 48 d. 48 m. North-Eastward from Bermudus to the Lyzard; and by the
Magnetic Compass I must Sail in an Angle of 71 d. 10 m. South-Westward from
the Lyzard to Bermudus, and I must Sail in an Angle of 18 d. 50 m.
East-Northward from Bermudus to the Lyzard; so the opposite point of the
Magnetic Compass, must be the Angle of position to return to the same Port, or
the Magnetic Compass is of no use in Navigation; so that I cannot give the
Question from the Practical part of the Sea, to be resolved by the Arch of a
great Circle, but I must alter the Meridian and Parallel of places in the
Globe, therefore you must resolve the Question from the Angle of position by
the Magnetic Compass, and the difference of Latitude in the practical part of
the Sea, by a Rightlined Triangle, and transferr the Meridian and Parallel of
places found in a Right-lined Triangle, into the Meridian and Parallel of the
Globe, as I have already showed; so that the work of Navigation must be
resolved by the Rumb, and the Right-lines of the Magnetic Compass in a
Right-lined Triangle, before the Meridian and Parallel of places can be known
upon the Globe.

Notwithstanding the Arch of a great Circle will not answer the design of
Navigation by the Magnetic Compass; it must be granted, that the Arch of a
great Circle in the Terrestial Sphere, and in the Celestial Sphere is a true
position, in regard the Angles of position in all Oblique Angles, are in
proportion to the several sides of all Oblique Angles, which is the nearest
distance of places.

EXAMPLE. If I observe the distance of two Stars, in one and the same Parallel,
I do measure the nearest distance between those two Stars, but I cannot measure
the extreme Arch of that Parallel by observation; so that the nearest distance
is the Arch of a great Circle, by observation and demonstration: Likewise all
observations in the Arch of a great Circle gives the nearest distance; so that
the Arch of a great Circle does not run in the Parallels of the Globe, without
it be in the Aequinoctial, to the Poles of North and South, and in the
Ecliptic, which is as the Aequinoctial to the Poles Ecliptic, and upon the
Horizon, which is as the Aequinoctial to the Zenith; therefore the Angles of
position found in the Arch of a great Circle, in any Parallel of Latitude, is
not to be measured by any Geometrical measure upon the Terrestial or Celestial
Sphere, without it be at the North or South Poles the measure of those Angles
are in the Aequinoctial, or at the Poles Ecliptic the measure of those Angles
are in the Ecliptic Line, or at the Poles of your Zenith, or point over your
head, the measure of those Angles are in the Horizon. In this case the Angles
make a Right-Angle in the Aequinoctial, and in the Zodiac, and in the Horizon,
but in all other Angles of position, they are not to be measured Geometrically
upon the Globe; so that such Angles, are only in proportion to the sides of an
Oblique Angle, which is the nearest distance of places upon the Globe;
therefore those Angles are out of all proportion to the Rumb, and the
Right-Lines of the Magnetic Compass; so that the work of Navigation, cannot be
performed by the Arch of a Great Circle.

To Conclude, I have proved how all the known part of the World is laid down in
the Meridians and Parallels of the Common Chart, in proportion to the Rumb, and
the Right-lines of the Magnetic Compass.

I have proved how the Meridians and Parallels of all places in the Common
Chart are transferred into the Meridians and Parallels of the Globe; in regard
the difference of Meridians upon the Globe, does increase from the Poles to the
Aequinoctial, and the difference of Meridians in the Common Chart, which is in
proportion to the Rumb, and the Right-lines of the Magnetic Compass, are of
equal distance, so that the difference of Meridians upon the Globe being
Oblique, are out of all proportion to the Rumb and the Right Lines of the
Magnetic Compass, without it be in the middle Parallel of places differing in
Longitude and Latitude.

It is proved, Mercator divides his Plani-Sphere in proportion to the
difference of Meridians upon the Globe: Therefore the Meridians of Mercator
does not run in the Meridians of the Magnetic Compass, or the Meridians of the
Common Chart, in regard the difference of Meridians upon Mercators
Plani-Sphere, does increase from the Poles to the Aequinoctial, and the
difference of Meridians in the Common Chart, which is in proportion to the
Rumb, and the Right-lines of the Magnetic Compass are of equal distance, which
leads me to this consideration; all points of the Magnetic Compass, as they
are drawn, are of Right-lines, therefore the North and South point of the
Magnetic Compass, does cross the East and West point of the Magnetic Compass
at Right-Angles; so that it is proved by Observation, that the East and West
point of the Magnetic Compass, will direct you the Circulation of the Earth
and Sea, in all Parallels of Latitude; then observe the North and South point
of the Magnetic Compass as it is drawn, does cross the East and West point of
the Magnetic Compass at Right-Angles, in all Meridians and Parallels of the
Earth and Sea. Therefore the difference of Meridians by the Magnetic Compass,
must run Parallel in all Meridians and Parallels of the Earth and Sea, in
proportion to the difference of the Parallels of Latitude, otherwise you may as
well say the North and South point of the Magnetic Compass, as it is drawn,
does not cross the East and West point of the Magnetic Compass at Right-Angles.

I have proved by Observation, that the Meridians of the Magnetic Compass,
does cross the East and West points of the Magnetic Compass at Right-Angles,
in all Meridians and Parallels of the Earth and Sea; therefore the Meridians of
the Magnetic Compass, must run Parallel to the Poles of East and West, as the
Parallels of the Magnetic Compass run Parallel to the Poles of North and
South, so that the Common Chart is the only Truth in Navigation, in regard it
is in proportion to the Rumb, and the Right-lines of the Magnetic Compass,
therefore the Magnetic Compass does measure the superficies of the Globe by
Right-lines, as if the superficies of the Globe was a plain to the Horizon.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere will be Published the Practical part of the Sea, with some Questions in
Astronomy, useful in Navigation, by the same Author.

APPENDIX.
THE foregoing Treatise is only upon a single Question in the three principal
kinds of Sailing, so called, proving that the work of Navigation cannot be
performed by the Arch of a great Circle, or by Mercator's Position; and that
the Common Chart that has been so much rejected, is the only truth in
Navigation, in regard it is in proportion to the Rumb and the right lines of
the Magnetic Compass; therefore I shall Illustrate this Position of the Common
Chart by a double Question in the practical part of the Sea, comparing it with
the same Question by Mercator's Position; wherein the defect of Mercator's
Position will more plainly appear, than in a single Question.

Before I proceed to give this Question, I shall show you by what Practical
Questions at Sea the work of Navigation is performed by the Common Chart, and
by Mercator.

First, by the Common Chart; if you have daily Observation, then you have the
difference of Latitude and the Rumb rectified to all impediments to find the
distance and the difference of Longitude in a right-lined Triangle.

By Mercator; if you have daily Observation, then you have the difference of
Latitude in Meridional parts, and the Rumb rectified to all impediments to find
the difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial.

The Second Question in the Practical part of the Sea by the Common Chart; if
you have no Observation for many days, and that you have run several traverses,
then you have your daily distance run by your Log, and the Rumb rectified to
all impediments upon each traverse, to find the difference of Latitude, and the
difference of Longitude; this traverse is called a dead reckoning; but as soon
as you have Observation, having as before allowed for all impediments of the
Rumb in your daily traverse, and that you find the Ship before your
Observation, or astern of your Observation, then you must add or subtract by a
due proportion to each distance run by your Log, so as to fall into your
Latitude by Observation: The several traverses being thus resolved, you must
find the difference of Longitude, and the distance, and the Rumb upon which you
have made your way from your last Observation in a right-lined Triangle, which
is in proportion to the Rumb and the right lines of the Magnetic Compass.

The Second Question in the Practical part of the Sea by Mercator. If you have
no Observation for many days, and that you have run several traverses, then you
have your daily distance run by your Log, and the Rumb rectified to all
impediments upon each traverse, to find the difference of Longitude in the
Equinoctial; this traverse is called a dead reckoning. Here you may observe
Mercator's brief Rules are not in proportion to the Rumb and Distance in a
right-lined Triangle; therefore Mercator must take the Latitude of places as
they are found in each traverse in a right-lined Triangle, then Mercator has
the Meridional parts contained in the difference of Latitude, and the Rumb in
each right-lined Triangle, to find the difference of Longitude in the
Equinoctial, which must be added or subtracted, as you increase or lessen the
Degrees of Longitude in the Equinoctial, until you come to shape a direct
Course to your Port, according to Mercator's Position, by a right-lined
Triangle.

In the last place, having made several traverses in the Sea, if you desire to
know a direct Course from your Ship to your Port in the Common Chart, you have
the difference of Latitude between the Ship in the Sea and your Port; and the
difference of Longitude between your Ship in the Sea and the Port you are to
sail to, to find the Rumb and Distance upon a direct Course to your Port by a
right-lined Triangle.

By Mercator, having made several traverses in the Sea, if you desire to know a
direct Course to your Port, you have the difference of Latitude in Meridional
parts between your Ship in the Sea and your Port, and the difference of
Longitude in the Equinoctial between your Ship in the Sea, and the Port you are
to sail to, to find the Rumb and Distance upon a direct Course to your Port by
a right-lined Triangle.

Having given you this general account of the Practical part of the Sea by the
Plain Chart, and by Mercator's Projection, I shall proceed to the Question.

Two Ships Sail from the Lyzard in the Latitude of 50 d. the first Ship Sails
in an Angle of 71 d. 10 m. South-westwards 3268 miles; the second Ship Sails
West North-west 2400 miles. I demand the Rumb or Course, and the distance that
the second Ship must sail to arrive at the Port of the first Ship.

By the Common Chart.
The Question of the first Ship is resolved by demonstration in the following
Figure: The Lyzard Latitude 50 d. I sail in an Angle of 71 d. 10 m.
South-Westwards, A L B, 3268 miles L B. I demand the difference of Latitude,
and the difference of Longitude? I answer, I find my difference of Latitude to
be 1055 miles in the Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. L A. and my difference of
Longitude to be 3093 miles, A B, which is the Meridian and Parallel of Bermudus
in the Common Chart: I have resolved the Arithmetical part of this Question in
the first part of this small Treatise, which is in like proportion with the
Geometrical part.

The Question of the second Ship in her first traverse, is resolved by
demonstration in the following Figure: The Lyzard Latitude 50 d. L. I sail
geometrical diagram in an Angle of 67 d. 30 m. or West North-west, D L C, 2400
miles, L C. I demand the difference of Latitude, and the difference of
Longitude? I answer, I find my difference of Latitude to be 918 miles L D, in
the Latitude of 65 d. 18 m. C; and I find my difference of Longitude to be
2217, D C, demanded.

The Question of the second Ship in her first traverse resolved Arithmetically,
to find the difference of Longitude, say, As the Radius 90 d. L D C, 1000000,
is to to the Logarithm of the distance L C, 2400 miles, 338021; so is the sine
of the Rumb 67 d. 30 m. D L C 996561, to the Logarithm of the difference of
Longitude 334582, or 2217 miles demanded. Add the second and third Numbers in
all Questions, as I have given them, and you shall have the Sine, or the
Tangent, or the Logarithm of the Numbers required.

The Question of the second Ship in her first traverse resolved Arithmetically,
to find the difference of Latitude, say, As the Radius 90 d. L D C 1000000, is
to the Logarithm of the distance 2400 miles L C, 338021, so is the cosine of
the Rumb 67 d. 30 m. D L C 958283, to the Logarithm of the difference of
Latitude 296304, or 918 miles L D. which agrees with the former demonstration.

The Question of the second Ship in her second traverse is resolved by
demonstration in the following Figure. In the first place, you must subtract
the difference of Longitude the second Ship has made upon a West North-west
Course D C 2217, from the difference of Longitude between the Lyzard and
Bermudus A B 3093 miles, and you have E B 876 miles, that your Ship is to the
Eastward of the Meridian of Bermudus; then add the difference of Latitude L D
918, to the difference of Latitude between the Lyzard and Bermudus L A 1055
miles, and you have 1973 miles D A, equal to C E, the difference of Latitude
between the Ship and the Latitude of Bermudus. Then the Question stands thus in
proportion, you have the difference of Longitude between the Ship and Bermudus
E B 876 miles, and the difference of Latitude between the Ship and the Latitude
of Bermudus 1973 miles C E. I demand the Rumb and Distance I have to sail to
Bermudus? I answer, I find the Rumb to be in an Angle of 23 d. 56 m. E C B
South-westwards, and I find the distance to be 2159 miles CB; so that the
second Ship is arrived in the Meridian and Parallel of Bermudus by
Demonstration, demanded.

The Question of the second Ship in her second traverse resolved
Arithmetically; to find the Rumb, say, As the Logarithm of the difference of
Latitude 1937 miles C E 329512, is to the Radius 90 d. C B E 1000000; so is the
Logarithm of the difference of Longitude 876 miles E B 294250, to the tangent
of the Rumb 964738 E C B 23 d. 56 m. So that your Course from your Ship to
Bermudus is in an Angle of 23 d. 56 m. South-westward, demanded.

The Question of the second Ship in her second traverse resolved
Arithmetically, to find the distance, say, As the Sine of the Rumb 23 d. 56 m.
E C B. 960817; is to the Logarithm of the difference of Longitude 876 miles E B
294250; so is the Radius 90 d. C E B 1000000 to the Logarithm of the distance
333433 C B 2159 miles, the distance between the Ship in the Sea and Bermudus,
demanded.

Then Observe, I have resolved the Question of the first Ship sailing from the
Lyzard to Bermudus Geometrically and Arithmetically, all which ^ositions are in
proportion in a right-lined Triangle to the Rumb and the right lines of the
Magnetic Compass and the Common Chart. Likewise I have resolved the Question
of the second Ship in a traverse from the Lyzard to Bermudus Geometrically and
Arithmetically; all which Positions are in proportion in right-lined Triangles
to the Rumb, and the right lines of the Magnetic Compass and the Common Chart.
So that the second Ship is arrived in the Meridian and Parallel of Bermudus.
Therefore the second Ship in her traverse has not altered the difference of
Longitude in the Equinoctial of the first Ship, as it was transferred from the
Common Chart to the Globe, or Merca^or.

The same Question resolved by Mercator.
I have given you a general account of the practical part of the Sea by the
Common Chart, and by Mercator; so that all traverses must be resolved in
proportion to the Rumb and the right lines of the Magnetic Compass, I shall
proceed to the Question.

Two Ships sail from the Lyzard in the Latitude of 50 d. the first Ship sails
in an Angle of 71 d. 10 m. South-westwards 3268 miles; the second Ship sails
West North west 2400 mil^s. I demand the Rumb and the Distance that the second
Ship must sail to arrive at the Port of the first Ship.

Before I can resolve this Question by M^rcator's brief Rules, to find the
difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial, I must see what Latitude is in
proportion to the Rumb and Distance of the first Ship as it is found in a
right-lined Triangle, in regard Mercator's brief Rules are not in proportion to
the Rumb and the Distance of places, then the Question stands thus.

The Question of the first Ship to be resolved by Mercator's brief Rules, the
Lyzard, Latitude 50 d. Bermudus, Latitude 32 d. 25 m. the Rumb is an Angle of
71 d. 10 m. South-westwards: I demand the difference of Longitude in the
Equinoctial?

To find the difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial, say, As the Radius 90
d. 1000000, is to the difference of Latitude in Meridional parts 1417: 315136,
so is the tangent of the Rumb 71 d. 10 m. 1046714, to the Logarithm of the
difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial 4155, 361850, demanded.

The Question of the second Ship in her first traverse resolved by Mercator's
brief Rules; before I can resolve this Question, I must see what Latitude is in
proportion to the Rumb and Distance of the second Ship in her first traverse in
a right-lined Triangle, in regard Mercator's brief Rules are not in proportion
to the Rumb and Distance; then the Question stands thus:

The Lyzard Latitude 50 d. the second Ship in her first traverse, Latitude 65
d. 18 m. the Rumb West North-west, or in an Angle of 67 d. 30 m. I demand the
difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial?

To find the difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial, say, As the Radius 90
d. 1000000, is to the Logarithm of the difference of Latitude in Meridional
parts, 1747, 324229; so is the tangent of the Rumb 67 d. 30 m. 1038277, to the
Logarithm of the difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial 362502, or 4217
miles, demanded.

The Question of the second Ship in her second traverse resolved by Mercator's
brief Rules: In the first place, you must observe, by the first traverse of the
second ship the difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial is 4217 miles;
therefore you must subtract the difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial (of
the first ship) 4155 miles, and you have 62 miles, that the second ship in her
second traverse is to the Westward of the Meridian of Bermudus in the
Equinoctial, then the Question stands thus:

The second ship in her second traverse is in the Latitude of 65 d. 18 m. she
is to sail into the Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. the whole difference of Longitude
in the Equinoctial between the second ship in her second traverse and Bermudus
is 62 miles East. I demand the Rumb or Course, and the distance the second ship
in her second traverse must sail, to arrive at the Port of the first ship?

To find the Rumb, say, As the Logarithm of the difference of Latitude in
Meridional parts 3164, 350023, is to the Radius 1000000, so is the Logarithm of
the whole difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial 62 miles, 179239, to the
tangent of the Rumb 829216, or 01 d. 07 m. So that I am to sail in an Angle of
01 d. 07 m. South-Eastward from the place of my ship in her last traverse, to
arrive at Bermudus: Then observe, Mercator has altered the Rumb from that of
the Common Chart 25 d. 03 m. To prove it, add 01 d. 07 m. that the second ship
in her second traverse sails by Mercator South-Eastward into the Latitude of
Bermudus, to 23 d. 56 m. that the second ship in her second traverse has sailed
South-Westward upon the Common Chart to Bermudus, and you have 25 d. 03 m. that
the Rumb differs between the Common Chart and Mercator; these are gross errors
in Navigation, therefore I shall show you wherein Mercator commits them.

In the next place, I shall resolve the remaining part of Mercator's Navigation
by right-lined Triangles in proportion to the Rumb found by Mercator's brief
Rules; for all traverses must be resolved by the Rumb and the right lines of
the Magnetic Compass, in regard Mercator's brief Rules are not in proportion
to the Rumb and the distance sailed; otherwise you cannot tell upon what Rumb
or Course you have sailed from your first Port upon a traverse, or upon what
Rumb or Course you are to return to your Port, or to any other part of the
World: Then observe, if the Rumb and the difference of Latitude found by
Mercator in a traverse by the second Ship, does not make out the same Rumb and
distance that the first Ship made from the Lyzard to Bermudus, then it must be
granted that Mercator's brief Rules have led you into gross Errors; this I
shall prove from the Practical part of the Sea.

I shall not be tedious, therefore I shall give the Questions resolved.

By Mercator, the first Ship sails from the Lyzard in the Latitude of 50 d. at
L, in an Angle of 71 d. 10 m. A L B, South-westwards 3268 miles L B; I demand
the difference of Latitude, and the difference of Longitude in a right-lined
Triangle? I answer, I find my difference of Latitude 1055 miles, and to be in
the Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. L A; and I find my difference of Longitude 3093
miles A B, demanded.

By Mercator, the second Ship in her first traverse sails from the Lyzard in
the Latitude of 50 d. at L, in an Angle of 67 d. 30 m. D L C, North-westward
2400 miles L C. I demand the difference of Latitude, and the difference of
Longitude in a right-lined Triangle? I answer, I find my difference of Latitude
918 miles, and to be in the Latitude of 65 d. 18 m. L D; and I find my
difference of Longitude 2217 miles D C, demanded.

By Mercator, the second Ship in her second traverse sails from the Latitude of
65 d. 18 m. at C, in an Angle of 01 d. 07 m. South-eastwards Q C E, into the
Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. Q C. I demand the distance sailed, and the difference
of Longitude in a right-lined Triangle? I answer, I find the distance C Q 1974
miles; and I find my difference of Longitude Q E, 39 miles East, demanded.

Then subtract the difference of Longitude of the second Ship in her second
traverse Q E 39 miles, from the difference of Longitude of the second ship in
her first traverse D C 2217 miles, in regard the second Ship in her second
traverse is gone to the Eastward, and you have 2179 miles Q A, the difference
of Longitude the second Ship has made from the Lyzard into the Latitude of
Bermudus.

Then subtract the difference of Longitude the second Ship has made from the
Lyzard into the Latitude of Bermudus Q A 2179 miles, from the difference of
Longitude the first Ship has made to Bermudus in the Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. A
B 3093 miles, and you have 914 Q B, or 15 d. 14 m. that Mercator is to the
Eastward of the Meridian and Parallel of Bermudus, when Mercator expects to be
in the Meridian and Parallel of Bermudus.

In the last place, you have the difference of Latitude between the Lyzard and
Bermudus L A 1055 miles, and the difference of Longitude 2179 miles A Q; I
demand the Rumb and the distance the second Ship has sailed from the Lyzard
into the Latitude of Bermudus upon a direct Course? I answer, I have sailed in
an Angle of 64 d. 10 m. A L Q. South-westward; and I find my distance sailed
2421 miles L Q demanded; at which place Mercator expects to be in the Meridian
and parallel of Bermudus; then subtract the Rumb of the second ship from the
Lyzard upon a direct Course A L Q 64 d. 10 m. when Mercator expects to be in
the Meridian and parallel of Bermudus, from the Rumb of the first ship from the
Lyzard to Bermudus A L B, 71 d. 10 m. and you have 07 d. 00 m. that the Angle
of the position does differ between the first and second ship; then subtract
the distance of the second ship L Q 2421 miles, from the distance of the first
ship L B 3268 miles, and you have 847 miles, that the second ship does differ
from the first ship; likewise subtract the difference of Longitude at the
second ship 2179 miles A Q, from the difference of Longitude of the first ship
3093 miles A B, and you have 914 mile^, or 15 d. 14 m. that the second ship is
to the Eastward of Bermudus in the Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. These are the gross
Errors that attend Mercator's Position; for all traverses by Mercator in the
practical part of the Sea, must be resolved by right-lined Triangles, otherwise
you cannot give any account of the Rumb and the distance, and the difference of
Longitude your second ship has made from her first Port, or that you can give
any account upon what Rumb you are to return to your Port, or to direct your
course to any other Port, if you do not resolve all traverses by the Rumb and
the right lines of the Magnetic Compass in right-lined Triangles; therefore it
must be granted, that I am to find the difference of Longitude in the
Equinoctial that the second ship has made in her traverse from the Lyzard to be
in proportion to the Rumb upon a direct Course by Mercator.

In the last place, I must find the difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial
that the second ship has made upon a direct Course from the Lyzard into the
Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. In the last Question, the Rumb is found to be in an
Angle of 64 d. 10 m. South-westward that the second ship has made in her
traverse from the Lyzard upon a direct Course into the Latitude of 32 d. 25 m.
then you have the Latitude of the Lyzard 50 d. and the Latitude of 32 d. 25 m.
and the Rumb 64 d. 10 m. South-westward; I demand the difference of Meridians
in the Equinoctial that the second ship has made from the Lyzard into the
Latitude of 32 d. 25 m? I answer, the difference of Meridians in the
Equinoctial is found to be 2926 miles, when Mercator expects to be in the
Meridian of the Equinoctial equal to the first ship; then subtract the
difference of Meridians in the Equinoctial of the second ship 2926 miles, from
the difference of meridians of the first ship in the Equinoctial 4155 miles,
and you have 1229 miles, or 20 d. 29 m. that the second ship is East of the
first ship in the Equinoctial, when Mercator expects to be in the meridian of
the Equinoctial with the first ship; so that Mercator has altered the Rumb,
and the distance, and the difference of meridians of the second ship in a
right-lined Triangle, and in the Equinoctial, from the Rumb, and the distance,
and the difference of meridians of the first ship in a right-lined Triangle,
and in the Equinoctial: So that to know the difference of Longitude in the
Equinoctial is no way useful in Navigation, either upon the Globe, or upon
Mercator's Plani-Sphere.

I have proved by the Common Chart, that the second ship making a traverse, is
arrived in the meridian of the first ship, and has not altered the meridian of
the first ship in the Common Chart, or in the Equinoctial, as it is transferred
to the Globe: I have satisfied the World that the Common Chart in the Practical
part of the Sea, is the only true Chart in Navigation; if otherwise, I desire
to be better informed: Therefore it must be granted, that the Magnetic Compass
as it is Horizontal, runs parallel to the Poles of East and West, as it runs
parallel to the Poles of North and South, and is as much in proportion by
Observation and Demonstration to those Poles, as the Poles Ecliptic are in
proportion to any Question in Astronomy.

FINIS.
Addenda.
The following Treatise will prove Mercator's practical Rules in Navigation, to
be notoriously false.

Likewise Longitude not to be found by Observation, from the Celestial Bodies,
without it be when Eclipses appear in the Equinoctial.

Last of all, the Earth is proved to be the Center of the Starry Heaven.

All which is proved by Observation and Demonstration.

THE last Appendix to the foregoing Treatise was a Question given me, the
Answer I gave to it, I thought sufficient to have given satisfaction to any
reasonable Men, wherein I prove the Work of Navigation cannot be performed by
Mercator's brief Rules; but finding Mr. Flamsteed and other of our Shore
Navigators to discourse in Company in derision of what I have offered publicly
to the World; I must tell him, it is not becoming a Man of his Quality, but I
hope this following Tratise may induce Mr. Flamsteed and the rest, to let the
World see some of their skill in Navigation, and to do me so much right as to
allow or disprove what I have offered that Men may not halt between Opinions;
however I shall make some small alteration in the Question in the foregoing
Appendix, and give the Question more Practical in Navigation, wherein all Men
that are Studious in Navigation may give an Answer to all Objections any man
shall propose, in opposition to what I have offered: for the Rules of
Navigation are Demonstrative, and the Arithmetical Rules must be in proportion,
otherwise such Rules must be rejected; therefore I shall resolve the following
Question by the Plain Chart, and by Mercator, wherein I shall show you how far
Mercator's brief Rules are in proportion in each Traverse to the Rumb, and the
Right-lines of the Magnetic Compass: then I shall show you in the following
Question, wherein Mercator's Practical Rules in Navigation do disagree with the
Rumb and the Right-lines of the Magnetic Compass, by which Mercator pretends
to Navigate; which will prove Mercator's Position in the Practical Parts of
Navigation to be notorious false; as likewise are all those that are of his
persuasion, without they will satisfy the World to the contrary. Lastly, as
the Meridian and Parallel of all the known part of the World cannot be found in
the practical part of Navigation, by the Arch of great Circle, or by Mercator's
brief Rules, so likewise the Meridian and Parallel of places cannot be
transferred from the Common Chart to the Globe, but only from one Meridian and
Parallel of the Common Chart by such Demonstrations; you shall have the same
Latitude and Distance of places to all the known Parts of the World, upon the
Globe as it is transferred from only one Meridian and Parallel of the Common
Chart to the Globe: otherwise the Meridian and Parallel of places cannot be
known upon the Globe as they are found by the Practical part of Navigation. All
which I shall prove at large.

The Question given is as following.
EXAMPLE. Two Ships sail from the Lyzard in the Latitude of 50 d. the first
Ship sails in an Angle of 71 d. 10 m. South-Westward 3268 miles; the second
Ship sails in an Angle of 67 d. 30 m. North-Westward 2400 miles, then the
second Ship sails in an Angle of 23 d. 56 m. South-west-ward 2159 miles, I
demand the difference of Longitude in each right lined Triangle, and the
Latitude the first and second Ship was in upon each Rumb and distance sailed;
and the difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial contained in each right
lined Triangle.

This Question must be resolved by right lined Triangles, which are in
proportion with the Common Chart, otherwise the Latitude upon each distance
runn cannot be known, in regard Mercator's brief Rules are not in proportion to
the Rumb, and the distance of places, therefore I shall give you the Question
resolved by right lined Triangles in the Practical part of the Sea, according
to the Common Chart, and proceed to Mercator's brief Rules in the Practical
part of the Sea.

I. The first Ship sails from the Lyzard in the Latitude of 50 d. L in an Angle
of 71 d. 10 m. South-west-ward, A L B, 3268 miles, L B. I find my difference of
Latitude 1055 miles, South, and to be in the Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. L A,
likewise I find my difference of Longitude to be 3093 miles, West A B, which is
the Meridian and Parallel of Barmudas upon the Common Chart, to which the
Arithmetical Rules are in proportion.

II. The second Ship in her first Traverse sails from the Lyzard in the
Latitude of 50 d. L, in an Angle of 67 d. 30 m. D L C, 2400 miles L. C. I find
my difference of Latitude to be 918 miles, North L D, and to be in the Latitude
of 65 d. 18 m. at C, likewise I find my difference of Longitude to be 2217
miles West D C, demanded, to which the Arithmetical Rules are in proportion.

III. The second Ship in her second Traverse sails from C, in the Latitude of
65 d. 18 m. in an Angle of 23 d. 56 m. South-west-wards E C B, 2159 miles C B,
I find my difference of Latitude to be 1973 miles South, and to be in the
Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. at B, likewise I find my difference of Longitude to be
876 miles West, E B, demanded, to which the Arithmetical rules are in
proportion.

To sum up the Practical part of Navigation, according to the Common Chart,
and to give you the Meridian and Parallel of the second Ship in her first and
second Traverse; first you must add the difference of Longitude the second Ship
made in her second Traverse, 876 miles, E B, to the difference of Longitude the
second Ship made in her first Traverse 2217 miles, D C, and you have 3093
miles, A B, the difference of Longitude of the second Ship in her first and
second Traverse from the Lyzard, where she meets the first Ship in the Latitude
of 32 d. 25 m. which is the Meridian and Parallel of the second Ship in her
first and second Traverse. See the Demonstration which is according to the
Common Chart.

Having found the Latitudes and the difference of Longitudes in each right
lined Triangle that the first and second Ship was in, upon each Traverse
according to the plain Chart, I shall proceed to show you how far Mercator's
brief Rules are in proportion to the Rumb and the right lines of each right
lined Triangle, in the foregoing Question, Then I shall show you wherein
Mercator's Practical Rules in Navigation disagree.

By MERCATOR.
In the first place, I shall show you that the Rumb and the difference of
Latitude in Meridional parts is in proportion to the difference of Longitude in
the Equinoctial in each right lined Triangle: In the next place, I shall show
you that the Meridional parts contained in the difference of Latitude and the
difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial, and the difference of Latitude is
in proportion to the difference of Longitude in each right lined Triangle, of
the foregoing Question: In the third place, I shall show you that Mercator's
Practical Rules in Navigation do disagree with the foregoing Rules of Mercator,
in each Traverse; In regard the difference of Latitude in Meridional parts from
the Lyzard, to the second Ship in her second Traverse, and the difference of
Longitude in the Equinoctial found according to Mercator's Practical Rules in
Navigation, and the difference of Latitude between the second Ship in her
second Traverse from the Lyzard, does not give the same difference of
Longitude, in a right lined Triangle from the Lyzard to the second Ship in her
second Traverse, in proportion to the difference of Longitude, found in each
single Traverse in a right lined Triangle. This being proved, Mercator's
Practical Rules in Navigation must be notorious false.

The Questions to be Resolved by Mercator's brief Rules, are as follows.
EXAMPLE. 1. To find the difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial, in
proportion to the foregoing Question, The first Ship sails from the Lyzard, in
the Latitude of 50 d. L, in an Angle of 71 d. 10 m. A L B, South-west-ward into
the Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. at B. I demand the difference of Longitude in the
Equinoctial.

To Resolve this Question, say as the Radius 90 d. 1000000 is to the Logarithm
of the difference of Latitude in Meridional parts 1417, 315136, so is the
Tangent of the Rumb, 71 d. 10 m. 1046714, to the Logarithm of the difference of
Longitude in Equinoctial 361850 or 4155 miles, or 69 d. 15 m. demanded.

2. To find the difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial, in proportion to
the foregoing Question, the second Ship sails from the Lyzard in the Latitude
of 50 d. L in an Angle of 67 d. 30 m. D L C North-west-ward into the Latitude
of 65 d. 18 m. at C. I demand the difference of Longi. in the Equinoctial.

To Resolve this Question, say as the Radius 90 d. 1000000 is to the Logarithm
of the difference of Latitude in Meridional parts, 1748, 324254, So is the
Tangent of the Rumb, 67 d. 30 m. 1038277, to the Logarithm of the difference of
Longitude in the Equinoctial 362531, or 4220 miles or 70 d. 20 m. demanded.

3. To find the difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial, in proportion to
the foregoing Question, the second Ship in her second Traverse sails from C, in
the Latitude of 65 d. 18 m. in an Angle of 23 d. 56 m. E C B, South-west-wards,
into the Latitude of 32 d. 15 m. I demand the difference of Longitude in the
Equinoctial.

To Resolve this Question, say as the Radius 90 d. 1000000 is to the Logarithm
of the difference of Latitude in Meridional parts 3165, 350037. So is the
Tangent of the Rumb, 23 d. 56 m. 964722, to the Logarithm of the difference of
Longitude in the Equinoctial, 314759, or 1405 miles, or 22 d. 25 m. demanded.

To sum up the Practical part of the second Ship, in her first and second
Traverse, according to Mercator, you must add the difference of Longitude in
the Equinoctial; the second Ship made in her second Traverse 23 d. 25 m. to the
difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial; the second Ship made in her first
Traverse 70 d. 20 m. and you have 93 d. 45 m. the difference of Longitude in
the Equinoctial of the second Ship from the Lyzard, in the Latitude of 32 d. 25
m. Thus I have given you a full account of Mercator's Practicai Rules in
Navigation.

Having given you a brief account of the Practical part of Navigation,
according to the Common Chart, and according to the brief Rules of Mercator, I
shall proceed to show you how the Meridional parts, contained in the difference
of Latitude, and the difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial, and the
difference of Latitude in each single Traverse, according to Mercator, is only
in proportion to the difference of Longitude, contained in each single Traverse
in all right lined Triangles; Then I shall show you that the like Rules of
Mercator are out of all proportion with the difference of Longitude, in a right
lined Triangle from the Lyzard according to his Practical Rules in Navigation,
the Questions to be Resolved by Mercator's brief Rules are as follow in Example.

1. The first Ship sails from the Lyzard, Latitude 50 d. into the Latitude of
32 d. 25 m. I find my difference of Latitude in Meridional parts 1417 the
difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial is 4155 miles; the difference of
Latitude is 1055 miles. I demand the difference of Longitude, in a right lined
Triangle that the first Ship made according to the Common Chart from the
Lyzard, A B.

To find the difference of Longitude of the first Ship in a right lined
Triangle, according to Mercator's brief Rules, say as the Logarithm of the
Meridional parts contained in the difference of Latitude 1417, 315136, is to
the Logarithm of the difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial 4155 miles,
361857. So is the Logarithm of the difference of Latitude 1055 miles, 302325,
to the Logarithm of the difference of Longitude, in a right lined Triangle,
349046, or 3093 miles, which is equal to the difference of Longitude, the first
Ship made in a right lined Triangle. See the foregoing Demonstration, according
to the Common Chart, A B.

2. The second Ship sails from the Lyzard, Latitude 50 d. into the Latitude of
65 d. 18 m. I find my difference of Latitude in Meridional parts 1748. The
difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial, is 4220 miles, the difference of
Latitude is 918 miles, I demand the difference of Longitude, in a right lined
Triangle, that the second Ship made according to the Common Chart, from the
Lyzard, D C.

To find the difference of Longitude of the second Ship, in her first Traverse,
in a right lined Triangle, according to Mercator's brief Rules, say as the
Logarithm of the Meridional parts contained in the difference of Latitude,
1748, 324254; is to the Logarithm of the difference of Longitude in the
Equinoctial; 4220 miles, 362531, so is the Logarithm of the difference of
Latitude, 918 miles, 296284 to the Logarithm of the difference of Longitude, in
a right lined Triangle 334561 or 2217 miles, which is equal to the difference
of Longitude, the second made in a right lined Triangle in her first Traverse.
See the foregoing Demonstration, according to the Common Chart, D C.

3. The second Ship sails from C. in the Latitude of 65 d. 18 m. into the
Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. I find my difference of Latitude in the Meridional
parts, 3165. The difference of Longitude, in the Equinoctial is 1405 miles, the
difference of Latitude is 1973 miles; I demand the difference of Longitude, in
a right lined Triangle; that the second Ship made in her second Traverse,
according to the Common Chart from E to B.

To find the difference of Longitude, the second Ship made in her second
Traverse, in a right lined Triangle; say as the Logarithm of the Meridional
parts, contained in the difference of Latitude 3165, 350037, is to the
Logarithm of the difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial 1405 miles, 314767.
So is the Logarithm of the difference of Latitude 1973 miles 329512 to the
Logarithm of the difference of Longitude, in a right lined Triangle, 294242 or
876 miles which is equal to the difference of Longitude, the second Ship made
in a right lined Triangle, in her second Traverse: See the foregoing
Demonstration according to the Common Chart; then add the difference of
Longitude the second Ship made in a right lined Triangle in her first Traverse,
2217 miles found according to Mercator's brief Rules to the difference of
Longitude, the second Ship made in a right lined Triangle in her second
Traverse 876 miles, found according to Mercator's brief Rules; and you have
3093 miles equal to the difference of Longitude, the first Ship made in a right
lined Triangle 3093: So that Mercator's brief Rules are in proportion to the
Rumb, and the difference of Latitude and the difference of Longitude in all
single Questions, in a right lined Triangle. See the forgoing Demonstration
which proves the Practical part of Navigation, performed by the second Ship,
according to the Common Chart, to be in the Meridian and Parallel of the first
Ship.

In the last place, I shall prove that the like Rules in the practical part of
Mercator's Navigation, will not give like difference of Longitude contained in
the Traverse of the second Ship, in a right lined Triangle from the Lyzard 3093
miles, which will prove Mercator's practical Position in Navigation to be
notoriously false, for in the plainest Rules of Art where propositions shall
disagree, we are to reject them. The Question is as following.

EXAMPLE. According to Mercator's Practical Rules in Navigation, the second
Ship in her second Traverse, is in the Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. the Lyzard in
the Latitude of 50 d. The difference of Latitude in Meridional parts, 1417; the
difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial, according to Mercator's practical
Rules in Navigation is 93 d. 45 m. or 5625 miles. The difference of Latitude is
1055 miles. I demand the difference of Longitude in a right lined Triangle,
between the Lyzard and the Ship in her second Traverse.

To find the difference of Longitude, in a right lined Triangle, say as the
Logarithm of the Meridional parts, contained in the difference of Latitude
1417, 315136 is to the Logarithm of the difference of Longitude in the
Equinoctial, 5625 miles 375012 So is the Logarithm of the difference of
Latitude 1055 miles, 302325 to the Logarithm of the difference of Longitude in
a right lined Triangle, 362201 or 4188 miles between the Lyzard and the Ship,
in the Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. demanded.

Then subtract the difference of Londitude found by the like Rules of Mercator,
in each Traverse in a right lined Triangle 3093 miles from the Lyzard to the
Ship, in the Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. from the difference of Longitude, found by
the like Rules of Mercator, in a right lined Triangle, according to Mercator's
practical Rules in Navigation 4188 miles, and you have 1095 miles or 18 d. 15
m. that Mercator's practical Rules in Navigation does differ from Mercator's
practical Rules in each Traverse, in a right lined Triangle in the Latitude of
32 d. 25 m. So that Mercator does alter the Rumb and the distance and the
difference of Longitude in the practical part of Navigation, from the Lyzard
1095 miles or 18 d. 15 m. more West in the Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. Therefore
Mercator's Position in the practical part of Navigation is notoriously false;
for in the plainest Rules of Art where propositions shall disagree we are to
reject them.

To sum up the foregoing Treatise, In the first place, I have proved the plain
Chart, that has been rejected by all Writers, to be the only true Chart in
Navigation, by Observation and Demonstration to which the Arithmetical Rules
are in proportion. Secondly, I have proved Mercator's Arithmetical Rules, to be
out of all proportion in the practical part of Navigation; and Geometry, In
regard the whole Dependants of Mercator's Navigation, is upon his brief Rules
in Arithmetic; which Rules disagreeing, disappoints the Design of Geometry:
Therefore the work of Navigation cannot be performed by Mercator: Thirdly, I
have proved the Art of Navigation cannot be performed by the Arch of a great
Circle; In regard the Arch of a great Circle does measure the nearest distance
of places in North and South Latitude without having any regard to the
Parallels of Latitude; so that the Angles of Position in the Arch of a great
Circle does differ from the Angles of Position, by the Magnetic Compass. See
the foregoing Demonstrations: So that you cannot give the Question as it stands
in the practical part of Navigation to find the Meridian and Parallel the Ship
is in by the Arch of a great Circle; neither can the Meridian and Parallel of
places be known upon the Globe, but as it is transferred to the Globe from the
Common Chart, of which I shall give you a farther Account in the following
Discourse. The chief intent of this Treatise, is principally for Information,
that all Men may give an Account of the Certainty of Navigation: Therefore I
desire Mr. Flamsteed, and the rest of our Shore Navigators, to let the World
see something of their skill in Navigation, and that they will not hide their
Talent in a Napkin, but allow or disprove what I have made public to the
World, which I expect from them.

To transfer the Meridian and Parallel of places from the Common Chart, to the
Globe.
As the Meridian and Parallel of places, cannot be found by Mercator's
practical Rules in Navigation, or by the Arch of a great Circle; so likewise
you cannot transfer the Meridian and Parallel of places from the Common Chart,
to the Globe; but it must be transferred only from one Meridian and Parallel
of the Common Chart.

Then by the following Demonstration, by which I transfer the Meridian and
Parallel of places from the Common Chart to the Globe: You shall have the same
Latitude and distance of places upon the Globe, as is upon the Common Chart,
from that Meridian and Parallel from whence it is transferred, otherwise the
Meridian and Parallel of places cannot be known upon the Globe, as it is found
by the practical Part of Navigation.

To transfer the Meridian and Parallel of Places, from the Common Chart to the
Globe.
EXAMPLE. 1. In the Common Chart, the first Ship sails from the Lyzard, L in
the Latitude of 50 d. into the Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. B, her distance sailed
is 3268 miles or 54 d. 28 m. L B, then take with your Compass 54 d. 28 m. L B,
from the Equinoctial part of your Globe; placing one Foot of your Compass in
the Latitude of 50 d. of your Globe for the Meridian and Parallel of the
Lyzard, then turn the Globe East, in regard your Ship is gone to the Westward,
until the other point does cut under the Brass Meridian of the Globe, in the
Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. there make a Mark which is the Meridian and Parallel of
the first Ship upon the Globe. To prove the Truth of this Demonstration,
observe the difference of Longitude between the Meridian of the Lyzard and the
Meridian of your Mark, in the Equinoctial part of your Globe is 69 d. 15 m. as
it was found by the brief Rules of Mercator. So that you have three certain
distances upon the Globe, as is in a right lined Triangle; that is the
difference of Latitude and the distance of places, and the difference of
Longitude in the middle Parallel. I shall proceed to the second Ship.

2. To transfer the Meridian and Parallel of the second Ship, in her first
Traverse, from the Meridian and Parallel of the Lyzard, according to the Common
Chart, to the Globe. Example in the Common Chart, the second Ship sailed from
the Lyzard L in the Latitude of 50 d. into the Latitude of 65 d. 18 m. C her
distance sails is 2400 miles or 40 d. L C, then take with your Compass 40 d.
from the Equinoctial part of your Globe, placing one Foot in the Latitude of 50
d. as you did before for the Meridian and Parallel of the Lyzard: Then turn the
Globe Eastward, in regard your Ship is gone to the Westward, until the other
point does cut under the Brass Meridian, in the Latitude of 65 d. 18 m. there
make a Mark which is the Meridian and Parallel of the second Ship in her first
Traverse, from the Lyzard, upon the Globe. To prove the Truth of this
Demonstration, observe the difference of Longitude between the Meridian of the
Lyzard and the Meridian of your mark in the Equinoctial part of your Globe is
70 d. 20 m. as it was found by the brief Rules of Mercator; so that you have
Three certain distances upon the Globe, as is in a right lined Triangle, that
is the difference of Latitude and the distance of places, and the difference of
Longitude in the middle Parallel. I shall proceed to the second Ship in her
second Traverse.

To transfer the Meridian and Parallel of the second Ship, in her second
Traverse, from the Meridian and Parallel of the Lyzard, according to the Common
Chart, to the Globe, Example the second Ship in her second Traverse, sails from
C in the Latitude of 65 d. 18 m. in an Angle of 23 d. 56 m. South-west-ward.
2159 miles to B and meets the first Ship, in the Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. at B.
so that the distance of the second Ship from the Lyzard, B L is 3268 miles, and
is equal to the distance of the first Ship from the Lyzard, B L, 3268.
Therefore the Latitude of the Lyzard 50 d. L and the Latitude of the second
Ship in her second Traverse 32 d. 25 m. B and the distance of the second Ship
in her second Traverse from the Lyzard 3268 miles B L or 54 d. 28 m. is in the
like proportion to the Meridian and Parallel of the first Ship in the Common
Chart, as it is transferred to the Globe, from the Common Chart, and is in the
like proportion to the difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial of the first
Ship from the Lyzard 69 d. 15 m. This Demonstration must be Infallibly True, in
regard Mercator's brief Rules, and the Rules of the Globe are in proportion to
the difference of Longitude in all right lined Triangles; as in the foregoing
Triangle between A and B.

In the last place, I shall prove the Meridian and Parallel of all the known
parts of the World, must be only transferred from one Meridian and Parallel of
the Common Chart to the Globe, otherwise you will alter the Meridian and
Parallel of places upon the Globe, as they are transferred from only one
Meridian and Parallel of the Common Chart: In regard the Meridional parts
contained in the difference of Latitude, and the Rumb, according to Mercator,
are only in proportion to the difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial, in a
single Traverse, but not in the practical part of Navigation, by which the
Meridian and Parallel of all the known parts of the World is found.

EXAMPLE. The second Ship, in her second Traverse, sails from C in the Latitude
of 65 d. 18 m. in an Angle of 23 d. 56 m. 2159 miles or 35 d. 59 m. into the
Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. Then take with your Compass 35 d. 59 m. the distance
sailed from the Equinoctial part of the Globe, placing one Foot in the Meridian
and Parallel of the second Ship, in her first Traverse, as it was transferred
from the Common Chart the Globe; then turn the Globe Eastward, in regard your
Ship is gone to the Westward until the other Point does cut under the Brass
Meridian of the Globe, in the Latitude of 32 d. 25 m. there make a mark upon
the Globe, and you shall have 23 d. 25 m. the difference of Longitude in the
Equinoctial, as it was found by Mercator's brief Rules in that single Traverse,
which being added to the difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial, that the
second Ship made in her first Traverse from the Lyzard, 70 d. 20 m. You have 93
d. 45 m. the difference of Longitude in the Equinoctial, West of the Meridian
of the Lyzard, then subtract 69 d. 15 m. the difference of Longitude in the
Equinoctial, the second Ship made in proportion to the difference of Longitude
in each single Traverse in a right lined Triangle, from the Lyzard, according
to the practical Rules of Mercator in each Traverse, and you have 24 d. 30 m.
that you must alter the Meridian and Parallel of the second Ship in the
Equinoctial part of the Globe, which proves Mercator's practical Rules in
Navigation to be notoriously false. In regard Mercator's Rules does disagree in
the practical Part, with the Rumb and the right lines of the Magnetic Compass.
Therefore as the Meridian and Parallel of places cannot be found by the
practical part of Navigation by the Arch of a great Circle, or by the brief
Rules of Mercator; so likewise you cannot transfer the Meridian and Parallel of
places from the Common Chart to the Globe, but only from one Meridian and
Parallel of the Common Chart, by such Demonstrations you shall have the same
Latitudes and distance of places to all the known parts of the World, upon the
Globe, as it is transferred from any one Meridian and Parallel of the Common
Chart, otherwise the Meridian and Parallel of places cannot be known upon the
Globe, as they are found by the practical part of Navigation; therefore the
Common Chart, is the only True Chart in Navigation.

In the last place.
There have been some that pretend to find the difference of Longitude or the
difference of Meridians, by Observation from the Celestial Bodies; first I
shall prove it is not to be found by observation from the Stars: Secondly, I
shall prove it is not to be found by observation from the Planets, upon their
greatest inclination or declination into the Equinoctial, without it be when
the Sun or Moon be Eclipsed in the Equinoctial.

1. In the first place, I shall prove the difference of Meridians, or the
difference of Longitude cannot be found by observation from the Stars.

EXAMPLE. Suppose your self to be in any Meridian and Parallel of the
Terrestial Sphere, there you take the Meridian altitude, of one or more Stars
in the Equinoctial, or out of the Equinoctial, the Meridian altitude of those
Stars: or the altitude of the guards upon their Angles of Position with the
North Star is the same the whole Circulation of the Earth, in that Parallel you
made your Observations in, so that you have no difference of Observation to
give the difference of Longitude, or the difference of Meridians. Therefore the
difference of Longitude, or the difference of Meridians cannot be found by
Observation, from any of the Stars, without you have difference of Observation,
to give the difference of Meridians.

2. In the next place, I shall prove the difference of Longitude or the
difference of Meridians cannot be found by Observation, from any of the Planets
upon their greatest inclination or declination into the Equinoctial, or day
after day.

EXAMPLE. If you observe in any Meridian and Parallel of the World, the
Meridian altitude of any of the Planets, upon their greatest inclination or
declination into the Equinoctial, or day after day, you will find the
difference in your Observations, in any one Meridian and Parallel you observe
in, not to have a proportion to the difference of Longitude or the difference
of Meridians with the circulation of the Earth, therefore the difference of
Longitude or the difference of Meridians cannot be found by Observation from
the Meridian altitude of any of the Planets without you have difference of
observation. In proportion to the difference of Longitude or the difference of
Meridians the circulation of the Earth.

3. In the last place, I shall show you how the difference of Longitude or the
difference of Meridians may be found by Observation when Eclipses shall happen
to be in the Equinoctial and not otherwise.

EXAMPLE. If the Sun or Moon be Eclipsed in the Equinoctial, and that several
persons in several Meridians and Parallels of the World, does observe the
altitude of the Sun or Moon, at the beginning or end of the Eclipse, these
Observations being compared, the difference of Observation between such places,
shall give the difference Longitude or the difference of Meridians between
those places such Observations were made in, In regard the Sun or Moon being
Eclipsed in the Equinoctial does appear at that instant of time those
Observations were taken at the beginning or end of the Eclipse as a Pole in the
East or West, so that the difference of Longitude or the difference of
Meridians must have the like proportions by Observation from such Eclipses, to
prove the Meridians does run Parallel to the East and West part of the
Terrestial Sphere, as the Parallels of Latitude are proved to run Parallel by
Observation to the the Equinoctial and to the North and South Pole of the
Terrestial Sphere, therefore it is a very strange Opinion in any Men to grant
the Magnetic Compass rectified to his true Poles to run East or West in all
Parallels of Latitude to the Equinoctial, and to the Poles of North and South,
and not to grant the Meridians of the Magnetic Compass to run Parallel to the
East and West part of the Terrestial Sphere; in the foregoing Treatise, I have
proved by Observation, that the Magnetic Compass in all Meridians and
Parallels of the World does point to the East and West part of the Celestial
Sphere, as it points to the North and South part of the Celestial Sphere;
therefore as the Magnetic Compass makes the same Position to the East and West
part of the Celestial Sphere as it does to the North and South part of the
Celestial Sphere, in all Meridians and Parallels of the World: therefore it
must be granted that the Magnetic Compass runs in Parallel Meridians, as it
runs in Parallels of Latitude upon on the Terrestial Sphere; to which the
Observations of Eclipses in the Equinoctial, and the Observations from the
Poles of the North and South does agree.

4. In the last place, If the Sun or Moon be not Eclipsed in the Equinoctial,
then the altitude of the Sun or Moon being observed in several Meridians and
Parallels at the beginning or end of the Eclipse, the difference of such
Observations being compared cannot give the difference of Meridians or the
difference of Longitude in proportion with the Parallels of Latitude; In regard
the Sun or Moon so Eclipsed out of the Equinoctial, such Observations cannot
cross the Parallels of Latitude at right Angles: For such Observations are as
much out of proportion with the Parallels of Latitude, as the Parallel
Meridians of the Poles Ecliptic, would be out of proportion with the Parallel
Meridians, of the North and South Poles, upon the Terrestial Sphere. So that
the difference of Longitude or the difference of Meridians upon the Terrestial
Sphere, cannot be found by Observation from the Stars, or from the Planets,
without it be when the Sun and Moon be Eclipsed in the Equinoctial.

To Prove the Earth the Center of the Starry-Heaven, and not to have any
Inclination toward the Poles, as Copernicus would have it.
THE Earth by Observation keeps its Parallels with the Starry-Heaven all the
Year, without alteration; for by Observation, that Star that is in the
Equinoctial part of Heaven, is always in the Equinoctial part of the Earth; so
likewise, take all the Stars in their several Parallels to the Poles from the
Equinoctial, and you will find they keep their Parallels with the Earth for
ever.

We need not go to the Equinoctial part of the Earth, to prove the Earth to
keep her Parallels with the Equinoctial part of the Starry Heaven: For, observe
in this Parallel or Latitude of London 51 d. 30 m. the Amplitude of any Star in
the Equinoctial, either upon his Rising or Setting, and you shall find
Amplitude to be East or West of you for ever, in this Parallel or any other.

Likewise observe the Meridian Altitude of any Star in the Equinoctial, in this
Parallel or in any other Parallel or Latitudes, and you shall find his Meridian
Altitude to be the Elevation of the Equinoctial for ever, in this Parallel, or
Latitude, or in any other Parallel or Latitudes.

And by daily Observations we find the Sun to alter his Amplitudes, and
Meridian Altitudes, and Parallels with the Starry Heaven and the Earth. And we
find the Starry Heaven to keep its Parallels with the Earth always, in regard
the Stars keep their Meridian Altitudes and Amplitudes with the Earth, without
alteration.

But if we should admit the Sun the Center of the Starry Heaven, and the Earth
should have her Declination toward her Poles; then the Sun must be always in
the Equinoctial part of the Starry Heaven; and the Sun must have the same
Amplitudes, and Meridian Altitudes, with the Stars in the Equinoctial, in all
Parallels! And then the Sun, and all the Stars in Heaven, should have a daily
Calculation of the Declination of the Earth, as the Earth should alter her
Parallels, by Inclining or Declining toward her Poles.

But it is proved by Observation, that the Sun cannot be the Center of the
Starry-Heaven; in regard the Sun is not always in the Equinoctial part of that
Heaven, and the Sun has not the same Meridian Altitude, and Amplitude, and
Parallels, with the Starry-Heaven in the Equinoctial, but twice in the Year,
and that is as the Sun Inclines and Declines from one Tropic to another.

And it is proved by Observation, that the Equinoctial part of the
Starry-Heaven is always in the Equinoctial part of the Earth, for the Meridian
Altitude of the Stars in Equinoctial is the Elevation of the Equinoctial in all
Parallels. Now there is a necessity, that the Declination of the Sun should be
Calculated for every day in the Year, in regard of his Declination toward his
Poles 23 d. 30 m. which is the cause the Sun alters his Parallels, and
Amplitudes, and Meridian Altitudes every day.

But for Stars in the Starry-Heaven, their Declination or distance from the
Equinoctial is the same for ever, and keeps its Parallels with the Earth, by
Observation.

Another Example from the Sun, to prove the Earth the Center of the
Starry-Heaven.
MOST Mathematicians hold, that when the Sun is depressed below the Horizon 15
d. that Twylight appears upon the Horizon; the proof of which is very suitable
in this Parallel or Latitude.

EXAMPLE. London, Latitude 51 d. 30. North, the Suns Declination 23 d. 30 m.
North, the Suns Depression 15 d. 00 m. I demand the Time of Twylight? By the
Work you will find the Sun being depressed 15 d. at Midnight, the 11th day of
June, in the Latitude of 51 d. 30. you will have Twylight appear in the North
all Night: At which time we find by Observation in the Equinoctial, and in this
Parallel, and in all other Parallels, the Sun to be distant from the North
Poles 66 d. 30 m. Now if the Sun was the Center of the Starry-Heaven, the Sun
would be always distant from the Poles 90 d. as the Stars in the Equinoctial
are, and as the Sun is the 10th day of March, or the 10th day of September,
when he is in the Equinoctial.

I shall add one Observation more from the Magnetic Compass, as it is
Horizontal to prove the Earth the Center of the Starry-Heaven.
It is granted by all Astronomers, that Stars of the least Magnitude, are
bigger than the Earth, so that the least Star appears as a Center to us upon
the Earth; In like manner I shall prove the Earth by Observation by the
Magnetic Compass, appears but as a Center to the Stars, and that the Earth is
the Center of the Starry-Heaven.

EXAMPLE. The Magnetic Compass as it is Horizontal in all Meridians and
Parallels of the World rectified to its true Poles, where there is occasion,
does point to the Stars in the Equinoctial, and to the East and West, and to
the North and South parts of the Celestial Sphere, crossing the Celestial
Sphere at right Angles, without giving any difference of Observation for the
Diameter of the Earth, so that the Earth appears as a Center to the Stars and
is the Center of the Starry Heaven, by the Horizontal Observations of the
Magnetic Compass; in regard you have no difference of Observation, for the
whole Diameter of the Earth; but if the Earth should incline or decline toward
its Poles as Copernicus supposed it does, 23 d. 30 m. then the Horizontal
Observations of the Magnetic Compass cannot point to the Stars in the
Equinoctial, or to the East and West part of the Celestial Sphere, for if the
Earth, as a Center should move upon its Axis 23 d. 30 m. to each Tropic, then
the Earth must alter the Equinoctial part of the Starry Heaven, as the Sun and
the rest of the Planets does, therefore Copernicus is under a very great
mistake, to suppose the Sun the Center of the Starry Heaven.

In the next place, I shall prove the foregoing position by Observation and by
Demonstration, the outward, Sphere representing the Starry-heaven the lesser
Sphere the Earth.
1. To demonstrate the Earth to be the Center of the Starry Heaven. If the
Earth should move upon its Axis 23 d. 30 m. toward the North or South Poles,
then there is a necessity the Earth must alter its Parallels with the Sun and
the Stars in the Equinoctial part of Heaven, 23 d. 30 m. but on the contrary it
is proved by Observation in all Meridians and Parallels of the World, that A is
always in the Equinoctial part of the Starry-Heaven, and that B is always in
the Tropic of Cancer; and that C is always in the Tropic of Capricorn, so
that the Earth always keeps its Parallels with the Starry-Heaven without
alteration; therefore the Earth is the Center of the Starry-Heaven.

2. If the Sun should be the Center of the Starry-Heaven, according to
Copernicus's supposition; then the Sun by Observation should be always in the
Equinoctial part of the Starry-Heaven, as it is the tenth day of March, and the
tenth day of September, at which time the Sun is by Observation distant from
the Poles, 90 m. but on the contrary the Sun is by Observation when he is in
the Tropicks 66 d. 30 m. distant from the Poles; therefore the Sun does alter
its place in the Ecliptic with the Constellations of the Starry-Heaven, by
inclining from the Tropic of Capricorn, to the Tropic of Cancer 47 d. so that
the Sun cannot be the Center of the Starry-Heaven but by supposition.

3. By the Horizontal Observation of the Magnetic Compass, the Earth appears
as a Center to the Equinoctial part of the Starry-Heaven, therefore if the
Earth as a Center to the Starry-Heaven should move upon its Axis from A to B,
in the Tropic of Cancer, and so back-again to the Equinoctial, and from thence
to C, in the Tropic of Capricorn, then the Earth as a Center must alter its
Parallels with the Starry-Heaven, from the Tropic of Cancer, to the Tropic of
Capricorn, which is 47 d. but on the contrary, geometrical diagram between page
156 and 157.
the Earth by Observation by the Magnetic Compass is the Center of the Starry
Heaven, and keeps its Parallels with the Starry Heaven, without alteration,
otherwise the Earth must alter its Amplitudes with the Equinoctial part of the
Starry-Heaven, as all the Planets does: So that the Earth is the Center of the
Starry-Heaven, and there is no Observation to be made from the Celestial Bodies
to prove the Earth has any motion at all.

What I have offered to the World in this small Treatise, I have proved by
Observation and Demonstration; therefore whatever Men may pretend to, if they
do not accord with the like Rules, it is but Fancy or Imagination.

FINIS.

