MEAN TEKEL, OR, The Council of Officers of the Army, Against The Declarations,
etc. of the Army.

WHEREIN Is flatly proved by the express Words of the Armies Declarations, that
the Sixth Article of the May 12. 1659.
late Address of the said Council of Officers to the Parliament, point blank
changes the Cause of Liberty of Conscience, from the Good Old One, to a Bad
New One; from that which at first, and all along the Army engaged in, and for,
and Declared to that which they engaged against.

MOREOVER, That the Imposition therein is agreeable neither to the Armies
solemn Declarations and Engagements, nor to Liberty of Conscience, nor to the
Scriptures of Truth, but is contrary to them All.

DIRECTED To the said Council of Officers, for their Convincement.

AND PUBLISHED For the Information of all who are concerned in the Cause of
Liberty.

GEO. BISHOP.

-- Heu quantum Mutat^sab illo? For if I build again the things I destroyed, I
make my self a Transgressor, Gal. 2. 18. LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by
Tho. Brewster, at the Three Bibles, by Paul's, 1659.

TO THE COUNCIL OF THE Officers of the Army.
FRIENDS,
HAving seen Your late humble Petition and Address to the Parliament, and
considered the Matter and Language of the Sixth Article, I was grieved in my
spirit (for your sakes) to see that ye should be so quickly removed from your
Stedfastness to the Good Old Cause, contained in your Declarations, and engaged
in a New, (as this more than seems to be, and I shall show it you by and by)
even that of your enemies, in opposition to the former, and so provoke the Lord
to anger against your Selves, whose loving kindness has so tenderly visited
you, when ye cried unto him because of your Oppression, who heard and delivered
you. Therefore bear with me, whilst in bowels of love, I lay before you the one
and the other, to the end, that ye may see your State, and be recovered out of
the Snare, in which ye are taken captive by the subtilty of men, who lay in
wait to deceive, and so repenting, the judgment of God, which is ready to break
forth, may be turned from you.

Ye know ( Friends) that the Good Old Cause, was (chiefly) Liberty of
Conscience, which being oppressed by the Bishops, and that Generation, cried
out so loud, as raised the first War, on the Bishops and Kings part, to oppress
and keep it under; on the Parliaments, to defend and deliver it, and the
Liberties of the Nation, which with the Liberty of Conscience were bound up,
and joined together, as two lovely Twins that cannot be divided, but with the
mutual Suffering, if not the Dissolution of each other.

The Bishops Yoaks of Wood being taken off some, who (but now) Suffered under
them, rise up in their steads to oppress Conscience; and these prepare other
yoaks, yoaks of Iron, for the necks of their Brethren, who Suffered in, and
with them, and together fought for equal Liberty; and nothing would serve these
(who Suffered themselves but yesterday, as it were for Conscience) but to bring
the Consciences of all others to their size, the Souls of all, to their
Diametre or square, who differed from them, or the Nations must swim in blood,
and peace be denied them; as if the Cause engaged in, had been, that they might
have Liberty, and that it was so to be, and as of right, and the Consciences of
all others made their Slaves and Vassals, (a more arrogant and unsufferable
Usurpation, in these than the Bishops, by how much the more they cried out
against, and opposed it in them.) Hence it came to pass, that they so soon
divided from the joint prosecution of the common Cause of Liberty, (to the
hazard of the public), distinguishing themselves and others into terms and
things, and endeavoring the setting up their private upon it, with such
imperious Lordliness, as no Age has pararell'd: and when as the most desired
peace, was trilling down the Mountains of Blood, to the weary Inhabitans of
these Nations, who had tugged hard for it, through the extremities of War, it
must all be turned back again, and the Bloody issue again opened, and the
common Enemy joined with, (after he was overthrown) King, and Irish, and Scots
raised up, and assisted for that purpose, against those of their Brethren, who
continued faithful, and were blessed of God, (because they were so blessed
against their wills, and endeavors to the contrary) to the overthrowing of the
common Enemy; and never would they be at rest (so strange was their itch at the
Consciences of others, and so insatiable their desires, to be dealing with the
Souls of men, who, yet enjoyed the Liberty of their own) raising and carrying
on War after War, till they were all vanquished, and their whole strength
together broken down, at Worcester, which quickly ended the Wars in these
Nations.

Thus ( Friends) briefly, as to the Cause, or State of the Case in reference to
Liberty of Conscience, and the public Contest thereabouts, in which how deeply
ye were concerned, viz. in the former as Puritans, Non-conformists, and
factious Fellows, (so called and persecuted) in common with the rest: in the
latter, as Heretics, and Schismatics, I shall not, (nor need I) further to
repeat. These things ( I may well presume) are engraven in you, in an indeleble
Charecter; Nor shall I treat, how honest men in these Nations, joined with and
assisted you, for this purpose, as in a common Cause, wherein they and you were
so equally concerned, as that One could not fall or miscarry, without the
damage, or the detriment of the Other; how readily they flowed to you, whilst
that moved you to any extraordinary actions; and what grief of heart it
occasioned to them, and sufferings, when ye have, at any time swerved
therefrom, is manifest; the things are fresh, and but of yesterday, the late
Revolutions speak them sufficiently; but this I shall show you plainly out of
your own Declarations, and in your own words, how this Article changes the
Cause, from the Old, to a New; from a good Old one, to a bad New one, from that
in which at first, and all along ye engaged for, and in; to another, to that
against which ye engaged. And this I shall endeavor to do, with as much
brevity, as the weight of the Case will admit, not clogging ye with a large
Recital, of all that ye have said in this particular, (though what ye have
taken liberty to speak, ye should endure to hear) But contracting the proof of
what I have laid down, to two of your Declarations, as my two instances or
witnesses, viz. The great Remonstrance St. Albans, Nov. 16. 1648. and your
draught of the Settlement of the Nation, Whitehal, Jan. 15. 1649. Both drawn up
by you, and presented this Parliament, upon two of the most weighty occasions
ye (then) had met withal, and the greatest Subjects; The one the the bringing
of the King to justice, and changing of the Government, into that of a free
State or Commonwealth, upon which ye pretend to build, now that ye are
returned thither again; The other, your asserting after the (then) Wars, and
the Justice done on the King, and the change of the Government thereupon) what
your selves and the People did expect, and ought to reap of Liberty therefrom,
and Right as to All.

First, in the Sum of the Public Intrest ( which had been the great Subject of
the contest all along, in the late Wars) drawn up by you in your said
Remonstrance, and laid down, as that which ( ye say) the King had all along
opposed, to set up his, and his posterities Will and Power; and whereupon ye
ground your charge against him, ye assign nothing (in the least) of power in
Parliaments, (that there was, or ought to be any such, or that it was any part
of the Contest) to impose in matters of Religion or Conscience; but charge him
with the opposing the Reformation intended and endeavored by the Parliament,
(as their proper work) of what he had imposed in matters of Conscience and
Religion.

For the proof of this, see what ye have said, Remonstrance, page 14, 15. The
sum of the public Interest, (say ye) of the Nation, in relation to Common
Right and Freedom, (which has been the chief subject of our Contest) and in
opposition to Tyranny and Injustice, in Kings and Others, we take to lie in
these things following; That for all matters of Supreme Power, or concernment,
to the safety and welfare of the whole, the People have a Common or Supreme
Council; and that the power of making Laws, Constitutions, and Offices (for the
Preservation and Government of the whole) and of altering, repealing, and
abolishing the same, (for the removing of any public grievance therein) and
the power of final Judgment concerning War, or Peace, the safety or welfare of
the People, and all [Civil] things whatsoevir, (here is not a tittle of
Religious) without further appeal to any created standing Power; and the
Supreme Trust, in relation to all such things, may rest in that Supreme Council.

By this it is plain, that to Settle, or Create a Power in Parliaments to
impose in matters of Religion or Conscience, was no part of the public
Interest in contest in the Wars.

Now, that the King had imposed in matters of Conscience, or Religion, and
opposed the Reformation intended and endeavored by the Parliament, of what he
had so imposed: Here what ye also say in your own words.

The Matters aforementioned (say ye Remonstrance St. Albans, page 18.
to the Parliament) being the main parts of Public Interest originally
contended for on our parts, and them that engaged with you, (viz. the
Parliament) and thus opposed by the King, for the Interest of his Will and
Power: many other particular, or special Interests have fallen into Page 20.
the contest on each Party; As first, on the Parliaments part, to protect and
countenance religious men, and godliness in the power of it, (Who has
discountenanced and put such out of protection (Now?) to the witness of God in
you all I speak.) To give freedom and enlargement to the Gospel, for the
increasing and spreading of Light amonst men, (Who endeavors to stop it now?)
To take away those corrupted Forms of an outside Religion, and
Church Government, whether imposed without a Law, or rooted in the Law in times
of Popish ignorance and Idolatry, or of the Gospels dimmer light, (Who
establishes such now? whose light is dim now?) By means whereof chains and
snares, were laid upon conscientious and zealous men, (Who have laid chains and
snares for such men now?) And the generality of the People held in darkness and
superstition, and a blind Reverence of persons, and outward things, fit for
Popery and Slavery, (Who holds them so now, and fits them for such?) And also
to take away, and loosen the dependence of the Clergy, and Ecclesiastical
affairs on the King, (Who has put it on the Magistrate, yea as the bottom of
a Free State (declared so) now?) Which the craft of both in length of time had
wrought for each other, (How crept it in? and by whose craft has it wrought it
so, and in so short a space now? Which several things were the proper subject
of the Reformation endeavored by the Parliament, (Who has prayed the
Parliament to do, and at whose address and request have they done the contrary
now?) Contrariwise on the Kings Party, (Whose Party is it now become, and
Interest? Who is it now that has laid a foundation for the following
particulars?) The Interest was to discountenance and suppress the power of
godliness, or any thing of Conscience obliging above, or against humane and
outward Constitutions; to restrain or lessen the preaching of the Gospel, and
growth of light among men; To hold the Community of men in a darksome
ignorance, and superstition, or formality in Religion, with an awful Reverence
of Persons, Offices, and outward dispensations (rendering them sit subjects for
Ecclesiastical and Civil Tyranny) And for these ends to advance, and set up
further forms of Superstition, or at least hold fast the old, which had any
foundation in the Laws (whereby chains and fetters might be held upon, and
advantages taken against such in whom a zeal or Conscience to any thing above
man, should break forth) and to uphold and maintain the dependence of the
Clergy and Church matters on the King, and greatness of the Clergy under him,
(Who has done, and is doing all this now?) And in all these things to oppose
the Reformation endeavored by the Parliament, (Who has set the Parliament now
to oppose the very Reformation themselves endeavored, of which (ye say) it was
the proper subject.) Read these things in the spirit of honesty, in which ye
wrote it, and then read your selves, and see how you are (in a moment, as it
were) beguiled and surprised (after all) and darkened into the Kings Interest,
(as ye your selves have here stated it) out of and from the Parliaments, doing
your selves the very things, with which ye here charge him, and for which
(among other things) ye took him off: The matters are so plain and obvious, as
they need no further demonstration: Consider them seriously in the fear of God,
for it is no slight thing that ye are deceived into; But that on which does
hang the guilt of all the blood that has been shed in the late Wars, ye have
given Judgment against your selves in the Case, in this your Judgment against
the King.

I shall close this instance with your own words, in the close of this
particular, (page 21.) In all or most of which respects (say ye) of what has
been repeated) it has been the great happiness and advantage to Parliamentary
and public Interest, that it has been made One, very much, with ^^e Interest
of the godly, or, (for the name whereof, it has been so much derided) the
Saints; as on the other side, the Kings, one with their greatest opposites; By
occasion whereof, God has been doubly engaged in the Cause, viz. for that, and
the righteousness of it) and to this indeed, (through the favor and presence
of God therewith) the Parliament has cause to own, and refer the blessing and
success, that has accompanied their affairs, which (accordingly as they have
held square, and been kept close to this) have prospered gloriously, and
wherein, or so often as this has been thwarted, swerved from or neglected in
their manage) have suffered miserable blastings. Read your Sentence thus
pronounced by your selves, and fear before the Lord, and bear your shame, and
cast out the unclean black Spirit, that bewitched you into this, the Serpent
that has beguiled you, least the anger of the Lord, and his Jealousy Smoke
against you, and there be no remedy.

Thus much of my First instance, my Second follows.

In your See the Petition of the General and Army, presented the Parliament
Saturday, Jan. 20. 1649. concerning the draught of an agreement of the people
for a secure and present peace, together with the said agreement.
Settlement of the People (so called by your selves) for a secure and present
Peace, upon grounds of Common Right, Freedom, and Safety, as a fruit of their
Labors, Hazzards, and Sufferings, that have engaged in the common Cause; as
some Price of the Blood spilt, and Balance to the Public expense, and Damage
sustained in the War; and as some due Improvement, of that success and
blessing, God has pleased to give them, (as are your words in the draught
thereof; (Page 7) and in the Declaration thereunto annexed, (Page 27.) which ye
presented this Parliament, Jan. 20. 1649. and desired (in the Petition
wherewithal ye presented it, Page 5, 6.) that whether it should be ^ully
approved by them, and received by the People, (as then it stood) yet it might
remain upon Record before them, a Perpetual witness of your real intentions,
and utmost endeavors, for a sound and equal Settlement, and as a Testimony
whereby all men might be assured, what ye were willing and ready to acquiess
in; and their Jealousies satisfied, or mouths stopped, who were apt to think and
say, ye had no bottom. I say, in your said Settlement ye are so far from
Assigning any Power at all, to the Representatives of the People, of Imposing
in Matters of Religion, or Conscience, things Spiritual or Evangelical; or
granting it (in the least) to be any part of the Public interest, which had
been the Subject of the contest, that ye positively exclude and bar them from
it for ever. For this see what your selves have said, and conclude your selves,
by your selves (as it does, without controversy conclude you) to have varyed,
altered and changed the Cause Point Blank, as I have charged upon ye, in this
the chiefest and most weighty part of the Public Interest, (the main subject
of the Contest) in these words.

Settlement, Page 29. Article 8. ye thus say, That the Representatives have,
and shall be understood to have the supreme Trust, in order to the preservation
and government of the whole, and that their power extend, without the consent
or concurrence of any other Person; or Persons; to the enacting and abolishing
of Courts of Justice, and Public Offices, and to the enacting, altering,
repealing, and declaring of Laws; and the highest, and final Judgment in all
natural or civil things; but not concerning things Spiritual or Evangelical.

Than which, what can be more Emphatically, or more Peremtorily expressed? And
yet how have ye (in your late Humble Petition and Address) prayed the
Parliament to take power, (which they have thereupon) yea, the Highest and
Final Judgment, concerning things Spiritual or Evangelical. viz. What of the
profession of things Evangelical or Spiritual, shall be encouraged and
protected, and what not: And this as (and upon) the Basis of a Government of a
Free State (which destroys the nature of it, even whilst ye spoke thereof)
without a single Person, King-ship, or house of Peers; (who have taken upon
them (at your Prescription) to be Kings, and Lords of Conscience, (for where
any take upon them to prescribe Laws, and finally to determine, what shall be,
and what not) (as is done in the case, there such assume Superiority or
Lord-ship; this is irrefragable) I say, who have taken upon them, to be Kings
and Lords of Conscience, of which Christ Jesus is made of God, Lord and King,
the one (single) and only Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy; and
has saved you (and others by you) from those who had, and would further have
lorded it over your consciences, (or have destroyed you) and has destroyed
them with a stroke reaching up to Heaven; yea, even by your hands; whose
Lording Spirit over Conscience (after all these Wars and Desolations, and
presently upon your cry for your, and your Countries Religious Rights, (or
Liberty of Conscience) that there was but a step (as ye cry out in your See the
Representation, April 6. 1659.
Representation) betwixt it and its Death, and the most notable Revolution
thereupon, and Deliverance) has entered into you, and from you into the
Parliament, (into whom neither Swords, nor Plots, nor force, nor Powers of
Darkness, could drive nor enter it before, nor subjugate thereunto; acting in
and by, and through you and them, and seeking to bring to pass, what it sought
before, but never could accomplish against Liberty of Conscience, but was still
(even to astonishment and wonder) dashed in pieces (as often as in any sort of
men, it sought to attempt it) by the Powerful presence and Arm of the Lord in
you and them, who will as certainly dash you in pieces (in whom this Spirit so
cursed of God before your eyes, and cut down by you, is got, and acts, and
lives) as it has done all, of all sorts in whom it got, lived and acted,
against you; yea, with a heavyer stroke, and more furions rebukes, because, by
you he has executed his dreadful Judgments against such, and delivered you
from their cruelty and power, as often as ye called upon him in sincerity and
truth, in the days of your distress; I say, ye will be Dashed in Pieces, except
ye repent, the Mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it, for he is come, and
his day draws nigh, wherein, for the Oppression of the Poor, and the Sighing
of the Needy; I will arise says the Lord, and set him in safety, from him that
puffs at him.

Now let the eye of honesty be open in you, and with it see where ye are, and
whereto your high Priest and Doctor, and his Brethren (through whom arose this
smoke of the bottomless pit) has led you, viz. to betray your principle the
good Old Cause, as soon as ye are delivered; thereby endeavoring to hasten the
vengeance of God upon your heads; For tell me, whether ye having thus changed
the Cause the Lord owned, ye can expect otherwise, than that the Lord should
dis-own you, and change his hard toward you, viz. from that to you, as his
friends; to that against you, as his enemies.

Thus have I undenyably proved out of your own mouths, in your own plain and
express words, that ye have changed the Cause, from that which ye at first, and
all along engaged in and for, and declared even to that of your Enemies,
against which ye engaged.

And here I might end, but being desirous out of truth, of Love and Tender
Compassion to you, (if by any means ye may see your error and be recovered, (as
I said) out of the Snare in which ye are taken;) I shall yet produce (for your
further conviction) some further passages of that your Settlement, against your
Address in the Case; yea, the very Article, out of which this New one would
seem to be drawn, and unto it to allude, but is no more it, than an Harlot is a
chaste Spouse, though it be got into the Bed of the Husband, and has bedeckt it
self, with some of the Spouses Apparel, the better to deceive; as by comparing
the one and the other, I shall by and by, make to appear.

Settlement, Page 24 Art. 9. Ye say, Concerning Religion we agreeas follows.

1 It is intended that Christian Religion be held forth, and recommended as the
Public Profession of the Nation.

Now Christian Religion, or the Religion of the Apostles and Disciples of
Christ, never limited the holy one of Israel, as does the Religion held forth
in that your Article, but by the unlimited Spirit it testified against all the
Worships, (whether such as were commanded of God, and had their end, or not) I
say, all the worships of them, even in their times and places, who limited the
holy one of Israel, as the Scriptures testify; as also of the Beatings,
Tumults, Stockings, Mockings, Whippings, and Imprisonments, which such received
from those who limited as it is at this day; and it is to be observed, that the
word Christian Religion, is not to be found in this your new one, your new
Article; nay, the Father of it knew, that the very sound of the name would
quickly cause the vizor to be plucked off, and that by it, (viz. the Christian)
the Hopocrisie of this Antichristian would be seen and discovered.

Settlement. Which we desire, may by the grace of God, be reformed to the
greatest purity, in Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, according to the word of
God.

The Scriptures ye mean, where such a Religion (as of Christ) is not to be
found (but of Idolaters and Antichrists) as limits God, stints his witness,
compels conscience, (with outward force) and casts all such out of protection
(as this your new one does) even all those who by the grace of God are
instructed, and unto whom the Lord has spoken with a strong hand, and
instructed them, that they should not walk in the way of this people, (the way
of the false worships, and worshippers of this Generation, out of which they
are come) but to reprove, and who have and must (if the Lord will yet strive
with this People) reprove and bear witness against them; I say, the Lord has
spoken to them, saying, Say ye not a confederesie to all them, to whom this
people shall say a confederesie, neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid;
sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be
your dread; and he shall be a sanctuary, but for a stone of Stumbling, and for
a rock of offense, to both the Houses of Israel; for a gin, and a snare to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and many among them, shall stumble and fall, and be
broken, and be snared, and be taken. The word of the Lord it is to them, and to
you, and as concerning you in this matter.

Settlement. The instructing of the People whereunto, in a public way, (so it
be not compulsive) as also the maintaining of able Teachers for that end, and
for the confutation or discovery of Heresy, Error, and whatsoever is contrary
to sound Doctrine, is allowed to be provided for by our Representatives. The
maintenance of which Teachers, may be out of a public Treasury, and we desire
not by Tithes.

In your New Cause and Profession, there is not a word of this, ( viz.) Able
Teachers for the instructing of the People in a public way, so it be not
compulsive, the maintenance of able Teachers for that end, and for the
confutation of Heresy, Error, and whatsoever is contrary to sound Doctrine,
the maintenance of which Teachers we desire may not be by Tithes. And (as your
Declaration to the said Settlement, has it, Page 28.) The taking away of
Tithes, (the Sore suffering of Gods Witnesses, and the Life of that Ministry,
which speaks in You, and in the behalf of Its encouragement, countenance and
maintaining) and putting that maintenance which shall be thought competent for
able Teachers to instruct the People, into some other way less subject to
scruple and contention. I say, In your New Profession, there is not a word of
this; Nay the Spirit of it likes not this language, it cannot speak it, it is
too pure, it is Death to it, it knows it not; It Is the voice of the chaste
Spouse, not of the strange Woman, the Harlot, whose bed is defiled.

Settlement 2. That to the public Profession, so held forth, none be compelled
by penalties or otherwise, but only may be endeavored to be won by sound
Doctrine, and the example of a good conversation.

Pure Language indeed, the voice of the Virgin, of You, in Your Virgin state,
but not of the Adulteress, of this Your adulterous state, which compels by the
high penalty of exclusion of Protection, to the Bed of whoredoms, out of which
Protection it is cast, as being too chaste, and as Judging such a Defilement.

Now follows the ARTICLE it self: See the COMPARISON.
Settlement. That such as Profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ, Address. That
all persons who profess Faith in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ his
eternal Son, and in the holy Ghost, God coequal with the Father and the Son,
God blessed for evermore, However differing in Judgment from the Doctrine,
Worship and Discipline, publicly held forth as aforesaid, And do acknowledge
the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, to be the revealed or written
Word or will of God, shall not be restrained from, but shall be Protected in
the Profession of their Faith, and exercise of Religion, shall not be
restrained from their profession, but have due encouragement and equal
Protection in the profession of their Faith, and exercise of Religion,
according to their Consciences, in any place (except such as shall be set apart
for the public Worship, where we provide not for them, unless they have leave)
so they abuse not this Liberty to the Civil injury of others, or to actual
disturbance of the public Peace on their Parts. whilst they abuse not this
Liberty to the Civil injury of others, or disturbance of others in their way of
Worshipps.

Exceptions against this Article of Your New Faith.
First, That in the first part of it concerning God, the Terms are more and
different. That ( viz. the Settlement) has only these, viz. That such as
profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ; (words few and simple) The Address,
That all persons who profess Faith in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ his
eternal Son, the true God, and in the holy Spirit, God coequall with the
Father and the Son, One God blessed for ever. Which because they are not ( all
of them) the words of Scripture, (for where says it, God coequall with the
Father and the Son? And for that those of them which are Scripture words, are
no where spoken by the holy Ghost in the Scriptures, so together as Ye have set
them, nor for that purpose, viz. to hold forth a Distinction of Persons, of
three Persons in the Godhead or Trinity, which the Imagination of Man has
formed of God, which knows not God; And in regard these Your Terms are laid
as so many Shibboleths or Snares for the tender Consciences of those who cannot
speak of God in the will and words that Man's wisdom teaches (which must be
confounded) but in the will of God, and the words which the holy Ghost
teaches. And, forasmuch as ye are, notwithstanding so Dogmaticall and
peremptory therein, as that ye make the Confession of this your Faith, to be
the Quallification, sine qua non, without which there is no Protection; And
have placed it as the bound or limit of Conscience-Liberty, under which it must
come or suffer, (which indeed, destroys Liberty of Conscience, for where it is
bound in any one Particular, there it cannot be said to be Liberty of
Conscience) And inasmuch as Ye seem to set such a high value on the Scriptures,
that ye make the acknowledging of what ye have pleased to call it (though not
in its own words, nor have ye made it to appear that it says so of it self)
essential to Protection, (of which in the next particular) And finally in that
ye exact this Profession as the issue and fruit of all the blood and Wars, and
your late Deliverance. I say, upon these Considerations, in the Name and dread
of the Eternal God, I do require you, and all your Doctors, and both their
Mothers, the two Universities, and all their Children the Priests, to prove, in
Plain and express Scripture words together, where the Scriptures do attribute
Faith or believing, to the holy Spirit as a distinct Person, as here ye have
set it, Or, confess that ye cannot, and so raze out with your own Pens, your
new Confession of Faith contained in this Article, which ye seek to enforce as
the fruit and issue of all, and with such a Penalty; Or, if ye are silent, ye
shall be taken pro confesso, that is to say, by your silence to confess, that
ye cannot. True it is, the Scriptures bear Record of Christ, that he said to
his Disciples, Ye believe in God, believe also in me, John 14. 1. And, He that
believes in me, as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers
of living water, this spoke he of the holy Spirit, which they that believe on
him [should] receive, for the holy Ghost was [not yet] given, because that
Jesus was not yet glorified, John 7. 39. And no man knows the Father but the
Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. The Comforter, when he is
come, even the Spirit of Truth, which proceeds from the Father, he shall
testify of me, John 15. 25, 26. And Paul said unto them at Ephesus, Have ye
received the holy Ghost since ye believed? And they said unto him [we have not
so much as heard whether there be any holy Ghost] And when Paul had laid his
hands on them, [the holy Ghost came on them] Act. 19. 1, 2, 6. And again, In
whom also, [after] ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of promise,
Ephesians. 1. 13. And, There are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one. And there are three that
bear witness on earth, the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood, and these three
agree in one, 1 John 5. 7, 8. And this we believe and set our seals to. But
where say they as ye have exacted it? Now the words of Man's wisdom concerning
God, which knows not God, which must be confounded, which must be brought to
naught, which the holy Ghost teaches not, and the Doctrines which are not from
the Spirit of Truth, we reject.

Secondly, that the words, viz. And do acknowledge the holy Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament, to be the revealed, or written word or will of God. Are
wholly added as so many Shibboleths or snares, also for those who in tenderness
of Conscience to God cannot say of the Scriptures, what they say not in their
own words of themselves. And that there be who in tenderness of Conscience to
God cannot do thus, is known by the sufferings of many in diverse parts of the
Nation, because of it. True it is, the Scriptures say of Christ Jesus, that in
the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was God,
the same was in the beginning with God; All things were made by him, and
without him was not any thing made that was made. And the word was made flesh
and dwelt amongst us, and we beheld his glory as the glory of the only begotten
son of the Father, full of grace and truth, John 1. 3, 14. Upholding all things
by the word of his power, Heb. 1. 3. His name is called the word of God, King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Revel. 19. 13, 16. And of this Word the Scriptures
are a true declaration, Luke 1. 1. And all Scriptures is given by inspiration
of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto all good words, 2 Timothy 3. 16. And the Prophecy came not in old
time by the will of man, but holy men of God, spoke as they were moved by the
holy Ghost. 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21. And this the Scripture says of it self, and this
we own and testify, and our Testimony is true, but as for the terms revealed,
or written word, or will of God, where says the Scripture such words; I
require you and your Doctors again, to prove it, for we cannot take a testimony
of the Scripures, which is not from the Spirit that gave it, which spoke its
own words, and its words we receive, who have received the Spirit, which cannot
be imposed upon by the wisdom of man, which must be confounded. It Is strange,
and a thing to be noted, that ye, your Priests and Doctors, who keep such ado
about the Scriptures, and who have put you upon this, and so magnify the
Letter, cannot make four lines of a Confession of your faith, in the Letter of
the Scriptures (as appears by this your Article) and that those whom ye seek to
ensnare with terms about the Letter, which it says not of it self, and whom ye
judge (but unrighteously) as undervaluing of the Letter, and as not attributing
that to it which ye would have; yea, as denying it, and therefore have made
such a provision, should be constrained by your going from the Letter, (whilst
ye are making the confession of your faith in the Letter, and setting that your
confession up for all to worship your Image of the Letter; I say, that they
should be constrained, or that ye should give them this just occasion, to Judge
you for departing from the Letter, whose Judgment ye cannot avoid, for that it
is the Judgment wherewith (by this your provision) ye Judge, and so thou art
inexcusable O man, who judge another, and yet do the same thing, for in so
doing thou condemnest thy self. And is it not also a strange thing, for any to
be so deluded by the Prince of Darkness, as to believe that those who witness
the holy Spirit which spoke in them, who spoke forth the Scriptures, as they
were moved of the Holy Ghost, and who by the Revelation of the same Spirit,
that moved in them who spoke forth the Scriptures, know it to be true, and
witness it to be fulfilled, and fulfilling in them (as do the people of the
Lord, who are aimed at in this provision) I say, to believe that such are
denyers of the Scriptures, and that such a snare, and in such terms should be
laid for them, as such, as in this Article, surely they can as soon deny their
life, the holy Spirit in them, as the words it spoke forth.

But to your terms, the revealed or written word, or will of God. How can any
thing be called or said by the creature to be the will of God, but what is Gods
discovery of himself, or Revelation to the Creature; otherwise, who can
attribute or say any such thing of God, as his will, seeing that he is
infinite, and cannot otherwise than by the Revelation of himself, and the
language of his Spirit, in the measure of himself be comprehended or expressed.
How is it then, and from whence comes it, that ye thus distinguish, the
Revealed will of God, which implies something else, that is or may be called by
the Creature, the will of God, which cannot be affirmed, so intruding into
those things, which ye have not seen, in a voluntary humility, and worshipping
of the Scriptures, into which ye are beguiled, and of your reward (for your
former service to the Nations Liberty) by the subtilty of men, which have lain
in wait to deceive you, vainly puffed up with their fleshly mind, and not holding
the head, from which all the body by joints, and bands, having nourishment
Ministered, and knit together, increases with the increase of God. How soon do
ye appear by this to be sunck in the Ground of your Divinity (which ye lay as a
foundation for all to build upon, as a God for all to worship) whilst ye are
soaring aloft to speak that of God, which ye do not understand, to distinguish
of Gods will, who is undistinguishable? And so ( Friends) how soon is Babel
writ upon your goodly buildings? How quickly is your language confounded
lifting it self up (indeed) to Heaven, but is thus brought down to Hell. Cease,
vain man, whose breath is in thy nostrils, to take upon thee, to speak of Gods
secret, for wherein art thou to be accounted of, cease ye potsherds of the
earth, to prescribe to conscience, as to the things and worship of God; of
which only he is Lord, least he dash you to pieces. Come down to the door, the
witness of God in you, the little thing that is as a grain of Mustard Seed, to
that which reproves (the Dominion of God) to that which makes manifest, (the
Light which comes from the Son of God, the Savior of all them who believe in
him) least ye be turned out amongst the Beasts of the Field, and times pass
over you, till ye acknowledge that the most high rules among the children of
men, that God alone, is as of right, Lord of Conscience.

Again, as to the things of God revealed on record in the Scriptures, or the
Scriptures of truth. Can any man say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy
Ghost? Is it not thus written, can any man say, that all Scriptures is given by
inspiration, but by the Revelation of the same Spirit, which inspired the holy
men of God, who spoke and wrote as they were moved of the Holy Ghost? Knows any
man the things of God, but the Spirit of God; and they who have received the
Spirit, that is not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God;
that they may know the things that are freely given them of God? And are not
the Scriptures the things of God, the things freely given of God, the deep
things of God, which none but the Spirit reveals, none but the Spirit
searches out? Now the Lord is that Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord
is, there is Liberty. Are they not a Book sealed, and is not the vision of all
become to all, (who have not received the Spirit) as a book sealed, which men
deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read this I pray thee, and he says I
cannot, for it is Sealed; and the Book is delivered to him that is not learned,
and he says, I am not learned? Is it not thus written, yea; Is it not also
written? Bind up the Testimony and Seal the Law among the Disciples, (those
who have received the Spirit) yea; says not Christ Jesus, Father, I thank
thee, because that thou have hid these things, from the wise, and prudent, and
have revealed them to Babes, even so, Father, for so it seems good in thy
sight? And said he not to his Disciples? to you it is given to know the
mysteries of the Kingome of Heaven, but to them it is not given, therefore
speak I to them in Parables, because they seeing, see not, and hearing they
hear not, neither do they understand. And in them is fulfilled that of Isa.
etc. and those were the Jews, of whom it is written, that they that dwell at
Jerusalem, and their rulers, because they knew him not, nor yet the voices of
the Prophets, which are read every Sabbath day; they have fulfilled them in
condemning him. How then can any man know of a truth, and acknowledge them to
be the revealed word or will of God, but by Revelation, the Revelation of the
same Spirit as moved them who wrote it to speak it forth, and if it cannot be
of a truth acknowledged to be such, but by Revelation, how is it then that ye
require all to acknowledge it to be the revealed word or will of God, without
having respect to the Spirit, or to Revelation? What faith is this that ye
impose upon all People, to confess upon pain of being denied protection,
whether they have received the Spirit or not? which Spirit unless they have
received and by it speak, they cannot acknowledge it to be such without a lie
against the truth? What a Religion have ye here held forth? that says, Profess
so and so, of God, Christ, the Spirit, whether thou of a truth, know them to be
so or no? And acknowledge the Scriptures to be so and so, whether they say so
of themselves, or of God, Christ, the Spirit, or that thou understandest them
by the Spirit to be so or not, or thou shall be cast out; What a cruelty is in
this Religion, that requires a man to profess what he knows not, nor can
without another, viz. the Spirit, (as I have proved) and the gift of the Holy
Ghost cannot be bought with money, nor can it be forced) or excludes him the
benefit of the Law, the privilege of his Birthright (how diserving soever he
be as to the Nation, or howmuch soever he has fought, or suffered, or done,
for Liberty, for Liberty of Conscience, Liberty Civil and Religious, or
exercises a good Conscience toward God or Man, or is serviceable in his
Generation, or according to Scripture in his profession; or knows the Lord, or
fears before him, or otherwise) so that if he profess what ye say, and not by
the Spirit, which (as has been made appear) ye have not respect to, for ye
require it of all that mind your protection, and all have not the Spirit) he
lies, and so ye expose him to the danger of the Lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, as it is written, and all Liars are for the Lake, if he do not
profess it he is in danger of being cast into the Pit, for preserve him out of
it, ye say, ye will not, in saying such shall not be protected; That is to say,
in plain English, Profess of God, and Christ, and the Spirit, and acknowledge
of the Scriptures what we will have thee, and say, thou shall whether thou
can, or not, whether thou have the Spirit and by it can speak, or
otherwise; Or, Do who will, what they will with thee in thy Profession: And so
ye expose him to be undone, either in Soul or Body, or both: Time was, it was
otherwise with you (O my Friends, and I knew it) yea, it was your case, from
your (then) and the Enemies of all who were against the enslaving of
Conscience. But now, alas! How soon has night overtaken ye? and Darkness
covered ye? Wherein differs this your Profession from that of the world? This
Imposition, in the root, from that of Rome, unto whose height of Coertion and
cruelty, it will (in time) ascend, if not beyond, unless it be cut down.

Thus much for your Terms, Revealed or written Will of God.

Now for the other, viz. Revealed or written Word of God.

Is not a word a Revelation (truly, and so understood) in Propriety of speech?
How is it then, that your Doctors cannot yet speak of their believing, without
a heresy in proper speaking? A Revealed Word, as much as to say, a written
writing, a spoken speech. Do they not call such Improprieties, as these, Bulls,
at Oxford? And disdain they not those who speak so, as the Vulgar or Ignorant?
Deserve they not then to be turned back again from their Doctorship of
Divinity, in things concerning God, or being Teachers of others (unto which
they pretend) to learn the Art of proper speaking unto men? May not this be
brought as a just reproof and a Taunt, upon those who have despised Truth,
because it has been brought forth by a stammering tongue, as to Natural
learning, viz. Has not the Head of the University, yet attained the Tongue of
the learned?

The Revealed Word of God, say ye.

Here ye are taken, as in the former; For, in that ye say, the Revealed Word of
God, what do ye thereby imply, but that there is another word of God? Now
Christ Jesus is the Word of God, or Gods Revelation of himself to the Creature,
and further than this the Creature cannot go, nor look, nor say, as to the Word
of God; For, as I said, God is infinite and cannot be comprehended, nor
understood, but in the Declaration of himself, Christ the Word; Nor to, or of
this, can the Creature go or say, but by Revelation; For, says Christ Jesus,
the Word of God, All things are delivered me of my Father, and no man knows
the Son but the Father, neither knows any man the Father save the Son, and he
to whomsoever the Son will reveal him: The Comforter, when he is come, whom I
will send to you from the Father, he shall testify of me. Now to say, there
are two Words of God, or to distinguish of the Word of God, that one part of
the Word of God is so, and another part is not so, (as ye must needs be
understood to imply in the case) what is it, but to say, there are two Christ's,
or that Christ is divided, who neither is, nor can be; Than which, what can be
more Blasphemous.

Again, for your Terms, Written Word of God.

How can, or dare any to say, without the highest Blasphemy, that the
Scriptures, or any visible, comprehensible thing, is the word of God, who is
invisible, incomprehensible, whom no man has seen, nor can see, God blessed
for ever, who cannot be written, and his word is like himself; for when ye
speak of a written word of God, ye speak of something that is circumscribed,
Physical, or Local, that is to say, something that may be seen, touched, or
handled by Man, as Man, which God cannot be, nor his word, nor his will, (which
is himself) nor his Church (which is in himself) the Ground and Pillar of
truth. For, though God, from the beginning has not left himself without a
witness, but has placed some thing of himself in Man (which reproves, which
makes manifest, the Light which comes from Christ) to which he has spoken
through all generations, and declared his will so far as concerned that
generation, to which he spoke, as after diverse other manners, so by writing, of
which the Scriptures of truth (now extant) are a part, and but a part of what
was so written, as the Scriptures themselves testify) yet to say of all that
has been so spoken, declared and wrote, from the beginning hitherto, that it
is the word or will of God (which is unfathomable, incomprehensible,
unutterable, inexpressible) much less of the Scriptures (which are but a part
of what was so written as aforesaid) to say, that that is the written word or
will of God (which the Scriptures no where say of themselves) is as absurd as
Blasphemous, and can no more be said to be the written word or will of God,
because they are a declaration of the will of God to many generations, or a
Record in writing, with Pen, and Ink, of his word so spoken, by which his will
was so declared to those Generations; Or because they being so recorded, are a
Testimony, that God left not himself throughout all ages without a witness, nor
his people, and so are useful for the Man of God (as the Spirit testifies in
them) and were written for our learning (the Church of God (to which the Holy
Ghost in Paul spoke) which is in God) than the Heavens can be said to be the
word of God, which were made, and are upholden by the word of his Power; for
they declare the glory of God; Or, the Firmament, for it shows his handy
work: Or the day, for day by day, utters speech; or the night, for night unto
night shows knowledge; or all of them, for there is no speech, nor Language,
where their voice is not heard: their line is gone out through all the Earth,
and their words to the end of the world, which cannot be said of the
Scriptures, this the Scriptures testify, yea, even that the invisible things
of him from the Creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by
the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead, so that they are
(says the Holy Ghost in Paul, of those who held the Truth in unrighteousness,
because that which is to be known of God, is manifest in them, for God has
shown it to them) without excuse, yea, that he left not himself without a
witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from Heaven and fruitful
seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness.

And yet, how do ye darken Counsel by words without knowledge, (words which
neither the Scriptures know, nor the Spirit of Truth, nor do ye your selves
understand what ye say) and then set it up as the Faith of Gods Elect, to be
imposed upon all, yea, upon Gods Elect; yea, for a Snare for Gods Elect; whose
Faith never sought to enforce it self, otherwise upon any, than by commending
it self to that of God in every man's Conscience, which this of yours does (viz.
by the Penalty of exclusion of Protection, if it be not Professed, and
therefore we rejct it; and should, though it were in the very words of Truth
(which this of yours is not) because coertion in matters of Faith or
Conscience, in things Spiritual or Evangelical, we are sure is out of Truth,
and comes from him who is out of it, to wit, the Devil: O how would vain man be
wise, in his wisdom, to speak of God, who by wisdom knows not God, for so it
has pleased the wisdom of God? But man is born as the wild Asses colt.

To conclude this particular; How can he be written who is without beginning of
Days, or end of life? of whom it is written, who can declare his generation?
How can he be said to be written, who is the Son of God, the word of God (and
there is no other) without circumscribing him, without making him an Image, a
thing like unto your selves?

The third Exception against this 6th. Article of your Address, is, that
instead of the words, however differing in judgment from the Doctrine, Worship,
or Discipline publicly held forth as aforesaid, (viz. Article 1. where ye say,
it is intended that Christian Religion be held forth, and recommended, as the
public Profession in this Nation (which we desire may, by the grace of God be
reformed to the greatest purity, in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline,
according to the word of God, the instructing of the people whereunto, in a
public way (so it be not compulsive) as also the maintaining of able Teachers
for that end, and for the confutation and discovery of heresy, error, and
whatsoever is contrary to sound Doctrine, is allowed to be provided for, by our
Representatives, the maintenance of which Teachers may be out of a public
Treasure, and we desire not by Tithes. And Article 2. That to the public
Profession so held forth, none be compelled, by Penalties or otherwise, but
only may be endeavored to be won by sound Doctrine, and the example of a good
Conversation. Which are the immediate preceding Articles to this third; of
either of which Articles, there is not a whisper in this your new Profession; I
say, the third Exception is, that instead of the words, however differing in
judgment from the Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, publicly held forth, as
aforesaid) shall not be restrained from, but shall be protected in the
Profession of their Faith, and exercise of Religion, according to their
Consciences; These only are inserted, viz. Shall not be restrained from their
Profession, but have due encouragement and equal Protection, in the Profession
of their Faith, and exercise of their Religion, which varies the case, both as
to the matter of the third Artitle of your said Settlement, and Cause, and
plainly shows, that the allowance of the Profession of their faith, and the
exercise of the Religion of such as Profess faith in God by Jesus Christ,
according to their Consciences (however differing in judgment from the
Doctrine, Worship, or Discipline, publicly held forth, is not intended in this
Article, nay its clear cut out; but the forcing of the Consciences of all such
as shall differ in judgment from that which it holds forth as the Public
Profession, which quite overthrows Liberty of Conscience. And it is worthy the
observation, that the Clauses, viz. However differing in judgment, from the
Doctrine, Worship, or Discipline publicly held forth, and according to their
Consciences; are wholly left out of this sixth Article of your Address; it is
the whole matter and words of the first and second Article of your Settlement,
aforesaid, unto which these Clauses of the third have relation.

Which undenyably manifests, that as there is not a word of Conscience in this
your new Cause and profession of Religion, so that it proceeds from the Spirit,
not that which fought for, but that which fought against: and has murdered
Liberty of Conscience. And further, that the good old Cause is changed, and
that the hand has done it which engaged against it.

Fourthly, The fourth Exception is, that whereas in your Settlement, Article 3.
ye say, shall not be restrained from, (viz. such as profess Faith in God by
Jesus Christ) but shall be protected in the profession of their faith, and
exercise of Religion, according to their Consciences in any place (except such
as shall be set apart for the Public Worship, where we provide not for them,
except they have leave) This Article of your Address runs it thus; shall not be
restrained from, (viz. All persons, who profess faith in God the Father, and in
Jesus Christ, etc.) their profession, but have due encouragement and equal
protection; that is to say, such only shall so have, as are of the same
Profession, as is therein publicly held forth, which indeed, is no
encouragement at all, nor Protection of Liberty of Conscience, but a mere
delusion, as seeming to hold forth that which it contains not, neither does it
intend, for (as I said before, in the former exception (the Provisions, viz.
However differing in judgment from the Doctrine, etc. Publicly held forth,
etc. And according to their Consciences, and the Provision mentioned in this
Exception, viz. In any place, etc. ( Except such as shall be set apart for the
Public, etc.) are wholly left out: And so the words, shall not be restrained
from their Public Profession, but have due encouragement and equal Protection
in the Profession of their Faith, and exercise of Religion, must necessarily
refer only, (and be so understood) unto those of your own profession, thus
publicly held forth, that is to say, all such persons as are of our own
Profession, shall not be restrained from their profession, but all such Persons
shall have encouragement and equal protection in the profession, etc. and no
others; so setting up one Profession of Religion only, and protecting only
such as are of that Profession; and this whilst ye are speaking of the
fundamentals of the Good Old Cause, and the endeavoring the Settlement of this
Commonwealth, upon such a foundation as may assert, establish, and secure the
liberties of the people in reference unto all, as men and Christians; and of
your full and fixed resolution (through the assistance of God) effectually,
even to the hazard of your lives, to endeavor the recovery and security of
the same; and of the signal Providence wherein the Lord has owned the
Parliament, and you their forces, both by Sea and Land, in asserting that
righteous Cause, wherein the civil and religious liberties of the People of
these Nations are involved, so as all open opposition was beaten down before
them, and of the Discouragements which that public Spirit, which appeared in
that work, has received since that time, in the late changes of Government:
And of another raised up, drawing back to the same things the Parliament had
contended against, even to the hazxard of the Essentials of that cause. And
lastly, of your thinking it your Duty, upon serious thoughts of heart, once
more to appear against those backsliding ways. I say, whilst ye are speaking
of such things as these, in the Preamble to this your profession; Are not your
eyes yet open? Do ye not yet see how ye are deceived, and who has deceived
you? And how the smoke of the bottomless Pit has smothered you, whilst the
coersive, or imposing Spirit has slipped up between your Representation and
Deliverance?

Fifthly, The fifth exception is, that whereas your Settlement says, so as
they abuse not this Liberty, to the actual disturbance of the Public Peace, on
their parts; (words honest and good, neither limiting the Lord, nor stinting
his witness, nor compelling conscience, nor meddling with worships, things of
Religion and conscience, but with what is proper, to the Magistrate to take
cognizance of, and to exclude protection, viz. Disturbance, actual disturbance
(or disturbance made by overt act, or force, qualifying it to the Law, and
speaking plainly that men may certainly know what it makes a transgression) of
the Public peace, and this on their parts too, not on, nor by occasion of, or
under the pretense of them; such as shall so abuse the Liberty afforded them,
shall not be protected) I say, whereas your Settlement thus says, this article
leaves this clause wholly out, and adds another altogether strange and foreign
and destructive to the Cause of Liberty of Conscience, contended for in the
Wars, and contained in the Settlement, viz. The disturbance of others (says
the Article) in their way of worships, neither saying what disturbance, or
explaining what shall be understood, to be such a disturbance, as shall exclude
protection; nor of what worships, (for there are many worships used in England,
and there is but one true worship) and the true worshippers, who worship God in
Spirit and truth, whom the Father seeks to worship him, (and the hour is come
wherein the true worshippers worship the Father in Spirit and in truth) seek
not to man for protection) nor qualifying it to the Actual disturbance of the
Public Peace, and this on their parts; but only to the disturbance of others
in their way of worships, (general words like the bottemless Pit, out of which
they come) so that, be the worships, what they will, or the worshippers, or the
way of their worships, how false, invented, vile, wicked, hypocritical soever;
be the occasion, cause or ground, witnessing against them, never so righteous,
just and substantial; be the command of the Lord, never so urgent to bear
witness against them; If any such witness-bearing be, whether in the time, or
place, or out of it, whether in Writing, Speaking, or Printing, whether in
looking, standing still, or sitting, (for it says not, where nor when, nor
what, nor how, but disturbance in the general Term or latitude) This (as it
has been, and the witnesses of God have suffered for, as to all these things,
from this adulterous generation, and the humble Petition and Advice has a Law
for most of it, even to imprisonment, working and whipping, if they speak but
to a Priest, as he is going to, or coming from his worship; yea, at the
discretion (or rather malice) of the Justices (for most of them were their
enemies on a Civil and Religious account, and laid it cruelly upon them, being
given up by your General and you, in the time of your Degeneration, as sheep to
the slaughter) is now desired by you, yea, that they be continued under the
same slavery and sufferings for it, and because of conscience for ever, and
this in the day of your bewailing of, and saying ye desire to take shame to
your selves, wherein soever ye have back-slidden. For in that ye say, that all
Laws, etc. to the contrary may be declared null and void, those which are
according to it, are such as must be understood to be by you desired to stand,
yea, as the foundation of the Commonwealth, for so ye lay it in this your
Address.

I say, this as it has been, so it must be deemed a Desturbance in the
construction of the Law aforesaid, which ye have thus provided to stand, unto
which there must be recourse, ye having not assigned the particulars wherein;
yea, such a one, as cuts off Protection, so that the Lord (in whom is the
breath of your nostrils) may not speak, may not testify against Idolatry or
Idolators, false worships or false worshippers, Priests or People, for those
who shall speak his word, and be his witnesses against such worships, or
worshippers, or ways of worships, must have no Protection; this is your new
Cause and Religion, this the fruit of your late Representation and Contrition.

Sixthly, the sixth Exception is, that ye say in the conclusion of this Article,
viz. And that all Laws, Statutes, Ordinances and Clauses, in any Laws,
Statutes, and Ordinances, to the contrary, may be declared null and void. That
is to say, All Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances, and Clauses in any Laws,
Statutes, and Ordinances, for Liberty of Conscience. For this profession,
excluding all Professions from Protection, but it self, (as I have proved) cuts
off Liberty of Conscience, to any other Profession, but it self, and all Laws,
etc. to the contrary of this profession, which so cut off, Liberty of
Conscience being voided and made null, it makes null and void, whatsoever is in
the Laws for Liberty of Conscience. Are ye awakened yet? Do ye yet see where ye
are, and how ye have shut out, and barred the door against Liberty of
Conscience.

Seventhly, (to add no more) the seventh exception is, that ye do at all
therein, meddle with Conscience, as to the things of God, things Spiritual or
Evangelical, which (as I have proved out of your own mouths) quite changes the
Cause, and lays the foundation of (what ye call) a free State or
Commonwealth, in the thraldom of Conscience.

Thus much by way of exception to this sixth Article of your Address, upon
comparing it with the third Article, under the ninth general Head of your
Settlement concerning Religion; I shall now give you in your own words, what
your selves have said, of your said Settlement, to the Nation in your
Declaration thereunto annexed, and so conclude this my second instance, out of
which it is taken, to prove, and by which I have fully proved, out of your own
mouths, that this sixth Article quite changes the Cause, from what it was, to
that which it was against. Your words in your said Declaration to your said
Settlement, Page 28, 29. follow.

We shall not otherwise commend it, (say ye of your Settlement) than to say, it
contains the best, and most hopeful foundations for the Peace, and future well
government of this Nation, that we can devise, or think on, within the line of
humane Power; and such wherein all the people interested in the Land, (that
have not particular interests of advantage and power over others, divided from
that which is common and Public, are indifferently and equally provided for.
And we call the consciences of all that read or hear it, to witness, whether we
have therein provided, or propounded any thing of advantage to our selves, in
any capacity above others; or ought, but what is as good for one as for
another. And therefore, as we doubt not, but the Parliament being now freed
from the obstructing, and perverting Counsels of such Members, by many of whom
a corrupt compliance, with the Kings interest has been driven on, and all
Settlement otherwise has hitherto hindered) those remaining worthy Patriots;
will, for the main allow thereof, and give their Seal of Approbation thereto.
So we desire, and hope, that all good people of England, whose heart God shall
make sensible of their, and our common concernment therein; and of the
usefulness, and suitableness thereof, to the Public ends it holds forth, will
cordially embrace it, and by subscription declare their concurrence, and
according thereto, when it shall be tendered to them, as is directed therein,
wherein, if it shall please God, we shall find a good reception of it wiih the
people of the Nation, or the well affected therein, we shall rejoice at the
hoped good to the Conmon-wealth, which through Gods mercy may redound therefrom,
and that God has vouchsafed thereby to make us instrumental for any good
Settlement to this poor distressed Country, as he has formerly made us for the
avoiding of evil. But if God shall (in his righteous Judgment toward this
Land) suffer the people to be so blinded, as not to see this their own common
good, and freedom, endeavored to be provided for therein, or any be so
deluded, (to their own and the Public prejudice) as to make opposition
thereto, whereby the effect of it be hindered, we have yet by the preparation,
and tender of it, discharged our consciences to God, and duty to our native
country, in our utmost endeavors for a Settlement, (to the best of our
understandings,) unto a just Public interest; and hope we shall be acquitted
before God, and good men, from the blame of any further troubles, distractions,
or miseries to the Kingdom, which may arise through the neglect, or rejection
thereof, or opposition thereto. Words truly serious, and deep, than which, I
need say no more in this matter for your convincement, and which will be a
witness against you for ever, except ye repent,

Having thus treated, of the matter of the said sixth Article of your Address,
I shall enquire a little concerning the language of it, whose language it is.

The language of your solemn declarations, etc. it is not, as has been made
manifest.

The language of the Good Old Cause, it is not, as has been abundantly proved.

The Language of Liberty of Conscience, it is not, for it restrains it, and
where Conscience is restrained, it cannot be said to be at Liberty.

The Language of a Free-Sate, it is not, for where Conscience thus suffers, the
persons or outward man is not free, and indeed it is the person, or outward
man, that suffers in the restriction of Conscience; for Conscience cannot be
touched by an outward Power, but the vessel in which it is. And so the right of
freedom of Conscience, is a civil Right, and a civil Right it is to have the
freedom of Conscience; And where this Liberty is abridged by a State, that
State is not free, For (according to the received Axiom) a free mind, and a
free speech, and a Free State, go together, and weere the two former are
wanting, the later is not, nor does it call such a people happy. But on the
contrary says it, faelix cui libera gens, libera men's, libera lingua, (or) a
happy people, where there is a free Nation (or State) a free mind (or
Conscience) a free speech (or profession) and where all professions are
excluded, but one, and Provision made only for that one Profession, how can
there be said to be a Weal Common, or a Commonwealth?

The Language of Christian Religion, the faith of Gods Elect, it is not, for
that never sought to enforce it self (as I have said) otherwise then by
commending it self to that of God in every man's Conscience. And the Apostles
said to the Chief Priests and Rulers, who commanded them to speak no more in
that name (who spoke in the Temple in that name, against the worships thereof,
and for that cause were sent to Prison, and stockt and whipped) whether it be
better to obey God or Man, judge ye. And the Lord says, for as much as this
people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, and
their fear toward me, is taught by the precepts of men, therefore I will
proceed to do a mavelous work among this people; even a marvellious work, and
a wonder, the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of
their prudent shall be hid; your Case at this Day.

The Language of Nature, of Humanity, it is not; For, what man ever hated (cast
out of protection) his own flesh? And they that were without natural affection,
were such as liked not to retain God in their knowledge, therefore God gave
them up to a reprobate mind. And Liberty of Conscience is a natural Right, (as
said your late General to the Parliament, September 12. 1654.) And so, to force
Conscience, is all one, as to force nature, that is to say, to murder: And the
common Law voids all Statute Laws made against nature, and all the Judges
cannot make that a Law, which is against Nature.

The Language of those who would desire Liberty for themselves (which was once
your Case) of those who do as they would be done to, it is not; for that which
imposes its own profession, with exclusion of all others, would not be imposed
upon it self. And if it be Lawful for a Magistrate, as a Magistrate, or for one
generationn of Men, because in Power to meddle with Religion, to impose their
profession, it is lawful for another generation of men, as they come into
Power, to impose their profession. And so all the blood and sufferings of the
Martyrs and the witnesses of God throughout all generations, against the
imposed profession of the Men in power, in each generation, comes to be
justified, and the generation of the Just, to be condemned. And the Question,
as to the Jus Divinum, the right, is not, whether it be in truth, but whether
there be power. Now no Profession can be assured of its Station, where one is
excluded; But must expect to vary according to the mutability of him or them,
who have power to their will, as the days of Henry, 8. Edward, 6. Q. Mary, and
Q. Elizabeth: in this Nation do abundantly witness.

The Language of this Parliament it was not (they held another balance) till
they spoke after you.

To conclude; The Language of your late Representation, April 6. 1659. Upon
this sense of your danger, it is not; for therein ye say, that ye have, as
Members of the Army, often solemnly declared, not without appeals to God, for
your sincerity therein, that ye did engage in Judgment and Conscience, for the
just Rights and Liberties, Civil and Religious, of your Countries, and not as a
Mercenary Army, that ye had been silent so long, that ye feared, it had been a
disadvantage to the Cause, and bred (though ye hoped groundless) jealousies of
you, in many of your friends, and till ye and and all that is dear to you, the
intrest ye have so long contended for, was in danger to be lost. That being
then under the sense of imminent dangers, and necessities awakned, ye did in a
deep sense of misery and approaching judgment threatened, and pursuance of your
duty in all humility represent, that the Good Old Cause against Tyranny and
intolerable oppression in matters Civil, and Religious, whereupon ye first
engaged, and under which the Lord had, in such a continued series of
Providence, given so signal a Testimony, and for the carrying on whereof there
had been, such a plentiful pouring forth of Treasures, Prayers, Tears and
Blood, during the late war (in the difficulties and dangers whereof, ye also,
the lively Monuments of Patience and mercy, had had your shares) was very
frequently and publicly d^rided and reproached, and the implacable adversaries
thereof, promised themselves, to be so far in possession, and Masters thereof,
that they began to appear, every where visible among you, and to mix
themselves, in the midst of those places, where that cause was wont to receive
its chiefest countenance and shelter. So that upon the whole, ye did evidently
see, there was but a step betwixt the public Cause of these nations, wherein
ye had been so signally blessed, and owned of God and good men, and the death
thereof; and that it was not likely to expire without a sure presage of the sad
Funerals, of the dear and never enough valued peace of these your Native
Countries: That ye could not but bewail your own great failings, and turnings
aside, and that wherein soever ye had backshidden, ye had cause, and desired,
to take shame to your selves. That ye were then as ever, equally endeared to
your Good Old Cause, and utter enemies to all Tyranny, oppression, and
disturbance of the public Peace; under what pretenses soever. And lastly, ye
desire, that there may be such a public asserting of the Good Old Cause, and
Justification of all proceedings, in prosecution and maintenance thereof, and
Declaration against its enemies, as may for the future, deter all Persons, from
speaking, or attempting any thing to the prejudice thereof, and of the Persons
that have acted in prosecution of it, and afford present security to the civil
and Riligious Rights and Liberties of these Nations, and the Peace thereof. And
that the Liberty of good and well affected people, in repairing with freedom
to their meetings for the worship of God (of late much violated by indicting,
and imprisoning many of their Persons) may be still asserted and vindicated.
But this sixth Article of your Address, cuts of Religious Right, viz. Liberty
of Conscience, (and consequently civil, for as I have showed) they cannot be
separated, but where a man suffers in the Liberty of his Conscience, he suffers
in his person) and casts out of Protection, such whose Consciences, cannot be
bounded by your said Profession (the people ye mind in this last clause, who
must witness against false worshippers and worships, and the ways of them (the
Lord moving) even through death it self, should that be inflicted; As it has
cast away the Cause, as soon as ye are delivered from the Emminent Dangers and
necessities, under the deep sense of which the Honesty in you, wrote in your
said Representation, as has been rehearst. And so all that ye have said,
returns on your heads, and is your own judgment pronounced by your selves, and
aggravates your condemnation.

Whose Language is it them?

Friends, I shall tell you, and in the fear of God, seriously consider it, It
is the Language of that Spirit, which first divided from the Common Cause, to
set up it self over it, (as I have showed in the State of the Case.

Which cast such from whom it divided, and over whom it sought to set up it
self) out of all places of Trust, Military, and Civil, and persecuted as
schismatical Heretics.

Which obstructed the passing of the List of Officers, for the New Model of the
Army, (in which were some of you) so long, that the members of this Parliament,
(then called the House of Commons) were forced by reason of the danger thereby,
threatening the overthrow of the Cause, to let the members of the other House
(then called the House of Peers) know, that if they concurred not, they would
pass it without them.

Which made all the obstructions to you in the New Model.

Which divided ye at Blandford in Dorsetshire, upon your first march, and sent
part of you to relieve Taunton in the West, (where ye might have been eaten up
like as ye were presently besieged) and part of ye against Oxford, (where ye
might have been beaten off) and part of ye, to join with the Scots Army, as the
field Army, (where ye might have been interposed, (the Scots retreating toward
West-moorland) and part of ye to the Isle of Ely in the East, (where ye might
have been surprised) which put a lock at South-ham in Warwickshire, upon the
feet of that part of you, as followed the Kings Army, who were marching into
the Eastern assotiation, (your untoucht Magazine for men and money) to preserve
that, commanding ye not to fight them, but to march to Oxford, to beleaguer
Garrisons, ere ye were Masters of the Field, or so much as recruted, as was
promised, leaving the enemy to his pleasure. And all this near about the same
time, that ye might have been cut off, whatever had been the issue of it to the
Nation.

Which sought to ensnare ye into a Scotch Presbytery, and interest, or to
divide you among your selves, by reason thereof, in sending order for the
covenant to be taken, by all of you, which many could not, in tenderness of
Conscience, and so ye laid it aside.

Which was offended at your not receiving its Ministers as your Chaplains, at
your speaking, or preaching to your Soldiers; At your going into
Steeple Houses, and speaking there, and sent orders from the (then) House of
Peers, to restrain it, which ye observed not.

Which when the overruling hand of the Lord, and inevitable necessity, had
brought the greatest part of you together at Naseby after such your division,
longed and looked for, and was over confident, in its hopes of your
destruction, scoffing ye with the derision of the New Nodel.

Which was sore pained at the heart, and grieved at that victory, and the rest
of your successes, though it was the Nations reviving, and covered over the
Sorrows of War, with the garment of rejoicing.

Which (those Wars being ended) endeavored to enforce its reduced General
Essex, by the Scotch Army, your Commander in Chief, and his Officers in your
steads, as a check upon your victories, and thought it too much for you, to
breath in English air, by whom (as instruments) England breathed, but by his
sudden death was prevented.

Which remanded General Lisle from Ireland, as soon almost, as he had put his
foot thereon, after the great expense of that expedition, and delivered all
into Inchequin's hand (who soon gave it to the King) to serve as a balance on
you.

Which emptyed some Garrisons of you and your friends, dismantled others,
seized the Armies Artillery, and Ammunition in its hands, that it might be
Treason in any else to touch it, in preparation against ye, and hanged many for
what they had done as Soldiers for the Parliament.

Which would have divided and destroyed you, upon the pretense of the Relief
of Ireland, and judged ye Traitors by its majority in Parliament, upon the
report of a harmless petition intended by you, to the Parliament, by your
Generals hand, for your rights as Soldiers, unseen and unheard, and enforced
you to embody and engage to and with one another, at Triplo Heath, for your
mutual preservation, and not to disband or divide, nor suffer your selves to be
divided, or disbanded, till the common ends, on which ye, and your friends
engaged, and your grievances, were secured and satisfied. Though they intended
no such thing as the relief of Ireland by you, but by this of Ireland (as I
said) to destroy you; for one of the Eleven Members confessed, viz. That their
Ministers put them on this attempt against you, rendering it no less than
damnation, to send such Schismatics as you, into Ireland: So far were they
from intending you thither, and the Regiments for Ireland were kept near a year
(some of them) quartering on the Country, in reserve for, and ordered to be
drawn up for this end, viz. to Balance your forces.

Which prepared Shibboleths for your Consciences, whilst your Bodies were
drawn in the field, for the Liberties of your Country, as witness the
Ordinance for Blasphemy (commonly called the Bloody Ordinance, brought in by
Bacon and Tate) to torture your bodies for your Consciences.

Which stirred up the Rabble of Boys, into that insufferable and unheard
affront on the Parliament (the first that ever was, on such an Assembly) whom
some of Its Rabbi Priests were seen to clap on the Shouldiers to encourage them
thereunto) forcing the Speaker, and such of the Members, in whom that Spirit
ruled not, to fly to you, and raising up; and Garrisoning the City of London,
and arming the desperate Reformadoes against ye; and endeavoring to draw the
whole Nation also, and Scotland (some of whose forces were near the borders on
their march) so endeavoring to engage this poor harassed Country into blood
again, to satiate its revenge, because by you, Peace was brought, and flowed in
unto their Country.

Which trinkled with the King, at the Isle of Wight, and made a private bargain
with him, and stirred up the People in the Nation, to petition for a Personal
Treaty, and under that and the pretense of his imprisonment, to raise Arms
again, which was boforehand Plotted, and formed by insurrections, and tumults,
and put ye to fight it over again more sharply than before, 2000 to 10000, from
Pembroke Castle, to Preston in LANCASIRE throughout, and a thwart the Nation,
yea to march to Edenborough, and brought in Duke Hamilton and his Army, which
it would not vote (viz. the then House of Peers) an Invasion, and out of
question, had questioned ye for it, had ye not prevailed against him, which
signed the Treasonable Engagement in London, and Petitioned for Batten to be
Vice Admiral, (who had received his Commission from the Prince) and broke the
Navy, and would not Settle the Militia; And voted the Concessions of the King
at the Treaty at the Isle of Wight, in order to a safe Peace, and held ye out
at Colchester, and got so into the House of Commons, and put ye so to it there,
that ye were necessitated for the preservation of the Public interest, ( ye
had contended for) and your selves and friends, to purge the House of Commons,
of those who had so voted, and who carried on, and were for a corrupt closure,
and compliance with the King, yea, to try the King, to lay aside the House of
Peers; to exheriditate his issue, to extirpate Monarchy, to chang the
Government into a Free State or Commonwealth, without a King, or House of
Peers.

Which put ye to a sudden expedition in Ireland, to recover that which was (in
a manner) lost to the Gates of Dublin, and when with wonderful success, and
hard service, ye had reduced that Nation, would not thank God for the
deliverance, as it refused to pray for your success. But the more ye were
laden with victories for the Nations sake, the more was it burdened with
grief for the sake of your victories.

Which became the third party, to bring the Kings eldest Son and the Scotch
together against the Commonwealth, with whom they joined and Plotted, and whom
it assisted in Pulpit and otherwise, and Commissioned Commissioners to join
with the Scots in Treaty with him at Breda, (whom they had declared King) and
joined in the conclusion of the Treaty, viz. to put him by force of Arms, in
the throne of England; and wrought off, your Renowned General Fairfax, from
leading you against them, and to lay down his Commission, upon some scruples
that were in him, it thinking thereby to have broken ye (in all which its
Priests were chiefly active and consulted) and put ye to it early to look to
your own House, by marching into theirs, who were preparing for yours, and to
pass through the sore extremities of wet and weather, of want of victuals and
provision, in a cold naked and Sterile Country, during the winter season, and
to attend under these upon the Scots couched in their Fastnesses, whilst the
Plots in England, might have set England in a flame behind ye (on which they
waited) and miserable necessity, should, in a manner reduce your Soldiers, in
the midst of ye, into little better condition, than of dying men (which was
even effected) that then its Army, before ye, might swallow ye up (which it
attempted) even when all those distresses had even compassed ye about, and it
so thought it, and it was so, and then it vaunted it self, and spoke proudly,
and sought to come between the passages and ye, that ye might not get home into
your Country; And then sought ye at Dunbar, where ye were delivered with a
wonderful Deliverance. My Friends, let it never be forgotten, nor the wonderful
Discovery, and breaking of their Plots in England, which immediately foreran
it, and corresponded therewith, and were on the Point of execution to have
served it, (Call to mind the former things, and let the things that are past
come into Remembrance.) And then held ye there another winter, whilst Plots,
and designs were forming up in England again, by Christopher Love and his
Brethren, the Priests and Confederates, and the Cavaleire Party (who thought to
have attacht those of you in this Nation, in the depth of Winter, by a general
Insurrection, which the breaking forth of that of Norfolk hindered, before the
general Day was come) and when they were disappointed thereby, wrought yet more
subtly, and made all things ready against Spring to have risen up generally
as one man ( Cavaleir and Presbyter) to have served, M. G. Massies designed
invasion of England, with a Brigade of Horse, which being also discovered and
broken, put ye upon your attempts on Fife, wherein ye being made successful as
formerly, it slipped into England (as its last Refuge) whilst ye were engaged at
St. Johnstons, and lay down in Worcester, till your long march from Johnstons
reached them, and ye with your friends in this Nation joining together, soon
encompassed them about, and gave them, and it, a total overthrow.

To conclude, which was glad at the late Interruption of the present
Parliament; and complied with him that made it, and set him up, that it might
set it self up, by him again, in a single Person, and House of Lords, and in
all things that it had before endeavored, upon Conscience and the Liberties of
the Nation; And which by him did set it self up (in the late Humble Petition
and Advise, and other Acts of that Parliament, over the Liberties of the Nation
and Conscience (wherein ye may read the Language of this Article) and then ( he
being cut down, when he had built again the things that he destroyed, so making
himself a Transgressor) sought to overrun, and cut down you, who yet stood in
its way, Trampling on the Cause, viz. in asserting a coersive power in them, in
matters of Religion, of Conscience, in its intended Declaration for a fast (as
this Article does in you, where ye may read its Language again, even the
Language of both to be the same, and from one Spirit) I say, trampling on the
Cause and you, and the sufferings of truth together (showing what it would do
as it had power, and who they were it looked upon as its enemies, viz. the
Truth, the Cause and you Israel, and Judah were a^^licted together) and
prepared a Pit for you all, which opening its mouth wide, to swallow you up,
and your eyes being opened to see it, started ye so that ye cried to the Lord,
and confessed, and vowed (as in your late Representation) who heard your Cry,
and delivered you. Now being delivered, this Spirit expected no other, than to
be tumbled into the Pit, which it had dug for you, which was ready to
receive it, and to close its mouth upon it, unless it could so work as to enter
into you (a difficult, and one would think, an impossible thing, as things
stood) and in and by you, preserve it self out of it, and so set up it self at
last through you, over all, which by wrapping it self in a friends mantle, and
coming under it (viz. the Garment of a Priest who had formerly been your friend
( ye may guess whom I mean) it has (now) done; raising up it self in you to do
that, which a man looking upon you, as in your former Declarations and
en^ngagements, and your late Representation, and hour, and deliverance, and the
sense o^ them all that was upon you) would have thought impossible that ever ye
should do, and which will lead you further, (as ye are led by it) to do that
which if a man should tell you now, ye would say, are we Dogs thus to do?
perking its head on, and over your shouldiers, above the Good Old Cause, (who
had trod that Spirit under foot (and was now ready to make of i^ an utter end)
and treading under foot the Good Old Cause, which on and over your shouldiers,
and you upon it, had stood above it, and which by you had trod it under. This
is a Lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation.

And yet, which of you of this is sensible, but so it is, after all your
victories and apportunities, and deliverances over and upon, and from this
Spirit and its workings, and this last especially, which was the greatest of
all, by which this Spirit was given into your hand, as appointed by God to
utter destruction, which would have destroyed ye) ye have let go out of your
hand, the Spirit which God has appointed to utter destruction; Therefore your
life, (or the life of those of ye, or him, who wrought, and has done it) shall
go for its life, and your, or his people for its: Its faithfulness in me, to
tell ye or him so, (and woe to me if I should not being required of the Lord, of
whom I have received it) However the King of Israel may take it, and go to his
house heavy and displeased, ye know the history, Read and apply it to your
selves in the case, ye who are concerned, who have done this thing, for it is
your Portion, and shall assuredly come upon you from the Lord.

Yea, is not the day from the Lord, come upon you already? is not your
strength, your life, already gone? Are not your Locks already cut off? viz.
your distinct Consistency in your selves, to choose your General from among your
selves, to receive your Commissions and Orders, from such your General, not to
disband, or divide, nor to suffer your selves to be disbanded, or divided, till
you, and the just grievance of you and your friends in the Nation, and the
Cause, were fully satisfied, and secured, into which Engagement ye were
necessicated at Triploe Heath, and resolved for the mutual preservation, of
your selves, and the Cause, and your friends which were engaged in it, against
this overruling Party in Parliament, who rose up against it, and them, and
you, and ordered your disbanding for that purpose, that, ye and it, and them,
might have been brought under at their pleasure. So ye were no longer as an
Army Commissionated by them, but as a Body of people; who upon inevitable
necessity and manifest justice, where incorporated in, and with, and among your
selves, and to and with your friends in the Parliament and Nation, for the
through Prosecution of the Cause of Liberty, in which ye were at first engaged,
called out, entrusted and assisted, against all attempts to the contrary what,
and in whomsoever, which was of God. By virtue of which ye were in a capacity,
and did ease this present Parliament of those of their members, who carried on
a corrupt and unsafe closure with the King, and with their obstructing
Counsels, (as ye declare) not only hindered the Settlement of the
Commonwealth, but often endangered it; after that, the Speaker and those
Members of the Parliament (who were faithful to the Cause) being forced by the
tumultuous violence of Boys and Reformadoes, to withdraw to you, were by you
(notwithstanding the raising of London in Arms, and endeavoring to do it
through the Nation, and Scotland, by the remaining Party at Westminster) put
into their House again, and secured in their Sessions; and lastly, brought this
Parliament to sit again, after six years interruption, to the hazzarding of
all, in which capacity ye should still have stood, and have been, as
heretofore, the Honorable and happy Instruments of your Countries Liberties,
and its life reserve against all Tyrannical, and intolerable oppressions, in
matters Civil, and Religious, had ye remained with God; but it is (now)
otherwise, ye are bowed down, ye are humbled, (as the case now stands) your
last is done, your Locks are off; ye are bound, and ye have have bound your
selves; ye can work (as now) no more such deliverance in the Earth, for your
selves or Country, as have been through your hands, it must come now from
another place, ye are submitted; and ye have submitted your selves; ye are
lowered, and have brought your selves low (as now) and your Friends, and the
Cause of Liberty of Conscience, even to the ground, to the dust. Your Masters
(as they come) may (now) put you to grind, at their pleasures, to disband, to
do as they will; and if ye shall hereafter go out, and shake your selves, when
affliction is on you, as heretofore, ye will find your Cause (which whenever
ye brought it in your hand, and could say in Truth, Lord here is the Cause, he
never failed to deliver you, what ever were your straits and Difficulties; I
say, ye will find your Cause, your Locks, your strength, your power, to be
gone, and your selves bound as with Fetters of Brass.

O! what will ye do then? and wither will ye go, when ye shall find it so, and
both your eyes out, and night over you, and the presence of the Lord removed
from you, and that he answers ye not, neither by Dreams, nor by Vrim, nor by
Prophet? If ye go to the Wizards, to those who have familiar Spirits, to the
false Prophets, the Spirit that ye have cut off throughout all these Nations,
and desire that it Divine unto you, and bring ye up him, whom ye shall name)
who formerly was with you, (Samuel, the Prophet of the Lord, the Angel of his
presence, which went before you, advised ye, and delivered ye out of your
straits, and subdued all under you,) and the Witch to whom ye go, the Spirit
which ye had cut off, and to which ye have promised, that no punishment shall
happen to it, for what it shall do, that it shall be protected, shall bring up
to you, him whom ye name, viz. an old man covered with a mantle (the likeness
of Samuel) and ye stoop with your face to the ground, and bow your selves, and
upon his saying, why have ye disquieted me, to bring me up? ye say to him, we
are sore distressed, and the Phylistians make War against us, and God is
departed from us, and answers us no more, neither by Prophets nor by dreams,
and therefore we have called thee, that thou may make known unto us, what we
shall do; he will answer you, wherefore then do ye ask of me, seeing the Lord
is departed from you, and is become your enemy; and the Lord has done to you,
as he had spoken by me: for the Lord has rent the Kingdom out of your hand,
and given it to your neighbor, even to David, because ye obeyed not the voice
of the Lord, nor executed his fierce wrath upon Amalek. Therefore has the Lord
done this thing unto you this day; Moreover the Lord will also deliver Israel
with ye, into the hands of the Phylistians, and to morrow shall ye and your
Sons be with me; The Lord shall also deliver the Host of Israel into the hands
of the Phylistians, then will ye fall all along on the Earth, and be sore
afraid, and no strength will be in you. And then will ye remember, that of
these things ye were told, and warned in the day of your deliverance.

And is it not just it should be so? even that you who have so soon changed the
Cause, and thereby given up your power to the enemy, should as soon have the
case changed with you, viz. that your power should be taken away, by your
friends; that ye who have given up the Cause of Liberty of Conscience, or
rather betrayed it, or rather are betrayed into it, should be given up to an
incapacity any more to relieve, to secure it. So that deliverance, if it arise
to consoience (and arise it will when the great Hour is over, which is at hand,
the like was never, nor shall be after it, in which the Lord alone will appear)
must arise from some other place, ye have bound your selves, and are bound; and
so how can it arise any more from you, this is that, indeed, which the Enemy
endeavored thorowout the wars, and the Iate alterations since the wars, that
it might have its end upon Conscience, and you, but could do never, because ye
held the Cause, now the thing has prospered against you, because ye have not
held the Cause, but changed it, to that of the Enemies.

And so, is not the Word of the Lord, which I wrote unto you, from his mouth,
and called to the Heavens, and said, hear O Heavens, and to the Earth, saying,
give ear O Earth, and be ye witnesses, and all good men, (viz. If ye do not so,
and so, as in your representation ye have said, and as in that my letter, is of
it rehearst and expressed, which ye have not done, but the contrary) ye shall not
prosper, the Lord has spoken it. If ye start aside once more, farewell, ye have
confessed against your selves, and your representation is witness against you.
Deliverance shall arise from another place, but ye, and your house shall
perish; I say, is not this word of the Lord beginning to be fulfilled upon you,
who took not warning, when from the Lord God (as it was told you) it was a
warning to you all; yea, that ye should have blotted out the name of Amalek
(i.e. the Principle that is against Liberty of Conscience from under Heaven;
yea, that ye should not forget it; yea, that ye should remember Amalck (i. e.
the soul murdering, and Conscience binding Clergyman) and what he did unto
you by the way, when ye were come out of Egypt; how he met you by the way, and
smote the hindermost of you, even all the feeble behind you, when ye were faint
and weary, and he feared not God, and that therefore ye should blot out the
name of Amalek from under Heaven. For at the moving of the Lord, that was wrote
also; Amalek the first of the Nations, that warred against Israel, when they
were come out of Egypt, whose latter end shall be that he perish for ever; as
Balaam said when his eyes were open, Cain Adams first born in the
transgression, who slew his Brother about Religion, because his offering was
accepted (and it was different) but Cains was not; Cain the fugitive, and
vagabond, who is cursed from the Earth, which opened her mouth to receive his
Brothers blood from his hand, the principle that is against Liberty of
Conscience, to be blotted out from under Heaven, ye shall not forget it, says
the Lord) But ye have forgot it, and instead thereof endeavored to record its
name (which God will blot out, and remember what Amalek did, though ye have
forgot it) when the Lord required the contrary, so ye have disobeyed the
Commandment of the Lord, therefore the Kingdom is rent from you, and is given
to a neighbor of yours; that is better than you; And have broken the Covenant
of the wife of your youth, therefore will I Judge you, says the Lord, as women
that break wedlock, and shed blood, are judged, and I will give your blood in
fury, and jealousy, for a short work is the Lord making in the Earth, yet a
remnant of you shall return, even a remnant, unto the mighty God, and the
Consumption decreed, shall overflow with righteousness; The day is at hand, the
Lord has spoken it. And though Agag the King of Amalek, whom Saul and the
People, (contrary to the commandment of the Lord) have spared alive, may come
delicately to Samuel (the Prophet of the Lord, who said to Saul, thus says the
Lord of Hosts, I remember that which Amalek did to Israel, how he laid wait for
him in the way, when he came up from Egypt; now go, and smite Amalek, and
utterly destroy all that they have, and spare them not, but slay both man and
woman, infant and suckling, Ox and Sheep, Camel and Ass) and though Agag may
say, surely the bitterness of Death is past, yet Samuel shall say, as thy sword
has made women Childless, so shall thy Mother be Childless among women. And
Samuel shall hew Agag in pieces before the Lord, even in Gilgal; he that can
receive it, let him receive it.

Ah my Friends, wherewithal shall I bewail you? How shall I lament you? How
soon are ye revolted? How soon are ye backslidden, and started aside? How soon
has darkness overspread you, and night covered you? How soon are your feet
stuck fast again in the mire? The honesty that stirred in you, how soon is i^
plunged again into the Pit? Cried ye not lately to the Lord in the day of your
Distress? Said ye not what ye would do, if he would once more deliver you? And
has he not been gracious to you, at the voice of your cry? When he heard it,
did he not deliver you? And when he had delivered you, did he not warn you, as
aforesaid (for I was moved of him, and from his mouth I spoke, and a witness I
am for him for ever; yea, that ye should bring forth fruit meet for Repentance?
Were ye not told, that this was your day, your day of Trial from the Lord;
wherein he was trying ye, and proving you, to see whether there was an heart in
you to do according to all that he had said (even that ye would fear him, and
keep all his Commandments always, that it might be well with you, and your
children after you forever) And that for that cause he had once more overthrown
your enemies, and in the thing wherein they dealt proudly, had shown himself
above them; and put the power of these Nations, into your hands to try you, and
prove you, and to see whether ye would do as ye spoke; yea, that it was your
Hour of Trial, wherein the Lord was trying you, to see, whether, being
delivered, and having power in your hands, ye would stand by, and secure the
Cause and your selves. And are the dawnings of your day so soon closed into
Night? Are ye so soon tried and found too light? Are these your fruits meet for
Repentance (which must be repeneed of, if ever it be well with you) Are ye rose
so early, and corrupted all your doings? Are ye delivered, to commit such an
abomination as this? Ah foolish people and unwise! of the Rock that begat you,
how soon are ye unmindful; And how have ye forgotten God that formed you? And
lightly esteemed the Rock of your Salvation (they sang his praise, they soon
forgot his works, they waited not on his Counsel, they forgot God their
Savior, which had done great things in Egypt, wondrous works in the Land of
Ham, and terrible things by the Red Sea. Many times did he deliver them, but
they provoked him, with their Counsel, and were brought low for their iniquity;
nevertheless he regarded their affliction, when he heard their cry, and he
remembered for them his Covenant, and repented according to the multitude of his
mercies; He made them also to be pittyed of all those that carried them
Captives, and had regard unto his name, that it might not be polluted among the
Heathen: I say, Oh my Friends! How shall I lament you? Wherewithal shall I
bewail you? Truly I bear a burden of grief for you, and the weight thereof is
heavy; Oh that my head were water, and mine eyes a Fountain of Tears, that I
might weep day and night for you, because of the day that I see is coming upon
you, except ye Repent.

My love was always dear to you, with you I travailed (as a Fellow Member and
otherwise) through the Difficulties ye met with from your first march to
Windsor, to the late Interruption, wherein I bare not the least part of the
burden, as there be among you can witness.

In the late Interruption I was not, but was against it (for this Reason (among
others) because I foresaw (it being shown me of the Lord) what has since been
attempted, and for that I also knew and observed the workings of him (and he
knew it) that miss-led you, from Worcester fight to that time; yea, I observed
how that Principle entered and wrought, from the time of his (and many of your)
falling under the King, by an Heart of unbelief, as soon as he and you were
delivered) by the Spirit that rose in the Soldiery, and the inferior Officers
at Triploe Heath, from the Major party in Parliament, which voted you Traitors
unheard, for your Innocent Petition intended to be presented them by your
General, for things necessary to you as Soldiers, and ordered your disbanding
as aforesaid, which spirit (as I have said) he (and many of you) falling under,
(viz. upon distrust, how, as the case stood then with you) ye should be able to
carry it against King and Presbyter in Parliament (who and their interest ye
expected, would be united against you, he being, at that time in their custody)
upon that your new Engagement (not minding the Arm that had delivered you so
often, and but then had wrought your Deliverance, to a Miracle, and so taking
into your Custody, out of the Parliaments, the King whom ye had opposed, the
Spirit of the King, or of Absoluteness, Monarchy or King-ship, against Civil
Liberty (under which he, and many of you fell) then entered him (and many of
you) as that of the Priests, or the Spirit against Religious Liberty, or
Liberty of Conscience (ye falling under it, by an heart of unbelief, as soon as
ye were delivered, has, now, into you, viz. upon diffidence, how (as was now
your (case) ye should buckle with the same generation engaged against ye in
Parliament, and ye expected, would be much more now, upon that their
Dissolution (who ordered the Dissolution of your Counsels, and ye know what
that signified, even the Dissolution of you) should ye lay aside their Coersive
Principle in matters of Religion, held forth in their intended Declaration for
a Fast, May 1659.

And consequently the Priests, upon that your new state or condition, (not
considering your former, and but then astonishing Deliverance,) and so taking
the Principle which ye had engaged against out of the Parliaments Declaration
into your Address, ye fell under it (as I have said) and it entered into you)
and that Spirit of absoluteness, being entered into him (who had so withstood
it, and cut it down) it never rested till (as time and opportunity would admit)
it had wrought it self into that Head-ship in him (thorough multitudes of
disguises) as it was at his Death, where It buried his Name and his Memory, and
his valiant Acts, together with his Carcass, in the Pit of Infamy, and the
Commonwealth) which he trampled upon, and despised, and made so inexpressibly
to suffer in order to this end, is rose over him (as the same Spirit against
Liberty of Conscience, (Mark what I say, and remember for the time to come)
will do by as many of you, as shall not speedily repent (we will be to you, out
of whom it is not purged till ye die) and Truth, the Dominion of God, in and
over Conscience, Liberty of Conscience, (which that Spirit in this your Article
has trampled upon and despised, and all the Blood that has been shed for it,
and against which it purposely provided, as in that Article, and laid a
foundation therein, to work it self Lord over Conscience, or Lord (as I may
say) over the God of the spirits of all flesh, who is Lord alone of Conscience
(as the other endeavored over the Commonwealth, and will (through notable
disguises, yea more notable than have been yet) endeavor, and make to suffer,
in order to this end, beyond what has been, or will be after it; I say, Truth,
the Dominion of God, in and over Conscience, Liberty of Conscience, shall (when
it is as (yea more) unlikely, than was the late case of the Commonwealth, yea
(I may say) impossible as to men) rise over your graves and carcasses, and
Spirit, and Rule for ever. The Lord has spoken it, and the things make have,
blessed is he that endures to the end, the same shall be saved; ye may think
these things strange, but the time is at hand) I say, I was not for, but
against the late Interruption, because it was not only foreshewn me by the
Lord, even what has since come to pass, yea, that he would never return (as
there are that can testify, to whom I then told it) but I knew, and was within
the Curtain of his Cable, or misterious proceedings in order thereunto, and did
often put checks to his carreir in that attempt (though single and alone, for
though I signified it to some Members of Parliament, whom I could trust, and
proposed a plain way for the prevention thereof, yet they had no heart
thereunto,) and at length, seeing how the design hastened to an Issue, and that
no Spirit appeared in them, whose proper work it was, to endeavor to crush it,
and having no other way before me, in behalf of the Commonwealth, (the
Committee of the Coucil of State, for Examinations and Discoveries (of which I
was Secretary) being unrevived, by reason of a vote for that purpose, obtained
of the New Counsel, November 1652. by him, for the security of his design) I
caused it to be devulged, yea the very day, when it would be (and on which it
was) done, if so be such an Alarm might raise up a Spirit in the Parliament to
prevent it, which it did not, nor could any thing hinder it, for the thing was
of God, for the stayning of the pride and glory of Man, and the bringing about
of his mighty works of wonder, for the glory of his Name, who alone will be
known to be King, and to Rule in the Earth.

Since the Interruption, what I have done, and suffered, I speak not, my life
is given me for a prey (after all the Secret huntings after my blood) and my
entegrity is with me, having a Testimony among men, as with the Lord, that as
from the beginning I never betrayed, nor acted contrary to my Principle, nor
was induced thereunto, upon any Temptation whatsoever, neither valuing my life,
nor what I had, in relation to the Commonwealth, so I have continued to this
day, mourning with them that mourned, and weeping for them who wept for it.

When the late hour was, I felt your burden, and the weight of the powers of
Darkness, which sought to overwhelm, and obstruct you, and the power of God
wrought through me, which overcame your difficulties and overthrew your
enemies, even at the very instant (as there be that can bear me witness, to
whom I signified here what was doing, at the time of its Action) ye being
delivered I waited, and with much gladness of heart, received whatsoever the
Lord showed me and required to write in order to your direction, and sent it to
you, that ye might be preserved, which was the earnest desire and breathing of
my Soul, yea, that it might have been so, I could freely have been offered up
in the will of the Lord, so dear were ye, to me; and least ye should
back-slide, and fall under Temptation again, and that inrecoverably, I hasted
that warning to you, as I was moved of the Lord, unto which ye having not took
heed, but being fallen, I am faithful in showing you what ye have done, and
what will assuredly befall you except ye repent, as I have received from the
Lord; and so having born my Testimony, and fulfilled the will of the Lord, and
suffered the sore travail of this last hour that is to come, as I did of the
former before it came, and wept over your graves, I rest in peace, being
assured, that as I have lived to see that day over, so I shall, to see this;
and that the word which I have spoken in the name of the Lord, he will fulfill;
and that he that has betrayed you, into this, shall bear his burden; and that
judgment shall run down as waters, and righteousness, as a Mighty stream in
England. And that the end of the Lord in the Wars shall be accomplished, in
their time and season, but not in the way, or in the time, nor after the
manner, that man expects it.

Not that we desire, or need your Protection, do I thus write, nor that we are
offended, in the least, at this your provision, as to us; nay, be it known unto
you, and all the People of (...) Nations, our Trust alone, is in the name of
the Lord, who as he has opened his peoples graves, and raised his seed out of
it, in despite of all the powers of Darkness; and has carried on his seed
thus far, under the shelter of his wings, through multitudes of sufferings; so
he will not rest till he has set it over the heads of all its enemies. And
verily this generation shall not pass, till this be fulfilled. Yea, rather do I
expect (and so I did whilst your late affairs seemed most promising to the
contrary) the greatest Trials that have been yet, than a freedom from them.
Because, I know, that before the seed of God reign over all, it must be tried
to the uttermost, and the day hastens, yea, the hour approaches, wherein the
son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of sinners, who shall do unto the
seed of God, whatsoever his hand, and his Counsel has before determined to be
done; then shall God raise it over all, and crown it in his enemies sight;
therefore, Judas, what thou have to do, do quickly.

These things I signify, that when they come to pass, ye may remember that ye
were told of them before; I say, I write not this, for that we desire or need
your protection (though if integrity and faithfulness, activity, and diligence,
fighting, and suffering, for the Nations Rights in General, do bespeak our
right to enjoy them in particular (as without controversy it does) we ought to
have as much as any; yea, full freedom in soul and body is our due, and the
due of the People of these Nations. But this I write in Bowels of love to you,
that ye may see and be convinced of the evil of your doing, that so the fierce
wrath of the Lord* which is ready, to break forth, and will light on the head
of the wicked, may be turned away from you; For from the Lord of (...)* I have
(...) consumption even determined on the whole earth, and we will be to them,
by whom his seed is betrayed and suffers.

And so I am, and the Lord is, clear of your blood, and the word of the Lord,
which came to me, at Bristol, the 23. day of the third month, called May,
1659, upon reading this Article of your Address, word for word, in the News
Books, as voted by the Parliament; viz. Son of man, will thou not judge them?
will thou not judge them? yea, declare to them their abomination, I have
fulfilled. It concerns you to mind what I have said, and me to wait, till the
appointed end. And so I have finished this my. Testimony.

GEORGE BISHOP.

THE END.

