A Brief RELATION OF THE BEGINNING and ENDING OF THE TROUBLES OF THE BARBADOS,
With the true Causes thereof.

Set forth by A. B. a diligent Observer of the Times.

LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, and are to be Sold at his Shop
at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1653.

A Brief Relation of the Beginning and Ending of the Troubles of the Barbados,
with the true Causes thereof.
Whilst the Bloody Contention for the Peoples Liberty was in its height among
the English Nation, The Island of Barbados (by the Opinion of its Governor
Concurring happily with the quiet Enclination of of the People) was bound up
with Principles of Neutrality, it being a Place which could not ad any
Assistance to either of the contending Parties in England, and as newly Settled
stood in necessity of Supplies from both, and therefore like subtle Statesmen
they temporized with all new Commissions, came they either from the Parliament
or late King, holding firm their Resolutions, until (the Parliament prevailing)
multitudes of the Royal Party being made Prisoners, were sent thither to be
sold as Servants, and many Officers of that side to mend their Fortunes,
applied themselves to that Place, and in such considerable Numbers, That by the
Civility of the first Setlers, they got into the Principal Offices of that
Government, and by degrees drew the People, if not absolutely to decline their
former Peaceable Resolutions, yet in a great measure, to incline to the lost
Cavalier Party, by making the Current of all Preferments and Authority to
Stream to those that way affected: Among others of that Party who came thither,
were two Brothers, Persons of good esteem once in their own Country; the elder,
Colonel Humphry Walrond, bred a Gentleman about London; the other, Edward
Walrond, a Lawyer of the Temple, who finding the advantage of their parts, of
the plyableness of the People to receive any impression, and the plain openness
of the then Governor, little doubted but in a short time to gain the Government
into their hands, and by that means amply to Repair their broken Fortunes out
of the Estates of those Persons that had so freely supplied their wants; Having
therefore fixed an opinion in the good old Governor of their very honest
meaning, as also in his Lady, in whom by reason of her quick and industrious
Spirit, lay a great stroke of the Government: Their first step was to drive
Col. Guy Molesworth out of the Island, who having been more Eminent in their
Kings Service, the Brothers doubted would overtop them, when the Royal Party
should Declare, and therefore cunningly Complained against him as a violent
Cavalier, and one that said, It would never be well in this Island, until the
Roundheads Estates were given to the poor Cavaliers: This settled the better
opinion of them, and gave them means in a short time after to bannish him the
Island upon some advantages, which they took against him: This act so plausibly
performed, gave them encouragment to move further, and procure the Office of
Treasurer and Master of the Magazines, and Capt. of the Platforms, to be put
into the hands of Serjant Major William Byam, a Soldier of Fortune, and one
very fit for their turns; these things being fitted to their minds, they waited
for an handsome occasion to get to the height of their Ambition, which soon
after thus presented: The Inhabitants of the Barmudas having turned the
well-affected to the PARLIAMENT off their Island, sent an Agent to Barbados,
requesting them to make a League Defensive and Offensive, and to furnish them
with Arms and Ammunition to Defend that Cause they had Declared for; which
(though the two Brothers were earnest to have granted) was by the great
opposition of Col. James Drax denied, and only this granted, That for his Money
he might buy what Ammunition he could get: This not taking, the younger Brother
did in the Name of the Governor Summon diverse Gentlemen to meet, and there told
them, That out of the good opinion the Governor had of them, they were
appointed a Committee to Consider of the Safety of the Island, which was now
near a great deal of Hazard if not prevented, alleging in a very long, set,
and industriously, and well penned Speech, That there was a very formidable
Malignant party in the Island which daily increased, and would in time master
this Island, and turn all well-affected to the King from thence, and there was
but Two ways to prevent this supposed Danger: The first was, Extirpation of
them; the second, Toleration. For the first he and the major part voted, and
then these Votes were carried to the Governor, but not made known to him, until
an Oath of Secrecy was taken by him as was formerly taken by the Committee:
Then an Assembly was called, where likewise after an oath of Secrecy by all
present was solemnly taken these Rotes were published, and after some Debates
confirmed, and a Committee appointed to Consider of the quietest and most
peaceable ways of sending these Malignants into Exile. But before that was
concluded on, Col. Modyford drew up a Bill for the way of Toleration, and at
the return of the Committee presented the same, backed with so many Reasons in
order to the peace and plenty of this place, that they all unanimously were so
apprehensive of it as they quite retracted their first Votes, and agreed to the
latter way, at which every man seemed well contented; but the Two Brothers, the
younger whereof having a ready wit, added such a misterious oath to that law, and
such severe cautions and clauses against non-conformists and private
conventicles, that this law so accompanied much distasted the well-affected to
the Parliament, which was no less then the Brothers both expected and desired:
Before the publishing of this Law, Col. Drax and others, incited the honest
Planters to Petition against it, and by strong Reasons given the Governor,
prevailed with him not to publish it until their Petition were Answered. At the
next Council the Petitioners came, and the Governor now well informed, declared
for them; at which the Walronds in a rage rose up and diverse of the Council
with them, and disserted the Governor, leaving only two to sit with him, at
which time he stopped the further proceeding of that Act, and dismissed the
Petitioners; from thenceforth the Brothers openly Declared the Governor to be a
Roundhead, cunningly make Libels against themselves and other eminent Persons
to draw them into discontent, and publish the same, as made by their then
declared Enemies, and to make them believe they were Persons in hatred equal
with themselves, and so in fine by such Devices and Arts increased their party,
and on May-eve, 1650. persuaded a plain, but over credulous Gent. Col. Shelly,
to believe, That the Independants (for so they were now styled) had a Plot to
seize the Magazine, and put all that loved the King to the Sword: The same
Jealousies they infused into the thoughts of Col. Read, who accompanied with
Shelly and their Regiments, advanced against the old Governor at the Bridge,
who suddenly awakened by an Alarm, had then by chance got Force enough to take
the elder Walrond and Byam Prisoners; but so inconsiderable were the Governors
Forces, and so weak his Counsels, that he was forced to send the said Walrond
to Shelly for a Parley, which was soon granted, and the next day plausible
Articles drawn up, such as the elder Walrond pleased, and such as he thought
would best cloak his design from Shelly, Read, and other his abused
Accomplices: But the poor old Governor now (though too late) saw throw the
inside of his mischievous intentions, and therefore Commanded Col. Modyford
(whom he had formerly forbidden) to Raise the Windward Regiment for his
Restoration to that Authority which he was so easily fooled out of; who
immediately issued his Orders to Leivt. Col. Burch for that purpose, which was
by his activity effected in one night, so that Lievt. Col. Burch was upon his
March with fifteen hundred Foot, and one hundred and twenty Horse, and became
very terrible to the Walronds, and would undoubtedly have turned the Scale, had
not the elder Walrond by commanding tears to wait upon his deceitful
professions of Zeal, Faith, and Honesty to the Governor, prevailed with him to
send a Warrant to Command Lievt. Col. Burch to Disband his Forces, and
forthwith to repair to the Governor to attend his further pleasure: This point
so easily gained, made all men afraid to Act for the Governor, that would upon
the persuasions of his Enemies be induced to Disarm himself and his friends,
and made the Walronds look on themselves as absolute Princes, taking upon them
in a very Kingly way, To give Orders, raise Horse, grant Commissions, and like
Princes indeed, To forget the Articles made, keeping only such as were for
their advantage; impudently alleging, That no other Promises ought to be
kept, by Persons in their Condition. Whilst all men began now to yield them a
true or feigned Obedience, the Lord Willoughby who had been some while in the
Road, gives notice to the Governor of it, and that he had Authority from the
King and the Earl of Carlisle to be Governor, and according to his Commission
desired to be received: This new Pageant gave a mortal wound to the ill-got
Principallity of the Brothers; for this man they could not Oppose without going
against their declared Principles of Loyalty to their Kingly stalking-horse;
And yet they were so impudent as first privately with particular men they
endeavored to raise a Dislike of him, saying, That he was once a Roundhead,
and might be again; and that as things stood, it was easy to obtain any thing
from the King: And after did in public oppose his Reception; and truly their
former influence, coupled with their present industry, prevailed so far, as
though not to Refuse, yet to suspend his Lordships Authority for three Months,
in which time they made no doubt, but either to gain him to their devotion, or
send him to Antigoa; during this time, They Proclaimed their King, forced the
innocent Delinquents from their Estates and Families, set heavy Fines upon
them, and after made themselves a Committee for Sequestrations of all they had,
and then tried the Affections of every man, how they stood either to Them, or
the Lord Willoughby: To some that were poor and Covetous, they promised shares
of the Roundheads Estates: To others that were blindfold Cavaliers, they
pressed the danger of Willoughby: To others who most regarded their Liberty,
they pressed the setting up of a Popular Government, which they did not stick to
say was their intentions from the beginning, and that they loved it above all
other Forms In fine, to compass their ill begun designs, they observed every
man's Affections, and applied themselves to entertain them accordingly. These
practices were as well observed as feared by the Lord Willoughby, who was now
to Countermine or be lost, and saw plainly he must be enforced to juggle as his
Enemies did, and therefore to the Cavalier he was all King; and to the Moderate
party, he professed a Dislike of the present Proceedings; and finding them the
greatest Enemies Walrond had, he made no scrupl privately to unfold himself to
one of the eminentest of them, therefore sending for Col. Modyford, he assured
him, That all his Counsels should be employed in Composing the present
Distractions here, and preventing the future Differences which may happen
betwixt England and this Place, for which purpose Capt. George Martin was sent
into England with Instructions to gain him a Commission from the Parliament,
which he averred above all things to desire. The Moderate party verily
believing his heart and words to agree, gave him Courage to take from the elder
Walrond his Regiment, and from both of them all Power and Authority in this
Island, caused the Acts of Sequestrations to be Repealed, and an Act of
Indemnity to be made, bestowed many marks of Favor upon the former Sufferers,
and their remaining Families, in so much, That all men generally looked on him
as a blessing sent from God to preserve them against the Tyranny of the two
Brothers. About this time Col. John Colliton came to this Island, to whom
likewise his Lordship unfolded his thoughts, and desired him to Write to the
Merchants of London, to procure a Commission from the State of England for him,
and did assure both him, Col. Modyford, and Col. Burch of his constant
Resolutions to persevere in Moderating and Composing all things, and wished
them to assure all well-affected Persons of it. This honest clearness in all
his Actions lasted until March, 1651. when a Passenger from England brought him
Letters of the great strength the King of Scots had, and of the violent
proceedings of some of the Planters against him, that Martin was like to be
Hanged for speaking for him; and in fine, That the Inhabitants were to expect
nothing but Fire and Sword, no Terms to be granted, and the great preparations
of Force to subdue this place: Then, and not till then, he began to change his
Game, and openly professed Defiance, and every day carressed and assured
himself more and more of the violent Party, and yet cunningly promised the
Moderate, That if ever good terms were offered, he would accept of them: This
made most men join cheerfully in the putting the Island in a Posture of
Defense; the most Moderate, like true Englishmen, resolving to sell themselves
at a dear Rate, by choosing to die, rather then to live less Free then any of
their Countrymen: Suddenly after this, the Lord Willoughby growing still surer
of the violent Party, caused new Sequestrations to be laid on the banished men's
Estates, killed and destroyed their Cattle and Stock, and did what mischief he
could unto them all without distinction. At length the Fleet arriving, after
Summons, and Refusal had past, Leivt. Col. Allen, and Mr. Francis Raynes,
applied themselves by Letter to Col. Modyford, therein tendering all things of
Fairness and Civility; which the said Col. received with much contentment and
showed the same to the Lord Willoughby, pressing his Promise of Composure upon
fair terms, which he not being able to deny, gave him Power by Letter to Treat,
to know the Admirals Power, and next the Particular Articles he would insist
on: All which by a private Treaty being perfected, and Articles agreed on, to
the Contentment of Col. Modyford, and Lievt. Col. Burch, to whom he from time
to time communicated his Proceedings, with which his Lordship being made fully
acquainted, and finding now no possibility of longer Dissembling, plainly
forsook all his old Promises, being encouraged by the weakness of the Fleet,
and the assurance of the violent Party now truly loving him whom they found so
much of their own Disposition, and perfectly hating the Walronds for ever
having doubted so true a Cavalier. In the mean time the admirable temper Sir
George Ayscue the States General showed in the mannagement of these Affairs,
cannot without breach of the laws of History be omitted, for he discreetly
weighing how little he was able to do by the Sword, being not provided with any
considerable Landforces, the Enemy having at least five thousand Foot, and a
thousand Horse at several Posts quartered on the Seaside, and considering they
were Englishmen, found his best Weapon to be gentle and fair means, which he
so ingeniously made use of, that though none durst speak well of him, yet most
knowing Persons were well satisfied in their minds, that there could not be any
danger in a submission to those that sent him; And knowing it a dull thing to
be all Courtesy, for to keep up the spirits of his own men, and give the
Islanders a taste what they could do, he beat up a Quarter at the Hole, and by
the help of the Scots which came in the Virginia-fleet, another at Spikes Bay,
both which were done in the night, and in both these was wondrous Succesful,
and not having Power enough to prosecute these successes, retired his Forces to
his Ships, not doing any further harm, which he might have done by firing
Houses, etc. The Prisoners he took he used extremely well, which still
increased the good Opinion the People had of him, and forwarded his Designs
more then some violent Persons about him could have imagined. The Moderate
Party were now to seek what to do, and yet their ends being honest, they were
bold by Leivt. Col. Burch to move a Treaty in the Public Assembly, seconded by
Col. Hawly, and Modyford, and brought it so far that a Committee was appointed
to draw Articles, which they did to the liking of most at the first reading,
but being put off to the next day, the Lord Willoughby by himself and
Instruments, had so dealt with the several Members, that they Voted such
Articles to be sent, as signified nothing but a Defiance: After this, followed
Healths to the Destruction of them that would have Peace; Threats to all
Moderate men; the Drunkards quibbingly alleging. That all the Desirers of
Treaty were Traitors: And then began the Lord Willoughby to be odious to all
moderate and good Men; which being well observed by Col. Modyford, he thinking
himself not further obliged to solicit so obstinate a man for his own good, or
longer to continue under his Command, that had broke all Faith, and those
Promises, for which only he first undertook to adhere to him; privately advising
with Col. Colliton, and calling Col. Burch then his Leivt. Col. Capt. Hooper,
and other Officers to him, they Resolved to make the Lord Willoughby by Force
to perform, what by honest persuasions could not be obtained. And therefore
having overnight had Conference with Capt. Pack, Col. Drax, and Mr Raynes on
shore, who having Power from the General, gave him all the satisfaction that
reasonably he could desire: On Saturday the 6th day of January, Colonel
Modyford drew his Regiment together, consisting of a thousand Musketeers, and
one hundred and twenty Horse, and in a short Speech made them so sensible of
the present Distractions of the Country, of the likelihood of their
Continuance, the violence of some men even in Council and the Assembly, whereby
the Freedom of Votes and Debates were lost, the present wants of the Country,
the willingness and abilities of those Ships that lay before them to give all
possible Supply unto them, and finally the Articles which they offered, that
they all Declared, That they would live and die with their Colonel in obtaining
Peace upon those Articles: Notice hereof being given a-Board, a Letter with the
Articles enclosed was presently disdatched to the Lord Willoughby, persuading
him yet to show himself so much an Englishman and a Christian as by an happy
Accord to shorten the miseries of this Island: but he was deaf, and that night
beat up an out-Quarter of Horse: in the mean time Col. Modyfords house about
seven miles in the Country was (by his order) made a Garrison for the State;
the Prisoners at Capt. Middletons by them releived. On Monday the Rainbow came
up, and Sir George came on Shore, had his Commission published, and at the same
time the Lord Willoughby was drawn down with about three thousand men, but
could neither hinder the Proclaiming the States Interest, or disturb the
Peacemakers quarters, but that same night at midnight made a silent and
shameful Retreat: Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday were so wet, that the
Peacemakers could not advance against him; but the Friday being drawn out, and
ready to March, the Lord Willoughbies Trumpet with a Letter earnestly desiring
Peace, stopped further Proceedings; On which Treaty the Island was delivered to
the State, and the People assured their full Freedom and Liberties, which they
now happily enjoy. Thus may you see that by the excellency of one man's temper
and Conduct, with Gods blessings thereon, this rich spot of Land, containing at
least thirty thousand Souls, Reduced and United to their Native Country without
Bloodshed, or any considerable expense of Treasure. Their wise General well
knowing that there could not be a greater Service to the State, then to
preserve his Conquests entire and without lesning, especially when they are to
be made on his Brothers and Countrymen, which Succesful Rule of sweetness he
practiced while he remained Governor here, whereby he has absolutely confirmed
every Soul here to be faithful to the present flourishing Government of our
Nation.

FINIS.

