A Bloody EIGHT IN IRELAND, Between the Parliaments Forces, commanded by Sir
Charles Coot, and Col. Russels; and the Kings Forces, under the conduct and
command of Genesis Preston, and the E. of Clanrickard; upon his Lordships Attempt
to raise the siege with 4000 Horse and Foot, on the 11th of this instant Feb.
1652.

ALSO, The particulars of the said Fight; the total routing of the Irish Army;
1500 slain upon the place, 700 taken prisoners; and a List of all their
Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, Bagg and Baggage.

LIKEWISE, The storming of Dublin, the burning of 800 Houses, or Cabines, the
putting of 500 Men, Women, and Children to the sword; their seizing on the
Treasury, and taking great store of Plate, and many thousand pounds in Money.

March. 1st. London, Printed for G. NORTON, 1652. 1651

A Great VICTORY Obtained in IRELAND
By the Parliaments Forces, against General Preston, and the Earl of
Clanrickard with their whole Army, on the 11 of this instant February near
Gallaway.
SIR,
SInce my last of the 24 of January last, it has pleased God to crown his
servants with a great Victory against the bloodthirsty Enemy, whose pride of
heart thought to have dissipared us in a moment; but divine providence
frustrated their wicked design; For Sir Charles Coot, and Colonel Russel having
received timely notice of the intentions of the Earl of Clanrickard to raise
the siege at Gallaway, drew off a party of Horse and Foot to a place called the
Blind, 5 miles from the Leagure, there to lie in Ambuscado, and to attend his
motion the morning following (being the 11 instant) which was the time prefixed
for relief of the Town; and accordingly, about 6 of the clock they marched by;
which Sir Charles perceiving, immediately gave command for all his men to make
ready, and forthwith he charged (in person) the Rearguard; which sudden Allarm
did so astonish the Van, that they soon betook themselves to flight, and in
great disorder exposed themselves to several Passes; but most of them were
intercepted, about 1500 slain upon the place, and 700 taken prisoners: Thus it
pleased Divine Providence so to blast and maugre their devices and stratagems,
that of 4000, there escaped not above 1800; But in their Retreat they were met
withal by Col. Sanchy, who charged them, and after a sharp dispute, routed
them, killed many, and took diverse prisoners, pursuing the rest as far as the
Bog of Moneal, where taking advantage of the frost entered the Bog, stormed the
strong Castle of Mondonall, and put all to the sword: After which great
success, he marched to another strong Hold (three miles distant) called Dublin;
which place contained 800 Houses, or Cabins; but he immediately stormed that
also, and killed 500 upon the place; In this gallant Attempt, the Colonel
deported himself with a most magnanimous Spirit, being the first man that
entered the Works; and the soldiers followed him so close, that they soon became
Masters o^ the Town, for which singular piece of service, he gave them the free
plunder of the Town, which amounted to a great value; as will appear by the
List enclosed.

The Enemy has lately made a desperate salley out of Gallaway, and fell into
our quarters, where they took a prey of near 100 Cows, and 200 sheep; But it
pleased the Lord as they returned, a party of Col. Russels rescued the prey,
fought the Enemy, killed 60 of them; and took an Ensign, and diverse others
prisoners.

The Town has held out a long time, expecting relief, but now they begin to
hearken to a Treaty; and its believed that General Preston (their Governor)
will desert them, (leaving them to make their own Terms and Conditions) and
betake himself to a strong Island of his in the Sea; and truly it is high time,
for the soldiery begin to mutiny, and threaten to deliver him up to the mercy
of the Parliament, in case he will not condescend to a Rendition of the Town.

A List of the Arms, Ammunition, Cattle, and other rich Prizes, taken from the
IRISH.
27 Pieces of Ordnance. 1500 Muskets. 300 Pikes. 200 Pistols. 150 Carbincs. 40
Barrels of powder. Great store of Bullet and Match. 30000 Bushels of Wheat. 500
Bushels of other Grain. 50 Fat Heifers. 300 sheep. 200 Cowes. 80 Horse. 13000
pounds in pieces of Eight; beside great store of English Money. 1000 Cases of
several sorts of strong Water. 100 barrels of Syder. 7 Buts of Wine. 500 Men,
Women, and Children put to the sword.
The last Letters from Ireland, of a more later date, confirms the certainty of
the precedent Victory; and withal ascertains, that Lieu. Genesis Ludlow,
Commissary General Reynolds, and Col. Venables, with their forces, have fallen
upon the Enemy near the Province of Ulster, and after a sharp dispute, killed
700 upon the place, took about 500 Officers and soldiers prisoners, and
totally routed and dissipated near upon 3000. So that the Enemy has no
considerable body left in any part of this N^tion, except a party under the
young Earl of Cas^lehaven, who does much prejudice us in leveral places, by
reason that the Country people are so treacherous, who does exceedingly annoy
us, and upon the least opportunity, leaves their De^^s, and commits many
outrages against our men, putting all to the sword that they meet withal: Even
the same measure we mete to them again; for truly in some places you may ride
20 miles, and scarce discern any thing, or six your eye upon any Object, but
dead men hanging on Trees and Gibbots: A sad spectacle; but there is no remedy;
so perfideous are the people, that we are enforced thereunto for the safeguard
of our own lives. Col. Hewson has likewise made a gallant attempt against the
Enemy, and has taken 500 Head of Cattle, and dissipated most of the enemies
forces that were gathered to a Head about the Newry.

Limerick 13 Feb. 1652.
FINIS.

