Blood justly Revenged: OR, A True RELATION OF THE CONFESSIONS AND BEHAVIOR OF
THE Two Persons Hanged in Fleetstreet, October. 22. 1675.

And thence removed to hang in Chains, on Sandford-hill and Finchly Common.

For Murdering Sir R. S.

Published for a Warning to all other Rash and Unadvised persons.

With Allowance.

LONDON: Printed for M. B. 1675.

Blood Expiated by Justice: OR, The Execution of the Two Murderers in
Fleetstreet.
THere having formerly been some brief Account given of this business in print,
in the Transactions of the last Sessions, I shall not stand tediously to repeat
all the precedent or concomitant Circumstances, upon what occasions and
provocations, as they alleged, the murder came to be committed for which
these persons now suffered. The sum and effect of their Crime being thus, as it
appeared at their Trial.

This Knight and a friend of his were in Company together at a Tavern in
Fleetstreet, but they had not long been there before, two persons intruded into
their Company; one of which presently falls a quarrelling with the Knights
Friend, upon the account of forty shillings that he pretended was owing to him
by his Brother, as won of him at play; and he would have it of him; which he
refused: and thereupon from words they fell to blows, but at length were
parted; but not being satisfied, they were resolved to waylay them, where they
might have a better opportunity to accomplish their Bloody designs; and
following them toward the back gate of the Temple, near White friars, both of
them most barbarously fell upon the Knight, thrusting both their Swords into
his Body, before he could draw his Sword: all which being proved by sufficient
Evidence, the Jury brought them in both guilty of Murder.

After this, having nothing material to say for themselves, save only some
frivolous pretenses that the Knight's Sword was drawn (the contrary whereof was
proved) and that they killed him fairly (as they called it). The Court
proceeded to Pass Sentence of Death against them, and they were remanded back
to Newgate.

The time of their Execution was deferred till Friday the two and twentieth of
October, and the place appointed for it was in Fleetstreet over against
White-fryers, the place where they did the Fact.

During the time of their continuance in Newgate in expectation of death, they
were visited by several Ministers, who with the most pressing and pathetical
exhortations endeavored to make them sensible of their Crimes and Condition;
advising them to repent, since it was high time, they being upon the very Brink
of Eternity.

They remembered them of the sad state they were in, as being doomed by Justice
to a certain death, and that for the crying Scarlet-sin of Murder; that in
their condition they could not expect any mercy on earth, nor any pardon but
from the King of Heaven; but told them, though it were vain for them to flatter
themselves with hopes of longer life in this world, yet there was means left to
secure them of everlasting life in the next: that to such sinful Wretches as
they had been, it was an unspeakable Mercy, that they had yet a little space
left wherein to make their peace with Heaven. Oh what would the damned Souls,
weltering without hope in eternal Flames, give for such a precious opportunity?
That they might have received mortal Wounds at the time when they did the Act,
and been snatched away suddenly with all the stains of Blood and Murder upon
their guilty Souls; whereas now they had leisure and opportunity if they would
lay hold of it, to wash them off with true penitential Tears, and the Blood of
their Crucified Redeemer applied by Faith.

These and the like pious Exhortations they heard and received with great
attention; yet still endeavored to excuse themselves, that they had no intent
to murder the Gentleman, and that it was an unhappy Accident done in heat and
passion, rather by mischance than premeditated malice: But to this it was
replied, That that very Passion was a sin, and the sad effects of it a far
greater: that by God's own Law, he that killed a man by misadventure was not
held innocent; How much less they who had taken away a Worthy persons life
voluntarily, and basely, and as appeared by the Circumstances, upon
deliberation? To all which they had little to answer, but their former
pretenses to extenuate their Crime, For which they professed themselves
heartily sorry, and begged forgiveness of God and the Gentleman's Relations for
the same.

For their Execution, two Gibbets were set up in Fleetstreet, one at the great
Gate going into White-fryers, the other at the lesser Passage down thither, by
the Green-Dragon Tavern.

When the Prisoners were brought thither, neither of them said much, but still
insisted upon their having no Murtherous design when they committed the fact.
They acknowledged they had led very vain and bad Lives, and that it was just
with God to bring them to this shameful death. And desired all persons to
beware of Gaming, and profaning the Sabbath, and of Ill Company; which bring so
many to ruin and destruction.

FINIS.

