Bloody Nevvs FROM CLERKENWEL OR, A Full and True Relation of a most Horrid and
Barbarous Cruelty, Comited by a Iourney-man-Cooper, Who lived in
Tumble-Down-Dick's-Court, Over Against WOOD'S-CLOSE.

After he had been out 3 or 4 days on a Ramble, coming home, on Monday the
18th. of this Instant May, most inhumanely and without any provocation, Killed
his Wife in a most Cruel Manner: She being then great with Child.

Together with his Examination before a Justice, and wishing that he had Killed
more: and his Comitment the same Evening to Newgate.

With Allowance.

Printed for P. B. in VVest-smith-field.

Bloody NEWS FROM CLERKENWEL.
HOw great a sway and Dominion the Black Prince of the Air has over the minds
of too many men, is evident in the strange Crimes and barbarous Outrages they
every day, as slaves to his hellish pleasure commit in the World. Murder in it
self is a scarlet and most crying sin, a defaceing of God's Image, and offering
violence to Nature; but Satan now adays is not content with a Sacrifice of
blood, unless attended with all agravating Circumstances, and acted by, and
between persons whose Relation requiring the most endearing affections for each
other, sets off Murder in the most exquifite colors of Horror.

The Malefactor was by Trade a Cooper, but never arrived any higher than to be
a JOurney-man in that Profession, he has been Married some years, and had two
Children by his Wife; they lived (having only a Lodging in a Chamber) in Court
called, Tumble-down-Dicks Court in Clerkenwel: he was generally a very bad
Husband, and froward and unkind to his Wife, who yet loving him very well,
endeavored to take no notice of it.

On Thursday the 14 of May he went abroad, and what Company he was with, we
cannot say, but know this, that he came no more home till the Monday following,
during all which time the poor woman and her two children were forced to make
what shift they could for a Livelihood, and compelled to sell some clothes for
a little money to buy them bread: However on Monday in the afternoon this poor
woman little dreaming that her end was so near aproaching, found her Spirits
more then ordinary cheerful, insomuch that she took notice of it to several of
the Neighbors, saying, That she never had been so brisk and light-hearted as
at that instant, in her whole life, and whilst some told her, that so sudden,
unusual, and causeless a mirth and cheerfulness was generally the sign or
forerunner of some grand misfortune; she concluded it on the contrary, a token
of good luck; and like a kind Wife, esteeming nothing more than her Husband,
how unworthily soever he had dealt by her, added, that she hoped she should see
him at home that night, for whose safety, by reason of his long absence, she
had for two or three days been much troubled. I shall not stand curiously to
descant on, much less determine the nature and causes of those sudden damps or
transports of joy or sorrow, which we oftimes feel upon our Spirits, without
any cause at all for such emotions, from external Accidents, nor the meaning
why they are generally to be understood as portent, of a quite contrary
Signification to what they seem to be, whether they are to be accounted the
cautionating Items of every persons Genius or Guardian Angel to alarm and
prepare one for eminent Disasters, or some sallies of the soul, who forseeing
his release from the body aproaching, swells with a full Tide of Joy at the
thoughts of that separation. It Is certain, that here we may deplore the
blindness of man's understanding, how we always Err, when from uncertain
guesses we measure futurities, and know not in the least one minute what shall
befall us in the next, not may we with less amazement consider the barbarous
ingratitude of this wretched Husband to his kind Wife, who so passionately
wished for his comeing home, though the same immediately after proved the loss
of her life in an inhumane manner.

For, behold! about five or six of the clock the same Monday in the Afternoon,
this long looked for Extravagant came home to his Wives chamber, where another
woman was come at the same time to see her, and though it is probable an
Alehouse had taken up the greatest part of his time, yet he did not seem to be
at all in Drink, the woman received him very mildly, told him she was glad to
see him well, and that she wondered, and had been much troubled to think what
was become of him; and then telling him that one of the Children was not very
well, she desired him to give her some money to go to the Apothecaries to buy
something for it. Upon which words this wicked man falling into a passion like
an enraged fury, catches up an Adze, an instrument which Coopers usually work
with, and by it is sharpness at one end, and hammer at the other, prepared to do
Mischief two ways, with the blunt end of this he forthwith knocked her down to
the ground, and then continued striking backwards and forwards till he had
given her several mortal wounds, at which as at so many sally ports her
affrighted soul took a sudden flight, and left the mangled body weltring in
it is own Gore upon the Floor.

The other woman when the assault began, feeing the man lay about him so
violently with that dangerous and mischievous weapon, was terribly affrighted,
and thought fit for to consult her own safety by running down stairs with all
the speed imaginable, and crying out as loud as she was able for help.

But no body could come in time enough to the rescue, before he had performed
his bloody work upon his poor Wife, and left her wholly breathless; which being
done he takes up one of his children into his arms, and was walking with it up
and down the room, as in Triumph for that Hellish victory.

It Is supposed by some words uttered by him since his apprehension that he had
a mind to have dispatched the woman if she had not saved her self by flight, and
also to have destroyed this Innocent Babe, but the Woman's Exclamations having
raised the Neighbors, they prevented his mischievous design, and took the Child
from him before he had done it any harm, and beholding there with pity and
amazement what he had done, they apprehend him, which was the more easy to be
done, because he did not seem to intend to make any escape: being charged with
a Constable he was forthwith carried before one of his Majesty's Justices of
the Peace for the County of Middlesex.

When he came there to be Examined, the Hamous Fact was too apparent, The
Woman's Testimony, and the Notoriousness of the thing, evidencing both the
Murder, and him to be the Author of it: Nor indeed did he go about to deny in:
but being asked by the Justice, what prompted him to do such a Divelsh Inhumane
Act, he Could give ^o^ther but this cursed Answer, That be knew well enough he
should be Hanged, and was sorry for nothing but that he had not dispatched some
more of them: And being pressed to explain himself, who he meant, he refused so
to do: but repeated the same words again; whereupon his Mittimus was made, and
he with a strong Guard sent to Newgate, whither he went attended with very many
people, and now lies there in expectation to receive the just reward due to the
Demerits of his Crimes.

Oh! Let this Example warn all others from following lewd Courses, absenting
themselves from their dwellings, and never providing for their Families; and
especially from Harkening to the Devils Suggestions, or their own Revenge; so
as in Passionate Phreasie to bereave any of their lives: which besides the
Danger of their Souls Eternal Ruin, most Deservedly and assuredly will bring
them to fall unpittied, by an untimely and ignominious Death.

FINIS.

