Sir Richard Blake HIS SPEECH IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS At a Grand Committee for
the Bill against paper Petitions.

Master Brereton sitting in the CHAIR June XXVIII. 1641.

LONDON, Printed Anno Domini, 1641.

Sir Richard Blake his Speech in the House of COMMONS, at a Grand Committee for
the Bill against Paper Petitions,
Master Brereton sitting in the Chair. June 28. 1641.
Master Brereton,
THe matter we now treat of is of great importance, it is of the power that
Paper Petitions have of late usurped in this Kingdom by the Arbitrary
Judicature of Civil Causes and Controversies. It will become the Judgment of
this great Council to consider, First, of the Nature and Essence, then of the
fruits and effects of these Paper Petitions, and lastly, if we find those
fruits so bitter and unsavory, that instead of pleasing they poison us, to
grub them up, and root them so out that they shall never grow again in this
Garden of ours, this our Eden, our dear Country, to destroy us and our
posterity, as the forbidden fruit did in Adam all mankind.

Sir, there are many things described by their Contraries, this will be granted
is Color contrarius albo, it is the deprivation and annihilation of our
Fundamental and vital Laws: Our Laws (Sir) are the ne plus ultra to all Kings
and Subjects, and as they are Hercules his Pillars, so are they Pillars to
every Hercules, and Prince, that they cannot pass; and Pillars that bear and
support every Subject in his life, in his Lands, and his goods.

When Rome triumphed in her ancient greatness, and was acknowledged sole and
sovereigne Empress of all the Nations in the World, a Poet of those times
shows the cause of her continued splendor and flourishing estate by this
Verse,

Moribus antiquis stat res Romana, virique. I may not unaptly apply that Verse
to this Kingdom, and truly say, that Legibus antiquis stat res Hiberna,
virique. Our Laws are the breath of our nostrils, the sight of our eyes, the
very Soul and Nerves by which this great body politic of ours does live and
move, they are the best Guards of Kings, Magistrates, and virtuous men, they
are Snaffles to bridle the wicked, they are Sickles to cut down all weeds
growing up in the Commonweal; those paper Petitions are their Antagonists,
their professed enemies, they trample them under foot, not revering or respecting
their venerable gray headed antiquity, not regarding that by their influence
and virtue we now sit together in this great Council, as well for the
conservation of them, as propagation of a new fruitful seed of more to
posterity, not valuing the great and unspeakable benefit that mankind has
originally received from them, in that by their means we lead the lives of
reasonable men, not of brute Beasts, of Freemen, not of Slaves, of Civil men,
and not of Salvages.

Those paper Petitions like whirlewinds throw down all before them that stand
in their way, make one man in the Lucifertan (as I may term it) Exaltancie of
his power to monopolize and appropriate unto himself the abilities of all men,
the properties of all Courts.

The Judges, once like so many Planets shining in their several Orbs,
observing their constant motion in their several Courts of Judicature,
imparted unto us the comfortable light, and vivificant heat of the Laws, those
paper Petitions extinguish and put out this light, with the vapors that rise
from them, they eclipse and darken the Luster of it, they sully the white
Furs of their Roabes, they endanger the blackning of their whiter
consciences, when by force of the Commands of those Petitions they are required
contrary to their Oath, not only to delay, but to deny Justice.

The Marshals Court was originally erected for Arms and Honor, the Chancery
for Equity, the Exchequer for the Revenues, and Kings Bench for the Pleas of
the Crown, the Common Pleas for Pleas between Subject and Subject, and the
Prerogative, Consistory, and Bishops Courts for Ecclesiastical Causes; from
those Cisterns the water of life did issue and flow upon us, but inimicus and
iniqu^s homo superseminovil z^ in ^dio tritici, one man in his vast unlimited
and transcendent power, took all their Functions upon himself alone, vainly
acted himself Omnipotent, which is an Attribute proper to God Almighty, and
that in quarto modo, (as your Logicians term it) soli semper and uni, created
himself Earl Marshall, Lord Chancellor, Chief Baron, nay, all the Barons of
the Exchequer, Chief Justice, nay, all the Justices of either Bench,
Archbishop, Bishop, nay, all the Archbishops, Bishops, Deans and Chapters of
the Kingdom.

Justine in the Preface to his History tells us, that in the nonage and first
infancy of the World, Populus nullis legibus tenebatur, arbitria potentium pro
Legibus erant, The people had no positive Laws to govern them, the wills of
great ones were their Laws, and those wills were so inordinate and so
exorbitant, that for the most part, they made their own wills and fancies to be
their Treasurers, and Hangmen, measuring by that yard, and weighing in that
Balance both good and evil. After the Revolution of so many Ages, as if
Pythagoras his opinion of Transmigration were true, or that the Platonicke
year of reducing all things to the same beginning, continuance and period (how
false soever in the books of nature) had bin come, have we not lived as it were
in these times? have we not groaned? and were not our backs cracked under the
weight that paper Petitions, and the Commands of those great ones upon them
involved, and fettered us in? were not our adversaries by their References made
our Judges? and our Judges, our sworn Judges made Arbitrary Censurers of what
properly was to be determined before themselves in their Courts? were not our
Freeholds and goods violently and extrajudicially taken from us? were not our
bodies imprisoned? Our bodies (Sir) whose liberty the Common Law did so highly
esteem, that they were not for any cause whatsoever to be restrained, but
only for force, and that because the Law being the preserver of the quiet and
Tranquillity of the Kingdom detested and abhorred force, as the enemy and
violator thereof, those bodies of ours were not only imprisoned, but
pillori'd, whipped and scourged upon Sentences given upon paper Petitions, and
our selves forced, as Children are, to kiss the rod by making a forced
acknowledgement of Guilt, against our knowledge and conscience, without which
we could not redeem those bodies from perpetual Imprisonment, our estates
from being extended, and our goods from being seized.

Upon the late solemn and famous Trial of the Earl of Strafford, and in the
greatest presence of the World, for that the King was pleased to be personally
present, and all the States of the Kingdom of England assembled in Parliament,
with the Commissioners and Committees of both his other Kingdoms, it has
been offered to Consideration as a matter of great consequence, that it
imbaseth the spirits of a Nation, when they must stand in fear of Pilloring,
Scaffolding, and like punshments, it takes away their spirits, tenders them
pusillanimous and weak-hearted, in England where this was represented, they
suffered not under such pressures or fears; the King whose virtues are his
Inmates, and true qualities ingenrate both in his judgment and nature, with
the sunshine of his presence (which makes them happy) cleares and expells all
such mists, but the reports of our miseries occasioned by the frequencie of
such usage, or rather mis-usage, flying over unto them with the gale of our
sighs, and springtide of our Tears, wrought that charitable Impression, and
drew that Emphaticall expression from them, Si in viridi ligno hoc faciunt, in
arid^ quia fiet? if they out of the sense of our slavish sufferance took that
to Consideration, and their pious Commiseration, have not we in whose Scene
that Tragedy was acted greater cause to take it to our more serious thoughts?
surely we have, and cannot without blemish to our Judgments, and wrong to our
selves and posterity, but endeavor to remove the cause, Sublata causa
tollitur effectus: And the principle cause I conceive to proceed from those
paper Petitions, the proceedings upon them being not limited to any certain
Rule, time, season, place, cause, or thing, nor any degree, Sex, age, or
quality privileged by them, by them his Majesty loses a considerable part of
his Revenue, that might justly and lawfully result and acrue unto him out of
original Writs, Fines, Amerciaments and profits, by them the Subject loses
the benefit of his writ of Error, Bill of Reversall, Voucher Essoignes, Views,
Fines, with Proclamations and Discents, and by them many other Legal and Just
advantages in the ordinary course, and Courts of Justice are declined, and
their only Consequence is by immoderate and unlawful Fees to enrich
Secretaries, Clerks, Pursivants, and Serjants at Arms, and not only them, but
Projectors, Informers, and such other Horsleeches, that suck the blood of our
bodies, and marrow of our bones, and their malignant operation rests not here,
but extends to our intrinsecall parts, that we call Qualitates animae they
strongly endeavor to subvert.

That the planting of Learning is the true and right way to plant Civility, and
that

-- ingenuas didicisse fideliter arts
Emollit mores, nee sinit esse feros,
Our own observation and the experience of all Nations tells us, and Cornelius
Tacitus in the life of Agricola demonstrates.

Julius Agricola the Roman, General in Britanie, found the ancient Inhabitants
rude, barbarous, and apt upon every occasion to make war, he being a wise
man, as he was a valiant man, conceived it the best way to Civilize, and
consequently to contain them in the Sphere of their obedience to the Roman
Monarchy, to build and erect free Schools, and places of public resort, and
in them to have the Children of the Nobles, and Genlemen, trained, and
instructed in the liberal Sciences, which he did, the event answered his
expectation, and his policy had the wished effect, for the British youth being
curious to attain the Eloquence of the Roman language, the Roman attire grew
to be in account, and the Go^^ in request among them, and so came as Tacitus
observes to the height of Civilitie, which ever since they have to their great
glory maintained. And I am (M. Brereton) of opinion, that our Ancestors in
their great wisdom left for us such part of the Common Law as is written, The
pleadings of them, and original Writs, in the Latin language, because that
being the general, and an immutable language, not subject to be sophisticated
as all other languages (except the Hebrew and Greek) were, or to receive Majus
aut Minus, a Language that was never conquered with any Conquest, and that the
fury of the Saxons, Danes, and Normans, could never so extirpate or suppress,
but that our Laws still lived in it, as in the Vestall fire that is never
extinguished, to the end I say, that we might be incited and invited to the
knowledge and use thereof; to strengthen my opinion in this, and to show how
necessary the knowledge of it is for the professors of our Laws, I will present
unto you the Authorities of two of the greatest Sages of the Law, the one
Ancient, the other Recent, and in their own words, which I only translate,
that I may not disparage, or take off the weight of them by mine.

Mr. Littleton, who is the Portall by which all Students make their first
entrance, and who by his excellent Book gives them Ariadnes clue, to guide and
direct them in their ways in that intricate Labyrinth, in his chapter of
Confirmation, lib. 3. cap. 9. gives them this grave and fatherly advice. Know
my Son, that it is one of the most honorable, laudable, and profitable
things in our Law, to have the Science of well Pleading in actions Real and
Personal, and therefore I counsel thee to employ thy courage and care to learn
this.

Sir Edward Coke, whose learned Works are the Coronides of the Students
endeavors, and do polish the same, in Blackamores Case 8. rep. fol. 159. says
that the Clerks are bound by the duty of their Offices to have skill and
science in the Form of original Writs, which are the foundation that all the
Law depends of, and therefore if the Forms of original Writs be neglected,
ignorance the mother of Error, and Barbarism will ensue, and in the end all
shall be involved in confusion, and the ancient Law of the Kingdom subverted.

This is the judgment (M. Brereton,) of these two great Pillars of the Law, and
that this they so earnestly direct, has not been observed in paper Petitions,
we all know; a common Scrivener draws them, and an illiterate Clerk, (for so
many of them are) whose knowledge soars no higher than his mother Tongue, and
whose best abilities, and perfections are to wait officiously upon my Lord, his
Master, sol^icits this, and he, or the powerful intercession of a Favorite
prevalls more in businesses of greatest consequence, and where Legal
proceedings and Scrutinie are requisite, then happily a Littleton or a Cook; O
tempora, O mores! which I think we lately had as great cause as Tully to
exclaim upon.

What a great Ornament to this Kingdom Mr. Brereton the Professors of our Laws
are, how daily and hourly useful, unto our selves both in this House and in
England, the members of the House (whom we term of the long Roabe) are, I
leave to the Judicious observation of this Committee, and likewise to their
consideration how infinitely they and the rest of that Honorable profession
have been damnified by those paper-blasts, Blasts I may well call them, for
indeed they blast, and nip in the very blossom the hopes of all our Law
Students, who having spent the Spring of their years in the Innes of Court in
that study, and many of them the best part of their fortunes, upon their
return to this their Native Country, their Land of promise, when they expect
to meet with a Harvest to crown their painful and chargeable endeavors, they
have hardly gleanings left for them by those paper-Clerks: This Sir as I
conceive is very considerable by us, and those Paper-Petitions being, as I
endeavored in their tree colors to represent them, Tares introduced and
planted among the Corn by the enemy of mankind, at least the enemy of the
welfare of this Kingdom, in their nature a Monopoly, or rather a Rape upon all
men's abilities and the properties of all Courts, being the Bedels of our
bodies, the disseisors of our Lands, Robers of our goods, Suppressors of our
intellectual parts, Subverters of the Common Law and Rebels to the
Statute-lawes as appears by Magna Charta 2. Hen. 3. by 28. and 25. of E. 3.
and by the Record of 21. Ed. 1. that are mentioned in the preamble of the Bill,
I am humbly of opinion that as the wisdom of this house has already looked
with a retrospect eye upon some of the many grievances that were occasioned by
them, that with the other eye we look forward, Ne quid detrimenti respublica
patiatur hereafter.

M. Brereton, the nature of domination is such, in the irregular minds of
some, that having once broken out of Circle, they cannot endure any limitation
or bounds, but range at liberty in the wide and spacious fields of their own
humors, and being not able to give Laws to their appetites, make Laws as
Champions to defend them, and reason as a Parasite to glorify them, and that
this has bin so, we have seen, and that it may be so hereafter the condition
and nature of man tells us, we are therefore to conclude upon this good way of
the perpetual damning of such paper-Petitions as extra judicially determine
Civil causes, that they may never rise after in judgment against us, that they
may not assume to themselves the force of Bulls and Cannons as they have done,
or like Hydra's heads pullulate and spring up, to the bane and utter
destruction of us and our posterity, And therefore my vote is that the Bill as
it is now drawn shall be approved with those Provisions that are inserted in
it, that it shall not extend to his Majesty's Courts of Castle-Chamber,
Chancery, Chancery of the Exchecquer, Court of Wards, the Presidencies of
Monster, Connaght, or the Lievtenancies of the Counties of Gallway, and the
County of Clare, or to the Civil proceedings before the Justices of Assizes,
but with such qualifications as in the Bill is mentioned, and that the House of
the Lords may by Message be acquainted with it, that we may have their
concurrent approbation, which I doubt not they will cheerfully give, for the
impetuous rage of those Paper Petitions had no more respect, and made no other
distinction between the freedom of their Peerage, or their estates and goods,
than the meanest common-persons. And that his Majesty will give his Royal
assent thereunto, I am hopeful and confident, having already in the abyss of
his goodness and care of his faithful Subjects of this Kingdom, publicly
declared his dissent and averseness from them in the very first Chapter of his
Printed Instructions, and likewise in the Proclamation that we sent over into
England, to accompany our Protestation to that part of the Preamble of our Act
of Subsidies that extold the Earl of Straffords Government. This being my
opinion I humbly submit to the consideration and better judgment of this
Committee.

FINIS.

