A BLOODY FIGHT IN Hartford-shire, BETWEEN The Parliaments Forces, and the Club
Royalists, on Tuesday last; showing the manner of their engagement, and how the
adverse party fell upon the Parliamenteers, to revenge the blood of the late
KING.

WITH The particulars thereof, and a Narrative of the barbarous Actions that
were then put in execution, by slitting their fingers, the palm of their hands,
and most cruelly wounding them, even from the Crown of the head, (almost) to
the sole of the foot.

ALSO A bloody Fight at Bristol, between the Butchers, and the Lord Lieutenant
Cromwels forces designed for Ireland* the success thereof; and joyful News
from the siege at Dublin, and the King of Scots his Fleet at Kingsale. July 19.

ORdered, That the aforesaid particulars, be printed and published without
interruption or molestation.

London, Printed for R.W. Anno MDCXLIX.

A BLOODY FIGHT IN Hartfordshire on Tuesday night last, between the Parliaments
forces, and the Club Royalist; she win the manner how they fell upon them, and
disarmed them, etc.
SIR,
THe Royalists in these parts begin to kick at Authority, and say, they will
neither yield obedience, nor be subject to the present Authority at
Westminster, but takes upon them the impudence to revile and speak very high
against their present actings and proceedings, to the great dishonor and
prejudice thereof, leaving no means unassayed, that may prove isntrumental to
alienate and withdraw the hearts of the people from their due obedience, as
appears by their late insurrections and co^^^^ions within the town of Royston;
the manner thus:

A party of Commissary General. Iretons Regime^^ (...) foot quartering in the
adjacent Villages, many of the Officers and Sould^ers came to the foresaid town
to receive Recruits, and to beat up the Drum for more Volunteers the
Inhabitants being somewhat troubled thereat, resol^ed to make opposition, and
immediately gathered to a head, which being done, about 150 marched to the
Market place, fell upon the Parliaments party, cut and mangled them
exceedingly, laid many for dead upon the place, broke their Halberts, Arms and
Drums, wounded Captain Steward the Commander in chief, Lieutenant Smith; and
some other; and in a most barbarous and inhumane manner, slit their fingers,
the palm of their hands, cut their wrists, and wounded them even from the Crown
of the head (almost) to the sole of the foot, calling them Rebels and Traitors
for ^^^thering of their King, and saying. That they would make Rogues of them
before they had clode with 'em.

The Conflict being ended, these bloodthirsty Villain^^ departed, leaving some
galant spirits gasping on the ground and their inveteracy was so great, that if
they did but see any of them stir, presently they made at them again with Club;
and other Weapons, vowing to leave not a man of them alive.

But it pleased divine providence, so to work for their deliverance, that upon
the receipt of an allatum, that a party were coming to rescue them, the blood
thirsty Maligoes began to fly, some betaking themse^ves one way, and some
another; so that the well aff^cted of the town hastened to them, and carried
them out of the ^^^^et to the George Inn, where they immediately sent for a
Chyrurgion to stanch the bleeding of their wounds, and to dress their bruised
Sores, which was speedily effectuated, and all sovereign means used for their
recovery; so that (blessed be God) the Captain, and the rest, are in a
reasonable condition, and its hoped, they have undergone the greatest misery of
their present affliction.

Most of the chief Confederates of this horrid Act are escaped and fled; but
its hoped by diligent inquisition after them, they may be taken and brought
bock to taste of the true administration of justice, and made exemplary for the
future to all succeeding Ages.

Royston 18. July, 1649. By Letters from Bristol it is advertized, that the
Inhabitants in those parts show themselves very forward to propagate the Work
in hand, for the relief of bleeding Dublin, the Citizens having also declared a
great willingness to expedite the same, and to accommodate and furnish the
Lord Litutenant with such necessaries, as shall become isntrumental for so
great and faithful a patriot and true a pernage. The Colors of his Lifeguard
are black and white, and in his match not far beyond Windsor, a shepherds boy
espying them, said, perhaps they might be died red enough before they
returned from thence; who being over-hard he was apprehended, and committed to
safe custody.

Letters from the Navy say, that there has lately happened some dispute and
action between the Parliaments Fleet and the Princes near Kingsale, and after
several Volleyes, the Parl, Navigators became Victors, and have taken (as is
said) the Swallow, and the Blackamore Lady, above one hundred prisoners, and
about 30 pieces and Ordnance. It is further said, that the L. Inchiquin has
lost near upon 200 men at the siege of Drogheda.



Bloody News from Dublin in Ireland,
Honored Sir,
ON Sunday morning Past, a party of the (...) Ormonds horse-faced our frontier
Guard^, ^^^ping a great careering near the City Walls, (...) making several
bold attempts within Pistol ^^^t of our Line, ^purs and Scollees, which contin
ue for the space of half at hour; till at the last Capt. Cambray (Commander in
chief of the new Fort) made a falsey out with a party of horse and foot; who
placed the Muschetiers in ^n obscure trench, for an Ambuscado; he himself being
the Coy, for the calling in and ensnating of the adverse p^ but upon his first
advance toward them with his hor^^ (...) found it a Work very full of
difficulty, by reason that they had used the like point of policy: However, he
resolved ^o dis^^^e the place, and thereupon divided his horse (being 6^ in
number into two parties, he himself commanding the one, and C^rnet Jackson the
other; Capt. Cambray char^^^ the Van of the Enemies Forlorn, Cornet Jackson
flank^^ them and upon their first charge exchanged ground, w^^^ the loss of
three then on both sides; but upon their pre^^^t w^eeling, both parties
received each other with a secon^ desperate Onset, who with great courage and
resolution (...) their stations, disputing the place with great gallantry; but
at last our men being overpowred (by their coming on are fresh supply of horse)
were forced to embrace in honorable retreat; the enemy pursued to the very turn
pikes where they were soon welcomed by the sons of Mars, born from the mouth of
the Canon and Musket, at which ^^^ley, 7 of them were forced to yield
obedience, and one man having his head separated from his shoulders by a Dra^e
shot, his right hand man being somewhat startled thereof, immediately replied,
The Div^l's in these Round-(...) (...)^king off heads. Whereupon the enemy soon
deserted engagement, leaving dead and wounded upon the place about (...) of our
party five slain and two wounded.

Since the enemies receipt of the intellige^^^ of the Lord Lieutenant Crammels
designment for this bleeding City, they have somewhat awakened us with stronger
allarms, and (as we hear) have entered into Protestation, to live and (...) and
fall together and to fight it out to the last (...) and that upon receipt of
the foresaid intelligence, (...) called a Council of Officers, at the head
quarters near ^ing^^^, the result was, whether they should prepare for (...)
before his Lordship^ ^^^^ing, or whether they should ^gi^ the City, streighten
other Gar^isons, take in what they could and then randezvouz and draw into a
Body, and (...) him battle at his landing; Upon mature deliberation there^n,
it was unanimosly declared by most of that Popish and Prelaticall faction, That
if he set footing there they world sigh then, in the mean time they would use
their ^just ^^^^^vours for the reducing of those Garrisons which the Parliament
had in possession.

But the thing that our Soldiery are most doubtful and dubious of, is that
they fear the enemy will not give them a field upon the addition all forces
landing, but that they will rather betake themselves to the Bogs and Woods.

And although we cannot but represent ourselves in a ^^ry sad condition without
timely relief (...) yet (...) exceedingly rejoice at the gallantry of (...)
Col. (...); our Governor, under such a state, in his (...) on ^o the Lord
Inchiquin, the sum whereof to (...).

My Lord, As for that conference by your Lordship^ ^ow propounded and desired,
it cannot be in (...) espacially in matters of this consequence, and in times
(...) such debatings must needs be dangerous, as being subject (...) whatsoever
constructions and misconstructions also. But (...) well am I satisfied in the
justice of my cause (where^ the Lords blessing has dwelt visibly, as I trust
it does (...) I am fixed to my just principles, whence by letters and
d^^courses I am not to be removed; and I wish heartily your Lordship had done
so likewise.

Your Sword has been (I confess) prosperous, bu^ remember, my Lord, the cause
in which you then appr^ the same with this now by where maintained, against
th^^^ bloody Rebels.

But now is your Lordship with them most unhappily joined, to the admiration of
those who formerly knew your Lordships professions, etc.

Our Governor is very vigilant, and resolved not to surrender upon any
conditions. By the next I shall impart my self more fully.

Dublin 14. July, 1649. By an Express from Bristoll it is further advertized,
th^^ a little before the arrival of the Lord Lieutenant Crom^^^^ some
differences arose between the Butchers, and a party (...) the Parliaments
forces designed for Ireland; the man^^^ thus: A great Company of Butchers
having appoint^^ (...) meeting at the Red Lion in the high street, to make
merry in the midst thereof, they began to drink healths to Ch^r^^^ the
second, and the Marq. of Ormond; and being over hear^ by some soldiers which
were in the house, they soon ^cquainted others therewith, and coming to the
door demanded entrance; but being denied, forced their passage in, the
Buthchers received them, disputed the place, and after a shart Conflict, timely
assistance coming in, the business was appeased, with the loss of two men,
and some few wounde^.



FINIS.

