THere is now in the Press, a GEOGRAPHICAL DESCRIPTION of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND,
and IRELAND, with the Isles thereto belonging: which in a compendious Method
treats of such things that are most necessary to be known, and as yet has
not been treated of by any Author. And for the further Utility and Adornment
thereof, shall be added a MAPP and TABLE to every County of England; besides
several general Ones. Which said Volumn, for the convenience of Portage, shall
be Printed in a small-siezed Folio, and finished with all possible speed.

And for the better satisfying of all such that have a desire to be concerned
in the said Work, it is thought convenient to give an Account as to the Method
thereof, which in brief is as follows:

The first Enterprise shall be to give (in a compendious Method) a Description
of the Kingdoms in general, as to their Situation, Clime, Temperature of Air,
Extent, Division, Fertility, Provisions, Commodities, Manufactures, and Trade;
also of their Inhabitants both Ancient, and Modern; their Laws, Customs,
Government, both Civil and Spiritual, the Courts of Judicature, the Precedence
and Degrees of Honor, etc.

And having thus run over these, and the like general Heads; the next attempt
will be to take a particular Survey of each County in the Kingdoms of his
Majesty's Dominions; and therein to give an Account as to their Situation with
other Counties, their Extent, Fertility, what Commodities and Manufactures they
produce; their chief Rivers, Hills, and Towns, especially those that have
Emunities granted unto them; as Cities, Boroughs, or Towns Corporate; as also,
of such as have the Convenience of Markets, and Fairs: with other Things of
Remark both Ancient and Modern: which Geographically shall be treated of.

And for effecting the same, an Abstract is first made from all approved
Authors yet extant, that have Writ of the same Subject, as well those in
general, as those of particular Counties; besides the Assistance of several
Manuscripts: Which said Abstracts so taken, (being digested into a Geographical
Method) are (and shall be) supervised by those that are known in the said
Parts, and accordingly enlarged, or rectified as occasion requires. And for
the better perfecting the said Work, an account of the Nobility, and Gentry
that each County is Ennobled with (especially so as Friends to the said Work)
as to their Names, Titles, and Seats shall be given: Which for the avoiding of
Exceptions, shall be placed Alphabetically; and besides which, all those that
are Subscribers, shall have their Coats of Arms affixed to the Mapp, or Mapps
of the County or Counties, by them made choice of, (so as allowed of by the
Kings of Arms) in a Border encirculing the same, to remain to future Ages. A
Work very necessary, and useful for all Men; wherefore these Proposals are
humbly tendered by me Richard Blome, Lodging at Mr. Kids, at the Corner of
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, near New Market.

THE PROPOSALS.
1. THose that will be pleased for the Advancement of the said Work, to
Subscribe, and pay unto the said Richard Blome the sum of 20 Shillings, shall
have one of the said Books presented them, in which they shall have their Coat
of Arms (so as allowed of by the Kings at Arms) affixed to the Map of the
County to which they are related unto, and by them made choice of, as Friends
to the said Work; 10 Shillings to be paid down toward the Charges thereof, and
Allowance of the said Coat of Arms; and the remaining 10 Shillings to be paid
upon the delivery of one of the said Books as aforesaid. But if mentioned in
more then one County, then 5 Shillings more for every other County they are so
mentioned in.

2. Those that for the Advancement of the said Work, will Subscribe, or procure
Subscriptions for six of the said Books as aforesaid, shall for their
Encouragement, upon the performance of the said Subscriptions, have one of the
said Books presented them gratis.

And that none may take Exceptions, if omitted in the said Work, as having no
notice thereof, this Divulgement is deemed fitting: Wherefore all those that
will be pleased to be mentioned in the said Work, are desired to bring, or send
Directions, or give timely notice thereof unto the said Mr. Blome, for the
doing the same as aforesaid; the said Volumn being intended without fail, to be
finished by Michaelmas Term, 1671.

In Consideration of the Premises aforesaid: I do promise, and engage to take,
and receive of the said Richard Blome, or his Assigns, one of the said Books,
according to the said Proposition, and to be mentioned accordingly in the
County, or Counties of (...)

Witness my Hand this (...) day of (...) Anno Dom. 1671.

