Bloody News from Dover.

BEING A True RELATION OF The great and bloody Murder, committed by Mary
Champion (an Anabaptist) who cut off her Child's head, being 7. weeks old, and
held it to her husband to baptize. Also another great murder committed in the
North, by a Scottish Commander, for which Fact he was executed.

Mary Champion holding her child's bloody head out to her husband Presbyterian

Anabaptist



Printed in the Year of Discovery, Feb. 13. 1647, 1646

BLOODY NEWS FROM KENT
AMongst the innumerous bloody acts, and desperate Designs which has bin
committed in this sinful Land, the like has seldom been seen or heard of,
which this ensuing Relation has here to unfold, being a most sad and
much-lamented story, of the late bloody murder committed at DOVER, within the
County of Kent; which I shall briefly recite: But (by reason of diversity of
Opinions, which are now held and maintained by too many sorts of people within
this Kingdom) I shall desire to spend some few lines of former Examples, by
instancing some inhumane acts, much reflecting upon this doleful story, viz.

In the beginning of the Reign of our Royal Sovereign, King Charles, there
happened near P^ntefract is Yorkshire, a great and bloody murder, upon a
little Boy about four years of age, committed by its own Parents.

For near the aforesaid Town, there lived a man and his wife, who were of two
several Religion, and having a ltitle son of some years of maturity, the
goodman (being a Protestant) desired to have him put to School, and to be
brought up in the Protestant Profossion: but his wife denved the same, saying,
she would havee hrm brought no in the Catholic Faith, or else he should be of
no Religion at all, which (indeed) fell out so: For, this bloody woman watching
her opportunity, murdered the Boy; but was afterward apprehended, and suffered
death for her bloody Fact.

Diverse other examples might be instanced, but I will no longer detract time,
and therefore proceed to the ensuing story, which we are now to treat upon.

At the samous town of Dover, within the county of Kent, it so fell out, that
one John Champian, an honest Tradesmad, having mairyed a wife from Feversham,
and living some certain years at Dover, his place of habitation, it pleased God
to send them tissue, and being delivered of a Child, after some few days
expired, her husband desired to have it Christened (according the ancient
Custom of the Kingdom) but she would by no means condescend to it, which
much perplexed her husband.

But six or seven weeks being past and gone, this wicked minded woman took
her opportunity; and on a day when her husband was abroad, took a great knife
and cut off the Child's head.

And when her husband came in, she called him into a little Parlour, where the
poor Infant lay bleeding, uttering these words.

Behold husband, thy sweet Babe without a head. now go and baptize it, if you
will, you must christen the head without a body: for here they lie separated.

At the 2ight of which, her husband were astonished, saying.

O thou bloody and inhumane wretch, what haste thou done.

Whereupon, some of the Neighbors hearing him immediately came in, and seeing
this foul misdeed, sent for the Offieers of the Town, where she was
apprehended, and forth with sent to prison, there to remain until the next
Assize, where by justice she must be tried according to the Laws of this
Realm. Many woeful expressions are heard to proceed from her, being very
penitent for her unhappy Crime, her Conscience being much troubled, and her
eyes sad and distracted, by beholding such strange Visions.

For, she can no ways fix her eyes upon any thing, but presently (she
conceives) the poor Bubo to appear before her without a head.

Thus may we see, that where division and cootrover sie does arise, sad effects
will suddenly follow: for no sooner can there a breach appea; but presently
Satan is ready to stop it up, by infusing his deluding spirit into their
hearts, for the increasing of variance, discord, and contention, and when once
it has taken possession, it is a hard matter to remove it, but stall lies
open to the deluding snate of the Devil, being ready to Be entrapped upon any
occasion.

And it is apparent, that when once the foot is in, the whole body will
endeavor to creep in after; and where the least clause of reproach, there will
immediately arise a strong argument, for the final confuting of it; even so is
it now, there being one breach laid open to the public view; a great Crime I
confess) yet not so great as to have a generass Gensure, for one particular
person; for, the best may do amiss, and the greatest Professor (sometimes)
that lives, may commit high mildemeanours, contrary to his Profession; for, is
it not apparent, and probable, that there is knaves of all trades.

Another Relation of the late Murder committed in the North, upon the Scots
advance from Newcastle.
UPon the Scots advance from Neweastle toward their own Country, one of the
Scots Officers killed a woman, for which he were apprehended, and at a Council
of War condemned to dye. For, so full of Power and Justice, are the Scottish
Commanders, that they do not only carry the Sword in one hand, but Justice
likewise in the other.

These, and such like Heretical Actions might be a great menes to move the
honorable houses of Parliament, to proceed on in a Parliamentary way, for the
putting down of all Sectaries whatsoever; and thersore thought fit to insist
upon this ensuing Order, viz. Ordered, that the Ordinance for observing the
Tenth Day of March next, a Day of Humiliation against spreading of Heresies and
Schisms, was ordered to be carried down into the respective Counties of this
Kingdom by the Sheriffs, and that it be published by the Ministers of every
Parish, within the respective Counties of this Kingdom, and Dominion of Wales
in their Church or Chapels.

It was ordered that M. Hodges be defired to preach before the Commons the next
Fast Day, in stead of Mr. Calamy who desired to be excused.

FINIS.

