A BLOODY FIGHT AT BALRVD-DERRY IN IRELAND: WHERE Sir Henry Titchburne was shot
in the belly, his Son slain, Colonel Trevor, and diverse Officers and
Gentlemen killed, others taken Prisoners.

Many of the Rebels slain.

THE Garrison of TRIM relieved, and the Rebels pursued by Colonel Jones, with
2 Demi-culverins, five field pieces, and 7000 Horse and Foot.

Aug: 10th Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson. 1647.

A Bloody fight at Balrud-Derry in Ireland, Sir Henry Titchburne shot in the
belly, his Son slain, Collonell Trevor, and diverse Officers and Gentlemen
killed, others taken prisoners, Many of the Rebels, slain.
Right Honorable,
SInce our last from hence, we have had much business and wearied daily with
several employments of which here is a brief account.

On Thursday the as of July 1647 Colonel Sir Henry Titchburne marched out
toward Drogheda, and with him rid his Son, and diverse Gollonels, Maions, and
Gentlemen of note, about forty is number all Officers, and others of very good
quallity. And in their march they were, surprised by a party of the Rebels
Horse, passing ^ere ^alrud ^erry, three of the Irish Troops fell upon them on
a sudden our men were all well mounted, but were beset on every side by the
Enomy.

Yet Sir Nonry Titchburne with the roast) rid up to them, who charged in the
Rear, where though our Officers were over powered, yet they fought most
stoutly, and slew diverse of the Rebels, the fight being exceeding violent on
both sides.

Sir Henry Titchburne got away, by breaking through them, but was shot with a
brace of bullets, but (God be praised the wound is not motal, only one of the
bullets grased side-long nere his belly) we doubt not but the wound will be
healed in short time.

There was not a man amongst the Officers and Gentlemen that were with him but
fought bravely, and all those which are escaped are every man of them sorely
wounded.

Sir Henry Titchburnes Son a very hopeful young Gentleman, (and one much
lamented) was there slain in the encounter and also Lieutenant Colonel Trevor
of Carlingford, with some others for whose deaths here is much sadness, both
in the City and Country.

Major Gore fought bravely, and is hurt by the Rebels, but fought still so long
as he was able, but being over powered, the Rebels took him prisoner.

Major Gibson fell on the Rebels like a Lion, killing and wounding many of
them, and he is missing but whither he be slain, or taken prisoner by the
Rebles we do not yet certainly know, we have yet no account that he is a
live, diverse others are slain, and many they took prisoners.

It was Gods exceeding great mercy (to us) that these Gentlemen were not cut
off, every one of them, by those blood-thirsty Villanes, who hunt after the
Protestants lives; And they had (at this time) a very great advantage upon
these Gentlemen, both by their over pouring their number so numerously, and
also in regard of the place where they had so hemmed them in that there was no
escaping from them, but by flying through.

On the same day all the Horse and Foot were mustered at a general Rendezvous
the place where they not was on St. Stephens Green, to which they were ordered
by the Commissioners directions, and the command of Colonel Jones, the
Goverour of Dublin, and the Council of War, upon those Orders, that so the
whole body might be viewed before they marched abroad toward the Enemies
quarters.

At this Randezvouz there appeared upon Muster above 4000 horse and Foot, and
good Equipage, and the Soldiers very resolut^.

After the army was mustered, and returned home into the City, (which was
before the Market was over, it being Market Day) the English Soldiers begun at
the end of the Town to plunder some Market people, where they had some little
opposition, but to little purpose, for they carried away what they laid hands
on, and coming up into the City, they plundered all the Market before them,
which caused the Market people to run with their wares, some into shops, others
into houses (as many as could) to secure their goods, hoping that would do it,
and I believe there were diverse that did save much of their ware so.

But the Soldiers (being grown into this disorder) and the City hereby in an
hubbub, they stayed not here, but plundered many shops also, and some houses,
though their Officers used what means they could to appease them, which they
were not able to do for some hours.

In this their plundering, they made no distinctions, of persons where they
came, no difference betwixt English and Irish, Protestants and Papists, all was
alike to them, and all fared alike when they were entered upon their booty.

They also brake into the Excise House where the Crmmissioners were sitting,
and there took what moneys they found. And (being not satisfied with that, and
something provoked by the Gentlemen who were loath to part with the moneys upon
those terms) they seized on the Impost-Masters themselves, and strip them, and
took from them not only the moneys in their pockets, but their cloakes from
their backs, their Hats from their heads, their Shoes from their feet, and
their Rings from their fingers, and they also took from them their watches,
and whatsoever else they found about them that was of value or use for them.

So that what with the Enemy abroad and the Soldiers at home, Your Lordships
may judge in what a most sad condition we are in here in this City.

On Friday July 30 1647. (The Governor having the night before appeased these
mutinies as well as he could, in which he deported himself with great
discretion, and gallently) There were preparations made for the Army to march
out into the field to relieve the besieged Garrison, And force the Enemy to a
further distance from this place, Onders went out for carriages, and other
necessaries, and instructions for the march.

On Saturday, July 31. we were very busy in setting forward our Army, and all
things were appointed to be in a readiness to march the next morning against
the (...). The Lord preferred this (...), and grant that they may return
victorious, which with Gods assistance I make no doubt of. Preston, we hear
had threatened the Garrisons of Trim and Maynoth, that if they would not
surre^der, he would (...) them, and put all to the s^ord (...) they are
iresolute within, in (...) of relief from hence, to which these Soldiers have
showed a very great willingness^.

On the Lords day, August 1. instan^, our Army set for^ard from herce upon
their march. They took forth with them 2. demi-culverins, and 5. Field-
pieces, with carriages, powder, bullet, match, and other (...) and necessaries
to encounter wi^h the ^^^my, and they marched toward Drogheda.

Sir Henry Tichburne (who God be thanked is pretty well of his hurt) with his
men, Col. Coot with his and also the Scots, were all appointed to join with
our Army: and we received le^te^s that day of their advance toward us.

On Monday, August 2. a Post was dispatched from hence to Col. Jones, upon
advertisements from London. That day we had Alarms from the Rebels, who made
approaches with their horses so near us, that they took away some of our
cattle.

On Tuesday, August 3. the enemies were so bold, that they marched up to our
very trenches, and that day, and the day before, took away about 300. fair
English milch Cowes.

We have 3. Troops left here to guard the City, viz. the Lord Lamberts, Sir
John Hoges, and Capt. Cressies, which hardly consist of 80. horse.

This present Wednesday, Aug. 4. about 9. of the clock, there was an alarm at
the end of the New street, where they took away our Cowes, and killed
Lie^^^nant Bond, who sallied out to relieve them.

This morning our Army met with 2000 Foot, and 600 Horse, which came from the
North to join with ours, according to the former Instructions: and the^ the
whole Army joined, consisting of about 7000 Horse and foot, who marched toward
the enemy, and forced Preston to raise the siege from Trim, from whence he is
^led, and Col. Jones having relieved Trim and Maynoth, ^ntends to try if the
enemy will fight him. God give a good issue. So prays

Your Lordships humble Servant.
Dublin Aug. 4. 1647.
FINIS.

