A MODERATE ANSWER To these two QVESTIONS 1. Whether there be sufficient Ground
in Scripture to warrant the Conscience of a Christian to present his Infants to
the Sacrament of Baptism. 2. Whether it be not sinful for a Christian to
receiv the Sacrament in a mixed Assembly.


Prepared for the Resolution of a Friend, And now Presented to the public view
of all, for the satisfaction of them who desire to walk in the Ancient and
long-approved way of Truth and Holiness.

By T.B. B.D.

EPHESIANS. 4. VER. 1.2.3. I therefore, the Prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that ye
walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith ye are called: with all LOWLINES and
MEEKNES, with long-suffering, forbearing one another in LOVE, endeavoring to
keep the UNITY of the Spirit, in the Bond of PEACE. LONDON, Printed by I.N. for
Abel Roper, at the sign of the Sun over against S. Dunstans Church in
Fleet Street, 1645.

YOu desire mine opinion touching these two Questions.

1. Whether there be sufficient Ground in the Scripture to warrant the
conscience of a Christian to present his Infants to the Sacrament of Baptism,
with an expectation of Benefit that may accrue unto them by it?

2 Whether it be not sinful for a Christian to receive the Sacrament in a mixed
Assembly? I shall endeavor to give Answer to them both for the satisfying of
your conscience. So that you turn not Conscience into Will: and Judgment into
Affection. The meek (yea only the meek) will the Lord guide in judgment, and
teach his w^y. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, he will show
them his Covenant, Psalm. 25.

The Answer to the first Question.
AS for the first, I answer affirmatively: There is sufficient Ground in that
Scripture to warrant the conscience of a Christian to present his Infants to
the Sacrament of Baptism, with an expectation of Benefit that may accrue unto
them by it: wherein I observe two particulars. 1. Whether the Parent so doing
may be excused from sinning through an unwarrantable use and Application of
Gods Ordinance? 2. Whether he may in the use thereof expect any Benefit
accrewing to the Infant? These two are different in their own Nature, and
require either of them several Grounds of Satisfaction. For tho, if it be
sinful for the Parent to bring his Infants to Baptism, he can expect no good
for them by it: In as much as no man may expect good to come from what is
evil: yet tho it be not sinful in the Parent, it will not follow that Good
may be expected by it: But I hold the Affirmative part of Both to be the Truth
of God.

The first Argument.
This I build upon the words of our blessed Savior in Mat. 19.14. Suffer
little children, and forbid them not to come unto me -- Children. The children
here m^ntioned were Infants, such as men do hold in their arms: The text says
(...), that He took them up in his arms, etc. Where we see that our Savior was
highly displeased with his Disciples, who had rebuked the Parents for bringing
their children to Christ. Hence I argue Christ's justification of what is done
does presuppose the lawfulness of the thing. It was (therefore) lawful for the
Parents to bring their children to Christ to receiv his Blessing if lawful for
them, so also for others, for all. Consequently even for us there is a
sufficient warrant to present our Infants to Christ, that they may receiv his
blessing. You will reply: That, tho it be lawful to present Infants to Christ
to receiv his blessing, yet not (therefore) lawful to present them to Baptism:
I admit your reply but rejoin thus. If lawful to present them to Christ for
his blessing: Then lawful to present them to him in his Ordinances in which
that blessing is to be expected. This I suppose will stand good: That whosoever
might be welcome to Christ in his person, were he here upon earth may be
admitted to his Ordinances in which he is present by the power of his Spirit.
For who doubts but that he has set up his Ordinances in the Church for this
end; that in them he might meet those of his who desire to draw near unto Him:
and by these Ordinances as by a Mean appointed for that end convey to them that
Blessing and Grace, which were he present with us in the flesh, he would bestow
upon them. This being laid down for a Ground: I build upon it thus: but there is
none other of Christ's Ordinances, in which, and by which a Christian can
present his Infants to Christ, with expectation of his Blessing excepting this
of Baptism: Consequently, either by Baptism they may be presented to Christ for
his blessing, or not at all: If not at all: Either Christ's presence in his
Ordinances is not equivalent to his Corporal presence, or some prohibition
has in a special manner put in a Bar to keep them off from his Ordinances
which did not keep them of from him when here upon earth: If any such there be,
let it be named: if not: Then is there a sufficient ground to warrant the
Parents bringing their children to Christ in his Ordinances, and particularly
in Baptism, that ther-in they may expect the Benefit of Christ's Benediction.

I know what has been objected: viz. That there is a Bar to hinder Infants
employed in these texts: Math. 28.19. Mar. 16.16. Act. 8.36. from whence this
Argument is framed: without Faith none may be baptized: Infants want Faith, and
(therefore) They may not be baptized: And then, To what purpose should they be
presented to that Sacrament. To which I answer: That granting the Assumption to
be true, (tho if a man deny it as some do, Vide Greg. Decretal lib. 3. cap. 3.
De Baptismo and ejus effectu, I see not how it can be proved): But I say, let
it be granted that Infants have not Faith: The Proposition is utterly falls:
viz. That without Faith none may be baptized: For neither do the texts prove
it; and besides, there is good reason against it.

1. The texts prove it not: 1. Not Mat. 28.19. This indeed shows what the
Ministry must do: Not what the People: The Ministry, must teach all Nations;
But defines nothing, whether they may not be baptized before they have
learned, or before they do beleev: much less does it say, None but believers
may be baptized. 2. Nor Mar. 16. This text shows, what is the issue of
Believing, and b^ing Baptized, viz. That such shall be saved: and contrarily,
He that believes not shall be damned: But says not, That none may be baptized
who believes not. Ob. But the Order of the Words does infer it. Believing set
before Baptising: Sol. I reply: That Doctrines collected from the order of
words are not always sound, nor such Arguments conclusive: Ex. gr. Mat. 3.6.
they were baptized, confessing their sins. And Joh. 3.5. Born again of water,
and of the Spirit: Here is Baptized before Confessing: and Water before Spirit:
yet doubtless they did confess their sins before they were baptized: And who
knows not, that the Spirit does sometime prevent the Water of Baptism. 3. Nor
yet Act. 8.36. This indeed proves the affirmative, viz. That He who believes
may be b^ptised. But from thence to conclude the Negative, That He who
believes not, may not be baptized, is against all Rules of reasoning: which
will yet more plainly appear by this: Philip says, If thou believe with thy
whole heart, thou may; Will any man thence conclude, That whosoever believes not
with his whole heart, may not be baptized? And so take liberty to bar all
such as presenting themselves, and professing their faith, may yet perhaps
justly be suspected of Fiction and Dissimulation? You see then, the texts do
not prove the Proposition. Nay, suppose that not by inference, but in direct
terms, some of these texts should say, He that believes not, shall not be
baptized: ought we not to understand it as true only in those persons of whom
the text speaks? viz. Of them that have been taught, and yet do frowardly
refuse, and profess a dislike and misbeleef of what has been taught them? And
so it will be too weak an Argument, to prove that universal Proposition, and
much less to draw on the desired conclusion, Without faith none may be
baptized, None, Ergo, Not Infants: ex. gr. That text of Mark says: He that
believes not shall be damned, q. d. Without Faith none shall be saved: Will
any man understand this in that Universality as to include Infants? Will he
assume Infants believe not, have no faith. (therefore) They shall not be saved?
God forbid: The Proposition has it is latitude of Truth, beyond which it may
not be extended. So then, these texts do show what is required of the Apostles
and their successors: What of the Nations and Heads of the Families in the
Nations, persons that are Sui juris, not under the command of another: But
determines nothing of inferiors, and much less concludes against Infants
Baptism.

2. Good reason against it. For why? First, a profession of Faith is enough to
entitle men to Baptism: Tho there be no soundness and sincerity in the heart at
all: Witness the admission of Simon Magus. True indeed, except there be
soundnes in the heart, God may justly deny man the Benefit which otherwise he
might expect. But, if he make profession to b^leeve in Christ, who shall dare
to d^ny him the Sacrament. 2. That which is presupposed to assert the
necessity of Fait^: (understanding it of the grace it self, is doubtful, viz.
That without Faith no man has wher^with-all to r^ceiv the Benefit of Baptism.
This I say may well be doubted, if not denied: especially if we intend to
comprehend Infants and little child^en: They have a passive capacity, which is
enough to receive that Grace and Benefit which we conceiv is reached forth to
them in that Sacrament: And what is that? Not s ch a fullness of Grace, or the
Habits ther-of, as may be expected by them who have formerly been prepared by
the Discipline and information of the Word: But rather initiall and seminall
Grace, that seed of God, wher-of the Scripture speaks, Pet. 1.23. 1 John 3.9.
The which does not presuppose Grace in the Heart, but is it self the seed and
root of Faith, and all other actual Graces whatsoever. To men and women
converted by the Word, and then coming to Baptism, viz. To Crispus, Cornelius,
Lydia etc. we beleev that Baptism does (as to Abraham Circumcision did) convey
a super-addition of further Grace to what they had formerly received in and by
the Word: But to their children, Baptism conveyeth (as did Circumcision to
Jsaac) the beginning and first seeds of Grace; And consequently calls for no
previous dispositions and preparations in the Recipient: only a passive
capacity not cross-barred with obstinacy and infidelity. It is the property of
preventing Grace, to be the first mover in the Heart, and to make way for it is
own Reception: Is this acknowledged to be done in the ministry of the Word upon
the Parents (as it is said of Cornelius and Lydia) and shall it seem
unreasonable to grant it to be done by this first Sacrament in their children?
For why? Did we conceiv the Spirit (who is the chief Agent and efficient
working in and by the ministry of the Word and Sacraments, and without whose
operation and assistance, they are but as empty vess^ls and edgless tools) the
Spirit I say did we conceiv him working only as a moral Agent, to stand at the
door and knock, as only ready and willing to enter if the door be opened; to
proffer Grace, if man will receiv it; Then were it reason indeed to require
Faith in Children no less than in their Parents: But it is not so: We conceiv
him in the Baptising of Infants working as a Natural or rather as a
super-naturall Agent, viz. opening the door and entering, putting Grace in the
Heart, and working it in the Will, conferring upon them such a Grace as for the
present they are capable of, viz. initiall, and seminall, as before was said.

Add this also: That in the Baptising of Infants, there is not Baptism
altogether without Faith. There is presupposed the Faith of the Parent; And this
suffices to qualify the Infant for Baptism, yea, for the Grace and Benefit of
that Sacrament. What is the Benefit of Baptism? Is it not Remission of sin and
spiritual Regeneration? To the obtaining of which, why may not the Faith of
the Parent suffice? In the child, as yet corruption of Nature which he brought
into the world is not active: it has produced neither thoughts, words, nor
deeds against the law: and therefore calls for no personal Act of Grace to
remove the Guilt ther-of. Guilty he is and polluted, but guilty only by
i^putation, and polluted, not by any consent of his own, but by the act of
another, viz. of his Parents Quanto magis prohiberi non d^het infans, qui
recens natus nihil peccavit, nisi quod s^cundum Adam carnaliter natus: qui
adr^m^ssam peccatorum accipiendam hoc ipso saciliis, acced t, quod illi
remittuntur non propria, sid aliena peccata. Cyprian. Epla. 59.
: Is it any wonder that the imputation of another faith, should procure for
him Remission and removal of that which comes by the imputation of another
act? That as he sinned in another, so he may be said to beleev in another? Here
is then the equity of Gods proceedings; that what Malady and mischief was
contracted without his will, shall be cured and remedyed without him, and any
act of his: It is by the ordinance and institution of God that the guilt of
Adams transgression is imputed to the Infant, and the Corruption of Nature
propagated: And it is by the Ordinance of God, that the Guilt of that sin is
remitted, and a Remedy against that Native disease provided: and both these are
done in and upon the Infant, without any concurrence of his own will. And as by
the act of the Parents, corruption of Nature is propagated (their act it is,
tho not voluntary in them) So by the act of the Parents (in this it is a
voluntary act) by Faith laying hold upon the Promise of God in that Sacrament
is obtained for the Infant, and bestowed upon him the Grace of Regeneration:
This to be the root and spring of future holiness and righteousness, as the other
was the root and spaun of wickedness and profaness. Ob. It is said, That every
man must live by his own faith, not by another. Sol. By his faith, indeed it
is said that the just shall live, Hab. 2.4. It is not said, Not by another,
this is not in the text of the Prophet; Nor does the text speak simply of the
Benefit it self gained by Faith, but of the Pre-assurance ther-of: No
pre-assurance of Salvation but by Faith: But this does not prove, That by his
faith the Parent may not obtain for his child this benefit of Baptism, the
Remedy for that Malady. We read in the Gospel, That the woman of Canaan
obtained mercy for her daughter: The man for his lunatic son, the Centurion
for his servant, the friends and neighbors for the Palsiesick man. Which
instances have been alleged by Divines to manifest this point in hand, viz. The
Benefit of Baptism obtained for the child by the Faith of the Parents. Bernard
Se^m. 66. in Cantica. Ecbertus contra Cathacos, Sermon. 7. Remigius on Mat.
15.21. Calvin: Harmon on Mat. 9.
That note of Remigius is worth the noting. She says not, Help my daughter,
but help me, and have mercy on me: and so Mar. 9.21. The father of the Lunatic
says, If thou can do any thing have compassion on us, and help us. He puts
himself in as a Co-partner of his child's misery, Say the same here. It is a
mercy to the Father that he can prevail for his child; who if he do rightly
understand himself suffers in his child: yea, not only by the way of
compassion, but as feeling the smart and punishment of himself: And therefore
has need to sue unto God for the Removing of that punishm^nt which lies upon
himself, in his child. Yea, he has this reason to ch^llenge it at the hand of
God by the prayer of Faith, that so he may obtain the fulness of the Promise
made to the faithful in the Covenant of Grace. Infants are part of their
Parents; So that the promise of Grace mentioned in the Covenant betwixt God and
the Faithful. Genesis 17. is not ratified to the whole Parent, except also it do
extend to his Infants. So then, it is the Faith of the Parent laying hold on
the Promise which qualifieth his Infant for the Grace and good effect of
Baptism.

Nay yet more: This text on which the Argument was grounded, Mat. 19. comes
yet nearer to the point; For first, the blessing of Christ which the Parents
sought and found for their children, was not terminated in an external and
corporal Benefit, as per-adventure it might be replied touching those former
Instances: Doubtless the Blessing of Christ extended to the good of their
souls; and yet procured by the Faith of the Parents without any concurrence of
Faith in the Infants. I will not per-emptorily affirm it: But probable enough
it is, that these Parents having been by John's Baptism directed to Christ, when
they knew him, brought their children to Him to receiv a further blessing from
him, even that which John told them he could not give, but they must expect it
from another, even from Christ. Next it may be worth the noting: That our
Savior says, Suffer little children to come unto me. To come, not, To be
brought; The act of the Parent is reputed the act of the child: That none may
deride the saying of the Ancient, Credit in alio sicut peccavit in alio, He
believes and comes to Christ in and by his Parent, as formerly he had sinned
in the loins of another.

Corollary: To conclude this first Argument, Since by that text of our Blessed
Savior, we have ground to believ, That Infants presented to him are accepted;
Since, what persons might be brought to him, may be presented to his Ordinance;
There being no bar put in by any word of Christ to keep them of. Nay more,
Since the Faith of the Parent does lay hold upon the promise of Grace not only
for himself, but for his Infants; yea there is ground to believ the imputation
of the Parents faith to the Infant; I conclude there is sufficient ground in
Scripture to warrant Parents to present their Infants to this Ordinance, and
that with expectation to obtain the Grace and Benefit of the same.

The second Argument.
THis I ground upon the words of our Savior, Mat. 28.0. A charge given to the
Apostles to instruct the Nations, whom they should convert to the Faith, to
instruct them (I say) in the observation of all such Ordinances as Christ had
commended to them. This Observation enjoined has special reference to matters
of Discipline for the right Ordering and Government of the Churches and
Assemblies of Christians: in which he instructed his Apostles no less than in
matters of Faith and Doctrine, as it is evident out of Act. 1.2. where is
mention made of some Commandments which Christ gave to his Apostles touching
things pertaining to the kingdom of God. And it is no less evident by some
passages in the New Testament, ex: gr. Cor. 11.2. 2 These. 2.15. and 2 Timothy 2.2.
that some things were delivered to the Churches, and particularly to the
Ministers ther-of which were not then committed to writing, but delivered from
Hand to Hand, called therefore Traditions. These were not matters of Doctrine,
especially not Articles of Faith (None such do we acknowledge but what are
delivered and set down in the writings of the Holy Apostles and Evangelists)
But matters of Discipline, and Rules of good order in the Church. These
Ordinances set up and practiced by th'appointment of the Apostles, are
equivalent in Authority to what Christ himself has immediately ordained. Hence
that of St. Paul, Cor. 14.37. Consequently a Ground on which Conscience may
build, and thereby may assure it self that ther-in it does not sin against God.
Of the which we cannot doubt, if reading that of Cor. 11.16. we note what is
the Question, and what is the Resolution. The Question is, Whether it were
indifferent for men and women to be covered or not covered in the
Church Assemblies as they listed: St. Paul says No, it is not: but the Men
must do so, and the Women so: Now says he, If any man be contentious q: d: if
he will presumptuously contend against all reason that the thing is
indifferent, and so he may in this use his own liberty: What then* why says
he, We have no such Custom, nor the Churches of God: q: d: The Custom of the
Church which is established must overruled men's froward fancies, and stand for a
law to quiet the conscience of him that is willing to be satisfied. So then the
Customs of the Church ordained by the Apostles are a Ground of satisfaction.
Nor are they therefore in themselves less authentical, because they are not
mentioned in the text of Scripture, as prescribed by the Apostles, if yet it
may appear that from them they fetch their first Original. It is not the
writing that gives things their Authority, See Hooker: Ecclesiastical Polity,
lib. 1 sect. 14. page 44. Field on the Church, lib. 4.20.
but the worth and credit of Him that delivers them, tho but by word and
lively voice only. More certainty to usward things have by writing, but not
more Authority in themselves, ex: gr. That saying of our Savior not mentioned
by the Evangelists, yet now known to be his by the Allegation of St. Paul, Act.
20.35. That Proph^cy of Enoch, Jude 14. These in themselves were no^ less
authentic truths before, than after those allegations, So for Apostolical
Customs: Those mentioned in the Scripture have a more unquestioned Certainty
than Traditions, but not greater Authority. Neither is this to set up
Tradition (as do the Papists) to the prejudice of the Scripture; Because we
admit none for Apostolical, which either are contrary to the Scripture, or
which may not by good reason from some text of Scripture be confirmed for
Apostolical. You see whither all this tends, viz. To make way for this
Assumption: That if the Baptizing of Infants may reasonably be judged one of
those Apostolical Traditions, one of these Church-Customs, which were
established in the Churches according to the commandment of Christ: Then is
there sufficient Ground in Scripture to warrant the use and practice of it. And
tho there be no mention of it in the text of Scripture: yet if it may appear to
have been ordained by The Apostles, and used by the Churches even from the days
of the Apostles, why should it not be acknowledged to be the commandment of
Christ, and so a Ground for Conscience to build upon. Well: But (you will say)
how may it appear to have been a custom of the Churches ordained by the
Apostles? Here it may be worth our Observation: That the pattern and president
from whence most (if not all) of them was taken, was the custom of Israel in
the Old Testament: It is the observation of Jerome. Ut sciamus traditiones
Apostolicas sumptas ex veteri Te^^amento; Quod A^ron and fi^^ ejus atque,
Levit^e in Templo ^^crunt, hoc sibi Episcopi Presbyteri, atque Diaconi
vend^^ant in Ecclia -- Hieron -- Epla. 85. ad Evagrium.
And this may be one special reason, why the Providence of God did not take so
much care for the writing of every Custom and Ordinance for the Government of
the Church Assemblies in the New Testament; Because as there was not so much
danger of Corruption in them as in points of Doctrine: So the President from
whence they were take being at hand, if any aberration did creep in, it might
easily be amended by reducing it to the pattern. Yea, and who can tell, whether
the wisdom of God did not hereby provide to uphold the credit of the Church of
Israel, and the Authority of the writings of Moses and the Prophets against the
frowardnes of some who were but too apt and ready to dis-esteem them. That the
Institutions of God by Moses for the Church of Israel were the Pattern for the
Apostolical Traditions which were appointed for the Discipline and Order to be
observed in the Christian Congregations; it will appear more evidently if we
consider, that the subject matter of these Orders are, Times, Places, Persons,
and the like. In all which the Apostles by the Commandment of Christ settled
such Rules as were consonant to what had been formerly in the Church of Israel.
That we might know, that no better Orders for the Church can be devised, than
such as in Conformity to the Church of the Old Testament may justly, and
without wrong to the time of Truth and Grace be framed, and as it were thence
translated. Was it not for this cause, that diverse particulars which should be
in the Christian Churches are prophetically described in phrases taken from the
Church of Israel? See these texts: Esai. 66.21. and 23. Zech. 12.16. I said,
Without wrong to the time of Truth and Grace, Because, as some judicial laws
were peculiar to that Nation; and to that Age of the World, and so may not be
now taken into the Statutes of the Commonwealth: So some Ecclesiastical Rites
were peculiar to that Age of the Church, and may not now be taken into the
Canons of the Christian Church: tho others may, which are more moral, and so
more perpetual. Ex. gr. In the Old Testament there was one day in seven set a
part to be a Day of Holy Rest; i. e. a time for the Assemblies and Holy
Convocations meeting together for the works of Piety and Devotion. In imitation
where-of The Apostles by the Direction of our Blessed Savior consecrated the
first day of the week to the same ends and uses, and gave it that honorable
name which still it bears The Lords Day. Then for Places Israel had their
Synagogues beside the Temple: And who knows not that even in The Apostles
times there were places set apart for the Assemblies to meet in, and even then
began to be called Churches. So for Persons Israel had those who were set
apart to the service of the Altar and the Temple: Accordingly the Apostles
ordained in several Churches certain Elders, men set apart and separated to
the work and office of the Ministry, who by that solemn Rite and Ceremony of
their Ordination might be known and acknowledged to receiv from God a special
designation to that function, from which they might not return to secular
employments and the cares of the world. The maintenance of them, does St. Paul
affirm to be ordained of the Lord in conformity to the Ordinance of the Old
Testament, Cor. 9.13.14. And whether the subordination of Some in the Ministry
to other in the same Order were not likewise an Apostolical Institution
appointed by Christ, and this also fetched from the pattern of Moses, I dispute
not. But this I make no question will be acknowledged by all: That the Censures
of the Church: That the Directions given to the Church how to proceed in the
execution of those Censures; That these, I say were received from Israel: and
that not only by the Apostles appointing them, Cor. 5. Tit. 3. but also by our
Savior himself, Mat. 18.15. That the Liberty which women have to come to the
Table of the Lord must be acknowledged a Tradition of the Apostles taken from
the Pattern of the Passover. Nay yet more, The Custom of the Apostles to
baptize the whole households of them that believed, and that immediately upon the
Conversion of the Master of the family, and his subscription to the Faith of
Christ; whence they should have it, except from that like pattern and President
in the Old Testament, viz. Abraham circumcising all the Males in his house,
that very day in which the Lord made a Covenant with him, and the practice of
Israel who did the like by all the male-children and infants which they bought
with their money: Whence I say that Custom should come, except from this
president, I see not. That they did so is evident by the story of their Acts,
and being done by them we doubt not of the lawfulnes: No Revelation had they
for it that is recorded: This Ground of Conformity to the Pattern of the Old
Testament we find in others, and therefore conclude this also: Now them; The
issue of all returns to this text. Why this Rule should hold in so many
particulars, and only fail in this point of Baptising Infants, I leav for them
to give a reason, who know what difference there is betwixt reason and
absurdity. Especially since it is plain enough by the Testimony of the Ancients
who lived in the next Ages after the Apostles, That this also was a Custom
established by the Apostles. In Pam^lius notes on Cyprian, Epla. 59. you may
find the names of the Ancients who referr it to an Apostolical Tradition. So
also does Augusti^, lib. 4. De Baptismo c^ntra Donatist. cap. 23. And in his
Epl. 28. Ad Hyeronimum, speaking of the 59 epistle of Cyprian, the Title
wher-of is Ad Fidum de Infantibus Baptisandis, he says, Beatus Cyprianus non
aliquod dec^etum condens novum ^ed Ecclesi^e fidem firmissimam se^^ans ad
corrigendum cos, qui putabant ante octavum d^^m nitivitatis non esse parvulum
baptisandum, mox natum rite baptisari cum suis quibussdam coepissopis censuit.


The Breviat of all this discourse is this: Every Commandment of Christ is to
be observed, Mat. 28. Infants Baptism is the Commandment of Christ; Every
Apostolical Institution is the Commandment of Christ: Infants Baptism is an
Apostolical Institution (therefore.) The Major is proved, Cor. 11.25. and
14.37. and must be acknowledged except we would suspect them of falls and
faithless dealing: The Minor is acknowledged by the Ancients; And there is great
reason for it, because it does (as do the rest of the Rules for Order and
Discipline delivered to the Church) carry in its face and forehead the stamp
of Christ's Ordinances, viz. Conformity to the Pattern of the Church of Israel.

So then; To them who think they may triumph in that Argument produced against
Infants Baptism: That, it being presupposed that the Testament of Christ is so
perfect, and he so faithful, that nothing ought to be practiced of Christians,
which is not therein warranted either by Precept, or Pattern: And it being
assumed, that there is neither Precept nor Pattern for this Custom; Therefore it
may not be practiced, To them I say we see what Answer may be returned.

1. To the Major, Flourished with that text of Heb. 3.2.6. as Moses: So Christ
was faithful: Nay more, Moses only as a servant, but Christ as a Son; And
(therefore) his Testament as perfect, nay more perfect than that of Moses. True
indeed; But know we not, that the faithfulness of a man in his office is to be
measured according to the intent and scope of his Office imposed? In which if
he fail and faulter, then is he unfaithful; if not, then is he not unfaithful
tho he look not to other things, ex. gr. The Minister may be faithful, tho he
meddle not with the Sword of Justice: The Magistrate, tho he fight not with the
sword of the Spirit. So then, what was the office of Moses? and what of Christ?
The Office of Moses was to settle the Commonwealth, and the National Church
of Israel: The Office of Christ was to make Reconciliation betwixt God and man,
to work out the Redemption of Mankind. It was fit that Moses should set down
particular laws for the Commonwealth, and Ordinances for the Church: Neither
of these did pertain to the Office of Christ; yet by his Apostles and their
successors in several Ages does he provide whatsoever is necessary for the
welfare and good order of the Church of the New Testament: But in his own
person, and by himself he established the Covenant of Grace, ordained the Seals
ther-of, set up a Ministry, gave to them the word of life and salvation, and
pointed to them a pattern for good Order and Government, and so was faithful
in his house as a Son, and worthy of more honor than Moses. This for the
Major.

2. To the Minor: We grant, That neither Precept nor Pattern formal and
explicit is to be found in the books of the New Testament for Infants
baptising, i. e. There is no Precept that says, Go and baptize Infants; no
more is there any Precept to baptize Women; nor to observe the Lords day as a
Christian Sabbath: There is no text that says, The Children and Infants of this
or that man were baptized; Nor is there any text that says, Such a woman was
admitted to the Table of the Lord. But we say, that both Precept and Pattern
virtuall and implicit may be found to warrant it, The which if found is not to
be neglected.

Precept Virtuall and implicit.
Here we pitch upon the continuation of the Custom in Israel to present their
Infants to the Sacrament of initiation, and we frame the Argument thus. What
was instituted in the Old Testament, and not repealed in the New, nor is any
way incompatible with the state of the Church in the New Testament, that is
understood to be continued, and commended to the practice of the Christian
Church: But that Infants should be initiated and admitted into the Covenant of
Grace by a Sacrament, was commanded in the Old Testament, neither is it
repealed in the New, nor incompatible with the state of the New Testament
(therefore.) That it is not repealed is thence confirmed, Because in the
Substitution of that new Sacrament of Initiation, there is no particular
exception taken against Infants, (as before was noted in the first Argument.
That it is not incompatible with the state of the Church in the New Testament
is thus further confirmed. 1. The Infants of Christians are as capable of
present incorporation into Christ, and of admission into the Covenant of Grace,
as were the infants of the Jews: And if so, who shall bar them (whom God has
not barred) from the Seal of the Covenant. 2. The Infants of Christians have as
much need of the Communion and Participation in the Covenant of Grace as had
the Infants of the Jews: And their Parents as much need of a Ground of comfort,
as touching the Remedy of that which makes them stand in need of the Covenant
of Grace and the Benefits thereof as the Parents of Jewish Infants. If so? who
shall think that God has not provided for them so well as for the other. If he
has not, how has Grace abounded in the New Testament, when in this particular
it is much restreined both to Believers, and to their Infants: But if he has,
who shall forbid them that, which God has provided for them?

1. That the Infants of Christians are as capable: is proved by that of Cor.
7.14. They are holy: And what is that? There be who gloss upon the text and say,
That ^hildren are Holy indeed, but how? As the wife not otherwise, viz. As she
is sanctified to the use of her Husband, so the children to the use of their
Parents: But they falsify the text: For the text says not of the wife, She is
sanctified to her husband, but by her Husband, (...), Nor of the children it is
said as of the wife. (...), is sanctified, but they are (...), Holy, which is
more full, and more emphaticall. Others shift it of with this: That the
children are said to be Holy, because, Notwithstanding the difference of
Religion in the Parents, yet the children are legitimate. This is further of
than the former; Nor can it stand, except this be presupposed, That all the
children of Heathens are illegitimate: No more than the former can stand
without this being presupposed; That neither wife, nor children of Pagans are
sanctified to their use. Wherefore, there is nothing left, but that they are said
to be Holy, by the Holiness of the Covenant, and sanctified with a federall
sanctification: The which is so much the more manifest, because it appears by
the context, That the pretense of them, who did repudiate their wives for their
infidelity, was a fear, lest the infidelity of the wife should deprive the
Husband of his interest in the Covenant of Grace which he had embraced: and
that his conjunction with her should rend him of (as did the Sin of
Fornication, cap. 6.15.) from Communion with Christ. St. Paul denies this, and
shows that rather the Faith of the Believers should so far preponderate and
prevail as to draw the other parties also after a sort within the Covenant, So
that the unbeleeving wife is sanctified and accounted as one interressed in the
Covenant by the Husband: His reason is, because otherwise the children of such
should be accounted Unclean, or altogether barred from the Covenant, wher-as
now they are Holy, i. e. Heirs of the Covenant, and admitted to the Seals
ther-of. Admitted, I say, For this is worthy our observation: That suppose any
of the Corinths would have been so wilful to doubt of this Medium, and deny
th'Argument of St. Paul: what is there to convince the Gainsayer, but only the
practice of Israel continued in the Christian Churches, viz. That the children
of one believing Parent are admitted to the Seals of the Covenant. This must of
Necessity be presupposed, else does the Argument fall to the ground and
overthrow it self. To say, That it rests upon the Authority of The Apostles
affirmation, is not sufficient: in as much as he does not positively set it
down as a thing to be learned, (as he had done the former point, The wife is
sanctified) but brings it in as a Reason to confirm that former point: And we
know, that the Reason of a Position is always presupposed, as a thing already
yielded and confessed.

2. That the Infants of Christians have as much need of partaking in the
Covenant of Grace, as had the Jewish Infants, is thence confirmed: Because,
That which is born of the Flesh, is flesh. Natural corruption is common to
all. Why was Circumcision ordained, but that ther-by the Uncircumcision of the
Heart might be taken away: that the Corruption of Nature might be cured, and
the Guilt of that first sin cut off from the Israel of God: That Abraham by
Faith apprehending the promise of God might ther-in have a Ground of comfort to
himself in respect of his Son, viz. That tho he had begotten him in his own
likeness, and had been a mean to convey unto him the Guilt and Filth of
Original sin: yet now by the mercy of God, he was provided of a Remedy for
that Malady of his child, and using that Sacrament in Faith he might
comfortably assure himself that the Remedy should prevail against the Malady:
And is not this Ground of comfort needful also for Christians? Surely they are
deceived, who either deny the propagation of original sin to Infants; or
dream of any Universal Demolition of it by the Death of Christ without the
particular Application of his Blood by the Sacrament of the Gospel. If there
be no such Malady, no such Guilt in our Infants, how comes it to pass that
they die? Is there any place for Death in Mankind, where there is no sin at all?
If the Beasts decay and die by reason of their natural mortality, yet we know
that sin it was which brought Death upon Adam and his Posterity. Where there is
no sin inherent, Death can claim no interest in that party: Where Death seizes
upon man, we must not deny sin, some sin there must be: Actual, there is none
in these Infants. Not yet have they sinned after the Similitude of Adams
transgression, viz. by listening to the Tentation of Satan; and therefore it is
Original Guilt and corruption which is in them: If the Disease be in their
Nature; Is there not need of a Remedy? Had the Infants of the Jews a Remedy, and
is there none provided for the Infants of Christians? Is there a Remedy provided
for them, and a ground of comfort for their Parents, and shall it be denied,
and they debarred?

Objection. The force of this Argument, some think to elude by denying
Circumcision to be a Seal of the Covenant of Grace, and consequently no Remedy
against that original Malady wher-of we speak: We oppose that honorable
Elogie of it, Romans 4 11. The Apostle terms it, A Seal of the Righteousness of
Faith: They answer, it was a seal of Abraham's Faith, not in the Promise of the
Messiah, and the Covenant of Grace, but in the promise of a Neumerous
Offspring, That he should be the Father of many Nations. This was (say they)
that part of Gods Covenant with Abraham, which was sealed by Circumcision: A
fleshly Covenant had a fleshly Seal. But in this Answer we find a twofold
ignorance bewrayed. 1. The mis-interpretation of the Phrase: The Righteousness
of Faith: A phrase peculiar to St. Paul by which is intimated not the Act of
Faith, but the Benefit ther-of. The phrase is equivalent to, and to be
expounded by that of Romans 9.30. and 10.6. The Righteousness which is by faith,
and that also, Romans 3. 21. and 10.3. The Righteousness of God Both which are
joined in one, Romans 3.22. The Righteousness of God which is by Faith: and thereby
is signified the Benefit of imputed Righteousness which God bestows on
Believers for their Justification: This benefit God having bestowed upon
Abraham, did seal it up to Him afterward by Circumcision, which is therefore
called, Not the Seal of his Faith, but the Seal of the Righteousness, i. e. of
Justification which comes by Faith and not by Works. 2. Another point of
ignorance, is in dis-joyning those things which ought not to be dis-joined,
viz. the Covenant of Grace, and the Promise of a Numerous offsprings. Is it
not evident that in Genesis 17. there is special mention of the Covenant of Grace,
viz. I will be the God of thee, and thy seed after thee -- and then follows,
Thou shall therefore keep my Covenant, thou and thy seed -- This is my Covenant-
Every man-child among you shall be circumcised. Why should Circumcision be
restreyned to the Promise of a Numerous offspring, when the text does not
restrein it? If any reply, That in Genesis 15. where the Righteousness of Faith is
mentioned, to which the Apostle alludeth, there is only mention made of a
Numerous offspring promised. Be it so: But that of Calvin is sound, who says,
That whatsoever promises God did give to Abraham, Jn dubium est axioma apud
Christianos quascunque promissiones Abrahae dedit Deus pr^mae illius fuisse
appendices -- Ergo cum audiret Abraham. Erit sem^n tuum si^ut arena m^^is -- in
hoc verbo non substitit, sed ipsum, potius includebat in gratia Adoptionis
tanquam partem in toto, Calv. in C^l. 3 6.
they were Appendices of that first promise made to Him: and so this of a
numerous of -- spring, was by Faith received as a fruit of that first Grace he
bestowed on Him viz. His Adoption; Nay more, That Promise of a Numerous
offspring, that he should be the Father of many Nations; Was it fulfilled in
the children of the flesh only, or in the children of the Promise also? And how
came he to be the Father of those children, but by Faith in the Covenant of
Grace?

Conclude (therefore) That Circumcision was a Seal of the Covenant of Grace; A
Remedy of that Dis-ease which is derived from Father to Son by Propagation.
Which being in the Posterity of Believing Christians no less than in the
Posterity of Believing Jews: It follows that these have as much need as the
other: And being Holy by virtue of their Parents interest in the Covenant, are
as capable of this Benefit as the other were. Consequently that the
implantation of Infants into that Mystical Body of Christ by a Sacrament is
not incompatible with the state of the Church in the New Testament. And if not
so: Since it is not repealed by Christ and his Apostles: we conclude, That there
is a Precept virtuall and implicit: And tho it be not said in direct terms, Go
and baptize Believers and their Children, yet in that it is said, Circumcise
them, their Baptism is included: so much the more: Because it will appear that
there is also for the Baptising of Infants.

Pattern virtuall and Implicit.
This is in the Baptising of whole Families upon the conversion of the Masters
ther-of, The whole Households of Lydia, Cr^spus, Cornelius, and others were
baptized: To say, that in them there might be no children, because none are
mentioned, is to speak against all sense and reason. As well may it be said
there were no servants, and so make up a Family of I know not how few. What say
we to those three thousand souls mentioned, Acts 2. which were added to the
Church in one day: Is it probable that they were all present at the Sermon, and
converted to the Faith by that Sermon, it being in a private House? Is it not
more probable, that the Men being present and converted, they brought also
their Families to be baptized, which they might well do, because they heard St.
Peter say: The Promise is made to you and to your children: So that the total
sum of men, women and children might be 3000. souls: Some such thing
doubtless is intimated in that phrase, 3000. souls: answerable to that in the
story of Genesis 46. ver. 27. Act. 7.14. All that came down into Egypt with Jacob
were 70 souls. Souls, i. e. persons, men, women, and children. And here
doubtless the course and practice of the Converts was answerable to that in
Genesis 17. No sooner is the Covenant made with Abraham, but he circumciseth all
the Males in his house both young and old: So doubtless, No sooner is the
Covenant of Grace ratified betwixt Christ and the Believing Parents by Baptism,
but the Household is also accounted Holy and so baptized. Doubtless, what St.
Peter said to them in Act. 2. The Promise is made to you and to your children;
The same did St. Paul preach to the Gentiles when they were converted, that
they might know the large bounty of God to them and theirs in the Covenant of
Grace: And how should they confirm this to them but by baptising their
children? Take away this, and you leav open a wide gapp to an Objection which
is not easily answered: For they might object: What tell you us of the Grace of
God in Christ, of the super-abundance of that Grace: Do we not see the
contrary? This is nothing answerable to that of Abraham and Israel? They by
their Faith received a Benefit for their children, yea their servants. Not so
here: We our selves per-aduenture may be the better for our Faith: But our
children remain still as they were strangers to the Covenant. Will you imagine
the Apostle to reply: Nay, but the Promise is to you and your children. So that
when they come to beleev they also may be admitted; How justly might the
Objector rejoin: what great privilege is this? So may the very Heathen, all
that are afarr of when they beleev; If this be all that we gain; Our children,
notwithstanding our Faith are in no better condition than the Heathen
themselves, Nothing so good as the children of the Jews: And so the great boast
of super-abundant Grace falls to the ground. Thus we see good Reason to
acknowledge this Custom of baptising Infants to be warranted both by Precept
and Pattern, tho not formal and explicit; yet virtuall and implicit; And that
with so great light and evidence from Scripture, that greater in that kind
cannot be expected.

Before I proceed to an other Argument: Let me improve this further,

That Custom and Practice of the Church may well be presumed to be
Apostolical, which is so consonant to the text of Scripture, that it does
readily illustrate the text: and opens a door of light to understand the
same: Such is the Custom of Infants Baptized therefore. That which being
granted gives light: and which being denied does leave the text under such a
cloud of obscurity, that it is not easily understood how it may pass for Truth:
This must be granted to open a door of light to understand the text of
Scripture. Now then, suppose this Act of the Apostles baptising Infants: we
easily see how 3000. souls may be added to the Church in one day,
notwithstanding the Sermon were in a private house: We see how St. Peter might
confirm their Belief in this, The Promise is made to you, and to your children:
even the Promise of super-abundant Grace: We see how St. Paul might urge this,
your children are Holy: But take away the supposition of this Custom, and none
of these texts are so easy to be understood. Consequently: it is more than
probable, that even this Custom of Baptising Infants was instituted and
ordained in the Churches by The Apostles: and that according to the commandment
of Christ.

Add unto all that has been said that of St. Ambrose: Sicut nunc in ecclesia
manet Constitutio salvatoris dicentis, Nisi quis renatus sucrit -- Ita
sacratissime in lege suerat praecautum, ut natus puer nisi die circumcideretur
octavo, exterminaretur anima ejas de populo suo -- Ambros. Epist. 33. Ad
Demetriadem. p. 132.
who setts these two as parallel: the law of God, touching Circumcision, The
soul who is not circumcised, shall be cut off from his people: and the Sanction
of our Savior: Except a man be born again of water, and of the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the kingdom of God. That this text is to be understood of
Baptism, as a mean and cause of Regeneration, Not so principal as the Spirit:
yet so isntrumental to the Spirit, that where it may be had, we have no ground
of Faith to beleev that the Spirit will work without it: This is I say the
constant and consentient judgment of all the Ancients, and most of our modern
Divines; Some few only excepted, who to avoid the Popish Tenet, touching the
absolute necessity of B^ptism, did fly to a Metaphor. And it may be confirmed
for Truth, out of the Text it self: if we note well, To whom, and upon what
occasion the words were spoken: viz. To Nicodemus, upon occasion of his
timerousnes: A Disciple of Christ, he was willing to be, but loath to prosess it
openly by being baptized. To him is the commination directed: and therefore the
words must be understood of Baptism: Now then consider well, whether there be
any ground sufficient to keep of Infants from this Ordinance? Any ground (I
say) which may secure the conscience of not having sinned against the souls of
our Infants, if by our default they die without this seal of the Covenant, and
so loos the Benefit ther-of? Have not Infants need of Christ, and the
Application of his Blood for the washing their souls from sin? Is there any
Hope of Salvation without Christ? Is there any other way revealed, by which any
may have part in Christ, but by his Ordinances? Is there any other Ordinance by
which Infants may be made partakers of Christ and the Covenant of Grace except
Baptism? Is there any text of Scripture that has peremptorily barred their
Admittance? Or is there any thing required of them that must be baptized, the
want wher-of may be a bar to Infants? Thou doubtest, because there is no text
that mentions either Precept or Pattern, and without a text, thou dare not
venture: It Is well: But when there is such a fearful sentence, that runns in
such general terms as does comprehend Infants also: and the Danger of Omission
is so great: Why art thou not more cautelous on the safer side? Why do thou
not as well call for a direct text to bar them? or a direct Reason from
Scripture, which may be equivalent? Is there any text that says, None may be
baptized, that do not Beleev? or that says Infants for want of Actual faith
may not be baptized? Do thou not see Infants Circumcised yea by commandment?
Do thou not hear the text that says, Children are Holy? And are there so
many Probabilities that by The Apostles themselves Infants were baptized? And
will thou rather hazard the soul of thy child, than lay hold upon the Covenant
for thy seed, nay for thy self? and that only upon a fear, and a doubt of
unlawfulnes; yea such a doubt that has no surer ground either in Scripture or
Reason to countenance it, than the contrary resolution?

Here is then the Case: if these Grounds formerly mentioned prove good, as there
is great probability: Then thou presenting thine Infant to Baptism building
upon these grounds, thou have saved thy self and thine Infant: but forbearing
and keeping him of, thou sinnest against thine own soul and his also: Again, if
those grounds should not prove good: yet have thou not wronged thine Infant,
nor thine own self: Because, upon such probabilities as are next door to an
Evident Demonstration, thou have done that which is intended for the Glory of
God, and the Good of the Infant. Thou have not transgressed against any
Precept, no nor any light of Reason which might justly withold thee from
seeking the Good of thine Infant at the Hands of Christ in this Ordinance.

I conclude therefore, That there is sufficient Ground in Scripture to warrant
the Conscience of a Christian to bring his Infants to this Sacrament of
Baptism, with a confident expectation to receiv Benefit by the same. Nay more:
There is Ground enough to warrant the Accusation of Him that upon such uncertain
Reasons shall forbear to present his Infant to this Sacrament of Initiation,
the Accusation I say of Him, as one that sins against the Ordinance of God,
and trespasseth against the Soul of his Infant, yea of Himself.

So much for the first Question.
THE SECOND QVESTION. Quest. Whether it be not sinful, for a Christian to
receiv the Sacrament in a mixed Assembly.
A Mixed Assembly is that, wherein good and badd are mingled together, and make
up one Congregation; when the precious are not severed from the vile, nor any
difference put between the Holy and Profane. Now these good and badd, these
precious and vile, are not to be reckoned in respect of their spiritual estate
toward God, i. e. as they are Elect or Reprobate, Sincere or Hypocritical: but
in respect of their Ecclesiastical state in the ey and judgment of Men, as
they are in their courses and conversations, in their Calling and Profession
holy or profane. These bad, and vile, are again to be considered A part ante,
or A part post, viz. Either such as yet profess not themselves in Covenant
with God, by joining themselves to the Assembly of his servants: Or such, who
having formerly had a standing in the Church, do afterward run out into
exorbitant courses to the scandal of Religion, and so deserv to be separated
from the Society of the Saints, and by the Sentence of Excommunication cut of
from the Assembly. So that the Question is, Whether if either of these be found
in the Congregation and company of them, that draw near to the Table of the
Lord to partake of those holy Mysteries; either those, who as yet have not been
admitted, or those that by the laws of Christ ought to be shutt out and
sequestered, whether their presence do make it unlawful in point of conscience
for a Christian to receiv the Sacrament among them, so that if he do, he is eo
nomine, thereby desiled, and become partaker of their sin.

Where also for the better understanding of the Answer to this Question, we are
to note, what is granted: and what is questioned and demanded.

Things granted are these.

1. Some are not to be admitted to the Table of the Lord. This is evident
enough No uncircumcised person might eat of the Passover: Nor any person
unbaptised be admitted to the Lords Supper, how morally righteous soever he
be. The Reason her-of is, Because, None may be received into the Communion and
fellowship of the Church, till he have professed himself one of them that
desire to lay hold on the Hope of Eternal life by the Mean and Mediation of
Christ, in whom alone is founded the Covenant of Grace. Now this Profession is
by submitting himself to the Sacrament of Baptism. Hence it is that our Blessed
Savior has joined these two together, He that believes and is baptized. As
none unbaptised: So not all that are baptized. Children so soon as they be able
to learn must be taught, and by teaching be fitted to discern the Lords Body
before they be admitted to it: Of old, Israel must instruct their children in
the Rites of the Passover: Exodus 12 26 and 13.14.
In imitation wher-of Christians receiv a charge touching their children, to
bring them up in the knowledge and practice of their holy Profession. Yea, and
by an Apostolical Ordinance (as it is probable from that of Heb. 6.2.) The
Pastors of the Church in all ages according to the trust committed to them,
have taken an account of what the Parents have done in this Education of their
children, examining them in the Articles of their Belief, and the points of the
Catechism, And ther-upon have approved those whom they found Proficients, and
by their Benediction have confirmed and comforted them in these their happy
Beginnings. This Order of solemn Confirmation is acknowledged by the Godly
learned to be of merveilous good use in the Church. And reason gives it so to
be: That so, when children are come to a perfect Age, and in some measure able
to understand the matters of Religion, and to give an account of their Faith,
they may then make an open profession of their Belief, and an open promise of
their Obedience to the laws of God: and so ther-upon in a solemn manner be
admitted to the holy Communion. And till they be thus confirmed, I should yield
it altogether unfitting (at least for Orders sake) that any be admitted to the
Table of the Lord.

2. Some are to be shutt out and sequestered. No doubt of this: Adam was thrust
out of Paradise, that he might not taste of the Tree of life, and feed himself
with a vain hope of immortality. The Leprous were to be shut out of the Camp:
They that were unclean by a dead body, Number. 9.6. could not keep the Passover on
the day. The Refractary and Obstinate is to be accounted as an Heathen. Mat.
18.17. The incestuous person must be delivered to Satan, and Scandalous
Christians excluded from civil, much more from sacred Communion. Cor. 5. Such
order must be taken also with in-ordinate walkers, 2 Thessalonians. 3. and with
unreformable Heretics, Tit. 3.10. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, i.
e. if any walk in a manifest Profession of Dislike and Detestation of Christ
and his Gospel, He must be pronounced Anathema: This is the Discipline of the
Church: and good is the Reason ther-of, 1. In respect of the Persons
Delinquent: That by the destruction of the Flesh the Spirit may be saved: This
was an wholesome severity, a Church-punishment, inflicted as a means appointed
of God to reduce and reclaim those who were not desperately given up to a
reprobate sense. 2. In respect of the Congregation, that others might hear and
fear: That others might shun familiarity wi h them for fear of infection by
them. 3. In respect of them that are without the Church: That the name of the
Lord might not be blasphemed by them: but that they might see and know, that as
the Profession, so the practice of the Church is a constant care of holiness.
Nor will the Church of God endure it, that any of their Society shall say one
thing and do another, talk holiness, and live profanely: If any do forget
himself, and conform to the Men of the World in exorbitant courses, he shall be
shutt out from among them, and cut off from their Communion: that so the whole
Assembly may even in the ey of the world be found in some measure conformable
to the Holiness of Christ their Head. For these Reasons some are to be shutt
out and sequestered. The first and second Reasons are perpetual, and press the
Execution of this point of Discipline at all times: The third was more urgent
in the times of the first Plantation of the Church: And in that respect it was
(as I conceiv) that the Primitive Churches were so severe and rigid, even to an
overgreat measure of extremity till experience taught them the Necessity of
some more mildnes and moderation. But yet always there is use of this point of
Discipline, to separate and cut off scandalous persons: that so the members of
the Church may be secured from infection, and the whole Body from scandal and
imputation.

3. The Neglect of the Church Officers in doing their duty, is a sin that may
expose the whole Congregation to the judgments of God: Their office it is to
watch over the Holy things of God, that they be not laid open to contempt,
either by admitting them that are not fitted, or by not sequestring them that
ought to be sequestered: And their Negligence is a provoking sin: was it not
upon this ground, that the Congregation does smart in the case of Achan? The
Elders and officers were not so careful as they should have been. To which if
there be added also the Neglect of inferior persons in doing what they ought
(it is their part to be eyes and ears to the Governors, informing them of what
is amiss: yea, and in a dutiful way to admonish them of their duty, and
entreat their diligent circumspection, which if they do not, much more if they
do approve of their slackness, and like of them the better, because they are
not so officious.) What wonder if this Neglect of the Governor prove the
destruction of the whole Congregation: understand this in respect of temporal
judgments: God to show his just indignation against sin: and to teach all and
every one to have a care of others, both to greev for them, and to admonish
them, does for the sin of some one, especially if an eminent person, cause the
whole to smart under the Rodd of some common Calamity. This also is not denied.

These things being premised, as things granted, and not at all questioned.

The Scruple does ly in this one particular. Whether the sin of the unworthy
and wicked person, intruding himself into the company of them that draw near to
the Table of the Lord: and the sin of the Church Officers who should (but do
not) exclude him, whether this sin of theirs defile the Conscience of Him (a
private Christian) who has no further communion with them, save only that he
is in their company, and they in his, when he goes up to the Table of the
Lord: He neither approves of them, nay is greeved for the dis-order; Whether
is he defiled?

To this I answer Negatively: It is not (always) sinful for a private Christian
to receiv the Sacrament in the company of them that are unworthy Communicants,
nay worthy of Excommunication. Not always, I say, Because I list not to plead
the cause of them, who for some private respects do voluntarily choose the
Society of some wicked persons, when it is in their liberty to make a better
choice, But where it is not: As it is not in the choice of Parishioners to
refuse their Parish Church to which by the just law of the Magistrate they are
bound for Order sake: Now that in this case it is not sinful: I prove by these
Arguments.

The first Argument.
What no text of Scripture has manifested to be unlawful, that is not
sinful: For in as much as Sin is the Transgression of the law, what is not
unlawful, that is not sinful: And if the text of Scripture does not manifest
a thing unlawful, who shall dare to do it. That no ^ext of Scripture has
manifested it unlawful for a private Christian in this case to come in the
company of the unworthy, it is evidenced by this, That there is neither any text
of Prohibition to forbid it, nor any text of Reprehension that has blamed
those that have done it: Consequent-ly it is not by text of Scripture
manifested to be unlawful, and therefore not sinful. As we conclude that
lawful, that by text is either commanded or commended. So that, unlawful,
that is either prohibited or reproved.

1. No text of Scripture has forbidden it.
Not that of Cor. 5.11. No not in that new translation, which some put in
capital letters, as if there were some great mystery in it: NOT TO BE MIXED
TOGETHER. Truth it is, there is a Prohibition directed to the Church of Corinth,
and it pertains to all the members ther-of: The Prohibition is to them, Not
to keep company with scandalous Christians, no not to eat with such a one. But
it is manifest that this Prohibition is not touching Sacred but civil Society:
That company-keeping is in the City, not in the Church: That eating is at
their own Table, not at the Table of the Lord. The Apostle had written to them a
former Epistle, Not to keep company with Fornicators and other scandalous
persons: Fain he would that Christians should not only forbear such sinful
courses, but even the company of them that were therwith-all defiled: This his
Epistle and his charge in it, he does now interpret. showing, That he did not
intend to forbid them all company or society with those of that ill-name which
were not of the Church; This had been to have shut them up in a cloister, to
have banished them out of the world, to have imposed upon them an
impossibility; so St. Chrysostom you must seek another world to live in,
seeing the ^ase of Gods people in this world, is as of Roses among thorns, they
cannot but live among the wicked: But, that, if there were any professed
Christians, that yet had not reformed those evil courses, but still lived in
the usual practice of them, with such a one they must have no familiarity, No
not to eat with them. So then, The eating forbidden is such as is not forbidden
in Relation to men of the world: Now with the men of the world they never had
any company at the Table of the Lord: Consequent-ly, the text does not respect
that sacred Communion, nor their joining with the scandalous in that sacred
Action. This phrase Eat not with him, is the same in effect with that of 2 John
10. Receiv him not into your House It was altogether unlawful for the Corinths
to invite such a scandalous Brother to their houses, or to show him any
courtesy; yea, I suppose the phrase does reach further, even to refuse his
invitation, q. d. Neither invite him to eat with you, nor accept of any
invitation to eat with him; that so all show of Familiarity betwixt him and you
may be avoided. Add this; It cannot be understood of that holy Society which is
among Christians at the Lords Table, because that (...), No not to eat,
intimates the least familiarity that may be; For so is the Argument, (...),
Not to keep company, no nor to eat: But in that Holy society which Christians
have one with another in the House of God, this (...). To eat together is the
greatest: Whence it is that the aggravation of the Punishment of obstinate
persons does runn in a contrary course, (...); they are first shut out from the
Table of the Lord* and afterward from the Houses and Tables of Christians. So
then, this text of Cor. 5. not respecting the familiarity and company of them
that come to the Lords Table, cannot be alleged to prove it unlawful, and
sinful for a Christian to be found in company, and to go along with the wicked
to the Table of the Lord.

Nor that of 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. The words are these: If any man obey not our word
by this Epistle, Note that man, and ^ave no company with him, that he may be
ashamed. Here it is forbidden to have company with a brother that walks
disorderly: So in verse. 6. viz. He speaks of them that were idle and
busi-bodyes, verse. 11. The Christians of Thessalonica were most of them
Artisans and Laborers; and for those to live idly out of a Calling was a
dis-orderly walking: and those the Apostle would have to be punished: The
punishment is set down, ver. 6. (...): To withdraw themselves from him; and
(...). To keep no company with him: Now this company cannot be understood of
the holy Communion, because it is subjoined to the verb (...), Note that man,
Calvin Beza, Bullinger: Marlorat.
which by diverse Godly and Learned is interpreted the Act of Excommunication:
q. d. Excommunicate him, and have no company with Him: Put him out of the
Church: yea, out of all Civil familiarity: Neither invite him to house, nor
willingly be ye found in his company. Which is yet more manifest; if we
consider, that this (...), is to set such a note upon Him as may make him
ashamed: Now that could not be by forbearing to communicate in his company. In
very deed who should forbear? Is not the Precept directed to the whole Church?
Should they all forbear the Communion, and leav him alone at it? Ridiculum. No,
they must all perform their duty, each in his place: The Church Officers must
set a note upon him: i. e. Denounce him as an unworthy member of the Church,
unfit to be admitted, not only to the Table of the Lord, but even unfit to be
admitted to any familiarity and society with them: The Church Members must do
accordingly, i. e. forbear all commerce and communion with him; they must shun
him as a Pest and a Plague Sore. So then, neither of these two texts relating
properly and directly to the Table of the Lord can be understood, as
prohibiting private Christians to communicate in the company of them that ought
not to be admitted. Sublato subjecto quaestionis, colluntur and accidentia.
Much less those other texts which are by some added ex abundanti to fill up
room rather then to confirm that cause, viz. Act. 2.40. Ephesians. 5.11. These. 5.22.
and 2. Tim. 3.2.5. For why? When St. Peter says, Save your selves from this
untoward generation. Does he speak of misbehaviour'd Christians? or rather of
misbeleeving Jews? And is it a work of Darkness? Is it an Appearance of evil
to attend on Gods ordinance? If it be not so well performed by these wicked
ones as it ought; yet is it not to be accounted evil. Surely it is rather a
work of light, and an Appearance of good, how-soever to the wicked and
unprepared nothing profitable, is there no difference betwixt what is evil in
the Substance of the Act, and what is so only by Accident, viz. through some
desert of the Actor. From such turn away (says the Apostle.) What then? Must I
therefore turn away from the Communion if they come to it? No: but in the course
of my conversation I must have nothing to do with them: Nay more, that text
does not necessarily prove that I must turn away such from the Holy Communion;
much less does it prove that I must turn away my self because of them. None of
those texts do speak home to the point, least of all that of,

2 Cor. 6.17. This text does indeed call for separation: but from whom? Collect
this out of the Coherence. In ver. 14. Be not (says he) un-equally yoked with
un-beleevers, Not yoked sc. in society and partnership of the shop and stock:
in Cohabitation and company of the Bed and Board: Thus to be joined in society
with Infidels he counts a yoke, an unequal yoke; and would have them take
heed of it. His Argument is taken from the unequal condition of them: To do
this is to couple Righteousness with Unrighteousnes, Light with Darkness; Christ
with Belial: the Temple of God with Idols: things that can have no commerce
together, nor communion: And then infers, Wherefore come out from among them,
and be ye separate (says the Lord) and touch not the unclean thing, etc. The
Church of Corinth lived in the midst of Infidels: No wonder therefore if the
Apostle call upon them to separate from such, to take heed of communion with
them, especially in that which he had taxed under the name of Idolatry, and
here under that phrase, Touch not the unclean thing; sc. their presence at the
Idolatrous feasts, This in special would he have them forbear; Now I pray,
what is this to the presence of the worthy receiver in the company of unworthy
Communicants at the Table of the Lord? Is not he blind that sees not a large
difference, and that the one does not draw on the other to be unlawful? Will
it follow, that because the Corinthians who were present with Idolaters at
their Idol-feasts, are said to have communion with Idolaters, that therefore he
who is in the company of wicked men in their approaching to the Table of the
Lord, does partake with them in their wickedness? If so: Then as the Corinths by
so doing are said to touch the unclean thing: So also these Receivers of whom
we speak, by so doing do also touch the unclean thing. And shall we call the
Table of the Lord an unclean thing? Is it also an Idol? There is a text in Hagg.
2. ver. 12 -- 14. which had wont to be alleged to prove that wicked men defile
the Ordinances of God. But if so, it is but to themselves not to others: As
wholesome meat received into a corrupted stomach turns into noxious humors: and
the same word that is to some the savor of life, is to others (in whom it is
not mixed with faith) the savor of Death; to these, but not to others in their
company: There is an error in these men's understanding: They conceiv, that
merely to be in company with the wicked, is to communicate with them in their
wickedness: They are deceived: To communicate in wickedness, is to join
fellowship in the pursuit of wicked intentions: ex. gr. When wicked men take in
hand a wicked purpose (to honor an Idol, to set up profaness; to act in the
works of darkness, murder, adultery, theevery, perjury, etc. Then to join
society with them wittingly, is to communicate with them in wickedness.
Wittingly, I say: For those 200. that in the simplicity of their heart went
along with Absalom to Hebron, did not communicate with him in his treason tho
they went in company. But now, Will any man of wit or reason say, That these
wicked men, and these scandalous Brethren, who come to the Table of the Lord
unworthily, that they go about a wicked purpose and intention? surely, what
faultines soever is in them, by which they bar themselves from the Benefit of
the Lords Table; yet the thing that they go about, in it self is good, a duty
enjoined, yea so acknowledged by them, in which respect it is that they address
themselves unto it: And therefore they that go with them to this, do communicate
with them in Good; because they do willingly join their company in the
prosecution of those good intentions. So then none of these texts do speak to
the point.

Object. But it will be replied: That tho the letter of the text does only look
upon civil society prohibiting that as unlawful: yet by consequence it will
follow; That if the one, yea that which is the less be unlawful, then the
other, yea much more that that is the greater is unlawful; If no Civil, much
less any sacred Society. True: but then, you must presuppose the same power of
Admitting and separating: If I may not admit him to mine house, much less may I
admit him to the Table of the Lord: supposing me to have the power of
Admitting. I grant, that for them that have power to keep him out, the Argument
holds. The Church Officers of Corinth and Thessalonica were bound to make
that inference upon the text of St. Paul; And if they did not, I acknowledge
them to have sinned. But the case is other wise in this matter: This does not
prove, that every particular Christian in either of those Churches did sin in
coming to the Table of the Lord while these were not removed, if not they,
then neither is it sin in any of our Church Members to present himself at the
Holy Table, to partake of those holy Mysteries in the company of them that are
unworthy. For why? The Table is the Lords: it is he that makes the feast, that
inviteth the guests, and bids them welcome: Shall any that is invited and
prepared yet abstain because of another unpreparednes? Tell me I pray you:
Did that text of the Apostle Cor. 5.11. forbid any Christian to eat at another
man's table, supposing that this other man has also invited a scandalous
Christian? I trow not. By virtue of that text I may not (as before was said)
invite the scandalous brother, I may not accept of his invitation. But if a
third man invite us both, this text does not bind me to refuse my friends
courtesy because of such company. If not so: much less to refuse the invitation
of God calling me to feast at his holy Table. Did any of those guests in the
Parable Mat. 22. turn back when they saw the Man who had not on his wedding
garment, and consequently in the state of manifest unworthines and
unpreparednes? Did they I say turn back? or is any of them checked for coming
in his company? Which brings on the second part of the first Argument, viz.
That as this case is not prohibited, so neither is it reprehended.

2. No text of Scripture has reprehended it.
Not that in Cor. 5.1.2. There indeed he taxes the Church of Corinth, that they
suffered the incestuous person still to remain in Communion with them. He
blames them that they were puffed up, i. e. they sought to hide and excuse the
fault glorying in the excellency of the man's gifts (for it is conceived that he
was a Teacher among them, and that for the eminency of his gifts, they were
unwilling to separate him from the Congregation.) This he charge upon them:
and that they had not mourned: What is meant by this mourning is not easily to
determine: That is not to be doubted which some say, viz. That there is good
reason why we should mourn for the sin of others (as did those in Ezekiel. 9.4.
who are ther-upon marked in the forehead to be preserved from the common
destruction) good reason, I say, both because hereby there grows a scandal
upon the Congregation; as also, because the sins of others do endanger us
(except we mourn for them) in respect of temporal things both goods and life,
and all: This I say is not doubted, yet I rather lean to the opinion of them
who understand this mourning, of the indicting a solemn day of Fasting and
mourning for the excommunication of that incestuous person: The custom then was
to denounce the sentence of Excommunication in a solemn manner, with the
general mourning and lamentation of the whole assembly invited ther-unto by
appointing a time for that Action, So much the learned do observe out of this
text, Cor. 5.2. and 2 Cor. 12.0. And this is that that I conceiv the Apostle
means in saying, Ye have not mourned, that he might be put away from among
you. And was this the Duty of every particular person in the Congregation? The
Epistle indeed is written to the whole Church of Corinth, and respects every
particular person in the Congregation: But I suppose that St. Paul does not
intend to accuse every particular member either of being puffed, or of not
mourning: much less to injoin every man to put on that solemn manner of mourning
by indiction of the day, and denouncing the sentence of Excommunication against
him.

To beleev that whatsoever is spoken to the whole Congregation may be executed
by every particular member ther-of, is in effect to take away distinction of
Orders and officers in the Church and Commonwealth: When God says Deuteronomy. 13.
That intisers to Jdolatry must be stoned to death; Does he intend to put every
man in Authority to see the execution done immediately; Nay, in case the
Magistrate neglect his office, does this warrantise every man to put the law in
execution? Does not this law of God rather intend that execution pass on
legally by the hand of the Officers deputed to hear and determine of such
matters? When St. Paul writing to the Collossians, Col. 4.17. puts in this
exhortation, And say to Archippus, Take heed to the Ministry which thou have
received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it; Does he hereby authorize every
Collossian to lay this charge upon the Minister? Or is it not rather to be
presented to him by the hands of them that were in place and authority? So
neither in Cor. 5. He that was not puffed up, was not guilty of communicating
in that sin. And suppose that the Church Officers had not done their duty in
removing the incestuous person (as perhaps they did not remove some other
scandalous brethren from the Church-society) there is nothing in the text to
lead us to beleev that St. Paul intended a reproof to them that were not
puffed, but indeed mourned privately in their devotions to see such disorder, a
reproof I say to them, for that they did not withdraw themselves from the
Communion of the Church in their approaching to the Table of the Lord.

Cor. 10. He reprehendeth them who held Communion with Idolaters in their
Idol-feasts: and in Cor. 11. them who profaned the Table of the Lord by their
unreverent carriage and behavior at it: using many Arguments to diswade them
from that evil, and to persuade them to a reformation: yet does he not either
mention this as a motive, that they did bring sin upon others, or admonish
others to forbear communion with them till these things were reformed, least
ther-by their conscience should be defiled, and the ordinance of God become
unprofitable to them. Yet this had been a very powerful Argument of persuasion
both to the one and to the other, and doubtless had there been truth in it, St.
Paul would not have forgotten it. The unworthy receiver (says the Apostle)
eats and drinks damnation to himself: He says not, to himself and others:
I grant, it does not follow from the silence of the Apostle, that his sin
cannot hurt another beside himself: But this does follow; That if to him that
has prepared himself there had been any danger at all from the presence of
others who are unworthy, this had been a fit place for St. Paul to have
mentioned it. Which since he has not, we conclude, that he who has examined
himself, has done enough to secure him from the danger of eating and drinking
damnation to himself, When the Apostle does set down the causes of that plague
that was among the Corinths does he mention any such thing as their presence
with the wicked in the Duty of Receiving? Or does the text any where at all
imply it?

We find in Ezekiel. 22.26. a complaint of the Priests that they had violated, and
offered violence to the law: that they had profaned the Holy things of God:
that they put no difference between the Holy and Profane, nor showed difference
between the clean and unclean. And in Jer. 15.9. the Lord by showing the
Prophet what he would have him to do, intimates a Reprehension of the
fals-prophets who had not done their duty, viz. To separate the precious from
the vile. But if we look upon the places and weigh them well, we may observe
that both texts have reference to the Duty of Teachers and Officers in the
Church: They must indeed put a difference betwixt things holy and profane, they
must separate the precious from the vile, pronouncing mercy to the one,
denouncing judgment to the other: admitting the one to the Holy things,
keeping of the other: This must they do, and if not, they deserve a just
reproof. But what is this to the cause in hand? Does this countenance the
course of such who condemn those that do not put themselves from the Holy
things of Gods because those be admitted which ought not? Is not this rather to
make sad the Heart of the righteous? That of Esaias 65.11. Ye are they that
forsake the Lord that prepare a Table for the Troup, and furnish a
drink offering for the number. This I say has been alleged to tax the
negligence of them who admit the promiscuous multitude to the Table of the
Lord: As if the Prophet had blamed Israel for the like carelessness in their
Passover and Peaceoffering, whereas the text does blame their Idolatry, not
their profaness: Idolatry in sacrificing to Jupiter and Mercury: to the Host of
Heaven. But admit it as a tax of negligence and profaness, yet must it not fall
upon every particular person: Apply it to the Church officers and spare not:
but blame not them, who because the promiscuous multitude are not turned away,
do not turn away themselves from the Table of the Lord. And so much for the
first Argument, etc.

The second Argument.
NO man may neglect, either the Duty that he owes to God; or the Benefit which
God reaches forth to Him upon pretense that another man does not perform his
Duty, or is not fitted to receive the Benefit with Him. Shall not the Husband
pray, or Hear and Receiv, because the wife of his Bosom is passionate and
irreconciliable? Shall not Lot make have out of Sodom, because his son-in-laws
do not prepare to go with him? That it is a Duty to receiv the Sacrament is
plain enough by that precept, Do this in Remembrance of me: That there is a
Benefit reached forth to us in it, is as evident by that word of our Savior,
This is my Body, This is my Blood; He that eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood, has everlasting life. Nay more: This Benefit cannot be had without this
duty: Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye
have no life in you, Joh. 6.53. You will perhaps reply: That Duties must be
performed in a right manner, otherwise we may provoke God: Israel must eat the
Passover, yet not in their uncleanness, nor with the unclean, say the same of
Christians. I grant the Proposition for sound and good: The instance of Israel
does not reach home to the point in hand. It does not appear by any text of
Scripture: That if the Master of the family did neglect to exclude such as
were unclean, that thereupon the children or servants did, or might lawfully
forbear the Passover.

Add this also, To bring home the Argument more particularly to the cause in
hand where a prepared Heart may comply with the principal end of Receiving the
Sacrament, there ought he not to absent himself for want of the secondary,
Reason gives it. That where there is a Duty to be done, a Benefit to be
expected: If there be diverse Ends of doing that duty, some more, some less
principal: No reason to neglect that by which the Principal end may be
obtained, because we cannot obtain the s^condary. Now then, As God has
appointed and ordained this Sacrament; 1. To hold forth the Benefit of Christ's
death to the worthy Receiver, that by partaking of Christ's flesh and blood the
Christian may be more nearly united to Christ himself in the first place, and
then to the members of Christ. 2. To call for and cause in the Society of the
faithful a public Testification of their mutual love and charity one to
another as members of the same mystical body. So, the principal end of
Receiving is to continue the Union and Communion with Christ, and all good
Christians (the living members of Christ) which was begun in Baptism: And the
secondary is to make profession of it by joining with this and that Assembly of
Christians. Now then, since the primary end of Receiving is our Union with
Christ: and our union with Christians is but the secondary (For we are not
united to Christ by being received into the Congregation, but indeed received
into the Congregation because first united to Christ.) Nay since, the primary
end, is Union: and our Profession or Testification thereof is but the second (or
third) end of Receiving. Therefore where the Primary end may be obtained, why
should the want of the second (or perhaps the third) be accounted any just bar
to keep us off. Now, howsoever the mixture of bad with the good, or the
scandalous courses of over-many in the Assembly might seem a just bar to our
Profession of Communion and Fellowship with this or that Congregation, yet
since it cannot hinder us in obtaining our desire of Union with Christ, and his
mystical Body, why should this mixture be any bar to the Duty enjoined? In
very deed if that Profession of our selves to be of the Number of them who hold
of Christ and his Church, if this (I say) were the principal end of Receiving
the Sacrament, Then were there some show of Reason to forbear joining with a
mixed Assembly: But now it is otherwise. It were indeed to be wished that the
whole Congregation were such as that we might affectionatly desire to continue
in Communion and Fellowship with them: But if it fall out otherwise through the
fault of other men: Can that be a sufficient reason to hinder us from the
Sacrament; The prime fruit and Benefit wher-of we may partake of, even in the
mixed Assembly? Add this also: That it is charitably supposed, there be some
Saints in the Congregation; and in our address to the Sacrament we do profess
our desire of Union and Communion with them: if others intrude themselves, we
came not thither to meet with them. Now the Question is, whether we may neglect
the good and godly Christians, and that Duty which we ow to God in respect of
them, because of the bad and wicked, whom finding there, we have not power to
remove.

The third Argument.
TThat Opinion which in the best Ages of the Church has been condemned of
error: And that which necessarily casts Christians upon inextricable
difficulty's and discomforts, is in all probability erroneous, and therefore not
to be embraced: Such is the opinion of them who hold it sinful for a Christian
(tho well-prepared for the holy Sacrament by self-examination according to the
Doctrine of the Apostle) to draw near to the Table of the Lord in the company
of them that are unjustly permitted to come to that holy Ordinance, That it
has been condemned as erroneous in the best ages of the Church, is evident by
the story of the Novatians first, and the Donatists afterward, who upon such
grounds made a separation from the Church of God, Against the Donatists does
St. Augustine dispute, as did St. Cyprian before him against the Novatians. Note
here, that often in his books De Bapt. contra Donatist, and contra Crescon,
Gram. lib. 2. cap. 15. does St. Austin cite an Authority out of Cyprian, lib de
lapsis, to prove the conclusion that we have in hand. Nos non communicare
peccatis aliorum etiamsi cum iis in Sacramentorum communione maneamus.
and set up select Congregations of their own; utterly condemning those
Churches and Assemblies, who admitted of any such to the Communion of the
Church whom they accounted fit to be suspended from the Sacrament, and the
society of the faithful.

That it does necessarily cast many Christians upon inextricable difficulties
and discomforts is evident in this: That if it be unlawful to receiv the
Sacramant in a mixed Assembly; Then it may fall out that some Christians may for
ever be deprived of that Ordinance, and so want that comfort both in life and
death, which they might have by it. For why? some have not liberty nor means of
separation, and seeking elsewhere, ex. gr. Wives, children, servants which are
under the Covert and command of their Husbands, Parents, Masters: Some again
are shut up in prison; others banished or confined to such a place where this
Doctrine is not believed, nor is that Sacrament any where to be had, but in the
Parochial Assemblies of that Place and People. Now for all such to be deprived
of the Sacrament, and of the comfort which comes by it, is a matter of such
inconvenience, that it cannot in any probability be allowed as an Order, and
Appointment of Christ. Consequently I conclude; That the Opinion which denies
it lawful for a Christian to communicate in a mixed Assembly, is in all
probability erroneous and not to be received.

This also may be cast in to make up full weight and measure: That we find in
the Gospel our Blessed Savior not excluding Judas from the Passover, even when
he knew that he had conspired with the Priests to betray him. Nor do any of the
Disciples, when our Savior told them, Ye are not all clean, One of you shall
betray me, not any of them do call upon Christ to turn out the Traitor, no not
when by the Sopp given to Judas, Christ had manifested him to be the man.
Wher-in if the Apostles were to blame (so it may be these men may think) as not
sufficiently (at that time) careful to have an Holy Communion by separating
the precious from the vile: yet certainly our blessed Savior did not at all
transgress the Rule of Holiness, Nor would he have permitted Judas to sit so
near them, if any of them might thereby fail of Receiving the Benefit that might
upon self-preparation be justly expected from that Sacrament. Nor do I know
what can be excepted against this, unless any would deny the Necessity of
moral cleanness to the preparing and fitting of the Jews for the worthy
receiving of the Passover, or boldly avouch that nothing more was required of
them but a care of Ceremonial purity, and legal purifications of the Flesh:
which I suppose is an opinion so gross and absurd, that none of understanding
would own it and avouch it. We read Hezekiah urging the Preparation of the
Heart, as an Argument to prevail with God to pardon the neglect of Ceremonial
purification: which had been of no force at all, if those Purifications had not
been required only in the way of signification and commonefaction to put them
in mind of that spiritual and moral duty, the Preparation of Heart. If God
took any pleasure in washing the hands, and scouring the flesh, why does our
Savior blame the Pharisees who were but too diligent, and observant of their
Ceremonies: No, no: Evident it is, that Sacrifices and Ceremonies, were
acceptable only as Institutions, and Admonitions of Moral Duties: As at other
times; So in their Preparation of themselves to the Holy Sacrament: Nor was it
enough for Judas that he was clean (as far as the water could reach) no not
enough that his feet were washed (if washed they were) by Christ: Since the
Heart was full of covetousnes and divelish intentions. Whose uncleanness, might
it be an hinderance to the Residue in receiving the Benefit of the Sacrament,
Can we with reason beleev, that our Savior would not have shutt him out, and
so have taught them (upon such an occasion) the Necessity of what these men
call for with so much importunity?

I close up all in a word: Since neither Scripture nor Reason do conclude it
unlawful. Nay since (the Scripture being silent in the cause, neither
prohibiting nor reprehending) Reason does draw us to conclude against the
opinion of these men: I conclude, It is not sinful for a Christian to receiv
the Sacrament in a mixed Assembly.

(...). Appendix.

Extracted out of a Responsary Letter.

To your two Questions propounded in the close of the Letter I return this
breef Answer for your satisfaction.

To the first viz. Whether it be not a sin in the Minister to deliver the
Sacrament to him that is scandalous: i. e. to him who having been such, has
not as yet reconciled himself to God and the Church by publik evidences of his
Repentance. I cannot admit the Affirmative for a Truth, viz. It is sin in him
except with these limitations.

1. When there is power in the Hand of the Minister to keep such men off, and to
bring them to the Testification of their Repentance. 2. Where it is evident to
the Minister, that the man has not reconciled himself to God and the
Congregation. 3. When the man is indeed scandalous i. e. notoriously known to
have given offense. But the case is otherwise; when either the Minister has
not power in his hand: or when he is not certain of the Man's Non-Repentance,
and Non-Reconciliation: Or thirdly, when the man is not indeed scandalous. I
say, Not indeed, Because some men account some things to be scandalous which
indeed are not. There is a scandal to a weak brother in the want of a charitable
use of Christian Liberty; There is a scandal to them that are without: This
latter is only that scandal that deserves repulse from the Communion: Not the
other.

To the second viz, Whether it be not a sin in the People to communicate with
any such: i. e. To receiv the Communion in the Society of such a Minister, and
such a scandalous Brother. I say as before: I cannot affirm it sinful; except
with these limitations. 1. When it is evident to the Christian that such a
person is indeed scandalous, and has not reconciled himself. 2. When it is in
the liberty of the Communicant to choose or refuse such company. But the case is
otherwise; when it is not evident to him, that the other has not reconciled
himself: or when it is not in the liberty of the Comunicant to refuse. Now as
it is not in the liberty of the Christian (saving the Duty that he owes to
God) to abstein altogether from the Sacrament: So neither is it in his liberty
(saving his duty that he owes to the Magistrate) to abstain from that
Congregation wher-of by virtue of his house and Habitation he is known to be a
Member. At the Communion of the sick peradventure he may forbear from joining
in society with such, if they should desire: Not so, from the public
Congregation.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

CHARLES HERLE.


