A BLOODY FIGHT IN FRANCE, Between the Kings Army, commanded by General
Harcourt, the King of Scots, and the Duke of York; and the Prince of Conde's
Forces, on Christmas Day last.

With the manner how the said Duke led on the Forlorn Hope, fell upon the
Princes forces, gave the first Onset; and after a gallant charge, (seconded by
his Brother the King) routed them, and beat them out of their Trenches.

With the number killed and taken prisoners, most of their Ordnance, Arms, and
Ammunition; and two other Armies entering the field, under the command of the
King of Poland's Son, and Prince Edward.

London, Printed for S. Holden, 1651.

A bloody Fight in France, between the Kings Army, commanded by General
Harcourt, and the Prince of Conde's forces, on the first of this instant Jan.
1651.
ON the first of this instant January the Prince of Conde took the field
against the Kings forces, where his Highness charged himself in person with
the forlorn Hope, doing gallant execution; the grounds and reasons of his so
sudden and unexpected Engagement were as follows: The Prince of Conde
receiving intelligence, that the King had a conjunctional design against his
Highness, he immediately resolved to fight General Harcourt (who then lay
within one league of his Rear) and accordingly advanced himself in person with
his own Regiment, whose Colors resembled the King of Scots at Worcester, being
green and white; but differed in the Motto; for whereas the King gave a type,
For Religion Crown and Kingdoms; so the Prince gave his Typification, To the
Law and Testimony of the Gospel. This proved an acceptable Sacrifice; for no
sooner had his Highness appeared at the head of each Regiment, and after an
excellent Speech, exhorting them to puissancie of spirit, for the fighting of
the Lords battle, they unanimously resolved to fight it out to the last man;
and accordingly fell upon Genesis Harcourt (both Armies being in battle array) and
after a sharp dispute, (which continued for the space of three hours) routed
the Kings forces, killed about 5000 upon the place, took 3000 prisoners, 90
Colors, the Kings Standard, with his blew Ribbon, and the Holy Ghost,
engravened in letters of Gold, as a Crucifix; together with all the Ordnance,
Arms, and ammunition.

In this Action the Prince of Conde deported himself with most puissant valor
and magnanimity of spirit; The D. of York charged against him in person, and
commanded the forlorn Hope, most of them consisting of the English Cavalry: His
horse was snot under him, but he himself receihed little hurt.

The Cardinals return into this Kingdom has brought all things to the utmost
extremity; and the increasing of the Armies on both sides, does show that they
are resolved to make an end by force, there being now no appearance of any
reconciliation.

Monsieur de Chas^caun us^, and Marshal de Villeroy (though together with the
Princes friends they have forwarded the return of the said Cardinal on a design
to unto him) being mistrusted, have forsaken the Court. It is likely the
quarrel will not be suddenly appeased. I hear that the said Cardinal passed
last Saturday from Sedan to Rhetel, and by Letters from Rheims we hear, that he
came over the River of Marue on the 3. instant with 50. Horse only about
Espern^^, whilst his forces were getting over at another place. It is very
probable, that at this time he is not very far from the Court, though his
adherents do give out that he is still in Campayne. In the mean while we are
informed, that a party of the Loraines Forces, some Spanish Troops, and
Monsieur le Princes Forces upon the Borders of Champagne, are to join together
at Arley, intending to march in a Body into France, to the number of 8000. men,
well commanded by Monsieur de Fauge, Dom Stephen de Gamarra, and by the Count
de Tavannes.

The Duke of Orleans Forces, and others sent for out of Picardy, do commit very
great violences upon their march, sparing neither friends nor foes, as well
about Paris as in the remotest places. The Horse are gone toward the River of
Loire to seize on the passes: 15. or 1600 Muskets went from hence last Tuesday
with abundance of Match and Bullet toward Estampes for the Foot, or for the
Recruits which are raising for the said Dukes forces, which are very poor and
naked for want of pay.

An Express come from the Court says, That there is no likelihood of any
accommodation with the Prince, and that several honest men were leaving the
Court, not being willing to see the said Cardinal.

Since the surprizal of Captain Green, we hear, That Cap. Smith has met with
some of the Hollanders, and has mered the same measure to them again, giving
no quarter. It is probable, this breach will grow wider and wider suddenly, for
the English are resolved to pay them in their own coin, and not to sell men's
lives for gain.

We hear that Captain Peacock has taken a French prize but not without loss;
for she disputed it to the last man.

There has been lately a proclamation printed at Amsterdam, and dispiersed up
and down the City, full of invectives against the parliament of England,
calling them Rebels, Traitors, and Bloudsuckers; but herein they hit themselves
a notable box upon the year.

There is greparation for shipping in all parts of Holland; a Fleet of one
hundred sail is intended.

From Constantinople they write, That the Emperor of Turkey has positively
declared against all the Kings, Princes, States, and Commonwealths in
Christendom, and has imprisoned about 4000 Christians; amongst the rest, many
eminent Gentlemen: some whereof, are men of quality, belonging to the English
Nation; who were Agents and Factors at Skaro^n, Smirna, and other places; yet
notwithstanding the Janisaries are not a little obstructive to his proceedings;
which in time may cause a glorious Sunshine of the Gospel, over those dark
A^heistical and Mohammedan Corners; But as ancient Pithogoras said, That he was
assured the Air was full of Spirits; so am I confident (as yet) that Turkey is
full of Devils.

But the Venetians are preparing a great Summer Fleet, to go out against the
Turks, under the command of the Lord High Admiral Foscolo, who has already
took 4 stately Galleys; and has made himself Mastes of the strong Castle of
Nedren, wherein he found 30 brass pieces, 500 bar^^ls of powder, and great
store of Ammunition. The Emperor of Germany is likewise raising 40000 men.
(...) Turks Design against Christendom.

Cardinal Mazarine has entered that Kingdom with 7000 horse and foot, to assist
his Sovereign Lord the King, against the Prince of Conde. The Duke of Orleans
has declared against his invasion; but the Duke of Elbeuf does declare himself
for the Cardinal, and so does all the new Cardinals in Picardy and Champane.
The Prince endeavors very much to win his Enemies by fair means: His gallant
and civil Order or Discipline in the Army, takes great Influence upon the
hearts of the people; and many excellent Presidents are extant touching the
glorious success of all those who fight under the Banner of Jerus Christ, viz.

Sennacherib (the King of Assyrians) invading Judea with a powerful Army,
commanded it to be related by his Captains to Ezcchias the King, that in vain
he reposed his trust in any Divine power; for seeing (said he) the Gods of
other Nations were not able to defend their Worshippers against the puissance
and might of the King of the Assyrians; therefore neither could the God of
Israel. For which horrible blasphemy God in one night destroyed almost his
whole Army, there being 185000 armed men slain by an Angel. And the King
himself after his return into Ninivie his City, sacrificing to his gods (who
could not defend him) was murdered by his own sons.

Nabuchodonesor (King of Chaldea) when in his fury he cast the h^ee children
into the fiery furnace, for that they refused to adore a Statua erected by him,
and further blasphemed against God, in preferring his own power before the
power of God, in these words: Quis est Deus? Who is God that can take you out
of my hands? Did immediately after acknowledge the contrary, and confessedia
Deity, through the sight of that stupendous miracle, by the which the children
being in the midst of the flames, remained unhurt and not burned. But after
when he had forgot the same, and bear himself with his former cl^tion and pride
of mind, maintaining, that his power and glory stood obnoxious or subject to
none, he was suddenly punished by God; a voice from Heaven rushing upon him,
and speaking thus: Tibi dicitur Nabuchodonosor Rex, etc. O King Nabuchodonosor,
to thee be it spoken: thy Kingdom shall depart from thee. And they shall drive
thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the Beasts of the field; They
shall make thee to eat grass as the Oxen; and seven times shall pass over
thee, till thou know, that the most high bears rule over the Sons of men,
and gives it to whomsoever, he will. Which voice being ended, he was presently
deprived of reason and grew mad. Whereupon being driven from all men's society,
he begun to live in the Woods among Beasts, and during seven years lived after
the manner of beasts. Which period of time being ended, he was restored to his
wits and senses, and preently thereupon most excellently confessed a divine
power. That this was to happen unto him, God foreshewed it a year before in a
vision which he had, while he dreamed; which vision Daniel did interpret.

Agrippa the elder being in Cesaraea, and clothed with sumptuous apparel, and
sitting in a high and regal seat, began to make a speech to the people; but
some of his people cried out, that it was the voice of some God, and not of
man; which words being grateful unto him, (who could be willing to assume
divine honor to himself) he was suddenly stricken with an Angel, and so his
flesh and bowels putrefying, he was consumed with lice.

The Syrians being overcome in War by the Israelites in certain mountainous
places, ascribed their overthrow to the Gods of the Mountains, who (they said)
did favor the Israelite; therefore they would fight with the Israelites in the
valleys, where they thought the God of Israel was not interessed; upon which
cause, God by his Prophet thus spoke to the King of Israel; Quia dixerunt Syri,
etc. Because the Syrians said, the Lord is God of the Mountains, and not of the
valies, I will give all this great multitude in to thy hand, and you shall now,
that I am the Lord. And thereupon both their Armies joining battle after, the
Israelites (though but few in number) killed in one day a hundred thousand
footmen: And there remained in a near place twenty seven thousand Syrians, who
flying into the City, were killed with the fall of the City walls: doubtlesly
this was a manifest revenge and punishment of the former blasphemy.

Nicanor being leader of the Army of Demetrius the King, and intending to
invade the Jews upon the Sabbath, was admonished that in honor and reverence
to God (who fecth all things) he should forbear that facred day: to the which
advise he thus answered: Estnepotens quispiam in caelo etc. Is there a Lord in
heaven, that commands the Sabbath day to be kept? to whom when it was answered,
Est^^minus vivus etc. There is a living Lord, which rules in Heaven, who
commands the seventh day to be kept: he replied; Et egopotens etc. And I am
mighty upon Earth to command them, for to arm themselves, and to perform the
Kings business. Upon which occasion the day of War being begun, though Nicanor
had a most powerful Army, furnished with all kind of Munition and Armor; yet
was he overthrown by a very few, with the loss of 35000 men. His blasphemous
tongue was likewise cut off, and by small pceces cast unto Birds; and his hands
which he lifted up against the Temple, were set up in an opposite place to the
Temple.

At what time Achior commended the power of the God of heaven, and averred,
that the Jews were secure and safe, in that they worshipped God religiously,
at which words Holofernes in great indignation thus answered. Quoniam
prophetasti, etc. Because thou have prophesied among us to day, that the people
of Israel is defended by their God, I will show thee, that there is no other
God, but Nabuchodonosor, etc. For which blasphemy he paid dear, forth is own
head was cut off by the hand of a Woman, and his Army being driven to flight, a
great part thereof was put to the sword by the Jews.

Antiochus for his pride and blasphemy, was stricken from God with an invisible
and incurable disease; for first, suddenly a violent ^ain of his Bowels invaded
him; and then quickly after he fell out of his chariot, wounding himself
dangerously: lastly his body purifying with a filthy consumption, and breathing
out a most loath^om smell, was consumed alive with worms.

Balthazar (King of the Chaldeans) when he commanded the holy Vessels to be
brought to him (which were taken out of the Temple of the Lord at Jerusalem)
and did drink in them with his Noble men, and his Concubines; for such his
profaning of them did presently fool Gods just revenge; for in the midst of
the banquet and jollity with his guests, it is said, Apparuerunt digiti, etc.
There appeared fingers of a man's hand, which wrote over the candlestick upon the
plaster of the wall of the Kings palace. And this appeared in the fight of all
men, and with great consternation of mind and fear to the King himself.

The King of Portugals eldest son is advancing with his Army against the
Spaniard, for the relief of the French in Barcellonia.

The King of France has sent Prince Edward (son to the Queen of Bohemia) to
make opposition against the Prince of Conde: the King of Scots, and the Duke of
York are designed for the field; the first as Lieut. Genesis of the Horse: the
second, as Major General. And its said that they are already advanced again the
Prince of Turence, and has fallen upon his forces, and after a sharp dispute,
beas them out of their Trenches.

FINIS.

