A BLOODY AND CRVEL PLOT, Intended by the Popish ARMY, AND Their Adherents,
against the Kings Majesty and all the Protestan^s of the KINGDOM,

To the murder and ruin of the English Protestants: discovered by a Petition
intercepted.

LONDON, Printed for H. R. MDCXLIII.

The Romish Remonstrance, setting forth to his Holiness of Rome the
proceedings of that faction in this Kingdom, and their adherents against the
Protestant party, presented in the year of division, 1642.
May it please your Holiness,
YOur faithful servants and subjects in these parts of Europe, within the
Dominion of England, as in duty we are bound, and in obedience to your
Holiness sacred command, have presumed to present you this Remonstrance of our
proceedings for the defense of our Religion, Laws and Liberties, and ancient
Supremacy of the Church and See of Rome, of which we have the honor to be
members, children and servants, against the heretical and adverse party
denominated Protestants and their accomplices, who now strive to abolish and root
out our Religion, and us out of these your Holinesses spiritual Dominions
consisting of these particulars, imploring from your wisdom, and thrice
reverend Senate by your authority there assembled, further aid and assistance
both by your holy Counsels, and otherwise to continue this holy war by us
begun, and to withstand our potent adversaries.

I.
After your servants with the assistance of our holy teachers, and spiritual
Fathers, Priests, Capouchins, Jesuits and Friars, we had endeavored by
underminings and secret plots to subvert and disolve the Parliament here now
against us unfortunately assembled, especially some particular Members of each
House, which we conceived swayed the rest, which might otherwise have been
more flexible and yielding to our desires and purposes, but could no ways
prevail in the same, although much encouraged with the justness of our cause,
and your graces plenary and indulgent pardons issued and granted us, we
thought by force of arms to suppress our adversaries, and to that purpose we
endeavored

II.
To draw to our party the learned Prelates, and Clergy of that Kingdom, who
easily inclined to our desires, and favored our cause, and as a good step to
our purpose procured even twelve of them together to protest against their King
and his proceedings by both Houses of Parliament, but it had been better
otherwise, for by experience we find their counsels, as Members of that House
might have done us more good then so hasty and public Protestation; for by
that means they were accused of high treason by the Commons, and expulsed the
Peers House, and cooped up together in the Tower, by which means our
expectation of their assistance became fruitless, and we driven to agitate on
other designs more safe for us as we conceived to proceed in, which was

III.
To stir up and raise division amongst the Protestants themselves, some in
defense of the Eccleiasticall Jurisdiction of Bishops, and some against the
same, both sides having favorites both in the Lords House and Commons, but
this little availed, for both Houses agreed in uniformity against them, and
their jurisdiction: yet we procured their deliverance upon bail, and now they
are much assistant to our designs, and have freely contributed their counsels
and estates to the maintenance of our cause, under pretense of defending the
Prerogative of their King, which being accomplished, we procured by lucky
agents his Majesty to

IV.
Take distaste and displeasure at the tumultuous assemblies of the Citizens of
London, who aimed by force to suppress the Bishops and Popish Lords of the
House of Peers, and to absent himself from his Parliament, under pretense of
more safety and security of his Majesty's Person and Offspring; after his
Majesty's departure we wrought so far with his Majesty's Council as to
persuade his Majesty to take, to

V.
His Person a guard, by that pretense endeavoring to raise arms against the
Parliament, which by both Houses was declared to be illegal, and against the
Laws of the Kingdom: in further pursuit of this great design we have in
hand, we procured diverse Members of Parliament

VI.
To be accused and proclaimed Traitors for giving counsel against our
proceedings, and procuring arms to be raised in defense of their Privileges
and Liberties, which we had procured to be infringed and broken. Thus far we
proceeded without any great danger or difficulty, for we had but bare
Protestations and Declarations against our proceedings, without hurt to our
persons or estates: but now open war is raised against us, our estates seized
upon, our Priests and Jesuits banished, and we driven from our habitations, and
as many of us as they could they have disarmed, for which having no other
pretense colorable to raise open arms most part of the Kingdom, opposing us,
and endeavoring to make or us (...) prey and spoil, we were enforced to use
our best friends about the Court for our protection, pretending the illegallity
of the Parliaments proceedings touching the settling of the Militia, which if
not prevented would be our utter destruction, and to persuade his Majesty that
his Prerogative was particular and undubitable in that point, and that it was
more agreeable to Law and Prerogative, to

VII.
Put a Commission of Array in execution throughout the Kingdom, and issue out
Proclamations for obedience to the same, which being approved, was attempted
accordingly, and in many places obeyed, a sufficient party to defend war, took
the Kings part against the Parliament, and we as native Subjects to our Prince
thought it our duty with our lives and fortunes to assist our distressed
Sovereign, and now to lay aside all pretense of our Religion (although that is
our only aim) fight now in defense of his Majesty's Prerogative, which if we
prevail, we in^end not to submit to his government otherwise then establishing
our Religion in his dominions, and abolishing the Protestant Profession as
heretical, which if he shall refuse, we hope your pardon will protect our
souls, if by treason or otherwise we conspire his destruction, and his
Posterity, and if we obtain, we conceive our selves safe enough, having gone
thus far, we endeavored

VIII.
That foreign force might be brought into this Kingdom from Spain, France
and Denmark, to assist his Majesty in his just war, which we accordingly
expect that

IX.
We are luckily possessed of many Castles, Towns and Cities of strength in
most parts of the Kingdom, have had many skirmishes with our enemies, but
still have had the worst; our Captain General is the noble Prince Rupert, of
the body of his Majesty's Army attending his Person, the Earl of Newcastle and
others, Captains of the forces raised on the behalf of his Majesty in the
North parts of England, and Sir Ralph H^pton Captain of the West parts; to
speak truth most parts favor the cause, but have had no great success, for
the party of the Parliament grows strong, and have won from us many Castles
and Towns, therefore if this next spring forces from foreign parts come not
in to assist the cause, it is like to perish, we have no mercy on ^he
he^eticks, but begin to deal with them if we overcome as our brethren in
Ireland; and indeed the lenity of the adverse party shows either in them no
magnanimity of spirit, or a careless imagination that they shall overcome us
with their looks, the conceit whereof is no small delight to our fancies.

X.
Also we have not a few friends, Officers and Commanders in the opposite army,
which stand us in great stead in skirmish, others to discover to us the
strength of our enemy how well they are furnished with powder and bullets, how
many affect not their service and the like, which is advantage to us.

And thus may it please your Holiness, we have presented the full estate of
things now and hitherto with us, once more humbly desiring speedy assistance by
your procurement, that a speedy end may be put to these wars, and we with our
Religion and Laws established in peace and tranquillity, which we pray the
Saints departed grant,

And that your Holiness and your Counsels, may take better effects then
Achitophels against David, we again pray, etc. B. J. V. D. G. L.


FINIS.

