BLOODY NEWS FROM Covent Garden; Being a True Relation, how one Mr. Bulger, an
Irish Gentleman, who Committed a Horrible and Bloody Murder near the Three-Tun
Tavern, in Chandois-Street: And of a Baker's Wife that is secured for the same
FACT.
BEtween 11. and 12. a Clock at Night on Thursday the 20th of this present
September, Mr. Ph^lpsa Bakers Wife in Bedford-Berry, came to the three Tun
Tavern in Chandois-Street for some Wine, and it so happening that the
Gentlewoman of the Tavern, suspecting the money not to be good refused it for
that Reason; and also to give her credit, not knowing at that time who she was
or where she dwelt: One Charlton an Honest and Industrious Poor Laboring Man,
and who plied as a Porter to the said Tavern, and to other Neighbors in the
same Street was present. Also a Coachman by Accident, spoke to Mrs. Phelps,
about her hindering him of 5 or 6. s. that was his due, from some of her
Lodgers, who he said were a Company of Bullys and Hectors, which so enraged her
that she presently, in a few minuits departs in a great Passion (as may be
thought) being conscious of her Guilt, and in a very few Minuits time, one
Bulger an Irish Gentleman comes rushing into the Tavern and asked for the
Coachman which the Porter perceiving, went immediately out of Doors, fearing
the Gentleman might do him some mifchies (his Countenance threatening as much)
and so it fell out; for the said Mr. Bulger pursued the Porter with all
Violence, and before he was four Yards from the Tavern door run the Porter
through the Body, upon which the poor man cried out Murder, and returned into
the Tav^rn being still pursued, and dropped down dead before the Bar.

At the same time the Murder was Committed, a Gentleman alighting from a Coach
at a Neighboring Door, called out to the people of the Tavern to secure the
said Mr Bulger, saying he had killed the man, which was accordingly done, and
at Constable sent for to secure the Prisoner, in O^der to his being prosecuted,
and at the same time upon Examination of the Prisoner he Confessed the Fact, and
declared he had ^o prejudice against the poor man that was slain, and that he
did it at the Instigation of the said Bakers Wife; who forced him twice out of
her doors to do it before he was willing to concern himself in her quarrel; she
pretending the Coachman had Affronted her, and said he was heartily sorry for
what he bad done and hoped God would forgive his grievous Offense Upon which
Declaration, the Constable sent some part of his Watch and seized the Bakers
Wife, and with the Assistane of another Constable and a great Number of
Watchmen, and other Assistances that came in by chance, they carried them both
to the Gate House about twelve a Glock the same Night, where they are to remain
till next Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, and Goal delivery of Newgate. Mr White
the Corroner of Westminster, having taken the Inquest, the Jury have found both
the said parties Guilty of Willful Murder; and its Generally believed, it will
appear so, when the Cause shall come to be tried at the Old-Baly, the
Circumstance and Evidence being very plain and possitive, besides the
Confession of the parties.

It is certain this poor Porter is nor the first person the said Mr. Bulger
has slain. It being not many months ago, since he killed a Middlesex Officer,
as he was Executing his office in German-Street in St. James's New-Buildings*
for which he was Convicted, and had his Majesty's Gracious Pardon. And it is
Credibly Reported, that Mr. Lesly the Scotch Gentlemau, that had the misfortune
to kill Mr. Glover in Covent Garden, not many months ago, did lodge at that
time at this Woman's House, and it is Conjectured that she might possibly have a
finger in that Mischief, as well as this, which if so we may glorify the
Providence of Divine Justice, in pursuing the Blood of the Innocent, which
cries aloud for Vengeance on the Heads of the Guilty: though they may privately
persevere in their wickedness never so long, the Hand of Gods Justice will
ce^^ainly, one time or another find them out, and this unfortunate poor man by
the unruly hands of his Violence fell as you have heard without any manner of
Provocation.

LONDON Printed for T. O. 1683


