THE BLOODY HUSBAND, AND CRVELL NEIGHBOVR.

Or, A True History Of TWO MVRTHERS, Lately committed in Laurence Parish, in
the Isle of Thanet in Kent, near Sandwich:

One Murder By the hands of Adam Sprackling Esquire, who upon the 12th day of
December last, being Sabbath day; in the morning, cut, mangled, and murdered
his own wife; for which fact he was hanged at Sandwich upon Wednesday the 27th
day of April last, 1653.

The other The Murder of Richard Langly, of the same Parish, whose blood also
(as is here showed) cried against the said Mr. Sprackling,

Numbers 35.33. Blood defiles the Land, and the Land cannot be cleansed of the
blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it.

Written by one that lives near the Place where the said Murders were
committed, and was present at Mr. Sprackling's trial; And published for the
warning, and good of all.

May 13. 1653. Imprimatur,

Edm. Calamy

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Warren. 1653.

THE BLOODY HUSBAND, AND Cruel Neighbor, etc.
GOD that made man after his own Image, made a Law, Genesis 9.6. Who so sheddeth
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed; for, in the Image of God made he
man. Against this sin of Murder, the wrath of God has been revealed from
heaven, by his just and daily revengings of innocent blood upon Murderers.
Treasurers of Examples of Judgments in this kind, both old and new, ly before
us; From the time of bloody Cain, to the blood thirsty Popish Rebels in
Ireland, to which slaughter men of the Scarlet whore of Rome, God has given
plenty of blood to drink. We see bloody men daily cut off by the Sword of
Justice in all places. The late Execution of the Wife-murtherer at Islington,
near London, And the late Murders in the Isle of Thanet in the County of Kent,
and the judgment of God on the Murderers, call for a book, wherein they may
be written for examples to the Generations present and to come.

Adam Sprackling Esquire, of St. Laurence Parish in that Isle, about 20. year
since, married Katherine, the Daughter of Sir Robert Leukner, of Kent; This
Gentleman having a fair estate in Lands, and being above thousands of his
Nelghbours in Estate, wanting the grace of Humility, exalted himself above
measure, affected pre-eminence in all Companies, used, in his braveries, long
hair, etc. to ride about the Island, and frequent Taphouses, and there to Rant
and roar, game and swear exceedingly, upon the least provocation, and used to
quarrel and draw his weapon, etc. He regarded not the Sabbath, but profaned
it at home; The public worship of God, and Preaching of the Word, he seldom
or never attended; delighted much in the company of drunken Ministers. This
man, having much wasted his estate by his riotous courses, was of late pursued
with arrests and suits at Law for debts, which he had contracted; and diverse
that entered into bond for him left to ruin, and imprisonment; Master
Sprackling had Executions out against him, and Bailiffs ready to apprehend him,
whereby he was constreined to make his own house his prison, to keep home, and
could not dominier abroad, and ride about as heretofore. Upon this occasion he
grew sad, choleric, and petulent, and full of rage in his house; His Wife
being diverse times constreined to lock up her self from him. She was a woman of
precious report for many virtues, and (with Mary) did choose the better part:
But upon Saturday at night December 11. last, Master Sprackling being resolved
to mischief her, as the sequel manifested, He then being in the Kitchen of his
house, had one Lamming a neighbor of his with him, and he then sent for one
Knowler a Seaman to come to him; but it being ten of the clock at night, he
desired to be excused, saying he was in bed; whereupon Master Sprackling sent
for one Martin, a poor old man, a Tenant, and neighbor of his, who (though in
bed) did arise and come to Master Sprackling, and then Lamming desired that he
might go home, which request Master Sprackling granted. So there remained
Master Sprackling and his Wife, and Martin, and one Ewell, servant to Master
Sprackling, these four only in the Kitchen; His Daughter and Maidservant got
away (seeing his rage) and locked themselves all night in an out-room far from
the Kitchen. Mr. Sprackling would not go to bed, though it grew late, but
commanded Martin to bind Ewells legs, which he did accordingly with a dogs
couplings, and so Ewell sat bound all night after on the ground. Martin and
Ewell conceived it only a frolic or ranting fit or humor come on him, such as
they had been formerly acquainted with.

Then he began to rage against his Wife, who sat quietly there: her words to
him were full of loving and sweet expressions; but he on a sudden drew his
Dagger, and struck her with it on the face, which blow hurt her jaw; but she
was very patient, and said little to him; but he still raged against her; And
toward morning the good Gentlewoman being weary, and in great fear, rose up to
go out of the room, and lifting up her hand to open the door, her Husband
following her with a chopping-knife in his hand, cut her wrist therewith, so,
that the bone was cut in sunder; her hand hung down only by the sinews and
skin; No help was near, Ewell bound, and Martin old and weak, and fearing his
own life, durst not interpose, but only prayed his Mistress to stay and be
quiet, he said he hoped all would be well; And Martin got a napkin and bound up
her hand with it. After this, toward morning, Mr. Sprackling, raging and
railing at her, dashed her on the forehead with the Iron Cleaver or
Chopping-knife. Then she fell down bleeding, but recovered her self on her
knees, and kneeling cried, and prayed to God for pardon of her own sins, and of
her Husbands sin, beseeching God to forgive him, for she forgave him. But, in
the time of her praying thus, her Husband chopped her head in the midst into the
brains, so that she fell down stark dead instantly, lying in her own blood;
Then he killed six dogs, four of which he threw besides his wife, and after she
was dead, he cut her in the leg in two places, and compelled Martin to wash
Ewells face with her blood, he also dipped linen in her blood, and besmeared
Martin's face with her blood, and bebloudied his own face with it.

For this Fact Master Sprackling was apprehended that night, having his Dagger
in one hand, and Pistol in the other hand; but he was surprised, and taken by
one Martin Brook. The next day he was carried to Sandwich Jayl: And after the
Mayor of Sandwich (being Coroner) and his Inquest had sat upon the death of
this Gentlewoman, Martin also was sent to Prison. The Sessions at Sandwich
followed on Friday the 22. of April last. The Steward of the Court Mr. Peter
Peak a Counselor of Grayes-Inne, gave a godly and learned charge to the Grand
Inquest, and, after mention of many sins, he spoke of the crying sin of
Murder, what a land-defiling and God-provoking sin it was, as he evidenced by
many examples; As, of the Sword not departing from the house of David, for his
murder of Uriah, by the Sword of the Ammonites; For the blood of Naboth, the
dogs lickd the blood of Ahab, and threescore and ten sons of his had their
blood shed afterward, and dogs did eat bloody Jezabel; The sons of bloody Saul
hanged up, etc. And, for the direction of the Court, he came to some cases of
Murder, showing in such cases there was malice expressed, malice employed, malice
supplied. Malice expressed, and Murder thereupon, is ordinary: but if a man
intend maliciously to kill one, and it fall out, that he kill not the party,
which he desired to mischief, but another, it is murder. He showed out of his
Law Books, that a Father-in-law procured physic for his sick Son-in-law; The
Physician prescribed a comfortable Medicine, which the Apothecary made
accordingly of several Ingredients; The Son-in law took some of it, but it had
almost killed him, though cordial Physic; The Father-in-law went to the
Doctor of Physic, and told him how the Cordial wrought; Hereupon the
Apothecary was sent for, and examined touching the Ingredients; He replied, he
had put nothing in, but as the Physician directed, and that he knew the physic
so Cordial, that he would take it himself, and, to justify himself, did take
part of that Medicine; but, he soon dyed: Afterward it was found out, that the
wife of the sick man had put poison in the Medicine, thinking thereby to poison
her Husband; but, he being of a stronger nature than the Apothecary, did
escape, though hardly: but the woman was executed for the Apothecaries death,
though she intended not his death, because there was malice expressed, murder
intended.

Malice employed was where no expression of malice in words, etc. appeared in
the slayer; as if a Son put his aged Father out of doors in a frosty night, and
he die, its murder; Non refert an occidat, an causam mortis praebeat. If two be
together, and, no provocation given or known, one kill the other, there is
malice implied; it is Murder.

Malice supplied, this he showed in two Children in King Henry the seventh's
time, one nine year old, the other eleven; one killed the other, and, because
the slayer denied the fact, and cunningly by excuses sought to hide it, and to
acquit himself of it, it was found Murder; Malice was supplied in Law, to be
in the Child though not of competent age, and the Child was thereupon executed.

After the Grand Inquest had received the Bill of Indictment, which was
presented in Court by Mr. Steward Leukner, brother of Mr. Spracklings wife, the
Inquest going together, returned to the Bar, finding both Mr. Sprackling, and
Martin guilty of the Murder of Mistress Sprackling. After dinner the Jury of
life and death was called, Mr. Sprackling and Martin pleaded not guilty; and
referred themselves to a fair trial: Mr. Sprackling held up his trembling hand
at the Bar; but when the Jury came one by one to be sworn, he excepred against,
and put by 20. of them, showing no reason for it; but, he not being permitted
by Law to except against any more, without showing reason for it, a Jury was at
last filled up and sworn. And the murder as before rehearsed, was proved by
Ewell; (for Martin being a Prisoner and party, could give no evidence.)

Mr. Sprackling pleaded for himself, that he was mad when he killed his Wife;
and that he knew not what he did: but Lamming, being deposed, testified, that
when he left Mr. Sprackling, that Saturday night, he perceived no distemper in
him, but that he was as he used to be at other times: And Joseph Cowell his
Tenant, who saw him that Sabbath after the Murder done, testified that he was
as he used to be, only he spoke thick, and often of blood, blood, blood. And it
was testified by Roger Streven, who saw him next morning after the fact, when
he went to Prison; He deposed that he saw no sign of distraction in him, but
was rational in his discourse, and provided a Wagon with a bed in it for his
conveyance to Sandwich Prison; And Roger Streven deposed, that he heard it
affirmed that Mr. Sprackling said after his wife was dead, now let us kill the
Dogs, and then they will say we are mad indeed.

And since the Trial, it is known that Mr. Sprackling writ a Letter that
Saturday morning to Roger Hooper, a Seaman, to buy him Goods at London, and
such, and such Books; and, to pay money at London for him; which Letter was
rational, in his usual form of writing. And since the trial also, Mr.
Hopestill Tilden of Sandwich affirmed in the hearing of many, that he being
diverse times with Mr. Sprackling in Prison, heard him say, he killed his Wife,
because she was a traitor to him, and said, that if it were your case
Hopestill, you would do the like to such a Wife that went about to betray you,
and undo you, and deliver you to the Bailiffs. And, I since hear, he affirmed
the same to another, that morning he went to Prison, saying, she left the doors
open on purpose, etc. And for further Evidence at the trial, many witnesses
were called and sworn, that testified, that this bloody Ox did use to push in
former time; and, that it was not a fit of frenzy at that time of the Murder
rehearsed; but, that he was of an habitual bloody disposition and practice. One
John Russell deposed, that about twenty year before, he saw Mr. Sprackling
endeavor to run one John Simons through with his naked Rapier, in St. Peter's
Parish, at a Tap-house there, and had nailed him to the wall, had not he took
hold on the hilt of the Rapier; and, that in another Tap-house there, he saw
Mr. Sprackling quarrel with one Giles, and drew his Sword at him; but, the
Deponent did not follow Master Sprackling into the next Room where Giles was;
but, he saw Giles come bleeding out.

One Robert Lister deposed, that Mr. Sprackling being worsted in a quarrel in
a Tap-house in that Parish, lay there at one Homans all night, and sent for his
man Corslet, his Champion, and next day morning, in cold blood, commanded his
man Corslet to fall on the said Robert Lister, which he did presently, and
struck the said Lister on the jaw with a cudgel, whereby a tumult arose; but,
company parted them: And one Goble, a Shoemaker, was run into the bowels, in
that Parish, another time, when Mr. Sprackling was in the affray.

Edward Taddy deposed, that he being Constable, did assist Humphery Pudner, the
Mayor of Dovers Deputy, at St. John's parish, and Richard Langley, Deputy to the
Mayor of Sandwich, at St. Laurence Parish, when they three had an Order to
disarm Mr. Sprackling, and, having taken and secured the Arms in his house, Mr.
Sprackling assaulted the said Edward Taddy, when he met him some months after;
And Humphrey Pudner deposed, that he drew upon him also in the street; and,
that he being Officer, disarmed Mr. Sprackling in an affray, which he made in a
Taphouse in St. John's Parish; And William Grant deposed, that in that Parish he
drew at him, and had cleav'd his head with his Cutlash, if he had not put by
the blow. Others were ready to depose many such bloody assaults done by Mr.
Sprackling: But (above all) the death of Richard Langley of St. Laurence
Parish, was mentioned in Court. This Richard Langley was a very godly man,
zealous for God and the State, had seized on Mr. Spracklings Arms, and Articled
against him, so that Mr. Sprackling was secured at Canterbury, at the first of
the Parliament: But Mr. Sprackling (being at liberty in the year 1648.) the day
before the Kentish Insurrection burst out, armed horse and men, and went down
from his own house to the Sea-town there, called Ramsgate; that is Romans-gate,
where the Romans first Landed when they subdued this Nation: And Richard
Langley living there, was sought for; but, he hid himself in his house for a
time; but, hearing that Mr. Sprackling was there at the Tavern with Horse and
Arms, and a rude crew with him, Langley crept out of his own house, and stole
away, and got to one Mistress Johnsons house, and making his sad case known, how
Mr. Sprackling sought his blood, The good Gentlewoman lent him her Mare, and
Langley presently fled out: but, Mr. Sprackling, hearing that Langley was got
away, his two men, Allen and Emersom, went after him; One Master John Johnson
deposed, that he saw them ride after Langley, so soon as Langley was got on
horseback, and that Mr. Sprackling's horse pursued, and they had their
Pistolls presented, as they rid by Mistress Johnsons Gate after Langley, whom
they overtook about two miles off, and there he was shot through his body with
a brace of bullets, which entered his back, and came forth at his breast, and so
he was left wallowing in his blood, and died presently, leaving behind him a
Widow and thirteen Orphans in a sad condition. Whereupon Paul Allen fled, and
is not yet taken: But Emersom, though he were afterward a Soldier in that
Insurrection, Yet he was apprehended and Executed at Canterbury. It was not
proved that Mr. Sprackling commanded them to kill Langley; But it is certain,
that Mr. Sprakling was Commander in chief there that day, and acted as
Commissioner, and sent for diverse honest men, and imprisoned some in his house,
and afterward went to Sea, and continued with the R^volted Ships. And it was
deposed at Master Sprackling's trial, that he had often threatened Richard
Langley, and that before Richard Langley was m^rthered, M. Sprackling seeing
him in the street, drew his Sword at him, and flourished it over his own head,
and was ready to assault Richard Langley, but was prevented by others. And it
was deposed also that before the Murder of Richard Langley, Mr. Sprackling
went out of the Tavern and pursued Langley to his own house with naked weapon
in his hand, and there called for him, and sought him, but not finding him
departed, and going out, let fall his Pistol in the entry of Langley's house,
which Pistol the Witness saw there, and took it up.

After the Court had heard the Evidence against Master Sprackling, leave was
given him to speak for himself, and to bring what witness he pleased in his
defense, he and they should be fairly heard. He named two Lawyers for his
assistance in form of Law, but none appeared. Two Physicians appeared in Court
for him, and some women, to prove he was mad: but they spoke only general
things; only one Physician deposed, that he had let him blood four times
together in a fever, about a year before, and that then he was in a distracted
fit; but none could swear he was distracted, near, at, or after the Murder
committed; only that he used to be outrageous in passion, etc.

The Jury, giving up their Verdict, said, they found Mr. Sprackling guilty of
wilful Murder.

But they acquitted Martin, having no proof that he had Combined to kill the
Gentlewoman, or assisted in killing her; but that, merely out of fear of death
to himself, he was willing to humor his Master in binding Ewell, and in
praying Mrs. Sprackling to stay: and Ewell upon oath said, that he could not
swear that he saw Martin lay hands on her, to keep her from going out, and
Martin having also a good testimonial of all his neighbors, of his peaceable
and harmless life. The sentence of death being pronounced by the Mayor of
Sandwich against Master Sprackling; Master Peak, the Steward, made a
patheticall exhortation to Mr. Sprackling to repent; he showed him the
heinousness of the fact, and aggravated it in regard of the murdered
Gentlewomans worth, in the admirable graces and virtues that shined forth in
her, etc. But Mr. Sprackling answered; No man can judge between man and wife,
but God alone, and showing small token of Repentance, or of care for his soul,
He only requested then, that his body might be delivered to four women, which
he named in open Court. Being returned to Prison, he refused Conference with
any, from his Judgment to his death. Diverse godly Gentlemen and Ministers
desired to speak to him, but he would admit none. There was a Lecture at
Sandwich upon the day of his Execution. The Jayl joined to the yard of the
Church, where the Lecture was preached; yet he would not so much as send to be
prayed for: But the Lecturer (Master John Durant) prayed earnestly for him. In
Prison he spoke of Receiving the Sacrament by the ministering of Mr. Edward
Fellows, but did not receive it.

Upon the 27. day of April last, Mr. Sprackling being ready to go to Execution,
desired the Sheriff of Sandwich to make a guard, that no man, Minister, or
other, might come near to speak with him. He had notes in writing at his
Execution to look on; He confessed in general that he was a sinner, and
deserved death, etc. Two Ministers pressed near him, and called upon him to
consider his condition, and to glorify God by a free Confession, and
exhortation to the people, there being (as was conceived) at least 2000. at his
Execution; but he desired the Ministers not to trouble him: But one of the
Ministers pressed Langley's death upon him, and desired him to discharge his
conscience in that, whether he were guilty or not; now was the time; as the
tree falls, so it lies; But Mr. Sprackling's answer was; Sir, I have made my
confession to God, I pray trouble me not; man has nothing to do with it, I
pray speak no more of it.

This is a sad presumption of his guiltiness of Langley's death; and that the
report is true, which says that Master Sprackling, when he sent Allen and
Emerson after Richard Langley, and bid them bring him dead or alive: If he had
not appointed them to kill Langley, he would now have disclaimed the fact; And
who would not have believed a dying man? It was the saying of many godly wise
people, when they heard of Mr. Sprackling's murder of his Wife, that they were
persuaded that the cry of Richard Langley's blood did move the bloodavenging
God to leave Mr. Sprackling to fall to that Wife-murther, that such a
blood-thirsty man might not go to the Grave in peace.

He was hanged in his Cloak, And afterward put into a Coffin clothes and all
at the Gallows, and after stripped, and laid forth, and coffined at the sign of
the three Kings in Sandwich; and the next day toward night carried from thence
six miles on men's shoulders over the Ferry to St. Lawrence Church, where in the
night he was buried near his Wife.

This is the true History of these bloody practices: God brings light out of
darkness, and the glory of his Justice out of the sin, shame, and destruction
of the wicked; They are not all sweet flowers from which the Bees gather honey:
All truth is written for our Instruction.

Learn

1. Let him that stands take heed lest he fall; All men are subject to the same
infirmities, and temptations; Walk circumspectly, pray continually, lest ye
enter into Temptation.

2. Forsake not God, by forsaking his Sabbaths, Ministry of the Word, etc. lest
Gods Spirit forsake thee, and thou be given up to Satan to be led captive by
him at his will.

3. Let all ranting and prodigal ones, my young Masters and others, learn here
the bitter sequels of riot and waste: Besides a world of evils, it brings want,
want distraction, discontent between the nearest Relations.

4. Take heed you marry in the Lord. It Is not a brave Spark that can manage
his Rapier well, etc. that you can expect to live well with, if there be not
grace in the heart.

5. Take heed of malice and wrath, and bloody mindedness, and of bloody
attempts and practices: Deliver me from blood guiltiness, O God.

6. Take heed of the company of the wicked, especially of bloody men: It had
like to have cost poor Martin his life.

7. Pray that our Higher powers moy take to heart the want of Government in the
Port part of the Isle of Thanet in Kent, which part is so far from Justice,
that it is full of profaneness; When the shire-part of the Isle, where Justice
is near and active, is better Reformed. I do humbly wish that all the Isle be
made Shire, or a Corporation set up in the Port-part: Drunkenness, Swearing,
Sabbath-breaking, etc. none to put such to shame; a Majors Deputy has no
power, the remedy is worse than the disease, to go so many miles to Complain to
the Majors; But Gods Justice acts where man's does not. Not a year passes
there, but a Drunkard breaks his neck off his horse, or over the Cliff: Two
have hanged themselves within a year last past, one on Easter Monday last,
being actually drunk, hanged himself.

8. Pray that a settled godly able Ministry may be established in the Parish
where this Master Sprackling lived; where these bloody and ungodly Practices
prevail: The dark corners of the Earth are full of the habitations of Cruelty.
There are many thousand souls, yet not ten pounds a year settled for the
maintenance of a Minister: Richard Langley procured the casting out of the
unsavory salt there; And be dyed in the time of his zealous actings to procure
maintenance for an able Minister.

9. Look upon this godly Gentlewoman, and Richard Langley, lying in their
blood, mangled and slain, and see what may befall the dearest servants of God
in this world: and prepare for the like trials. They that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution.

FINIS.

