Bloody Nevvs from CHATTAM OR, A True and Impartial Account of a most Barbarous
Murder, committed upon the Body of a Widow, and her Son.

On Twelf-day last past, by her pretended Sweetheart, in a Copps, about half a
Mile from Becon-Hill, within a mile of Chattam.

With the manner how this Murder (through the Providence of God) was
Discovered by a Dog, that was with a Boy gathering of Sticks.

A Relation of his Apprehension, and what he confessed to the Justice of Peace
and some Ministers, in the Goal at Canterbury, where he is now in Durance.

Any man may be satisfied of the truth of this, at the Queens-head at
Billinsgate, at the Starr Inn upon Fish-street-hill, by the Kentish Carriers,
and other Gentlemen lodgeing there.

Printed for George Smith, 1675.

BLOODY News from Chattam. etc.
WHere Lust takes up our desires, and Revenge and Murder seizes on our
resolutions, it is the true way to make us wretched in this life, and our souls
miserable in that to come; For if Chastity and Charity, (the two precious
virtues and Ornaments of a Christian) steer not our actions on Earth; how
shall, nay, how can he arrive to the Harbor of Heaven; or if we abandon those
celestial virtues to follow and embrace those Infernal vices, what do we but
take our selves from felicity to misery, and consequently give our selves from
God to Satan; but did we seriously (and truly) consider that there is a Heaven
to Reward the Righteous; and a Hell to punish the ungodly? We would neither
defile our hearts, and polute our souls with the thoughts, much less with the
actions of such beastly and inhumane crimes: but in this sinful age of ours,
there is two many lascivious nd invious wretches, who make it their business to
debauch themselves and others. Among whom I here represent unto you a sad, but
true History: (It Is Bloody, and therefore mournful) But if we derest the crime,
we need not fear the punishment, for God is as gracious and propitious to
protect the innocent, as Just and Severe to chstise the guilty.

In the Town of Chattam in the County of Kent lately Lived one -- Ruttle, a
lascivious debaucht Young Man, being much adicted to company-keeping, having
thereby wasted almost all his portion; begins to take into consideration how he
might raise his fortune, and redeem his credit: First, reforms his life; and
having put on a civil garb, and Nature having endewed him with wit and
comeliness, he resolves to seek after a Yoke Fellow, and such a one as might
help him in this low estate which he had brought himself into. He informs his
friends of his intentions to marty; Who informed him of a Person living near
him, that had they were sure enough to supply his present occasions, (and would
no doubt if he pleased to make his mind known unto her) be willing to accept of
him. He having this encouragement resolves to give this person a visit, and
that upon the next day, which he thought long e're it came; Now the Morning
being ceme he puts his resolution into practice; Being come into her presence,
and having fixed his eye upon her, saw she was worthy to be beloved, and
proceeds to make his mind known unto her, and seek her for his Wife, by his own
solicitations, promises, attained her good will to marry her, but not without
sighs, rears, and Prayers, and Oaths; and by these false hypocritical tears and
promises he gets the good will of this poor Widow, being the mother of two
Children, and them both living, the one at Nurse, the other at home with her
about six or seven years old; and now having got her good will for which he
came, he does proceed to confirm the business, and that by telling her what she
desired to know, viz. What he had, and in what way he was to live, and whether
able to maintain she and her two Children in case she should grant him her good
will: He knowing that he could not if he sooke the truth give her full
satisfaction; therefore as he now says, he resolved to turn the best side
outward, and to tell her that he had a considerable living near Canterbury
which was morgaged, but if she had but so much money that would redeem it, then
it would be worth so much a year, and that would be enough to maintain them,
and if she had not so much, he did not doubt but he could borrow so much, and
if she pleased but to go along with him he would show her what it was, and the
Writings, she gave credit to him, thinking his heart had been like his words,
gave consent to go along with him, and not only to see what he told her he
had there, but also to see his Friends, which dwelt there, he being born at
Faulston: now the time being come that she was, according to promise to go
along with him, in order thereunto she took Clothes with her, and also her son,
having none at home to leave him with, and with what Money she had, she goes
with him, not thinking that her journey had been so short as it proved to be:
for they were not gone above a Mile, or their abouts, but he considered with
himself, what he should do in case he should have her to the place he had told
her, it being but a false and a mere forged story, that he had made to delude
her, and being now in abundance of care and trouble, the Devil that Old
Serpent, that lies in wait to devour, quickly laid hold of this Opportunity,
and having strong hold, and good footing before, intends to bring this his
servant into his own bosom, that had so long nd faithfully served him: tells
him that his best an donely way was, if he could, to get get her to be kind to
him before hand: this bait of the Devils was very pleasing to him: he there
puts it into practice, and finding a convenient passage out of the Rode-way,
into a Copps or Wood, he entreats her to go with him: she readily follows him,
like a poor innocent Lamb: where being come into a secret place, he desires one
favor of her, and that was, that since they were both agreed, she would be
pleased to let him enjoy some nearer familiarity then had formerly been between
them, which she resused, being always virtuously inclined: he finding he could
not prevail in this, readily hearkened to what the Devil had before Insinuated:
Who advised him to Kill her and her child, and told him that the place was so
fecret that he would never be found out, and thereupon he is vvilling to try
this unhumane Tragedy: which he acted thus: he finding no way to bring his
business about to the obreyning his will of her, was the more incensed against
her, and there upon Draws his Knife, and Cutts her Threat, in several Ghastly
forms; and then acts worse then a Beast, takes his will of her when she
could not help her self, before she was quite Dead, as he has since resated
to the Goal-Keeper of Canterbury, Mr. Henry Landman: and having performed this
unnatural act, he takes what Money she had, and seeks after the little Foy,
who in this time of their Discourse, was rambled a little way off, further
into the Copps, not minding what they did: He having found him, cuts his
throat, and so flies to Dover, intending to pass over to France; about ten Days
after comes to the Wood a poor boy to gather sticks, and with him was a Dog,
and while the boy was busy a seeking fireing, the Dog was busy in running up
and down; and as God had appointed this Dog was the first that revealed this
horrid murder; who when he had found would not wag from thence, but howled
more and more till that the boy came to him, and no sooner was he come but he
was frighted almost out of his wits, and in this manner runs as fast as his
Legs could carry him home to acquaint the town, which he quickly did, and many
with speed as the boy directed them, went to see, where they quickly found it
to be too true; and that which troubled them inost, that it was one of their
Neighbors that had lived civily and honestly with them many years; they
quickly send Hue and cry after him, and take him at Dover; and after
examination by a Justice of Peace, was committed to Canterbury Goal; Where
several Ministers has been with him, but as yet find him very little
concerned, notwithstanding his acknowledging of his own guilt, but we must
leave him to the mercy of the Jury, and to the Justice of God.

FINIS.

