A Physical Dictionary; In which, all the TERMS Relating either to ANATOMY,
SURGERY, PHARMACY, or CHEMISTRY, are very accurately explained.

By STEPHEN BLANCARD, M. D. and Physick-Professor at Middleburgh in Zeeland.

LONDON; Printed by J. D. and are to be sold by Samuel Crouch in
Popes-head-Alley, and John Gellibrand at the Golden-Ball in St. Paul's
Churchyard, M.DC.LXXXIV.

TO My Honored Friend, Mr. William Molins.
SIR,
BEing very unwilling to be singular, as to send this Book into the World
without either Epistle or Preface, would certainly be, I resolved from the time
of my setting it to Press, to send it out with both; and had no sooner made
that Resolution, but presently pitched on a Patron under whom to shelter it. I
now humbly dedicate it to your self; and beg of you to belive that I am in all
sincerity,

Sir, Your very humble Servant, J. G.

Courteous Reader;
THe ensuing Dictionary was compiled in Latin, by the eminently Learned and
Famous Physician, Dr. Stephen Blancard, now Physick-Professor at Middleburgh in
Zeeland; in which he has taken that pains, and done it with such Accurateness,
that the like has never yet been extant. The Authors he has consulted (and out
of which he has made the following Dictionary) you have a Catalogue of, ensuing
this Preface. But chiefly, and most of all, he has extracted the most useful of
all the Terms in Anatomy, Pharmacy, Surgery, and Chemistry, out of ancient
Authors, as Erotian, Galen, and others; and from the more modern, as Gorraeus,
Foesius, Castellus, and others; out of whose Writings he has not omitted any
one useful term in the whole art of Physic. I am certain, that things of this
nature are extremely wanting, that so the terms (in which all, or the most part
of Mankind has daily occasion to use) may not be talked by rote; but may give a
rational account of their discourse, than which, nothing is more rational or
demonstrative than this of Physic.

That the Publick-Good has all along been drove at in this Affair, both by the
Author and Bookseller, is very apparent, in that it might have made a Book of
three times the price, and the matter spun out to a far greater bulk; but in
things of this nature, the Buyer's Interest ought to be, and has been consulted.

Vale.
Two Books printed for Samuel Crouch.
BRitannia Languens, or a Discourse of Trade: showing the Grounds and Reasons
of the Increase and Decay of Land-Rents, National-Wealth and Strength, with
Application to the late and present State and Condition of England, France, and
the United Provinces.

The Purchaser's Pattern, much enlarged. The First Part, shows the true Value of
Lands or Houses, by Lease, or otherwise. Whereunto are added many Rules for
the valuing of the ruined Foundations in the City of London, and for the
composing of Differences between Landlord and Tenant about re-building them.
Also Rules and Tables for the valuing of all Party-VValls; also Tables of
Interest and Rebate, at 6 per Cent. The Second Part, shows the measuring of
Land, Board, Timber, etc. correcting the false ways used by many therein. Also
the Art of Gauging, much enlarged; showing not only the measuring of Wine,
Beer and Ale Vessels, but also the gauging of all manner of Brewers Tuns; with
Tables of the Excise of Beer and Ale. Also many other Rules and Tables of
Weights and Measures, Foreign and Domestic; Tables of Accounts, Expenses,
etc. By John Phillips.

There is now lately reprinted, these two Treatises of Dr. Wilkins, late Lord
Bishop of Chester. The World in the Moon, and the Earth a Planet, with all the
Schemes and Plates, new cut, and engraven. To be sold by John Gellibrand, at
the Golden Ball in St. Paul's Churchyard,

THE Physical Dictionary OF STEPHEN BLANCARD.
A Baptista, see Modiolus. Abdomen, which Juvenal calls sumen and equaliculus,
is the lowermost Belly, containing the Liver, Spleen, Reins, Stomach,
Intestines, Bladder, etc. The innermost part of it is begirt with a Membrane
called the Peritonaeum, the foremost part is divided into the Epigastrum, the
right and left Hypochondres and the Navel, and the lowermost Region or part is
called Hypogastrium. Ablactatio is when a Child of one or two years of Age is
weaned. Abortus is the bearing of a Faetus before the Female have gone out its
full time, which happens either through the abundance of nutritious juice, or
defect or depravation of it; as likewise it may come by a fall, a blow, a
sudden fright, diuritics, etc. Abscessus, see Apostema. Abstemius is he who
abstains from whatsoever meats and drinks his Physician has forbid him the use
of. Abstergentia are those things which consisting of rugged, hard, and sharp
particles, do as it were shave and scour off all filth from the superficies,
and the pores and passages of bodies, where they are frequently put into
various fermentations from the spirits, and other elements Iodged in those
parts. Acamatos signifies the best constitution and figuration of humane body,
as also one that takes no pains, and a person that is not tired with it.
Acantabolus is a Chyrurgeons Tool called Volsella, which is to take out Thorns,
or any such prickly substance that shall chance to stick in the oesophagu; or
Gullet. Acautha is the most backward protuberance of the Vertebres, called
spina dorsi, as also the Thorn of Trees or Plants. Accessio, see Paroxismus.
Accidens, see Symptoma. Acetabulum is that cavity in the Huckle-bone which is
appointed to receive the head of the thigh bone within it: Also certain
glandules in the Chorion are called Acetabula, concerning which see
Cotyledones. Achlys is a certain dark distemper of the eye; it is reckoned
amongst the species of Amblyopia, or dimness of sight. Achor is a sort of a
crusted Scab which makes an itching and stink on the surface of the head, and
is occasioned by a serous, salt and sharp matter; the difference betwixt an
Achor and Favus consists in this, that in Achors the holes or Cavities are
small, and sometimes not visible; but in a Favus they are more large and
conspicuous. Achroi are men that have lost their color, such as are
melancholy persons, men of an ill habit of body, and they who are troubled
with the Jaun: dies. Acia Celsi, the same that Fibula Chyrurgorum. Acida
dyspepsia, see dyspepsia. Acidulae, see Balanaeum. Acinesia is the immobility
of the body, or of any part thereof, as in a Palsy, Apoplexy, swounding, etc.
Acini, are small grains; whether they grow by themselves, as Elder-Berries; or
shut up in a husk, as Grape-stones; nay, sometimes they are taken for the
Grapes themselves. Acmastica the same with Synochus. Acme is the height of a
disease: Many distempers have four Periods, the first is called (...) or the
beginning, when the matter is but yet raw, as it were, and unripe; the second
is (...) the growth or increase, when the morbifick matter becomes a little
digested and ripened; the third is (...), when it is fully and completely so;
the fourth is (...), or the declension of a distemper when its rage is abated,
and the Patient is judged beyond danger, for none die in the declension of a
disease: This diversity of periods arises from the bloods imbibing of crude
juices, which have their times of crudity, maturation, or ripening, defection,
and volatility; and thus the case may be said to stand in Fevers and other
distempers. Acopum is a medicine which applied by fomentation, allays the sense
of weariness, contracted by a too violent motion of the body, compounded of
warming and mollifying ingredients. Acosmia is an ill state of health, joined
with the loss of color in the face. Acoustica are medicines which help the
hearing. Acrasia is the excess or predominancy of one quality above another in
mixture. Acrisia is when a distemper is in so uncertain and fluctuating a
condition, that the Physician can hardly pass a right Judgment upon it.
Acr^^^olum is a species of warts. Acromium is the upper process, or increase of
the shoulder blade, or the top of the shoulder where the neck-bones are joined
with the shoulder-blades. Acromphalum is the middle of the Navel. Acros is the
height and vigor of diseases, as also it signifies the prominency of bones, the
tops of fingers, and of plants. Acrotes is the vigor, top, and extremity of any
thing, as sulphurous and saline particles exalted ad (...) that is, brought to
the most exalted vigor their nature is capable of. Actio is an Operation or
Function, which men perform either by the body alone, or by both body and mind;
and it is either animal, which depends upon the brain; or natural, which is
owing to the Cerebellum. Acutus morbus, an acute disease, is that which is over
in a little time, but not without imminent danger; and it is either very acute,
or most acute; the later is meant when the distemper is over in three or four
days; but the former is that which continues till the seventh day; or else a
disease is called simply acute, when it lasts fourteen, or it may be twenty
days; or lastly acute ex decidentia, which lasts forty days at most. Aden is a
glandule, which is either conglobated as the glandules of the Mesentery of the
Groin, and the Pinealis, whose office is to dispense the separated humor to the
veins, or conglomerated, like a Cluster, as the salival glandules, the
Pancreas, or Sweetbread, etc. which convey their juice by their own proper
channels into some notable cavities of the body; they are made up several
little bladders, and fibers, or little hollow conduits disposed in a confused
manner: Aden sometimes also signifies the same with bubo. Adephagia is the
greediness of children, who ever now and then fall to fresh feeding before
their former victuals are digested. Adeps, or Pinguedo, fat is a similar part,
made of earthy and sulphereous blood, white, soft, insensible, apt to preserve
natural heat, and nourish the body in time of need: The eyelids, the lips, the
yard, the Scrotum, or outward skin of the cods, the membranes of the testicles,
the brain, the tendons, the nerves, the bones, etc. are destitute of fat by
nature. Adeps and Pinguedo differ in this, that Adeps is a thicker, harder, and
more earthly substance than Pinguedo, the fat which is particularly meant by
Adeps, flows from the blood through vessels into little bags or bladders
appropriate thereunto, as is plain from the observation of Malphighius.
Adiapneustia is a different perspiration through the insensible pores of the
body. Adnata tunica is the common membrane of the eye, called Conjunctive; it
springs from the skull, grows to the exterior part of the tunica cornea; and
that the visible species may pass there, leaves a round cavitie forward, to
which is annexed another tunic, without any particular name made up of the
tendons of those muscles which move the eye; by reason of its whiteness it is
called Albuginia. Aegilops, Angilops, and Anchylops, is a little swelling about
the glandule of the eye called Carancula major, for the most part accompanied
with an inflammation; Anchylops, and Aegilops are often used indifferently; yet
some for distinction's sake say, that Anchylops is a swelling betwixt the
greater corner of the eye, and the nose, not yet open; but that aegylops is a
swelling betwixt the nose and angle of the eye, which if it be not seasonably
opened, the bone underneath grows putrified; Aegilops is often taken for the
Fistula lachrymalis; it signifies likewise a sort of grass that is destructive
of Barley. Aeipathia is a passion of long continuance. Aeromeli is Manna, or
aerial honey; for in Calabria and other places the air is impregnated with
several delicious particles which in the night time cleave to trees, leaves, or
any other thing they meet with; and in the day time, are farther concocted and
condensated by the heat of the Sun. Aetas is part of the duration of life,
wherein from the continual action and fermentation of the blood and spirits,
the temperature of humane bodies undergo a considerable and sensible change;
and it is sixfold, Pueritia, childhood, which is reckoned to the fifth year of
our age, is distinguished into the time before, at, and after breeding of
teeth. 2. Adolescentia, Youth, reckoned to the eighteenth, and youth properly
so called to the twenty fifth year. 3. Juventus, reckoned from the twenty fifth
to the thirty fifth. 4. Virilis Aetas, manhood, from the thirty fifth to the
fiftieth. 5. Senectus, old age, from fifty to sixty. 6. Decrepita Aetas,
decrepit age follows, which at last is all swallowed up in death.
Aetiologia is the cause or reason which is given of natural and preternatural
contingencies in humane bodies; whence Aetilogica is part of Physic, which
explains the causes of diseases and health. Aetiologica, see Aetiologia.
Affectio Hypochondriaca; see Hypochondriacus affectus. Affectus, the same with
Pathema. Agerazia is a growing old. Agonia is fear and sadness of mind. Agonia
is barrenness, or impotence of the Womb, whereby the man's seed corrupts.
Agrippa is one who is born with his feet foremost. Agrypnia signifies watching,
or a dreaming slumber which proceeds from a too great agitation, or attension
of the animal spirits in the pores of the brain, whence it happens that the
pores are not permitted to close and wet. Agripnocoma, the same that Coma
Vigil. Agyrta is a Mountebank, one who vends his Empyrical Receipts to the
Rabble that surrounds him. Aisthesis, or Sense, is either external, as seeing,
hearing, smelling, taste, and touch; or internal, as the common sensory, (as
it is usually called) the Fancy, the estimative faculty, and the memory; but two
of them will serve the turn, the fancy and the memory; Aisthesis or sense, is a
reception whereby motion from external objects being impressed upon the slender
strings or fibers of the nerves, is communicated to the common sensory, or to
the beginning of the medulla oblongata in the brain, by the mediation or
continued motion of the animal spirits in the same nerves. Aisteterium is the
common sensory: which Cartesius and others his Abettors make the glandula
pinealis; but the common sensory ought rather to be placed where the Nerves of
the external senses are terminated, which is not in the glandula pinealis, but
(as the most ingenious Willis has demonstrated) about the beginning of the
medulla oblongata (or top of the spinal marrow) in the Corpus striatum. Alae,
signify the sides of the Nose; the little sins, as it were, of the nymphae, or
the lips of a Woman's private parts; the upper part of the ear, the Armpits,
and the process of the bone, Sphenoides. Alantoides, see Allantoides.
Albara^nigra, see lepra Graecorum. Albaras alba, see Leuce. Albuginea oculi, is
a white tunic of the Eye, which proceeds from the pericranium, grows to the
tunica cornea, and leaves a hole forward for the opening of the Apple of the
Eye: see tunica adnata. Albuginea testis, is the membrane which immediately
involves the testicles. Albugo oculi, is the same with album oculi, the white
of the Eye; it signifies also a white speck in the tunica cornea, which
proceeds either from humors, or a scar, or ulceration. Album oculi, is that
part of the Eye, where the tunica adnata, and the albuginea grows to the tunica
sclerotes. Albumen oculi, or albugo, the same with album oculi. Alcali, is all
such Salt as is extracted from the ashes of any substance by a boiled lixivium,
or Lie, proper for any thing liquid as well as solid. It Is said to borrow its
name from the herb Kali, with whose Salt the Egyptians, as well as we, make
glass. Alchymia, is the same with Chymia. Alcohol, is the purer substance of
any thing separated from the impurer; it signifies also most subtle and refined
dust; and sometimes a most highly rectified Spirit, in so much that if it be
set on fire, it shall burn all away without any dregs or phlegm at the bottom.
Alcol, the same with Alcohol. Alcool, the same that Alcohol. Alembicus, or
Alembicum, is a Chemical Instrument used in Stilling. It has the shape of an
helmet, concave within, and unequal without; and toward the bottom is placed a
beek or nose, about a cubit long, by which the vapors descend; if they be made
without a nose, they are rather used in circulatory vessels; they are made of
Brass, Pewter, or Glass. Alexipharmacum, is a medicine which expels poison, so
that it shall not be hurtful to the Body; they are most commonly such things as
attenuate the Blood, that it cannot be coagulated with Poison in the Air, as
Acids. Alexiterium, is a remedy which preserves the Body, that it take not
Poison. Algema, Pain, is a sad troublesome Sensation, impressed upon the Brain
from a smart Vexatious irritation of the Nerves; it arises from either a
sensible or insensible solution of the Continuum. Algematodes, the same with
Algema. Alhasef, the same with Hydroa. Alkahest, signifies an universal
Menstruum or liquor, which resolves Bodies into their first matter, still
preserving the virtues of their seeds and essential form: a thing of great
fame, if of equal virtue, which every one estimates according to his success in
the Operation. Some take it for prepared Mercury, others for Tartar. Aliformes
processus, are the prominencies of the Os Cuneiforme, from the fore part.
Alimentum, is a Body so convenient for, and adapt to the nature of an animal,
that it may be digested by its heat and fermentation, and assimilated into its
own nature; and it is either Meat or Drink. Upon the account of its different
degrees, it is taken three ways by Hippocrates; one is for future nourishment,
which passes from the Mouth into the Ventricle or stomach: another is for that
which is as it were nourishment, and that is the arterious Blood and animal
Spirits. The third is true or proper nourishment, that which fastens to the
parts, and at last is assimilated into their nature. Alindesis, is an
exercitation of the Body, wherein people first anointed with Oil, were wont
afterward to roll themselves in the dust. Alipasma, is a small dust, which
mixed with Oil is used to be soaked into the Body to hinder sweating. Alitura,
is the action of a live Body, whereby the perpetual waste of Blood, Spirits,
and substance, is as continually repaired by the accession of new nutritious
juice, rightly prepared and fermentated, and then stuck upon the parts that are
to be nourished. Allantoides, is the urinary tunic, placed betwixt the Amnion
and the Chorion, which by the Navel and Urachus, (or passage by which the Urine
is conveyed from the Infant in the Womb), receives the urine that comes out of
the Bladder. It Is called likewise Farciminalis, because that in many brutes
it is of the shape of a gut-pudding; but in man and some other few animals, it
is round, and like the thin soft skin which wrappeth the Child in the Womb.
Allioticum, is a Medicine which by Fermentation and cleansing alters and
purifies the Blood; boiled up for the most part of the root of Sow-thistle,
Cichory, Fennel, Endive, Lettice, etc. Allogotrophia, is a disproportionate
nutrition, when one part of the Body is nourished disproportionately to
another. Alopecia is a shedding of the Hair, occasioned by the Pox, or
otherwise. So called from a Fox, (...), whose Urine is said to make places bald
and barren for a year, as the Scholiast of Callimachus observes; or from a
disease peculiar to a Fox. It is called likewise, (...) from the figure,
because that the parts smooth and destitute of Hair, look winding like a
Serpent, in Greek (...). Its common to both these Distempers that the hair
falls, of Areatem, by shedding, whence in general this Disease is called Area.
Alphus is described by Celsus, to be a Distemper wherein the white color of
the skin is somewhat rough, but not continued, like so many several drops:
Sometimes it disperses it self wider, and with some intermissions. Alphus is
likewise called morphaea; it differs from Leuce, in that it penetrates not so
deep. Alterantia, the same with Alliotica. Alteratio is a depuration, or a
preparation and expurgation of the Blood by breathing a Vein, or purging.
Alvearium is the cavity of the inward Ear, near the passage which conveys the
sound, where that yellow and bitter excrementitious stuff is bred. Alvi fluxus,
the same with Diarrhaea. Amalgamatio is the corrosion of metal by Mercury.
Amaurosis is a dimness of sight, whether the object be placed near or at a
distance; but so, that no external fault appear in the Eye, if you inspect it
never so narrowly; the defect consists in the obstruction of the optic nerve;
it is called also gutta serena. Ambe is a superficial jutting out of the Bones:
also a Chyrurgeons Instrument with which disjointed Bones are set again.
Amblotica are Medicines which make abortive, as are all diuretics. Amblyopia
is dullness of sight, which is-fourfold; Myopia, Presbytia, Nyctalopia, and
Amaurosis, of which in their proper place. Ambonae, the same with ambe.
Ambrosia is a solid Medicine, but prepared as grateful and pleasant as can be;
it seems to take its name from the meat of the gods, because the gods eat
Ambrosia, and drink Nectar. Ambustio is a solution of the Continuum, caused by
some external burning matter which offends the inward thin skin always,
oftentimes the outward thick skin, and sometimes also the muscles, veins,
arteries, nerves and tendons. Amethodicum is that which is done without any
methodical rational prescription, as your Empyricks, or Quacks do. Amma, or
Bracherium, is a sort of a girdle, useful to those who are troubled with a
Rupture in the Belly, wherewith the privy parts are closely connected with the
Abdomen, the Ribs, and the Loins, lest the intestines should fall out. It seems
to have took its name of Bracherium, from the girdles which are made for the
Reins and Loins, which Isidorus calls the Amber Monkish Bracelet; it is called
Brachile or Brachiale, tho it be not any girdle belonging to the Arms, but the
Reins. Cassianus calls it rebrachiatorum, whence without doubt the Bracherium
of the Chyrugeons had its rise; that girdle or swathe which they use in
Ruptures of the Belly. Amnion is the membrane with which the faetus in the Womb
is most immediately clad, which with the rest of the secundinae, the chorion
and alantois, is ejected after the birth; it is whiter and thinner than the
chorion. It contains not only the faetus, but the nutritious humor, whence the
faetus by the Mouth and Throat sucks its nourishment. It is outwardly clothed
with the urinary membrane, and the chorion, which sometimes stick so close to
one another, that they can scarce be separated. Amolyntum is a Medicine which
will not defile the hands that touch it. Amphemerinus is a Quotidian distemper.
Amphiblestroides, or the tunica retina of the Eye, is a soft, white, and slimy
substance, which is so named, because that being thrown in the water, it
resembles a net. It shoots from the very center of the optic nerve; and
expanding it self over the vitreous humor, is extended as far as the ligament
of the Eyelids; this tunic, in that it is whitish and of a marrowy substance,
seems to proceed from the very marrowy and fibrous substance of the optic
nerve; so that it is as it were an expansion of nervous fibers, which are there
gathered into one bundle, into a contexture made like a net; and indeed if the
whole eye were taken for a flower which grows to the brain by the stalk, as I
may call it, of the opticknerve, the tunica retina would be the very flower it
self, and the two former by only in the nature of a stem; They receive the
sensible species within the bed of the eye much after the same manner as a
whited wall in a darkened chamber receives and represents the visible species
which are intromitted through a little hole. Amphibranchia are places about
those glandules in the jaws which moisten the Aspera Arteria, Stomach, etc.
Amphidaeum is the top of the mouth of the Womb, like the lips of a
cupping-glass. Amphismela is an anatomical instrument, useful in the dissection
of bodies. Amulatum is the same with Periamma. Amygdalae, the same with Antias
and Paristhmia. Amigdalatum is an artificial milk, or an emulsion made of
almonds, and other things. Ana is an equal portion of different ingredients in
the same receipt. Anabasis is the increase of diseases. Anabatica, see Synochus.
Anabrochismus is when any thing superfluous and corrupted is taken up by the
letting down of a band fit for thar purpose; it is likewise a way of drawing
out the inverted prickling hairs of the eyelids, by the help of a thread of
fine silk in the eye of a needle; which when you have doubled, you put the hair
through, and draw it out. Anabrosis is a consuming or wast of any part of the
body by sharp humors. Anacatharsis is a medicine that discharges nature by
some of the upper parts; as any thing that provokes to vomit, to sneezing, to
salivation, etc. Anacollema, is a sort of ointment, or dry medicine, either
applied to the forehead and nostrils to stop bleeding; it signifies likewise a
medicine that will breed flesh, and conglutinate the parts. Anadiplosis is a
frequent reduplication of Fevers. Anadosis is whatsoever tends upward in the
body, as the distribution of Chyle, or a Vomit. Anaisthesia in defect of
sensation, as in paralytick and blasted persons. Analeptica are medicines which
cherish and renew the strength; it signifies also a part of Hygieina, or art of
preserving health, whereby weak persons are recovered. Analgesia signisies
indolency, or absence of pain and grief. Analogia, see Analogismus. Analogismus
is a comparison and perception of causes that help by likeness. Analysis is the
reduction of a body into its first principles; also it is an Anatomical
demonstration of the parts of man's body, which is performed by insisting upon
the parts severally. Anamnestica are medicines which restore the memory, as all
spirituous things do. Anaplerosis is part of Chyrurgery, whereby that which
either Nature has denied, or has by chance decayed, is restored by art.
Anarrhopus is the same with Anodosis. Anasarcha is a white, soft, yielding
tumor of the whole outward body, or of some of its parts, which dints in by
compressing the flesh; it is caused by the blood upon a double account; first,
when it does not rightly sanguisie, or assimilate the Chyle; and again, when it
is not rightly accended in the Lungs. The blood thus perverted, pours forth the
Serum at the extremities of the Arteries in greater quantity than it can
receive and reduce by the Veins and Lympheducts, or expel by the Veins and
Pores, and other passages that send it forth. If the humors be too viscous, it
is called Leucophlegmatia. Anastoichiasis is a Chemical resolution of bodies.
Anastomasis is an effluxion of the Blood, the Lympha or Chyle, at the meeting
of Vessels that close not narrowly. It is also taken for the mutual opening of
Veins and Arteries into one another, as some long ago dreamed, though they were
awake; for this were to offer violence to the Laws of Circulation: yet it is
not impossible neither, since Veins open into Veins, and Arteries into
Arteries; as is plain in the Spermatick Vessels; the Plexus Choroides, rete
mirabile, etc. Anastomotica are Medicines which open the Pores and Passages, as
Purgatives, Sudoriferous things, and Diuretics. Anatasis is the extention of
the Body toward the upper parts. Anatica portio, See ana. Anatomia is a neat
Dissection of an Animal, especially Man, whereby the Parts are severally
discovered and explained, for the use of Physic and Natural Philosophy.
Anatomicus is a Physician that is skilful in Dissections. Anatripsis is a
bruising or Comminution of the Stone, or a Bone. Anchoralis processus, See
Ancyroides. Anchyle is a contraction of a Joint, or the back part of the Knee.
Anchylops, the same that Aegilops. Ancon, or the top of the Elbow, is strictly
taken for the backward and greater shooting forth of that Bone of the Cubit
which is called Ulna. Anconaeus, See in Ancon. Ancyle is the contraction of the
Ham. See Anchyle. Ancyloblepharum is the growing of the Eyelid to the tunica
cornea, or to the Albuginea, or when as it sometimes happens, both the Eye lids
grow together: this concretion sometimes happens before the delivery of a
Child, and then it is the fault of the Birth. Ancyloglessum is when the little
string under the Tongue is too straightly tied, which causes difficulty of
utterance. Ancyroides is the shooting forth of the Shoulderbone like a beek,
which is called Coracoides, Anchoralis, and Cornicularis. Androgynus, or an
Hermaphrodite, is one who has both Man and Woman's Members: also one who has
had his Members cut out; also Effeminate. Aneurisma is a dilatation or bursting
of the Arteries, always beating, and swelling sometimes to the bigness of an
Egg, which yields, if you compress it, but recoils presently. Angina is an
Inflammation of the Jaws or Throat, attended with a continual Fever, and a
difficulty of respiration and swallowing: and it is twofold; either Supria or
Exquisita, a bastard or a true Squincie: the later is again fourfold,
Synanche, Parasynanche, Cynanche, and Parachynanche: of all which in their
proper place. Anhelatio, See Asthma. Any procidentia, See Procidentia any.
Animal is facultas, the Animal Faculty, is an Action whereby a man exercises
Sense, Motion, and the principle functions of the Mind, which are three,
Imagination, Ratiocination, and Memory. (...) purgare, to discharge upwards, as
in a Vomit, etc. opposite whereunto is (...) purgare, to do it downwards.
Anodynum is a Medicine that allays Pain. Anoea. is Madness, or an extinction of
the Imagination and Judgment. Anomeomeres is the same with Heterogeneus; or
that which consists of several and different Particles. Anorexia is a loathing
of Meat, arising from an ill disposition of the Stomach. Antagonista is the
opposite Situation of Muscles, as may be seen betwixt the Adductor and
Abductor, that which contracts and expands the Arm. Antarthriticam is a
Medicine against the Gout. Antasthmatica are Medicines proper for Asthmatic
people. Antecedens causa, See Proegumena. Antecedentia signa, Antecedent Signs
are such as are observed before a Disease, as an ill disposition of the
Pancreatic Juice, or the Bile, is an Antecedent cause to infinite Diseases.
Antemetica are such things as hinder Vomiting too much. Antendaxis is a
Countre-indication, or a contradictory indication, which forbids that to be
used which the former indication suggested as proper: as for instance,
abundance of ill juice in blood requires Evacuation; but then again the
weakness of the Patient may forbid it. Antepileptica are Medicines against the
Fallingsickness. Anthelix is the Protuberance of the Ear, or the inward brink
of the outward Ear. Antherum is any thing that is florid in our Bodies. Anthera
are also the tops in the middle of Flowers, which lean upon little hairy
threads. Anthracosis oculi is a scaly corrosive Ulcer of the Eye, attended
with a Defluxion and fear of the whole Body, especially about the Eyes. The
Cause is now and then an Inflammation of the Eye from a Malignant Fever.
Anthrax, Carbo, Pruna, or Carbunculus, is defined to be a Tumor that arises in
several places, surrounded with hot fiery and most sharp Pimples, accompanied
with acute Pain, but without ever being suppurated; and when it spreads it self
farther, it burns the Flesh, throws off lobes of it when it is rotten, and
leaves an Ulcer behind it, as if it had been burnt in with an Iron.
Anthypnotica are Medicines which hinder Sleep. Anthysterica are Medicines good
against the Fits of the Mother. Antias, in the Plural Antiades, Tonsillae,
Glandules of the Neck, which Chyrurgeons commonly call Almonds, which they do
not too much resemble neither. They are two Glandules, which in reality make
but up one Body, placed at the sides of the Epiglottis, or cover of the
Windpipe; its substance is similar, and made like separate Grains, just like
Honey or Oil, hardened with cold; but that they stick closer together, as if
they were joined by a Membrane; it is of somewhat a yellowish Color, and soft;
it had on each side one common large oval hollow passage which opens into the
Mouth within the skirt, whereof it contains two somewhat big, and several less
Cavities. Its use is to collect the snotty viscous Matter, and to moisten the
adjacent parts therewith. It signifies also, the Inflammations of these parts.
See Paristhmia. Antiballomena are Medicines of a like strength, which are now
and then used in the defect of one another: Apothecaries call them quid pro
quo. Anticardium is a cavity in the Breast above the region or place of the
Heart. Anticnemium is the former part of the Leg. Antidotum is a Medicine
against deadly Poison. Antinephritica are Medicines which Cure the Distempers
of the Reins. Antipathia is a Contrariety and Repugnancy in the Body, or in
Medicines: also a loathing and abhorrence of any thing without a manifest
cause. Antiperistasis is the surrounding of the Air, as in Hay that is cocked
and made up into Ricks too moist. Hippocrates the first great Author of
Physic, says in his Aphorisms, That Bodies are hotter in Winter, and colder in
Summer. I interpret it thus, That this does not come only from the
Antiperistasis of the Air, but from the Nitre with which the Air in Wintertime
is impregnated; especially, when the North Wind blows; so that when we come to
breathe, the Sulphurous Blood is more fermentated and inflamed in the Lungs.
Antipharmacum is a Remedy against Poison; or a Remedy against any other
Disease. Antipleuriticum signifies any Remedy against a Ple^risie.
Antipyreuticum, or antipureticum, is a Medicine that temperates and allays too
much heat in Fevers, as any acides do. Antiqui morbi, old Diseases, are such as
from the fourth day continue often many Years, and therefore they are called
also inveterate. Antipasis is a revulsion of a Disease; that is, when Humors
which flow into some one part, are turned into another by the opening of a Vein
in a remote part. Antispasmodicum is a Medicine that hinders contractions.
Antispasticum is a Medicine that diverts Distempers to other parts. Antitasis
is an opposite placing of parts in the Body, as the Liver, and the Spleen.
Antrum buccinosum, the same with Cochlea. Anus is the extremity of the
intestinum rectum; it consists of Three Muscles, two called levatores, which
distend and open it in time of necessity; and one called Sphincter, which shuts
it, and keeps it so. It is also a cavity in the Brain, which arises from the
contact of four Truncs of the Spinal Marrow; also the Skin which goes over the
Navel, which when wrinkled, are a sign of old Age. Aorta, or the great Artery,
is a Vessel which proceeds from the left Ventricle of the Heart, consisting of
four Tunics, a Nerveous, Glandulous, Muscular, and Membrancous, or Internal
one; it beats continually, and distributes Blood into the whole Body for
nourishment. The branches which creep from the Heart to the Brain, are called
Carotites: those which run laterally toward the Arms, are called Humerar is:
as the Trunc of it discends, the Branches extend themselves toward the Bowels:
and going further on to the Thighs and Feet, it ends. Apagma is the thrusting
of a Bone or other part out of its proper place. Apanthismus is the
Obliteration of a part in the Body, so that it can be no more found; as it
often happens to a little Arterious Pipe about the Heart. Apathia is an utter
want of Passions. Apepsia is when the Stomach has no Concoction. (...) are
Crude Wheals or Knobs in the Body, not yet ripe. Aperientia, opening things,
are those which consisting of sharp, small Particles, penetrate the Body
profoundly, and by attenuating and expelling the more crass and gross, open the
Pores and Passages of the Body and its Vessels. Aperistatos is a hollow Ulcer.
Aphoeresis is a part of Chyrurgery so called; which teaches to take away
superfluities. Aphonia is want of Voice. Aphorismus is a short determinative
sentence. Aphrodisius morbus, the same with Lues Venerea. Aphthae are Wheals or
Pimples about the Internal parts of the Mouth; as also about the Ventricle and
Guts, which when they come to be ripe, fall off by piecemeal, and are often
accompanied with a Fever in those of riper Years. In newborn Children, I
believe it arises from some Impurities which the Mass of Blood contracts in the
Mothers Womb; for the Blood for want of Eventilation there, being more impure,
presently after the birth of the Faetus begins to flourish and refine. Celsus's
Aphthae are otherwise described; but, says He, There are extreme dangerous
Ulcers in Children, which the Greeks call (...) for they often kill them. There
is not the same danger in Men and Women. These Ulcers begin in the Gums, then
by little and little spread over the Palate and the whole Mouth; and then at
last descend to the Epiglottis, or cover of the Wind pipe, and the upper part
of the Throat, which being once Infected, the Child hardly recovers. Apnaea is
a suppression of Respiration, either wholly, or at least to Sense. Apochylisma,
called Succago, Robub, and Rob, is the boiling and thickning of any juice with
Sugar and Honey, into a kind of a hard consistence. Apocope is the cutting off
of a part. Apocrusticum is any thing that helps by virtue of binding and
repelling. Apodacryticum is a Medicine that provokes Tears. Apolepsis is the
interception of Blood and Animal Spirits. Apomeli, is Oxymel, or a Decoction of
Honey and Vinegar. Aponeurosis is the end, tail, or string of Muscles; it is
called also a Tendon. Chyrurgeons take it falsely for a Nerve. Apoflegmatica,
See Apophlegmatismus. Apoflegmatismus, Commansum, some Physicians call it in
Barbarous Language Masticatorium; it is a Medicine which being kept in the
Mouth, and often also chewed, draws forth Pituitous Humors, which are excited
at the Mouth, made of the Root of bastard Pellitory, Salt, Holly, Mastich, Wax,
etc. when it is used in this solid Form, it is called Masticatorium: it is used
also in a Liquid Form, and is of the Nature of a Gargarism, made up of
Cephalics, and attenuating Ingredients, boiled and prepared. Apophthora is an
Abortion, or the Birth of a Faetus before its due time. Apophysis, Probole,
Echphysis, Processus, Productio, Projectura, and Protuberantia, is a part of a
Bone that is not contiguous, as an Epiphysis is, but continuous with the Bone,
and stretching it self beyond a plain surface. Apoplecta is the Jugular Vein,
which the Ancients falsely called, the Soporalis, or Sleepy Vein. Apoplexia,
Attonitus stupor, Sideratio, and Morbus attonitus, is a profound Sleep, wherein
the Patient being vehemently shaken, tossed, and pricked, yet perceives
nothing, nor affords any sign of Action; accompanied with a difficulty of
Respiration for the most part, and sometimes with none at all: it arises
frequently from viscous Blood, which obstructs the least Pores of the Brain: or
from Blood Extravasated about the Basis of the Brain, which oppresses and
straitens the Carotidal Arteries, or the Brain. Aporrhoae are Vapors, and
Sulphurous Effluviums which exhale through the pores of the body, and other
breathing holes. Apositia is a loathing of Meat. Apospasma is when the unity of
Organical compounded parts is dissolved, and those things which were of
different natures, yet naturally compacted together, are disjoined by the
Rupture of those Ligaments, and little Fibrous Threads or Filments which held
them together: as when the Skin is separated from a Membrane, a Membrane from a
Muscle, one Muscle from another; and in short, any one part from another, which
naturally adhered to it. Apostasis, see Apostema. Apostema, which Pliny calls
Apostasis, Hippocrates Metastasis, and Celsus, Abscessus; is an Exulceration
left after a Crisis: but Apostasis, and Metastasis sometimes differ in this,
That the former is meant of an Acurate Crisis, the later of the translation of
a Disease from one part to another. Aposurma is a shaving away of the Skin, or
Bone. Apotherapia is a Cure, or Remedy: also an Exercitation, which both Purges
the Excrements, and secures from Weariness. Apothermus, the same with
Apochilysma. Apozema, the Apothecaries call it a Decoction, is a Decoction of
Roots, Woods, Barks, Herbs, Flowers, Fruits, Seeds, etc. which is boiled down
commonly to Twelve, Fifteen, or Twenty Ounces. It is either Purging, Loosning,
Altering, or Drying, Cephalic (for the Head) Stomachic, Diuretic, Splenetic, or
Hepatic, (good for the Liver.) Appetitus alimentarius, or Hunger, is a certain
Constitution of the Fancy, arising from the Motion of a Nerve of the par
vagum, and the Intercostal, which for want of Nourishment, is moved
inordinately in the Stomach; whereby we are impelled for Animal Spirits, to
those Motions of our Members which are most conducive to the procuring of
Nourishment. It is occasioned in as much as the Animal Spirits being any way
excited about the middle of the Brain, shoot thence toward the body of the
Nerves: or it may be thus defined, appetitus alimentarius is an incitement to
seek Nourishment, proceeding from an acid Humor which arises from a ferment in
the Stomach, with which the Nerves being vellicated, they communicate the sense
of want of Nourishment to the Brain; which want, the Brain naturally judges
ought to be supplied. Apsychia is a Deliquium of the Mind. Aptystus is want of
Spittle, so that a Man cannot spit. Apyrexia is an intermission, or cooling of
Fevers: the cause of it is, that all the Morbific Matter is spent in one Fit,
and it intermits till new come, and begin to swell and ferment as the other.
Aqua distillata, distilled Water, is such as is drawn out by Distilling,
consisting of Watery and Spirituous Parts, but more of Watery. Aqua inter
cutim, Water betwixt the Skin; the same with Anasarca. Aqualiculus, or the
lowest part of the Belly; the same with Hypogastrium. Aquaeus humor, the Watery
Humor, see Humores Oculi. Arachnoides is the Cristalyne tunic of the Eye; so
called from its likeness to a Spiders Web. Araeotica, see Rarefacientia. Aranea
tunica, or Cristalyna, is that which surrounds the Cristalyne humor, by reason
of its light thin contexture, like the workmanship of a Spider, it has the name
of Aranea. Arcanum Theophrasto is the Quintessence of a thing most highly
exalted, or, as He says, it is the virtue of a thing Refined by a thousand
Exaltations. He boasts of four Arcana especially; 1. The Arcanum of the First
Matter. 2. Of the Philosophers Stone. 3. Of the Mercury of Life. 4. Of Tincture.
Others call it an Extract specially so called. Arche is the beginning of a
Disease. Archeus is the highest, and exalted, and invisible Spirit, which is
separated from Bodies, is Exalted and Ascends, an hidden Virtue of Nature
common to all things; an Artist, a Physician. Also Archiatios, or the Chief
Physician of Nature, which distributes to every thing, and to every Member its
peculiar Archeus occultly by the Air. Also Archeus the first in Nature, is a
most occult quality, which produces all things from Iliastes, being only
immediately sustained by the Divine Virtue it self. Arcuatus Morbus, see
Icterus. Ardentes febres, burning Fevers, are those which are accompanied with
a great Heat and Thirst, by reason of a too high Exaltation of the Sulphur; as
in that called causus, and lipiria. Ardor is a very intense acute Heat raised
in our Bodies by a too high Exaltation of Sulphur or Spirits. Ardor ventriculi,
that which we call Heartburning, is a particular sort of Pain in the Stomach
which at the same time molests the whole Gullet; some call it a Fervent Heat of
the Stomach; some an Ebullition, and a boiling bubling heat of the Stomach;
when a certain fiery Pain is felt in the Ventricle, and the Throat, as if it
burnt; it happens often to people that are in good Health enough, and that
either Feeding or Fasting; especially when they belch, as if there were a fiery
sort of Blast closely pent up, and which could not break out. Yet it happens
sometimes in Fevers too. It is caused by a certain effervescence of little,
very sharp bileous particles, with Sulphurous, whence is perceived that
Ebullition, or bubling heat of the Stomach. Area; Celsus reckons two sorts of
Areas. This is common to both of them, that the uppermost little Skin being
decayed, the hairs are first lessened, and then fall off: and if the place be
beat, it sends forth a liquid matter of an ill savor; both of them spread in
some swiftly, in others slowly; that is the worst that makes the Skin thick,
fattish, and perfectly bald: That which is called (...) dilates it self in any
shape, it happens both in the Head, and in the Beard; the former is called,
(...) from its resembling a Serpent, it begins at the hinder part of the Head,
exceeds not the breadth of two fingers, spreads it self toward the Ears in two
branches, in some to the Forehead, till they both join in the fore part of the
Head: the one Distemper is incident to any Age; the other common to Infants.
The former is scarce ever cured, the later often ends of his own accord. Arena,
Gravel, is a thing bred in the body of a great deal of Salt and Earth, which
often grows up into a Stone. Argemon is a little Ulcer of the Eye in that
circle of it which is called Iris, comprehending part of the white and black.
Arilli, the same with acini. Aroma is any Odoriferous Spice, as Cloves,
Cinnamon, Galangal, etc. Arquatus, the same with Icterus. Arteria trachea, or
Aspera, the Windpipe, is a Cartilaginous Vessel implanted in the Lungs, and
consisting of various rings and parts: the forepart of it is full of ligaments,
and depressed for the better passing of the Gullet; its upper part is called
Larynx, and the lower Bronchius: its use is for the Voice and taking in breath.
Arteria aorta, or magna, the great Artery, is a Vessel that beats continually,
fastened to the left Ventricle of the Heart: it consists of four tunics, and
receives the Blood in the Lungs, which is sent from the Heart, and Elaborated
by the Nitre in the Air, and diffuses it through the whole Body for its
Nourishment. Arteria caeliaca, see caeliaca arteria. Arteriaca, see Arteria.
Arteriotomia is an Artificial opening of an Artery, for the Letting of Blood
in an inveterate Headache, Madness, Falling Sickness, Pain and Inflammation in
the Eyes and Ears. The Section is made in the Forehead, Temples, or behind the
Ears: the manner of it is thus, After the ligatures made in the Arms or Neck,
the Artery is cut just as a Vein is, and when the blood is Emitted, you apply
a very Astringent Plaster, with a Leaden Plate, to the Orifice, and then
swathe it well; the Cure is performed in Seven or Nine days time. Arthritica,
see in Arthritis, Arthritis, or Morbus articularis, the Gout, exercises its
Tyranny about two or three, or more Joints; and it is defined to be a pain
about the Joints, proceeding from an effervescence of the Nervous Acid Juice,
with the fixed Saline Particles of the Blood, whence the Nerves, Tendons,
Ligaments, the thin Membranes about the Bones, are contracted, and miserably
Tormented; whence proceeds Swellings, Redness, hard sandy concretions in
several parts of the Body, and other symptoms that accompany it. It is
fourfold, Chiragia, the Gout in the Hands; Ischias, in or about that Bone which
is connected to the Os Ilium: Gonagra, in the Knees; and Podagra, in the Feet,
almost an incurable Distemper. Arthritis vaga, a Wandering Gout, is a Disease
in the Joints that creates pain sometimes in one Limb, sometimes in another. It
proceeds from a double cause. We may suppose in this Disease a great many
heaps, as it were, of fixed Salt thrust out from the Mass of the Blood, to be
placed like so many Nests here and there about the Limbs and Joints, which
being treasured up in several distinct Cells, or Repositories, like the Spawn
of Fish, or the Seed of Women; the lower recrements of the Nervous Juice comes
afterward, like the Man's Seed, and Impregnates them; and hence from the
mutual Effervescence of these two, the Membranes and Nervous Fibers being
vellicated and contracted cause an extraordinary quick and acute Pain. It is
called vaga, wandering, because it is not constant to one and the same place, as
the true Gout is. Arthrodia is the joining of Bones, when the cavity that
receives the Bone is in the Surface, and the little head or top of the Bone
that is received, is depressed: as in the lower Jaw Bone, with the Bone of the
Temples. Arthon is a Joint, or Connection of Bones, proper for the performing of
Motion. Articuli are sometimes the Knuckles of the Fingers. Anthropologia is
the Doctrine of Man: which Batholine distinguishes into two parts: Anatomy,
which Treats of the Body and its Parts; and Psucologie, which Treats of the
Soul. Arthrosis, the same that Articulatio. Articularis morbus, see Arthritis.
Articulatio is a Conjunction of Limbs for the performing of Motion: and it is
twofold, Diarthrosis, or a more loose Articulation: and Synarthrosis, or a
closer. Articulus, see Arthron. Artomeli is Broth made of honey and bread.
Artus are Members growing to Cavities in the body, and distinguished by Joints.
Arytaenoides are two Cartilages, which with others make up the top of the
Larynx; it is taken also for certain Muscles of the Larynx. Arythmus is a Pulse
lost to sense. Ass, or Assis, is the least piece of Money that is Current, and
in Weight a Pound. Asaphia is a lowness of Voice, which proceeds from a loose
or ill constitution or contemporation of the Organs. Ascaris, or Ascarides, are
little worms which breed in the Intestinum rectum, and then tickle and trouble
it. They are bred of some Excrements which stay longer than they ought, and
there putrefie. Ascites is a Dropsy or swelling of the Abdomen, and
consequently of the Scrotum, Thighs, and Feet; proceeding from a Serous, and
sometimes Lymphatic or Chylous Matter, like the washing of flesh, collected in
the cavity of those parts. Asef, the same with Hydrea. Asema is a Crisis beyond
hope, happening without any previous indication by signs. Asitia is a loathing
of Meat. Asodes, see Assodes, Aspera Arteria, or Trachea, is an Oblong Pipe,
consisting of various Cartilages and Membranes, which begin at the Throat, or
lower part of the Jaws, lies upon the Gullet, descends into the Lungs, and is
dispersed by manifold Ramifications or Branches through their whole substance:
the upper part is called Larynx, and the lower Bronchus, to which Malpighius
adds a third, or lowest, called by him Vesicular: It is subservient to Speech
and Respiration. Asphyxia is a pulse that is sensibly decayed. Assodes
signifies a continual Fever, wherein the outward parts are moderately warm, but
with a great heat within, an insatiable drought, perpetual tossing, watching,
and raving. Asthma is a frequent respiration, joined with an hissing, a sound,
and a cough, especially in the Nightime. The causes thereof are a sharp and
scorbutic blood, which too much vellicates the Organs of respiration, and puts
them into a mere convulsive motion, whereby the Lungs are puffed up, and the
Circulation of the Blood is hindered; whence suffocations, swounds, and coughs
easily proceed. Astragalus is the first and most principal Bone, which together
with other little bones in the Foot, make up that little part of the Foot which
immediately succeeds the Leg in Beasts, called the Pastern. Astringentia,
binding things, are those which with the thickness and figure of their
Particles, force and bind together the parts of the body. Astrologia is a
reasoning about the Virtues of the Stars; not so necessary to Physicians, as
the Ancients imagined. Astronomia is a naming of the Stars, or a knowledge of
the laws and rules of Stars and Constellations; or a knowledge concerning, or
about the Stars. Ataxia is a confounding of Critical Days. Atecnia, the same
with Agonia. Atheroma is a tumor contained within its own coat, arising from a
pappy humor, without pain, not easily yielding to the Fingers, nor leaving any
dint after it is compressed. Athymia is a Defection or Anxiety of Mind. Atlas is
the first Vertebre under the Head; so called, because it seems to hold up the
Head; it wants Marrow. At^mus is a Body so small, that it is not capable o^
being divided into lesser parts, as are the Elementary Particles of Spirit,
Salt, Sulphur, Water, and Earth. Atonia is a faintness, infirmity, defect of
strength. Atra Bilis is a sulphurous, and saline, earthy, adust and black
blood, which is bred in the body, and gathered in the Spleen; for there it is
volatilized, and exalted into a ferment fit to mix with the blood. Atretus is
one whose Fundament or privy parts are not perforated. Atrophia, or Tabes, is
when the whole body, or any one part of it is not nourished, but gradually
withers and decays away. Tabes is often taken only for an Ulcer in the Lungs,
whereby the whole body by little and little perishes and decays. Atta, says
Festus, is one who by reason of the tenderness of, or other defects in his
Feet, touches the ground, rather than treads it. Attenuantia, or incidentia,
are those things which opening the Pores with their acute Particles, cut the
thick and viscous humors in the body. Attonitus morbus, the same with an
apoplexy; Celsus takes it for Blasting. Attrahentia, drawing things, are those
which opening the Pores with their little Particles, and dilating the humors,
and expelling them, where their resistance is weaker, not only swell the
parts, and make them red; but by driving more vapors and humors out of the
Skin and Flesh than can make their way through a thick inner Skin, gather them
under it, and swell it into little bladders. Auctio is Nutrition, whereby more
is restored than was lost. Auditus, Hearing, is a Sense wherein sounds from the
various trembling Motion of the circum ambient Air, beating the Drum of the
Ear, are communicated to the common sensory by the auditory Ne^ve, and are
there felt and perceived. Augme^tum Febricum, or incrementum, is a computation
from what time the heat of a continual Fever has seized upon the whole Mass of
Blood, till it has arrived at the height. Aureus is a sort of Weight amongst
the Arabians, of a Dram, and a Seventh part; the same with Denarius. Auricula
infima, the same with Lobus auris. Auricula cordis, Ear of the Heart; there are
two of them, the right and the left; the right receives the blood from the vena
cava, or great Vein, which is carried into the right Ventricle, and then enters
the Lungs: the left is that which receives the blood rightly prepared and
fermented by the Nitrous Air from the Lungs, that it may be discharged by the
left Ventricle into the great Artery, and thence be distributed into every
part of the body. Aurigo, the same with Icterus. Auris, the Ear, is the Organ
of hearing, which is either External, whose upper part is called Pinna, or Ala;
and the under Lobus, the Lobe, or Auricula infima, the lowest part of the Ear:
its External circumference is called Helix; the Internal, Anthelix, or
internal; in which you may consider the Drum, the four little Bones, with the
little Muscles, the Concha, or Hollowness, the Foramen Ovale, the Oval hole,
the Labyrinth. Automatos is that which moves of its own accord, as the Motion
of the Heart, the digestions and fermentations of the bowels. Autopyros is
bread made of whole Grains, without any bran taken from it, or added to it.
This sort of bread is preferred before any other, because the Bran is
cleansing. Auxilium, or remedium, is whatsoever is good against a Disease by a
contrary virtue; and it is threefold, Diet, Medicine, and Chyrurgery. Axilla
is the Arm-pit, hairy in adult people. Axioma is a proposition built upon the
Authority of Hippocrates, or Galen; but of little validity, now that Physic is
built upon Reason and Experience. Axis is the third Vertebre from the Scull.
Axungia is the fat or tallow of an Hog. Azoth sometimes signifies the Mercury
of any Metallic body, sometimes an Universal Remedy, as it is thought, made of
Mercury, and prepared with Gold and Silver; a few years ago, it was famous
amongst the Vulgar, and Persons of Quality too; of different color, according
to the diversity of the preparation, which was often too troublesome, whence it
begun to decrease both in price and repute. Azygos is a famous Vein about the
Heart, called sine pari, or jugo, which reaches to the Vertebres, and proceeds
from the Vena Cava, the great hallow Vein. Azymus is unleavened, unwholesome
Bread.
B.
BAcilli, are called those Medicines which are of a long, round Figure, like a
stick or Pillar. Balanaeum, or Balneum, is properly a washing of the whole
Body; yet it is sometimes taken for a washing of the lower parts only, which
they commonly call Nisessus, and semicupia; and it is either dry, or moist; the
dry are prepared of Ashes, common Salt, Sand, filed Steel, etc. the moist are
either vaporous or watery. The former are made of the boiling of Roots, Herbs,
Flowers, Seeds, etc. the Vapor whereof is all that is taken. The watery, are
either artificial, which are made of Physical Decoctions; or Natural, which are
called Thermae Bathes, whose Waters are either Aluminous, Ironish, Copperish,
Nitrous, Sulphurous, Bituminous, Vitriolie, etc. all which Waters are called
Acidulae. Balanus, or glans, is the Nut of the Yard, covered with the
Foreskin; also the Clitoris of a Woman. Also all Fruits and Roots that have
round Heads, as a Walnut; also an Acorn, an earth-Chesnut: also a Suppository.
Balneum, the same with Balaneum. Balsamus, or balsamum; the Word Balsame is
used very differently in the Shops. 1. It signifies a certain sort of Persume,
of somewhat a thick Consistence, like an Ointment; and this is its most usual
signification; as for instance, Balsame of Roses, Apoplectic, and the like. 2.
There are a sort of Liquors distilled from Gum, and resinous Substances, with
spirit of Wine, which are anointed outwardly, and these are called Balsams too;
as Nervous Balsame, Sciatic, etc. 3. It signifies a Liquor that is anointed
into the Body, thicker than Oil, and more Liquid than an Ointment. 4. Salt
things funded and melted, are called Balsame, as the Balsame of Salt of Jewels.
5. There are a sort of particular preparations called Balsams, as the balsam of
Sulphur, etc. 6. and Lastly, some Gums of Trees are called Balsams.
Bamma is a Tincture, or a Liquor, wherein any thing is tinged or moistened, as
bread sopt in broth. Barycoja is heaviness of hearing. Basilareos, see basis.
Basilica is the inner Vein of the Arm, called Hepatica, the Liver vein.
Basilicum is a rich precious Medicine, that excels all others. Basioglossum is
a pair of Muscles that depress the Tongue. Basis is the upper part of the
Heart, which is opposite to the point; it is also the ground or foundation of
the bone Hyoides, for the use of the Tongue: also the principal Ingredient in a
prescription. Bathmis is a Cavity in the bone of the Arm or Shoulder, on each
side one; whereinto, when the whole hand is stretched forth and bended, the
process of the undermost and lesser of the two long bones of the Cubit, enters.
Batrachus is a Tumor under the Tongue, which makes one croak like a Toad, when
they speak. Bechica are Medicines good against a Cough. Belenoides is the
process or shooting forth of a bone, called Aliformis, made like a wing, which
is fixed in the Basis of the Scull. Benignus morbus, a favorable disease, is
that which has no dreadful Symptoms, but such as are consonant to its nature.
Bicongius is a measure which contains Twelve Sextaries, one of which is just
our Pint and an half. Bilis, the gall, is a Sulphurous Saline Excrement of the
blood, separated in the Liver by means of little Glandules, and is sent either
into the little bag that contains the Gall, or into the Gut called Dundenum, by
the Ductus Hepaticus, that it may farther promote the fermentation of the
victuals, and carry off the Dregs that are left behind when the Chyle is
separated from the whole Mass. The Gall consists of Sulphur, Adust Salt, and a
little Serum; it is naturally yellow: preternaturally it is of the Color of
the yolk of an Egg, green like a Leek, rustie, and sky-colored; all which
variety of colors proceed only from different degrees of Heat and
Fermentation. Sylvius maintained, That the Bile ascended to the Heart by the
ductus hepaticus; but this Opinion, as it is neither consonant to Experience,
nor Reason, so nor to Truth neither; this excrement is not called Bile, but
when it is separated from the Blood; and therefore the Opinion of the Ancients
concerning this Bilious Humor, is quite out of doors, since that Circulation
of the Blood was found out. See Humores Sanguinei. Biolychnion is Natural Heat,
which is communicated to the Faetus from the Parents; but when it is brought
forth, the heat gradually decays, after that the Blood and Spirits of the Child
are altered, fermented, and accended by nourishment and nitrous Air. They do
but babble who tell us, that this Heat lasts for many years; for if it be Heat,
it is in continual Motion, and is therefore dispelled as other Fires and Heats
are. Blaesitas is a stammering in speech, which proceeds from the ill make or
temperature of the Tongue. Blaesus is one that has an Impediment in his Speech.
Also a Bandy-legg'd Person: or one whose Back bone is bended, either forward or
backward; also a Paralitic Person. Blenna is a thick Snot which distills
through the little holes of the Palate, and the Nostrils, and proceeds from the
Ventricles of the Brain, by the Processes, called Maniformes, like Teats.
Bocium, the same with Bronchocele. Bolus is a Medicine taken inwardly, of a
consistence something thicker than Honey, and in quantity for one Dose, as much
as may be conveniently taken at a mouthful. Bovina fames, the same with
Bulimus. Bothor signifies Pimples in the Face, which don't spread, but are
easily suppurated, and vanish. It is besides a general Appellation for Pimples
in the Face, Lungs, or other parts. The Arabians also call the small Pox and
the Measels Bothor. Bracherium, the same with Amma. Brachiale, the same with
Carpus. Brachiaeus, see Lacertus. Brachium, or Lacertus, is a Member that
consists of the Arm properly so called, the cubit, and the hand. Brachylogia,
of the same signification with Brachylogus. Brachylogus is one who gives his
positive Opinion in few words. Brachylogia is a curt expression: as for
instance, the Aphorisms of Hippocrates. Bradypepsta is slow digestion,
proceeding from a depraved disposition of the Acid ferment in the Stomach.
Branchus is a hoarsness in the Throat. Bregma, or Pregma, is the bone of the
Forehead. Brochi are blubber lip'd persons: also a sort of Chyrurgeons cord, or
halter. Bronchocele is a Tumor in the top, or the middle fistulous part of the
Windpipe. Bronchotomia, is a Section of the Windpipe, in a membranous part
betwixt two of the Rings; it is used to prevent suffocation in people troubled
with a Quinsie. Bronchus is the middle Fistulous part of the Windpipe, whose
forepart is made up of so many little Rings; the upper part is called Larynx,
and the under Vesicularis; it is used in the voice, and in respiration. Bubo is
the Groin, or place from the bending of the Thigh to the Privy-parts: also a
Tumor in the Groins, proceeding from the Pox, or Pestilence. Bubonocele is a
Rupture; when the Intestines fall into the Groin, or the outermost skin of the
Cods: sometimes it is taken for a Bubo or Swelling. Bucca is the inferior lax
part of the Face, that may be swollen or puffed up, as appears in Trumpeters.
Buccinator is the round Muscle of the Cheeks, like a Circle, thin and
membranous, interwoven with various Fibers, and inseparably girt about with the
Tunic of the Mouth. Casserius has observed, a certain strong band that grows
outwardly in the Center of this Muscle, which spreading it self about the
Cheek-bone, is terminated in a little slender Muscle directly opposite to that
part of the Face called Bucca: it arises from the upper Jaw Bone, and is
fastened in the lower, at the Roots of the Gums. Its use is to move the Cheeks
with the Lips; and serves as a hand to the Teeth, whilst it tosses the Meat to
and fro, and throws it upon the Teeth, that it may be more exactly chawed.
Buccula is the fleshy part under the Chin. Bulimia, the same with Bulimus.
Bulimiasis, the same that Bulimus. Bulimus signifies an extraordinary Appetite,
often accompanied with a defection of Spirits: it proceeds sometimes from a too
sharp Ferment of the Stomach, whence the Membranous Tunics and Nerves being
irritated, the Animal seeks after Nourishment for a remedy.
C.
CAcatoria febris is an intermittent Fever, (so called by the famous Sylvius de
le Boe) accompanied with a violent Purging, which is sometimes griping, and
very painful, extremely afflicting, and weakening the Patient when it comes.
Chachecticus is one that has an ill Habit of Body. Cachexia is an ill Habit of
Body, proceeding from an ill disposition of the Humors of the Body; whence
lingering Fevers, Consumptions, and Dropsies are contracted: in this Disease the
Face is often pale, and discolored, and the Body big, and swollen: Cachexia
taken in a large sense is opposed to (...), and as a good Habit of Body is
common to all sound parts, so an ill one is propagated by all the ill parts.
Strictly, Cachexia is only taken from an ill disposition of the Habit of the
Body; and Euexia on the contrary for a good disposition of the Humors, or
Blood, and Body. Cacochymia is the abundance of ill Humors in the Blood: and it
is either Ulcerous, Bilious, Pituitous, Melancholic, Acid, Salt, or Sharp.
Cacoethes, Chironium ulcus, or Telephium, is a Disease or Ulcer beyond Cure,
which is called Malignant Ulcer; this happens when an Ulcer is callous, or
sinuous, under which there sometimes lie little putrified bones that have
fallen down. Cacophonia is an ill voice, proceeding from an ill constitution of
Organs. Cacotrophia is an ill Nutriment, proceeding from a fault in the blood;
as in a Leprosy, Ringworms, etc. Caducus morbus, see Epilepsia. Casarea
sectio, the same with Hystertomotocia. Calamus Scriptorius is a certain
Dilatation, about the fourth Ventricle of the brain, which is afterward
pointed, from which shape it has its Name. Calcaneus is the same with Calx.
Calchoidea are three little bones in the Foot, which with others make up that
part of the Foot which succeeds the Ancle: and Fallopius calls them
Cuneiformia, made like Wedges. Calcinatio is the solution of a mixed body into
powder by fire, or any coroding things; as Mercury, Aquafortis, etc. Caldarium,
the same with Laconicum. Calculus the Stone, is an hard praeternatural
concretion in a Man's body, which is often bred in the Reins, Testicles, and
other parts, from Saline and Earthy Particles concreted together. Calidum
innatum, see Emphitum thermum, or Biolychnium. Callicreas, or Pancreas, is a
conglomerated Glandule, placed under the hinder part of the Ventricle, about
the length of three or four fingers in a Man; it is clotted with a thin
Membrane from the Peritonaeum: it is terminated in Man near the common Ductus,
or Passage of the Bile into the Gut duodenum, and distills a volatile insipid
sort of a juice: but Sylvius de le Boe, and de Graaf affirm, That they have
found an Acid and a somewhat Acid juice there; nay, sometimes an austere and a
sweet one; thence also they bring the Original of all Diseases: but we must
know, that this possibly was observed, when scarce one in twenty which they
dissected was found exactly sound. Concerning this question, see my Anat. of
things, l. 1. c. 21. Its use is, to temperate the Chyle, which is something
Acid, and the bitterness of the Gall with its Volatile Juice, that is may at
last enter the Lacteals with a sweet taste. Callus is a kind of swelling
without pain, like Skin contracted by too much labor. Calor nativus, see
Biolychnium. Calva is the Scull, also the upper hairy part of the Head, which
either by Disease, or old Age, grows Bald first. Calvaria, the same with Calva.
Calvitium is that Baldness which is naturally incident to old Age. Calx is the
second Bone in that part of the Foot which succeeds the Ancle, bigger and
stronger than the rest, oblong, and grows backward, that a man may stand more
strongly upon it, and not fall so easily backward. Calx also is that which by
Calcining, is either turned into Alcool, as Calx Saturni, or at least is made
friable, as Hartshorn burnt. Camarium, see Fornix. Camarosis is a blow upon the
Scull, whereby some part of the Bone is left suspended, like an Arch. Cambium
is a secundary humor according to Avicen, which yet is reckoned amongst the
Humors, and its use was said to be to nourish the parts: the first was called
the nameless humor: the second Glue; and the fourth, which was very near
converted into Nourishment, was called Cambium: but these figments are quite
Exploded since we found out the Circulation of the Blood, by the Fibers.
Cameratio the same with Camerosis. Capulum is the Contortion of the Eyelids,
or its Hairs. Canales are passages by which the Juices of the Body flow: as
those which serve for the Spittle, the Bile; that in the Liver, Pancreas, etc.
Canaliculus Arteriosus, is a Vessel betwixt that Arterious Veins of the Lungs,
and the great Artery in Faetus's; for it is obliterated in Adult persons: its
use in Faetus's, is, that the Blood may be discharged by this Ductus out of the
Arterious Vein, into the great Artery, because that the Blood is not accended
in their Lungs, for want of Respiration in the Womb. Cancer, see Carcinoma.
Canina appetentia, see Cynodes orexis. Canina rabies, the same that
Hydrophobia. Canini dentes, the same with Cynodontes. Canities is a hoariness
of the Head before the usual time: it is twofold, the one is according to the
ordinary course of Nature: the other is ill, and as Aristotle calls it,
Diseased. Canna major, the same with tibia. Canna minor, the same that Fibulae
os. Canthus, or hircus, is the angle or corner of the Eye; which is either the
greater or the Internal; or the less or External. Capreolus auris, see Helix.
Capsulae artrabilariae, or Renes succenturiati, are Glandulous Bodies placed
above the Reins; their use is to receive the Watery Substance called Lympha,
into their Cavities, wherewith the Blood in its return from the Reins being
thicker, and much destitute of Serum, may be diluted, and circulate more
fluidly. Capsula cordis, see Pericardium. Capsula communis, which Glisson has
observed in the Liver, is nothing but a Membrane which proceeds from the
Peritonaeum, which includes both the Porus bilarius, and the Vena porta, or
great Vein in the Liver. Capsulae seminales are the Extreme Cavities of the
Vessels which convey the Seed, dilated like little Coffers, which by two small
holes emit the Seed received from the Testicles into the little seminary
Bladders, that it may be either preserved there against the time of Coition, or
be reduced into the Blood by the Lymphatic Vessels. Caput mortuum is that thick
dry matter which remains after the Distillation of Minerals especially: but
most commonly it denotes that which remains of Vitriol. Caput purgium, the same
with Errhinum. Carbo, see Anthrax. Carbunculus, the same with Anthrax.
Carcinodes is a Tumor like a Cancer. Carcinoma, Carcinus or Cancer, is a Tumor
that arises from a Salino-sulphureous and sharp Blood; it is round, hard,
livid, painful, at the beginning as big as a Pea, but afterward it is
surrounded with great swelling Veins, which resemble the Feet of a Crab, though
not always. Carcinus, see in Carcinoma. Cardia is the Heart, or Principle
Muscle ordained for the Circulating of the Blood. Cardiaca is a Suffocation of
the Heart from a Polypus, or Coagulated Blood. Cardiacum is a Medicine which
(as they formerly thought) corroborates the Heart: but it rather only puts the
Blood into a fine gentle Fermentation, whereby the Spirits formerly decayed,
are repaired and invigorated, whereupon the Blood by consequence Circulates
more easily and briskly. Cardialgia and Cardiogmos, is a gnawing or contraction
of the Nerve called par vagum, and the Intercostal implanted in the Stomach,
proceeding from a pungent vellicating Matter in the Ventricle; so that the
heart being straightened and contracted by consent with the Stomach, occasions a
swooning away. Cardiogmos, the same that Cardialgia. Caries is the corruption
of a bone, from the continual Afflux of vicious humors, or from their Acrimony
and Malignity; or from an occult quality: or from a bruise that some way
affects the bone, or from sharp Medicines. Caro, flesh, is a similar Fibrous
part, bloody, soft, thick, together with the bones, the prop of the body, and
what covers the Spermatic parts; and it is five-fold, Musculous, Fistulous or
Fibrous, as in the Muscles, and the Heart; Par^nchymous, as the Lungs, Liver,
Spleen; Viscerous, as the Guts; Glandulous, as the Pancreas, the Glandules of
the Breasts, those for Spitting, etc. Spurious, as the Gums, Lips, the Nut of
the Yard, etc. Caro also signifies that soft pappy substance of succulent
Fruits which we call the Pulp: as the Pulp or Flesh of a Quince, etc. Carotidis
arteria, is either External or Internal, the External which arises near the
Heart, divides it self into two branches, the outermost whereof is variously
distributed to the Jaws, the Face, the top of the Head, and behind the Ears;
but the other, with a sort of Mechanical Preparation for its Reception, passes
through the Os cuneiforme; for Nature has dug a peculiar Channel in both sides
of it, wherein this Artery for its greater security is clothed with a new
Adventitious and thicker Tunic, and there representing the Figure of an S. it
goes double out of its Channel of bone, puts off its borrowed Coat, and tends
toward the Brain, with its charge of Blood; ascending therefore about the
Ocular Nerve, it spreads it self toward the sides, than to the foremost part
of the Brain betwixt the passage of the Olfactory Nerves: Lastly, it tends
backward, and taking leave of the Brain near the Medulla Oblongata, and the
Spinal Marrow, waters it with its blood, as far down as the Os Sacrum. They
formerly called this the Vertebral or Internal Artery, because they thought it
ascended and joined with the Carotidal in the Brain; which yet is otherwise
found by Experience, according to the acurate Dr. Willis; they are called
Soporales, or Carotides; in as much as if they be tied, they immediately
incline the person to sleep: but the Ancients mistook when they ascribed
Natural Sleep to them. Carpia is a Tent that is put into a Wound or Ulcer, to
cleanse it. Carus is a Sleep, wherein the person affected being pulled,
pinched, and called, scarce shows any sign of either hearing or feeling; it is
without a Fever, greater than a Lethargy, and less than an Apoplexy. It
proceeds from an obstruction, or compression of the Pores and Passages which go
toward the middle of the Brain, and are placed at least in the utmost
Extremity of the Corpus Callosum. Carpus, commonly Brachiale, the first part of
the Palm of the Hand. Hesichius calls it that part of the Arm which is betwixt
the lowermost part of the Cubit, and the Hand, the Wrist: it consists of Eight
small bones, with which the Cubit is joined to the hand. Cartilago is a white
part, dryer and harder than a Ligament, and softer than a Bone; it is said to
be Similar and Spermatic, but falsely; for it is no more made of Seed, than any
other parts; it renders Articulation more easy, and defends several parts from
injuries from abroad. Carunculae Myrtiformes, are the wrinklings of the Orifice
of a Woman's Vagina, or Membranous inequalities, not to be reckoned in any
certain number, which in Women with Child and after Child birth are so
obliterated, that they are altogether imperceptible, there are for the most
part four of them. Carunculae oculi, are Glandules placed at each greater
corner of the Eye, which separate Moisture for moistning the Eyes, the same
with Tears, which afterward by the Puncta Lachrymalia, placed in the bone of
the Nose, are discharged into the Nostrils. Carunculae papillares are Ten
little Bodies that are in the Reins: they are properly little bundles which
arise from the centring together of a great many small Channels, which the
Reins are in a great measure made up of; and these receive the Serum from the
little ductuses, and convey it into the Pelvis. Casus Uvulae, see in Cion.
Cataclida is the first Rib, called the Subclavian. Catagma is the breaking of
bones, or a separation of the Continuum in the hard parts of the body; which is
effected with some hard Instrument forcibly impressed upon the part; whose
differences are taken from the Form, the Part, and several accidents.
Catalepsis, or Catochus is an abolition of all the Animal Functions, wherein
the Respiration remains entire, and the Patient preserves the same habit of
body that he had before he fell sick: the cause of it seems to consist in the
Obstruction or Angustation of the Corpus striatum in those Pores by which
Objects are Represented in the brain, so that there is no perception of any
Object; but the Pores, by which the Animal Spirits are Conveyed from the Brain
to the Organs of Sense, are left free and open. Catalotica, the same with
Cicatrizantia. Catamenia are Women's Courses, which gathering every Month by the
Fermentation of the blood, and being come to a Turgency by the Accession of a
Ferment that is in the Womb, discharge themselves at their set-time; others
say, they proceed from Seed bred in the Testicles, and communicated to the
blood. Some ascribe the Courses to the motions of the Moon; but if this were
true, then all Women would have them at the same time. They begin at Twelve,
Thirteen, or Fourteen Years of age, and stop about Fifty; but this cannot be
exactly determined: they are suppressed in breeding-Women, and Nurses; yet this
is not a rule neither. Catapasma is Fragrant Powder, which by reason of its
Scent is strewed amongst clothes: also a fragrant Powder, which after anointing
is applied to the Stomach or Heart. Cataphora is the same with Coma; they only
differ in this, that Cataphora is taken as the genus to all sorts of Stupors
that are not attended with a Fever. Cataplasma is a Topical Medicine of the
consistence of a Pultise; it is usually prescribed two ways, either boiled, or
without it; the former is more frequent, the latter of more efficacy. In the
former, they are to take such Vegetables as are proper, as Roots, Herbs, Seeds,
Flowers, Fruits, etc. adding proper Meals, or omitting them; all which are
boiled up in a convenient quantity of Liquor, v. g. Water, Beer, Milk, Honey,
etc. to the consistence of a Pultise: the latter is prepared commonly of
Vegetables shred small with the Infusion of so much Liquor only as may make it
of the former consistence. You may add here Meal, crumbs of Bread, Oils,
Ointments, as in the former sort of Cataplasms too. Catapotium, commonly
Pillula, is a Medicine given inwardly, Purging Pills. Cataptosis is one
Symptom of an Epilepsie; when Men fall suddenly to the Ground. Cataracta, is
Twofold, either beginning, or a suffusion only, or confirmed, or a Cataract
properly so called; the incipient is but a suffusion of the Eye, when little
Clouds, Motes, and Flies seem to fly before the Eyes; but the confirmed
Cataract, is when the Pupil of the Eye is either wholly or in part covered and
shut up with a little thin Skin; so that the Sunbeams have not due admittance
to the Eye. Confirmed Cataracts are cured with thrusting a Needle through the
Albugineous and the hornie Membrane as far as the Cataract, which is to be
depressed with the Needle, and if it start back to be broken, then the Eye is
to be tied up with Water of Roses, the white of an Egg, and Alumn, all shaken
together. Catarrhopus is when Humors, Vapors, or Wind, go downward.
Catasarca, the same with Anasarca. Cataschesis is a good state of Body,
opposite to an Hectic. Catastasis is a disposition of Humane Body, or of time.
Catatasis is an Extension of the Body toward the lower parts. Catheretica are
Medicines that take away superfluities. Catharma, the same that Catharcticum.
Catharrbus is a Defluction of Humors from the Head toward the parts under it,
as the Nostrils, the Mouth, Lungs, etc. Catharsis, the same with Catharcticum.
Catharticum is a purging Medicine, which cleanses the Stomach, the Guts, and
whatsoever is vicious and heterogeneous in the Blood, and throws it into the
Common-shore of the Guts. See Purgatio and Vomitorium. Cathemerina the same
with Quotidiana Febris. Catheter is a Fistulous Instrument which is thrust up
the Yard into the Bladder, to provoke Urine when it is suppressed by the Stone;
or into whose cavity an Instrument called Itinerarium is thrust to find out the
Stone in the Bladder, that then the Sphincter of the Bladder may be shown, and
an Incision be made in the Perinaeum, i. e. betwixt the Fundament and the
Privities. Cathetetrismus is the Administration or Operation of Injecting any
thing into the Bladder by a Catheter, or a Siringe. Catholicum is a common
Medicine that expels all ill Humors; which is kept in the shops. (...)
purgare, to Purge downwards. Catoche, the same with Catalepsis. Catochus, the
same with Catalepsis. Catopsis, the same with Myopia. Catoretica the same with
Purgantia. Cavitates are the greatest Cavities in the Body, wherein some
Principal part is contained, as the Brain in the Head; in the Chest, the Lungs,
Heart, etc. in the Abdomen, the Liver, Spleen, Reins, Stomach, Intestines,
Bladder, etc. and they are three, the Head, the Chest, the Belly. Cavitates
minores are the Ventricles of the Heart and Brain, of which in their proper
place. Cauledon is the breaking of the bones a cross, when the parts of the
bones are so separated that they will not lay direct. Causodes, the same with
Causus. Caustica, or Escharotica are those things which burn the Skin and Flesh
into an hard crust, as burnt Brass, unquenched Lime, sublimated Mercury, and
hot Iron, etc. Causus, or a burning Fever, is that which is attended with a
greater heat than other continued Fevers, an intolerable thirst, and other
Symptoms which argue an extraordinary accension of the blood: and that which
formerly discriminates it from other putrid Fevers, is, that the temper of the
blood is hotter, i. e. abounds more with combustible Sulphur; and therefore
when it begins to boil, is accended in a greater measure, and in its
deflagration diffuses Particles of most Intense Heat through the whole body;
its Motion is acute, it comes presently to its height, is accompanied with
dreadful Symptoms, has a very difficult Crisis, and a dangerous Event?
Cauterium is a Chyrurgeons Instrument, made of Iron, Silver, or Gold, which
after it is healed, has an actual power of burning into any thing; they differ
in Bulk, and in Form; it is sometimes taken for a potential cauterie, prepared
of Lixiviums, or Lime and Soap. Cedmata are defluxions upon the Joints,
especially the Hip. Cele is a tumor in any part. Cellulae intestini coli, the
little Cavities of the Gut Colon, are where the Excrements lodge some while,
that they may refresh some adjacent parts with their Heat, and digest and
ferment any occurring crudities. Cementium is a Powder by whose means
Cementatory Calcination is performed: or as others say, it is an acute piercing
Mineral Matter, wherewith Metals being strewed are Reverberated to cement, and
it is either simple or mixed; and either in form of a Powder, or a Confection.
Cenchrias is a sort of spreading Inflammation which we call Wildfire, called
Herpes Miliaris from the resemblance it bears to the Seed of the small Grain
called Millet or Hyrse. Ceneangia is an Evacution of the Vessels, by opening a
Vein. 1. It is expedient in a Plethora, to free Nature from too great a load.
2. It Is expedient to draw back the blood when it rushes too plentifully toward
any one part. 3. To divert the blood from one part to another, though it be no
way lodged there, nor be Extravasated. 4. To Ventilate and Cool the Blood in
Burning and in Putrid Fevers.
Centrum is the middle of a Body not taken Mathematically, but Physically, and
that they say is the Heart; from which, as from a Center, the blood continually
Circulates round the most distant parts of the body. Cephalaea is an obstinate
Headache. Cephalalgia is an Headache that proceeds from Intemperance, or ill
Confirmation of the Parts. Cephalartica are Medicines which purge the Head.
Cephalica are Spirituous and Volatile Medicines used in the Distempers of the
Head. Also the outermost Vein in the Arm is called Cephalica, because it uses
to be opened in Diseases of the Head. Cephalopharyngaei signifies the first
pair of Muscles of the upper part of the Gullet, which proceed from beside the
Head and Neck, and are spread more largely upon the Tunic of the Gullet.
Cephalophonia is a pain or heaviness in the Head. Ceraea are the Horns of the
Womb in Bruits, wherein Generation is performed. Ceratium, the same with
Siliqua. Ceratoglossum is the proper pair of Muscles belonging to the Tongue,
proceeding from the horns of the Bone called Hyoides, and joined to the sides
of the Tongue; their use is to move the Tongue straight downwards toward the
inward parts, when they act jointly: but if either the one or the other be
contracted singly, they move it to the right or left side. Ceratodes, the same
with Cornea Tunica. Ceratomalagma is a softening Composition, prepared of Wax,
and other ingredients. Ceratum is a Medicine applied outwardly, made of Wax,
Oils, and sometimes Dust mixed thicker than an Ointment, and softer than a
Plaster. Cerchnos is a certain Asperity of the Larynx, which is felt as it
were like so many Juniper Berries, whence, proceeds a little dry Cough. Cercis
is the Second Bone of the Cubit, called Radius, because it is like the spoke of
a Wheel. Cerea, the same with Achor. Cerebellum is the hinder part of the
Brain, consisting, like the Brain it self, of an Ashie or Barkie Substance, and
a white Marrowie Substance, wherein the Animal Spirits which perform
Involuntary and mere Natural Actions, are Generated. In Man, but not so in
Beasts, it seems to consist of a great many thin Plates that lay upon one
another. Cerebrum, the Brain, is strictly taken for the foremost part of the
Substance which is within the Skull; and it is a Substance of a peculiar sort
to it self; outwardly it is covered with the Skin called Pia Matter; it is
wrought with many turnings and windings, its Exterior Substance is Ashie,
wherein the Animal Spirits are Generated: the Interior is white, which
receives the Animal Spirits from the former, and discharges them by the Corpus
Callosum, and the Medulla Oblongata into the Nerves; upon which voluntary
actions do chiefly depend. Likewise the Brain is the subject of Imagination,
Judgment; Memory, and Reminiscence; for the Idaea's or Species of things being
received from the Organs of the External Senses, are carried to the common
Sensory, or the beginning of the Oblong-marrow, and then by the Corpora
striata, and the Corpus callosum, there the judgment and imagination are
formed; but the Seat of the Memory is said to be in the Ashie Barkie Substance;
and if the Idea's after some time chance to be called for out of the place of
the Memory, then it is properly said to be Reminiscence, or Remembering; Sleep
is likewise transacted in the Brain; concerning which, see in its proper place.
Cerelaeum is an Ointment made of Wax and Oil. Cerevisia medicata,
Physick-Drink, is wherein Medicines, proper for any Diseases, have been
infused. Ceria, the same with Favus. Cerio, the same with Favus. Cerotum the
same with Ceratum. Cerumina are the filth of the Ear, which seems to be sweat
out from the Cartilages: others think it comes from the Glandules which border
upon the Ears; it consists of abundance of salt and adult Sulphur, which gives
it its bitterness: it is good to hinder Dust, Motes, or little Animals from
getting into the Ear. Chalastica are Medicines of a moistning Quality, which
Relax the parts that are too hard bound up. Chalazia is a little swelling in
the Eye lids, like a Hail-stone. Chalazae, every Egg has two of them, one in
the Obtuse, and the other in the Acute end: there is more of them in the White;
yea they stick closer to the Yolk, and are fastened to its Membrane. They are
something long bodies, more Concrete than the White, and whiter; knotty, have
some sort of Light, as Hail, whence they have their name: for each Chalaza
consists as it were of so many Hailstones separated from each other by that
White: one of them is bigger than the other, and farther from the Yolk; is
extended toward the Obtuse-end of the Egg: the other is less, and extends it
self from the Yolk toward the Acute-end of the Egg. The greater is made up of
two or three Knots like so many Hailstones, which are moderately distant from
each other, the less, in order succeeds the greater. It is also a Disease
incident to Swine. Chalinos, Aurelian says it is the Ultimate Angle, and
joining of the Mouth, or that part of the Cheeks which adjoyns upon the Lips.
Character is a Mystical Sign or Figure, which signifies or denotes something
amongst Chemists. Charta Virginia, the same with Amnios. Cheimetlon, the same
that Pernio. Cheironium, the same that Cacoethes. Chemia, the same that Chimia.
Chemosis is the Tumor of the Albuginious Tunic, that makes the black of the Eye
appear Concave. Chimetlon, the same that Pernio. Chiragra is a sort of Gout in
the Hands, arising from the Effervescence of Acid Particles, and fixed Salt.
Chiromantia is a Divination from inspecting the hand, when men Predict
futurities from the Lineaments thereof, not at all necessary to a Physician,
since it is rather a Diabolical and deceitful art. Chirones, the same with
Sirones. Chyronia is a great Ulcer, and of difficult Cure. Chyrurgia,
Surgery, is an Art, wherein by the help of our Hands or Instruments we
endeavor to Cure Diseases. Or, it is a part of the Art Theraputic, wherein
Diseases are Cured by Incision Burning, and Setting Joints. Or, it is a Science
which teaches the manner and way of Operation upon Living Human Bodies; and it
is fivefold; tho others choose rather to divide it into Four Parts. 1.
Synthesis, a setting together of things separate. 2. Diaeresis, a separating of
things that were continued before. 3. Diorthosis, a correcting of things
squeezed together and contorted. 4. Exeresis, a taking away of Superfluities.
5. Anaplerosis, a Restoring of that which was Deficient.
Chirurgus, one skilful in this art of Surgery. Chlorosis, or Morbus
virgineus commonly Icterus albus, seems to be a kind of Phlegmatic Pituitous
Dropsy, arising from an obstruction of the Courses, want of Fermentation in
the Blood, and a Detention or Depravation of the Ferment in the Womb; whereupon
the Muscular Fibers being obstructed, they become lazy, and unfit for Action.
Choana is a sort of Cavity or Tunnel in the Basis of the Brain, by which the
serous Excrements are brought down from the Ventricles of the Brain to the
Pituitary Glandulae: also the Pelvis of the Reins, of which in its proper
Place. Choenicis, the same with modiolus. Choenix is a sort of Measure
containing two Sextaries, which is Three Pints of our Measure. Choeras, the
same with Scrophula. Cholagoga are Medicines which purge Sulphurous and
Bilious Humors; as Rhubarb, Senna, etc. Choledechus is the Ductus bilarius, or
passage of the Bile, called Common, wherein the Bile from the Bladder that
contains it, and the Ductus in the Liver, is carried on to the Gut called
Duodenum. Cholera is a depraved motion of the Ventricle and the Guts, whereby
the Bilious Excrements are discharged in great plenty upwards and downwards:
the cause of it consists sometimes in the very Acrimonie of the Gall, which
meets and ferments highly with the juice of the Pancreas, as sharp and Acid as
it self. Chondros, see Cartilago. Chondrosyndesmus is a Cartilaginous Ligament,
or the joining of Bones by the intervention of a Cartilage. Chorda the same
that a Tendon, Nerve, or Gut, of which in their proper place. Chordapsus, so
Celsus calls it, barbarously called Miserere mei, by others Illiaca passio; by
others, Volvulus, commonly Ileus, and it is an Ejection of the Excrements at
the Mouth only, proceeding from an Obstruction of Excrements, from Wind,
Inflammation, or Contortion, or Convulsion of the Guts; when the upper part of
the Intestines are twisted with the lower; or on the contrary, whereupon the
Peristaltic or Vermicular Motion of the Guts, whereby the Excrements are
Excluded, becomes Inverted. Chorea sancti Viti, is a sort of Madness, which
formerly was very common amongst some People, wherein the persons affected
laid not down, but ran hither and thither dancing to the last gasp if they
were not forcibly hindered. Horstius says, That he has spoke with some Women,
who paying an yearly visit to the Chapel of Saint Vitus, which is near the
City Ulme in Sweedland, have been taken with such a violent fit of Dancing
Night and Day, together with a sort of Frantickness in the Mind, that they fall
together like so many people in Ecstasies: and are sensible of little or nothing
for a Year together, till next May, about which time they perceive themselves
so tormented with a restlessness in their Limbs, that they are forced to repair
to the same place again about the Feast of Saint Vitus, to Dance. Chorion is
the outward Membrane, which with the rest of the Membranes and Humors, contain
the Faetus in the Womb. It is of an Orbicular Figure in Women, and its upper
part is annexed to the Placenta, where it adheres to the Womb. Choroides is the
folding of the Carotidal Artery in the Brain, wherein is the Glandula
Pincalis. It is also the Uvea Tunica, which makes the Apple of the Eye.
Chromatismus is the Natural Color and Tincture; for Example, of Urines,
Spittle, Blood, or Excrements. Chronicus is a daily inveterate Distemper, that
has continued above forty days, and a Quartane Fever, a Consumption, an Asthma,
Dropsy, etc. Chronius, the same with Chronicus. Chrysocer aunius pulvis, is
Aurum fulminans, which is prepared of Gold, dissolved in a Menstruum,
impregnated with Ammoniac Salt, infused in Oil of Tartar; the Calx is
precipitated to the bottom, which is sweetened and dried for use. Chus is a
measure that contains four Sextaries, or two Chaenices, in our Measure six
Pints. Chylificatio is a Natural Action which makes Chyle. Chylosis, the same
with Chylificatio. Chylus, Chyle, is a white Juice in the Ventricle and
Intestines, proceeding from a light Dissolution and Fermentation of Victuals,
especially of their Sulphur and Salt, with which Edible things abound, and
which by the Intervention of the Acid Humor in the Ventricle, becomes white:
for if you pour an Acid upon any Liquor that is impregnated with Sulphur and
Volatile Salt, it presently turns Milkie; as is obvious in preparing Milk of
Sulphur, or the resinous Extracts of Vegetables. Nay, Spirit of Hartshorn, and
of Soot, abounding with Volatile Salt, if it be Mixed with an Acid or but with
plain Water, grows to be of a Milkie Color; at last the Chyle after a
Commixion and Fermentation with the Gall, and the Pancreatic Juice, either
Volatile, or Acid, passing the Lacteal Veins, etc. is mixed with the Blood. It
is called in Latin also Chymus. Chymetlon, the same with Pernio. Chymia, or
Chemia is a Resolution of Sublunary Bodies into their Elements; and again, a
Coagulation of the same Elements into the Bodies which they constituted before,
in order to the preparation of Medicines more grateful, more healthful, and
more safe; there are two parts of it, Solution and Coagulation: by the addition
of the Arabic Article it is called Alchymia, or Alkymia; it is called also
Spagiria, Hermetica ars, ars perfecti Magisterii, ars Segregatoria,
Seperatoria, and Destillatoria. Chymica, or Chymicalia, are Medicines which the
Chemists prepare, that they may be taken in a less or more grateful quantity.
Chymicus is one skilful in the Art of Dissolving and Coagulating one skilful in
Chemistry Chymosis, or Chemosis, is a Distortion of the Evelids, by an
Inflammation: also an Inflammation of the Tunica Cornea in the Eye. Chymus, the
same with Chylas. Cicatrisantia are such things as by drying binding, and
contracting, fill up Ulcers with Flesh, and cover them with a skin. Cicatrix,
Cicatrices, Scars, are Marks which are left after great Wounds or Ulcers: some
are simple, others accompanied with a Cavitie, Diminution, or Excrescence in
the part Affected. Cilia, and Supercilia, are the Eyebrows, hard Cartilaginous
Bodies; but Supercilia properly the hair upon the Eyebrows, at the Extremity
of the Forehead; they are like two hairy Bulwarks or Ramparts to the Eyes, to
defend them from the sudden Incurse of any thing from the Head or otherwise.
Cion, Columella, Gargareon, Gurgulio, uva, uvula, uvigena, uvigera, epiglottis,
sublinguium, is the cover of the Windpipe; it hangs betwixt the two Glandules,
called Amygdalae, above the Chink of the Larynx, and is a Process from a
Substance, as one would think, Glandulous, Spongie, and Red; which Columbus is
of opinion, arises from the Tunic of the Mouth redoubled in that place. But
Riolan says, it proceeds from some Muscles which are terminated there; it is a
Figure roundly Oblong, in the upper part thicker, and ending Obtusely in an
Acute. Its use is to attemperate the coldness of the Air, and to hinder the
Drink from falling upon the Nostrils: sometimes this Uvula sticks out too far
from the Humors that fall upon it, which cannot return by the Lymphatic
Vessels, whence proceeds the falling of the Uvula, which we call Roof of the
Mouth. Cionis, the same with Cion. Circuitus, the same with Periodus.
Circulatio sanguinis, see periodus. Circulatio Chymica is the Exaltation of
pure I iquor; by a Circular Distillation in an Instrument called a Pelicane, or
a blind Alymbic, by the virtue of Heat. Circulatorium is a Glass Vessel,
wherein the Liquor infused by its Ascending and Descending, rowls about as it
were in a Circle: there are several sorts of these Vessels, but two especially
of moment and use, that called Pelicanus, and the other Diota. Circulus is a
round Instrument, made of Iron, for the cutting of Glass; which is performed
thus: The Instrument being heated, is applied to the Glass, and is there
continued till it grow hot, then with a drop of cold water, or a cold blast
upon it, it flies in pieces. Cirsocele is a swelling of the preparing Vessels
about the Testicles, so that they sometimes look like a Third Testicle. Cirsos,
or Varix, is a Dilatation and swelling of the Veins, crooked or winding, and
arising in one or more parts of the Body, insomuch that the Veins threaten a
Rupture. Citta, or Pica, is a depraved Appetite, when people long for those
things which are not fit to be, nor are ever eat, as Lime, Coals, Shells,
Cloth, Hides, Sand, etc. that cause lies in the Depravation of the ferment of
the Ventricle. Claretum is an Aromatic Wine, impregnated with an Infusion, and
sweetened with Sugar, it is otherwise called, Vinum Hypocraticum, Hypocras Wine:
also a medicated Wine. It is so called, because it is percolated and purified
by a Winesack through which it is drained from its dregs, called Manica
Hippocratis. Clarificatio is when Juices or thick Decoctions become clearer and
finer: which is done three ways, by subsiding Fermentation, or the addition of
Vinegar, white of an Egg, or Milk. Claviculae are two little Bones which close
the Chest of a Man, fastening the Shoulder Bone like a Key, with the Breast
bone, that part where the Ribs join together: they are otherwise called,
Ligulae, or Furcale, Furcala Superior, etc. they are placed transverse under
the very bottom of the Neck, in the top of the Breast, on each side one. Clavus
see Helos. Clavus, according to Tornamira, is a pain in a small part of the
Head, commonly above the Eye in the Eye-brow, and seems as if that part of the
Head were bored through with a little Auger, or Wimble. Cleidion, the same with
Clavicula. Clitoris is a part in a Woman, resembling the Yard of a Woman, whose
use is Titillation; it consists, like a Man's Yard, of two Nervous Bodies, which
arise from the lower part of the bones of the Privities, and at the end is
covered with a Nut, and a Prepuce, or foreskin; its substance is spungie, so
that it is capable of increase and Relaxation, but is not perforated as in Men.
Clydon, is a Fluctuation in the Ventricle. Clysma, the same with Clyster,
Clyster, and Clysterium, or Enema, is a fluid Medicine given inwardly, injected
into the Bowels by the Fundament; some Clysters are softening and loosning,
others scouring, others astringent, others which ease pain, and others for
other uses. Clyster is sometimes taken in a larger sense, for Mehenchyta,
Otenchyta, Ritenchyta, etc. which see in their proper places. Cuismus, the same
with Pruritus. Coccyx, the last Portion of the Back, is made up of three little
Bones, sometimes four, which are under the Os Sacrum, and serve for easier
sitting. Cochlea is the cavity of the inner part of the Ear, so called from its
windings and turnings, for it has three or four Rings which mutually succeed
one another; it is girt about with a very soft and thin Membrane. Coctio,
Concoction or Digestion, is the fermentation of the smallest Particles which
our Nourishment consists of, that they may be made fit and proper for the
nourishment and increase of a Living Body. The first Concoction is made in the
Stomach by a Ferment which partly remains there, from the relics of the
former Meat, and partly flows thither from the Caeliac Arteries. The second is
made in the Guts by the Gall and Pancreatick juice. The third is in the
Glandules of the Mesenterie, from a Lympha or Water which mixes it self with
the Chyle. The fourth is in the Lungs, from the Inspiration of Nitrous Air. The
fifth is in the Vessels and Bowels, as in the Spleen, Liver, Testicles, etc. It
is ill called coction, or boiling, because it is the property of Fire to boil:
for if Heat were the cause of Fermentation, what should be then of Fish and
other things, wherein there is no sensible heat at all. Codia are the tops of
Poppies, of which they make Syrup. Cecum intestinum, is the Fourth, in order
from the Stomach, and first of the thick Guts; in Children new born, it is found
full of Excrements; but in Adult persons its Cavitie often disappears, and
only hangs like a Worm. Caelia is a great Cavity, as the uppermost, middle,
and the lowest Region or Cavity. Caeliaca Arteria is that which arises from the
Trunc of the great Artery, and spreads it self toward the Ventricle and Liver
with its Branches. Coeliaca passio, or Affectio, is a Purging, wherein the Meat
either wholly changed, or in part is ejected, without any Chilification; and it
is twofold: the first, in which the Meat is only Digested in the Stomach; the
other, when Concoction or Fermentation is performed in the Stomach and
Intestines both at once; but by reason that the Lacteal Vessels, or little
Teats of the Guts, are Obliterated through long Fasting, a Purulent Dissenterie
or the like, the Chyle is not distributed. Coeloma is a hollow and round Ulcer
in the Horny Tunic of the Eye. Coelum is the Cavitie of the Eye toward the
Corners. The Palate is also called Coelum. Cohobatio is when a distilled Liquor
is poured upon its Menstruum again, and afterward is Distilled. Coindicantia
are signs which do not indicate by themselves, but by another. Colatura is that
which after Boiling, or Infusion, is percolated through a Sive or Cloth.
Colc^thar is the dry Substance which remains after Distillation, commonly
called Caput mortuum. Coals, see Penis. Colica passio, the Colic is a vehement
pain in the Abdomen, from an ill disposition of the Animal Spirits, begun in
the Nervous foldings of the Mesenterio, and is sometimes falsely imputed to the
Gut Colon. Others make this Disease to proceed from an Acid Pancreatic Juice;
others, other ways, but falsely. Colla is Glue. Colletica are Medicines that
Conglutinate. Colliciae are the joining of the puncta Lachrymalia into one
passage on both sides, which derive the humor of the Eyelids into the Cavitie
of the Nostrils; the holes that are made in the very tops of the Eyebrows
descend in little Channels, easily to be shown, unless the bones of the
Nostrils be so cautiously broken, that the Tunics remain entire; for after they
have penetrated the Bones (whither they are separated with a thin Membrane)
they spread themselves into a larger Channel, and are continued to the Tunic of
the Nostrils. The same holes or openings in Sheep, Hares, Calves, Rabbits, are
not found in the very Eyebrows, but a little more inward; and most of all in
Birds, where they are larger than in any other Creatures; the Membrane which
separates the holes here, is very short. Collutio is a washing of the Mouth,
when we scour loose Teeth, the Gums, or Ulcers. Collyrium was once an Oblong
Medicine which was taken in Distempers of the Eyes; it is prepared in an
Oblong, sometimes an Orbicular Form, and is dissolved in a convenient Vehicle
for curing the Eyes. Coloboma is a fault in the Lips, Eyelids, Ears, Nostrils,
and the like, when one part either from the Nativity, or by some accident grows
to another, which were either before actually loosned, or at least ought to
have been so. Colon, is the second of the great Guts; it is thus situate; it
arises from the Caecum Intestinum, in the right Flank, and adheres to the right
Kidney; then it tends upwards under the Liver, where sometimes it is annexed to
the Bladder of the Gall, which dies it a Clayish Color: it goes on further
transverse under the bottom of the Ventricle, and on the left hand is joined to
the Spleen; then again it is fastened to the left Kidneys, where it winds and
turns very obliquely; and after that, descends in a right Line; it is commonly
about Eight or Nine hand breadths in length; but the widest and largest Gut of
all, it has a great many little Cells, or Cavities in it; a certain Ligament is
twisted with it the breadth of the middle Finger about its middle upwards; and
then by reason of its largeness it is guarded with two strong Ligaments, the
one upwards, the other downwards, that it may be fastened to both the upper and
under parrs: about the beginning it has a Valve that looks upwards, lest any
thing should return from the great Guts into the small. Colpus, the same with
Sinus. Columella, the same with Cion. Colummanasi is the fleshie part of the
Nose prominent in the middle, near the upper Lip. Columma oris the same with
Cion. Coma somnolentum is a deep sleep, less than a Lethargy, without a Fever,
wherein the Patient being awakned, answers to any Questions propounded to him,
but falls into a profound Sleep again, with his Mouth open, and his under-Jaw
fallen, liker to one dead than alive. It proceeds from an Obstruction of the
Brain, when the Serum has invaded the Tegument of the windings and foldings of
the Brain, and the little streaks of the Marrow that is included therein. It is
the same that Cataphora. Coma vigil is a Disease wherein the Patients are
continually inclined to Sleep, but scarce can sleep, being affected with a
great drowziness in the Head, a stupidity in all the Senses and Faculties, and
many times with a delirium too. If the reason of these things be demanded, we
may solve them thus, That the Pores and Passages of the Brains, wherein the
Spirits move, are very much stuffed up with a thick Soporiferous Matter from
the Blood, whereby the Spirits being hindered from their usual Explosion and
Commerce with one another, seem to induce a profound and almost irresistible
Drowziness upon the Person Affected; but in as much as there are some sharp
nimble Particles, like so many Stings, intermixed with the Spirits, and which
keep them in perpetual Motion, therefore some of them still force their way,
and directly or obliquely, as they can find a passage, meet and exert; and this
Motion, such as it is, confused and wandering, tho it do not perfect the
complete Exercise of the Animal Function, yet easily interrupts its Rest; so
that persons thus Affected, enjoy neither perfect day, nor perfect night, but
live in a continual Twilight betwixt sleep and waking. Comitialis morbus, the
same with Epilepsia. Composita are Medicines made up of many simple Medicines;
as certain Waters, Syrups, Electuaries, Opiates, Trochies, Ointments,
Plasters, etc. Conarium, or Glandula pinealis, hangs in the folding of the
Choroides in the Brain, so called from the shape of a Cone. It is seated
betwixt the two beds of the Optique Nerves, and the Prominences of the Nates.
We can scarce believe, that this Glandulae is the seat of the Soul; or that the
Principal Faculties in a Man arise hence; because that several Animals which
are in a manner wholly destitute of the Prime Faculties of the Soul,
Imagination, Memory, etc. yet have this Glandulae very fair and ample: it ought
therefore to be looked upon rather as a Sensorie, whence the Nerves arise; to
wit, about the beginning of the Oblongated Marrow. Its use is, to receive and
contain the Serous Humors which are Excerned from the Alterious Blood, till
either the Veins being emptied, suck them again; or else the Lympheducts (if
there be any at hand) convey them away. Yet the Learned F. Boil doubts of its
use, when he says, That it is not so easy to determine what its use is. Since
I have observed this Glandulae to be always impregnated with an apparent and
pretty sharp saltness in several Brains of Men, Oxen, and Sheep; I cannot but
imagine, that it separates some Volatile Humor from the Blood, Analogous to a
Volatile Ammoniac Salt, which being diffused upon the Trunc of the Spinal
Marrow, communicates some new Vigor to the Animal Spirits, and hinders their
Coagulation. Concha is the winding Cavitie of the inner part of the Ear.
Condensantia, see Incrassantia. Conditum is a composition of Conserves,
Powders, Spices, made up into the Form of an Electuarie, with a convenient
quantity of Syrup: it is taken also for a Simple Medicine, sweetened with Honey
or Sugar; as candid Ginger, or Helicampane. Condyloma is the knitting or
joining of Joints. Also a certain Tumor in the little skin of the Fundament; an
hard and Callous Swelling, growing from black Humors that flow thither. and
rather troublesome than painful: sometimes also it is accompanied with an
Inflammation. Condylie are the joints and knuckles of the Fingers, thicker
thereabout the Joints, than in other places. Confecta, Confitures, are things
(as Seeds, Almonds, Cinnamon, etc.) crusted over with dry Sugar. Confectio is a
Composition of Powders, Gums, Sugar, Honey, Syrups, etc. made up into one
Substance, and it is Twofold; either dry, as Lozenges, etc. or moist, as
Opiates, Preserves, Conserves, and all sorts of Antidotes. Conformatio is an
Essential part of Health, or Sickness; and therefore is either good or bad; it
consists in these Six following Particulars, Number, Magnitude, Figure,
Cavitie, Surface; and Situation. Congius, or Choa, is a Measure that contains
Six Sectaries. Conjunctiva tunica, the same with Adnata. Conoides, the same
with Conarium. Consensus, a Disease by Consent, is when one Disease is caused
by another, as Respiration is hindered by a Pleurisy; it is likewise the
correspondence of different parts, by the mutual and common Ligaments of both;
to wit, Nerves and Tendons. Conserva, a Conserve, is a Composition of Flowers
or Herbs beat together, to every pound whereof, if they be dry, are added three
pounds of Sugar; if moister, two pounds, so that they may be kept several
years. Consolidantia are those things which cleansing with a moderate heat and
force, by taking Corruption out of Wounds, and preserving the temperature of
the parts, cause the Nourishment to be fitly applied to the part Affected.
Contagium, is a Poison, which from one Subject is propagated to another; which
happens two manner of ways, either at a distance by the Air, or by simple
Contact. Contemplabiles dies, see Critici dies. Continens causa, is the
Internal Cause of a Disease, with the matter of it, which arises elsewhere,
which is so near a kin to the Disease, that if it be, the Disease is too; and
if it be taken away, the Disease follows. As the Stone, which proceeds from ill
Humors arising from ill qualities in Meats and Drinks, Obstructs the Ureters.
Continens febris is a Fever that continues without any Intermission: and it is
Twofold, either Primarie, or Secundarie; the former proceeds from a too great
Exaltation of Sulphur, as in a burning Fever, a Pleurisy, Quinzie, etc. the
latter, which is also called Symtomatica, is caused by Wounds, Ulcers, etc. as
in a Consumption, Wounds in the Head, etc. Continua Febris, is a Fever (or
Ague) which is continually troublesome, but with some intermission: and it is
either Quotidian, Tertian, Quartane, or Erratic. The cause of its continuance
proceeds from a too high Exaltation of Sulphur; as in the former sort of
Fevers: but the Paroxismes, or Fits, proceed from that equal portion of Chyle
which is continually added to the Blood. Contraindicatio is an Indication which
hinders that to be done which the first Indication suggested; and it is either
Contra indicans, which hinders of it self; or Correpugnance, which is
Secundarily Repugnant, and in Conjunction with other Indications. Contusio
ossis, a bruising of a Bone is when a Bone is so hurt with some hard blunt
Instrument, that outwardly it appears whole, when as inwardly it is otherwise.
Convulsio, Convulsion, is a Motion whereby the Nerves or Membranes are
contracted and remitted without the Will, as in the Falling Sickness, Cramp,
etc. of which in their proper place. Cophosis, is a Deafness. Copos is a
weariness of the Body, when the Muscles, or their Fibers rather, are laden and
obstructed with such Viscous Humors, that they are rendered unfit for Motion.
Coprocritica are Medicines which Purge away the Excrements in the Guts. Cor,
the Heart, is a Fleshy Fibrous Substance, made up of several Muscles and
Tendons; it has two Auricles or Ears, and as many Ventricles; the Vena Cava, or
Great Vein, is fastened to the right Auricle, and the Pulmonarie Vein to the
left; the Pulmonarie Artery is joined to the Right Ventricle, and the great
Artery to the left. It is clothed with a little Membraneous Bag, called the
Pericardium, wherewith it is joined to the Mediastinum, and the Diaphragme; its
Basis is upwards, and Point downwards, and is placed in the middle of the
Chest, amongst the Lobes of the Lungs. Its use is only to receive and disperse
the Blood to all parts in the Body; though others place I know not what Flame,
others a Ferment in its Ventricles, which are all Fables, and no way consonant
to Reason, as we have sufficiently Evinced in our Tract, concerning The
Circulation of the Blood. Coracohyoides, are Muscles which proceed from the
Process of the Shoulder Bone, called Coracoides, and go on as far as the Bone
Hiordes: their use is to move obliquely downwards. Coracoides is the Process of
the Shoulder Blade in form of a Beek. Cordialia are Medicines which are
commonly thought to strengthen the Heart: but they only put the Blood into a
fine gentle Fermentation, which Corroborates and Facilitates the Motion of the
Heart. Cornea oculi tunica, which is also called Sclerotes, and Dura, the hard
Tunic, proceeds from a skin in the Brain called Dura Menix; it is pellucide
forwardly, that it may transmit the visible Species; its sides are covered with
the Albugineous tunic; inwardly it contains the Aquaeous Humor. Cornicularis
processus, see Ancyroides: Cornua uteri, are two lateral parts of the Womb in
some Bruits, as Cows, Hearts, Sheep, Goats, etc. yet some Authors have
attributed the same parts to a Woman's Womb, from something which imitates them
there; for at the sides of the bottom of the Womb, there is a sort of
Protuberance on both sides, where the Vasa deferentia are inserted: a Woman's
Womb is rarely bipartite, as it is in Bruits. Coronalis sutura, is a Cleft in
the Head, made like a Comb, and joins as if the Teeth of two Saws were closely
compacted into one another; it is placed in the upper part of the Skull, from
one Temple to another, and is circumscribed with the bones of the Forehead, and
that particularly called Bregma, in the middle whereof the Suture, styled
Sagitalis, is terminated. Coronaria vasa are the Veins and Arteries which
surround the Heart, to Nourish it. Corone is an Acute Process of the lower
Jawbone, from its likeness to the Beek of a Raven, called Rostriformis, in form
of a Beek. Corpus Callosum is the Marrowie part of the Brain, whose
Complication makes the foremost Ventricle of the Brain; and it is wholly
Marrowie, without any Membrane, and is fastened on both sides to the little
Tuffs of the Oblongated Marrow; from which, as from its rise, this Medullarie
Substance which overspreads the Arches of the Brain is expanded toward the
hinder parts, and gradually diminishes; at length the Exterior Edge of this
Expanded Substance is more narrowly contracted, and lower down is joined to the
Trunc of the Oblongated Marrow, by the connection of Membranes and Vessels: and
farther, that the Connection may be firmer, there arises a Medullary Process
from its former part, near its little Tufts, which subtending the opening of
the Brain, goes to the very Extremities of it; with which, as with two Arms
folded, it is united on both sides: which Arms embrace the Trunc of the
Oblongated Marrow, and so unite that Limbus of the Brain too more firmly to
themselves. Corpus glandulosum, the same with Prostata. Corpus varicosum, see
Varicosum corpus. Corpus Pampineforme, see Varicosum corpus. Corpus Pyramidale,
see Varicosum corpus. Corrosio Chymica, is a Calcination of mixed Bodies by
Corrosives. Corrosivum is a Medicine that has a power of Corroding, as Lime,
Aquafortis, etc. Corrodentia, Corroding things, are those which eat up and
consume Excrescent Flesh, with their sharp Particles. Corticalis substantia
cerebri, is the outward Substance of the Brain, full of Labyrinths, and
Meanders in the outside; it is covered with a thin skin, it is of an Ash
grisly Color, and full of little Vessels: inwardly the Medullary Substance is
next to it. Its use is to generate Animal Spirits from the Blood, and hence
they are conveyed by the Medullarie Substance to the Nerves, and distributed
through the whole Body. Secondly, The Seat of the Memory, and Sleep is placed
there. Coryphe is the Crown of the Head; also the interior Extremity of the
Fingers, near the Nails. Coryza, or gravedo, is a defluction of a sharp, salt,
and thickened Humor, into the Mouth, Lungs, and Nostrils, from the Ventricles
of the Brain, by the Nerves of smelling; for when it grows thick, it can
neither be Percolated by the Reins, nor pass from the Pitutarie Glandule,
thorough the Infindibulum into the Veins, and therefore it Distills into the
Nostrils by the aforesaid Nerves, which if it meet with an Accension of
Sulphurous Particles, it produces a Fever, and consequently thirst. Hence
comes that Coryza, either with or without a Fever. Cosmetica are Medicines
which whiten and soften the Skin, as Oil of Tartar, a dissolution of Sublimated
Mercury, Sulphur, Camphor, etc. Costae, the Ribs, are those Bones which with
other parts make the Chest or Thorax: backward they are connexed with the
Vertebres of the Back, forward with the Cartilages of the Breast Bone; they are
Twelve in Number on both sides; the seven upper are called true, the five lower
spurious, the broader part of the Ribs is called Palmula, the straiter toward
the Vertebres, Remulus. Cotyla attica, is Nine Ounces, as an Italian Hemina;
but Cotyla Italica contains Twelve. Cotyle, the same with Acetabulum, is the
Cavitie of the Huckle-bone, which is appointed to receive the head of the
Thigh Bone Cotyledon, the same with Cotyle. Cotyledones, or Acetabula uterina,
are Glandules dispersed up and down the uttermost Membrane of the Faetus,
called Chorion; which separate Nutritious juice from the Womb to nourish the
Faetus; but this is found only in some Animals: the Placenta in the Womb
supplies their place in Women. Also the gaping meeting of the Veins in the
Womb, are called Cotylidones, and Acetabula; these Glandules are so called,
from the resemblance they bear to the Leaves of the Herb Pennywort, in Latin
Cotyledon. Coxae os, the Hyp-bone, called otherwise Innominatum, and illium
coxendix, because it contains the Gut called ileum; it is annexed to the sides
of the Os Sacrum; in Infants it consists of Three Bones, Ilium, Ischium, and Os
pubis, which are joined together by Cartilages till Seven Years of Age, then it
is distinguished by a Triple Line; it grows into one continued Bone in Adult
persons. Coxendix, the same with Coxa and Ischium. Crama, Croma, and Chrama, is
a mixture of any thing, whether Medicines or Elements. Cranium is the compages
of the Bones of the Head, to which belong the Bones of the Forehead, of the
sides of the Head, of the hinder-part of the Head, of the Temples, the Bone
called Sphenoides, and another called Cribriforme like a Sieve: it is like a
(...) an Helmet to the Head, which defends it from External Injuries; its upper
part is double: some call it Calva and Calvaria. See Calva. Crapula is an
Headache proceeding from too much Wine. Crasis, or temperamentum, is a
convenient mixtion of qualities; temperament is either Simple, or Compound;
Simple, is when only one quality exceeds the rest, as hot, cold, moist, dry,
salt, sharp, etc. Compound, is when more qualities exceed, as hot and dry, hot
and bitter, salt and sharp, acid and frigid, acid and acrimonious, and also one
is inherent, which is fixed in the parts; another influent, which is derived
upon the parts, from the Blood and Spirits; and it is either moderate, or
immoderate; total, or partial; natural or acquired; permanent or transitory,
to an equality in weight, or a just proportion; and so they make a great many
distinctions, which signify little or nothing. Craticula is a Chemical
Instrument made of square pieces of Iron, as thick as ones Finger, placed so
near one another in Acute Angles, that there is half a Fingers space betwixt
them; it is used in making of Fires, to keep up the Coals. Cremasteres, are two
Muscles of the Testicles, called suspensores, hangers; they grow outwardly to
the Membrane of the vagina, and proceed in men from the Ligament which is in
the os pubis; and are fast connexed to the lower part of the Testicles.
Cribrosum os, see Ethmoides. Cribrum benedictum antiquorum, the Ancients
fancied Two Cavities, placed long-ways in the Reins; one uppermost, whereinto
the Serous Blood was poured from the Emulgent Arteries; another lowermost,
which they fancied was distinguished with a certain Transverse Membrane full of
little holes like a Sieve; whence they called it Colatorium, a Strainer, and
Benedictum Cribrum, a blessed Sieve, through which they would have the Serum
Percolated into the Ureters, and the good Blood stay behind for the nourishment
of the Reins. Cricoarytaenoides are Muscles which proceed from the Cartilage,
called Cricoides. and are inserted into the Arytaenoides, which whilst they
draw back-ward and outwardly, the opening of the Larynx is Dilated. Cricoides
is the Cartilage of the Larynx Windpipe, which is in fashion of a Ring.
Cricothyroides signifies a pair of Muscles, which proceed from the Cartilage
like a Ring, and are terminated in that which is called Scutiformis, or like a
Shield; they Dilate the opening of the Larynx by moving a little obliquely.
Crimnoides, or Crimnodes, is Urine with thick Sediments at the bottom, like
Bran. Crisima are Signs by which one may discern and judge. Crisis is a sudden
Change in a Disease, either toward a Recovery, or Death. It sometimes
signifies a Secretion of Humors; but is more frequently taken for a Judgment
passed upon a Disease. One Crisis is called perfect, another imperfect; the
perfect is that which frees the Patient perfectly and entirely from the
Distemper; and it is either Salutary, or deadly. 1. It must be judged by very
good Signs. 2. Be manifest. 3. Happen upon a Critical Day. 4. Be faithful. 5.
Secure. 6. Suitable to the Disease, and the Distemper of the Patient. An
imperfect Crisis, is that which does not clearly determine the Tendency of the
Disease, but leaves room for another Crisis: and this is Twofold, either for
the better, or for the worse: the former is that which does not quite take away
the Disease, but enables the Patient to bear it better: the latter, is when the
Disease becomes more violent and dangerous. That Crises depend upon the Motion
and Influence of the Moon, and Stars, and follow their Quadrate and opposite
Aspects, or their Conjunctions, is false and frivolous; for Critical
Evacuations are determined only according to the store and turgescencie of
Adust Matter, which is Expelled the Body sooner or later, according to the
different Temperament of the Persons Affected: whereupon depends the variety of
Critical days. Cristae are Excrescencies of Flesh growing about the Fundament,
from a preposterous use of Coition, the Roots whereof are often Chapt, and
Cleft. Christa Galli is the Third part of the Bone Ethmoides, or the inner
Process, not much unlike the Comb of a Cock: it arises betwixt the Olfactory
Nerves; and has the Extremity of the Third Cavity of the hard skin of the
Brain, called Dura meninx, implanted in it. Criterium, the same that Crisis.
Crithe, or Hordeolum, is a little Oblong Push, or Swelling, which grows to the
Eyebrows where the Hairs are; so called from its resemblance to a Barly-corn.
Critici dies are those whereon there happens a sudden change of a Disease, and
they are Threefold: some are called truly and perfectly Critical; others
Indices; others Intercidentes. The perfectly Critical Days are called
Principes, or Radicales; because that the Crisis which happen on these days
have all the marks of a perfect Crisis: and these are the Seventh, the
Fourteenth, and the Twenty-first Day. Indices which are called also
Contemplabiles, and Internuncii, are those which Indicate, that the Crisis will
be on the Seventh day: and these are Three: the Fourth, the Eleventh, and
Seventeenth Day. Intercidentes, which are called also Intercalares, irrepentes,
or provocatorii, and those which fall betwixt the days called Principes and
Indices, and they only aim at an imperfect Crisis, and are the Third, the
Fifth, the Ninth, the Thirteenth, and the Nineteenth; but all other Days which
are neither Principes, nor Indices, nor Intercidentes, are called Vacui, and
Medicinales, and they are the Sixth, the Eighth, the Tenth, the Twelfth, the
Sixteenth, and the Eighteenth. The computation of Critical Days, is to be
Instituted from that hour wherein the Patient first felt himself ill. We may
observe by the by, That the computation of Critical Days in these Countries
does not exactly correspond with Hypocrates his Accounts. All these days depend
upon the sooner or later Fermentation and Maturation of the Morbific Matter.
Critica Signa, Critical Signs, are such as are taken from a Crisis, either
toward Death, or a Recovery; and some of them are antecedent, which either
foretell the time of a Crisis, or signify a kind of Crisis. Others are
concomitant, which appear at the same time with the Crisis. And others, Lastly,
are Subsequent, which show, whether an imperfect Recovery be to be expected; or
there be fear of a Relapse. Crotaphites are the Muscles, Veins, and Arteries
about the Temples. Sometimes Crotaphium is taken for a pain in the Head.
Crotaphium, See in Crotaphites. Crucibulum, a Crucible, is a Vessel for melting
Minerals and Metals made of Earth, extraordinarily hardened by Fire, with an
Acute Basis, but a larger top, round, or triangular. There is also a sort of
Crucible made, commonly called Testa, which is sufficient to melt Metals.
Cruditas morborum, a Crudity in Diseases, is when the Blood (as in continued
Fevers) is not yet duly sermented, and brought to a right consistence. Cruditas
Ventriculi, a Crudity of the Stomach, is when meat out of a defect of
Nourishment, or some other cause, is not rightly fermented, and turned into
Chyle: and it is Threefold, Apepsia, Bradypepsia, and Dispepsia: of which in
their proper places. Cruor, Blood, see Sanguis. Helmont makes a distinction
betwixt Sanguis, and Cruor; the former whereof, he says, Is the Blood in the
Arteries; the latter, that in the Veins. Crus, or Magnus pes, is all that part
of the Body which reaches from the Buttocks down to the end of the Toes; it is
divided into the Thigh, Leg, and Foot. Crusta lactea is a species of Achor, a
Scurf, or crustie Scab: only with this difference, that an Achor Infects only
the Head; but this, not only the Face, but almost the whole Body of an Infant
at the time of its first Sucking. Crusta Lactea turns white, but Achors have
another color. Crymodes is a cold shivering Fever, but many times accompanied
with an Inflammation of the inn parts. Crysorchis is an absconding of the
Testicles in the Belly. Crystalinus humor oculi, called also Glacialis, the
Crystaline humor of the Eye, within the opening of the Tunica Uvea, like a
Glass put over a hole, collects and refringes the Rays which strike upon it
from all parts; its Substance is like Glue, or the Gum of a Tree, very
pellucide, and of a consistence like melting Wax, which though it be pressed,
does not yet easily yield and separate. In Men it is shaped like a Lintel,
whose outward Surface is pretty plain, but the inner gibbous and risting: this
Humor, though it be not apt to spread abroad, yet is clothed with a small
Membrane of its own, called Aranea, by reason of its thinness, like to a
Spiders Web. Crystalloides tunica, the same with Aranea Tunica. Cubiforme, see
Cuboides. Cubitus, the middle part betwixt the Shoulderbone and the Wrest; it
consists of two Bones, one called Ulna, and the other Radius: the ends whereof
meet indeed, but the middle parts are separate, though they be tied together a
little by a Membranous Ligament. Cuboides is the Fourth bone in that part of
the Foot which immediately succeeds the Leg, and that in both Feet. It is
called also Grandinosum, and Cubiforme. Cucupha is a Cover for the Head, made
of Odoriferous and Cephalic Spices beat to Powder, and stitched betwixt two
pieces of Silk; or else, sowed within a Cap, and worn upon the Head against
Catarrhs, and other Diseases of the Head. Cucurbita is a Chemical pointed
Vessel made of Earth or Glass, used in Distillations by an Alembic sometimes it
is taken for Cucurbitula. Cucurbitini lumbrici are broad Worms, like the seed
of a Gourd. Cucurbitula, or Cucurbita, a Cupping-glass, is a wide, hollow
Vessel, made of Glass or Tin, which is applied to the Body with Scarrification,
or without it, to divert, to derive the Blood into another part, or to let it
out; if it be applied without Scarrification, it is called Cucurbita caeca and
ventosa. Cupping-glasses are applied to the most fleshy parts, where the large
Vessels and Nerves cannot be hurt. The drawing which is performed by these
Glasses, is done thus: after the Skin is scarrified, the Air in the
Cupping-glasses is rarefied, and dilated by the flame of the Towe that is fired
within it, which after it is cooled and condensed, takes up less room than
before; so that the External Air pressing upon the Flesh without, forces the
Blood into the Glass. There are two sorts of Cupping-glasses, says Celsus, one
of Brass, and the other of Horn: the former is open on one part, and shut on
the other; the latter is equally open on one part, on the other has a little
hole: burning Towe is thrown into the Brazen one, and so its mouth is applied,
and forced upon the Body till it stick. That of Horn, is applied singly by it
self, and by a violent sucking at the little hole, which must presently be
stopped up close with Wax, it sticks as fast as the other: but if other things
fail, then a little Cup or Goblet with a strait mouth may be very fitly applied
to the same Effect; after it has stuck, if the Skin be scarrified before with a
Penknife, it draws out the Blood; if it be whole and entire, it draws out the
Flatulent Matter; therefore where the matter within is hurtful and offensive,
it must be applied the former way; where there is an Inflammation, the latter.
The Egyptians at this day use those of Horn; as appear from Prosper Alpinus.
Cuneiforme os is so called from the resemblance they say it has to a Wedge; in
Latin Cuneus; the Ancients called it Multiforme, of many Shapes, by reason of
the various Processes inside and outside, which render it rough and unequal: it
is situate in the midst of the Basis of the Brain, and is placed under it like
a Basis, so that it touches upon most of the Bones of the Head, and the upper
Jaw. Cuneiformia ossa, are those bones which make the Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh
bone of that part of the Foot which immediately succeeds the Leg: which
Fallopius calls Sphenoidea, Innominata, and Calcoidea. Cunnus is a Woman's
Privy Parts, consisting of a Clytoris, Nymphae, etc. Curatio is a right way or
method of finding out by Symptoms and Indications, proper Remedies for any
Disease, in order to the Recovery of Health. Curativa indicatio, is an
Indication which respects the Disease to be cured. Curculio, the same with
Cion. Cuticula the little thin skin, is a cover of the skin without sense,
extended outwardly over the whole skin like a Membrane, full of Innumerable
small Pores, accommodated to the avoiding of injuries from abroad, to the
shutting up of the Cutaneus Vessels, and to the more Acurate Perfecting of
Tactile Qualities: It is nourished by the Blood; for if it be lost or perished,
it comes again, though its Vessels be but little conspicuous. It is not
condensed by Cold; for I have often shown it in Abortions; nor is it condensed
by Oily Vapors, because that condensed Vapors easily slide off again. Cutis
is the skin in a living Man: but Pellis, is that which is flead off, and it is
the outermost cover of the whole Body, or a pretty thick Membrane wrought of
several Filaments of the Veins and Arteries, Nerves, and Nervous Fibers,
Complicated and Interwoven with one another, full of Glandules, and
Limpheducts, or Vessels that convey away the Vapors and Swet, abounding with a
great number of Pores here and there, and sensibly Perforated in many places to
let in and out, as occasion requires, as at the Mouth, Nostrils, Eyes, Ears,
Privities, Fundament, etc. it is thickest of all upon the Head; moderately hard
in the Neck and Back; finer in the Face, Yard, and outer skin of the Cod; thin
on the sides; thinnest of all on the Lips; in some places, as the Elbow,
Forehead, soles of the Feet, etc. it sticks very close together. Cyathus, we
English it properly a Beeker, is a Measure of Dry things as well as Liquids;
not as some think, a common sort of Cup; but the Eighth part of a Sextarie.
Cyclisci, are Surgeons Tools wherewith they scrape away Corrupt Flesh, or the
like; made in the form of an Half Moon. Cyema, the same with Embrion. Cylindrus
is a Plaster made oblong; which Physicians call Magdaleo. Cyllosis, see in
Cyllum. Cyllum signifies a Leg put out of joint outwardly. Also one Lame and
Crooked. Cymbiforme os. see os Naviculare. Cynanche and Lycanche, so called,
because it is frequently incident to Dogs and Wolves, is an Inflammation of the
inner Muscles of the Larynx, accompanied with a difficulty of breathing, and a
continual Fever. Cynantropia is Madness given by a Dog, wherein the Patient
flies light, and any thing that is bright and splendid; fears Water, and
trembles at the sight and remembrance of it; it proceeds usually from a
poisonous bite, or the like, of some mad Creature, as a Dog, a Wolf, etc.
Cynodes orexis, is a Canine Appetite, or an Extreme hunger joined with
Vomiting, or a Looseness: it arises from too much, or a too acid Ferment in the
Stomach. Cynodesmus is the band which ties the little skin of the Yard to the
Nut. Cynodontes are those Teeth betwixt the Axel Teeth and the Grinders, called
Canini, Columellares, and Oculares, Eye-Teeth, as we say. Cyphosis is the
bending of the Vertibres of the Back toward the Back parts. Cyrtoma is a bunch
on the Back, or a Tumor in any other part. Cyrtosis, the same with Cyrtoma.
Cyssaros is the Gut called Rectum, the lowermost of all: Also the Fundament.
Cystica are Medicines used against Distempers in the Bladder. Cystis is the
Bladder that holds the Urine, or the Gall. Cystis choledochus, the same with
Folliculus fallis.
D.
DAcryodes are Ulcers which continually send forth Matter. Danich, the same
with Lupinus. Darsis is an Excoriation of the Skin. Dartus is the second Tunic
of the common Cotes which mediately cover the Testicles of a Man: it arises
from the Fleshie Membrane; but in Women the Testicles are immediately covered
with the Cote of the Peritonaeum. Dasymma is a Superficiarie in equality of
the inner part of the Eyelids, accompanied with a redness. Debilitas is a
weakness proceeding from Swounding, Fainting, Hunger, Disease, or otherways.
Declinatio morbi, the declension of a Disease is when it recedes from its
height, and the Patient is beyond danger: for none dies in the declension of a
Disease but accidentally. See Acme. Decoctum, see Apozema. Decussis, the same
with Denarius. Decussorium is a Chyrurgeons Instrument wherewith the Dura Matter
being highly pressed, is acurately adjoined to the Scull, that the puss or
snottie Matter gathered betwixt the Scull and the Skin called Dura Menix, or
Matter, may be Evacuated by a hole made with a Chyrurgeon's instrument called
Trepanum. Defectio animi, see Lypothomia. Deflagratio febrium, see Apyrexia.
Defluvium capillorum, see Alopecia. Deflexus, the same with Catarrbus.
Deglutio, swallowing, is an Animal Action whereby Meat chawed in the Mouth, or
any thing more Liquid, descends into the Stomach by the contraction of the
Fibers of the Gullet. Delirium is a Depravation of the imagination and
judgment, arising from a Tumultuary and disorderly motion of the Animal
Spirits; whereupon the Persons Affected speak several absurd and incongruous
things, the antecedent cause whereof lies either in the Blood, or in the Animal
Spirits; there are several species of it: some who speak little, some who dote
in their talk; and not only think, but speak things ridiculous, strange,
magnificent, and malicious; others again really execute what they think, and
that either with laughter, or in great earnest: but all these orders of doting
people, are reduced to certain destinctions. Dejectio is an Evacuation of the
Excrements by the Peristaltick Motion of the Guts. Deleterium is any Poisonous
Medicine. Deligatio is a part of Chyrurgery that concerns the binding up of
Wounds, Ulcers, broken Bones, etc. and it is either Simple or Compound. The
Simple is either equal or unequal: the equal is only round, which swathes the
affected Member without any Declention to either side: the unequal is divided
into Ascia and Sima, which at least differ upon the account of one being
greater, and the other less; Ascia declines little from a round, but Sima much.
There are a great many distinctions of Swathing, taken from the likeness of the
parts which are swathed, or from certain Animals and other things. Deliquium
animi, the same with Eclipsis. Deliquium chymicum, is a Distillation by the
force of Fire: or a melting of the Calx which is suspended in moist Cells, and
a Resolution of it into a Lixivious Humor. Deltoides is a Triangular Muscle,
like the Greek D, it proceeds from the Channel Bone, from the upper Process of
the Shoulder Blade, and from the Process of the same, which is called
Spiniforme, or like a Thorn; and being fastened to the middle strong Tendon of
the Shoulder, lifts up the Shoulder it self. Denarius is the Seventh part of an
Ounce. Dentarpaga, see Forfex. Dentes the Teeth, are little bones of both Jaws
fastened one within another like so many Nails. Men are said to have Thirty, and
Women Twenty eight; as far as they appear above the Gums there is no Membrane
about them; they grow continually, otherwise they would be worn out by daily
grinding, they are not only provided with Veins and Arteries, but with Nerves
too; as the great pains which they are subject to, manifestly evince.
Dentiducum, see Forfex. Dentifricium is a Medicine for whitening, scouring, and
fastening the Teeth, and for strengthening the Gums. Dentitio is the time that
Children breed Teeth, which is about the seventh Month, or later; and usually
the upper Teeth come first, in some the under; and amongst these, the
fore-teeth first: many times Fevers, Convulsions, Loosnesses, etc. attend
Children in the time of breeding Teeth. Derivatio is a means whereby blood that
flows toward one part, but is not fixed there, is drawn away by a neighboring
part. Derma, the same with Cutis. Descensum, or per descensum destillare; See
Delicquium. Desiccatio is an Evaporation of superfluous moistness by heat.
Destillatio is an Extraction of the moist or unctuous parts, which are rarefied
into Mist, or Smoke as it were, by the force of Fire. Distillation is performed
by a Bladder, by the Chemical Instrument called Cucurbita, (before described)
by a Retort, by Deliquium, by Filtre, by Descent; etc. and that either in
Balneo Mariae, Sand, Vapors, Dung, the Sun, a Reverberatorie, etc.
Detergentia, see Abstergentia. Deuteropathia is a Disease that proceeds from
another Disease; for Example, If the Headache from the Distemper of another
part, the Morbific Matter being translated thither from its former Repositorie.
Diabetes, so Galen calls it, and Agineta dipsacus, from the great Thirst that
attends it: and as others will have it, from a certain sort of Serpent called
Dipsacus, found especially in Lybia, which Poisons with its bite, and brings an
unquenchable Thirst upon the person Affected. It is a rare Distemper, which
Galen says, he has seen but twice. The Famous Doctor J. Van Dueren, and I,
observed it once in a Reverend Pastor of the Church; and it is too great a
Fusion of the Blood, whereupon the Serum, joined with a violent Thirst, passes
the Reins, and is Excerned in great quantity by the passages of the Urine; it
proceeds ordinarily from a too much exalted, or a too Acid Ferment in the
Reins. Diabrosis is a solution of the Continuum, by eating out of parts.
Diaclisma is a washing of the Mouth to cleanse it, or to strengthen the Teeth
or Gums; the Washes are made of several Astringents, as of the Herbs
Britannica, Tormentil, bark of Pomgranates, Galls, Alum, Flowers, or Blossoms
of wild Pomgranates, etc. Diacopraegia is a Medicine made of Goats-dung,
against Tumors in the Spleen, and Glandules behind the Ears, called Parotides.
Diacrisis is a distinction and dijudication of Diseases and Symptoms.
Diacritica, see Diacrisis. Diadoche is a succeeding by a Crisis. Diadosis is a
distribution of Nourishment through all the parts. Diaeresis is an Eating out,
or consuming of Vessels, as Senertus says, when from some cutting corroding
Cause, some ways and passages are made which naturally ought not to have been;
or when some which really are, yet are dilated more than ordinary, so that the
Humors which ought to have been contained in the Vessels, run out. For first,
a Diaeresis may be occasioned by sharp Humors which dissolve the Unity, and cut
away; which likewise sharp Medicines will do, if they consist of thick parts;
for those of Minute parts are not Corrosive, because they stick not long
enough. Again, plenty of Humors may occasion a Diaeresis, by distending and
bursting the parts. Thirdly, There are several evident causes of a Diaeresis;
to wit, all those which by Contusion and Stretching, do break the Unity of the
Vessels; such as are Vehement Motion, Noise, great Weight, things that Wound,
that Bruise, a Fall, a Leap, and the like; amongst which, you may reckon Wind,
which being long pent up, does sometimes so forcibly distend the parts of the
Body, that it does not only Dilate the natural Cavities which contain it, but
make new, when it breaks our, and dissolves the Unity of the parts also; a
Chyrurgical Operation, which either by Incision, Burning, Perforating, Shaving,
Filing, Sawing, or Eating, solves the Continuity of parts. Diaeta, Diet, is a
method in sound Persons of living moderately; in Sick, a Remedy consisting in
the right use of things necessary to life; and upon that account is either of a
thick, moderate, or thin consistence: the first is done by a good quantity of
firm solid Meats, and such as afford good nourishment; this sort of Diet is
called simply full, and was formerly made of whole Barleycorns husked and
boiled, like Furmety: or it is more full and thick, which is done by Pullets
flesh, and poched Eggs: or it is most full, which allows of eating of things
Gelt: that of a moderate consistence, is which consists of Meats of a moderate
quantity and substance; this was formerly done by Bread sopt in Pottage, or
with young tender Flesh: that of a thin consistence is, which is done by little
Nourishment, and that thin and weak; which for the most part is agreeable in
sharp Diseases: and this is Threefold, either simply weak, which was formerly
done by the juice of Ptisane: or more weak, when the Patient drunk Water and
Honey boiled together: or weakest of all, when the Patient took no meat; but
now-adays Diets are not so strictly observed as formerly; especially in these
Countries. Diaetetica is a part of Physic that prescribes the use and
knowledge of Six things which are not Natural. Diagnosis is the Knowledge of
present signs: or a knowledge whereby we understand the present condition of a
Distemper; and it is Threefold, either a right instigation of the part
Affected, of the disease it self, or of its Cause. Dialeimma, the same with
Apyrexia. Diapasma, according to Pliny, is a dry Medicine, made up of dry
Powders, to be sprinkled upon something; as either upon Clothes to Pertume
them, or upon Ulcers, and Wounds, several ways; or upon Drink, to make it more
Delicious. Diapedesis is an Eruption of the Blood, by reason of the thinness of
the Vessels. Diaphanum is that which is Transparent, as the Humors of the Eyes,
the Tunica Cornea, etc. Diaphoresis, Sweating, is a Perspiration of all manner
of Effluvia through the invisible pores of the Body. Diaphragma, or Septum
Transversum, and Disseptum, is a Transverse Muscle which separates the Thorax
or Chest from the Abdomen; in the middle it is Membranous; the Gullet, the
great Artery, and the great hollow Vein, all pass through it: it conduces to
respiration with other Muscles, and pressing upon the Guts, helps forward the
Secretion of the Excrements. Diaphrattontes are Membranes called Pleura, which
cover the inside of the Thorax, and leave a kind of partition in the middle,
called Mediastinum. Diaphthora is a Corruption of any part of the Body.
Diaplasis is the setting of a Limb out of joint. Diaplasma is an Ointment or
Fomentation. Diapnoe, the same with Diaphoresis. Diapyema, the same with
Empyema. Diapyetica are Medicines which ripen the Pus, or Crass snotty Matter.
Diaria febris, the same that Ephemera. Diarrbaea is a looseness in the Belly
which Ejects several Bilious, Pituitous, and other faeculent Excrements.
Diarthrosis is a good constitution of the Bones, whereby they are apt to move
easily and strongly; such as is in the Arm, Hands, Thigh, Foot, etc. Diastole
is the Dilatation of the Heart, when the Blood flows into it, from the place
where it is accended, the Lungs. Diateretica is part of the art of preserving
Health, which is various according to the Age and Constitution of Men.
Diathesis is the Natural or Praeternatural Disposition of the Body, whereby we
are inclined to perform all Natural Actions, ill or well. Dichophyia is a fault
in the Hair, when it parts. Dicrotus is a Pulse that beats twice. Didymi are
twins. Dies Critici, see Critici dies. Digastricus is a double-bellied Muscle,
which arises from the Process called mammiformis, or like a Teat, and ends in
the inner middle part of the Chin, and draws it downwards. Digerentia, or
praeparantia, are those things which change the qualities of fermenting Heat,
which resist Action. Digestio Chymica, a Chemical Digestion, is when things are
Digested by an Artificial heat, just as they are naturally in the Stomach.
Digestiva, see Digerentia. Dilatatio is when any Passages or Receptacles in the
Body are too much distended, as in Veins that swell with Melancholy, corrupt
Blood in the Temples, Legs, etc. Dilatatorium is a Chyrurgeons Instrument
wherewith the Womb or the Mouth is dilated or opened. It is called likewise
Speculum, because by it one may see into the Mouth, or Womb. Dilutum, the same
with infusio. Dinus the same with Vertigo. Diota is a Vessel that surrounds a
thing; so called from its Two Ears, which Environ both Arms, applied to its
sides: its Inferior part is made like a Cupping-glass, upon which an Alembic is
put, wherein there is a Channel at the top which serves to pour Liquor in and
it has besides two crooked Noses conveniently placed, which convey the
Condensed Humor from the Head of the Instrument into the Cucurbite. Dioptra is
an Instrument whereby one may see into the Matrix, otherwise called
Dilatatorium, wherewith the Womb is dilated and enlarged in the extraction of a
dead Faetus out of it, or in inspecting any Ulcers that are in it. Diplasiasmus
is a Reduplication of Diseases: also Two Muscles of the Arm, which serve to
turn it about. Diploe is the lower thin plate or shell of the Scull: also a
double Vessel usual with Chemists. Diploma, the same with Diploe: sometimes it
is taken for a complicated or folded cloth. Dipsacus, the same with Diabetes.
Dislocatio, the same with Luxatio. Dispensatorium, a Dispensatorie, is a Book
useful for Apothecaries, wherein all Medicines, at least the most usual, are
contained, and prescribed; that they may be prepared in the Shops all the Year
round. Dispositio is an Habit whereby we are well or ill disposed to perform an
Action. Dissimilares parts, Dissimilar parts, are such as can be divided into
various parts different from one another; as the hand into Veins, Muscles,
Bones, etc. Dissolutio is when Electuaries and Powders are mingled and
dissolved in water or a decoction. Distentio is when parts are puffed up,
dilated, or relaxed by any thing, as the Guts by Wind, raised from Effervencies
within them, whence Oppressions and Pains frequently proceed. Distorsio is when
parts are ill placed, or ill figured. Distributio Chyli, the Chyle is
distributed when after a due fermentation in the Ventricle and the Guts, it
soaks into the little Teats in the Intestines (which Dr. Willis calls the
Glandulous Tunic) and passing through the Lacteal Veins, and its proper Channel
along the side of the Thorax, at last falls into the Subclavian Vein, that it
may Circulate with the Blood, and receive its Color. Districheasis is a double
row of Hair on the Eyelids. Dieuresis, is a Secretion of the Urine by the
Reins; which is done after this manner: there are little Glandules placed near
the Emulgent Arteries, wherewith the Serum is separated from the Blood, and is
conveyed by little Channels (of which the substance of the Reins does
principally consist) to the Carunculae Papillares, little Pappie pieces of
Flesh, thence to the Pelvis, the Basin, thence to the Ureters, thence to the
Bladder, and so out of Doors. Diuretica, are those Medicines which by parting,
dissolving, and funding the Blood, do precipitate the Serum by the Reins to the
Bladder. Dodecadactylum is the first of the small Guts, beginning from the
Pylorous of the Stomach, and ending where the Gut jejunum begins: it is so
called, as if it were the length of Twelve Fingers, which yet is never observed
in any men amongst us; perhaps the Ancients mistook from inspecting the Guts of
some Brutes. Dogmatica Medicina, or rational: Hippocrates was its first Author,
and after him Galen; who both added reason to experience. Dolor, Pain, the same
with Algema. Dolor Nephriticus, the same that Nephritis. Dorsum, or Tergum, the
back, is the hinder part of the Thorax; The Dorsum, back, of the Hand or Foot,
is their outside. Dosis is a set quantity of Physic, or as much as is given
at once. Dothien is an hard swelling, or push, as big as a Pigeons Egg,
accompanied with a grievous Pain, and proceeding from thick Blood. Dracunculus
is a Ulcer which eats through a Nerve it self: also, a long sort of Earth worm,
white, plain, but not very broad; which frequently grows to Indians Legs.
Dram, a Dram, is the Eighth part of an Ounce, it contains three Scruples.
Drastica are the most ready Medicines. Dropacismus is that wherewith all the
External Members being extenuated, loosened, cold and moist, are anointed; and
it is either Simple or Compound: the Simple is made of a little Pitch melted
with Oil: The Compound, besides that, has Pepper, wild Pellitory, Brimstone,
and Rosemary-seed in it; and if there be occasion for drying, they add Natural
Brimstone, as it is dug out of the Earth, Salt, and the Ashes of
Vine-branches: but if it be to Vellicate, then you must add Euphorbium, (a Tree
first found by King Juba) it is made up in different Forms; sometimes like an
Emplastrum, other times like a Cataplasme. Dropax, the same that Dropacismus.
Ductus bilarius, see Porus bilarius. Ductus Chyliferus is a Vessel, in the
lower part whereof, all the Lacteal Veins, and many Lympheducts are terminated:
it arises about the Glandule of the Kidney on the left side; and ascending
along the Thorax near the great Artery, ends at the Subclavian Vein on the
left side; it is furnished with several Valves, that the Matter which ascends
by it, may not fall down again: betwixt the Fourth and Sixth Vertebre it is
variously forked as Nature has been pleased to sport. Its use is to convey the
Chyle and the Lympha from the lower parts to the Heart. Ductus pancreaticus, is
a little Channel which arises from the Pancreas or Sweetbread, which is
inserted into the Guts near, or not far off the passage which conveys the Bile;
it runs with a Lymphatic juice, which it discharges into the Gut Duodenum, to
ferment and volatise the Meat from the Acid ferment of the Stomach, and the
mixture of Gall: The Learned Dr. Graaf knew how to get a juice out of it, that
was something Acid; though other Physicians doubt of it, and of certain
Diseases which the Excellent Sylvius Attributes to the Effervescence of this
Acid Pancreatic juice, with the Gall in the Duodenum. But we Affirm, That there
is sometimes an Acid juice found in it, and often a salt and austere; but
frequently an insipid volatile Liquor. See my Antomie Reformed. Chap. 11. l. 1.
Ductus Roriferus, so the Noble Bilsius calls it; the same with Ductus
Chyliferus. Ductus Salivares, or Salivarii, are passages which proceeding from
the Maxilarie Glandules, goes as far as the Jaws and sides of the Tongue, where
they emit the juice we call Spittle, which conduces to the better chewing and
swallowing of solid Meat, and something to its Fermentation too. Ductus
Thoracicus, see Ductus Chyliferus. Ductus Umbilicalis, see Funiculus. Duodenum
intestinum, the same with Dodecadactylon. Dura Matter, see Matter Dura.
Dysaesthesia is a difficulty of, or fault in sensation. Dyscrasia is an unequal
mixture of Elements in the Blood, or Nervous Juice. Dyselces is one who is
troubled with Ulcers that are very hard to be Cured. Dysenteria is a Looseness,
accompanied with Gripings in the Belly, wherein bloody and purulent Excrements,
and Membraneous pieces of the Intestines too are Excerned, always or very
frequently attended with a continual Fever, and a Drought. Dysepulatica are
great Ulcers, beyond Cure. Dysodes is any thing that swells ill, as Excrements.
Dysorexia is want of Appetite, proceeding from an ill disposition of the
Stomach. Dyspathia is an Impatient Temper. Dyspepsia is a difficulty of
Digestion, or Fermentation in the Stomach and Guts, whereupon the Nourishment
is often turned into Acidity, and smells ill. Dysphonia is a difficulty of
Speech, from an ill disposition of the Organs. Dysphoria is an Impatience in
Suffering. Dyspnaea is a difficulty of Breathing, which proceeds from vitiated,
obstructed, or irritated Organs. Dystherapeuta, are Diseases of difficult Cure.
Dysthimia is a sickness of the Mind. Dystichia is a double row of Hair on the
Eyelids. Dysthriachisis is a continual defluction of Tears, from the pricking
of Hairs in the Eyelids, which grow under the Natural Hairs. Dystocia is a
difficulty of bringing forth; or a preternatural Birth; as when the Faetus
comes forth Obliquely, Transverse, or with its Feet foremost; or when the
Passages are straightened by Inflammation, or otherwise; or when the Faetus is very
large, weak, fat, or dead. Dystrichiasis is when the Hairs grow inverse.
Dysuria is a difficulty of Urine, proceeding from an ill disposition of the
Organs, or from an Obstruction of them by the Stone, Gravel, or Viscous Clammy
Humors, accompanied with an heat of the Urine.
E.
ECbolica are Medicines which help the Delivery in hard Labor. Also Medicines
which cause Abortions. Eccathartica, see Cartharticum. Ecchyloma, the same with
Extractum. Ecchymoma signifies Marks, and Spots in the Skin, from the
Extravasation of Blood. Ecchymosis, the same with Ecchymoma. Eccope, the same
with Extirpatio. Ecchoprotica, the same with Catharticum. Eccrimocritica are
signs from particular Excretions. Eccrisis is a Secresion of Excrements.
Eclegma, or Linctus, which the Arabians call Loch, and Lohoch; others
Illinctus, is a Medicine applied inwardly, of a middle consistence, between a
Syrup and an Opiate, made up of several Pectorals against the Distempers of the
Throat, and the Lungs. Eclipsis is a Defection of Spirit. Eclysis is when the
strength is a little decayed, proceeding from a want of sufficient warmth, and
spirits in the Body. Ecphracticum is a Medicine good against Obstructions.
Ecphraxis is a taking away of Obstructions in any part, by opening cutting
Medicines. Ecphysesis is a breathing thick. Ecphysis is a Process that coheres
with the Bone. Ecpiesma is a juice squeezed out: also dregs which remain of any
thing that is squeezed: likewise a fracture of the Scull, wherein the broken
parts press upon the Meninges or Skins of the Brain. Ecpiesmus is a very great
Protuberance of the Eyes. Ecplexis is a fright or Stupor. Ecpneumatosis, see
Exspiratio. Ecptosis, the same that Luxatio. Ecpuctica are condensing
Medicines, see Incrassantia. Ecpyema, the same with Empyema. Ecpyesis, see
Ecpyema. Ecrythmus is a Pulse which observes no method, nor Number incident to
any age. Ecstasis, an Ecstasie, is a commotion of the Mind: also a dimotion of
any thing from the state wherein it was, into another. Ecthlimma is an
Ulceration arising from a violent compression in the Surface of the Skin.
Ecthymata are Pimples, or certain breakings out in the Skin, as the small Pox,
etc. Ecthymosis is a Commotion and Intumescencie of the Blood: also a
cheerfulness of mind. Ectillotica are Medicines which consume Callous parts,
and pull out hairs. Ectropium is a growing of the Eyelids, when the lower is
shorter than the upper. Eczemata are red hot, and burning Pimples; some take
Hydroa for Eczema, but it is a mistake. Effervescentia is an Intestine Motion of
Particles of different nature and qualities, tending to sudden Destruction;
sometimes attending with heat, and a flame, as in unquenched Lime, Hay laid up
moist, Chemical mixtures, etc. Egestio, the same with Dejectio. Elastica vis,
is an Explosion of Animal Spirits, as is frequent in Cramps, Convulsions: also
an Intestine Commotion of the Air. Elaterium is the Juice of wild Cucumbers
made up in a thick and hard consistence: also any Medicine that purges the
Belly. Elctica, see Attrahentia. Elcus, see Helcus. Electuarium is a Confection
of Simple Ingredients, Paps or Pithes, Gums mixed with Syrup, or Honey, of a
Consistence like a Conserve; and it is either Simple, or Compound; the Simple
consists only of the Pith of Cassia, Tamarinds, or Pruines; but the Compound,
for the most part of several Simple Ingredients, Pulps, condensated Juices,
Gumms, etc. made up with Honey or Syrup. Electuaries are Digestive, Loosning,
Purging, Strengthening, Alexipharmic, etc. Elementa, or Principia, are the
Simplest Bodies that can be, which are neither made of one another, nor of any
thing else, of which all things are made, and into which they are ultimately
resolved. There are Five Elements, Spirit, Salt, Sulphur, Water, and Earth; the
two last whereof are called Passive, the rest Active. Others reckon Three only,
Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury; but not so well. The Peripateticks reckon Four,
Fire, Air, Water, and Earth. Cartesius supposes a First Matter, a Second, and a
Third; but all those Elements are compounded of others; wherefore to say, that
any thing consists thereof, is as if one should say, That a Tree is compounded
of a Root, Trunc, Branches, Leaves, Flowers, etc. Eleosaccharum, is nothing but
Distilled Oil, mixed with Sugar. Elephantiasis Arabum, of which the Greeks
speak nothing, but the Arabians do frequently, is a kin to a varix, or crooked
swelling in the Veins; and proceeds from thence, and is only a Tumor in the
Feet. Avicenna Treats of this Distemper, where he speaks of the varices: yet
Rhases differs from him, and Haly Abbas follows the Greeks; who says, That an
Elephas is a Disease, which corrupts all the Members of the Body, and is as it
were an Universal Cancre: but neither is he consistent with himself when he
Writes, That Ulcers in the Legs and Feet are called Elephas; and that
Elephanticus Morbus is an Aposthume proceeding from Melancholy, in the Legs and
Feet: and a sign of it, is that the shape of the Foot is like the figure of an
Elephant. All the rest Treat separately of a Leprosy, and an Elephantia, and
make the latter to be a swelling of the Feet, proceeding from Melancholy and
Pituitous Blood, and the crooked swelling of the Veins, whereby the Feet
resemble the Feet of an Elephant in shape and thickness, and this sort of Tumor
is often seen in Beggars who wander much. Elephantiasis Grecorum, which the
Arabians call a Leprosy: it is called also Elephas, Elephantiasis, and
Elephantia, from an Elephant; as some think, because it makes People big like
an Elephant: which is a foolish notation of the Word; for the Body is no
bigger, though the Disease be. Others think it so called, because the Distemper
lying in the Legs, makes them stiff and equal, like an Elephant: or because
it is a strong vehement Disease like an Elephant; with such like stuff. Galen in
his Fourteenth Chapter of Tumors says, That this Disease is called Saturiasmus,
when it first begins, because it makes the face like that of a Satyr. For the
Lips are thick, the Nose swells, the Ears decays, the Jaws are red, the
Forehead is set with Tumors, like so many horns. Though others think it is
called Saturiasmus, because the Persons Affected are much inclined to Leachery
at the beginning, as Satyrs are. Celsus Describes it thus, The whole Body, says
he, is so affected, that the very bones may be said to be Corrupted: the upper
parts of the Body are full of Spots and Tumors, the Redness whereof is
gradually turned into Black: the top of the Skin is unequally Thick, Thin,
Hard, Soft, Rough, as if it had Scales on it; the Body decays, the Bone, Calves
of the Legs, and Feet swell: when the Disease is old and inveterate, the Toes
and Fingers are hid in the swelling, and a small Fever arises which easily
consumes a man laden with so many Infirmities. Elevator, the same with
Elevatorium. Elevatorium, so called from lifting up, is a Chyrurgions
Instrument wherewith Sculls that are depressed are raised up again. Elixir, so
called from the Arabic Word Elecschir, or Elieschir, or Eleschus; is the
Essence of any thing Extracted with the Spirit of Wine, or something of that
Nature; it is the same that a Tincture. Elminthes are little Worms bred in the
Guts; especially that called Rectum, the lowermost. Elodes is a continual
Fever, wherein the Patients are almost melted through moisture. Elythroides, or
Vaginalis, is the second proper Tunic which mediately involves the Testicles.
Embrocatio, the same that Embroche. Embrocha, the same that Embroche. Embroche,
an irregulation, or instillation, is a sort of Fomentation, when a Liquor is
distilled from on high, like Rain, upon a part, which is either done by a
Vessel with a Nose that inclines, or by distillation, or out of an Ewer. First,
it is used in Distempers of the Brain, where the Liquor is first poured upon
the Suturs called Coronalis, and is permitted to run by that called Sagittalis.
Secondly, it is applied to the top of the Spinal Marrow, in Diseases of the
Nerves, and is permitted to run down the whole ridge of the Back. Thirdly, it
is used to warm or dry the Ventricle, and the Liquor is suffered to run through
the whole Abdomen; and if the Bowels be weak, they apply a Sear-cloth of
Santalum (some English it Sanders) to the Liver, when they apprehend it may be
overheated. The matter whereof these Embroches are made in common Bathe water,
a Decoction, Milk, and Oil, according as the Distemper of the part, and
necessity require. Embryon is the Rudiment of a Child in the Womb. Embryatomia
is an Anatomical Dissection of a Faetus. Emetica or Vomitoria, are Medicines
which with their Pungent Particles contract the Fibers of the Stomach upwards,
and so Eject at the Mouth whatsoever is offensive to the Stomach; they are made
of Decoctions, Tinctures, and Infusions, etc. and therefore for the most part
are Liquid. Emetologia is a description of things that provoke Vomiting.
Emmenagoga are Medicines which excite the Courses. Emmoton is a Liquid
Medicine, which is injected into Ulcers, with a little Instrument which they
use in Wounds, fashioned like a Man's Yard. Emollientia, softning things, are
such as with a moderate heat and moisture, dissolve the parts, which before
cohered close, and dissipating others, make them loose and soft. Empasma, the
same with Catapasma. Emphraxis is Obstruction in any part. Emphractica, the
same with Emplattomena. Emphysema is an Inflammation, proceeding from an
Effervencie, or otherwise. Emphyton Thermon, is the innate heat, or heat first
sown in the Faetus from the Parents Seed, which afterward, when Respiration is
begun, and the Faetus subsists of it self, decays by degrees. Both Philosophers
and Physicians call this heat an innate and native Spirit, and say that it
consists of Three parts, of a primogenial moisture, an innate Spirit and Heat.
Whence Fernelius defines innate heat, to be a primogenial moisture every way
qualified with an innate spirit and heat: but these toys of the Ancients are
nothing to us; for it is certain, that Heat belongs only to newborn creatures.
Empirica Medicina, quacking, is Curing the Sick by guess, without reason. Acron
Agrigentinus was the first Author of it, who neglecting the reasons of things,
contented himself with bare Experience. Quacks first flourished amongst the
Egyptians; from this Trade came Mountebanks. Emplastica, the same with
Emplattomena. Emplastrum a Plaster, is a Medicine applied outwardly to the
skin, spread upon Linen, or Leather; it is commonly made of Oils, or of those
things which are of a like consistence with Oil; as Swines-grease, Butter,
Slimie viscous extractions from Gums, Roots, etc. also of Powders and Wax, or
those things which are of a like consistence with Wax; as Rosin, Pitch, Gum,
etc. the Mass whereof being yet hot, is formed into a Cylindriacal Figure.
Emplattomena, or Emplastica, are Salves which so constipate and shut up the
pores of the Body, that Sulphurous Vapors cannot pass. Empneumatosis is an
alternate dilatation of the Chest, whereby the Nitrous Air is continually
breathed in, and by the Windpipe, and its Bladdery parts is communicated to
the Blood to accend it: but if we inspect the matter narrowly, Inspiration does
not seem to depend principally upon the Thorax, but upon the contraction of the
Membrane which covers the Windpipe, the upper part of the Gullet, and the
Nostrils; for take this away, and you take away the motion of the Chest, the
Lungs, and the Abdomen. Emprosthotonos is the continual Contraction of the
Muscles of the Neck toward the fore-parts. Empyema, properly so called, is a
Collection of Purulent Matter in the Cavity of the Thorax; but largely taken,
signifies the same in the Abdomen too. Empyreumata are little Feverish remains
after a Crisis: also that thick Viscous Matter which subsides to the bottom in
Distilled Waters. Emulgentia vasa are the Arteries and Veins which pass under
the Reins. Emulsio, an Emulsion is a Medicine to be Drunk, made of the Kernel
of some Seeds, infused in a convenient Liquor. Emuncteria are Cavities into
which something is emptied, as the Pituitous Humor of the Brain into the
Nostrils; the yellow thickish Humor, which we call Ear-wax, into the Ears, the
Excrements into the Bowels; the Urine into the Bladder, etc. Enarthrosis is
joynting, when the Cavitie that receives is deep, and the head of the bone
that is inserted is Oblong; as may be seen in the Hucclebone, and its Cavitie;
in the principal Bone of that part of the Foot which immediately succeeds the
Leg, with the Bone called Cymbiforme, or like a Boat. Enaemen is a Medicine
which stops the Blood, or which by binding, cooling, or drying, closes the
passages of the Vessels which were open, stops or diminishes the fluidity and
violent Motion of the Blood. Enaeorema is that crass Substance which is
suspended in the middle of Urines. Encanthis is the Caruncula Lachrymalis, or
an Excrescence and Swelling of the inner angles of the eye. Encathisma, the
same with Insessus. Encephalos is whotsoever is within the compass of the
Scull: as the Brain, the Cerabellum, the Oblongated Marrow, etc. Encharaxis,
see Scarificatio. Encheiresis Anatomica, is a readiness in Dissections; when an
Anatomist shows the parts of a Carcass dexterously. Enchymoma is an Afflux of
the Blood, whereby the External parts are rendered black and blew; as in the
Scurvey, Blood shot Eyes, ande. also an Afflux of Blood, by the quickness and
suddenness of its Motion, as in Anger and Joy. Enchyta is an Instrument
wherewith Liquids are instilled into the Eyes, Nostrils, or Ears. Enclysma, the
same that Clyster. Encope is an Incision of any part, as in a Gangrene.
Encranium, the same that Cerebellum. Endeixis is an indication of Diseases,
whereby is shown what is to be done: as for Example, a Plethora, too much
fullness of blood, indicates the opening of a Vein. Endemius, or Morbus
Vernaculus, and Communis, is a Disease which always infects a great many in the
same Country, proceeding from some cause peculiar to the Country where it
reigns. Such is Scurvie to the Hollanders. Endemus, the same with Endemius.
Enema, the same with Clyster. Energia is an agitation or operation of the
Animal Sp^rits and Blood. Engizoma is a blow upon the Skull, wherewith the bone
descends to the inner Membrane of the Brain, and presses upon it. Also an
Instrument which we use in such like cases. Engonios is the bending of the Arm
or Leg. Ensisormis Cartilago is the lowest part of the Breast bone, pointed like
a Sword. Entera are long Membraceous Winding-pipes, annexed to the Mesenterie,
that they be not confounded with one another; and they are six (unless you
reckon the Gullet, the Stomach, and the Bladder amongst the Intestines, which I
should not stand upon, since they have the same substance, and almost the same
action) the Gut Duodenum, Jejunum, Ileum, Caecum, Colon, and the Rectum; the
Three uppermost are called small Guts, the lower great Guts, they are clothed
with Four Tunics; the outermost is Membranous, which arises from the
Paeritoneum: The Second is Fibrous or Fleshie, whose Exterior Fibers are long,
the Interior round, placed upon one another at Right Angles: The Third is
Nervous, and contains the meetings of both Lacteal and Sanguinarie Vessels, to
which there inwardly adheres a Fourth Tunic, which is Glandulons, or rather of
a pappie Substance, whereby the Chyle is imbibed and communicated to the Milkie
Veins. The Intestines, for the most part are about six times as long as the Man
whose they are. Some take Lactes to signify the small Guts only; others take
them for fat Guts, as particularly Persius. Enterenchyta is a Clyster-pipe,
which is also called Siphon, and Syringa. Enterocele, or Hernia Intestinalis is
the fall of the Intestines, especially of the Ileum, through the Processes of
the Peritoneum Dilated, into the Groins or outer skin that covers the Cods.
Epacmastica is a Fever that continually grows stronger. Epaphaeresis is an
iterated Phlebotomie. Epar, see Hepar. Eparmata are Tumors of the Glandules
called Parotes, behind the Ears. Ephaebeum is the place from the Hypogastrium,
or lower part of the Abdomen, to the Secret Parts. Ephelscis is that Bloody
substance which is brought up in spitting of Blood: also a shell or crust that
is brought over Ulcers. Ephelis is a dewie Spot, we call it a Freckle, which
proceeds most commonly from Sun burn; they grow especially in Spring and
Summer, and chiefly in those who have very thin Skins; but about Winter they
disappear again: they are about as big as Flea-bites, and often disfigure the
whole face. Ephemera, or Diaria, is a continued Fever which lasts but a day,
arising from a Commotion and Accension of the fine parts of the Blood: if it
last above a day, it is called Synochus Simplex. Ephialtes, or Incubus, the
Nightmare, is a depraved Imagination, whereby people asleep fancy that their
Windpipe is oppressed by some superincumbent body, that their breath is
stopped, and they are excited to Venerie: this proceeds from a compression of
the Cerebellum, when the Ventricles are too full of moisture: or, if those who
are thus Affected lie upon their backs, then the whole bulk of the Brain lies
upon the Cerebellum, whereupon all the Pores and Passages being stopped by so
much weight, the Spirits are hindered from Influencing the Nerves, called par
vagum, and the Intercostal Nerve, which being thus destitute of Spirits, the
Lungs are oppressed, and flag, and cannot perform their Office. Ephidrosis is
Sweating. Ephippium, or Sella Equina, or Tursica, is part of the Bone
Sphenoides, wherein the Pituitarie Glandulae is placed. Epiala is a continued
Fever, wherein the Patient feels both Heat and Cold at once. Epialtes, the same
with Ephialtes. Epicarpium is a Medicine applied outwardly, like a Plaster or
a Cataplasme, applied to the Pulse or Wrist of the hand to drive away
intermitting Fevers. Epicauma is a Crustie Ulcer that sometimes happens to the
black of the Eye. Epicerastica are Medicines which obtund and temperate sharp
Humors. Epicheiresis, the same with Encheiresis. Epicolicae regiones, or
Laterales, or Lumbares. Glisson calls that part Epicolica which lies upon the
parts of the Gut Colon: whence it has its Name. Epicrasis is a gradual
Evacuation of ill Humors in the Bood. Epicrisis is a judging of a Disease.
Epicrusis is a percussion of the soft parts, with light Ferula's, an usual
Custom amongst the Japaneses. Epicyema is a Superfaetation, which rarely
happens. Epidemius is a common Disease, proceeding from a common Cause,
spreading it self over diverse Countries, at diverse times; such are the Plague,
Malignant Fevers, etc. the reason is, that the Nitre of the Air, with other
particles that are in it, acquire the Virtue of an Arcenic, or a Sublimate, as
we see in making Sublimates; for the Particles of which that consists, if they
be given severally, are not so destructive; but taken together, they make a
deadly Poison. Epidermis, see Cuticula. Epedesis is the Injection of a
Ligament, to stop the Blood. Epidesmus is a tying of Swathes underneath.
Epididymis, or Paristata, in Latin Supergeminalis, and it is a winding Vessel,
making a Figure like the winding of crooked Vessels that are swollen with ill
Blood, and is affixed to the back of the Testicles: its greater Globe is
annexed to the Testicles, consisting of one Vessel or Passage above five Else
long: the lesser Globe is connected to the Vessel that carries the Seed.
Epigastrium is the forepart of the lowermost Belly, whose upper part is called
Hypochondrium; the middle part Umbilicalis; and the lowermost Hypogastrium.
Epigennema is that which happens to a Disease like a Symptom: also the order
of parts in Generation, which is done successively. Epiginesis, the same that
Epiginema. Epiglottis is the Fifth Cartilage of the Larynx, the cover of the
opening of the Windpipe: it is also, called Sublinguium. Epigonatis is the
Whirl-bone of the Knee. Epilepsia, or Morbus Caducus, because that the persons
Affected fall down on a sudden: or Herculeus, because it is hard to be cured;
also Lues Deifica, Sonticus, Comitialis, Sacer, etc. and it is an Interpolated
Convulsion of the whole body, which hurts all Animal-Actions, proceeding from
an Explosion of Animal Spirits in the Brain, whereby the persons Affected are
suddenly cast upon the ground. This Explosion arises either from an irritation
or pricking in the Spirits: or when something Heterogeneous is intermixed with
the Animal Spirits. Epilogismus is the Vote of Physicians. Epinyctides are
Pimples that send forth matter, and are painful, especially in the Night.
Epiparoxismus is when a Patient endures more Fits in a Fever than usual, which
happens in inordinate Fevers. Epiphaenomena are signs which appear afterward
in Diseases. Epiphisis, Appendix, Adnascentia, Additamentum, signify one Bone
that grows to another by simple and immediate Contiguity, though not with so
even a Surface, but with some kind of ingress of one Bone into the Cavitie of
the other, like that Coarticulation wherewith the Bones form the Joints, but
without any Motion. Epiplasma, the same with Cataplasma. Epiplocele is a
Rupture when the Cavile falls into the outward Skin of the Cods. Epiplocomistae
are fat big-bellied Men, who have fat huge Cawls; which Writers say, has
sometimes hindered Conception in Women; and therefore they are named
Cawl-bearers. Epiplomphalum is a Navel Rupture, when it juts out by reason of a
swollen Cawl that is fallen down. Epiploon, Omentum, or Reticula, the Cawl, is a
cover spread over the Intestines, arising from the bottom of the Ventricle, and
the back of the Gut Colon; to wit, from the doubling of the Peritonaeum; it is
shaped like a Net, or a Fowlers Bag; and abounds with several Sanguinary
Vessels. Its use is to cherish the Stomach, and the Guts with its fat.
Episarcidium, the same with Anasarca. Episemasia is the very time that a
Disease first seizes a Person, and is properly called Significatio. Epision is
the place of the Secret Parts, or Aqualiculus. Episphaerid are windings and
turnings in the outer substance of the Brain, that the Sanguiferous Vessels may
pass more securely. Epispastica, the same with Attrahentia. Epistomia are the
utmost gapings and meetings of Vessels. Epistropheus, or Cardo, is the second
Vertebre of the Neck; so called from turning, because the Head turns upon it.
Epithema is a Medicine applied outwardly to the more Noble parts of the body,
especially to the Heart and Liver. Epneumatosis, the same that Expiratio.
Epomis is the upper part of the Shoulder, called also Acronium. Epomphalum is a
Plaster, or any such thing applied to the Protuberances of the Navel. Epsema
is a Decoction of new Wine till half be boiled away. Epulis is an Excrescence
in the Gums which reaches the farthest Axel-Teeth; so that it hinders the
opening of the Mouth. Epulotica the same with Cicatrizantia. Erodentia are
Medicines which gnaw and prey upon the Flesh, with their Acute Particles.
Erpes, see Herpes. Errhinum, barbarously called Nasale, is a Medicine which
being made like a Pyramid, is put up the Nostrils, and cleanses the Brain of
Viscous Humors, especially without sneezing: and it is either Liquid, Soft, or
Solid. The Liquid is made of the juices of Cephalic cleansing Herbs, Extracted
by Wine or other Liquor, to which Spirit of Wine is sometimes added. Or of a
Decoction of-fit Simples, to which are added sometimes Juices, Honey, Syrup,
and Powders too. The soft is made of Powders, with Honey, Oil, or Juices,
boiled to a kind of Ointment. The Solid, is given either in form of a Powder,
and that has place especially in Medicines which provoke sneezing; or in form
of a Pellet, and it is called Nasale, and is prepared of fit Powders mixed with
Viscid Extractions from Seeds, Gums, Roots, etc. with Wax, or with Turpentine.
Erysipelas, Wildfire, is a swelling in the Skin, or any other Fleshie or
Membraneous part, red, broad, not spreading high, nor beating, but attended
with a pricking sort of a pain, arising from a sharp, and frequently a
Sulphurous Blood. I take the cause of it not to be the Blood, but a serous
sweating, which is sharp and sulphurous, and flows from the Fibers themselves.
Erysipelatodes is a swelling like an Erysipelas, or a bastard Erysipelas.
Erythremata are red spots like Flea-bites, common in Pestilential Fevers.
Erythroides is a red Membrane of the Testicles, the first of the proper Tunlcs.
Eschara is a crust or shell brought over an Ulcer, or ralsed with a Seering
Iron. Escharoticum is a Seering Iron, Fire, or the like, which burns the Skin
and Flesh into a crustie Substance. Essentia, Essence, in acurate speaking
signifies the Balsamic part of any thing separated from the thicker matter, so
that when ever this is done by means of Extraction, the Balsamic part is called
Essence by way of Eminence; otherwise sometimes, thickened juices are called
Essences. But it is better to call these by their own Name, to avoid Confusion.
Some call Compounds of Oil and Sugar, Essences: but it is an abuse of the word.
Essentia Quinta, Quintessence, is a Medicine made of the entire Energetical and
Active Particles of its Ingredients. Essere, Sora, and Sare, they are little
Pushes or Wheals, something red and hard, which quickly Infect the whole Body
with a violent itching, as if one were stung with Bees, or Wasps, or Flies, or
Nettles; yet they vanish after a little time, and leave the Skin as smooth and
well-colored as before. This Disease differs from an Epinyctis in this, that
an Epinyctis Sweats out Matter; but an Essere does not. Esthiomenos is a
Winding Inflammation that consumes the parts: it proceeds from this, that the
little Pappie Substance of the Skin, keeps a certain sharp Humor in it, which
for want of Perspiration, corrupts and gnaws not only the Skin with its
Acrimonie, but the parts which are under it. Ethmoides is the Bone which
resembles a Sieve, placed above the inner part of the Nose, and full of little
holes to receive the Serous and Pituitous Humors from the soft Pappie
Processes of the Brain. Evacuatio, Evacuation, is either of the Blood, when it
abounds too much, as in a Plethora, where opening a Vein is requisite. Or of
ill Humors in the Blood, and the Primae Viae, as they call them, which is done
by Purging or Vomiting. Euchroa is a good color and temper of the Skin.
Euchymia is an excellent temper of the Blood. Eucrasia is an excellent temper
of the parts of the Body. Euectica, the same with Gymnastica, or that part of
Physic which teaches how to acquire a good Habit of Body. Euelces, one that is
troubled with Ulcers, easy to be cured. Euexia is a good sound Habit of Body.
Eugeos is the Womb; so called from its Analogy to fruitful Ground; the Hymen
is also so called. Euodes is a sweet smell of Excrements. Euosma, the same with
Euodes. Eupathia is an easiness in suffering. Euphoria, the same. Eupncea is a
right natural Respiration. Eurythmus is an excellent natural Pulse. Eusarcus,
one that is well fleshed. Eusema is a Crisis excellently well judged.
Eustomachus is a good Stomach; as also Meat convenient for it. Euthanasia is a
soft easy passage out of the World. Euthyporos is a strait Gate. Euthropia is
a due Nourishment of the Body. Exacerbatio, see Paroxysmus. Exaltatio, or
Sublimatio, is an Operation whereby a thing being changed in its natural
qualifications, is elevated to an higher degree of Virtue and Substance; or it
is a Subtilizing of things by gradually Dissolving them, and Exalting them into
a purer and higher degree of their own qualities: and it is done either by
Circulation, or Ablution. Exanastomosis is an opening of the Extremity of
Vessels. Exanthema is a certain Efflorescenae upon the Skin of the Head, like
those which appear in the skin of the whole Body; it is described two ways by
Senertus; one is, that at least it changes the color of the Skin, as in
continued Malignant Fevers; wherein the skin is spotted as with Fleabites; the
other is, when certain little swellings break out in the Skin, which may be
called Papillae. Exarthrema, the same with Luxatio. Exceptio is the
Incorporation or Mixture of dry Powders with some moisture or other; thus
Electuaries are made, Powders and Pulps are mixed with Honey, or Syrup: and the
powder of Pills with Syrup, Honey, Wine or Juice. Excrementa, Excrements are
whatsoever is separated from the Aliments after Concoction, and is to be thrown
out of the Body; as the moisture in the Mouth, Spittle, Snot, Milk, Bile,
Sweat, the Wax of the Ears, the Excrements of the Belly and Bladder. Exelcismus
is a bringing of the Bones from the surface downward. Exercitatio is a vehement
and voluntary Motion of Humane Body, attended with an Alteration in Breathing,
undertook either for preserving, or acquiring Health. Excercitium is a Motion
whereby the Body is agitated in order to Health; and it is Threefold. 1. What
proceeds only from things Extrinsic; as in Riding, Navigation, etc. 2. What
proceeds partly from other things, partly from those who are moved, as in
Gladiators, and Wrestlers. 3. What comes from those only who exercise, as in
walking, and the Ball; and best of all in Handball: the end of Exercise is
Threefold likewise; either Heat, Sweat, or Breath, and this is sufficient.
Exomphalos is a Protuberance of the Navel, common to Infants. Exophthalmia is
a protuberance of the Eye, out of its natural Position. Exostosis is a
Protuberance of the Bones out of their Natural place. Expiratio is an Alternate
Contraction of the Chest, whereby the Air, together with Fuliginous Vapors is
expelled by the Windpipe; the cause of Expiration does not seem to consist in
the contraction of the Chest, but in the Relaxation of the Tunic of the upper
part of the Gullet, and the Windpipe; for take that away, and you take away
the Motion of the Chest, and Abdomen. Explosio is an action of the Spirits,
whereby the Nerves are suddenly Contracted; the reason is, That some
Heterogeneous Particles are mixed with the Animal Spirits, or that they are
driven into a confusion, like Gunpowder out of a Gun. Expulsio, the same with
vis Expultrix. Expultrix vis, according to the Ancients, was that faculty
which expelled the Excrements: but we need not have recourse to those blind
Faculties, since we know that this is performed by the Animal Spirits, which
cause the Peristaltic Motion of the Guts. Exstasis is a depravation of the
Judgment and Imagination, familiar to Mad and Melancholy Persons. Extasis, the
same that Exstasis. Extirpatio is the cutting of a part, by reason of a Cancre,
or Blasting; it is best to cut it off Two, Three, or more Fingers breadths from
the Joint, unless the Mortification have reached the upper parts of the Arms,
or Thigh; for here we are forced to choose the Joint it self: it is a surer way
to make the Excision in a sound part, though it be more painful. Extractio is a
Separating of the subtle parts of a mixed Body, from the more gross: for
Example, when the strength of any Medicine is Extracted by Spirit of Wine, that
which is left after the Evaporation of the Menstruum is called the Extract.
Extractum is that pure, unmixed, and efficacious Substance, which by the help
of some Liquor is separated from the duller and more unactive parts.
Exulceratio is a Solution of continued parts, proceeding from some gnawing
Matter, and in soft parts of the Body, attended with a loss of their quantity;
it differs from an Abscessus in this, that an Abscessus is occasioned by a
Crisis. An Exulceration is either great, little, broad, short, narrow, strait,
transverse, winding, equal, inequal, deep, etc.
F.
Facies Hyppocratica is when the Nostrils are sharp, the Eyes hollow, the
Temples low, the Laps of the Ears contracted, and the Lobes Inversed, the Skin
about the Forehead hard, and dry; the Complexion pale, livid, of a leaden
Color, or Black. Facultas is an action in Man, which is performed, either by
the Body alone, or by both Body and Mind: Faculties are either Natural, which
depends upon the Cerebellum: or Animal, which depend upon the Brain. The
Ancients made three Faculties, Natural, Vital, and Animal: but the Vital
belongs to the Natural. Faeces, see Excrementa. Falx is a doubling of the Dura
Matter, like a Sickle, annexed below to the Third Cavitie whereby the Brain is
divided into the right and left Hemisphere. Fames, Hunger, is either Natural,
which is a desire of Food, when an Animal from a Vellification of a Nerve of
the par vagum, and the Intercostal in the Stomach, which proceeds from an Acid
Humor, carried thither by the Caeliac Arteries, or Glandulous Tunic, is
excited to seek for Food as a Remedy to allay that Vellication; or it is
praeternatural, which is either depraved, as longing in Women with Child; or it
is a Canine Appetite, want of Appetite, etc. Fames Canina, see Cynedes Orexis.
Farciminalis Tunica, the same that Allantoides. Fascia, a Swathe, is a long
Band, moderately broad, which Chyrurgeons use: Swathes are wound up; long, and
all of a breadth; others are cut, which are indeed of one piece of Linen, but
that cut either at the ends, or middle: others sewed together, which consists
of Swathes and Thongs of several ends, and like several Swathes. Others are
longer, some shorter; and others broader, some narrower. Fasciatio is a binding
of Swathes about a Limb that is to be Cured. Fasciculus, see Manipulus.
Fastidium Cibi, the same that Anorexia. Fauces and Frumen, the same that
Pharynx. Favus, see in Achor. Febris a Fever, is an inordinate Motion, and too
greatan Effervescence of the Blood, attended with Cold first, and afterward
with Heat, Thirst, and other Symptoms, wherewith the Animal Oeconomie is
variously disturbed. Fevers in general are divided into Intermittent,
Continued, Continent, and Symptomatical. Scotus in his Magic assures us, That
the Blood in a Fever has Worms in it. Feculae are Dust that subsides in the
squeezing of certain Vegetables, as in Brionie, Ramp, etc. Fell, see Bullis.
Femur, and Femen, the Thigh, the part from the Buttocks to the Knee; it is so
called from bearing, because it holds up, and sustains an Animal; it consists
but of one Bone, but that the greatest and longest in the whole Body, whose
External and fore part is gibbous or rising; but the Internal hinder part flat
and bending. Grammarians make Femen to be the hinder fleshy part; and Femur the
former outward part. Fermentatio is an Intestine Motion of Particles, or of the
Principles of any Body, tending to Perfection, or a Change: and it is either
Natural, which comes of its own accord, as in Natural Actions; or Artificial,
which we make, as we see in Beer, Wine, Bread, etc. Ferulae are little light
chips or planes, which are made of different Matter, according to the nature
and necessities of the places to which they are applied, as of Barks of Trees,
of the Bark of the Herb Sagapene, in Latin Ferula; whence they have their Name:
they are made of Firr, Paper glewed together, Leather, etc. which are applied
to Bones that have been loosened, or disjoynted, after they are set again.
Fibra Auris, the same with Lobus Auris. Fibrae, Fibers, are little, round,
oblong Vessels; and are either Musculous or Nervous: the Nervous are such as
have no Valves, and by which the Spirits flow conveniently from the Nerves to
the several parts: the Musculous Fibers receive the Blood from the Arteries,
and discharge themselves into the Veins, and have a great many Valves, they are
called long, round, or oblique from their Situation; some small threads
interwoven with Trees and Leaves are called Fibers too: and so are the small
threads which stick to their Roots. Fibula, the Ancients mention them; for if
there be a Wound in the Flesh, says Celsus, that gapes, and cannot easily be
closed, it is improper to sew it, you must apply a Fibula; but because this way
of closing the gaping of Wounds, by Fibula's was so usual amongst the Ancients;
they have not been at all sollicitous in describing either their Matter or
Form. Guido tells us, That they made these Fibula's of Iron Circles as it were,
or Semi-circles crooked backward on both sides, the hooks whereof being fastened
on both sides to the gaping Wound, answered exactly one another; but since this
must be an unsupportable pain to the poor Patient, it is hardly credible, that
they meant any such thing by their Fibula's. The Opinion of Fallopius is more
probable, who tells us, That is was only a sowing up the Wound with a Needle
and Thread, which is commonly used at this day. Sanctorius writes thus, We need
not Discourse much of Fibula's, since the use of them is almost out of doors;
and though the Ancients have not described them, yet they forbear not to
acquaint us how to use them; as Argenterius falsely imagines. For not only
Physicians but some of the Ancients knew the form of them, since Cern. Celsus
has informed us. That Fibula's as well as Sutures were made of a Needle-full of
soft untwisted silk or thread, wherewith they sowed the gaping Lips of the
Wound together. Some call Acia, or this needle-full of Thread, Vinculum,
Ligatura, Colligatio, Obligatio, Ligamentum; all which signify tying or
binding. Whoever would be farther informed in this particular, may consult the
Incomparable Rhodius in his Discourse about Acia. Fibula is the lesser Bone of
the Shank, it seems to join the Muscles of the Leg like a Button, or Clasp, in
Latin Fibula; it is the hinder bone betwixt the Knee and the Foot, smaller than
the other Bone, called Tibia, and fastened outwardly to it; as the Bone called
Radius in the Arm is to the Cubit: its round head does not extend as far as the
Knee upward, but downward, it goes farther than the other Bone called Tibia,
and therefore is altogether as long a Bone as the Tibia. They part in the
middle, because the Muscles of the Feet are placed there; in which interval, a
slender broad Ligament joins them together lengthways. It is joined likewise to
the Tibia with a common Ligament above and below; as it tends acutely downwards
it has an Appendix belonging to it, which growing thicker and thicker, makes a
Process, called Malleolus Externas. Ficus are Excrescencies about the Fundament
and other parts, like Figs; if they grow big, then they are called Ficus, or
Sycoses. Filtratio is the Percolating any Liquor through a woollen Cloth, or
course Paper. Filtram is a woollen Cloth, or blotting Paper, through which
Liquors are strained to Clarify: as through a Manca Hippocratis, a Wine-sack
which draws Wine from the dregs. Fissura ossis is a fracture of a Bone
lengthways. Fistula is a strait long Cavity, or a winding, narrow and callous
Ulcer, of difficult Cure; proceeding for the most from an Aposteme. Fistula's
differ from winding Ulcers in this, that Fistula's are callous and hard, but
Ulcers are not. Fistula Lachrymalis is when the Punctum Lachrymale, the little
hole in the bone of the Nose, through which the Liquid Matter passes to the
Nostrils, is grown hard and callous, from an Ulcer of a Caruncula, Glandules
placed at the greater corners of the Eye, by which means there happens a
continual Defluxion of Tears. Fistula Pulmonis, the same that Aspera Arteria.
Fistula Sacra, is that part of the Backbone which is Perforated. Fistula
Urinaria, the same with Urethra. Flatus are Effervescencies excited in the Body
from wind let in, or from Flatulent Meats, or from the Bile and Pancreatic
juice mixed together, whence wind and noise. Flores Chymici are the Subtiler
parts of the Body separated from the grosser by Sublimation, in a dry Form.
Fluor Albus, or Fluor Uterinus, is a continual Evacuation of corrupt Humors
from the Womb, or the Pores in the Vagina. Fluor Muliebris, see Fluor Albus.
Fluor Uterinus, the same. Fluxio, the same with Catarrhus. Fluxus Chylosus, the
same with Caeliaca passio. Fluxus Hepaticus is a kind of Dysentery, wherein
black shining blood, and too long roasted as it were, is driven out of the Guts
by the Fundament: it is sometimes taken for a Dysentery wherein serous sharp
Blood is evacuated. Focile Majus is the greater Bone of the Cubit called Ulna;
or the greater bone of the Leg called Tibia. Focile Minus is the lesser Bone of
the Cubit called Radius; or the lesser bone of the Leg, called Fibula. Focus is
some place in the Misenterie and other parts, whence they formerly deduced the
Original of Fevers. Fodina is the less Labyrinth in the bone of the Ears.
Faecula signifies a Powder which subsides to the bottom in certain strainings
of Vegetables; for it is prepared of some green, washed, and pared Roots beat
together, with a little water, then strained, that there may subside a white
sort of Powder which is to be dried lightly. Faetor oris, a stinking Breath,
procceds from the filth about the Teeth, and Gums: sometimes from the Lungs,
and a Consumptive or Scorbutic Blood. Folliculus Fellis is a little Bladder
fastened to the Concave-part of the Liver, which receives the Bile, which in
proper time empties it self into the Gut Duodenum, by a Ductus, or Passage
called Cheledochus. Fomentum, that which applied to the Body cherishes and
warms it; and it is Twofold, either wet, or dry; the latter is a Decoction
applied to several parts of the body for to cherish it, by the help of a
linen, or woollen Cloth, a Sponge, Bladder, etc. Fontanellae, Issues, are
little Ulcers which Chyrurgions make in sound parts of the Body, to Evacuate
bad Humors, Cure Diseases, or prevent them. Issues are made either with an
Actual or a Potential Seering-Iron, with a Lance, and a pair of Scissers: You
must always observe to make Issues betwixt two Muscles. Fonticuli, the same.
Forceps is an Instrument wherewith dead and corrupt parts, (also things
besides, or against Nature) are seized, cut off, or pulled out; they are of
several shapes, as long, crooked, with Teeth, with Beeks, in fashion of an half
Moon, such as will open the Mouth, or the Womb; and by which you may see into
either of them; which according to the difference of their shape, are of
different use. Forfex is an Instrument to pull out Teeth with. Formula is a
Physicians Prescription, which the Apothecaries prepare accordingly. Fornix is
the Callous Substance of the Brain; so called, because it seems to sustain the
Cavities of the Ventricles, and the bulk of the impending Brain, like an Arch
or Vault. Fotus, the same with Fomentum. Fovea Cordis, the same with
Anticardium. Fractura Ossis, the breaking of a Bone, is a Solution of the
Continuum in the hard parts of the Body, which is done by a hard External
Instrument, forcibly impelled upon the part; the differences whereof are taken
from the Form, the Part, and the Accidents of it. Fraenulum is a Membraneous
Ligament under the Tongue; in newborn Children, it sometimes spreads over the
whole under side of the Tongue, that the Midwife sometimes is forced to pull it
asunder with her Nails (which yet ought not to be allowed of) or the Chyrurgion
with his Penknife. Froenulum, or Froenum penis, is a Membrane which ties the
foreskin to the Nut of the Yard. Frons, the forehead is the upper part of the
Face. Frontale is an External Medicine, frequently applied to the Forehead, for
a pain or heat in the Head: it is made for the most part of Herbs, Flowers,
Seeds, Meal, moistened with Vinegar of Roses. Fumigatio Chymica is an erosion of
Metal by smoke, or Vapor. Functio, the same that Aclio. Funda Galeni is a
Swathe divided into Four parts; useful in Accidents that happen to the Jawbone.
Fungus is soft spongie Flesh which grows upon Wounds. Funiculus, Intestinum,
Laqueus, or Ductus Umbilicalis, the Navel-string, is a Membraneous Channel or
Conduct in a Faetus which reaches from the Navel to the Placenta in the Womb;
it contains Two Arteries, one Vein, and the Urinarie passage in the Faetus.
Furcale os, the same with Furcula. Furcula Superior is the upper bone of the
Sternum, or Breast Bone, others call it Jugulum. Furcella, the same that
Furcula. Furfuratio is when Dandriff falls from the Head in Combing; it comes
for the most part from that skin which is under the Hair; also from the Beard,
and Eyebrows. Furnuss, a Furnace, is a place where a Fire is conveniently kept
for Chemical uses: and it is either open or covered. Furor the same with Manea.
Furor Uterinus is an unseemly Distemper, which is wont to seize upon Maids;
especially those of riper Years, and sometimes Widows too. They who are
troubled with it, throw off the Veil of common Modesty, and Decency, and
Delight only in lascivious, obscene Discourses: they covet a man greedily, and
even furiously, and omit no inviting Temptations that may induce them to
satisfy their desires. The cause seems to be in the Seminal juice, which being
Exalted to the highest degree of Maturity, drives the Maids into a kind of
Fury; which is conspicuous every year in some Bruits; as in Cats, Bulls, Bucks,
Does, Hearts. There is another Distemper akin to this, which the Ancients
called, the Fervor of the Womb, or the Matrix, when the whole substance and
body of the Womb is extreme hot, accompanied with a pain and heaviness of the
Loins; a roughness by the growth of Hair, Loathing, and a suppression of the
Urine, and Excrements: and the Woman all the while covets to be laid with, but
by reason of pain is still afraid of it. Furunculus a Boil, is an acute
swelling, as big as a Pigeons Egg, attended with an Inflammation, and Pain,
especially when it begins to Corrupt, and Putrify: when it is opened, and the
Matter let out, part of the Flesh underneath is turned into Corruption, of a
whitish, and reddish Color, which some call the Ventricle of the Furunculus:
there is no danger in it, though you apply no Remedy to it; for it ripens of it
self, and bursts; but the pain makes it more Elegible to apply a Remedy,
because that frees the Patient sooner from his trouble. Fusio is a melting with
heat.
G.
GAllactophori, are Ductus's which carry Milk, convey the Chyle (as some Modern
Authors have fancied) a straight way from the Guts to the Glandules of the
Breasts: yet the Arteries were more properly so called, because they carry the
Chyle along with the Blood to the Breasts, wherein Milk is reserved for the use
of the Faetus. Galactopoietice Facultas is nothing but an Aptitude to sequester
Milk in the Breasts: of the seParating of Milk. See in the Word Lac. Galenica
Medicina, is that Physic which is built upon the Principles of Galen, and
therefore they are Galenists who embrace the Foundation of their Art, which are
fetched from Galen and the Philosophers, proved by Reason, and confirmed by
Experience. Galea is a pain in the Head, so called from the likeness of the
place, because it takes in the whole Head, like an Helmet; in Latin Galea.
Galea is likewise when the Head of the Faetus is clothed with part of the
Membrane called Amneos, as it comes into the World. Galreda, or Gelatina,
Gellie, is a Thickened, Viscous, and Lucid Juicie Substance; it is commonly made
of the Cartilaginous parts of Animals boiled, as of Calves Feet, etc. Ganglion
is an Humor in the Tendinous and Nervous parts, procecding from a Fall,
Stroke, or otherwise; it resists if stirred, if pressed upon its side is not
diverted, nor can be turned round. Gangraena, a Gangrene, is a Cadaverous
Corruption of a part, attended with a beginning of Stink, Blackness, and
Mortification. Gargareon, See Cion. Gargarisma, a Gargarisme, is a Liquid
Medicine which cleanses the Mouth, and the Adjacent parts by Gargling, without
swallowing; and it is either a Decoction, wherein convenient Syrups are
dissolved, or distilled Waters mixed with Syrups, and sometimes with Mineral
Spirits. Gastrocnemium is the Calf of the Leg, whence its Muscles are called
Gastrocnemii, from their swelling like a belly. Gastrocnemii Musculi, see
Gastrocnemium. Gastroepiploica is the Vein and Artery which goes to to the
Ventricle and the Cawl. Gastrorhaphia is a Connection or a Suture in the wounds
of the Abdomen. Gaudium is a cheerfulness proceeding from the apprehension of
some good obtained, or to be obtained. Gelatina is almost the same with
Galreda, but that is of a more general signification, and is taken for any
Pellucide Glutinous Juice, which used first to be made of the juice of Fruits,
as of Apples, etc. as the Gellie of Quinces, etc. Gena Mala is part of the Face
from the Nose to the Ears. Also the Chin, the Jaw Bone, which is either upper
or lower. Generatio is a natural Action, whereby an Animal begets another like
it of the same Species, of convenient Seed, in Generation; the first thing we
see is a red Speck, which is clothed with a little bladder, next a little
Heart, whence Veins and Arteries flow, at the Extremity whereof you see the
Viscera, the Bowels, etc. afterward the whole Faetus is formed and clothed
with Membranes; before Generation the Seed of the Male being cast into the
Womb, enters and prepares its Pores, afterward sweats out a Viscous Substance,
like the white of an Egg, which moves the Egg out of the Testicles and Tubes;
for the Woman's Eggs are impregnated by the influence of the Seed, are emitted
out of the Testicles, and received by the Fallopian Tubes. Genioglossum is a
pair of Muscles proceeding inwardly from the Chin under another pair called
Geniohyoyides, and are fastened in the Basis of the bone Hyoides. Geniohyoides
are Muscles reaching from the internal and lower Seat of the Chin to the Basis
of the Bone Hyoides, which is placed at the Basis of the Tongue. Gercomia is a
part of that part of Physic called Hygieina, or Preservation of health, which
teaches the way of living for old Men. Gingipedium, the same with Scorbutus.
Gingiva, the Gums, is a hard spurious sort of Flesh, which surrounds the Teeth
like a Rampart, and in people that want Teeth helps to the chewing their meat,
which being either eat out, relaxed, or too dry, the Teeth shake or fall out.
Ginglymus is a Conjunction of Bones, when the Head of one is received into the
Cavitie of another, and again the head of this into the Cavity of that.
Glacialis Humor, see Humoris Oculi. Glandula, a Glandule, is a Substance of a
peculiar nature, fleshie, white, or gray, and Friable; and it is twofold,
adventitious, as those Kernels which are sometimes under the Arm-holes, and in
the Neck, the Kings Evil; a swelling in the Larynx and middle of the Windpipe,
etc. or perpetual and natural, as the Thymus, Pancreas, Glandula, Pinealis,
etc. the perpetual is again Twofold, either Conglobated in one entire piece,
which sends the separated Humor into the Veins, as the pituitarie Glandule,
the Pinealis, the Glandules of the Mesenterie, of the Groins, etc. or
Conglomerated in a cluster, which convey the juice by their own Channels into
some notable Cavities of the body, as the Pancreas, the Glandules of the
Breast, the Salival Glandules, etc. Glandula Guidonis is a Tumor like a
Glandulae, soft, single, Movable, without Roots, and separate from the adjacent
parts. Glandula Pinealis, see Conarium. Glandula Pituitaria is a little body in
the Sella Equina, a place in the Brain so called, covered over with the Rete
mirabile in many Brutes, but not in Man; it receives the serous Humor from the
Infindibulum and the Rete Mirabule* which it sends into the Jugular Veins, and
the Lymphatic Vessels. Glandulosum Corpus, the same with Prostata. Glans, the
same with Balanus and Suppositorium. Glaucoma is a fault in the Eye, or a
Transmutation of the Chrystaline Humor into a gray or sky-colour. Glaucosis
the same with Glaucoma. Glene the same with Pupilla: also the Cavitie of a Bone
which receives another within it. Glenoides are two Cavities in the lower part
of the first Vertebre of the Neck. Globulus Nasi is the lower Cartilaginous
moveable part of the Nose. Glossocomium is a Chyrurgions Instrument for broken
Limbs, so called from the shape of a Merchants little Casket which was formerly
carried upon the back. Glottis is the Chink of the Larynx which is covered by
the Epiglottis. Gluten says Avicen is a Secundary Humor, and is so called,
when that dewie Humor is Agglutinated to the parts: there were reckoned four
of them, Humor Innominatus, that had no name: Ros Glutea, and Cambium; but
those Names are now out-dated. Glutei are six Muscles which move the Buttocks,
on each side three. Glutia are two Prominences of the Brain, called Nates.
Glutos is the greater Rotator (an Apophysis in the upper part of the Thigh Bone
so called) of the Buttock, and the Thigh Bone named Trochanter, Gomphoma, the
same that Gomphosis. Gomphos is when the Pupil of the Eye going beyond a little
skin of the Tunica uvea is like that swelling of hard Flesh in the corner of
the Eye, called Clavus. Gomphosis, or Conclavatio, is when one Bone is fastened
into another like a Nail, as may be seen in the Teeth. Gonorrhaea is a too
great Effusion of Seed: and it is either Simple, when Crude thin Seed, which is
not white neither, is Emitted, and that rather from the Prostates then the
Seminary Vessels: or Virulent, when a Poisonous liquid Substance, of a white
or yellowish Color, is Ejected. Gramma, the same with Scrupulus. Graudo, see
Chalasia. Granum, a Grain, is the least weight we use: they take instead of it
sometimes white Pepper Corns, twenty make a Scruple. Graphoides is a Process
like the Pen for a Tablebook, about the Basis of the Brain it inclines
backward. Gravedo, the same with Coryza. Gula, see Pharynx. Gumma Gallicum is
the eating out a Bone in the French Pox. Gurgulio, the same that Cion. Gustus,
the Taste, is a Sense whereby the Soul perceives the Taste of things from the
Motion of the Nerve inserted into the Tongue and Palate for that purpose. Gutta
rosacea is a redness with Pimples wherewith the Cheeks, Nose, and whole Face is
deformed, as if it were sprinkled with red drops: these Pimples or Wheals often
increase, so that they render the Face rough and horrid, and the Nose
monstrously big. Gutturis os, the same that Hyoides os. Gymnastica, the same
that Evectica. Gynaecia in general are the Accidents incident to Women; but
Hippocrates. takes them more strictly for the Courses. Gynaecomastum is a
growing of the Breasts. Gynaecomystax is a Tuft of Hair at the upper part of a
Woman's Secrets; from this some take their estimate of the temperament of the
Womb and the Testicles.
H.
HAbitus, the same with Hexis. Haematosis, or Sanguification, depends
principally upon the Fermentation, Dissolution, and Union of Particles; to wit,
Spirit, Sulphur, and Salt; especially, upon the inspiration of Nitrous Air,
which accends the Sulphurous Blood in the Lungs. Sanguification is performed
in all the parts of the Body, and not in any peculiar part, as the Heart,
Liver, or Spleen. Haemodia is a great pain in the Teeth, which proceeds from
Acid and austere Particles, which penetrate the Pores of the Teeth; whence the
Nerves being Vellicated and Contracted, cause pain. Haemophobus is one who
fears to be let Bood. Haemoptysis is the Spitting up of Blood from the Lungs,
which proceeds either from a sweating out at the Glandules of the Larynx. with
which its Tunic is clothed within; to wit, when the openings of the Arteries
are too much Relaxed: or from some great Vessels that are broke, or out of the
little Bladers of the Lungs themselves. Haemorrhagia is a Flux of Blood at the
Nostrils, Mouth, or Eyes. Haemorrhoides are swelling Inflammations in the
Rectum, or about the Fundament, red and painful, which sometimes send forth
Blood or Matter. Haemorrhoidis vena, is a Branch of the Vena Portae, the great
Vein of all, extending to the Rectum and the Fundament. Halo is a red spot of
flesh which surrounds each N^pple in the Breasts. Hama, when a Dose is took off
at once. Harmonia is a joining of Bones by a plain Line; as may be seen in the
Bones of the Nose and Palate. Haustus, or Potio is a Liquid Medicine taken
inwardly, made into one Dose, of several Ingredients, mixed with a suitable
Liquor, by Decoction, Infusion, or Dissolution, to Purge, alter, or Sweat.
Hectica is a continued Fever arising from the very habit of the body, and
introduced in a long time, and has so rooted it self into the very Constitution
that it is infinitely difficult ever to Cure it: for the most part it is
accompanied with an Ulcer of the Lungs, Leanness, and a Cough. Hedisma is any
thing that gives Medicines a good scent. Hegemonicae are the principal Actions
in Human Body, as the Actions Animal and Vital. Helcydria are certain little
Ulcers, thick and red, in the skin of the Head, like the Nipples of Breasts,
which send forth Matter. Helctica, see Attrahentia. Heliosis is a Sunning.
Helix is the Exterior brim of the Ear, so called from its Winding. The Interior
is called Scapha. Helminthes, see Elminthes. Helodes, see Elodes. Helos, or
Clavus, is a round, white, callous swelling of the Foot, like the head of a
Nail, and fixed in the Roots of the hard Skin of the Foot. Haelesis is a
reflexed inversion of the Eyelid. Hemeralopia, or Acies Necturna, is when one
sees better in the Night than in the Day. Hemicrania is an Headache in either
part of the Brain. Hemina Italica is a Measure containing half an Attic
Sextarie, and nine Ounces: So much is a Cotyla Attica, and a Cotyla Italica is
Twelve Ounces. Hemipagia, the same that Hemicrania. Hemiplegia is a Palsy on
one side below the Head, proceeding from an Obstruction in one part or other of
the Spinal Marrow; or from a blow; whence it comes to pass, that the Animal
Spirits are Obstructed in their passage. Hemiplexia, the same that Hemiplegia.
Hepar, the Liver, is a Parenchymous Substance placed under the right side of
the Diaphragme, considerably thick and big in a Man; it is clothed with a thin
Membrane, which proceeds from the Peritonaeum; and is fastened to other parts
with three strong Ligaments. 1. To the Abdomen, by the Navel-vein. 2. Upwards,
to the Diaphragme, by a broad thin Membranous Ligament, on the right side. 3.
To the Diaphragme likewise, by a round and exceeding strong Ligament, the
Bladder of the Gall, and the Ductus Hepaticus are in the low flat part; it is
of a reddish Color: its substance seems to be compounded of several Membranes
and clusters, or Glandules joined together like Concreted Blood, which I
observed from frequently washing it. The Blood of the Spleen which is carried
thither by the Vena Portae does in some measure Ferment in the Liver, with the
Arterious Blood, which the Caeliac Artery affords, (to wit, when after
Nutrition it is discharged into the Veins again) and dissolves the Contexture
of the Blood; whereupon its Saline Sulphurous Particles, which constitute the
Gall, are Segregrated by the Glandulous Clusters, and conveyed to the Gut
Duodenum by the Bladder of the Bile, and the Ductus in the Liver called
Hepaticus. There are no Lobes in a Man's Liver; but in Brutes it is divided
into several. Portions, which they call Lobes, the Fibers of the Liver, etc.
The Ancients believed, That the Chyle was elaborated and Sanguified in the
Liver, whilst only its bilious Recrements are separated there. Hepatica vena,
the same with Basilica. Hepaticus Merbus is a Dejection of a watery sharp
Blood, like the washing of Flesh, when the Nervous Juice, or Watery Blood,
being not rightly Concocted, but sharp, is discharged into the Guts. Also when
black, shining, dried Blood is driven into the Gut: the Disease is so called,
because they attributed Sanguification to the Liver. Hepiala, the same with
Epiala. Herculeus Morbus, the same with Epilepsia. Hermephroditus is one of
both Sexes: but they only use the Woman's Instruments, they are seldom Men,
this abuse in Nature happens, when the Clitoris hangs out too far. Hermetica
Medicina, which the Egyptians falsely fetched from Mercury, refers the Cause of
Diseases to Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury; and prepares most noble Medicines, not
only of Vegetables and Animals, but of Minerals too. Hernia, or Ramex, is
properly the falling of the Intestines, Cawl, etc. by the Processes of the
Peritonaeum Dilated into the Groin: also, a Protuberance of the Navel. The
falling down of the Womb is improperly so called; swelling in the Larynx;
winding Tumors of the Spermatic Vessels; Distentions from Flatulent Matter;
Watery Humors, or Swellings. Herpes, a spreading, and winding Inflammation, is
Twofold, either Miliaris, or Pustularis, like Millet Seed, which seizes the
Skin only, and itches; or Exedens, Consuming, which not only seizes the Skin,
but the Muscles underneath: The cause of it is, That the Glandules of the Skin
are too much stuffed with salt Particles, which are kept there by others that
are Viscous, whence proceed the little Ulcers like Millet Seed, that occasion
an Itching in the Skin, which if the Peccant Matter abound; they grow into a
Crust, and eat the parts they lie upon. Heterocrania is a pain in one part or
other of the Head. Heterogeneum is when any thing disproportionate is mixed
with the Blood and Spirits, as in Fevers, Swimmings in the Head, Explosive
Motions, and the Apoplexy. Heterorythmus is a Life unsuitable to the Years of
those who live it; as if a Young Man should live an Old Man's Life, and on the
contrary: this Word is said of Pulses too, when in Diseases the Pulse beats
diversely. Hexis is a Habit, or Habitude of Body. Hidroa are Pimples about the
Secret parts, proceeding from a sharp Humor. Hydrocritica, are Critical
Judgings of Distempers, taken from Sweating. Hidronosus is a Fever, wherein the
Patient sweats Extremely. The English call it the. English Swear. Hydros the
same with Sudor. Hidrotica, things that provoke Sweating, are those which by
Fermenting, and Attenuating parts penetrate the closest Pores of the Blood, cut
into things, rarifie them, and turn them into a kind of Vapor, whatsoever they
meet carry along with them, and drive it to the Surface of the Body; where
being condensed into an insensible Liquor, it makes its way out. Hiera Picra is
an Electuary of Aloes, Lignum Aloes, Spikenard, Saffron, Mastick, Honey, etc.
Hieroglyphicae Notae, are foldings and Wrinkles in the hand, from which vain
curiosity pretends to predict strange things. Hippus is an Affection of the
Eyes, wherein they continually shake and tremble, and now and then twinkle, as
it happens in Riding. Hircu, Hirci, or Hirqui, the corners of the Eyes.
Hirquus, the same with Canthus. Holippae are little Cakes or Wafers made of a
Medicinal Infusion, with Wheat Flour and Sugar. Haeme^meres, see Similares
Parts. Homogeneae Particulae, are such Particles as are Pure, Entire, Unmixed,
and altogether like one another. Homoplata, Scapula, Spatula, Scoptula aperta,
the Shoulder Blade, is a broad and Triangular Bone which constitutes the
breadth of the Shoulder, thin, especially in the middle, but thick in its
Processes, on each side one, lying upon the upper Ribs behind, like a Target;
it has Three Processes, Acromium, or the Shoulder point; Carocoides, or
Anchoralis; and Cervix; its use is to strengthen the Ribs, to joint the
Shoulder and Neck Bones, and to implant Muscles therein. Homotona is a
continued Fever that acts always alike. Hora an Hour, signifies the determinate
space of a Year with Hippocrates. Horaea are seasonable or Summer-Fruits, as
Apples, etc. Hordeatum is a Liquid Medicine taken inwardly, prepared of Barley
beat and boiled sore, with the addition of suitable and strained Liquors; to
which are frequently added Almonds, and the Seed of white Poppies, etc.
Hordeolum, the same with Crithe. Horrifica Febris, see Phricodes. Horror is a
Vibration and Trembling of the Skin over the whole Body, with a Chilness after
it. Humectantia, moistning things, are such as can insinuate their moist
Particles into the Pores of our Bodies. Humidum Primogenium may be properly
called the Blood, which is seen in Generation before any thing else. Humores
Oculares, the humors of the Eye, are Three: the Watery, which is contained
between the Tunica Cornea, and Urea. 2. The Chrystaline, or Icie Humor, which
is contained in the Tunica Uvea, and is thicker than the rest. 3. The Vitreous,
or Glassy humor, bigger than any of the rest, fills the backward Cavitie of
the Eye.
Humores, the Ancients made Four Humors in the Blood, the Bilious, Pituitous,
(Yellow, and Black Choler) Melancholic, and the Blood, properly so called; and
that according to the Four Peripatetic Elements: but this Opinion is Cashiered,
since the invention of the Circulation of the Blood. Yet they are sound, when
the blood preternaturally departs from its due Temperature; but they do not
constitute an integral part of the blood; for the blood is only one humor; if
otherwise, Tartar in Wine, and Dregs in Beer were constituent parts of Wine and
Beer. In Blood that is let, there appear only Three different species of
bodies; for in the Surface you see a kind of a Fibrous Crust of Coagulated
Blood, which spreads it self over all the whole Mass; then you see certain Red
Particles amongst the Fibers, which grow black about the bottom, by reason of
their fewness; lastly, you see the Serum wherein it swims. But if any one will
proceed more acurately, Distill the Blood, and Dissolve it Chymically, he shall
find Five pure bodies in it: to wit, Spirit, Sulphur, or Oil, Water, Salt, and
Earth. There are Three General Bumours which wash the whole Body, Blood,
Lympha, (a sort of pure Water) and the Nervous Juice; but there are several
particular Humors, as Chyle, Bile, Spittle, Pancreatic, Juice, Seed, etc.
Humores in Secundinis, Humors in the Three Membranes that cloathe the Faetus
in the Womb, are Three in those Animals which have Bladders: at the beginning,
when the Eggs falls down from the Testicles into the Womb, the Humors which
are to this purpose in the bottom of the Womb; first sink into the Membrane
called Chorion, and then into the Amnium: but in progress of time, when the
Faetus is Formed, and the Navel Vessels are extended to the Chorion, and the
Amnium, we imagine that the Nutritious Humor being received by the opening of
the Veins, is carried to the Faetus, and thence by the Arteries some part of it
is carried into the Amnium, as into the Child's Storehouse; so that at the said
time, the Liquor of the Membrane Amnium may be increased upon this double
account. At last, when the time of delivery draws near, that way of Sweating
through seems to cease, and the other only to take place: unless (as Wharton
Writes) The Nutritious Humor descend from the Placenta by the Navel-string,
and by the little soft Protuberances thence pass into the Cavity of the Amnium:
The use of these Humors is to nourish the Faetus at the Mouth. The Third
Humor is the Urine, which flows from the Bladder by the Urinarie Passage, into
the Urinarie Membrane. Hyaloides is the Vitrous Humor of the Eye, contained
betwixt the Tunica Retina, and the Aven. Hybona is an Incurvation of all the
Vertebres. Hydatides are little Watery Bladders in the Liver, Spleen, or some
other Viseus, common to Hydropical Persons: also an increase of Fat about the
Eyelids. Hydatoides is the Watery humor of the Eye, contained betwixt the
Tunica Cornea, and Uvea. Hyderos the same that Hydrops. Hydragia, see Venae
Lymphaticae. Hydragoga are Medicines which by Fermentation and Precipitation
purge out the Watery Humors. Hydrelaeum is a mixture of Water and Oil.
Hydrenterocele is a falling of the Intestines, together with Water, into the
outward Skin of the Cods. Hydroa are certain little, broad, moist, itching
Pimples, like Millet-Seed; sometimes without itching, which render the Skin
Ulcerous and rough: the occasion of them is, that Nature endeavoring to expel
the sweat by the Skin, is hindered sometimes by its thickness; so that the
Matter being lodged there, and the Subtiler parts being either carried back, by
the Lymphatic Vessels, or Evaporated, the Skin swells. This Distemper is
familiar and common to Boys, and Young Men; especially of a hot Constitution,
when they use too much Exercise in Summer; it infects the Neck,
Shoulder-Blades, Breast, Arms, Thighs; yet more frequently the Secret Parts,
and the Fundament. Hydrocele is a swelling of the outermost Skin of the Cods,
proceeding from a Watery Humor. Hydrocephalum is a swelling of the Head, by
reason of a Watery Humor, whence the Sutures of the Brain are forced asunder;
it proceeds sometimes from a Bursting of the Lymphatic Vessels. Hydromel, Mead,
is a Decoction of Water, and Honey. Hydromphalum is a Protuberance of the
Navel, proceeding from Watery Humors in the Abdomen. Hydrophobia is a
Distemper highly Convulsive, accompanied with Fury, and shunning of all things
that are Liquid, and Splendid; sometimes with a Delirium, a Fever, and other
Symptoms, not without great danger of Life, proceeding from a Bite of a Mad
Dog, or a Contagion analogous to it. Hydropica are Medicines that expel the
Watery Humors in a Dropsy. Hydrops is a Stagnation of a Watery Humor in the
habit of the Body, or some other Cavity; and it is either general, as an
Anasarca and Ascites, to which some add a Tympany, but ill: Or particular,
confined to one part, as a Dropsy in the Head, Breast, Hand, Foot, etc. of
which in their proper place severally. Hydrops ad Matulam, the same that
Diabetes. Hydrosaccharum is a Syrup boiled of Water, and Sugar. Hygieia is
health, which consists in a good temperature, and right confirmation of Parts.
Health is a disposition of the parts of humane body, fit for the performance of
the Actions of the Body. Signs of Health are Three, due Actions, suitable
Qualities, and when things taken in, and let out, are proportionable. Hygieina
is that part of Physic, which teaches the way of preserving Health: some
divide it into Three parts, Prophylactic, which takes notice of future imminent
Diseases; Synteretic, which preserves present health: and Analeptic, which
recovers the Sick. Hygrocyrsocele is a branch of a Winding Vein swollen with ill
Blood, accompanied with other Moisture. Hymen is properly a Membrane; it is
taken also for the Private Membrane in a Virgin, which arises from the
wrinkling of the lower part of the Vagina; and in Women with Child, when the
Womb grows thicker, it disappears. Hyoides is a bone placed at the Basis of the
Tongue. Hyothorides are Two Muscles of the Larynx, proceeding from the Bone
Hyoides into the Cartilage called Scutiformis, like a Shield, and destined to
contract, or shut up the opening of the Windpipe. Hypercatharsis is a Purge
that works too much. Hypercrisis is a Critical Excresion above measure.
Hyperephidrosis is a too great Sweating. Hyperoon are two holes in the upper
part of the Palate, which receives the Pituitous humors from the Mammillary
Processes; and after they are sepatated, discharges them at the Mouth.
Hypersarcosis is an Excrescence of Flesh in any part. Hypnotica are those
things which by fixing the Spirits, by straitning and shutting up the Pores of
the brain, cause Sleep. Hypochondriacha Affectio, see Hypochondriacus Affectus.
Hypochondrium, or Subcartilagineum, is the upper part of the Abdomen, under the
Cartilages of the Chest. Hypocondriacus Affectus, is a purely Flatulent and
Convulsive Passion, arising from Flatulent and Pungent humors in the Spleen,
or Sweetbread which Afflict the Nervous and Membranous parts. Hypochyma is a
depraved sight, whereby Gnats, Cob-webs, little Clouds, or such like, seem to
swim before the Eyes: the cause of it seems to consist in turbid humors, or
sometime in the Optic Nerves, whose little Pores are obstructed by the Matter
that is thrust into them. Hypochysis, the same with Hypochyma. Hypocratis
Manica, see Manica Hypocratis. Hypogastrium is the outermost part of the
Abdomen, betwixt the Hypocondres and the Navel. Hypoglossis or Ranula is an
Inflammation, or Exulceration under the Tongue: also a Medicine that takes away
the Asperity of the Larynx. Hypophaulum is a vulgar Diet which observes a mean
betwixt a plain and an exquisite Diet. Hypophorae are deep and Fistulous Ulcers
which gape like Ulcers, and cavities in the Flesh. Hypophysis, the same with
Hypochyma. Hypophthalmia is a pain in the Eye under the Horney Tunic. Hypopyon
is a gathering of Matter under the Horney Tunic of the Eye. Hyposarca, the same
with Anasarca. Hyposarcidium, the same. Hyposphagma is a blood-shot, from a
stroke upon the Eye. Hypostasis Urinae is that thick Substance which generally
subsides at the bottom of Urine. Hypothenar is the space from the fore to the
little Finger. Hypothesis is the supposition of a thing. Hypozoma is a Membrane
that parts two Cavities, as the Mediastinum in the Thorax. Hyposiloides, see
Hyoides. Hysteralgia is a pain in the Womb, proceeding from an Inflammation, or
otherwise. Hysterica Passio, Fits of the Mother, is a Convulsion of the Nerves
of the Par Vagum, and Intercostal in the Abdomen, proceeding from a Pricking
Irritation, or Explosion of Spirits: this Distemper does not always depend upon
the Womb, as is commonly thought; we have seen it more than once in Men,
because the Spleen, Pancreas, and other adjacent Bowels, are often the cause of
it. Hysterica are Medicines against the Diseases of the Womb. Hysterotomotocia,
or Sectio Caesarea, is a cutting the Child out of the Womb, which is done thus;
You make a Semilunar Section under the Navel, along the White line, the cavity
whereof looks toward the said Line; then according to the leading of the
Fibers, the Faetus being extracted after the Section, the wound in the Womb
contracts of it self, so that the Blood scarce flows more plentifully than in a
Natural Birth; but if the Mother be dead, choose the most convenient place you
can. Hysterotomia is an Anatomical Dissection of the Womb.
A Catalogue of the Authors which have been consulted and made use of in this
DICTIONARY.
AVenzoar. Acta Societ. regiae in Anglia. AEgineta. Agellius. Agricola.
Ammonius. F.ab Aquapendente Arantius. Aretaeus. Aristoteles. Asellius.
Atheneus. Averrhoes. Avicenna. de Back. Bapt. Porta. Barbette. Casp.
Bartholinus. Th. Bartholinus. Bauhinus. Beguinus. Beverovicius. Blasius.
Bontius. Boyleus. Budaeus. Calepinus. des Carts. Cardanus. Cassianus.
Castellus. a Castro. Celsus. Charleton. Cicero. Columbus. Columella.
Conringius. Cordus. Decker. Deusingius. Diemerbroekius. Dodonaeus. Ent.
Erotianus. Euripides. Eustachius. Everhardi. Fallopius. Fannius. Fernelius.
Foesius. Fontanus. Forestus. Galenus. Gemma. Glissonius. Gorrhaeus. de
Gradibus. Grammatici. de Graef. Guido. Harvaeus. Helmontius. ab Heers.
Herodotus. Herophilus. Hesychius. Hesiodus. Otto Heurnius. Joh. Heurnius.
Higmorus. Hildanus. Hippocrates. Hoboken. Hofmannus. ab Hogelande. Hollerius.
Homerus. van Horn. Horstius. Isidorus. Junius. Johnsonus. Kircherus. Krollius.
Kyperus. Langius. Laurentius. Liddelius. L. de Bills. van der Linden. Lowerus.
Marchette. Malpighius. Martialis. Massarias. Moebius. Mercurialis. Minsicht.
Needham. Nicander. Oribasius. Ovidius. Owenus. Pacuinus. Paracelsus. Paraeus.
Passeratius. Pavius. Pecquer. Philotheus. Piso. Pindarus. Pinaeus. Platerus.
Plautus. Plempius. Plinius. Plutarchus. Pollux. Primerosius. Quercetanus.
Regius. Renodaeus. Reusnerus. Rhodiginus. Rhodius. Riolanus. Riverius.
Rolfinkius. Rondeletius. Roussettus. Reubekkius. Ruisch. Sala. Sanctorius.
Salius Diversus. Saxonia. Scaliger. Schapula. Schenkius. Scheinerus. Schola
Salernitana. Schroderus. Scultetus. Senguerdus. Sennertus. Severinus.
Spigelius. I. Sylvius. D. Le boe Sylvius. Stenonius. Suida. Swaluwe.
Swammerdam. Swelfer. Tertullianus. Tulpius. Valverda. Varro. Vesalius.
Veslingius. Virgilius. Walleus. Wekkerus. Whartonus. Willisius. Wormius. Et
alii plures.
I.
JAnitor, the same that Pylorus. Ichor is a sulphurous and watery Humor which
flows from Ulcers. Ichoroides is a moisture like Corruption. Icterus, the
Jaundice, is a changing the Skin into a yellow Color from an obstruction of
the ductus choledochus, or the Glandules of the Liver, through the weakness,
obstruction, or Schirres of the Liver, or because the Gall abounds more than
can be conveniently excerned, so that it stays in the Blood. It takes its Name
from (...), a Ferret, whose Eyes are tinged with the like Color. Or from a
Bird called Icterus of the same Color, which the Latins call Galbulus, which
if one sick of the Jaundice sees, says Pliny, the Party is cured, and the Bird
dies. The Latins call it Regius Morbus, the Kingly Disease, because it is
easily cured in Courts with the Pastimes and Divertisements there which cheer
the Mind. It is also called a Suffusion of Gall. Idea morbi is the Propriety
and Essence of a Disease. Idiopathia is a primary Disease, which neither
depends on, nor proceeds from any other. Idiosyncrasia is a Temperament
peculiar to any Body. Jecur, the same with Hepar. Jecur uterinum, see Placent
alteri. Jejunum intestinum is the Second of the small Guts, so called, because
it is frequently empty: The little glandulous Nipples in it imbibe the Chyle,
and convey it to the Milky Veins. Varro calls it Hilla. Ignis actualis, actual
Fire, is that which burns at first touch, as Fire it self, and seering Irons.
Ignis potentialis, potential Fire, is a Medicine which after it has laid
sometimes upon the part, exerts it self. Ignis persicus, the same that
Gangraena: It is taken also for a Carbuncle. Ignis sacer, the same that
Erysipelas: yet some take it for an Herpes. Ignis sylvestris, the same that
Phlyctaena. Ignitio is Calcination made by Fire. I Will is the Cavity from the
Thorax to the Bones of the Thighs: Pliny observes, that all the Intestines in
all Animals, except a Man and a Sheep, are called I Will. Ilia are the lateral
parts of the Abdomen, betwixt the last Rib and the secret Parts. Ilingus, see
Scotomia. Ilium is the Third of the small Guts: It begins where the Jejunum
ends, and ends it self at the Gut called Caecum: It is one and twenty
Handbreadths in length. Ilium, is a Disease, for the most part, of the Gut
Ilium, and is called Volvulus, when the upper part of any Intestine is involved
in the under, and on the contrary. Ilium os is part of the Bone Innominatum,
without any particular Name: It is so named because it contains the Gut Ilium.
Its Circumference is circular, the upper broadest, it is connected to the os
Sacrum: The upper part of it is called Spina, the interior Costa, and the
exterior Dorsum: It is larger in Women than Men. Iliaca passio, the same that
Ilium Morbus. Iliaca vasa are those double forked Vessels of the Truncs of the
great Artery, and the great Vein of the Abdomen, about the place where the
Bladder and the Womb are situate. Imaginatio the same with Phantasia.
Imperfecta crisis, see Crisis. Impetigo Celsi, the same that Lepra Graecorum.
Celsus makes four sorts. The most harmiess, says he, is that which is like a
Scab, for it is red and harder, and exulcerated and gnawed: But it differs from
it, in that it is more exulcerated, and is accompanied with speckled Pimples:
And there seem to be in it certain Bubbles, from which after a certain time
there fall, as it were, little Scales, and it returns more certainly. Another
sort is worse, almost like a sort of Meezles, or hot Pimples in the Skin, but
more rugged, and redder, and of different Figures: In this Distemper little
Scales too fall from the surface of the Skin, and it is called Rubrica. The
third sort is yet worse, for it is thicker and harder, and swells more, and is
cleft on the top of the Skin, and gnaws more violently: It is scaly too, but
black, and spreads broad and slow: It is called Nigra. The fourth sort is
altogether incurable, of a different color from the red; for it is something
white, and like a fresh Scar, and has pale Scales; some whit^^, some like the
little Pulse called Lintell, which being taken away, sometimes the Blood
follows: Otherwise the Humor that flows from it is white, the Skin hard and
cleft, and spreads farther. All these sorts arise especially in the Feet and
Hands, and infest the Nails likewise. Impetigo some reckon the same with
Lichen. Impetigo Plinii, Pliny's Impetigo is the same with Lichen Graecorum.
Inappetentia, is want of Stomach, for want of Ferment in it. Inceratio is a
mixture of Moisture with something that is dry, by a gentle soaking till the
substance be brought to the consistence of soft Wax. Incidentia, the same with
Attenuantia. Incineratio is the reducing the Bodies of Vegetables and Animals
into Ashes by a violent Fire. Incisores dentes, the same that Primores.
Incisorii, the same with Primores. Incorporatio is a mixture whereby moist
things are contemperated with dry into one Body, as into a Mass, therefore here
is no lingering Nutrition, but as much moisture is added as is requisite to the
consistence of the mixed Body, so that it becomes like a Pudding as it were;
whence it may be called also Impastatio, and in some things Subactio, a
Kneading. Things thus incorporated must be left in a digestive Heat, that by
mutual Action and Suffering they may get one temperature common to them both.
Incrassantia, thickning things, are those which being endued with thick ropie
parts, and mixed with thin liquid Juices, bring them to a thicker consistence
by joining and knitting their parts. Incubus, see Epialtes. Incus is one of the
Bones in the inner part of the Ear: It is like a Grinder, and lies under the
Bone called Malleus. It has two Processes below; one shorter, which leans upon
the scaly Bone; another longer, which sustains the top of the Stapes or
triangular Bone, that bears upon the Cavity of the inner part of the Ear,
whilst it immerges it self into the place called the Oval Window with a pretty
broad Basis. Indicans is nothing else than something observed in the Body, upon
whose account something is said to be done that ought to contribute thereunto.
Indicantes dies are those days which signify that a Crisis will happen on such
a day, which are therefore called indicant and contemplable: Such are 4, 11,
17, 24. Indicatio is that which demonstrates what is to be done in Diseases,
and it is threefold, praeservatorie, which preserves Health; Curative, which
expels a Disease that has already seized upon a Person; and Vital, which
respects the Strength and way of living. Indicatum is that which is signified
to be done in order to the recovery of Health. Indices dies, see Critici dies.
Indurantia, see Sclerotica. Indusium, see Amnios. Inedia is abstaining from
Meat, when one eats less than formerly. Infimus venture, see Abdomen.
Inflammatio, see Phlegmone. Inflatio is the distention of a part from flatulent
matter. Infundibulum cerebri, the same that Choana. Infundibulum renum is the
Pelvis or Basin through which the Urine passes to the Ureters and the Bladder.
Infusio is an Extraction of the Virtue of Medicines with a convenient Liquor,
which if it be purgative, it may be taken at once; and to this the Name
properly agrees. Inguen, is the place from the bending of the Thigh to the
secret parts. Injectio intestinalis, the same that Clyster. Inium is the
beginning of the oblongated Marrow, which is the common Sensory, because the
Species which are received from the external Organs are conveyed thither by the
Nerves. Innominata tunica oculi, the Tunic of the Eye that wants a Name, is a
certain subtle Expansion of the Tendons from the Muscles which move the Eye to
the circumference of the Iris or horney Membrane. Innominatum os, others call
it os Coxae, or Ilium, is placed at the side of the os Sacrum, consisting of
three Bones, Ilium, os Pubis, and Ischium, joined by Cartilages, and appear
distinct by three Lines till seven years old, but grow all into one Bone at
riper years. They are called also Cuneiformia, and Ossa Innominata, nameless
Bones. Innominatus humor, or Insitus, is a secondary Humor, as the Ancients
call it, wherewith they thought the Body was nourished: For those nutritious
Humors they talked of are four; Innominatus, Ros, Gluten, Cambium. Insania, or
Amentia, Madness, is an Abolition or Depravation of Imagination and Judgment.
Insessus is a Bath for the Belly, proper for the lower Parts, wherein the
Patient sits down to the Navel. They are for several uses, as for easing of
Pain, softning of Parts, dispelling flatulent matter; and frequently for
exciting the Courses. Inspiratio is an alternate Dilatation of the Chest,
whereby the nitrous Air is communicated to the Blood to accend it by the
Windpipe, and its Vesicular parts. The cause of Respiration does not seem to
consist only in the Dilatation of the Thorax, as is commonly thought, but in
the Contraction of the Tunic which covers the upper part of the oesophagus, and
the most close Recesses of the Windpipe. Intellectus, is Cogitation, whereby a
Man apprehends an Object: It seems to be transacted in the Corpus Callosum,
from the expansion of Spirits there. Intemperies is a Disease which consists in
inconvenient qualities of the Body, and these are either manifest or occult:
The Manifest are either simple or compound; the Simple is when one Quality is
peccant; as an hot, thin, hard, acid, salt Disposition, etc. the Compound is
when more Qualities than one are peccant; as an hot and salt, a cold and acid
Disposition, etc. An Occult ill Disposition or Distemper is such as proceeds
from some poisonous Qualities, as from the Air, from poisonous Animals, etc. It
comes from the Air, when the Nitre in it becomes contagious by reason of
standing stinking Waters, daily Droughts, Earthquakes, etc. whence malignant
pestilent Fevers, and Plagues themselves arise: For the Vapors being taken
away, that which remains of the Air (by reason of the Sulphur and Salt in it)
contracts an ill Savor, whereupon the Air and its Nitre degenerate from their
due Temperature and Crasis. And I believe the same happens from very dry
Grounds, for sulphurous and saline Particles intermix with the watery ones
above, which render the Nitre of the Air sharp and pointed, like Arsenic,
sublimated Mercury, or Aqua stygia, which being sucked into the Lungs do
coagulate, and corrode the Mass of the Blood and make its Spirits vanish;
whence proceed Quinzies, Plurisies, Pestilential Swellings, etc. Intercalares
dies, or intercidentes, which others call Provocatorii, are those Days wherein
Nature, either by reason of the vehemence of the Fit, or some external cause,
is excited to expel her Load unseasonably: Such are the 3d, 5, 9, 13, 19.
Intercidentes dies, see Intercalares. Intercus, see Anasarca. Inter for
amineum, the same that Perinaeum. Intermissio febrium, see Apyrexia.
Internuncii dies, see Critici dies. Intermittens morbus is a Disease which
comes at certain times, and then remits a little. Intermittent Fevers, or
Agues, proceed not from any fictitious Focus, but only from a wrong
Assimilation of the Chyle. Inter scapularia are the Cavities betwixt the
Shoulder Blade and the Vertebres. Intertrigo, or Attritus, is an Excoriation of
the parts near the Fundament, or betwixt the Thighs; or a Fleaing of the Skin
proceeding from a violent Motion, especially Riding: It happens frequently to
Children, that the Cuticula in their Thighs and Hips is separated, and as it
were shaven off from the true Skin, which pains them so that it makes them
restless. Intestina, see Entera. Involucrum cordis, see Pericardium. Jonthus,
or varus, is a little, hard, callous swelling in the Skin of the Face. Iris is
that fibrous Circle next to the Pupil of the Eye, distinguished with variety of
Colors. Isatodes is a blew Bile, like the Herb Woad wherewith Cloth is died
blew. Ischaema are Medicines that stop the Blood, which with a binding,
cooling, or drying Virtue close up the opening of the Vessels, or diminish and
stop the Fluidity and violent Motion of the Blood. Ischias is the Gout in the
Hip. Ischium is the Hip, or Huckle-Bone. Ischophonus is a small Voice.
Ischuretica are Medicines which thicken the Blood in difficulty of Urine, so
that the Urine stops. Ischuria is such a Suppression of Urine in the Bladder
that little or nothing of it can be discharged. Isthmus is that part which lies
betwixt the Mouth and the Gullet, like a Neck of Land: Also the Ridg that
separates the Nostrils. Ithmoidea ossa, see Ethmoides. Itinerarium is a
Chyrurgions Instrument, which being fixed in the Urinary Passage shows the Neck
or Sphincter of the Bladder, that an Incision may be more surely made to find
out the Stone.
Jugale os, the same that Zygoma. Jugularis vena is that Vein which goes
toward the Scull by the Neck. Jugulum, the same that Furcula. Julap, see
Julepus. Julapium, the same. Julep, see Julepus. Julepus is a Liquid Medicine
taken inwardly, of a grateful taste and clear, made of a convenient Liquor with
Syrup or Sugar without any boiling, and of the quantity of three or four Doses,
to alter or refrigerate. A Julep consists commonly of one pound and an half of
Barley-Water, or of distilled Waters, rarely of Wine, of the cooling Syrup of
red Goose-berries, Berberies, Violets, etc. to which they commonly add some
drops of Sulphur, Vitriol, Salt, etc. to give it a good taste. Juleb, whence
the word Julepus comes, is a Persian word, and signifies a sweet Potion.
L.
LAbia leporina are such Lips as by reason of their ill make will not come
together, which some call rostra leporina. Labyrinthus is a Body full of
windings and turnings, as may be seen in the inner part of the Ear, and in the
outer surface of the Brain. Lac, Milk, is made by separating of Chyle from the
arterious Blood by the Glandules of the Breast. Milk begins to be made for the
most part after the going with Young, or a little before the Birth; but it
ceases in old Creatures, in those with Young, and in menstruous Persons.
Lacertus, see Brachium. Lachrymale punctum is an hole made in the Bone of the
Nose, by which the matter that makes Tears passes to the Nostrils; if the hole
grow hard and brawny from an Ulcer in one of the Glandules at the Corners of
the Eyes, thence arises a Fistula Lacrymalis. Lachrymae are a moisture which is
separated by the Glandules of the Eye to moisten the Eyes, which if it be too
much so that it cannot be received by the Punctum Lachrimale, they fall from
the Eyes and are called Tears. Laconicum, Caldarium, and Assa, or Balneum
aereum, was formerly a Cellar without any Water, made to provoke Sweat, which
was done by an hot Vapor, or a dry Heat included therein. Lactea vasa, see
Vasa lactea. Lactes some take for the Pancreas, or for the Mesenterie, others
for the Milky Vessels. Lactucimina, the same that Aphthae. Lactumia, the same
that Achores. Lacunae are little Pores or Passages in the Vagina of the Womb,
but no where greater than in the lower part of the Urinary Passage: There flows
a certain serous pituitous matter out of these Ductus's which lubricitates the
Vagina, and is looked upon as Seed; it flows out in a great quantity in the Act
of Coition. Lagochilus one who has cloven Lips, see Labia leporina.
Lagophthalmus one who has Hares Eyes. Lambdoides is the backward Suture of the
Brain, so called from its likeness to the Letter L Lambda. Lanceta is a
Chyrurgions little Knife, straight, pointed, two-edged; used in opening of
Veins, cutting of Fistula's, opening of the Fundament, Yard, or Womb that is
shut. Laqueus is a Band so tied, that if it be attracted, or pressed with
weight it shuts up close: Its use is to extend broken or disjointed Bones, to
keep them in their places when they are set, to bind the parts close together;
the differences of these Laquei, or Bands, are several, having their Names
either from the Inventors, or from their Use, or from their likeness to or
shape of any thing, or from the manner of lying, or their Effect, which unless
they were here delineated, can scarce be understood by a bare Description.
Laryngotomia, the same that Bronchotomia. Larynx, Guttur, according to Galen
Larynx is properly the head or top of the Windpipe, which consists of five
Cartilages. The first pair is called Scutiforme, like a Shield, which
constitutes the protuberance in the Neck called Adam's Apple: The second pair
is called Annular, because it is round like a Ring: The third and fourth
Cartilage some reckon but one, but if the Membrane be took off, it appears to
be two, and is called Guttalis and Glottis. The fifth is called Epiglottis,
which covers the opening of the Windpipe at the top. Its use is in the Voice
and Respiration. Lassitudo, see Copos. Lavamentum, the same that Fotus.
Laudanum is meant only of a Medicine made of Opiate, and that they call an
Opiate Laudanum, from its excellent Qualities. Authors give several
descriptions of it. It allays the most unsupportable Pains, and stops any Flux.
Laxantia, loosening Medicines, are those which with their benign Particles
softning and scouring the Intestines cleanse them of their Excrements.
Lenientia, the same with Laxantia. Leno and Linon is that part of the Brain
called Torcular Herophili, that place where the third Cavity of the Meninx is
joined to the first, second, and fourth. Lentigines, Freckles, are little Spots
especially in Women, and chiefly in their Faces, but sometimes in their Hands,
Arms, and the upper part of the Chest which is exposed to the Air; the Skin is
sometimes spotted thicker sometimes thinner with them, like as with so many
drops, but without any Trouble or Pain; in some they appear only in Summer, and
disappear in Winter, in others they continue the Year round. Lepidoides is the
scaly Suture of the Scull, see Mendosa. Lepra, a Leprosy, is a dry Scab,
whereby the Skin becomes scaly like Fish: It differs from Leuce and Alphus, in
that a Leprosy is rough to the touch, and causes an Itching; for the Skin is
the only part affected, and therefore that being flayed off, the Flesh
underneath appears sound and well. Lepra Arabum, the same that Elephantiasis
Graecorum. Lepra Graecorum, or Impetigo Celsi, is the highest degree of
Scabbedness; but it must be observed, lest any should be gravelled in the
reading of Authors, that we here speak of the Leprosy of the Greeks, not the
Arabians. That which the Arabians call a Leprosy is the Elephantiasis of the
Greeks, which is nothing else than an Universal Canker of the whole Body. A
Leprosy is a Disease proceeding from black Bile diffused through the whole
Body, whence the Temperature, the Form and Figure, and at last the very
Continuity of the Body is corrupted, and it is a Canker common to the whole
Body. The Arabians call the Leprosy of the Greeks Albaras nigra, which is the
same with a kind of Ring-worm or Tetter which fleas the Flesh, and is a rough
violent Scab in the Skin, accompanied with Scales like Fish and itching. There
is a greater Corruption of Humors in a Leprosy than in a Scabbedness, and from
the latter there only fall little flakes like Dendriff from the Head, but from
the former as it were Scales of Fish; so that one passes from Itching to a
Leprosy by the Scab. For Pruritus, or Itching, is a certain small Asperity of
the Skin, wherein, unless you scratch very hard, nothing falls from the Skin:
When it is grown to a scab the Humor is more apparent, and certain little
Particles like Dendriff fall off, whether it be scratched or no. For in a Scab
the matter is thinner, and at least preys upon the Surface of the Skin: But
then in a Leprosy the matter is thicker, and not only feeds upon the Surface
but the inner parts of the Skin. Celsus doubtless meant this Leprosy of the
Greeks by the Word Impetigo, but not the Lichen of the Greeks, which some call
Impetigo. Leptuntica are attenuating cutting Medicines, which part the crass
and viscous Humors with their acute Particles. Lethargus, a Lethargy, is a
Drowziness like another Disease causing an heavy sleep called Coma, accompanied
with a Fever and a Delirium; and it is nothing else but an heap of too much or
incongruous moist Matter within the Pores of the barky substance of the Brain.
This Distemper does not seem to come of it self, but rather from the
demigration of Fevers. Leuce is when the Hairs, Skin, and sometimes the Flesh
underneath turns white; the Flesh being pricked with a Needle is not sensible,
nor emits Blood but a Milky Humor. It differs from Alphus in that it
penetrates deeper and changes the Skin so that the Hairs are changed too.
Leucoma is a white Scar in the horney Tunic of the Eye. Leucophagum is made of
Almonds macerated in Rose Water, and of Capon or Partridg boiled, bruised and
strained through a Sieve made of Bristles: It is used in a Consumption.
Leucophlegmatia is a pituitous Dropsy, or a Dropsy that has seized the whole
Body. Lichen barbarously called Serpigo or Zerna, Halliabbas calls it Petigo
and Sarpedo; the vulgar Voliatica. Lichenes are certain Asperities of the Skin,
and as it were Tumors, which itch much and send forth Matter: The Greeks and
Arabians have made two sorts of Lichens, the one mild and gentle, the other
fierce and cruel. And according to Avicen, some are moist, which being rubbed
send forth a kind of Dew, others are dry; and the moist are more safe, but the
dry is made of salt pituitous Matter turned into Melancholy Blood. And again
he writes, that one Manginess (Impetigo) brings off the Skin by reason of its
great Dryness, and another does not; and that one is ambulatory and malignant,
another fixed and standing; as also one is old, another fresh. Hence it
appears, that the Scabies of Corn. Celsus was nothing but these Lichenes of the
Greeks, and the Impetigo of the Arabians. It comes in any part of the Body, but
especially in the Face and Chin, as Galen has it; for a Lichen, says he, is a
most ungrateful Distemper in the Chin, because it makes it itch exceedingly,
and stretches out the parts affected: It is not a little dangerous, it spreads
over the whole Face, and sometimes reaches the Eyes, and at last makes the
Person affected extreme filthy and loathsome. Lichen of the Greeks is Pliny's
Impetigo, or an Inequality of the Skin, extending it self to the neighboring
parts, and accompanied with an extraordinary Itching and dry Pimples. Lichen is
also the callous part in an Horses Foot; likewise a sort of green Moss. Libra
medica, a Physicians Pound, is twelve Ounces; for as often as they prescribe a
Pound they mean so many Ounces. Lien, see Splen. Lienteria is a Looseness when
the Meat is sent out before it be altered. Ligamentum, a Ligament, is a solid
and very fibrous part, proceeding almost from Matter like a Cartilage,
different in size, number, and situation, broad or round, cold, as it comes
near the constitution of a Membrane or a Cartilage, dryer or moister, harder or
softer, more or less tough and flexible, and designed by Nature for the
connecting of Parts, especially Bones, that they may better perform their
Motions. Ligula, the same that Clavicula. Linea alba is a concourse of the
Tendons of the Muscles of the Abdomen, excepting the Tendons of the straight
ones. For the Tendons of the Oblique Muscles unite, and meet so on both sides,
that they make a kind of Tunic that covers the Abdomen, as if they were all but
one Tendon. It is white and not fleshy, proceeding from the pointed Cartilage
to the os Pubis; and is narrower below the Navel than above. Lingua, the
Tongue, is an oblong, broad, thick Member, and thicker at the Roots and thinner
and sharper at the end; of a moderate bigness, that it may move more quickly.
In the Exterior and upper part of the Tongue there are a great many little
Bodies which break out from the Surface of the Tongue, and crooking moderately
incline backwards toward the Root, so that they look like a Comb that cards
Wool. These Cartilaginous Bodies in an Ox especially seem to resemble the
Figure of a Boare's Tooth; in the lower part they have a certain Cavity: They
are made of a thick tenacious fibrous Matter, which seems like a heap of little
Rods: About the sides of the Tongue they grow smaller and smaller, so that they
almost disappear, and certain membranous Bodies are placed at their Basis,
which look like a Conical, and then by and by a more obtuse pappy Substance:
All the little Protuberances are clothed with the Membrane of the Tongue; they
are firmly implanted in a certain tenacious Tunic of the Tongue, there being
under them a crass viscous, or nervous Substance, especially in those places,
where there are remarkable Pits in the Tongue disposed in like order and
manner, so that in the inner part of the Tongue there are a great many of them,
which are firmly implanted in a certain viscous sort of Body. When the Membrane
that covers the whole Tongue is taken off there appears a certain glutinous
Substance; then a nervous pappy Body something yellow, which spreads like the
Membrane, and discovers remarkable nervous Protuberances disposed of in a
wonderful order. The next thing that appears are little Nipples in greater
abundance than those spoke of and of another order; for as many little
Protuberances as cover the outside of the Tongue, so many nervous Nipples of
this sort are found within; these proceed from the common pappy Substance, grow
tolerably high, and shoot out farther into nervous Sprouts from the top of
them, about which you discover innumerable little Protuberances proceeding from
the same Stock, and of an equal height, only slenderer, like a Cone, and which
go within their proper Cavities ready made in the crass viscous Substance
before mentioned, and at last end toward the outermost Membrane. Furthermore
the Substance of the Tongue is Musculous. The Center of the Tongue consists of
several sorts of Fibers, long, transverse, and oblique, which being mutually
interwoven with one another look like a Coverlet or Blanket: It owes its Motion
to peculiar Muscles of its own, wherewith it is contracted and abbreviated. The
pairs of Muscles are the Styloglossum, Basioglossum, Genioglossum,
Ceratoglossum, and Myloglossum. * Lithontriptica, are Medicines which break the
Stone. Lithotomia is a cutting the Stone out of the Bladder, and is thus
performed. The Operator lays the sick Person upon a soft Pillow in the Bosom of
some strong Man, after he has lept three or four times from on high, then he
ties the Hands on each side fast to the sole of the Foot, and two People
standing on each side hold the Knees as open as possible: After this the
Operator moistening one Finger of his left Hand, or if necessity require, the
two foremost, with Oil of white Roses, thrusts them up into the Fundament, and
with his right Hand presses the upper parts of the Secrets lightly, that by
this means the Stone may be brought to the Perinaeum, which when he has forced
thither with his Fingers, he cuts with a two edged Knife proportionably to the
bigness of the Stone, in the left side betwixt the Testicles and the Fundament,
near to the Suture of the Perinaeum, bringing the Stone toward the Knife: And
if the Stone come not out either of its own accord, or by the thrusting of the
Fingers, he draws it out with Pincers, or some such Instrument of Art. The
Stone being drawn out, and all the Bands being loosed, he closes the Wound
duly, applys Remedies to stop the Blood, and takes care that the Wound be
closed up, least the Urine should continually drop through. This way is called
Apparatus minor, and is used especially in Boys, tho it be frequently practiced
too in adult Persons in these Countries. But in the Apparatus major, or the
greater Operation, the Patient bound as before is set upon a Table and held
there, then the Chyrurgion thrusts in his Instrument called Itinerarium by the
Urinary Passage into the Bladder as far as the very Stone, and cutting an hole
as before, He puts another Instrument called Conductor into the hollow part of
the Itinerarium through the Wound, then the Itinerarium being taken out of the
Urinary Passage, he puts in his Instrument called Forceps (a sort of Pincers)
or any other sit to pull out the Stone, through the Wound he made, that he may
lay hold of the Stone and bring it out. This being done, the Wound is bound up
and consolidated as it is in Children, only if it be large, it is saved, and an
Instrument of Silver applied to it for two or three days, which is useful to
let out concreted Blood, Phlegm, and gravelly Urine. There is yet another way of
taking out the Stone, to wit, by making an hole in the Abdomen by which the
Stone is taken out of the bottom of the Bladder, and in this way no dribling of
Urine need to be feared. Lithotomus is a Chyrurgion who is skilful in cutting
out the Stone. Lobus auris is the lower part, or teap of the Ear. Localia
Medicamenta are those which are applied outwardly, as Plasters, Ointments,
Salves, etc. Loch, and Lohoch, the same that Eolegma. Lochia are those things
which are evacuated by Women in Childbed, after the Birth of the Foetus and
the Membranes called Secundinae. Lohoch, the same that Eclegma. Loimographia is
a Description of contagious Diseases. Loimos is pestilent Poison, which
proceeds from the Nitre of the Air too highly exalted and pointed with
heterogeneous Particles, which being taken into the Lungs infects and corrupts
the Blood and the animal Spirits. Longanon, the last Gut, see Intestinum
rectum. Lopidoides, the same that Lepidoides. Lordosis is the bending of the
Backbone forward. Lotio is in a manner a particular Bath, wherein the Head,
Armpits, Hands, Feet, and natural Parts are washed, and that with physical
Decoctions: Some Medicines are also thus washed, by reason of their Saltness
and Acrimony, as in Calx, and the heavier Soil of Brass that sticks to the
higher places of Furnaces or Melting-houses. Lotium, see Vron. Lozongae,
Lozenges, the same that Morsuli. Lues Venerea, Morbus Gallicus, the French Pox,
is a malignant and contagious Distemper, communicated from one to another by
Coition, or other impure Contact, proceeding from virulent Matter, and
accompanied with the falling of the Hair, Spots, Swellings, Ulcers, Pains, and
many other direful Symptoms. Lumbaga is a Pain in the Muscles of the Loins
clogged with Scorbutic Matter, so that the Patient is forced to stand upright.
Lumbrici are little Worms or Animals produced by Corruption in humane Bodies;
they are of different Shapes, round, etc. Lupia is a Tumor, or Protuberance,
about as big as a sort of Bean. Some take it for a Meliceris, others for a
Ganglio. Lupinus is equal to half a dram. Lupus is a sort of Canker in the
Thighs and Legs. Lutatio is a Cementing of chemical Vessels. Luxatio,
disjointing, is when a Bone goes out of its own Cavity into another place,
which hinders voluntary Motion. Lycanthropia, rabies Hydrophobica, a Mandness
proceeding from a mad Wolf, wherein Men imitate the howling of Wolves. Lycoides
is a Madness like that of Wolves, proceeding from the Retention of Seed.
Lygmos, the Hickets, is a couvulsive Motion of the Nerves which spread up and
down the Gullet, returning after short Intermissions: It proceeds from some
truoblesome Matter that vellicates the AEsophagus. Lympha is a clear limpide
Humor, consisting of the nervous Juice and of Blood, which being continually
separated by the Glandules, is at last discharged into the Blood again by
Vessels peculiar to it. The Lympha comes not immediately from the Blood or
nervous Juice, as some think, but it is the Superfluity of each, which was more
than enough for the Nourishment of a part, like the Marrow in Bones: It is
taken sometimes for that Water which flows from the Pricking of Nerves and
other Wounds, and which does not really flow from the Nerves themselves, but
from the Lymphatick Vessels which are cut and wounded. Lymphatica vasa, see
Venae Lymphaticae. Lynx, the same that Lygmus. Lyteria is a sign of the
loosening of a great Disease.
M.
MAcrocosmus is the whole Universe. Macula epatica is a Spot of a brown, or of
a sad yellow Color, about an hand's breadth broad, chiefly seizing upon the
Groins, the Breast and back; nay sometimes it covers the whole Body, is
attended with a certain slight Asperity of the Skin, which lets fall Scales,
or a sort of Dendriff from it, which yet do not stick altogether, but are
disseminated here and there, and sometimes disappear, sometimes break out
again. Macula Matricalis is a spot with which a Child is born, of brownish
Color. Macula volaticae is a red or purple Spot here and there in the Skin,
which if it touch any Orifice in the Body, as the Mouth, Nostrils, Eyes, Ears,
etc. and pierce so far, it becomes mortal; fatal to Children. Madarosis is a
Baldness of the Head. Magdaleones are pieces of Plaster made up in form of a
Cylender. Magisterium properly signifies a Powder prepared by Solution and
Precipitation, improperly a resinous Matter made the same way, which is more
truly called an Extract. Magisteria as they are various, so are they variously
prepared; a solvent Liquor is always poured upon a dry Matter, reduced to
durst, if it can be had, or (if necessary) calcined, which is different
according to the Diversity of the Magisterium, plain or distilled Vinegar, both
by it self, and sharpened with Spirit of Nitre, Vitriol, Salt, etc. These are
only in Minerals and Animals; a Lixivium prepared of Salt of Tartar and Water
in Vegetables, Spirit of Wine in things sulphurous, that is, endued with an
oily part; Yet these things belong rather to Extracts. There is a precipitating
Liquor poured upon dissolved Bodies, commonly Oil of Tartar per deliquium,
Urine, salt Water, Spirit of Vitriol, Nitre, etc. in Minerals and Animals
common Water, or Allum-water in Vegetables; and there will subside at the
bottom of the Glass a coagulated Substance which must be dried, and if
necessity require, first sweetened and then burned. Magistralia medicamenta are
those Medicines which Physicians use to prescribe in the Shops for several
uses, they are commonly called usualia, usual, because they ought to be used
frequently, once a Week, twice a Month, or the like. Magma signifies the Dregs
that are left after the streining of Juices. Malacia is a depraved Appetite
which covets those things which are never eat: Also a Tenderness of Body.
Malactica, or Emollientia are those things which soften parts with a moderate
Heat and Moisture, by dissolving some of them, and dissipating others. Malagma
was the same with our Forefathers, as Cataeplasma. Malagma, the same that
Malacticum. Malignus Morbus, a malignant Disease, is that which rages more
vehemently and continues longer than its Nature seems to pretend to, as a
pestilent Fever, etc. Malleus is one of the four little Bones in the Ear.
Malleus pedis, see Malleolus. Malleolus, or Malleus, is twofold, external,
which is the lower Process at the foot of the Bone of the Leg called Fibula: Or
internal, which is the lower Process of the Bone of the Leg, called Tibia,
these make the Ancle. Malthacode is a Medicine softened with Wax. Malum
mortuum, the dead Disease, is a sort of Scab, so called because it makes the
Body appear black and mortified: It is accompanied with Colors black and blew,
and with a crusty sort of Pimples, black, and filthy, but without Matter,
Sense, or Pain. It infects the Hips and Legs especially. Mamma, Mammilla, Vber,
the Breast, Dugs, etc. the Grammarians call the inner part Vbera, and the
outward Protuberances Mammae. A Breast or Dug is a globous, white, and soft
Body, laying upon the pectoral Muscle on both sides, made up of conglomerated
Glandules in the inside, by the mediation whereof the Milk is separated from
the arterious Blood, and is conveyed out by very little Pipes, which pass
through the Nipples. Mammiformes processus are two Apophyses of the Bone of the
back part of the Scull. Mammilla, the same that Mamma. Mandibula, Maxilla, the
Jaw, is either upper or lower. The upper is made of twelve Bones, on each side
six. The first is at the external corner of the Eye, which joined with the
fore-process of the Bone of the Temples produces the jugal Bone. The second
constitutes the inner corner of the Eye, has a large Passage in it, by which
the superabundant Moisture of the Eye descends to the Nostrils. The third is
within the circle of the Eye, interposed betwixt the other two. The fourth, the
greatest of all, makes the greatest part of the Cheeks and the Palate, and is
elaborately carved for the Reception of the Teeth. The fifth helps to make the
Nose. The sixth with another Bone along with it terminates the extremity of the
Palate: And all these are joined rather by a plain Line than by Sutures. The
lower Jaw at riper Years grows into one continued Bone, extreme hard, and
thick, and consequently very strong: It has two Processes, one acute, called
Corone, the other in the form of a little Head, called Condylus. It has two
Holes within, and as many without which make way for the Nerves; the under
Teeth are implanted in it, and it is joynted with the inner side of the Bone of
the Temples called Os petrosum. Mania, a sort of Madness, is a deprivation of
Imagination and Judgment, with great Rage and Anger, but without a Fever and
Fear: It proceeds from sulphureo-saline Animal Spirits, like Aqua stygia, which
cause strange furious Impulses in the Body, not by consent of Parts, but by
their own Strength. Manica Hypocratis, is a woollen Sack, in form of a
Piramide, wherewith Aromatic Wines, Medicines, and other Liquors arestreined.
Maniodes is a Phrensy, like the Madness which is meant by Mania. Manipulus is a
dry Measure, usual with Physicians in their Prescriptions; for it is a
determinate quantity, to wit, as much as can be held in one hand; meant for the
most part of Herbs. Fasciculus is a different quantity from Manipulus, an
handful, for it properly signifies an arm-full. Manus Christi is a sort of
Sugar, so called because it is put into Cordials for very weak People.
Marasmodes is a Fever which at last ends in a Consumption. Marisca, the same
that Ficus. Marmarygae are the Glistenings and Corruscations of the Eyes.
Marmelata, Marmelate, is the Juice of Quinces condensated into a Gelly with
Sugar; and is either plain or spiced, for the use of Families. Marmorata
aurium, Ear-wax, is a certain Excrement of the Ears, laid there in the auditory
Passage from the openings of the Arteries, or sweat out from the Cartilages.
Masseteres are Muscles of the lower Jaw, produced from the upper, and the jugal
Bone, they are connected to the lower Jaw, and can move it right-side,
left-side, and forward by reason of the various Disposition of Fibers.
Masticatio, chawing, is an Action whereby we mince the Meat, and mix it with
the Spittle cated Juice in the Mouth. Masticatorium is a Medicine which is
mastito provoke spitting. Mastoidei are Processes like Breasts or Dugs, which
from a broad Basis end in an obtuse top, and are shaped like Tears in a Cows
Udder: Also Muscles which bend the Head, proceeding from the Neck-bone and the
Breast Bone, terminating in the Process Mammiformis, i. e. like a Dug or Pap.
Mastos, the same that Mamma. Matter dura is a Membrane which sticks close to the
Scull within in some places, and mediately covers both the Brain and
Cerebellum, or little Brain; it has four Cavities which supply the place of
Veins, and come together betwixt the Brain and Cerebellum, which Conjunction
Herophilus calls torcular. Matter tenuis is a Membrane which immediately clothes
the Brain and Cerebellum, extremely full of sanguinary Vessels, made to keep in
the Spirits generated in the Brain and Cerebellum, that they fly not away.
Matracium is nothing but a little Sack, wherein is calcined Tartar or the like,
pricked here and there for the emission of Liquor. Matrix, the same that
Vterus. Maxilla superior, the upper Jaw Bone, has eleven Bones belonging to it,
five on each side, and one without a fellow. 1. In the lesser Corner of the
Eye. 2. In the greater Corner of the Eye. 3. Which is the greatest of all,
constitutes the whole Palate, and contains the upper Teeth. 4. With its Partner
constitutes the ridge of the Nose. 5. Is placed at the extremity of the Palate,
where the Holes of the Nostrils tend toward the upper part of the Gullet: See
Mandibula.
Maxilla inferior, the lower Jaw-borne is that which contains the under-Teeth;
it has a Process on each side, the foremost, called Corone, the hinder
Condylus. Meatus auditorius, the auditory Passage begins from the Cavity of the
inner part of the Ear, and is clothed with a thin Skin as far as the brim of
the Tympanum, or drum of the Ear: It Is use is to receive the Air and audible
Species, and to contain the Ear-wax. Meatus urinarius, see Vrethra. Meconium,
Opiate, or the condensed Juice of Poppies. Also the Excrements of a Faetus,
which stick to the Intestines after the Birth, so called from the Blackness of
Poppy-Juice. Meconologia is a Description of opium. Mediana Vena is the middle
Vein in the bending of the Cubit betwixt the Cephalic and Basilick: It is
safely opened, because there is neither Nerve nor Artery under it. Mediastinum
is a doubling of the Membrane of the sides, which divides the Lungs and other
Viscera of the Breast into two parts. It proceeds from the Vertebres of the
Back, and going on forward reaches the Breast Bone, and makes this Partition.
Medicamentum, a Medicine, is a convenient help, whereby Diseases are repelled
for the recovery of Health; and it is either actual, which affects the Body at
first touch with that Quality it is endowed with, as hot Iron, cold Water: Or
potential, whose Efficacy is not perceived till it be stirred up from some stay
in the Body, as Pepper, Raddish, sharp Salts, etc. Again, a Medicine is endowed
with first, or second, or third Qualities, all which depend upon the
Temperament and the various Motion of Particles in our Bodies. Medicine is
threefold, Chyrurgery, Physic, strictly so called, and Diet. Medicina,
Physic, is an Art assistant to Nature, and preserving Health in Human Bodies
as much as is possible by convenient Remedies. Senertus and others rightly
divide it into five parts: 1. Physiologia, which treates of Human Constitution,
as it is sound and well, to which belongs Anatomy too. 2. Pathalogia, which
treats of the preternatural Constitution of our Bodies. 3. Semiotica, which
treats of the signs of Health and Diseases. 4. Hygieina, which delivers Rules
of the Regimen to be observed in the Preservation of Health. 5. Therapeutica,
which teaches Diet, Chyrurgery, and Medicine. The general Division of Physic
is only into two parts; the Theory and the Practice; the Subject of Physic is
human Body, as curable; and its end and design Health. Hippocrates calls it a
long Art, and Paracelsus a short one; and certain Arabians a little one, but in
reality it is a long, a great, and noble Art.
Medicinalis dies, see Criticidies. Medicus, a Physician, is a Man highly
skilful in the art of Physic, modest, sober, and courteous. Scaliger describes
a Physician thus, That he ought to be a learned, honest, mild, diligent, a
fortunate Man, and of ripe Years, one that relies upon God, not arrogant with
his Knowledge, Labor or Success, nor covetous. Medius Venture; see Thorax.
Medulla in Mineralogia in the Description of Minerals, is that softish part
which is found in some Stones in Phytologia, or Description of Plants, it
signifies the middle, softer and more excellent part, which they call also Cor
and Matrix. Medulla cerebri is a white soft Substance, covered on the outside
with the barky Substance, which is more of an ashy Color; it makes that which
is called the Corpus callosum, or callous Body, within: Imagination and the
Distribution of Animal Spirits are performed there. Malpighius asserts that it
consists of innumerable Threads or Filaments. Medulla oblongata is the beginning
of the Spinal Marrow, whence arise the Nerves within the Scul, it descends to
the Os sacrum, through the Hole of the hinder part of the Head and the
Vertebres. It sends out ten pair of Nerves to the Chest, the Abdomen, and the
Limbs. It is called also the common Sensory, because that where the Original of
the Nerves is, there is the common place of the Reception of Species from the
external Senses. Medulla Ossium, Marrow in the Bones, is a fat Substance laid
up in the Cavities, or Porosities of the Bones by the Arteries; it is kept in a
Membrance, and is quite destitute of all Sense; it is red in the greater
Cavities, white in the less, soft and succulent in spungy Bones. We may imagine
likewise, that it is but a sweating of the Bones, in that they receive more
sulphurous fat Matter than they can convert into Nourishment, which afterward
flows to the inner part of the Bones by Ductus's and little Cavities for that
purpose, after that is received by the Veins, and communicated to the Blood.
Medulla spinalis, the spinal Marrow, or the tail of the Brain, is that part
which goes down the middle of the Back by the Vertebres, and is terminated at
the Os sacrum; it is also of the same nature and use with the Brain; it is a
Coagmentation of Nerves, and has the use of them; upwards it is forked; hence
if either party be obstructed there arises a Palsy of one side. It sends out
thirty pair of Nerves on each side to the Limbs, great Cavities, and other
parts of the Body. If it be washed with a convenient Liquor, it twill sever
into a great many little Fibers. Megalosphlanchnus is one who has great
swelling Bowels. Mela is a Chyrurgeons Instrument, called Specillum, the vulgar
call it Tenta, a Tent, from trying. It is made for the most part of Silver, or
Ivory, and that to probe Ulcers, or to draw the Stone out of the Yard, etc. It
is of different Shapes according as it is differently used. Melanagoga are
Medicines that expel black Choler. Melancholia is a Sadness without any evident
Cause, whereby People fancy terrible and sometimes ridiculous things to
themselves: It proceeds from the Degeneracy of the Animal Spirits from their
own spirituous saline Nature into an Acide, like the Spirit of Vitriol,
Box-tree, Oak, etc. Also it is called black Choler, or black Blood, Adust, and
Salino-sulphureous. Melas, see in Alphus. Meliceri is a Tumor shut up within a
Tunick, proceeding from matter like Honey, without Pain, round, yielding if
pressed, but quickly returning again. It seems to proceed from Lymphatick
Particles which do not circulate right, and which when the Moisture is
evaporated, leave a honyish-kind of Substance. Melicratum is a Drink made of
one part Honey, and eight parts Rainwater. Membrand is a nervous, fibrous,
broad, plain, white, and dilatable Substance, which covers the Bowels, the
great Cavities of the Body, the Muscles, etc. and is endowed with an exquisite
Sense. Membrana carnosa, the same that Panniculus carnosus. Membrana Vrinaria,
the same that Allantois. Membrum, a Member, is an organical Body, made up of
several similar parts, designed for the performance of voluntary Actions.
Memoria, Memory, is the retention of Marks or Footsteps impressed in several
places in the barky Substance, or folding Fibers of the Brain by the motion of
Objects. Memory resides in the substance of the Brain, called Corticalis, like
Bark. Mendosa Sutura, or Squammea, is a scaly Connection of Bones, as may be
seen in the Bone of the Temples, and the Bone of the fore part of the Head.
Meningophylax is that which preserves the Meninx or Membrane of the Head, as
thin Gold or Silver Plates, which are applied when the Skull is opened. Meninx,
see Matter dura and tenuis. Mensa is the broader part of the Teeth called,
Grinders, which chaws and minces the Meat. Menses, the Courses, are Excretions
of Blood every Month from the Womb, and not from its Neck or Passage called
Vagina. The cause thereof consists in a fermentative Matter, generated in the
Substance of the Womb; or a seminal Matter, infused into the Blood from the
Testicles, or Ovaria in a Woman, which being mixed with the mass of the Blood,
ferments it into such a motion, that it is forced to discharge it self every
Month. They begin usually when young Maids grow ripe, at twelve or fourteen,
but cease naturally in Women with Child, past Children, and those that give
suck. Menstrua alba, see Fluor albus. Menstruum Mulierum, see Menses. Menstruum
is that which is to be distilled, or a Liqour which corrodes Metals, and
dissolves Stones, as Vinegar, Aqua fortis, Spirit of Wine, etc. It may be taken
also for the Caput mortuum, which is left after Distillation. Mentagra is a
sort of wild Tetter or Ringworm, which was not known in Claudius's days.
Mesaraeum, the same that Mesenterium; whence its Vessels are called as well
Mesaraick, as Mesenterick. Mesaraica vasa, see in Mesaraeum. Mesenteria vasa,
see Mesaraeon. Mesenterium is the Membrane of the Peritonaeum doubled, enriched
with Glandules, Nerves, Arteries, Veins, Chyliferous and Lymphatick Vessels; it
is in the middle of the Abdomen, and contains the Intestines in a wonderful
manner. It has a great Glandule in the middle called Pancreas Asellis; about
which are several other less Glandules, to which the milky Vessels of the first
rank tend from the Intestines, and Lymphatick Vessels from the Liver and other
Parts; from these Glandules again the milky Vessels of the second rank ascend
to the Vessel that carries the Mass of Chyle, and discharge themselves into it.
Meseraeum, see Mesaraeum and Mesenterium. Mesocolon is that part of the
Mesentery which is continued to the great Guts. Mesonuctium is the middle of
the Night. Mesopleurii are the intercostal Muscles, twenty two on each side,
eleven external, and as many internal. Metabole is a change of Time, Air, or
Diseases. Metacarpus and Metacarpium is the back of the Hand, made of four
oblong little Bones, which expand the Palm of the Hand, and they are called
Post-Brachialia. Metacondyli are the utmost Bones of the Fingers. Metalepticus
is a Metaleptick Motion of the Muscles. Metallum, Metal, is a solid, rigid
Substance, found in Mountains and subterraneous Cavities. The several sorts of
them are comprehended in this Verse. Sol, Mars, Luna, Venus, Saturnus, Jupiter,
Hermes. Gold is the most solid Metal, the Tincture whereof is highly extolled
by the Chemists. Metallurgus, or Metallicus, is one who searches after Metalls,
as the Chemists. Metapedium, the same in the Foot, that Metacarpus is in the
Hand. Metaphrenum is that part of the Back which comes after the Diaphragme.
Metaptosis is the degenerating of one Disease into another, as of a Quartane
Ague into a Tertian; and on the contrary, of an Apoplexy into a Palsy, etc.
Metastasis is when a Disease goes from one part to another; which happens to
Apoplectick People, when the Matter which affects the Brain is translated to
the Nerves. Metasyncrisis is the Operation of the Medicine externally applied,
which fetches out the Humors from their closest Recesses. Metatarsus are the
five little Bones of the Foot, connected to the Bones of the first part of the
Foot, which immediately succeeds the Leg. Methodica Medicina is that which was
invented by Themison Laodiceus, and improved by Thessalus Trallianus, who said
that the Art might be learned in six Months time. Methodus is a part of Physic
whereby Remedies are found out by Indications for the Restoration of Health.
Metopum is the Forehead. Metrenchyta is an Instrument wherewith Liquors are
injected into the Womb. Miasma is a contagious Infection in the Blood and
Spirits, as in the Plague and Scurvy. Microcosmus, Man is called the little
World as a Compendium of the greater. Microphthalmus is one who has little Eyes
from his Birth. Miliaris herpes, see Herpes. Miserere mei, or Chordapsus, is a
most vehement Pain in the Guts, proceeding from an Inflammation of them, or
Involution and the peristaltick Motion inversed; whence the Excrements are
discharged by the Mouth. It is called also Volvulus. Mitella is a Swathe that
holds up the Arm when it is hurt or wounded. Miva is the Flesh or Pulp of a
Quince boiled up with Sugar into a thick Consistence. Mixtura is a solid or
liquid Substance mixed together of several Medicines. Mixtures are very
different according to the scope of the Physician; they are taken especially in
Drops or Spoonfuls, and sometimes in Draughts. They are made either of Liquors
only, such as are distilled Waters, Spirits, and Oils, any way mixed together,
as Waters with Waters, Oil with Oil, Waters with Spirits, etc. or of Liquors
with convenient Syrups, Pouders, Consections, Opiates, all of them together, or
only some. Mna, or Mina, an Attick Mna contains an hundred Drams, or twelve
Ounces and an half; the Roman, ninety six Drams, or twelve Ounces; the
Alexandrian, an hundred and sixty Drams, or twenty Ounces. Modiolus, Trepanum,
or Anabaptiston, is an Instrument which they use in profound Corruptions,
Contusions, Cuts and Fractures of Bones, not easily, tho to be, applied;
unless, 1. The Chips and Prominences of the Bones prick, 2. When the upper
Table is entire, but depressed, and the lower broken. 3. When the extravasated
Blood would choke a Man with Corruption. The manner of perforating is thus:
When the Hairs are shaven off, the Skin is to be cut to the Pericranium,
avoiding as prudently as may be the Muscles of the Temples and the Sutures, and
for this time the Wound is to be bound up, unless there be so little Blood
spilt, that the Membrane, called Pericranium, may at the same time be pulled
off from the Scull: Then after a few Hours you may stop the Ears of the
Patient, and take one of these Instruments called a Masculine Modiolus, whose
point is to be fixed in the Skull, but so far off the Fracture, that it touch
it not, much less the Suture, with its Teeth; tho some never avoid the Sutures,
and assure us that they have perforated them as successfully as any other part:
Then hold the Instrument fast with the left hand, and turn it round with the
right, till you have cut out a pretty deep Circle: After this take a Feminine
Modiolus (which has no point in the middle) and turn it round as before: In the
mean time take away the Dust that proceeds from the Perforation, and moisten
the Instrument in Oil and Water to make it cool and slippery: The Blood that
appears with show that you are now gone as deep as the second Table, i. e.
beyond the Scull to the Meninx, and then you must press very gently, lest the
Membrane of the Brain be unadvisedly hurt; when the Bone begins to wag, put
something in betwixt the sides of the Wound, loosen it, and take it out with a
pair of Surgeons Pincers. Mola, Patella, or Rotula, is a round and broad
Bone, at the joynting of the Thigh and Leg, where the Knee, excepting this
Bone, is begirt with a Membranous Ligament. Mola carnea, is a fleshy, and
sometimes a spungy Substance without Bones, or Bowels; it is often black like
concreted Blood; and sometimes extreme hard, preternaturally brought into the
World instead of a Faetus. Molares, or Maxillares Dentes; see Dentes.
Mollientia; see Emollientia. Melopes, Vibices, Enchymoma, Sugillationes, all
signify the same thing; red Spots like those which remain in the Skin after
beating, in malignant and pestilential Fevers. Molynsis, the same that Miasma.
Monocolum is the Gut Caecum. Monohemera are Diseases that are cured in one day.
Monopagia, see Monopegia. Menopegia is a sharp Pain in the Head, afflicting one
single place. Mons Veneris is the upper part of a Woman's Secrets, something
higher than the rest. Morbilli, the Meazles, are red Spots which proceed from
an aerial Contagion in the Blood, they neither swell nor are suppurated, and
differ only in degree from the Smallpox. Morbus, a Disease, is such a
Constitution of Body as renders us inapt for the due performance of our
Actions: Or, it is an ill Constitution in a Man which hurts any of our
Faculties, according to Sylvius de le Boc. Diseases are twofold, either from
an ill Conformation, or an Indisposition: An ill Conformation is six-fold, for
it sonsists in Number, Magnitude, Figure, Cavity, Surface and Situation:
Indisposition is either occult or manifest; the Occult is poisoned, contagious,
and pestilent; the Manifest s either simple, as hot, cold, moist, dry, etc. or
compound, when more Qualities than one are peccant at once, as cold and moist,
hot and moist, etc. There Is a Disease by Idiipothia, peculiar to ones self, by
Protopathia, when one has it first, by Deuteropathia, at second hand, and by
Sympathy. Also Diseases are simple or compound, gentle or malignant, short,
long, acute, continued, intermittent, hereditary, native, Pituitous, bilious,
melancholy, Summer, Winter, Autumnal, Epidemick, etc. Morbus Regius, the same
that Icterus. Moretum is a sort of Drink which our Women use much when they
think they have conceived, for they are persuaded that it spoils a false
Conception and strengthens a true one: It is so called from the Mulberries they
put in it. Moria, Dullness or Folly, or Stupidity, is a defect of Judgment and
Understanding; it proceeds chiefly from lack of Imagination and Memory.
Morosis, the same that Moria. Morphaea, the same that Alphus. Morselli, the
same that Morsuli. Morsuli, Tabellae, they are Medicines of a square Figure for
the most part, made of Powders and the like mixed with Sugar dissolved and
poured upon a wooden, stone, or brazen Table, to be consolidated. Morsus canis
rabidi, the same that Cynanthropia. Mortariola, are the Caverns wherein the
Teeth are lodged. Morum, the same that Pladarosis. Motos is a piece of Linen
teezed like Wool, which is put into Ulcers, and stops a Flux of Blood. Motus
Peristalticus, see Peristalticus. Muccus, the same that Mucus. Mucago is a
viscous Extraction, made of Seeds, Gums, Roots, etc. with Water. Mucilago, the
same that Mucago. Mucro cordis, or Apex, is the lower pointed end of the Heart.
Mucronatum os, see Ensiformis Cartilago. Mucus, we call it Snot, is a liquid,
thick, and viscous Excrement, which flows from the Processus Papillares by the
Os Cribriforme to the Nostrils and Palate. Muliebria, see Cunnus. Muscae caput,
the same that Myocephalum. Musculus, a Muscle, is an organical part furnished
with two Tendons, and a fibrous or fleshy Belly or middle part: Its Office is
to move the Members that are contiguous to it. This Motion or Contraction is
performed by the flowing of the Animal Spirits from the Brain to the Tendons by
the Nerves, and thence to the middle of the Muscles, where they contract them,
and when that is done, recede to the Muscles again. The Ancients divided the
Body of a Muscle into the Head, Belly, and Tail; in which division they called
the Extremity of the Muscle, connected to that part toward which the
Contraction was made, the Head; the end or part of the Muscle, inserted into
that part which was to be moved, the Tail; and lastly the intermediate part of
the Muscle, which is more swelled with Flesh, they called the Belly; and then
in the performance of Motion they supposed the Muscle was swelled about the
Head and Belly, and consequently shortened in its length, so that it drew the
Member, to which it was fastened, near to it. But how this was done they say
not. Muscles are destined either to the use of Cavities, or Limbs, and are
diversely denominated from their Shapes, Places where they are, and Actions they
perform. Mycteres are the Nostrils, or the Receptacles of pituitous Humors,
which distill out of the Brain by the Processus Papillares, the Extremities of
the Olfactory Nerves. Mydesis is Corruption or Rottenness from too much
moisture. Mydriasis is a too great Dilatation of the Pupil of the Eye which
makes the Sight dim. Myelos the Marrow of the Bones, or of the Brain, or Spinal
Marrow. Mile, the same that Molagenu. Myloglossum is a pair of Muscles which
arise about the back side of the grinding Teeth, and are inserted into the
Ligament of the Tongue, and are said to turn the Tongue upwards. Mylphae
signify the falling off of the Hairs of the Eyelids: Also Medicines against
the falling off of Hair. Myocephalum is the falling of the Tunica uvea just
begun, like the Head of a Fly, whence it has its Name. Myodes platysma is a
broad musculous Expansion in the Neck, proceeding there from a sort of a fat
Membrane. Myologia is a Description of Muscles. Myopia, is a certain Dimness of
sight in distant Objects, and yet a Perspicacity in things near at hand.
Purblindness. Myopiasis, the same that Myopia. Myops is one that is Purblind;
which is occasioned by this, that the Sunbeams, entering in too great a
quantity, represent the Object confusedly in the Brain. Myrach, is an Arabian
Word, and signifies the same that Epigastrium. Myracopum is an Ointment that
takes away Weariness. Myrmecia is a sort of Wart; they are harder and lower
than those fleshy Tumors called Thymi, take deeper Root, and occasion greater
Pain, broad below, small at top, and emit less Blood. They are scarce ever
bigger than a sort of Pulse called Lupines. They breed in the Palms of the
Hand, or the sole of the Foot. Myrinx, the same that Tympanum. Myron, the same
that Vnguentum. Myropola, is one that sells Ointments. Myrtum is a little piece
of Flesh in a Woman's Secrets, about the Cleft, proceeding from a Corrugation of
the Vagina. Mystax is the upper Lip and the Hairs upon it. Myurus is a
mutilated Pulse, increasing or decreasing gradually. Myxa is Snot, a pituitous
Humor, which descends from the Extremity of the olfactory Nerves to the
Nostrils.
N.
NAevi, Moles, are certain native Spots, and are twofold, either plain, or
protuberant, different in shape and color. They happen to Childbearing Women
from a false Imagination, Drunkenness, Ecstasy, etc. Narcosts is a privation of
Sense, as in a Palsy, or in taking of Opium, etc. Nacrotica are Medicines that
stupify, and allay Pain. Nascalia, the same that Errhina. Nascalia, are little
globular Bodies which are put into the Neck of the Matrix, made of the same
substance as Pessaria: see Pessaria. Nata, the same that Natta. Nates cerebri
are two round Prominences, behind the Beds of the Optic Nerves, which grow to
the upper part of the Marrowy Substance, they are small in Men, and larger in
Brutes. Natta is a great soft Tumor, without Pain and Color, which grows
especially in the Back, yet sometimes in the Shoulders; its Root is slender,
yet it increases so prodigiously that it will grow as big as a Melon, or a
Gourd; it is made of fat Matter; and therefore ought to be reckoned amongst the
Steatomata. See Steatomata. Natura, the same that Cunnus. Naturalis facultas, a
natural Faculty, is an Action depending chiefly upon the Cerebellum, whereby
the Body, without our notice, is nourished, increased, and preserved by the
Blood and Animal Spirits; upon which likewise all Excretions, Digestions, and
Generations depend. Naviculare os, called also Cymbiforme, is the third Bone in
each Foot, in that part of it which immediately succeeds the Leg. Necrosis is a
black and blew Mark in any part. Nectar is the drink of the Gods, as Ambrosia
is their drink. But with Physicians it signifies rather a Medicinal Drink, but
with a most delicious color, taste and smell. Nemomena, see Nomas. Nepenthes,
Opiate Laudunum, a Medicine worthy indeed of Praise. It signifies as much as
without Pain and Trouble, and by reason of the incomparably admired Effects it
produces, highly deserves the Name of Laudunum (a Word importing Praise.)
Nepenthes they say was Helen's Remedy, wherewith she expelled all Sorrow from
her Heart, and waxed merry and cheerful. Nephelae are small white Spots upon
the Eyes. Also little Clouds as it were that swim in the middle of Urine;
likewise little white Spots in the surface of the Nails like little Clouds.
Nephritica are Medicines against the Diseases of the Reins. Nephriticus is one
who is troubled with a Disease in the Reins. Nephritis is a Pain in the Reins,
proceeding either from an ill Disposition, or an Inflammation, or from the
Stone and Gravel, accompanied with Vomiting and Stretching of the Thigh.
Nephros is a Kidney, on each side of the Abdomen one, placed about the Loins
under the Liver and Spleen; it is shaped like a Kidney Bean: Its Substance is
made up of a great company of little Conduits. On both sides it receives the
Serum from the Glandules which border upon the Arteries, and carries it to the
little Bodies in the Reins called Carunculae Papillares (which see) that so it
may be discharged by the Pelvis, the Basin, the Ureters, the Bladder, etc.
Nervus, a Nerve, is a fibrous, round, long, white, porous Substance like an
Indian Cane, which conveys the Animal Spirits to make the parts of the Body
moveable and sensible. Ten pair of Nerves proceed from the oblongated Marrow
within the Scull: As the Odoratory, and Opthalmick Nerve, that which moves the
Eyes; the Pathetick, the Gustatory, or that which perceives Tastes; the Nerve
called Timidus or fearful, that which serves the Organ of Hearing; the
Parvagum, that which moves the Tongue, and the Muscles of the Neck. The
Ancients only acknowledge Seven pair within the Scull. Below the Scull they
reckon Thirty pair; seven from the Spinal Marrow in the Neck; twelve from the
same in the Back; five from the Loins, and six from the Os Sacrum: All the
Nerves below the Scull proceed from the Spinal Marrow, which pass through the
holes in the sides of the Vertebres, and are designed for the use of the Limbs
and great Cavities. A Nerve, a Tendon, and a Ligament are impertinently taken
for one and the same thing by Surgeons. Neurodes is a sort of lingering
Fever, so called by the most Learned Willis; because that the nervous Juice,
departing from its own right natural Crasis, becomes the occasion of an
Atrophae. Neurologia is an elegant Description of the Nerves, which Willis has
performed beyond any Man whatsoever. Neuron, the same that Nervus. Neurotica
are Remedies against the Diseases of the Nerves. Neurotomia is an Anatomical
Section of Nerves; also a pricking of Nerves. Neurotomus is one who is troubled
with a pricking of the Nerves. Or one who dissects them Anatomically.
Neuritica, the same that Neurotica. Nidrosa Dyspepsia; see Dyspepsia. Nidus,
the same that Focus. Noctambulo, or Noctambulus, is one who walks in his Sleep,
opens Doors and Windows, and goes over the highest and most dangerous Places
without perceiving it: The Cause of it is hardly to be given, unless Sleep be
divided into Total and Partial; the Total is common ordinary Sleep, but the
Partial takes place in this case, because that Objects are seen indeed, and are
offered to the common Sensory, but penetrate not to the place of Imagination,
so that they may be perceived. Nodulus, Nodus, is a Bag of suitable Ingredients
as the Disease requires, put into Beer or Wine, the Tincture whereof the
Patient is to drink. Nodus, the same that Ganglion and Nodulus. Noli me tangere
is a sort of Canker in the Face, especially above the Chin. There arises a
Tumor or Ulcer about the Mouth and Nose, like an exulcerated Canker, which
grows slowly at the beginning, like a little Pimple; it remains a whole Year,
otherwise is less troublesome than a Canker, which gnaws and eats more in one
Day than a Noli me tangere does in a Month. Nomas is a putrid Ulcer that feeds
upon the parts. Nosocomium is an Hospital for poor sick People, where they are
attended, and cured, if possible. Nosologia, the same that Pathalogia. Nosos,
the same that Morbus. Notae maternae, the same that Naevius. Nothae costae are
the five lowest Ribs on each Side, called Bastard Ribs, so called because they
do do not join with the Breast Bone as other Ribs, nor are as the others Boney
but Cartilaginous. Diseases are likewise called Nothi, or Bastard, which exceed
the ordinary and common Rule; as tertain, quartane, or quotidian Bastard Agues;
a Bastard Plurify. etc. Nothis is the Back, the back part of the Chest.
Novacula is a Surgeons Knife, the shape whereof differs according to the
difference of Operations: And therefore can hardly be described. Nubeculae are
little light Particles which mutually, but loosely, close with one another, and
swim upon the Urine. Nucha is the hinder part, or nap of the Neck, called
Cervix. Nuciositas, the same that Myopia. Numero, not only Fruits and Seeds are
measured by Number, but likewise the parts of Animals, as Yolks of Eggs. It is
commonly noted thus, No or Number. Nutrimentum, the same that Alimentum. Nutritio
is a natural Increase, whereby that which continually decays of any corporeal
Substance, is repaired by convenient Nourishment. Nux is a sort of Pain in the
Head, which afflicts a place about as big as a Nut; as an Ovum, a Clavus, and
other sorts. Nychthemerum is four and twenty hours space. Nyctalopia is
twofold: the first is a Dimness of Sight in the Night, or in dark Places,
without any Impediment in the Light: The other is a Dimness in the Light, and
clear Sight in the Night, or in Shades. Nymphae are little pieces of Flesh in a
Woman's Secrets. So called because they stand near the Water that comes out of
the Bladder. Also the hollowness or void space in the nether Lip. Nymphomania,
the same that Furor Vterinus. Nymphotomia is a cutting off the Nymphae, the too
great Protuberance whereof in marriageable Virgins sometimes hinders the
Enjoyment, or at least renders it difficult. The Egyptians cut them frequently.
O.
OBelaea is the Sagittalis Suture in the Scull (see Sagittalis) which touches
the Coronalis Suture forward, and the Lamdoides backward; for it is made of the
mutual Conjunction of the Bones of the Forehead. Oblatae Laxativae and
Purgantes are made of Meal with Sugar and purging Ingredients. Oblivio,
Forgetfulness, is a loss of the Ideas of Things once perceived out of the
Brain. Which happens when things make but a light Impression upon the Brain; as
a light Motion is scarce perceived, so a light Impression easily decays. Obolus
is half a Scruple; it weighs ten Grains. Physicians mark it thus, but now the
Hollanders do not use this Character. Obstructio is a shutting up of the
Passages of the Body either by Contraction, or by some foreign Body that has
entered within them. Occiput is the hinder part of the Scull. Ochema is a
Liquor or Vehicle wherewith Medicines are mixed. Ochthodes are Ulcers whose
sides are callous, or of the nature of Warts, but not malignant. Oculares
dentes, the Eye-Teeth: The same that Cynodontes. Oculus, the Eye, is the
external Organ of Sight; it is compounded of six Muscles, to wit of two Direct,
and as many Transverse, to which a seventh is added in Brutes. It has seven
Tunics, the Adnata, Innominata, Cornea, Wea, Retiformis, Chrystallina, and
Vitrea. It has also the Optic Nerve, the Iris, and the Pupilla. See them
singly in their proper places. Oculi are the forerunners of Flowers, which are
likewise called Gemmae, Buds. Odaxismus is the itching of the Gums, when
Children breed Teeth. Odontagra, see Forfex. Odonthalgia is the Teeth-ach;
which is caused by black rotten Teeth, or an Effervescence of fixed and acid
Salt; and therefore it is called the Gout in the Teeth. Cold also will cause
it. Odontiasis, the same that Dentitio, and Odontophyia. Odontica are Medicines
against Pains in the Teeth. Odontoides, that which is like a Tooth; as the
Tooth of the second Vertebre, and of other Bones. Odontophyja, breeding of
Teeth. Odoramentum is a Medicine applied for its Smell. It is compounded of
Laudunum, Storax, Benzoin, Musk, Civet, etc. Odoratus, the Smell, is a Sense
whereby odoriferous Effluviums are offered and represented to the common
Sensory, from the Motion and Irritation of Nerves, implanted in the Membranes
of the Nose. Oeconomia is the management of Family-Concerns. Oedema is
sometimes taken in a large Sense by Hippocrates, for any Tumor, but strictly
for a white, soft, insensible Tumor proceeding from pituitous Matter heaped up
together. It has no Pulse, and yields easily to the Fingers. It may proceed
likewise in some measure from the Lympha or nutritious Juice extravasated and
turned into a Gelly. Oenoides is diluted Wine, or a Liquor Analogous to Wine.
Oenomel is Wine and Honey. Oesophagaeus is a Muscle that closes the Gullet,
called Sphincter. Oesophagus, the Gullet, is a membranaceous Pipe reaching from
the Palate to the Stomach, whereby the Meat, chawed in the Mouth and mixed with
the Juice there, passes to the Ventricle: It has three Tunics; the outermost or
membranaceous Tunic, which comes from the Peritonaeum, or inner rine of the
Belly, and clothes the Ventricle. The innermost is Musculous; the whole
Oesophagus seems to consist of two Muscles, which with their opposite Fibers
crossing one another make four Parallelograms. The Third is altogether Nervous,
which is covered on the inside with an hairy sort of Coat, and which may pass
for a fourth Tunic. Oesypus, the Filth and Greasiness of Sheep, proceeding of
Sweat, and cleaving fast to their Wool. Therefore they are mistaken who take
it to signify the little Clods of Dung that stick to their Wool. Olecranum, or
Ancon, is the greater Process of the first Bone of the Cubit called Vlna. Also
the upper part of the Shoulder. Olecranus, the same that Anconaeus. Olfactus,
the same that Odoratus. Oligophoros is a small Wine, with few Spirits.
Oligotrophia is a Decrease of Nutrition. Oligotrophus is Meat that nourishes
little, to which is opposed Polytrophus, that which affords much Nourishment.
Omentum, Reticulum, the Cawle, is a double Membrane spread upon the Intestines,
interwoven with Fat and Vessels like a Fisher's Net, enriched also with two or
three Glandules, annexed to the Stomach, the Gut Colon, and the Pancreas, and
useful to cherish the Intestines with its warmth: It has some milky and
Lymphatic Vessels, as also a great many Ductus's and little Bags of Fat,
concerning which see our Reformed Anatomy. Omoplata, and Homoplata, the same
that Scapula. Omphalocele is a Rupture about the Navel, to wit, when the Cawle
or Intestines are protuberant in that part: Which happens from a Relaxation, or
bursting of the Peritonaeum, the inner rine of the Belly. Omphalos, see
Vmbilicus. Onyx, see Vnguis. Ophiasis is when the Hairs grow thin and fall off
here and there, so that they leave the Head spotted like a Serpent. Opthalmia
is an Inflammation of the Tunics of the Eyes, proceeding from arterious Blood,
collected and extravasated there, because it cannot return by the Veins.
Opiata, or Electuarium, is a Medicine taken inwardly, of a consistence like to
those Opiates in the Shops, (Triacle or Mithridate) and is made up into several
Doses of several Ingredients mixed with Honey or Syrup. Opiatum is a Medicine
in form of an Electuary with Opiate mixed in it: As Triacle, Mithridate,
Dias-Cordium, etc. Opiologia is a Description of Opium. Opisthotonus, or
Tetanus, is a kind of Cramp, or stretching of the Muscle of the Neck backwards;
which proceeds sometimes from a Palsy of the Muscles in the Neck, whereupon the
Antagonists or opposite Muscles move the intermediate parts too much; or from a
sharp and serous Matter in the Tendons; or from the Animal Spirits which enter
the Fleshy Pipes more than is usual and will not easily recede, so that the
parts are swelled and wrinkled up. Opium is the condensed Juice of Poppies; the
purest Opium is made of white Drops. Opticus Nervus, or Visorius, the Optic
Nerve is that which carries the visible Species from the Eye to the common
Sensory. The Nerves of both Eyes proceed from the Thalami of the Optic Nerves,
afterward these Nerves come together, and as they enter the Scull separate
again. Optica are Medicines against Distempers of the Eyes. Orchis is a
Testicle, whose Substance in Men is nothing else but a Contexture of very
little Vessels which make the Seed: But it is quite otherwise in Women; where
they are made of several Membranes and little Fibers loosely united to one
another, betwixt which several white Bodies are found, which are there either
naturally or preternaturally: The Testicles of Women breed Eggs, and therefore
they are rightly called Ovaria. They are also called Testes, Colei. Orchotomus
is a Gelder: One who gelds Animals that they cannot copulate. Orexis is a
Natural Appetite of Meat, which proceeds from an acid Ferment in the Ventricles
that comes from the Caeliac Arteries, with which the nervous Tunic of the
Stomach and its Nerves are extraordinarily moved to covet Nourishment. Organum
is a part which requires a right and determinate and sensible Conformation to
its constitution and the performance of its Actions; as an Arm, Muscle, Heart,
etc. Orgasmus is an Impetus and quick Motion of Blood or Spirits; as when the
Animal Spirits rush violently upon the Nerves. Oroboidcs is a subsiding in
Urine, like to a kind of Pulse called Vetches. Orthocolon is a preternatural
Rectitude of a Joint. Orthopnaea is an ill Respiration, when the Person
affected cannot breathe but with his Neck erect. Os, a Bone, is an hard, dry,
and cold Substance, consisting especially of earthy and saline Particles,
designed for the upholding of the Body, to render its Motion easy, and for a
Fence for several parts. Some make their Number 249, others commonly 304, and
others as many as the Days of the Year. Yet the number of them is uncertain,
because the Bones of Infants differ from those of Adult Persons. Also because
the Bones called Sesamoidea (see them in their proper place) and the Teeth are
not determined to a certain number in old Men and Adult Persons. They are of
different Shapes, some are round, others plain, acute, obtuse, hollow, spungy,
solid, oblong, triangular, etc. A Nut-Shell is also called Ossiculum.
Oscitatio, Yawning, is a certain light convulsive Motion of Muscles which open
the lower Jaw of the Face. Some look upon it as a light Motion whereby
Excrementitious and Halituous Matter, which irritates the neighboring parts,
is expelled. Oscula are the openings of Vessels at the end. Osculum uteri is
the Cavity where Conception is made and the Man's Yard enters; it is so small in
Maids that it can only receive the bigness of a small Pen we use for Writing
Tables, and you cannot thrust your least Finger into it by any means; the
Courses flow out of it. It sticks out in the Vagina, and is like the Mouth of a
Tench, or, as Galen will rather have it, like the Nut of a Man's Yard; it has a
transverse cleft; in Virgins it is very small, but grows bigger in Women who
have had many Children; if it be too much stretched, or exulcerated, covered
over with a Scarr, or too moist, Barrenness follows thereupon. Osteologia is a
Description of Bones. Osteon, see Os. Ostocopi, are Pains in the Bones, or
rather in the Membranes and Nerves about the Bones: For Bones as such are
insensible. Otalgia is a Pain in the Ears, whencesoever it proceeds. Otenchyta
an auricular Clyster. Celsus calls it, Oegin. A little Syringe or Squirt which
injects Medicines into the Ears. Otica are Medicines against Distempers in the
Ears. Ovarium is a Woman's Testicle. Oviductus, the same that Tuba Fallopiana.
Ovum is a sort of pain in the Head affecting a place about the bigness of an
Egg. Oxelaeum is a mixture of Vinegar with Oil. Oxycratum is a mixture of
Vinegar with Water, called Pusca or Posca. Oxydercica are Medicines which
quicken the Sight. Oxygala is sour Milk. Oxymel is a composition of Vinegar
and Honey, like a Syrup. Oxyregmia is an acid sour Belch from the Stomach.
Oxyrhodinum is Vinegar of Roses, mixed with Rose Water, or so. SY NO'SHMA, the
same that Morbus acutus. Ozoena is an Ulcer in the inside of the Nostrils that
smells ill.
P.
PAchuntica are Medicines of a thickning nature, but withal cold, and full of
thick and boughy parts, which if they are mixed with a thin Juice, by joining
and stifning the Parts one with another, make a more Dense and firm Composition
as Bole-armoniack, Mill-dust, Water Lillies, Almonds, Poppies, etc.
Paedotropica is a part of Hygrena that concerns the Management of Boys. Palatum
the Palate is the upper part of the Mouth, which because it somewhat resembles
the upper part of an House, is thence called the Roof of the Mouth. Palliatio,
or Cura Palativa, is a Medicine which helps (as much as is possible) incurable
Diseases by the Application of present Remedies. Palindrome is a Disease into
which one relapses. Palma is the inside of a Man's Hand, which we call the
Palm. Palmus is a Shivering, or palpitation of the Heart, caused by a
Convulsion, or Irritation of the Nerves; the cause whereof consists in the
Blood or nervous Juice, or in the Water in the Membrane that covers the Heart.
Palpebrae are the Coverings of the Eyes, made up of a Skin, a fleshy Membrane,
Muscles, a Tunick, and another little Skin called Tarsus, with Hair upon the
uppermost Skin: They are either the upper or the under Eyelids. Palpitatio
cordis naturalis, the natural Palpitation of the Heart, is in the Systole
thereof, whilst the Cone and the Sides are pressed together, the Basis and the
Roots of the Vessels, being blown up with the Blood that gathers there, grows
big and swollen. It often proceeds from an extraordinary Contraction of the Heart,
or a thick and irritating Matter which sticks in the Heart. Panacaea is a
general sort of Physic for all Diseases indifferently; but I question if there
be any such thing. Many People brag much of Tobacco, Tincture of the Sun, the
Philosophers-stone, vitriolated Tartar, etc. Panaritium, vid. Paronychia.
Pancaenus, vid. Pandemius. Panchymagoga are purgative Medicines that expel all
corrupt Humors. Pancreas, the Sweetbread, Pancration, Pancreon, Callicreas,
Callicreon, and Lactes, are all synonimous. It is a conglomerated Glandule in
the Abdomen, placed behind the Ventricle, and fastened to the Gut Duodenum, and
reaches as far as the Liver and the Spleen; the Use and Office thereof is to
convey a volatile, Insipid, and Lymphatick Juice, or as others will have it
(for it is a disputable Point) a something acid Juice, by its own Ductus to the
Gut Duodenum, in order to a farther Fermentation and Volatilisation of the
Chyle, and to attemperate and allay the Qualities of the Gall: It is the
biggest Glandule in the whole Body, but bigger in a Dog than a Man. Pandalea,
as the modern Physicians call it, is the same with a solid Electuary, but that
it remains entire, for the Sugar being rightly boiled is let grow hard; the
Patient takes a piece of it like a Lambative; it only in the shape differs from
Rolls and Morsels. Pandemius is a Disease which is rife in some places or
other. Pandiculatio is a certain Dilatation and convulsive Distension of the
Muscles, by which the Vapors that annoy them are cast off. Panicus is a sudden
Fear or Consternation. Panniculus Carnosus is a fat sort of Membrane, in some
parts thick and musculous; in other parts thin, with many Ductus's of Fat in
it; it covers the whole Body. Panus is a sort of Botch or Sore under the
Armpits, Jaws, Ears, and Groins, to wit, in the Glandulous Parts. It is also
taken for Phygethus. Papillae Intestinorum are little Glandules wherewith the
in-most Tunick of the Entrails is full, they soak in the percolated Chyle, and
dispense it to the lacteal Veins. Papilla is a red Excrescency in the middle of
the Breast, in the Pores whereof are received all the milky Tubes or Pipes,
proceeding from the Glandules of the Breasts. Papillarum processus are the
Extremities of the Olfactory Nerves, which convey the slimy, viscous Humors by
the Fibers, which perforate the Os cribriforme to the Nostrils and Palate.
Papulae, vid. Pustulae, also a kind of small Pox. See Exanthemata.
Paracelsistica Med. vid Hermetica. Paracentesis, or Punctio, is a Perforation
of the Chest and Abdomen through a cuspidate Channel: It hapens in the Breast
when it is stuffed with putrified Matter, or Water, and then there is a pricking
in the side between the fifth and sixth Vertebre. It happens in the Abdomen,
when it is swelled by a Dropsy near the white Seam in the Abdomen, in the
Muscles that either ascend right or oblique. If a Man be strong and has taken a
Purge, and also his Lungs, and the rest of his Entrails be uncorrupted, when
the Navel does protuberate, don't look another way, for there you must make the
Incision; don't let Purulency and Water come out both together, for that were
to kill the Patient, but one after the other, as in seven days a pound, or a
pound and an half as the Patient can endure it: After the Operation is
finished, draw the Wound up with an astringent Plaster: If the inward Vessels
and Passages be broke through this pricking, it is to no purpose to endeavor
the Cure. Paracheteusis, vid. Derivatio. Paracmastica is a daily declining
Fever, also declining Age. Paracme, vid. in Acme. Parachynanche is an
Inflammation with a continual Fever and difficulty of Breathing, excited in
the outward Muscles of the Larynx. Paralysis is an Aboition of voluntary
Motion, or Sense, or both, either in all the Body, or only some part. It comes
by either an Obstruction, Obscission, Contusion, or pressing of the Nerves, or
by an Indisposition, or ill Conformity of the Muscles. Paramesus is the next
Finger to the middle one, called the Ring-finger. Paraphimosis is a fault of
the Yard, when the Praeputium's too short; also a Narrowness and Contraction of
the Womb. Paeraphrenitis is Madness accompanied with a continual Fever through
the Inflammation of the Midriff, with difficulty of breathing as the Ancients
dreamed. But Dr. Willis has confuted this Opinion of it, and says the matter of
it lies in the Cerebellum, whereby the Animal Spi-Spirits cannot flow, and
thence the Midriff and Lungs are troubled. Paraphrosyne is a slight sort of
Doting in the Imagination and Judgment. Paraphlegia is a Palsy which seizes
all the parts of the Body below the Head, through an Obstruction of the spinal
Marrow. Paraplexia, idem quod Paraplegia. Pararythmus is a preternatural
Breathing. Parastatae, vid. Epididymis. Parasananche is an Inflammation of the
Muscles of the upper part of the Aesophagus with a continued Fever.
Paremptosis is a falling, as when Blood slides from the Heart into the great
Artery. Parencephalos, idem quod Cerebellum. Perenchymata are Entrails by which
the Blood passes for better Fermentation and Perfection, as the Lungs, Liver,
Heart, and Spleen, etc. Sometimes Parenchyma is taken in a large Sense for all
the Entrails. Paristhmia, or Amygdalae, are two Glandules tied together by a
broad slender Production, they have one common Cavity large and oval, opening
into the Mouth; the Use they serve for is, to transmit a certain slimy or
pituitous Matter into the Jaws and Mouth: They are called also Tonsillae.
Paronychia is a preternatural Swelling in the Fingers end very troublesome; it
rises from a sharp, malign Humor; which can gnaw the Tendons Nerves, the
Membrane about the Bone, and the very Bone it self. Parotides are Glandules
behind the Ears, also a preternatural Swelling of those Glandules. Paroxysmus a
Fit, is part of the Period of Diseases, whereby they increase and grow worse.
It is either Ordinate, which returns at certain times, as in a Tertian Ague; or
Inordinate, that has no certain time, but comes sometimes one day, sometims
another, as the Erratick Ague. Pars, a part, is a Piece of the whole serving
each for their proper Uses. The Parts are either sensible or insensible,
spermatick or bloody, similar, or the contrary; organical or inorganical,
principal or inservient. Partus is the bringing forth of a Mature Faetus, or
Young, in natural Births. The Faetus having broken the Membranes, turns his
Head forward, and inclining it toward the neck of the Womb, strives to get
forth; the usual manner is after nine Months; yet I have known some at
Amsterdam born at seven Months, who have lived to fifty or sixty. Partus
Caesareus is when Children are forced for want of Passage to be cut out. Partus
difficilis, idem quod Dystocia. Parylis is an Inflammation, Rottenness, or
Excrescency besides the Gums. Passio, vid. Pathema. Pastillum is a sweet Ball
composed of sweet Dust, Wax, the Gum-Storax, and India-Balsam with a little
Goats-flower and Turpentine; it serves for Swelling. Patella, vid. Mola Genu.
Pathema is all preternatural Conturbation wherewith our Body is molested.
Patheticus is the Nerve of the fourth pair within the Scull, as Dr. Willis
says, tho Fallopius reckons it one of the eighth pair. Pathognomonicum is a
proper separable Sign, which agrees only to such a thing, and to all of that
kind, and tells the Essence of its Subject, and also lasts from the beginning
to the and; as in a true Plurisy, there is always a continual Fever, hard
Breathing, and Stitches, and a Cough. Pathologia is a part of Physic that
teaches us the preternatural Constitution of a Man's Body. Pathos, vid.
Pathema. Pectoralia pectoral Medicines, are such, as either by attenuating, or
thinking, or allaying, render the Matter which causes coughing fit to be
expectorated. Pectus is the fore-most part of the Thorax reaching from the
Neck-bone down to the Midriff. Pedicularis Morbus, vid. Phthiziasis. Pedium,
vid. Tarsus. Pelicanatio Chymica, vid. Circulatio Chymica. Pelidnus is a black
and blew Color in the Face, frequent in Melancholic Men. Pelvis is the place
at the bottom of the Belly, wherein the Bladder and Womb are contained. Pelvis
Aurium, vid. Cochlea. Pelvis Cerebrs, vid. Choana. Pelvis Renum is a membranous
Vessel or Receptacle in either Vein, which receives the Urine and pours it into
the Bladder. Pemphigodes Febris is a Spotted Fever; some say a windy, a
flatulent Fever. Penis is the Yard, made up of two nervous Bodies, the Channel,
Nut, Skin and Foreskin, etc. Penis Muliebris, vid. Clytoris. Pepansis is a
rectifying and bringing to order of the vitiated and corrupt Humors. Pepasmus
is a Concoction, or rather a Fermentation, or ripening of preternatural
Humors; which is twofold, One tends to an end, as in an Inflammation; the
Other has no Fermentation, as when it cannot conquer the Disease. Pepasticum
is a Medicine that allays and digests the Crudities. Pepsis is the Concoction
or Fermentation of the Humors and Meat in a Man's natural Constitution, as
when Meat is turned into Chyle, and that into Blood. Peracutissimus Morbus,
vid. Acutus M. Peracutus, vid. Acutus. Perfecta Crisis, vid. Crisis. Periamma
is a Medicine which being tied about the Neck, is believed to expel Diseases,
especially the Plague. Periaptum, vid. Periamma. Pericardium is a Membrane
which surrounds the whole Substance of the Heart, and contains a Liquor in it
to refrigerate the Heart. Pericholus very Choleric. Pericranium is a Membrane
which infolds the Scull. Perinaeum is the ligamentous Seam betwixt the Cod and
the Fundament. Periodus Morborum is the space betwixt the coming of fits of
Sickness in intermitting Diseases. Periodus Sanguinis is a continued
Circulation of the Blood through the Body, which is thus. The Blood is carried
out of the Arteries by Fibers, either of the Flesh or of the Entrails, or the
membranous parts to the Mouths of the greater Veins. Now we say that those
Fibers are terminated at the Mouths of the Veins, and implanted in them, as we
see many other little Channels in the Veins; so the Blood, passing through
these out of the Arteries, is presently sent to the Veins, that it may be
carried back again to the right Ventricle of the Heart; and thence by an
arterious Vein to the Lungs, in which after the Blood has been accended by some
nitrous Particles, breathed in thither by the Air, it goes into the veinous
Artery, thence into the left Ventricle of the Heart; which again empties it
self into the Aorta or great Artery; so that the Body may be nourished and
enlivened, it goes into every part of it. Periosteum is a thin Membrane that
incloses immediately the Bones, except a few. Peripheria is the Circumference
of the Body, or any Entrail thereof. Periphimosis, vid. Phimosis. Peripneumonia
is an Inflammation of the Lungs accompanied with a sharp Fever, hard Breathing,
a Cough, and an heavy Pain. Perisistole is the time of Rest between the
Contraction and Dilatation of the Heart. Peristalticus Motus is a Crawling as
it were of the Entrails, whereby the Excrements are voided. Also the motion of
the Vessels whereby Humors, as Water, Chyle, the Blood, etc. ascend and
descend. Peristromata are the sick Man's Bed-clothes; also the Tunicks about the
Entrails. Peritonaeum is a Membrane which clothes the whole Abdomen on the
inside, and its Entrails on the outside: It consists of two Tunicks. Perittoma
is an Excrement in the Body, lest after Digestion: Also the Relics of
Diseases. Pernio is a preternatural Swelling caused by the Winter Cold,
especially in the Hands and Feet, which at last breaks out. Perona is also
called Fibula, because it joins the Muscles of the Leg, whence the first and
second Muscle in the Leg is called Peronaeus. It is the less and slenderer
Bone, which is fastened outwardly to the greater Bone of the Leg, called Tibia.
Peronaeus, vid. Perona. Perperacutus, vid. Acutus. Passarium is an oblong
Medicine, which being made like the middle Finger, is thrust up into the neck
of the Womb, and is good against several Diseases incident to it. Pessulus, the
same. Pessus, the same. Pestis the Plague, is an epidemick contagious Disease,
arising from a poisonous and too much exalted Nitre in the Air, which secretly
takes a Man, extinguisheth the Spirits, clods the Blood, deads the sound parts,
and is accompanied with Botches, Boils, and a train of other dreadful
Symptoms. Pestaloides is a sort of Urine which seems to have little Leaves or
Scales in it. Petechialis is a malignant Fever, called also Pulicaris, because
it makes the Skin look as tho it were Flea-bitten. Petia is Stuff that certain
Physicians Bags are made of. Petigo, vid. Lichen. Petrosum Os is the inside of
the Bones of the Temples, so called from the Hardness thereof. Phacia, vid.
Lenticula. Phacos is a Spot in the Face like a Nit, whence it is called
Lenticula and Lentigo. Phacotos is a Chirurgical Instrument. Phenomaena are
preternatural Appearances in the Body. Phagadena is an exulcerate Cancer.
Phalacrosis is a falling off of the Hair. Phalangosis is a fault of the
Eyelids, when there are two rows of Hair, or when the Hair grows inward and
offends the Eyes. Phalanx is the Order and rank observed in the Finger-Bones.
Phantasia is an internal Sense or Imagination, whereby any thing is represented
to the Mind, or impressed in it. It seems to be a certain Undulation, or waving
of the Animal Spirits in the middle of the Brain, which are afterward expanded
toward its Circumference. Phantasma is the same with Phantasia. Pharmacum is
any sort of Medicine against a Disease. Pharmaceutica the same that Pharmaca.
Pharmacia is an art of collecting, choosing, and compounding Medicines: The
Apothecary's Art. Pharmacopaea is the Doctrine, or a Description of things
physical in order to cure. Pharmacopaeus is a Man that understands to make up
Medicines; he is called the Right Hand of a Physician, and a Surgeon the left.
Pharyngetrum is sometimes used for the Pharinx, sometimes for the Bone Hyades.
Pharyngotomia, vid. Laryngotomia. Pharynx is the upper part of the Gullet,
consisting of three pair of Muscles. Philtrum is the hollow dividing the upper
Lip; also a Love-cup. Phimosis, the same that Paraphimosis; also the Inversion
of the Eyelids through an Inflammation. Phleborragia is the breaking of a
Vein. Phlebotomia opening of a Vein. Phebotomus the Blood-letter; also an
Instrument called a Phleme. Phlegma is a slimy Excrement of the Blood, caused
often by too much nitrous Air: It is likewise a watery distilled Liquor,
opposite to spirituous Liquor; also those Clouds which appear upon distilled
Waters. Hippocrates uses it often for an Inflammation: It is also the Disease
of Hens, called the Pip, and is sometimes taken for a viscous Excretion.
Phlegmagoga are Medicines to drive away the Phlegm. Phlegmasia an
Inflammation, Heat or Burning. Phlegmatici those that are much troubled with
Phlegm. Phlegmone is a Tumor of the Blood in the Flesh or Muscles, causing
Heat, Redness, Beating and Pain. Phlegmonodes is an Inflammation like the
former. Phlogosis the same that Phlegmone. Phlyctaena is a Pimple in the Skin;
also a little Ulcer in the corneous Tunick of the Eye. Phlyctenodes are hot
watery Pustules, like the former. Phaenygmus is a Medicine that makes the Skin
red. Phrenes, vid. Diaphragma. Phrenesis the same with Phrenitis. Phrentiasis
the same. Phrenetici Nervi are those which belong to the Midriff. Phrenetis is
a Dotage with a continual Fever, often accompanied with Madness and Anger,
proceeding from too much Heat in the Animal Spirits, not from the Inflammation
of the Brain, as the Ancients thought. Willis thus defines it, namely, an
Inflammation of the whole sensitive Soul and Animal Spirits. Phricodes is a
dreadful Fever, whereby besides the Heat, Men fancy terrible things.
Phtharticum is a corrupting Medicine. Phthirasis is the lousy Disease; also a
skaly Scab of the Eyebrows. Phthisicus, a Man in a Consumption. Phthisis a
Consumption of the whole Body, rising from an Ulcer in the Lungs, accompanied
with a slow continued Fever, smelling Breath and a Cough. Phthoe, the same.
Phygethlon is a Swelling proceeding from an Inflammation of the Glandules,
wherein Nature expels something; as in the Plague about the Groins. Phyma is a
Swelling: There are five sorts, Verrucae, Calli, Vari Farunculi, and Hydroa, or
Desadationes. Of which in their order. Others reckon it a Tumor in the
Glandules only, which quickly suppurates. Phymatodes, like the former. Physema
an Inflammation in any part of the Body, as a Tympany; also the Rosine of the
Pine. Physesis, the same. Physiognomica are Signs whereby we conjecture
something by the Countenance. Physiognomia is the Art of knowing Natures.
Physiologia is a part of Physic, that teaches the Constitution of the Body, so
far as it is sound. Physocele, vid. Pneumatocele. Physodes that which is very
flatulent. Pia Matter, vid. Matter tenuis. Pica, vid. Citta. Picatio, vid.
Iropacisinus. Picra, vid. Hiera picra. Pichrocholus a Man troubled with a black
Bile. Pilula is a solid Medicine, made like a little Ball of Powder, Gums,
Extracts, etc. mixed with a glutinous Liquor. Pili, the Hairs, are round,
oblong, slender Bodies, consisting of much Sulphur and Earth; and of different
Colors according to the difference of the Constitution: They grow out at the
Pores of the Skin, that the vapors may may more easily exhale through them, as
through so many little Tubes or Pipes. I have discovered through my Microscope
several little Knots or Valves in them. Pinealis Glandula, vid. Conarium.
Pinguedo, vid. Adeps. Pinna Auris is the upper and broader part of the Ear,
called the Wing. Pittacium is a little Cloth spread with a Medicine, and
applied to the part affected. Pituita, vid. Phlegma. Pituitaria Glandula, vid.
Glandula pituitaria. Pityriasis, vid. Fupfurratio. Pityroides a settling in the
Urine like Bran. Placenta Vterina is a red Substance, like the Liver, full of
Glandulous Kernels: It has an Artery and a Vein from the Navel-string, and
perhaps lymphatick Vessels from the neighboring parts; outwardly sticks to the
Womb, to either side indifferently, yet more commonly to the middle; within it
is covered with the Chorrium. It has its nourishing Moisture from the
Porosities of the Womb, (as it happens with the Papillae of the Guts which
drink in the Chyle and communicate it to the milky Vessels) which through the
Navel-vein feeds the Young. The superfluous part whereof the Arteries lodge in
the Ammion, that the Young may be nourished by its Mouth. The Placenta together
with the Membranes is expelled after the Birth, and are called Secundinae,
Secundines. Pladarosis are little soft Tumors which grow under the Eyelids.
Plagula, vid. Splenia. Planta Noctis, vid. Sudamina and Hydroa. Plastica Virtus
is that which can form or fashion any thing; it is an old saying and a sure
Refuge of Ignorance, for what the Ancients could not explain they called a
plastic Virtue. Platisma is a broad Linen Cloth put upon Sores. Platysma
Myodes, vid. Myodes. Plectrum, vid. Cion. Plenitudo is when a Man has too much
Blood: The same that Plethora. Plerotica are Medicines that breed Flesh and
fill up Wounds. Plethora, when there is more good Blood than's requisite. It
happens either to the Vessels, when they are stretched out and cannot hold all;
or to the Strength, for sometimes tho the Vessels be not over full, the
Strength is over loaded. Plethoricus, a Man troubled with a Plethora. Pleura is
a Membrane that incloses the Breasts and its Entrails. Pleuritis a Pleurisy, is
a Inflammation of the Membrane Pleura, and the intercostal Muscles, attended
with a continual Fever and Stitches in the Side, difficulty of Breathing, and
sometimes spitting Blood, and it is either a true Pleurisy, this which we have
described, or a bastard Pleurisy. Pleuritis Notha a bastard Pleurisy, that
differs in some things from the other. Plexus choroides seems to hang over the
pineal Glandule, as it were over a Button. It is an admirable Contexture of
small Arteries in the Brain like a Net. Plexus nervosus is when two or three
Nerves meet together and jut out. Plexus reticularis, vid. Choroides. Plica is
an epidemical Disease in Polonia, when their Hairs grow together like a Cow's
Tail; besides, they are crook'd-back'd, have loose Joints, it wrenches their
Limbs and loosens them, breeds Lice, with other Symptoms. Pleumaceola, vid.
Splenia. Pneumatocele is a windy Rupture, when the Skin of the Cods is
distended with Wind. Pneumatodes is a short Breathing. Pneumatosis is the
Generation of Animal Spirits, which is performed in the barky Substance of the
Brain; the little Arteries there are emptied, and the Spirits distill, which
after they are come as far as the middle of the Brain, they actuate and
Invigorate all the Nerves. Pneumatomphalus is a swelling in the Navel, got by
Wind. Pneumon, the Lungs. Pnigalium, vid. Epialtes. Pnigmus, Strangling or
Choking. Podagra, vid. Arthritis, the Gout in the Feet. Pollutio nocturna is
an involuntary Pollution in the Night, caused by lecherous Dreams. Polychronius
is a Disease that holds a Man many Years or Months. Polygophora are Drinks or
Wines full of excellent Spirits. Polypus is a Swelling in the hollow of the
Nostrils, and is twofold; either like a Tent, and goes by the general name of
Sarcoma; or such a one that has a great many distinct Branches or Feet, which
extend either to the outside of the Nose or the inside of the Mouth: Their
Color is white, oftentimes reddish, and sometimes black and livid.
Excrescencies of this nature happen not only in the Nostrils, but sometimes in
the Heart and in the Cavities of the thicker Membrane of the Brain. Polytarcia,
Corpulency. Pompholigodes, Urine with many Bubbles upon it, which are frequent
if the Body be puffed up or pained. Pomum Adami is a Protuberance in the foreside
of the Throat; so called, because it is commonly thought a piece of the Apple
stuck in his Throat as part of his Punishment, and hence derived to his
Posterity. Pondo a Pound-weight. Joh. Rhodius writes, That of all the Roman
Weights and Measures, a Pound was the chief and Standard of the Rest. Poplitea
Vena, a Vein that consists of a double crural Branch, which being covered with
Skin, reaches down the Back of the Leg even to the Heel. Pori, Pores, are
little unperceptible Holes in the Skin, through which Sweat and other vaporous
Effluviums perspire through the Body. Porocele is a Rupture proceeding from
callous Matter, or the Stone. Poromphalus is a brawny piece of Flesh, or a
Stone protuberant in the Navel. Porosis is the breeding of callous Matter.
Porotica are Medicines which by drying, thickening, and astringent Qualities
turn part of the Nourishment into brawny callous Matter. Porus bilarius, or
Hepaticus, is a Channel which transmits the Bile from the Liver, by the common
Ductus or Passage, into the Gut Duodenum, which Bile is segregated in the
Liver, by the Intervention of some small Glandules. Porrigo, vid. Furfurratio.
Portae Vena, vid. Vena. Posca, vid. Oxycratum. Postbrachiale, vid. Metaca pus.
Potio, vid. Haustus. Praecipitatio is a certain Subsiding and Reviviscence of
very small Particles dissolved in a convenient Liquor, by the Infusion of
another Liquor. Praecordia are all the Entrails in the Chest, or Thorax.
Praefocatio Vterina, vid. Hysterica passio. Praeparantia Med. vid. Digerentia.
Praeparantia vasa, the preparing Vessels, are Veins and Arteries which go to
the Testicles and Epididymes (which see;) so called by the Ancients, thinking
that they prepared the Seed: The Vein has several Branches and Anastomoses; the
Artery goes straight on, but for two, or at the most three Divisions, or
Branches. Praeputium is the Foreskin, also the Prominency of the Clytoris.
Praesepia the holes of either Jaw, wherein are contained the Teeth.
Praeservatoria Indicatio is a way whereby we prevent Diseases. Pregma, vid.
Bregma. Presbytia is a dimness of Sight in things nigh at hand, tho a Man see
tolerably well things at a distance: Usual with old Men. Priapismus is a
continual Erection of the Yard without Lust: Also the Yard it self. Primores
Dentes the fore-Teeth, wherewith we chaw our Meat, and which we show in
laughing. Principes dies, vid. Critici dies. Principia, vid. Elementa. Probole,
vid. Apophisia. Procatarctica is the pre-existent Cause of a Disease, which
co-operates with others that are subsequent; whether it be external or
internal, as Anger, or Heat in the Air, which beget ill Juice in the Blood, and
cause a Fever. Procatarxis, the same. Processus, vid. Apophysis. Processus
Peritonaei are as it were two oblong Pipes or Channels, reaching to the Skin of
the Cods through the Holes of the Tendons of the oblique and transverse
Muscles, in which Productions, or Didymi, as the Ancients called them, the
seminary Vessels descend and return toward the Stones they grow under and
cover them. Procidentia Any, is a falling of the Gut Rectum by reason of too
much looseness through the Fundament. Procidentia uteri, is a relaxing of the
inner Tunick of the Vagina of the Womb, which falls through the Privities, and
was cut off by Physicians: Formerly, and even still some think the Womb may
fall down, but the Ligaments of the Womb hinder any such fall. Procondyli are
the Bones of the Fingers next the back of the Hand. Prodromus is a Disease that
comes before a greater, as the straitness of the Breast predicts a Consumption,
or the Rickets. Productio, vid. Apophysis. Proegumena is an antecedent internal
Cause of a Disease in the Body occasioned by another, and so causing the
Disease, that if it be taken away, the Disease may still continue; as a
Plethora, or ill Juice in the Blood, produced by an ill way of Diet, whence
proceeds an Obstruction of Vessels and Passages, and a Constipation of the
Entrails. Prognosis and Signa prognostica are Signs whereby we know what will
become of the Patient. Projectura, vid. Apophysis. Prolabia the outmost
prominent parts of the Lips. Prolapsus uteri, vid. Vteri prolapsus. Prolepticus
is a Disease always anticipating; so as if the Ague come to day at four of the
Clock, then to Morrow one Hour sooner, and so on. Prophasis is a Fore-knowledg
in Diseases; also an Occasion or antecedent Cause. Prophylactica is a part of
that part of Physic called Hygieina, (or what respects the Preservation of
Health) which gives notice of future but imminent Diseases. Prophylaxis, the
same. Propoma is a Drink made of Wine and Honey, or Sugar. Propotisma is the
taking a Dose. Proptosis is the falling down of some part, as of the Eye, the
Caul, etc. Prospheromena are Meats or Medicines taken inwardly. Prosphysis is
a Coalition, or growing together, as when two Fingers are connected to each
other. Prostatae, Adstantes, or Corpora glandulosa, are two Glandules under the
seminal Bladders, near the Passage of the Seed, which (as may be guessed)
Lubricitates the common Passage of the Seed and Urine, and is a Vehicle to the
seminal Matter, and are said to provoke the Titillation in Coition: Their
Moisture being conveyed by certain little Tubes, which terminate in the Passage
near where the Seed is ejected, is emitted at the same time with it: The
Learned Bartholine has observed some such thing in Women. Prostethis is the
fore-side of the Breast; also a fleshy part in the Hollows of the Feet and
Hands, and betwixt the Fingers. Prostesis a part of Surgery which fills up what
is wanting; as we see in hollow and fistulous Ulcers filled up with Flesh by
Surgery. Protopathia is a primary Disease, not caused by another.
Protuberantia, vid. Apophysis. Provocatorii Dies, see Critici Dies, and
Intercalares. Pruna, see Carbunculus. Pruritus, the Itch, is a dry Unevenness
of the Skin caused by Saline fixed Particles, pricking the Skin, and kept in by
others more retentive which cannot exhale. Psammismus, a Bath of dry and warm
Sand, wherewith the Feet of Men in the Dropsy are dried. Psammodea are sandy
and gravelly Matter in the Urine. Psammos, a Gravel which breeds in Men's
Bodies, and is voided in Fits of the Stone. Psilothron is a Medicine wherewith
Hairs are either taken out of the Body, or thinned, if they be extreme rough.
Psoas are Muscles of the Loins, which proceed from about the two lowermost
Vertebres of the Thorax, and the three uppermost Vertebres of the Loins or
Flank: They descend obliquely upon the Rotator minor of the Thigh, and bend the
Thigh. Psora is a wild Scab that makes the Skin Scaly. Psoriasis is a dry
itching Scab of the Cods, which is often accompanied with an Exulceration.
Psorica are Medicines against the Scab. Psorophthalmia is an itching Scab of
the Eyes. Psyctica are cooling Medicines. Psydracia, according to Paulus and
Alexander, are little Ulcers of the Skin of the Head, like those which are wont
to burn the Skin. Celsus says, they are an hard sort of Pustle something
whitish, and acute, out of which is squeezed a moist Matter. Psydraces,
according to others, are little Pustles or Pimples, which break out upon the
Skin, like Bubbles, by reason of the Winter cold. Psylothrum, see Psilothron.
Ptarmica, or Sternuta loria, are those things which being endowed with a more
piercing Acrimony than their Errhinaceous Medicines, do so extremely irritate
and shrivel up the Membranes of the Brain, that it sends forth the pituitous
Humor at the Nostrils in an extraordinary Measure. Pterna, see Calx. Pterygium
is the Wing or round Rising of the Nose or Eye, or the Process of the Bone
Sphenoides which is like a Wing. Also a membranous Excrescence above the horney
Tunic of the Eye, called Vnguis and Vngula, growing for the most part from the
inner corner toward the Apple of the Eye, and often obscuring it: Also the
Nymphae of a Woman's secret Parts. Pterygoides are the Processes and Muscles of
the Wedg-like Bone. Pterystaphylini are Muscles of the piece of Flesh in the
Roof of the Mouth called Gargareon, which proceed from the Wing-like Processes,
and are terminated in the sides of the Uvula, or Gargareon. Ptylosis is when
the Brims of the Eyelids being grown thick the Hairs of the Eyebrows fall
off. Ptisana, Ptisan, is a Decoction of Barley husked, Liquorish, Raisins.
Ptyalismus is a too great Spitting. Ptyalon is Spit, or that Matter which is
brought up from the Lungs by Coughing; for Saliva (which we English Spittle
too) properly signifies the Moisture which is excerned by the Ductus Salivales.
Ptysma, see Ptyalon. Pugillus is an handful of any Herbs. Others interpret it
as much as may be taken up with three Fingers. Pulmones, the Lungs, are Organs
of Respiration. The Famous Malpighius makes the Substance of the Lungs
(excepting the Nerves, a few Vessels, and the Branches of the Windpipe) to be
nothing but an Heap of little Bladders, the contexture whereof is so ordered,
that there is a Passage into them from the Windpipe, and into one another; till
they all open into the Membrane which clothes the Lungs. The use of the Lungs
is to breathe withal, and to mix and accend the Blood with the Nitre they suck
in. Pulpa is the fleshy part of Fruits, Roots, or other Bodies, which is
extracted by Infusion or Boiling, and passing through a Sive: As the Pulp of
Tamarinds, Cassia, Althaea, Dates, etc. Pulsus, the Pulse, is the immediate
Index of the Heart, by the mediation whereof the Blood is diffused through the
whole Body, and is differently affected thereby according to the different
Influx of the Animal Spirits; the Motion whereof is chiefly to be attributed to
the circular and direct Fibers. Others affirm it to be the Dilatation and
Contraction of the Heart and Blood. A Pulse is either natural or preternatural;
of the former we have spoken already; the latter is such as is different
according to the different Circumstances of the Fibers and Animal Spirits, to
wit, strong, weak, swift, slow, equal, unequal, intermittent, etc. Pulvilli,
the same with Splenia. Pulvis, see Species. Punctum lachrymale, see Lachrymale
punctum. Punctum saliens, in the growth of an Egg you see a little Speck, or
Cloud as it were, in the innermost Tunic of it, called Amnios, which growing
gradually thicker, acquires a kind of slimy Matter, in the middle whereof you
see first this Punctum saliens (a little Speck that seems to leap;) afterward
the rude Body of an Embrio, just like a shapeless kind of Maggot; which tends
every Day more and more to Perfection. Pupilla, or Pupula, is the opening of
the Tunic of the Eye, called Wea or Choroides; it is round in Man, and is wont
to be contracted or dilated like a Muscle, according to the different Influx of
the Animal Spirits. Pupula, see Pupilla. Purgantia, Purging Medicines are
those, which by reason of a peculiar disposition of their parts irritate the
fleshy Fibers of the Ventricle, which become swollen and consequently contracted
at the right end, so that the whole Substance of the Stomach is drawn up
together and inclined toward the Pylorus, whence follows an Excretion
downwards. Purgatio, Purging, is an Excretory Motion quick and frequent,
proceeding from a quick and orderly Contraction of the carneous Fibers of the
Stomach and Intestines; whereby the Chyle, and Excrements, and corrupted
Humors, either bred or sent there from other parts, are protruded from part to
part, till they be quite excluded the Body. Pus, see Pyon. Pustulae, Pimples,
are the Recrements of ill Blood that shoot forth in the Skin, and for want of
Perspiration, or too viscous a Matter, stick there and cause an unequal
Surface. Putrefactio Chymica, is the Dissolution of a concrete Body, by natural
Rottenness, in a moist Heat which corrupts the very Substance of it, and
penetrates its most intimate Parts. Pyon, or Pus, is putrified Blood concocted
into white Matter. Pycnosis, see Pycnotica. Pycnotica, see Incrassantia.
Pyelos, see Choana. Pylorus, or Janitor, is the right Orifice of the Ventricle,
which sends the Meat out of the Stomach. Pyosis is a Collection of Pus in any
pa^^ of the Body. Pyramidales Musculi are placed in the Abdomen, and lie upon
the lowest Tendons of the right Muscles. They are not parts of the right
Muscles, as Vesalius and Columbus are of opinion, but distinct, as Falopius
proves, tho with some pertinent some impertinent Arguments. The peculiar
Membrane wherewith they are clothed, and the order of their Fibers, show them
to be different from the right Muscles. They proceed from the external Os
Pubis, and the higher they climb the narrower they grow, and end about the
Navel in the white Seam; sometimes they are wanting, or the left is less than
the right, or the right than the left. Pyramidalia are Vessels which prepare
the Seed, of which in their proper place. Also Muscles of the Nostrils and of
the Abdomen called Pyramidales, or of a Pyramidical Figure. Also two Strings of
Marrow about the Basis of the oblongated Marrow. Pyretologia, is a Description
of Fevers: Of which Dr. Willis has writ most accurately. Pyrotechnia, the same
that Chymia. Pyrotica, or Vrentia, are Medicines virtually hot, which being
applied to Human Bodies, grow extremely hot; because that having Particles and
Pores so ordered, that Vapors and Humors insinuating into them, the subtle
Matter finds such Passages, that it being moved extreme violently, forces
certain earthy, hard, and acute Particles, which slote in the Passages, upon
the neighboring parts with great Impetuosity, and so excites an Heat which
corrupts, or changes differently, according to the diversity of its Motion, and
the Particles which are moved. Such are things that cause Redness, that
blister, that ripen or rot, that close up and bring Wounds to a Crust, and that
pull Hairs out of the Body. Pyulcus is an Instrument wherewith Pus, or
corrupted Matter, is evacuated. Pyxis is the Cavity of the Hip-Bone, which is
called Acctabulum.
Q.
QVadrans, Physicians reckon a Weight of three Ounces, that is the fourth part
of a Roman Pound. Qualitas is a Disposition or Contexture of little Particles,
whence our Bodies may be any way denominated of such a Quality. Quality is
manifest, hidden, poisonous, contagious, Pestilent, etc. Quartana febris
intermittens, a Quartan Ague, which the Ancients called Saturn's Daughter. It
is at this Day a Scandal to Physicians, because it is so hard to be cured by
those who follow the old way. It is a preternatural Effervescence of the Blood,
which attaques a Man every fourth Day, and then leaves him. It is caused by an
acid austere Blood, and nutritious Juice hindered in its Assimilation.
Quartarium, the same that Quadrans. Quid pro Quo is when a Medicine of one
Nature and Quality is substituted for another, which is not to be done without
the consent of Physicians. Quinta Essentia, see Essentia quinta. Quotidiana
febris intermittens, an intermitting Quotidian Ague, is that which returns
every Day, and proceeds from crude Blood and an ill Assimilation of Chyle.
R.
RAbdoides, the same that Sutura Sagittalis. Rabies Hydrophobica, see
Hydrophobia. Rachitae and Rachiaei are Muscles belonging to the Back. Rachitis,
see Rhachitis. Radicales dies, see Critici dies. Radius is the less Bone of the
Cubit, called Focile minus; it is more oblique than the great Bone called Vlna,
and is distant a little from it in the middle, where there occurs a small
Ligament: Above the Vlna receives the Radius, and below the Radius receives it.
The upper part of the Radius is jointed with the outward Process of the Arm by
Diarthrosis (which see); the lower by way of Appendix with the wrist Bone at
the middle Finger. Its upper end is small, and the lower thick. It is also the
greater Bone of the Leg. Ramex, see Hernia. Ranula, see Hypoglossum. Raphe, see
Sutura. Rarefacientia, rarifying Remedies, are such as by dissipating a little
the Vapors and Humors make the Pores of Bodies larger. Rasetta, the same that
Carpus. Raspatorium, or Scalprum Rasorium, is a Surgeons Instrument to
scrape or shave filthy and scaly Bones with. Raucedo, the same that Branchus.
Recidivus morbus, a Relapse, is when the morbifick Matter, that was left in the
first Distemper, begins to work and ferment again. Rectificatio is a repeated
distillation of Liquors, to exalt and purify them the more. Reduvia is a
certain light Cleft or Chap in the Skin at the Roots of the Nails.
Refrigeratorium is a wooden Vessel, full of Water with a straight or spiral
Pipe in it of Tin or Lead, which distilled Water is to flow through to cool it.
Regius morbus, see Icterus. Relaxantia, see Chalastica. Relaxatio is a
Dilatation of Parts or Vessels. Reminiscentia, Remembrance, is a Perception
whereby the Ideas of things before perceived, and impressed upon the Mind by
Sensation or other Perception, are again offered and represented to the Soul,
by the Mediation of Animal Spirits, in the common Sensory; either by their
former Footsteps and Images impressed upon the Brain, or by some Words or other
Signs which awakened and stirred them up. Or Reminiscence is an arbitrary
drawing out of things, which were before impressed upon the Brain, for its own
use. Remissio Febrium, a remitting of Fevers, is a boiling down of hot and
over-boyling Blood, which is Absolute in intermittent Fevers, and but Partial
in continued ones. Renes, the Reins or Kidneys; there are two of them in the
Abdomen, placed under the Liver and Spleen; the right Kidney is lower in a Man
than the left: They are chiefly made up of little Channels, or Conduits, which
arise from the Glandules that lie about the Extremities of the Arteries, whence
they receive the Serum, which passes on to the Carunculae Papillares, or little
pieces of pappy Flesh, to the Pelvis, (or Basin) to the Ureters, the Bladder,
and so out of Doors. Renes succenturiati, see Capsulae atrabilariae.
Repellentia are such things as by stopping the Heat and Afflux of Humors, and
by shutting up the Pores with their cold or binding Qualities, decrease the
swelling of a part, and drive the Humors another way. Res naturales, Natural
Things are three; Health, the Causes of Health, and its Effects. Others reckon
seven, as the Elements, Temperaments, Humors, Spirits, Parts, Faculties,
Actions; but Elements and Temperaments belong to natural Philosophy; Humors,
Spirits and Parts are reckoned amongst the Causes of Health, which consist of a
good Temperature and a due Conformation; Faculties and Actions are comprehended
under the Effects of Health. Res non naturales, Things that are not Natural are
Six: Air, Meat and Drink, Motion and Rest, Sleep and Waking, the Affections of
the Mind, Things that are let out of, and Things retained in the Body. They are
so called, because that if they exceed their due Bounds, they often occasion
Diseases. Res preter Naturam, things beside Nature are Diseases, their Causes,
their Symptoms and Effects. Resolventia, dissolving Remedies are such as are
apt to dissipate or scatter Particles, that are driven into the Body or any
part of it, with their own spirituous and sulphurous Particles. Respiratio,
Breathing, is an alternate Dilatation and Contraction of the Chest, whereby the
nitrous Air is taken in by the Windpipe for the accension of the Blood, and by
and by is driven out again with other vaporous Effluviums. The Cause of
Respiration does not seem to consist in the Dilatation and Contraction of the
Thorax, as is commonly thought, but in the Contraction of the Tunic which
covers the upper part of the Oesophagus and the Windpipe as far as its Closest
Recesses. Rete mirabile, the wonderful Net, in the Brain, is so called by
reason of its admirable Structure; it consists of several small Arteries; it is
under the Basis of the Brain, and comprehends the pituitary Glandule, by the
sides of the Bone Ophenoides: The Use of it is, that the Blood may cast off its
serous parts into the pituitary Glandule, that it may afford finer and purer
Spirits: Secondly, lest the Blood by rushing too suddenly upon the Brain,
should in some measure suppress it; it is not so found in a Man and an Horse,
which perform noble things. Reticularis plexus, the same that Choroides.
Reticulum, the same that Omentum. Retiformis plexus, see Plexus retiformis.
Retiformis tunica is a certain Expansion of the inner Substance of the Optic
Nerve in the Eye, which is to the Eye like a whited Wall in a dark Chamber,
which receives and represents the visible Species that are let in by a hole in
a darkened Room. Retina tunica, see Retiformis and Amphiblestroides. Retorta, a
Retort, is a Chemical Vessel, made of Glass, Stone, or Iron; of a round Figure,
to the side whereof there is fastened a bended, retorted, and hollow Beak or
Nose, whereby the things that are to be distilled are put in and out.
Reverberatio chymica is a Burning, whereby Bodies are calcined by an actual
Fire in a Furnace called Reverberium. Reverberium is a Chemical Oven or
Furnace, wherein Bodies that are to be burned or distilled are calcined.
Revulsoria, V. S. is whereby the Blood that gushes upon one part is diverted a
contrary way, by the opening of a Vein in a remote and convenient place.
Rhachitis is the Spinal Marrow, which see in its proper place: Also a Disease
common amongst the English, which is an unequal Nourishing of parts accompanied
with Looseness of parts, Softness, Weakness, Faintness, Drowzyness, a great
swelling Head, with Leanness below the Head, with Protuberances about the
Joints, Crookedness of Bones, Straitness of the Breast, Swelling of the
Abdomen, Stretching of the Hypochondres, a Cough, etc. The English call it the
Rickets: But because the occasion of it often lies in the Spinal Marrow, the
Famous Glisson calls it appositely enough Rhachitis. Rhagades, the Latins say
Soissurae, Eissurae, Rimae, Chinks, Clefts, which as they happen in other parts
of the Body, Hands, Feet, Lips, the entrance of the Womb; so they may happen in
the Fundament, in the Extremity of the Gut Rectum, and in the Sphincter or
Muscle which closes the Fundament. Rhagades in the Fundament are certain oblong
little Ulcers, without Swelling, like those which are sometimes occasioned in
the Hands by great Cold. Some are superficial, others deep: Some are not hard
nor callous, others are: Some are moist and send forth Matter, others dry and
cancrous. Rhegma is a Breaking or Bursting of any part, as of a Bone, the inner
Rine of the Belly, the Eye, etc. Rheuma, Rheum, is a Defluxion of Humor from
the Head upon the parts beneath, as upon the Eyes, or Nose. Rheumatismus is a
wandering Pain in the Body, often accompanied with a small Fever, Swelling,
Inflammation, etc. Rhexis, the same that Rhegma. Rhinenchytes is a little
Syringe to inject Medicines into the Nostrils. Rhodinum is Rose-Vinegar, or any
thing made of Roses. Rhomboides is a pair of Muscles proceeding from the three
lowermost Vertebres of the Neck, and as many upper Spinal Processes of the
Vertebres of the Back: By and by they descend, and being fleshy at the
beginning and end, go as far as the Basis of the Shoulder Blade, which they
move backward and obliquely upward. Rhyptica are scouring Medicines which
cleanse away Filth. Rhythmus is a certain proportion of Pulses, Time, Life,
Age, etc. Rhythidosis is a Wrinkling of any part. Rigor is a Vibration and
Concussion of the Skin and Muscles of the whole Body, accompanied with
Chilness. Rima pudendi, or Fissura magna, is so called, because it reaches from
the lower part of the Os Pubis almost as far as the Fundament, so that the
space betwixt the one and the other, which is called Perinaeum, or
Interforamineum, is scarce a Fingers breadth. By frequent Coition it grows
larger. The use of it is for Generation, Excretion of Urine and other
Excrements, and for the bearing of Young. Risus Sardonius is a Contraction of
each Jaw. Rob, see Apochylisma. Robub, the same. Roriferus ductus, the same
that Ductus chyliferus. Ros, in the account of the Ancients, was the first
Moisture that falls from the Extremities of Vessels, and is dispersed upon the
Substance of the Members. Ros, says Galen, is a third sort of Moisture whereby
the parts of our Body are nourished, and is contained in all the parts of an
Animal, like a certain Dew sprinkled upon them: This is the Opinion of the
Ancients. Rosa, the same that Erysipelas. Rostriformis processus, see
Coracoides. Rotator major and minor, are two Apophyses in the upper part of the
Thigh Bone, called Trichanteres, in which the Tendons of many Muscles are
terminated. Rotula, the same that Mola genu. Rotulae, see Tabellae. Rubrica,
see Impetigo. Ructatio, Belching, is a depraved Motion of the Stomach,
occasioned by an Effervescence there, whereby Vapors and flatulent Matter are
sent out at the Mouth. And it is either acid, or stinking, or savours like
something burnt or roasted. Ructus, see Bombus and Ructatio. Rugitus is an
Effervescence of Chyle and Excrements in the Blood, whereby Wind and several
other Motions are excited in the Guts, and roll up and down the Excrements,
when there is no easy Vent nor upwards nor downwards. Ruptio, see Rhegma. Ryas
is a too plentiful and preternatural falling of Tears.
S.
SAccus is the Gut called Rectum. Sacculus Chyliferus, or Roriferus, is the
lower part of the Passage of the Chyle, into which are inserted all the Lacteal
Veins of the second sort, and a great number of the Lymphatic Vessels. Sacculus
Cordis, see Pericardium. Sacculi Medicinales, are* when several Simples,
according to the Nature of the Disease, are compounded and beaten together, and
tied up in a little Bag, to be applied to the part affected. The Bag is to be
sewed or quilted down in several places, that the Ingredients run not
altogether in a Lump. Sacer Ignis, see Herpes Exedens. Sacer Morbus, see
Epilepsia. Sacrum Os, the Holy Bone, consists of the six lower Vertebres, to
which are joined the Ossa Coccygis, or Hip Bones; in the hinder part of the
Abdomen it makes that Cavity which is called Pelvis or the Basin. Sagittalis
Sutura, or Veruculata, is that Suture of the Scull, which begins at the Coronal
or Crown Suture, and ends in the Lambdoidal Suture. Saliva and Salivum,
Spittle, is an insipid Liquor, which being separated in the Maxillar Glandules
or Glandules of the Jaws, and by proper Passages flowing into the Mouth, serves
to moisten its Mouth and Gullet, and assists to the chewing of Meat, and in
some measure to the Digestion and Fermentation of it in the Stomach. Salivatio,
Salivation, is an Evacuation of Spittle by Salivating Medicines, of which sort
principally are Mercurial Preparations. Salivation is sometimes taken for a
preternatural Increase of Spittle. Salvatella, is that Vein which from the
Veins of the Arm is terminated in the little Finger. Sanguificatio, see
Haematosis. Sanguis, Blood, is a red florid Liquor contained in the Veins and
Arteries, and consists of all those parts of the Chyle which pass through the
Papillae, the little soft risings of the Intestines. This is that which gives
Nourishment, Life and Strength to all the parts of the Body. The Microscope
discovers that the parts of the Blood are round or globular naturally, but that
in Fevers it is full of Worms. Sanies, is a thick and bloody Pus, or Matter.
Sanitas, see Hygieia. Sapa, see Apochylisma. Saphaena is the Vein of the Leg,
or Crural Vein. Saphatum is a dry Scurf in the Head, see Achor. Saponea is a
Lambitive made of Almonds. Sapor, see Gustus. Sarcocele is a Rupture, which
consists in a fleshy Excrescence of the Testicles. Sarcoma is a fleshy
Excrescence. Sarcomphalum is a fleshy Excrescence of the Navel. Sarcophagum,
see Cathaereticum. Sarcosis, see Sarcoma. Sarcotica are those Medicines which
fill up Wounds with Flesh, such as by their moderate Heat and cleansing
qualities keep Wounds and Ulcers free from Filth and preserve the natural
temper of the Parts, so that the Aliment easily supplies the Solution of the
Parts. Sare, see Essere. Satyriasis, sive Priapismus, is an immoderate desire
of Venery, which upon Coition vanishes. It Is taken sometimes for the Leprosy,
because in that Disease the Skin acquires the Roughness of a Satyr: It Is
likewise used for the Swelling of the Glandules behind the Ears. Satyriasmus,
see Satyriasis. Scabies, the Itch: It Is of two sorts, moist and dry; the Moist
is an inequality or roughness of the Skin with moist and purulent Pustles,
accompanied with a constant Itching; the Dry Itch is fourfold Pruritus,
Impetigo, Psora, and Lepra, which see. Scalenum, is that pair of Muscles which
extend the Neck. They are perforated to make way for the Veins and Arteries,
and the Nerves of the hinder part of the Neck as they go to the Arm. Scalpellum
Vmbilicarium, is the Knife with which the Midwife cuts off the Navels of
Children. Scalprum Chirurgicum, a Lancet. Scalprum Rasorium, see Raspatorium.
Scamnum Hypocratis, Hypocrates's Bench, is an Instrument of six Else long, it is
used in setting of Bones. Scapha, is the Inner Rim of the Ear. Scaphoides, is
the Third Os Tarsi in the Foot, it is joined to the Ancle-Bone and the three
hinder Bones: It Is called also Os Naviculare from some resemblance it has of a
Boat. Scapula, see Homoplata. Scarificatio, Scarification, it is an Incision of
the Skin with a Penknife or Lancet: This is done either with or without
Cupping-Glasses; without Cupping-Glasses if there be any Mortification or
Gangrene, because the Separation is by all means to be hastened; with
Cupping-Glasses, if there be a necessity of taking away Blood. Sceletum, a
Skeleton, is when the Bones are dried and put together according to Art in
their natural Order and Position. Scelotyrbe, is a wandering Pain in the Legs,
proceeding chiefly from the Scurvey. Hence the Water proper for this Distemper
is called Aqua Scelotyrbitis. Schesis, is the Disposition of the Body. Schetica
febris, is opposed to the Hectic Fever, because it is feated mostly in the
Blood and is easily cured, but a Hectic Fever is fixed in the very Habit of the
Body, and not to be removed without great difficulty. Schisma, a Cut in any
part either hard or soft. Schiatica, see Arthritis. Schirrosis, see Schirrus.
Schirrus and Schirroma, is a hard, livid Swelling, that resists the touch and
is without Pain. Scleriasis, is a Hardness of any part. Scleroma, the same.
Scleropthalmia is a hard Blearedness of the Eyes accompanied with Pain, a slow
Motion of the Eyes, with redness and dryness of 'em. Sclerotica, see Cornea.
Sclerotica, or hardening Medicines, are such as unite the parts more firmly
amongst themselves, and that either by dissipating the thin and soft parts, or
else sometimes by retaining them; the first by hardening the Matter into a
Schirrus by too hot Medicines, the latter is done when the part affected
acquires a Hardness by cooling and astringent Medicines, such are Sengreen,
Nightshade, Porcelan, and Water-Lintels. Therefore these Sclerotic Medicines
are either healing, or else cooling and astringent. Scleruntica, the same with
Sclerotica. Scoliasis, is a Distortion of the Backbone to one or the other side.
Scolopomachaerion, is a Chirurgions Knife, with which Wounds of the Thorax are
widened; it is used also in opening larger Swellings; as also in opening the
Abdomen. Scorbutus, the Scurvy, is a Disease that is Epidemial to the
Hollanders. The Symptoms of it are generally, livid Spots on the Hands and
Feet, weakness of the Legs, stinking Breath, looseness of the Teeth, bleeding
of the Gums, Convulsions, Pains, running Gout, Cholick, etc. This is of two
kinds, either Salino-Sulphureus, when the Sulphur is predominant to Salt; or
Sulphureo-Salinus, when the Salt is predominant to the Sulphur; this is
likewise either in the Blood or nervous Juice. Scriptulus, see Scrupulus.
Scotoma, the same with Scotomia. Scotomia, Dizziness or Swimming of the Head,
is when the Animal Spirits are so whirled about that the External Objects seem
to run round. Scrobiculus Cordis, see Anticardium. Scroptula, are preternatural
hard Glandules, or preternatural Swellings of the Glandules of the Neck and
Ears; they are contained in a proper Tunic. Scrotum, the Cod, is a Bag which
contains the Testicles of the Male, it consists of a Skin fleshy Panniculus,
the two Tunics Erythrois and Elythrois. In the middle of it is a Line extended
in the length, which divides the right part from the left. For more easy
Distention or Contraction it is void of Fat. Scrotum Cordis, see Pericardium.
Scrupulus, a Scruple, it is the third part of a Dram and contains twenty
Grains. Scutiforme Os, see Mola Genu. Scutiformis Cartilago, see Ensiformis.
Scutum, see Mola Genu. Scybala, are Sheeps, or Goats, etc. Buttons, or
Excrement. Scypho, is the Infundibulum in the Brain: Likewise those Passages
which convey the Spittle from the Os Cribriforme to the Pallat. Sectio
Caesaria, see Hysteratomotocia. Secundinae, the Secundine, or Afterbirth, are
the three Membranes, Chorion, Alantois, and Amnion, which with the Placenta,
are excluded after the Birth. Sedimentum Vrinae, the Sediment of Urine, are
parts of the nutritious Juice, which being separated from the Blood, with the
Serum, because of their gravity, sink to the bottom of the Urine. Sella Equina,
seu Turcica, it is compounded of four Processes of the Bone Sphenoeides, or
Wedg-like Bone; it contains the Pituitarian Glandule, and in Brutes the Rete
Mirabile. Sella Sphenoeidis, the same with Sella Equina. Sella Turcica, the
same. Semeiosis, see Diagnosis. Semeiotica, is that part of Physic which
treats of the Signs of Health and Sickness. Semen, Seed, is a white, hot,
spirituous, thick, clammy, saltish Humor, which is made out of the thinnest
parts of the Blood in the Testicles and Epididymides, and by proper Passages is
ejected into the Womb of the Female. There is also in the Female a Matter which
is called Seed, which proceeds from the Prostates, and frequently in their
Lechery is emitted forth: The use of this is to raise Titillation, and render
the Coition more pleasant. Semicupium, is a Bath in which the Patient is only
up to the Navel in Water. Sensorium Commune, or the Seat of common Sense, is
that part of the Brain in which the Nerves from the Organs of all the Senses
are terminated, which is in the beginning of the Medulla Oblongata. Sensus,
Sense, is when the Motion impressed by the outward Objects upon the Fibers of
the Nerves is conveyed, by the help of the Animal Spirits in the Nerves, to the
common Sensory or Medulla Oblongata. Sephyros, is a hard Inflammation of the
Womb. Septa, the same with Septica. Septica, sive Putrefacientia, are those
things which by a malignant Heat and sharpness rot and corrupt the Flesh.
Septum Lucidum, is a Partition, upon the account of its thinness Diaphanous,
which distinguishes the Ventricles of the Brain. Septum Transversum, see
Diaphragma. Serpigo, see Lichen. Serapium, see Syrupus. Serra, a Saw. Serum, is
a watery, thin, yellowish, and saltish Humor, which consists chiefly of Water,
with a moderate quantity of Salt and a little Sulphur: The Use of it is to be a
Vehicle to the Blood. Sesamoeidea Ossa, are 16, 19, 20, and sometimes more
little Bones, so called from the likeness they have to Sesamum Seeds, which are
found in the Joints of the Hands and Feet. Setaceum, is when the Skin of the
Neck is taken up and run through with a Needle; and the Wound afterward kept
open by Bristles, a Skean of Silk, etc. that so the ill Humors may vent
themselves. Sextans, is the sixth part of a Pound, containing two Ounces.
Sialismus, see Ptyalismus. Sialochus, see Ptyalismus. Sialon, see Sielos and
Saliva. Sideratio, see Spacelos. Sief Album, see Collyrium. Sigmoides, are the
Apophyses of the Bones, representing the Letter C of the ancient Greeks. Also
the three Valves of the Great Artery that hinder the Blood from returning back
to the Heart. Signum Morbi, the Symptom of a Disease. Siliqua, is half a
Lupin, of which six weigh a Scruple. This is to be understood of the Seed
contained in it. Similares parts, Similar Parts, are such as are throughout of
the same Nature and Texture. Simplicia, Simples, are Medicines unmixt and
uncompounded. Sinapismus, is a Medicine applied to the Head, and is prepared of
Mustard, wild Radish, Salt, and Leven. Sinciput, the sides of the Head.
Singultus, see Lygmus. Sinus Mening is, are those Cavities which Galen calls
the Ventricles of the Thick Membrane. The first and second, or the lateral
Sinus's, are seated between the Brain and the Cerebellum, and end in the
Vertebral Sinus's. The third begins from the Os Cribiforme, and ends in the
middle of the former Sinus's. The fourth arises from the Pinealis Glandule, and
ends in the middle of the lateral Sinus's. The Insertion of these Sinus's is
called Torcular Herophili. The Sinus's after they have passed through the
Skull, are partly continued with the Jugular Veins, and partly descend through
the whole length of the Spinal Marrow down to the Os Sacrum. The Use of them is
to supply the place of Veins, for they convey the Blood from the Brain and
Cerebellum, partly into the Jugular Veins, and partly into the Vertebral
Sinus's. Sinus Ossium, are those Cavities of the Bones which receive the Heads
of other Bones. Sircasis, is an Inflammation or rather great Heat of the Brain
and its Membranes, occasioned by the heat of the Sun: This is frequent in
Children, because of the thinness of their Skulls. Sirones, are a sort of
Pustles which arise in the Palms of the Hands and Soles of the Feet, and
contain in them a very little sort of Worms or Lice. Sitis, Thirst, is a Defect
of the Salival Juice which occasions the fancy and desire of Drink. Solutio
chymica, is a resolving any Body into its Chemical Principles; which are,
Spirit, Salt, Sulphur, Water and Earth. Solutio continui, is a Dissolution of
the Unity and Continuity of the Parts: As in Wounds, Ulcers, Fractures, etc.
Somnambulo, see Noctambulo. Somnifera, or Sleeping Medicines, are such which
consisting of faetid Sulphurous parts, dissipate and extinguish the Animal
Spirits, and hinder their increase, whence follows Sleep. Somnus, Sleep, is a
streightning of the Pores of the Brain, caused by the Rest of the Animal
Spirits, by which means the outward Senses rest from their Operations.
Somnolentia continua, is a constant Drouziness and Inclination to Sleep; this
comes to pass when the Pores of the outward or Cortical Substance of the Brain
are quite closed up by some viscous Matter, so that the Animal Spirits cannot
freely pass. Spagyrica Medecina, see Hermetica. Sparadrapum, is a piece of
Linen tinged of both sides, either with a thick Ointment, or Plaster, and is
made this way; after you have melted your Ointment, or Plaster, dip your
Linen in it; extend it and keep it for use. Sora, see Essere. Sparganum, see
Fascia. Sparganosis, is a Distention of the Breasts, occasioned by too much
Milk. Spasma, see Spasmns. Spasmodica, are Medicines against Convulsions.
Spasmologia, is a Treatise of Convulsions. Spasmus, is any Convulsive Motion.
Cardan makes two sorts of Convulsive Affections, viz. Tetanus and Spasmus; by
the former he understands a constant Contraction, whereby the Member becomes
rigid and inflexible; by the latter he understands sudden Concussions and
Motions, which cease and return alternately. Spatha, is an oblong Instrument,
broad at the lower end: Its Use is to take up Conserves and Electuaries without
fouling the Hands. Spathomela, is an oblong Instrument, made of Silver or Iron,
which Chirurgions and Apothecaries use. Species, or Pouders, are those Simples
which are designed to make Compounds with. So Species of Treacle are those
Ingredients of which Treacle is compounded: By the same Name are called the
Species of ordinary Decoctions. This Name is chiefly given to some Aromatic
and Purging Pouders: Perhaps because heretofore they were made up into
Electuaries, Bolus's, etc. Specifica Medicamenta, are those Medicines which
have a peculiar Virtue against some one Disease. Specillum, a Probe. Speculum
lucidum, see Septum Lucidum. Speculum Oculi, the Apple or Pupil of the Eye: see
Aranea Tunica Oculi. Speculum Oris, see Dilatatorium. Spermaticae Parts, are
those Arteries and Veins which bring the Blood to and convey it from the
Testicles: Likewise those Vessels through which the Seed passes: Likewise all
whitish parts of the Body, which because of their whiteness were anciently
thought to be made of the Seed: Of this sort are Nerves, Bones, Membranes,
Grissles, etc. Spermatocele, a Rupture caused by the Contraction of the Vessel
which ejects the Seed, and its falling down into the Scrotum. Sphacelodes, like
to the Apoplexy. Sphacelus, is a sudden Extinction of Life and Sense in every
part. Sphagitides, are the Jugular Veins in the Neck. Sphenoeides, see
Sphenois. Sphenois, see Os Cuneiforme. Sphenopharyngaeus, is a pair of Muscles
arising from the Sinus of the inner Wing of the Os Cuneiforme, or Wedg-like
Bone, and going obliquely downward, is extended into the sides of the Gullet;
it dilates the Gullet. Sphincter, is a Muscle that contracts the Gullet, Anus,
Bladder, etc. Sphygmica, is that part of Physic which treats of Pulses.
Sphygmus, the Pulse. Spina Dorsi are the hinder Prominences of the Vertebrae's.
Spina Ventosa, is an Ulceration in which the Bones are eaten by a malignant
Humor without any pain of the Periostium, or Membrane that covers the Bone,
after that a Swelling being risen without any Pain, the part affected is quite
eaten out with the Ulcer, from whence frequently follows a necessity of
Amputation. Spinalis medulla, see Medulla spinalis. Spiritus, Spirits, are
reckoned of three sorts, the Animal Spirits in the Brain, the Vital in the
Heart, the Natural in the Liver; but late Authors distinguish'em only into two
kinds, the Animal in the Brain, the Vital and Natural (which are accounted the
same) in the Mass of Blood. The Animal Spirits are a very thin Liquor, which
distilling from the Blood in the outward or Cortical Substance of the Brain,
are by the proper Ferment of the Brain exalted into Spirits, and thence through
the Medullar Substance of the Brain, the Corpus Callosum, and Medulla
Oblongata, are derived into the Nerves and Spinal Marrow, and in them perform
all the Actions of Sense and Motion. The Vital or Natural Spirits, are the
subtilest parts of the Blood which actuate and ferment it, and make it fit for
Nourishment. Splanchnica, are Medicines proper against Diseases of the
Intestines. Splanchnon, see Intestina. Splen, five Lien, the Spleen, is a
Receptacle for the Salt and earthy Excrements of the Blood, that there, by the
assistance of the Animal Spirits, it may be volatiliz'd, and returning again
into the Blood may concur to its farther Fermentation. The Spleen consists of a
great number of little Bladders, between which the Glandules are scattered up
and down and supply the place of Veins: The Spleen has likewise an Artery,
Nerves, and Lymphatick Vessels, first discovered by Fr. Ruisch. It Is very like
the Sole of the Foot, and in Cows is exactly like a Beeves Tongue. Splenia, are
Bolsters made of Linen, three, four, or five times doubled, even to the
thickness of the Spleen, they are used upon Wounds, Ulcers, and Fractures. The
Figure is threefold according to the manner of Application, viz. at length,
obliquely, or transversely: They are called also Plumaccoli and Plagulae.
Splenica, Splenical Medicines, are such as by attenuating and volatilizing the
grosser parts, remove the Distempers and Obstructions of the Spleen. Splenii
Musculi, arise partly from the five lower Vertebrae's of the Neck, and partly
from the points of five of the upper Vertebrae's of the Thorax; the Fibers of
these Muscles tend obliquely, and are fastened to the hinder part of the Head:
The Use of 'em is to draw the Head backward. Spongoeidea Ossa, see
Cribroformia. Sporadici morbi, are those Diseases which (different in Nature)
seize several People at the same time, and in the same Country. Sputum, Liquor
thicker than ordinary Spittle. Squammosa Sutura, see Lepidoides. Stagma, are
Juices of Plants mixed together in order to Distillation. Stalagma, is that
which is distilled from the Stagma. Staltica, see Sarcotica. Stapes, see Incus.
Staphyle, see Cion. Staphyloma, is a Disease of the Eye, in which the two
Tunics of the Eye Cornea and Wea, being broken, fall outward in the shape of a
Grape. Status Morbi, see Acme. Steatocele, is a Rupture or Tumor in the Scrotum
of a Fatty or Suet-like Consistence. Steatoma, is a preternatural Swelling,
which consists of a Matter almost like Suet, of the same Color throughout,
soft, and tho not easily yielding to the touch, yet suddenly returns, the
Fingers removed, to its proper shape and bigness. Stegnosis, is a Constriction
and stopping up of the Pores. Stegnotica, see Astringentia. Stercus, is that
Excrement which is voided by Stool; it consists of those parts of the Aliment
and Bile which is unfit for Nourishment. Sterilitas, see Agonia. Sternum Os,
the Breast Bone, is joined to the Ribs in the foremost part of the Breast; it
consists of 3 or 4 Bones, and frequently in those that are come to ripeness of
Age grows into one Bone; to this is joined in the lower part of it the
Cartilago Ensiformis. Sternohyoides, is that pair of Muscles which from the
uppermost part of the Breast Bone, goes outward and ascends up to the Basis of
the Os Hyoeides. Sternothurocides, is a pair of Muscles of the Cartilago
Scutiformis which draw it downward; this arises from the uppermost and inward
part of the Breast Bone, and is inserted into the lower side of the Cartilago
Ensiformis. Sternutatio, Sneezing, is a forcible driving out of the Head some
sharp Matter which vellicates and disturbs the Nerves and Fibers: It Is defined
likewise an involuntary Motion of the Brain, which also contracts the Muscles
of the Thorax and Abdomen, to the intent that the Matter which vellicates the
Nostrils and Brain may be driven out. Stigma, a Scar. Stoma, the Mouth, as also
the Mouths of any Vessels. Stomachus, is properly the left Orifice of the
Ventricle, or Stomach, by which Meats are received into it. To this part
descend Nerves from the par Vagum, and intercostal Nerves, and are mixed and
woven with one another. Strabilismus, see Strabismus. Strabismus, Squinting, is
occasioned by the Relaxation, Contraction, Distorsion, too great Length, or too
great Shortness of the Muscles which move the Eye. Strabositas, see Strabismus.
Sternutatorium, five Sternutamentum, a Sneezing Medicine, or Snuff.
Stillicidium Vrinae, see Stranguria. Stranguria, the Strangury, is a difficulty
of Urine, when the Urine comes away by Drops only, accompanied with a constant
Inclination of making Water. Stratificatio, is a corroding of Metals by
corrosive Pouders. The Operation is performed in this manner: Put first in the
bottom of the Crucible some of the corroding Powder; then some of the Metal you
are to corrode beaten into thin Plates; then some of the Pouders, and upon them
some more Plates of your Metal, and so on till the Crucible be full; then make
Ignemrotae, or a Fire round your Crucible to the top, or else place it in a
Reverbatory, according as the Operation shall require. Struma, see Scrophula.
Stryphna, see Astringentia. Stupefacientia, see Narcotica. Stupea, seu Stupa,
is a piece of Linen dipped in a Liquor, and applied to the part affected.
Stupor, Numness. Stylocer athoeides, are the Muscles of the Os Hyoeides which
draw upwards: They arise from the outward Appendix of the Os Styliforme, and
are extended to the Horns or Points of the Os Hyoeides. Styloglossum, is that
pair of Muscles which lift up the Tongue; they arise from the Appendix of the
Os Styliforme, and are inserted about the middle of the Tongue. Styloeides, are
Processes of Bone fashioned backward like a Pencil, fastened into the Basis of
the Skull it self. Stylopharyngaeus, is a pair of Muscles that dilate the
Gullet, descending from an Appendix of a Bone in fashion of a Pencil, and which
reaches the sides of the Gullet. Stymma, is that thick Mass which remains after
the steeping of Flowers, Herbs, etc. and pressing out their Oil. Styptica, see
Astringentia. Subcartilageneum, see Hypocondrium. Subeth Avicennae, see Coma.
Sublimatio, is a dry Extract, consisting of the more subtle parts raised above
the Mass, and sticking to the Sides and Neck of the Vessel. Sublaxatio, a
dislocation, or putting out of Joint. Subsidentia, see Sedimentum. Succago, see
Apochylisma. Succedaneum, see Antiballomenon. Succenturiati Renes, see Capsulae
atrabilariae. Succus Pancreaticus, see Ductus Pancreaticus. Sudamina, are
little Pimples in the Skin, like Millet Grains; this is frequent in Children
and Youths, especially those that are of a hot Temper, and use much Exercise:
They break out in the Neck, Shoulders, Breast, Arms and Thighs, and mostly
about the Privities. Sudationes, the same with Sudamina. Sudor, Sweat, is a
watery Humor which consists of Water chiefly with a moderate quantity of Salt
and Sulphur: This is driven through the Pores of the Skin by the Heat and
Fermentation of the Blood, and sometimes by its Weakness and Colliquation.
Sudorifera, see Hydrotica. Suffimentum, the same with Suffitus. Suffitus, is a
thickish Powder, prepared of odoriferous Plants, Gums, etc. which thrown upon
Coals produces a pleasant Smell. Suffocatio Vterina, see Hysterica passio.
Suffumigium, see Suffitus. Suffusio, see Hypochyma and Cataracta. Sugillata,
see Enchymoma. Sugillatio, see Enchymoma. Summitates, the tops of Herbs.
Supercilium, see Cilium. Superfoetatio, is when after one Conception another
succeeds, so that both are in the Womb together: Sennertus makes mention of
frequent Cases of this Nature. Superpurgatio, see Hypercatharsis. Supplantalia,
are Plasters applied to the Feet; these for the most part are made of Leven,
Mustard, wild Radish, Salt, Soap, Gunpowder, etc. Suppositorium, a
Suppository, it is compounded of Honey, Salt, and Purging Powders. Suppuratio,
see Abscessus. Sura, the same with Os Fibulae. Sutura Ossium, a Suture is the
Juncture of Bones (of the Scull) like the Teeth of Saws meeting together.
Sutura, is a Connection of the Sides or Lips of a Wound: This is of two sorts,
Actual, which is done with a Needle of a triangular point, a Pipe, or Cane, and
waxed Thread, first in the middle of the Wound you must sew it together with a
double Thread, and having made a knot, cut it off; the rest of the Wound must
be sewed up with a single Thread; care must be taken that the Stitches are not
set too wide, nor too close, especially not too close, that there may be room
for any corrupt Matter bred in the Wound to work out: The other sort of Suture
is much like the way that Skinners use to sew Skins together; this is proper in
Wounds of the Intestines, and in Cuts of the Veins and Arteries. Sycosis, is an
Excrescence of the Flesh about the Fundament. It Is also an Ulcer so called from
the resemblance of a Fig; this is of two kinds, one hard and round; the other
soft and flat: Out of the hard issues a very small quantity of glutinous
Matter; out of the Moist proceeds a greater quantity, and of an ill Smell:
These Ulcers grow in those patts only which are covered with Hair; the hard and
round chiefly in the Beard, the moist for the most part in the Scalp.
Syderatio, see Apoplexia. Symbebecota, are Accidents which happen to those that
are well, to distinguish 'em from Symptoms which happen in Diseases. Symmetria,
is a good Temper. Sympasma, see Phaenigmus. Sympepsis, is a Coction of those
Humors which are growing into an Imposthume. Symphysis, is the Joining of two
Bones of which neither has a proper distinct Motion: This is either without any
Medium, or else with it, as with a Cartilage or Grisle, a Ligament or Flesh.
Symptoma, is a preternatural Disposition of the Body occasioned by some
Disease: This is either a Disease caused by another Disease; or else the Cause
of a Disease proceeding from another Disease; or else simply a Symptom: This
last is either some Action of the Body hindered or disturbed, some fault of the
Excrement, or change of the natural Temper. Synactica, are Medicines that
contract any part. Synaitia, see Continens causa. Synanche, is a sort of
Squinancy, which quite stops the Breath; or a preternatural Inflammation of the
Muscles of the Jaws. Synarthrosis, is a joining of Bones by a Grisle.
Synch^ndrosis, is the joining of Bones by a Grisle. Synchysis, is a
preternatural Confusion of the Blood or Humors in the Eye. Syncope, is a sudden
Prostration or Swouning with a very weak or no Pulse, and a Depravation of
Sense and Motion. Syncritica, are relaxing Medicines. Syndesmus, see
Ligamentum. Syndrome, is a Concurrence of several Symptoms in the same Disease.
Synedreuonta, are common Symptoms which accompany the Disease; and yet neither
flow from the Nature of the Disease, nor are necessary Concomitants of it; but
do notwithstanding signify the Greatness, Continuance, etc. of the Disease.
Synocha, is a continued intermitting Fever; this lasts for many days with a
great Heat, sometimes Putrefaction of the Blood: It is either quotidian,
tertian, or quartan. Synochos, is a continued Fever without any Intermission or
Abatement of the Heat, which continues for many days: This is either Simple, or
accompanied with Putrefaction. Syntasis, is a preternatural Distention of the
parts. Synteretica, is that part of Physic which gives Rules for the
Preservation of Health. Syntexis, is a Consumption and Colliquation of the
Body, in which first the Flesh is wasted, and afterward the Substance of the
more solid parts. Synthesis, is either the Frame and Structure of the whole
Body; or more strictly the Composure of the Bones. Synulotica, see
Cicatrisantia. Syringa, a Syringe, is an Instrument which is used in injecting
Liquors into the Fundament, Womb, Ears, etc. Syringomata, are Chirurgions
Knives which they open Fistula's with. Syringotomia, is the Incision of the
Fistula. Syringotomus, the same. Syrupus, Syrup. Sysarcosis, is the connection
of Bones by Flesh. Sysygia, is the Natural Temper. Systema, the same that
Synthesis. Systole, is the Contraction of the Ventricles of the Heart, whereby
the Blood is forcibly driven into the great Artery.
T.
TAbella, is a solid Medicine taken inwardly, made of Powder, and three or four
times as much Sugar, dissolved in a convenient Liquor, boiled to the
Consistence of a Syrup, and made into little round Cakes upon a Marble-Stone.
Tabes, see Atrophia. Tabes dorsalis, a Consumption in the spinal Marrow, most
incident to Lechers, and fresh Bride-grooms; they are without a Fever, eat
well, and melt or consume away: If you ask one in this Disease an account of
himself, he will tell you, that there seem so many Pismires to fall from his
Head down upon his spinal Marrow; when he eases Nature either by Urine or
Stool, there flows thin liquid Seed plentifully; nor can he generate, but when
he sleeps, whether it be with his Wife or no; he has lascivious Dreams. When he
goes or runs any way, but especially up a steep place, he grows weak and short
breathed, his Head is heavy, and his Ears tingle: So in progress of Time being
taken with violent Fevers; he dies of a Fever called Lipyria, wherein the
external Parts are cold, and the internal burn at the same time. Tabula, see
Tabella and Morsuli. Tabum, is a thin sort of Matter that comes from an ill
Ulcer. Tactus, the Touch, is a Sense whereby the tactile Qualities of Bodies
are offered to the common Sensory (and there perceived) by the different motion
of Nerves diffused through the whole Body, the Skin being intermediate: Or
Touch is the Sense of a thing touched, offered to the common Sensory by the
Nerves, the Skin being intermediate, and there perceived. Talpa, is a Tumor, so
called, because that as a Mole (in Latin Talpa) creeps under ground; so this
feeds upon the Scull under the Skin: It may be referred to the Species of
Atheromas; which see. Talparia, the same that Talpa. Talus, see Astragalus.
Taraxis, is a Perturbation of the Humors of the Eye, the Stomach, or the
Entrails. Tarsus, is a cartilaginous Extremity of the Eyelids, whence the
Hairs spring, called Cilium. Also eight backward Bones of the Foot, ordered
like Grates. Tecmarsis, is a Conjecture at Diseases. Telephium, is the same
Ulcer with Chironia, which see; it is so called from Telephus, who was a long
time troubled with this Disease. Temperamentum, Temperament, is a Quality that
results from the Union and Mixture of Elements: See Crasis. Temperies, see
Crasis. Tempus, the Temple, is a lateral part of the Scull in the middle
betwixt the Ears and Eyes, where Cephalic Plasters are applied for the
Toothache, and Headache. Tendo, a Tendon, is a similar nervous part annexed to
Muscles and Bones, whereby the voluntary Motion of the Members is chiefly
performed: The generality of Surgeons scarce ever distinguish betwixt a
Tendon and a Nerve. Tenesmus, Tenasmus, is a continual Desire of going to
Stool, yet attended with an Inability of doing any thing, but bloody slimy
Matter. Tentigo, see Priapismus. Terebrum, see Modiolus. Teredum, the same that
Caries. Teretrum, see Modiolus. Tergum, see Dorsum. Terminthus, is a swelling
in the Thighs with a black Pimple at the top, as big as the Fruit of the
Turpentine-tree. Terra mortua, is the earthy part that remains after
Elixivation, destitute of all active efficacious Qualities. Tertiana Febris
intermittens, a Tertian Ague, is an Effervescence of the Blood every third day,
which with its various Symptoms, comes exactly at a set time. The Cause of it
is Nitro-sulphureous Blood; and it is either a true Tertian or a spurious.
Testes Muliebres, see Orchis. Testes viriles, Men's Testicles, consist of
several small Vessels wherein the Seed is generated: It is covered on the
outside with several Tunicks. Testes Cerebri, are two backward Prominences of
the Brain, called Testes, from the likeness they have to Testicles: They are
bigger in Men than in Brutes. Testudo Cerebri, see Fornix. Testudo, is a soft,
large Swelling, or not very hard, in the Head, broad, in form of an Arch or
Tortoise, from which Resemblance it takes its Name. At the beginning it grows
like a Chest-nut, afterward like an Egg, wherein is contained a soft Matter
clothed with a certain Tunick (whence some refer this sort of Tumor to
Meliceres, which see) which sticks so close to the Scull, that many times it
infects and corrupts it. Tetanus, is a constant Contraction, whereby a Limb
grows rigid and inflexible. The Cause of it is, sometimes a Relaxation or Palsy
in some other Muscles, which when they are relaxed, the opposite Muscles act
too strongly, so that they draw the part wholly to themselves, which ought to
consist as it were in an Aequilibrium betwixt both: Yet sometimes such a
permanent Contraction may proceed, from the Tendons being loaded and obstructed
with serous Matter, which thereupon grow rigid and stiff: This Distemper is
frequent in the Scurvies, that the Patient can extend neither Joint nor Limb:
The Tendons in the Back are sometimes contracted into a round globular Form,
which by reason of such an Afflux of Humors upon them, draw the Bones out of
their due place, and cause an hunched Back, or a stooping and bending of it: It
is usually distinguished into Universal, of which there are three sorts,
Emprosthotonos, Opisthotonos, and Tetanos, properly so called; and Particular,
which respects a certain Member, or a particular Joint. Tetrapharmacum, is a
Medicine consisting of four Ingredients, as Vnguentum Basilicum. Theorema, see
Theoria. Theoretica, see Theoria. Theoria, is the speculative part of Physic;
whence Theorema, a Speculation, and Theoretica, those things which belong to
the speculative part of Physic. Therapeutica, is that part of Physic which
delivers the Method of Healing. Theriaca, Triacle, is a Medicine that expels
Poison. Therioma, is a wild cruel Ulcer, like Carcinoma, which see. Thermae,
are natural Baths. Thermantica, are healing Medicines. Therminthus, see
Terminthus. Thermomethron, is natural Heat, which is perceived by the Pulses.
Thlipsis, is a Compression of Vessels. Thorax, or medius Venture, the Chest, is
all that Cavity which is circumscribed above by the Neck-bones, below by the
Diaphragme, before by the Breast Bone, behind by the Back-bones, on the sides
by the Ribs; it is of an Oval Figure, contains the Heart and Lungs, and is
covered on the inside with a Membrane called Pleura. Hippocrates and Aristotle
took all that space from the Neck-bone to the very Secrets, both the middle and
lowermost Cavity, for the Thorax. Thorexis, is the drinking of a generous Wine,
which warms the Breast. Thrombus, is the Coagulation of Blood or Milk into
Clots or Clusters. Thymiama, see Suffitus. Thymus, is a Glandule in the Throat,
which separates the watery Humor, called Lympha, from the Blood, and empties
it by the Lymphatick Vessels. It is also a fleshy Tumor that hangs upon the
Body like a Wart, of a Color like the Flower of Time, whence it has its Name.
Thyroarytaenoides, is a pair of Muscles that proceed from the Cartilage called
Scutiformis, and extending themselves forward to the Sides of the Arytaenoides
(the fourth and fifth part of the Larynx) serve to contract and close the
opening of the Larynx. Thyroidaeae Glandulae, are two, of a viscous, solid,
bloody Substance, wonderfully adorned with Vessels of all sorts, and hard
Membranes, almost of the bigness and shape of an Hen's Egg, situate about the
lower seat of the Larynx, at the sides of the Cartilages of the Thorax,
Cricoides, and some first rings of the Windpipe, upon which Parts they
immediately lie; yet so as they may be easily separated, unless where they
stick something obstinately, about the beginning and the end; Nature has placed
them in those parts, that they may warm them when cold, receive superfluous
Moisture, and contribute to the Ornament of the Neck. Thyroides, is the
Cartilage, called Scutiformis, of the Larynx: Also the Hole of the Os pubis.
Tibia, the Leg, is the part betwixt the Knee and the Ancle. It consists of two
Bones: One outward, called Focile minus; another Inward and larger, which has
usurped the Name of the whole, and is called Tibia, Focile majus others call
it, and Canna major. The upper end has a Process which is received by a Cavity
in the Thigh, and two oblong Cavities to admit the Heads of the Thigh Bone, the
Depth of which Cavities is increased by a Cartilage that is annexed thereunto
by Ligaments: This Cartilage is movable, soft, slippery, moistened with an
unctuous Humor, thick in its Circumference, and smaller toward the Center,
whence it is called Lunata, made like an Half Moon; there are rugged sharp
Ligaments before, which Increase the Lunary Cartilages. The fore part, which is
acute and long, is called Spina: There is below a prominent and gibbous Process
in the inner side, nigh the Foot, and is called Malleolus externus; one of the
Ankle-bones. Tinctura, a Tincture, or Elixir, is the Extraction of the Color,
Quality, and Strength of any thing. Tinea, if running Sores in the Head full of
little Holes, called Achores, continue long, or be too slowly or ill cured,
they grow into Tineas, crusty stinking Ulcers of the Head, which gnaw and
consume its Skin; therefore it is deservedly reckoned amongst the Diseases of
Children, but when they are a little grown; for tho Adult Persons are sometimes
troubled with this Disease, yet they contracted the Rudiments and Seeds of it
in their Infancy. It is called Tinea, which signifies a Moth, from those little
Worms which eat and consume Clothes; because those Ulcers prey upon the Skin of
the Head, as those Animals upon Clothes. What the Greeks called this Distemper
is not so obvious. Tinnitus Aurium, is a certain Buzzing or tingling in the
Ears, proceeding from Obstruction, or something that irritates the Ear, whereby
the Air that is shut up is continually moved by the beating of the Arteries,
and the Drum of the Ear is lightly verberated, whence arises a Buzzing and
Noise. Tometica, the same that Attenuantia. Tomotocia, the same that
Hysterotomia. Tonica, are those things which being externally applied to and
rubbed into the Limbs, strengthen the Nerves and Tendons. Tonotica, the same
that Tonica. Tonicus, the same that Tetanus. Tonsillae, see Paristhmia. Tophus,
is a stony Concretion in any part. Topica, are Medicines applied outwardly, as
a Plaster, Cataplasm, etc. Topinaria, the same that Talpa. Torcular Herophili,
is that place where the four Cavities of the thick Skin of the Brain are
joined. Tormina alvi, the same that Colica Passio. Toxica, are poisonous
Medicaments, wherewith Barbarians use to anoint their Arrows. Trachea, the same
that aspera Arteria. Trachoma, is a Scab, or Asperity of the inner part of the
Eyelid. Trageae, differ not from Powders, but that the Ingredients whereof
they are prepared, are not beat so small: And they are applied externally to
the Body, either put to or resolved into Smoke, or they are put into a Linen
Bag, and then into Wine or other Liquor, that they may communicate their
Strength and Qualities to it. Yet sometimes they are compounded of some sort of
Antidotes, or Counter-poisons, and other odoriferous things, and of simple
Medicines reduced into a Powder, with an Addition of Sugar. In the making
these, they commonly take one Ounce of Sugar to every Dram of Ingredient,
especially those which are bitter and unpleasant. Tragema, the same that
Tragaea. Tragus, is the extreme Brim of the Ear. Traulus and Traulotes, is a
Stammering, or fault in pronouncing the Letters L and R. Trauma, see Troma.
Traumatica, are those things, which being taken in Decoctions and Potions,
fetch the serous and sharp Humors out of the Body, and so attenuate the Blood,
that it may be conveniently driven to the wounded, broken, or bruised parts.
Tremor, see Tromos. Trepanum, the same that Modiolus. Triangulare ossiculum,
the triangular little Bone, is that which is placed betwixt the Suture called
Lambdoides, and another called Sagittalis; which they say conduces too to the
Falling Sickness. Trichiasis, the same that Phalangosis: Also hairy Urine, such
as by reason of pituitous Humors Hairs seem to swim in. Tricongius, is a
Measure that contains eighteen Sextaries, a Sextary being about a Pint and an
half. Triens, is the Third part of a physical Pound, containing three Ounces.
Tripsis, is Contrition, or Contusion. Trismus, is the grinding of the Teeth, or
a Convulsion of a Muscle of the Temples, whereby the Teeth gnash whether one
will or no. Tritaeophyes, is an Ague that comes every Third day. Tritaeus, the
same that Febris Tertiana intermittens. Trituratio, is a Pounding, whereby
Medicines are reduced to Powder, that they may be the better mixed. Trochanter,
the same that Rotator. Trochisci, Trochies, are round marked things made of
Pouders, mixed with viscous Extracts and made up into Paste, and then into
round little Bodies, which are to be dried up in the Shade: They are called
also Pastilli. Trochlea, the same that Bathmis. Trochlearis, is the upper, or
greater oblique Muscle of the Eye. Troma, is a Wound from an external Cause.
Trombosis, is a Coagulation of Milk or Blood in Human Bodies. Tromos, is a
Trembling, or a Depravation of the voluntary Motion of Members. Trysmus, see
Trismus. Tubae Fallopianae, are two slender Passages, proceeding from the Womb,
which when they are a little removed from it, grow gradually wider; they have
large Holes or Orifices, which almost lie shut, the extreme Edges falling flat;
yet if they be diligently opened and dilated, they represent the extreme
Orifice of a brazen Pipe. Their Use is to receive the Eggs from the Testicles
and carry them into the Womb, according to the excellent R. de Graaf. the Truth
whereof is evident from the Inspection of Rabits dissected. Tubercula, the same
that Phymata. Tulus, the same that Callus. Tumor, Swelling, is when the parts
of humane Bodies are enlarged and extended beyond their due Proportion, so that
they cannot perform their Operations. Tunica, the same that Membrana. Tunica
retiformis, see Retina and Amphiblestroides. Turunda, the same that Turundula.
Turundula, signifies a Tent put into Wounds or Ulcers. Tussis, a Cough, is a
vehement Efflation of the Breast, whereby that which is offensive to the Organs
of Breathing is expelled by the Force of the Air. Tympanias, the same that
Tympanites. Tympanites, Tympanias, Aqua intercus sicca, a Tympany, is a fixed,
constant, equable, hard, resisting Tumor of the Abdomen, which, being beat,
sounds: It proceeds from a stretching Inflaation of the parts, and of the
membranaceous Bowels, whose Fibers are too much swollen with Animal Spirits, and
hindered from receeding by the nervous Juice which obstructs the Passage; to
which Distemper there is consequently added, as the Complement of all, an
abundance of flatulent Matter in the places that are empty. Tympanum, the Drum
of the Ear, is a small, thin, orbicular, transparent Membrane, stretched over
the Cavity of the inner part of the Ear, which contains the natural congenite
Air: Its Use is Hearing. There is also a Cavity in the Ear, called Concha.
Typhodes, is a symptomatical, continued, burning Fever; as if it were from the
Inflammation of the Bowels. Typhomania, is a Delirium with a Phrensy, and a
Lethargy. Typhonia, the same. Typus, or Periodus and Circuitus, is an Order of
Fevers, consisting of Intension and Remission, or increasing and decreasing.
Tyria, the fame that Ophiasis. Tyroides, see Thyroides. Tyrosis, is when Milk
which is eaten curdles into a Substance like Cheese.
V.
VAcuatio, see Evacuatio. Vacui dies, are those Days wherein an imperfect and
ill Crisis frequently happens; and those are 6, 8, 10, 12, 16, 18. to which
some add, 22, 23, 25, 29, 30, 32, 33, 35, 38, 39. these are called medicinal
Days, because Medicines may be given on them. Vagina uteri, it is called also
Matrix, Vteri Ostium, Vteri Cervix, is that Passage in which a Man's Yard is
sheathed as it were in Coition; it is placed in the Hypogastrium, and is of an
oblong Figure, and of different Magnitude according to the Age of the Woman,
and her Use of Men; its upper part is as thick as the breadth of a Straw, but
the lower twice or thrice as thick again: it is about as broad as the Gut
Rectum, nervous and wrinkled within: It is perforated with a great many little
Pores, especially in the lower part, about the end of the urinary Passage.
Vaginalis tunica, see Elythroides. Valetudo, is either a good or ill
Disposition of the Parts of the Body. Valvulae, are little thin Membranes in
Vessels or Fibers, like Folding-doors as it were; they have received different
Names, according to the Diversity of their Figuration, as Sigmoides, like the
Letter Sigma, Semilunares, like an Halsmoon, etc. They are found in Veins,
Arteries, Lymphatick and Lacteal Vessels, and in musculous Fibers, which were
first discovered by our Curiosity, and of which we have discoursed in a
particular Tract: The Use of them is to hinder the Blood and other Liquors,
from returning the same way they came. Valvulae, Valves, are also found in the
Intestines, in the small and great Guts, especially in the Jejunum, and about
the beginning of the Ileum, which are called Semi-circular from their Figure.
These Valves or Folds grow more and more oblique by little and little the
nearer you come to the Ileum, and at the beginning of the Ileum they are less
oblique than farther on. In like manner near the end of the Jejunum, they are
gradually more and more distant from one another; and so in the Ileum too. At
the beginning and in the middle of the Jejunum, they are scarce distant half a
Thumbs breadth; in the Ileum a whole Thumbs breadth and more. They yield a
little if thrust with your Finger, and move here and there: At the beginning of
the Colon there is a fleshy and circular Valve, besides several others in that
Gut. The Use of them is to stop the Meat a little, that it may be the better
fermented, the Chyle distributed, the adjacent Parts be cherished with Heat,
and lastly, that it ascends not again. Vaporarium, is when the Patient does not
sit in Liquor, but receives Vapors through an Hole, under which there is
placed a Pot full of apposite and boiling hot Ingredients, which cooling, fresh
Matter is added. Varicosum corpus, is that Contexture of Spermatick Vessels
which enters the Testicles. Variolae, the small Pox, consists in a contagious
Disorder of the Blood, contracted from the Air, or otherwise; accompanied with
a continued wandering Fever, which sometimes increases, sometimes decreases,
with a Pain in the Head and Loins, Anixety and Inquietude, and with a breaking
forth of Pimples or Wheals, which swell and suppurate. The famous Willis
attributes the Cause of this Distemper to some filthy and fermentative Matter,
which is communicated to the Faetus, together with the Nourishment, from the
Womb; but how this can hold in Adult Persons, whose Blood has undergone so many
Alterations, I could never yet understand from his Writings. It seems rather to
consist in a depraved Temperature of Air, with a peculiar Disposition of the
Blood and the nervous Juice toward this Distemper. This poisonous Quality of
the Air first infects the nervous Juice (whence proceeds the Pain of the Head
and Loins) wherewith the Blood boils and ferments, and parts into little Pieces
or Clots, which in the Course of Circulation stick to the outward Parts, and to
the inner Viscera too; after a while they grow ripe and suppurate. Varix, see
Cirsos. Varus, see Jonthus. Vas breve, see Breve vas. Vasa, the Vessels, are
Cavities through which the Liquors of the Body pass, as a Vein, an Artery,
lymphatick Vessels, the Ductus that conveys the Chyle, and those of the
Spittle. Vasa lactea, the Milky Vessels, in the Mesentery, they which reach
from the Guts, especially the small Guts, to the Glandules in the Mesentery,
are said to be of the First sort; and they which reach from those Glandules to
the Bag that carries the Chyle, are of the Second sort. Their Use is to convey
the Chyle from the Guts to the little Bag that holds the Chyle, and thence to
the Ductus, which conveys it along the Thorax. Asellius was the first who
discovered them, and the dextrous F. Ruischius afterward discovered Valves in
them. Vasa Lymphatica, see Venae Lymphaticae. Vena, a Vein, the Species of them
are the Vena cava, the Vena portae, the lymphatick and milky Veins. Arteries
are sometimes taken for Veins. They consist of four Tunicks, a nervous, a
glandulous, a muscular, and a membranaceous one. The Branches of the Vena cava
above the Heart, are called Jugular Veins, which go toward the Head; they
which go toward the Arms, are called Axillary; that about the Heart Coronary;
in the Lungs Pulmonary; in the Liver Hepatick, or Liver-Vein; in the Diaphragme
Phrenica; in the Thighs Crural; in the Reins Emulgent; and so from its various
Ramification, it is variously denominated. Vena portae, is only in the Abdomen,
and extends its Roots to the Liver, Spleen, Ventricle, Mesentery, Intestines,
Pancreas, Cawl, etc. The Office of the Vena cava and portae, is, to convey the
Blood that is more than what seryes for Nourishment, to the Liver, or Heart, or
Lungs. Venae Lymphaticae, the Lymphatick Veins, receive the Lympha from the
conglobated Glandules, and discharge themselves either into the Sanguinary
Veins, or into the Receptacle of the Chyle. Venae lacteae, see Vasa lactea.
Venae sectio, is the Opening of a Vein, which is either for Evacuation, or to
derive the Blood to another part, etc. In Bleeding respect must always be had
to the Strength of the Person. There never ought to be taken away above a
Pound; but the better way is, to take away first six or eight Ounces, and if
Occasion require, to repeat the Operation. A Vein is to be cut according to the
length of the Fibers, and not Across or Traverse. Veneris OEstrum, the same
that Clitoris. Venture infimus, see Hypogastrium. Ventosa, see Cucurbitula.
Ventres, see Cavitates. Ventriculus, the Stomach, is a membranous Bowel in the
Abdomen, under the Diaphragme, betwixt the Liver and the Spleen, consisting of
four Tunicks; a nervous, fibrous, glandulous, and membranous one: It has two
Orifices, one on the Right Hand, called Pylorus or Janitor, whereat the Meat is
sent out into the Guts; another on the Left Hand, at which the Meat enters: Its
Office is to concoct or ferment the Meat; it is called also Stomachus and
Aqualiculus. Ventriculi cerebri, the Ventricles of the Brain, are four; the Use
of them is to receive the serous Humors, and to bring them by the Pelvis to
the Pituitary Glandule; or into the Processus mammillares by the Os cribriforme
to the Nostrils. They are nothing but Complications of the Brain, which
happened there as 'twere by accident. Ventriculi cordis, the Ventricles of the
Heart, are two; the first or Right Ventricle receives the Blood from the Vena
cava, and sends it to the Lungs; the Left receives the Blood from the Lungs,
and sends it through the whole Body by the Arteria Aorta: In the Systole or
Contraction of the Ventricles the Blood is sent out: In the Diastole or
Dilatation it is let into the Heart: Yet others explain it on the contrary,
because they understand not Greek. Vermes, see Lumbrici. Vermiformis processus,
is the Prominence of the Cerebellum, so called from its shape. Vertebra, see
Spondylus. Vertigo, see Scotomia. Verrucae, Warts, are a sort of Tubercula;
they are called also Porri, because if you look into the tops of them, they
seem to resemble the Capillaments, or little Threads of Onyons: They are an
hard, high, callous, little Tuberculum, or Swelling, which break out of the
Skin, and breed in any part of the Body. Vertex, the Crown of the Head, is the
gibbous middle part of the fore and back part of the Head. Vesica, the Bladder,
is an hollow membranaceous Part, wherein any Liquor that is to be excerned, is
contained; as the Bladder that contains the Urine, the Gall, the Seed. Vesica,
destillatoria, is a Brazen or Copper Vessel, which contains any thing that is
to be destilled. Vesicatoria, are Medicines which act upon and rarify the
Spirits and serous Particles, gather them betwixt the Skin and Cuticula, the
thin fine Skin, and consequently separate them, and raise little Bladers full
of serous Matter. Vesicula fellis, see Folliculus fellis. Vespertilionum alae,
Bats Wings, are two broad membranous Ligaments, on each side one, wherewith the
bottom of the Womb is loosely tied to the Bones of the Flank. Aretaeus likens
them to Bats-wings. Veternus, see Lethargus. Vibex, see Enchymoma. Victus
ratio, is a way Living, whereby Health is preserved, and Diseases repelled by
things convenient: It consists in the Use of things called non Naturales, not
natural (which see in their place;) and it is in Diseases threefold, thick,
moderate, thin; the thin is again either simply thin, more thin, or the
thinnest of all. Vigilia, Waking, is an Agitation and Expansion of animal
Spirits in the Pores of the Brain, whereby the Motions of Objects are easily
represented to the common Sensory by the external Organs; which Spirits if they
be too much expanded and agitated, they cause an obstinate long Wakening. Vigor
Morbi, see Acme. Vinum Cos, is a Wine of good Color, Smell, and Taste. Vinum
Hypocraticum, is a Wine wherein Sugar and Spices have been infused, and is
afterward strained through a Bag, which they call Manica Hypocratis, which
see. Vinum Medicatum, is a Wine wherein Medicines have been infused for the use
of sick People. Virga, see Penis. Virginale claustrum, see Hymen. Viscera, are
Organs contained in the three great Cavities of the Body: They are called also
Exta and Interranea. Visus, Sight, is a Sense whereby Light and Colors, are
perceived from the Motion of subtle Matter upon the Tunica retina of the Eye.
Vitalis facultas, the Vital Faculty, is an Action whereby a Man lives, which is
performed, whether we design it or no; such are the Motions of the Heart,
Respiration, Nutrition, etc. It depends chiefly upon the Cerebellum. It is the
same with Natural Faculty, tho the Ancients distinguished them, placing the
Natural in the Liver, and the vital in the Heart. Vitalis Indicatio, is a way
whereby Strength and Vigor are continually renewed and preserved. Vitiligo, a
sort of Leprosy; there are Three kinds of them. Alphus where the Color is
white, something rough, and not continued, like so many Drops here and there;
but sometimes it spreads broader, and with some Intermissions. Melas differs in
Color, because it is black, and like a Shade; in the rest they agree. Leuce
has something like Alphus, but it is whiter, and descends deeper, and in it the
Hairs are white, and like Down: All these spread, but in some quicker, in
others slower. Vitreus Humor, see Humores Oculi. Vlceratio, see Exulceratio.
Vlcus, an Uucer, is a Solution of the Continuum, proceeding from a consuming
Matter, in the soft parts of the Body, and attended with a Diminution of
Magnitude. Vlna, or Focile majus, is the greater Bone betwixt the Arm and the
Wrist, which is jointed upward with the Shoulder by Ginglimus (which see,) and
therefore it has there both Processes and Cavities: Two oblong Processes, and
as it were triangular, and rugged, that the Ligaments may knit it strongly. The
fore-most and upper-most is less, and goes into the Cavity of the Shoulder: The
backward Process is thicker and larger, ends in an obtuse Angle, and enters the
hinder Cavity of the Shoulder; the Latins call it Gibberus: In the middle of
these there is a great Cavity like a Semicircle. It has yet another external
lateral Cavity for the Head of the Radius, or lesser Bone of the Cubit; it is
joynted at the lower end with the Wrist, both by a Cartilage in the middle, and
by an acute Process, and therefore called Styloides (or like a sharp-pointed
Pen used in Writing-Tables) whence there arises a Ligament, which fastens the
Cubit and the Joint of the Wrist together. Vlomelia, is a Soundness of the
whole Body. Vmbilicus, the Navel, is a Boss in the middle of the Abdomen, to
which the Navel-string in a Faetus is joined, which is cut off after Delivery.
Vncia, an Ounce, is the Twelfth part of a Physicians Pound, containing eight
Drams. Vndimia, the same that Oedema. Vnguentum, an Ointment, is a Medicine
outwardly applied, of a Consistence something thicker than a Linimentum: It is
called also Vnguen. Vnguis, a Nail, is a similar, flexible, white, and hard
part, which defends the Fingers from external Injuries, and in some measure
adorns them. The root of it is joined to a certain Ligament, and by reason of
the neighboring Tendons it becomes sensible: They seem to be made of a
Collection of very little Pipes, which adhere extremely thick to one onother,
and shoot out into length. Where they begin, there you find certain nervous
Fibers like so many small Nipples lengthened, the lengthened parts whereof are
seen as far as the Nail: If they be forcibly torn off, they leave diverse Holes,
so that the Horney Substance of the Nails looks like a Net. Under the Nails
there is a pappy sort of Body, which has its Vessels of Excretion. The Apices,
or tops of the Nails, are they which grow beyond the Flesh; the Parts which are
cut, are called the Segmina, the parings of the Nails, the parts under the
Nails, are the (...), the hidden parts; the White semilunar part next the Root,
is the Rise of the Nail; the very beginnings that grow into the Skin, are
called the Roots of the Nails; the Sides, the Clefts; the white Spots,
Nubecula, little Clouds, etc. Vngula, is a sort of hooked Instrument to draw a
dead Faetus out of the Womb. Vngula Oculi, the same that Pterygium. Vola, is
the Palm of the Hand; also the Cavity of the Foot. Volatica, the same that
Lichen. Volsella, or Vulsella, is an Instrument to pull up Hairs with by the
Root, Tweezers: Or a Chyrurgions little Tongs, which are of different shape
according to the Diversity of their Use. Volvulus, see Ileon and Chordapsus.
Vomica, is a fault in the Lungs, from Heterogeneous Blood, which being lodged
perhaps in one of the little Bladdery Cells there, occasions neither a Fever
nor a Cough; but afterward when it is increased, it oppresses the neighboring
Sanguiferous Vessels, and impregnates the Blood as it passes along with its
Effluviums; whereupon there succeeds a small Fever, accompanied with Inquietude
and Leanness; at last when it is full grown and concocted into Matter, it makes
a Nest as it were and lodges there. Vomitorium, is a Medicine taken inwardly,
made of Emeticks, or things that provoke Vomiting, infused, dissolved, or
decocted. Vomitus, a Vomiting, is a violent and inverse Motion of the
Ventricle, wherein its fleshy Fibers being irritated, and contracted toward
the left Orifice, send out at the Mouth whatsoever is contained in the Stomach.
Vrachus is the urinary Passage in Faetus's, reaching from the Bladder to the
Membrane called Allanitodes; which after the Faetus is born becomes like a
Ligament, and is that which suspends the Bladder; it is joined with the Navel
and the bottom of the Bladder. Vranismus, the same that Palatum. Vrentia, see
Pyrotica. Vreter, is a fistulous membranaceous Vessel, which proceeds from both
Reins, and opens between the Membranes of the Bladder, by which the Urine
passes from the Reins to the Bladder: Celsus calls it the White Vein. Vrethra,
or Fistula, is the urinary Passage, whereby the Urine is discharged at the Yard
in Man, and in like manner in Women: It serves also for the Ejection of Seed.
The seminal little Bladders, empty themselves into it by two Holes at the
beginning of it, when there is occasion; which Bladders or Vessels are
surrounded with glandulous Prostates, perforated with several Holes; to which
there is a little piece of Flesh affixed. Vrinaria Fistula, the same that
Vrethra. Vretica, the same that Diuretica. Vrina, see Vron. Vrocrisis, the same
that Vrocritica. Vrocriterium, is a Judgment upon Urine. Vrocritica, are Signs
which are observed from Urines. Vromantia, see Vrocriterium. Vromantis, is one
who can divine something from Urines. Vron, Vrina, Lotium, is a serous
Excrement conveyed from the Blood, that passes the Reins by the Ureters to the
Bladder, and so is excerned when occasion requires: It consists of much Salt, a
little Sulphur, of Earth and Spirit. Vroscopia, is the Inspection of Urine.
Vteri osculum, see Osculum uteri. Vteri Procidentia, see Procidentia uteri.
Vsnea, is Moss which grows upon Bones or Trees. Vterus, the Womb, is an
organical part placed in a Woman's Abdomen, which is divided into the Bottom,
the Neck, and the Sheath: It has two broad Ligaments, and two round: It is of a
nervous and fibrous Substance; and is of different Thickness according to the
difference of Age, and time of going with Child. At the bottom within, there is
a Cavity whence the Courses flow, wherein likewise Generation and Conception
are made: Before it is the Bladder; behind it is the Gut Rectum. Vulneraria,
see Traumatica. Vulnas a Wound, is a Solution of the Continuumu with some
external Instrument. It is different, as well according to the place or part
whence it is inflicted, as upon a Nerve, or the Flesh, as according to the
Instrument which inflicts it; so that if it be done by a sharp keen Instrument,
it is called Sectio and Incisio, cutting or Incision; if by pricking, it is
called Punctura or Punctio. Vulsella, see Volsella. Vulva, is a Woman's secret
Parts: See Gunnus. Uvula, see Cion. Wea Membrana, or Choroides, is almost
altogether Continuous on the inside to the Tunica Scelerotis; it is perforated
in the fore part, and leaves a space for the Apple of the Eye, which may be
contracted or dilated.
X.
XErophthalmia, is a dry Bleardness or Bloodshot of the Eyes. Xerotes, is a dry
Disposition of Body. Xiphoides, is the pointed Cartilage of the Breast. Xyster,
is an Instrument to shave and scrape Bones with.
Z.
ZErna, the same that Lichen. Zirbus with the Arabians, is the same that
Omentum the Cawl. Zone, is that part of the Body where we are begirt; also a
sort of Herpes called Holy-fire. Zoogonia, is a Generation of perfect Animals
born alive. Zootomia, is an artificial Dissection of Animals. Zotica, is the
vital Faculty. Zygoma, is the jugal Bone about the Temples. Zymoma, is a
Ferment, as the nitrous Air, the Watery Juice in the Mouth, the acide Liquor in
the Stomach, the Blood in the Spleen, etc. Zymosis, see Fermentatio.
The END.
These Books sold by John Gellibrand, at the Golden Ball in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
Theoph. Bonnetti Anatomia Practica, Fol. 2 vol.

Baudrandi Geographia, ordine Litterarum disposita, Fol. 2 vol.

Zodiacus Medico-Gallicus, in tribus Tomis, in Quarto.

The Morals of Plutarch translated from the Greek Original, by several Hands in
Octavo, now in the Press.

Publ. Virgilii Maronis Opera, cum Notis Selectissimis Johannis Minellii, in
Twelves.


