A BLOODY FIGHT AT SEA Disputed and maintained by the Royal Navy, under the
Conduct and Command of His Highness the Prince of Wales, with the exact and
true particulars thereof, the number killed, wounded, and thrown overboard.
And the further proceedings of the Earl of Warwick concerning the Prince, with
a Letter to his Highness, from the English Seamen, and their resolution
thereupon. Also, exceeding good News from the Isle of Wight for Peace.

depiction of the sea battle between the Swallow and the Admiral depiction of
the ship the 'Swallow' The Swallow.
depiction of the ship the 'Admiral' Admiral.


Printed for R. Emerson, 1648. Sept ye 28

BLOODY NEWS From the Princes NAVY
Declaring The proceedings of the Revolted Mariners, and Sea-Royalists, and
their bloody Fight near Goree Harbor.
Noble Sir,
THe Princes Royal Fleet continues their great insolent and deboystness to the
Flemmings, and runs ashore at their own will and pleasure, drinking and
disordering themselves, and fighting with the Dutchmen, insomuch, that the
Boars, and other of the Inhabitants began to rise, forced them aboard their
ships, and are now resolved to suffer no more to land.

Whereupon the Sea Royalists began to mutiny amongst themselves, and at the
last fell into such an agony and passion, That they encountered each other,
fought resolutely, disputing their Decks with half Pikes, Muskets, Swords,
and other Warlike weapons, killing near upon twenty, and wounded many, throwing
them over shipboard into the Sea.

In which insurrection some of the Commanders in chief were wounded, who used
all means possible to beget a calm to lay so great and bloody a storm, and
after great diligence, and much importunity therein, they prevailed, promising
a general Act of Oblivion to all the Abettors, Fomenters, and others, who had
a hand in the said Riot or Insurrection.

The aforesaid differences being composed, a Letter were sent to the Prince,
purporting, the great wants of the Mariners for want of money, and their
mutining in the ships, which caused a great distraction amongst them, desiring
some considerable sum to satisfy their Desires: whereupon it was ordered,
that the prizes taken at Sea should be sold for payment of the Mariners.

A sudden Engagement is expected between the E. of Warwick, and the Princes
Navy, for we hear that the Parliaments Fleet are floting upon the Neptune Seas
toward Goree in Zealand, to sight the revolted ships.

Amsterdam 26. Sept. 1648.
A Declaration of the further proceedings of the Treaty, between his Majesty
and the Commissioners.
SIR,
the Commissioners of parl. for themselves and attendants are putto a very
large expense of money, which is necessarily required for the carrying on this
great and public employment, and therefore do desire the parliament to supply
them with the remainder of the 10000. l. with convenient speed. As for the
beginning and some days progress in the Treaty you may be pleased to take
notice of the passages between his Majesty, and the parliaments Commissioners,
meeting in the Treaty Chamber the 18 of this instant Septem. in the Forenoon
little business was dispatched, only the Commission read of the parliaments
Commissioners, and some introduction made into the Propositions, after which
his Majesty went to dinner and met the Commissioners again in the afternoon and
after they were set,

The Commis. proceeded to this effect. May it please your Majesty, Having made
known our Commissions to treat personally with your Maj. upon the propositions
formerly presented at Hampton Court, as they concern the Kingdoms of England
and Ireland. And this Treaty to be for 40 days, beginning this present, and to
proceed in the first place upon the propositions following in order, viz. For
recalling all Oaths, Declarations, etc. And to receive your Maj. Answer in
writing.

Then his May. desired nothing to be binding, but what should be agreed upon in
writing, which was assented to.

The Commissioners then desired his Majesty to give his Royal assent to this
proposition ensuing, That whereas both Houses of Parliament have bin
necessitated to undertake a war in their just and lawful defense, etc. An Act
of parliament may pass, whereby all Oaths, Declarations, etc. against both or
either houses, or against any for adhering unto them, etc. to be declared null,
and that publicly intimated in all parish Churches in all your Majesty's
Dominions of England and Ireland.

Then his Majesty desired to have the Propositions of the English and Irish
entirely together.

To which the Commissioners answered, That the Propositions themselves were
formerly presented to your Majesty at Hampton Court we conceive are in your
Majesty's hands, excepting that of the Court of Wards, delivered since in the
Isle of Wight, etc. what concerns our instructions we shall do; but we have no
warrant from our Houses to do that.

And to the latter part of the second paper delivered in the morning, we shall
acquaint the Houses, that no agreement put in writing, be binding till the
conclusion of the whole Treaty, unless it shall be otherwise especially
agreed.

On Tuesday September. 19. the King and the Commissioners met again in the same
order that they had done the day before, and treated both forenoon and
afternoon.

None of them do go to the King at all, but in the Treaty Chamber, and
altogether publicly, where there are made gallant speeches.

And the 19. Sep. his Majesty brought in a paper to this effect.

CHARLES R.

In answer to your proceedings the 18 Sep. concerning the recalling of all the
Oaths, Declarations and Proclamations heretofore had, or to be had, against
both or either Houses of Parliament, or against any for adhering unto them, or
for doing, or executing any Office, place or charge by any authority derived
from them: And all Judgments, Inditements. Outlawries and Inquisitions in any
of the said Causes, and all Grants thereupon, made or. hnd to be made or had,
be declared null, suppressed and forbidden, and that this be publicly
intimated in all Parish Churches, and other places needful within his
Majesty's Dominions of England and Ireland.

His Majesty concerning that expression that both Houses of Parliament have
been necessitated to undertake a war for their just defense, which seems to
lay the blame of the blood spilt on his Majesty; therefore his Majesty desires
that part may be referred to be treated on last.

September. 19. 1648.
The Commissioners then put in a paper to this effect. For our giving the
Propositions entirely together, we find not our selves warranted to present our
desires concerning all the Propositions at once, or in any sort to treat them
but in Order, but what we have drawn out for our own use, we shall give your
Majesty to expedite the Treaty.

And this draught is separated from what concerns the Kingdom of Scotland.

And this we do not in way of Treaty, but out of desire to satisste your
Majesty.

We humbly desire your Majesty's Answer to our paper delivered yesterday
concerning the Proposition for recalling all Oaths, etc. and other proceedings
thereupon against the Parliament, or those that acted by their Authority.

So that the business that thus holds in Dispute is, about the matter of the
fault, upon whom the guilt of the blood shed in these wars shall be laid, and
how as to freeing his Majesty, which his Majesty would have done, and about
this the Commissioners have written to the House.

There is as yet nothing denied by the King to be passed; though nothing
actually granted. But the great rub is not yet removed.

His Majesty is loath to charge himself with the guilt of the blood spilt. The
Commissioners are very faithful to their Instructions.

Postscript.
SIR,
THis morning his Majesty came somewhat early to the Treaty, and sitting in the
Chair of State at the upper end of the Table, He rose up, and made a Speech to
the Commissioners of both Houses, intimating, That it was His Majesty's
gracious will and pleasure to pass an Act, for justifying the proceedings of
Parliament in the late War, and for declaring all Oaths, Declarations,
Proclamations, and other proceedings against it to be void, to the end, that no
obstruction whatsoever, may hinder or endanger this blessed work in hand, that
so all differences may be composed, all jealousies removed, and the peace of
this languishing Kingdom firmly settled and united.

This gallant speech took great impression in the hearts of the Commissioners,
who forthwith dispatched a Messenger to the Parliament, to communicate the
joyful tidings from the King.

Newport 25. Septem. 1648.
FINIS.

