Bloody News FROM Angel-Alley IN BISHOPSGATE-STREET, BEING A full and true
Account of the cruel Murdering of one Dorothy Jewers, who on Friday last, the
27th of September, was barbarously robbed and killed by two of her Lodgers.

WITH An Account how she was at first found dead, and also how these Murderers
after they had committed this bloody Fact made their escape.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for D. M. 1678.

Bloody News FROM Angel-Alley IN Bishops-Gate-Street.
The horror of this ensuing Relation, is too great to need any amplication, or
the needless imbelishment of a starched Exordium; I shall therefore without
putting either my self or the Reader to farther trouble, give him a candid and
true account of a dismal accident, which happened in Angel Allie, in Bishops
Gate Street. Toward the upper end of which Allie, over against the Rose
Alehouse, there has lived for some time an ancient industrious widow, Dorothy
Jewers who by her good huswifry had obtained so much as made her esteemed very
wealthy, considering the meanness of her quality; her common way of livelihood
being to deal in old Goods which were exposed to sale, and having ready money
many times bought them to great advantage; by this and the like means, the
report of her Estate, in Plate and money, became generally talked of, that it is
to be feared, at length the fame of it reached the Ears of two young persons of
different Sexes, who on the one and twentieth of this instant September, came
to enquire for a Lodging at her house, which she having ready to dispose of,
without much scruple, set it them at so much per week; but the sad event of her
so doing, will not let me omit giving the Reader a kind warning, to take care
not to follow her example, but to be cautious and circumspect whom either he or
she admits under the dangerous shelter of their own Roof, for by this means
many Masters and Mistresses of Families themselves have lost their Reputation,
and their Goods, nay and their lives to boot, which have been brought to a
shameful Catastrophe, merely for want of that Care and industry which is
absolutely requisite in such Cases.

This unfortunate Woman in Angel-All^y, little considered what she had done,
when she let these unknown Persons have a free Egress and Regress out and into
her House, as well as her self; and by so doing ran indeed too great a hazard
for that inconsiderable benefit she was to receive of them, had they proved
really honest. But alas, two or three days experience of their cautious and
timorous Conversations, offered her so much reason to think they were either
engaged in the World, or else had in a base manner abused it, that she grew in
that small time weary of their Companies, and therefore warned them to provide
a new Habitation against that Week expired; for that since they did not give
her that Testimony of their honesty which at their entrance they promised, she
was resolved to be troubled with them no longer. Her Lodgers seemed very little
concerned at the News, only desiring of her that during that time they might
enjoy their Lodging in friendship and content; and at the VVeeks-end they would
honestly pay her, according to their Covenant, and leave her. VVhereupon she
said little to them afterward, but much wondered to see them take such
extraordinary care to skulk in and out of Doors at such unseasonable hours, as
none, no not their very next Neighbors, could ever set sight of them; nor can
now give any account of them, or tell what manner of Persons they were.

But since, it is easily imagined this unusual desire of concealment was not by
reason of Debt, or any worldly Engagements; but with full and premeditated
design that they might the better commit their intended Murder, and after more
securely make their escape.

For on Friday the 27th Instant, (and the day before the expiration of the
forementioned Week they were to stay with her) about eight of the Clock in
the Evening, they both came, very seemingly kind, down to their Land-Lady, and
telling her they had bought a piece of Pork for Supper, desired, that since it
was the last Night they were to be in her House, she would do them the favor
to go up-stairs into their Room and take share of it, and a Glass of Ale, and
be merry with them before their departure; (this she declared to several
Neighbors before she went up) the good Woman little suspecting they durst be
so impudently wicked, as to attempt any thing on her Life, especially at says
a seasonable hour as all her Neighbors were stirring, accepted the invitation,
and went up with them, where, in order to the expected Supper, she savv the
Board fairly laid with Napkins, Trenchers, and all things requisite in those
cases.

The particular of every Action which passed among them, is impossible as yet
to be related; the two chief Actors of them being her two Lodgers, who are
since fled: But this is certain, that the good Woman, who had left her Door
open, staid above Stairs so long, that some of her Neighbors, who had never
before seen her negligent in that kind, went to her House to advertise her of
it; but finding her not below Stairs, at first knocked, but receiving no answer,
went up stairs, and found the poor Woman stark dead, but in a struggling
posture, with a Cambrick Handkerchief, thrust, as it is immagin'd with a
Bed-staff, which lay by her, asfar down her Throat as possibly they could ram
it, in so much that they had rent her Mouth, and a Napkin, with which it is
thought they first strangled her, tied so extremely hard about her Neck, that
it was impossible for her to take her breath, much less make any noise that her
Neighbors might have come in to her ^ssistance, 'Twas about the hour of nine
when she was first found in this lamentable condition; and it is credibly
reported that about a quarter of an hour before, the she Lodger came to the
Door, and perceiving a Woman, who kept the opposite Alehouse, to stand at the
Door, she ran boldly to her, and told her she wanted three pints of Drink,
which whilst the Hostess was fetching, she and her pretended Husband made their
escape, taking along with them many things, whereof, as yet, we have no
particular.

FINIS.

