BLOODY NEWS FROM HOLLAND: BEING A true Relation of the present Proceedings of
the Dutchmen against the English, at the Hague, Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Brill,
D^rt, Flushin, and diverse other places.

Also, a great Fight at Sea, between the Parliaments ships, and the Hollanders;
the number burnt, sunk, and taken, by Captain Johnson and the rest of the
English; with the manner of the said Engagement.

Likewise Lieu. Colonel John Lilburn made Captain of a Man of War for the
States of Holland, and his Letter to the Lord General Cromwell.

LONDON, Printed for E. Cotton, 1652.

A Bloody Fight at Sea, between the Parliaments ships, under the Command of
Captain Vice Admiral Clerk, Captain Penington, and Captain Armstrong; and the
Hollanders, commanded by Vice Admiral Frederick. With the particulars of the
Fight, the manner of their Engagement; and the number of ships, men, and
Ordnance, sunk, killed and taken.
Sent in a Letter from Captain Owen, aboard the Dragon in the Downs, March 15,
1652.
SIR,
ON the 12 of this instant March, we discovered a Fleet of ships coasting along
the Channel, whose pride and insolency, did much exasperate the spirits of our
Officers and Soldiers, who making toward them, found them to be Hollanders;
whereupon Captain Johnson haled to them, demanding from whence they came, and
where bound: the Dutch Captains answered, That they scorned to give an account
to Englishmen. Then Captain Johnson required them to strike sail in obedience
and honor to the States of England; but that seemed more detestable unto them;
who said, That although they never cut off a Kings Head, yet they were the
ancientest States: Why then have at you, replied Capt. Johnson, I Will have some
of your heads before I leave you; and withal, gave them a broad side, and
immediately tackt about and gave them another, which did great execution both
above and below Decks: The Hollander being exceedingly enraged thereat, gave
him a gallant Volley of 7 broad sides; but were answered treble by the rest of
the English ships; who by that time were come up close to engage; insomuch that
a sharp and bloody fight began, which continued for the space of 3 hours; being
performed with great gallantry on both sides: But at last Captain Stokes coming
in, did so terrify them with round shot, and Hand-Granadoes, that he soon
fired one, sunk another, and boarded a third; which the rest of the Flemins
perceiving, declined engagement, and with a fresh Gale sailed toward the Coast
of France. We had them in chase for the space of 5 hours, but night
approaching, we were enforced to desist. These are said to be New-Commission
Pirates, set forth with Letters of Mart from the Scotch-King, and not by the
Authority of the States of Holland. Their loss we conceive to be very great;
for each ship that were sunk, carried 34 pieces of Ordnance, and manned with 80
men, stout knaves I Will assure you. In this conflict we lost about 27 men; the
Enemy near upon two hundred.

The Hollander has set forth a Declaration to raise 60000 Horse and Foot; and
300 Sail of ships; but their design is variously spoken of.

Yet great are the Contests between the Burgomasters and the Bores; for the
latter does threaten to sequester their Estates, and bring them to a Trial for
their lives, if they will not take a course to defend and assist them at Sea.
And some Tumults and Risings have already been in Zealand, Rotterdam, Dort,
Delf, and at the Hague, where many were both slain and wounded, and amongst the
rest some English, which the Mutiniers chiefly aimed at, and brand them with
the most infamous Badge of Traitors and Conspirators to their Religion and
Liberties; etc.

From aboard the Dragon, March 15. 1652.
SIR,
THere has been a great and imperial Council held at Munster in Germany, by
the Ambassadors of 13 Christian Kings, Princes, and Dukes; At which Diet, they
took into consideration the present state and condition of many exiled Princes;
and amongst the rest, a Conference arose touching the King of Scots; but
nothing dne therein (at present) by reason of other weighty and emergent
businesses, which call them to a Work of far greater concernment; and may also
prove fatal, if not timely prevented: For the Great Turk, and his Bashaw have
taken the field with seven hundred thousand Horse and Foot, and are resolved
(if possible) to make a great devastation and inroad upon Christendom this
Summer: But great is the care of the Emperor of Germany, the 7 Christian
Princes of Italy, the Queen of Sweden, the Prince of Transylvania, and Prince
Frederick of Malta, to raise a formidable Power, and to unite and join with the
Venetians, both in an offensive and defensive War against the Turks; And in
pursuance thereof, a League is concluding between the aforesaid Princes; who
have had a large consultation thereupon; But that which is thought most
requisite and feasible at present, is, the sending of a Summons to all
Christendom, for Warlike Provisions to be made against the Enemies thereof; And
indeed great reason have they so to do; for never was a more potent and
irresistible Army raised these many years, as now the Turks and Janisaries have
raised. Yet notwithstanding, Prince Philip (the third Son to the Queen of
Bohemia, and General to the Stases of Venice) has given them a great Overthrow
near the Isle of Candia, and killed, taken, and routed about threescore
thousand men: This Overthrow does exceedingly retard the Enemies Design; and as
it is a great prejudice to them, so it is a great advantage to Christendom; And
his Highness Prince Philip has embraced this opportunity; who by the
assistance of the Divine Power, has obtained another great Victory against the
Janisaries: Since which Achievements, he is called Philip the Great; a
Gentleman of a gallant temper, and endowed with excellent Properties and
Virtues, both for prudence, wisdom, and magnanimity of Spirit: He is even
become as great a Terror to the Turks, as Alexander the Great was to the
Christians.

The King of Scots has sent the Lord Wilmot with a Message to the Princes of
Italy, imploring Supplies and Accommodation, suitable to his present
Necessities and Condition; but they have returned Answer, That by reason of the
homebred divisions, and foreign Preparations of the Enemy in several parts
against the Christian Territories; they could not answer his expectation at
present, etc.

The Duke of Malta has declared, that he will give his Royal Assent to the
Union, and that he will raise forty thousand Horse and Foot, to join with the
Christians against the Turks; and in pursuance thereof has granted a
Commission to Prince Frederick, Landgrave of Hesse, to command in chief under
his Highness Prince Philips.

It is reported, that Lieu. Col. Lilburn is made captain of a Man of War for
the States of Holland; and that he has received Power and Instructions, to
fire, sink, or take, any ships whatsoever, that shall be declared Enemies to
the United Provinces.

Some also relate, that he has sent a Letter to the Lord General, putting his
Exceliency in mind of his Protestation at Huntington; wherein he desires him to
stand up against Oppression; to propagate the Gospel; to preserve the liberty
of the People, and to maintain the Laws of the Land in its purity without
corruption or bribery.

FINIS.

