A BLOODY FIGHT Between the Parliaments Forces, AND Sir GEORGE BOOTH's, Under
the Conduct of Sir Thomas Middleton, and Colonel IRELAND; ON Priest-Moor, near
Red-Hill Castle, in the County of Shropshire, about seven Miles from SHREWSBURY.

With the Particulars thereof, the manner of the Engagement; the number of
Officers and Soldiers taken prisoners; diverse slain; and a great Body of Horse
routed and pursued.

Likewise the Names of the Commanders that gave the Onset; the dividing of the
Enemies Army into two Bodies, and their marching toward YORK and WALES.

August 25 London, Printed for G. HORTON, MDCLIX.

A Bloody FIGHT between the Forces of Sir George Booth, AND The Parliaments:
With the number killed and taken Prisoners, etc.
THE Indulgent Brow having let loose the Golden Reins of Discipline, has
caused a great Error and Distraction, in several Counties of this Nation; and
it is no wonder if at any time the Bridle of Government be slackned, when the
Snaffle that should keep it steady and even, has lost its two B^sses, Fear and
Punishment.

And thus it is, that diverse Gentlemen under Sir George Booth, have run
themselves into such an Exigent, that they have not only unbotton^'d their
former Beings, and made themselves incapable of their happy Enjoyments; but
have also rendered themselves capable of the high displeasure of the present
Parliament; by their levying of a New War, and their actual engaging to imbrue
the Nation in blood; as evidently appears by their Acts of Hostility, at
Priest-Moor (on Tuesday last) in the County of Shropshire, the manner thus:

After the possessing of the City of Chester by Sir Geo. Booth, and a Summons
sent to Col. Croxton, Governor of the Castle; his Answer spoke so high, that
it changed the Scene of that great Affair, who declared, That as Ferfidiousness
in him was detestable, so the Castle of Chester which he kept for the
Parliament of England was disputable; and that if they would have it, they must
fight for it; for the best blood that ran through his Veins, in defense thereof
should be as a Sluice to sill up the Castle Trenches, etc.

This being communicated to Sir George, a Council of War was held, where it was
resolved, That the F^rces which they had, should be divided into two Bodies;
the one to march toward York, under the Command of Sir George Booth; the other
toward Wales, commanded by Sir Thomas Middleton: And thus having designed
their several Quarters, or Stations, for the increase of more Forces, they
quitted the City of Chester; and upon their march met with little opposition,
until such time, that Sir Thomas entering the Confines of Shropshire, and
advancing toward Whit-Church, and Red-Hill Castle, two Troops of gallant Horse
commanded by Major Creed his Quartermaster, beat upon the Enemies Rear-Guard,
consisting of two Troops belonging to Colonel Ireland's Regiment, but commanded
by his own Quartermaster; who discovering the near approach of the Parliaments
Party upon Priest-Moor, prepared to receive them; and facing about, disputed
the place, but not able to maintain the ground; for Major Creed's Quarter
master (after the first Charge) pursued it so close, that he immediately brake
in amongst them, brake their Ranks, put them to a great disorder, took the
Quartermaster prisoner, and eight Troopers, killed some, and routed the rest;
but could not embrace the pursuit far, by reason the Enemies main Body was not
far distant: So that they made good their Retreat to Shrewsbury, with little
loss, being about six or seven miles from the place they first engaged.

T^is is observable, That as some of the chief Ringleaders of this Party were
the first Instruments of this Insurrection, so i^ it the first Blow struck in
the Field since their great Rising: And we doubt not, but that GOD; who has
already crowned Us with the first Victory, will also evidence His Strength and
Blessing upon the Wisdom and Care of the Parliament and Council, by checking
the Rise of some grand plotted Insurreotions, and by restraining the Fury of
the rest laid in other parts of the Nation.

For which end, General Disborow, and Col. Packer, have raised diverse new
forces in and about the City of Gloucester; so that the Enemy cannot get to a
head, or dare to rendesvouz in that County.

The like is done by Colonel Okey about Bristol, and by Col. Rogers in Hereford
shire. From whence we shall take a view Northward, and a little trace and
introduce the quick march of Sir George Booth, which appears to be from Chester
toward Kendal in Westmerland; from thence toward Skipton upon Craven; and
from thence toward York, who on Tuesday last was within twelve miles of the
City, where he made his Randezvouz; and it is thought unless the Parliaments
Forces prevent him, that he will surprise the City; for it is supposed not to
be very formidable, especially at Middlegate Bar, Mary Gate, Bowdon Bar, Stone
gate, And the Minster Port.


Only the Manor House, and Cliffords Tower is somewhat considerable, if
prudently managed, and but indifferently manned.

But the Lord Lambert it is possible may divert the Design; his meeting of the
Cheshire Forces being suddenly expected, for on Thursday night last his.
Quarters was at Litchsield. There is great Expectation by the contrary Party;
but the further Issue we shall leave to him that bestows all Victory.

The Countries are much disturbed at these New Insurrections, because they have
not as yet got in their Harvest, supposing that their men will be employed
otherwise; but we hope better things, for we shall be more troubled for want of
Bread, then they for want of Men.

As touching the Rumor of lauding Ten Thousand men at Newcastle, to join with
Sir George Booth, it appears as ayrie as the Report of Sir William Waller being
seized for having a hand in the New Conspiracy; which, in truth, appears to be
only thus: That Sir William, and several other Gentlemen were seized by a
Troop of Horse at Mr. Barnham's House near Maidstone, but upon a fair account
given of their Meeting, most of them were discharged.

In a word, that the Icy-fancies of many in these Times, may not work too great
a delusion by taking Center in their Affections, for the bringing in of
foreign forces, be pleased to treat your Eye, and observe, the great danger of
relying upon such Aid and Assistance; which I shall demonstrate in the words of
By. Barlow, as they were by him cited in his Sermon at Sr. Paul's, on the next
Sunday after the discovery of the Gunpowder Treason, 1605. O England, England!
Behold and beware.

THere is a Fable, how that the Horse being too weak fer the Stagg, required
the help of a Man, which was easily granted; Who getting upon the Horseback,
put the Stagg to flight; but after that, Non equitum dorso, non fraenum
depluitore, he could never quit his back of the Rider, nor his mouth from the
Bridle-bit. So it is with the helps of Worldly Potentates, mere beneficia
viscata, just like the poor Bird, that having escaped the Snare, percheth upon
the Tree for refuge, and there she finds bird-lime to entangle her, from whence
she cannot fly, but with the loss of her feathers, if not of her members. And
thus it is with the helps of States and Nations, Ask their help in time of
distress, and they will grant it; but withal, either they exact a Tribute,
which exhausteth the Treasury, or impose conditions which infringe the Liberty,
or require a future aid which weakneth the power, or betray upon advantage,
which redoubles the misery, or upbraid the benefit, which exulcerates the Mind;
so that it is matter of danger to make any reliance upon such aid and
assistance.

Upon a further confirmation of the Defeat given to Sir George Booth's forces
in Shropshire, many are said to be killed upon the place, and the Quartermaster
before mentioned is a Papist. More Action is suddenly expected; but at present
a declining of Engagement.

FINIS.

