PROPOSALS FOR THE Printing an entire Course or Body of PHILOSOPHY, according
to the Principles of the Famous Renate Des Carts; Wrote in Latin by the
Learned Anthony Le Grand; which will now be carefully Translated into English
by Good Hands, with large Additions and Alterations by the said Author, and
Printed in Folio, with an Illustration of about an Hundred Ornamental
Sculptures, suitable to the several Subjects; By Richard Blome, dwelling near
Clare-Market in New Weld-street at the House with Green Pallisado Pails; where
Proposals are delivered and Subscriptions taken for the same, and where they
may inspect the said Work.
THe Books of this Learned and much esteemed Anthony Le Grand, now to be
published in English, are the Institution of PHILOSOPHY, the History of NATURE,
and a Discourse of BRUTES: Which said Books have been so well received by the
Learned, that several Impressions have been made and vended here in England,
and in Foreign Countries. And now to this Great Work, the said Author for the
public Good has made such large Additions, as well as Alterations therein,
that nothing material is wanting to make it an entire Body of Philosophy, and
is rendered so facile as to be of use and delight to the meanest Capacities. And
for the making this Work the more acceptable to the Curious, it shall be
Illustrated with about 100 Sculptures dispersed through the Work, to such
Chapters as best admit thereof; all designed and drawn Historically by good
Artists. And besides the said Ornamental Sculptures, there are great variey of
Schemes for the Explanation of the Philosophical Parts that require the same.

This Work, as aforesaid, is divided into Three Books: The first treats of the
Institutions in 10 Sections or Parts; First, Of Logic, divided into 23
Chapters. Secondly, Natural Theology, or Metaphysics, in 16 Chapters. Thirdly,
Daemology and Created Spirits, in 11 Chapters. Fourthly, Of Natural Philosophy
in general, and of Bodies, in 25 Chapters. Fifthly of Special Natural
Philosophy of the World and Heaven, in 23 Chapters. Sixthly, Of the four great
Bodies, viz. the Earth, Water, Air and Fire, in 23 Chapters. Seventhly, Of
Living Creatures in general, as Fourfooted Beasts, Creeping things, Birds, Fish
and Insects, and in particular of Plants, in 23 Chapters. Eighthly, Of Man, as
it respects his Body, in 23 Chapters. Ninthly, Of Man, as to his Mind,
Affections or Passions of the Soul, in 14 Chapters. And, Tenthly, Of Ethics or
Moral Philosophy, treating of the right ordering of a Man's life, etc. in 37
Chapters.

The second Book, viz. the History of NATURE, in 9 Parts, which illustrates the
first Book of the Institutes, and consists of great variety of Experiments,
relating to the several Parts thereof, and explained by the same Principles.

The third Book is the Tract or Discourse of Brutes, giving a Mechanical
Account of their Operations.

The French for some years past have Printed their Books in their own Language,
which has been a very great improvement to real Learning and Knowledge, even in
the Female Sex, to their great commendation, and much to the Honor of the
Nation; which Reasons may be sufficient for the Printing this Work in our
Native Tongue.

And as this Work cannot but be acknowledged by all, to be of great use for the
advancement of real Learning, as well as Entertaining and Pleasant, so it is
hoped Encouragement will not be wanting cheerfully to embolden the Undertaker,
Richard Blome, to finish the same; wherefore he humbly tenders these Proposals.

The PROPOSALS.
1. Those that please, for the Advancement of so good a Work, to Subscribe and
pay to the said Richard Blome, or his lawful Assigns, by Writing under his Hand
and Seal, Fifty Shillings, shall have one of the said Books in Sheets; Twenty
Shillings to be paid the said Richard Blome, when about half the Book is
printed, if so required by the said Richard Blome, upon the delivery of a
Receipt under the Hand and Seal of the said Richard Blome, and the remainder to
be paid on delivery thereof in Sheets. And such as are curious in their Books,
may have them of a finer sort of Paper gracefully Ruled and carefully Bound, or
the Sculptures illustrated in Colors, paying the Charges thereof. II. Such as
for the further Encouragement of this Work, will be greater Benefactors, shall
according to their generosity have one or more of the said Books, as aforesaid,
with a Memorial of their Arms and Titles (so as allowed by the Heralds)
Engraven either at the beginning of the Book, or to a Sculpture as Patron
thereof, to remain to future Ages, as Promoters to so good a Work; and if to a
Sculpture, then at the beginning of the Book also. And it is desired that the
Money so subscribed above 50 s. the price of the Book, be advanced to the said
Richard Blome, for and toward the said Charges of the Arms and Sculpture, for
which a Receipt shall be given by the said Richard Blome, under his Hand and
Seal. III. Such as procure Subscriptions for Six of the said Books, shall upon
the payment of the Money due for the same, have one of the said Books in Sheets
presented them gratis.
Although the Subject of this Work is very useful and delightful, and performed
by so good an Author, and Illustrated with such great variety of Sculptures,
all done by the said Author's Directions, suitable to the Subjects, and that
the Book is set at so low a rate; yet considering the badness of the Times, and
the great Charge in Printing, there will be but a very small Impression made,
which will be Printed by Michaelmass Term, 1693.

Subscriptions being a voluntary Act and Encouragement, if performed, it is
desired that none Subscribe, but such as will readily recieve their Books, and
pay the Money according to the Proposals by them Contracted for.

For Advancement of the said Work, I promise to receive of the said Richard
Blome, his Executors or Assigns, One of the Books, and pay the Sum of (...)
according to the Proposal; Witness my Hand this (...) day of (...) Anno Domini
169(...)

An Account of the said WORK.
ANd forasmuch as PHILOSOPHY, the Subject of this Work is of so copious an
extent, comprehending the Nature, etc. of all Things that the Mind of Man is
capable of knowing: Therefore for the better satisfying of such as desire to be
Subscribers, it is thought convenient to give a short Account of the principal
Heads therein Treated of.

This Work is divided into Three BOOKS; The first, The Institutions of
Philosophy: The Second, The History of Nature: And the Third, A Discourse of
Brutes. The Institutions is divided into 10 Parts, and those into several
Chapters.

The First Part is of Logic, which the Author calls the Organ or Instrument
of all Philosophy: It is divided into 4 Parts, and those into 23 Chapters, and
treats, First, Which are the Obstacles to the attaining of Science, and how to
be removed. Rules for attaining Truth. Nothing is admitted for Truth, which
includes any Doubt. Not to rely too much on the Senses. Whatsoever we see
clearly and distinctly, is true. The various manners of Perception. Of the Five
Universals examined, as to their nature, properties and use. Of Substance, and
its affectives or modes. Of the common Attributes of Substance. How Substance
agrees to God, and the Creatures. The Genealogy of Things and Modes, Causes and
Effects, Subjects and Adjuncts, of the distinctions, whence the natures and
differences of Idea's are deduced. Secondly, Of Judgment Absolute and
Comparative. What a Proposition is, and how many sorts there are. Of Truth and
Falsehood. Of Propositions, Definitions, and Division. Thirdly, Of the
Ratiocination of the Mind. Of Reasoning or Argumentation. Of simple Syllogisms,
and those either complext or incomplext, conjoined or compound. Of
Demonstration, Topical Sylogisms, and Sophistical. Of Places or Topics whence
the Medium Term is fetched. Fourthly, Of Method, or orderly ranking our
Thoughts. Of the general and special Method of Knowing. The Method of
Composing; and Rules of Definitions and Axioms.

The Second Part treats of Natural Theology, or Metaphysics, which is divided
into 16 Chapters. First, An Introductory Discourse, its definition and
certainty. What God is* and how known by us, which appears by the inborn Idea
we have of him. That Existence does necessarily belong to God, which is
deducible from the contemplation of the Things of this World. Of Fate, and that
it puts no force on the Will. Of Divine Attributes; and first of the Unity of
God, that he is Eternal, Immense, not circumscribed in any one place, the most
simple Being; that he is True, and cannot deceive nor be deceived; that he is
Supreme and All-knowing; that he is Good and does Good; is Almighty, the
Creator and Governor of all things.

The Third Part; of Created Spirits, Angels, and Demons; which is divided into
11 Chapters, and treats of the division of Created Beings. The Doctrine of
Spirits. What the Nature of Angels is. Whether the Existence of Angels is
demonstrable by the light of Nature. The Faculties of Angels, as to their
Understanding, Will and Power, to move, produce, or assume Bodies; their
Number, Distinction, and Subordination; whether they be in a place, talk
together, and of their Care over Mankind and these inferior Beings.

The Fourth Part: Of Natural Philosophy in General, which is divided into 25
Chapters, and treats of the Essence and Certainty of Natural Philosophy. The
Existence of Material Bodies. Of the Nature of Matter or Body. Of the
properties of extended Substance; its divisibility and impenetrability. The
division of Matter into sensible and insensible Parts. The Threefold kind of
Matter, and that there are but three Elements of the World. That there are no
material Forms in Bodies. Whether there be any Qualities or real Accidents.
What intelligible Forms may be attributed to Natural things. The Nature of
Rarefaction. The heaviness and lightness of Bodies. Of Place. The Nature of
Motion. Of the Motions assigned to Nature's endeavoring to avoid a Vacuum. Of
the simple and compound determination of Motion. Of Reflection, and Refraction.
The force of Action and Resistance. The state of Bodies, as those hard and
fluid. Their rarity and density, roughness, smoothness, etc. and that there are
Pores as well in fluid and thin Bodies, as in hard and consistent. Of Duration,
Time and Eternity.

The Fifth Part; Of Special Natural Philosophy, of the World and Heaven, which
is divided into 23 Chapters, and treats of the Unity and Perfection of the
World; its Form, etc. That GOD, as he is the efficient and conserving Cause of
Matter, so likewise of Motion. The Action of Bodies, and the Communication of
Motions. Of the Ptolomaick, Copernican, or Tychonick Systems of the World, and
of the true System of the Universe. That the Heavens are fluid Bodies. How the
Heavens were ranged at first, and of their different Motions. The Action and
Motion of Celestial Matter. Of the Celestial Globe and its Circles. Of the Sun.
Of Light and Refulgency, and how Spots come about the Sun, and the reason of
their Vanishing. Of Comets. Of the Original and Affections of Planets. The
Principal of the Planets motion; and of their station, direction, and
retrogradation. Of the Moons motion, and its various Appearances. Of Eclipses
of the Sun and Moon. Of the fixed Stars, and their Influences. And of Judicial
Astrology.

The Sixth Part; Of the Four great Bodies, the Earth, Water, Air and Fire, and
what mixed and compound Bodies proceed from them. This Part is divided into 24
Chapters; and first, of the Original of the Earth, and its Figure; that the
Earth is moved by the fluid Heaven, which surrounds it. An Answer to
Aristotle's, and others Objections against the Motion of the Earth. Of the
Visibility of Day and Night, and the Seasons. Of the Zones, and their
Inhabitants; and of the Climates. Of things generated in the Earth, as
Fountains, Metals, Minerals, etc. The Productions of Stones common and
precious, and of their difference. Of the Lodestone, and its virtue whereby it
draws Iron. Of the Water, the Flowing and Ebbing of the Sea. Of the Nature of
the Air. Of the Elastick force of the Air. Of Meteors, and first of the Wind.
Of Rain, Dew and Hoar-frost. Of Snow and Hail. Of Thunder and Lightning. Of the
Rainbow. Of Fire, and the Nature of Heat and Cold. Of the various effects of
Fire, and amongst them of Earthquakes. Of the Mixtion of Bodies, as also of
their Changes, viz. Generation, Corruption, Alteration, Augmentation and
Diminution.

The Seventh Part; of Living Creatures in General, and in Particular of Plants.
This Part is divided into 23 Chapters. Of the Division of Living things. How
Living Bodies differ from those without Life. That Bodily Life consists in heat
and moisture, and that their Death proceeds from the contrary Principles of
cold and dryness. Whence the hardness proceeds that is found in the outside of
Living things. Of the diversity of Heat in Living Bodies. Of the virtue and
nature of Food that abides in the Bodies, that are fed by them. That Living
things are changed according to the diversity of Time and Place. Of Plants, as
to their Original, Nutrition, Growth, Difference and Propagation, by Grafting;
their color, taste, smell, etc. Of the diseases and death of Plants. Of
Animals. Of the Soul of Brute Beasts, and what it is. Of Four footed Beasts and
Creeping Things. Of Birds, Fish and Insects; and of the death of Animals.

The Eighth Part; of Man, with respect to his Body; which is divided into 24
Chapters. The definition of MAN. The outward and inward Parts of Man's Body.
The forming of the Birth in the Womb, the configuration of its Parts, and the
vivifying or animation of the Compound. How the Body is Nourished. How the
Motions of the Heart, Arteries and Muscles in the Body is performed. Of the
Circulation of the Blood. Of Respiration. Of the growth and decrease of Man's
Body. Of its Temperaments, and different Ages. Of the Senses in general, and in
particular of each, viz. Feeling, Tasting, Smelling, Hearing and Seeing; of the
Eye, of Colors, and how the Sight is performed. Of Watching and Sleep. Of
Hunger and Thirst. Of the common Sense of Imagination and Memory. Of Health and
Sickness; of Medicine in general, and of their Operations.

The Ninth Part; of MAN, considered with respect to his Mind; which is divided
into 14 Chapters, and treats of the Nature of the Mind of Man, and that it is
more evidently known than the Body. That the Mind is distinct from the Body,
and that the same is Spiritual or Immortal. Whether there be any inborn Idea's
in the Mind. Of its Faculties, viz. Understanding, Imagination, Will and
Memory. Of the Affections or Passions of the Soul. In what part of the Body the
Soul feels its Passions. Of the number and order of the Passions. Of Wonder or
Admiration; of Love and Hatred; of Desire or Longing; and of Joy and Sorrow.
Whence the Natural Inclinations and Aversions of some Men arise. Of the
Immortality of Man's Mind, and its state after Death.

The Tenth Part, treating of the ^ight Ordering of Man's Life; which is divided
into 37 Chapters. It begins with an Introduction of the worth and use of
Ethics, or Moral Philosophy, the Subject of this Part. Of the nature and
principal Parts thereof. What Good is, and how and why it is desired. That the
good things of the Body do not conduce to the Happiness of Man. That outward
Good things are not for his Good. What is the highest Good in this Life, and
his ultimate End. Of Virtue in general. Of the Law of Nature and right Reason,
and the Practical dictates thereof; of Prudence, Temperance, Fortitude and
Justice. Of the usefulness of the Passions of the Soul; and of Admiration. Of
the end of Love and Hatred, and their Interpretations. Of the use of Desire,
Joy and Sorrow. Of the government of the Passions, and their Remedies. Of Man's
Liberty; how they continue Free notwithstanding God's Power; and whether the
Liberty of his Will can be hindered. Of Human Actions, and the goodness and
pravity of them. Of the Duties of Man in general, and of a good Citizen in
particular. Of the Rule of Human Actions. Of Man's Duty toward God, and
toward himself. Laws to be observed with respect to other Men, as to Bargains,
Contracts, or the like; and by what means Obligations may be broken. Laws that
respect Speaking and Swearing. Of Dominion, and the Duties or Offices thence
arising. Of the Duty of Married People; the like of Parents and Children,
Masters and Servants. Of the Right of Dominion, and its different Forms, viz.
Monarchy, Aristocracy and Democracy. Of the Duties of Sovereign Lords, and the
Duties of Citizens.

The Second BOOK, viz. the History of Nature, which Illustrates the First Book
of the Institutions, and consists of great variety of Experiments relating to
the several Parts thereof, and explained by the same Principles. This Book is
divided into Nine Parts, and subdivided into several Articles or Heads. The
First Part treats of Bodies, viz. an extended Body in general. Of Epicurus his
Reasons for Vacuities, etc. The Experiments by which Cassendus asserted
Vacuities, discust. Of Bodies divisible, rarefied and dense; hard and fluid,
rough and smooth, transparent and opaque, bent and comprest. The Second Part
treats of Qualities, viz. of Qualities in general; of Heat, Cold, Gravity and
Lightness; of Taste, of Smelling, of Sound, of Light, of Heat, and of hidden
Qualities. The Third Part treats of the Earth and Heaven, viz. concerning the
Beginning of the World; of the generation of Things, and the disposure of all
its Parts; of the generation and corruption of Things; of Heaven, of the Sun,
of fixed Stars, of the Moon; of Spots in the Sun, Moon, and fixed Stars; of
Comets; of the production of Stars, and of Astrological Predictions. The Fourth
Part treats of Earth, Water, Fire and Air; viz. of the Terrestrial Globe; of
the Waters, and the properties of certain Waters; of Fountains and Rivers; of
the Sea, its Flux and Reflux; of Fire, of Earthquakes and subterranean Fires;
of Glass, of Ashes and Coals; and of the Air. The Fifth Part treats of Minerals
and Metals, viz. of Metals in general; of Mercury and Sulphur; of Salt, of
Gold, Silver, Tin, Lead, Brass and Iron; of the various generations of Stones;
of Gems; and of the Lodestone. The Sixth Part treats of Meteors, viz. of
Vapors and Exhalations; of the Wind, of Clouds, Rain, Hail and Snow, Dew and
Honey; of Tempest and Thunder; of Lightning, of the Rainbow, of Fire and Air
kindled; of Circles about the Moon, and of counterfeit or Mock-Suns. The
Seventh Part treats of Plants, viz. their production and strength; their
obvious and occult Qualities; their Sympathy and Antipathy; their Birth,
Nourishment, Generation and Death. The Eighth Part treats of Animals, viz. of
Animals begot; of Living Creatures produced from Seed; of Monsters; of the
Birth of Animals; of Hunger and Thirst; of the Motion of the Heart, and
Circulation of the Blood; of the Actions of Animals; of the aversion and
agreement of Animals; of Sleep and Watchfulness; and of Diseases of Animals.
The Ninth Part, which treats of Man, viz. of the Senses of Feeling, Tasting,
Smelling, Hearing and Seeing; of Imagination, and Memory; of Dreams; of
external Passions; and of the natural Inclinations and Aversions.

The Third BOOK, is a Tract or Discourse of Brutes; giving a Mechanical Account
of their Operations, etc.

An Account of some Volumes which the Nobility and Gentry may be accommodated
with, that were Printed for the said Richard Blome, dwelling in New Weldstreet,
as aforesaid; as also by the aforementioned Booksellers: Viz.
THe Gentleman's Recreation, in Two Parts, in large Folio. The first, of the
Liberal and Mathematical Sciences; which in a brief and clear Method treats of
the Doctrine and general Parts of each Art, with Eliptical Tables engraven on
Copper Plates, for the better comprehending the same. The Second Part at large
treats of Horsmanship, Hawking, Hunting, Fowling, Fishing and Agriculture; all
being Collected from the most Authentic Authors, and the many gross Errors
therein Corrected, with great Enlargements made by those well Experienced
therein. And for the better Explanation thereof great variety of useful
Sculptures, as Nets, Engines, Traps, etc. are added for the taking of Beasts,
Fowl and Fish, not Published by any: Nothing material being omitted for the
rendering them complete. The whole Illustrated with about 86 Ornamental Copper
Plates, in Folio.

The History of the Old and New Testament, treating of the most remarkable
Transactions therein, with good and useful Morals for the better government of
our Actions in all Conditions. To which is added, the Travels, Voyages and
Lives of the Apostles; with a large Historical Chronology of such Matters of
Note that are related in the Bible. Collected and Translated by Good Hands,
from Authentic Authors. The whole Illustrated with about 240 Sculptures, of
the most remarkable Passages, peformed by good Artists, far surpassing any
Collection hitherto done, to the end it may be the more Acceptable to the
Curious. This Work is Printed in Two Volumes in large Folio, of a fair Print,
and chiefly designed for the Curious.

The said Work is likewise Printed in large Octavo, with all the Sculptures, as
designed for a more general Sale.

The said Richard Blome is now Reprinting a useful Volume of Cosmography and
Geography, in Two Parts in Folio The First, of the Arts of Cosmography and
Geography, being a Translation of the much Esteemed VARENIUS. The Second Part
is a Geographical Description of the World, from the Works of the Famous
Monsieur SANSON; with about 100 Geographical Tables of the Kingdoms and Isles
in the World, with their Chief Places, drawn from the Maps of the several
Kingdoms, which Illustrates this Work. And to this Impression are added the
County Maps of England, drawn from those of Speed's, in a smaller Scale. For
this Work the said Richard Blome takes Subscriptions, Proposals being delivered
to those that desire the same, by the said Richard Blome, or Mr. Richards his
Book-Binder, at the Bible at the Corner of Essex-Street, as aforesaid; where
they may have a perusal thereof.


