THE BLASPHEMER Tried and Cast: Or a more full Narrative of the Trial of
Lodowick Muggleton, On Wednesday the 17th of this Instant January, at the
Sessions House in the Old-Bayly.

With a Relation of the Charges delivered to the Jewry, and the Sentence passed
upon him for his most Impious and Horrid Blasphemies.

WHICH WAS To stand Three Days in the Pillory in three of the most eminent
places in the City, and to have his Books burnt before his Face by the Common
Hangman.

And also to pay Five Hundred Pounds Fine, and to find Sureties for his good
Behavior.

Licensed Roger L'Strange, Jan. 22. 1676.

LONDON: Printed for J. B. in the Year 1676.

The Blasphemer Tried and Cast, etc.
THE birth and Education of this Monster that the whole Christian world may
expect an account of, is so obscure and low, so extremely inconsiderable, that
even his own Gang of foolish followers, upon a strict inquiry of them, can only
tell you that their first acquaintance with him did arise, when first his
Co-partner in Villainy, Reeve and himself, gave themselves to be the two last
witnesses; then it was that Muggle^on leaped over the Shop-board, and would
conceit himself, and make sick-brained Idle people believe he was a great
Prophet; that the power of binding and loosing were more strongly confirmed to
him then ever the Roman Bishop pretended they were to the Holy Chair, for some
years last past has the impudence of this deceiver imposed upon a Company of
Rude inconstant, Debauched people, to the wonder and astonishment of good and
considerate men, that Justice did not stifle such a horried Fomenter of all
that was superlatively wicked in its first birth; but such are those latter
days that no Heretic has appeared upon the stage of the World, but he has
found both adherers and admirers, some professing Religion, thinking it their
glory to be always seeking, though that their over curious inquiry hazards the
welfare of their immortal Souls; too many are the present examples of this
kind, and as easiy it were to give many instances how that at last the
Vengeance of Heaven has overtaken such enemies to God and Religion, and
because men have not so far espoused the cause of the Almighty, as severely to
punish such wretches presidents are not wanting where God himself has made
manifest by his Judgments his dislike to, by punishment upon those Sons of
Belial that durst derogate from the power of Heaven, much more against those
that would establish an opposition to it; this indeed must not be the design of
this sheet to manifest, that to undertake, were to swell this sheet into a
Vollumn, which is not my design, but observing a defect in the former Relation,
it was thought necessary to give a more perfect account of Muggletons Trial,
and to inform the world that God has given us such wise and learned judges,
that the greatest zeal imaginable was shown by them, and indeed by the whole
Court against the Blasphemies of the boldest wretch that ever the earth made
known, who at last being overtaken by the justice of the Law, received a Trial
before many of the great Oracles of Justice, whom his Majesty for their great
merrits has dignified with a judicatory Power; on Wednesday the 17th. of this
Instant January, at Justice Hall in the Old-Baly, was this great blasphemer
arraigned, and indicted by the name of Lodowick Muggleton, for that he had
sold, uttered, and dispersed several books, contained most horried Blasphemies
receited in the indictment, but too base for any man to name, and indeed too
foul for any tongue to express; after his charg read, and the witnesses heard,
he was asked what he had to say for himself, who begged the favor of the
honorable Court, that he might have Counsel to speak for him, and he desired
Mr. Jenner might be the person, which was graciously granted him, who like a
good man discharged his duty as a Christian, and Counselor, he hoped the
Court did not expect he should defend or once name his Blasphemies, all that he
would say was, that the prisoner did confess the fact, all that he did say in
defense of himself, was that the Books so sold and uttered were written before
the year 1673. In which year, his Majesty's Act of Grace came forth, which he
hoped would bring him under that cognizans, after this had received some
Consideration by the Reverend Judges, his charge was given to the Ju^y in words
to this Effect.

Gentlemen, you have heard the hainousness of the crime this wretch stands
indicted for, it is for most horrible Blasphemy against the great God, such
wickedness his own Council will not dare to repeat, and truly could it have
been avoided, the indictment contains such horrible Blasphemies and villainies,
it should not have been read, but Gentlemen, as to the matter, it is proved
that he did utter, sell, and dispose several Vollums of these Blasphemous
books, that great quantities were taken in his own custody, that he vented them
for several prizes, the whole Vollumn for 14. s. the half for 7. s. another
part for 3. s. 6. d. and some for 18. d. a piece, so that he had prepared and
fitted his poison to all degrees; he whose stomach was strong enough, had a
full cup of Poison, and for him whose appetite was weaker the half doze should
serve, and for those whose disgestion was not so good nor purses so large, he
had fited and prepared a smaller proportion for them; so that as much as in him
lay, he endeavored to infect all his Majesty's Subjects that could be so
ignorant as to buy his impious works, now what defense does he make, he
confesses that the books were sold and dispersed after the year 1673. In the
following years, 74. 75. 76. Yet says he, they were written before the year
1673. so I hope the Kings Act of grace reaches so far as to pardon me; now
Gentlemen, what witness, what proof brings he of this, why truly here is
nothing appears but his own assertion, and he tells you the Title of his most
wick^d Books speak that they were written before) who can be proof in such a
case as to what he did? what Testimony can he give account of his writing his
Manuscript, except his own wicked Spirit? he says it was written before, but
can you believe him, do you think h^ will make a conscience of lying, that has
vented such unheard of Blasphemies against God, than it were hard for the Devil
to out do him in his malice; as to the Titles of his hellish books, who can
tell but he might g^ve them a false date or purpose to shelter himself under
the Kings Act of grace, and foreseeing at last that Justice would overtake him,
he thought to take that for his refuge, for to give books a new Title, it seems
as it is easy, there is nothing more ordinary. Gentlemen we are fallen into
such sad times, that what over opposet Government, whatever pusheth at
Majestracy is upheld and carried on by a desperate sort of men; Gentlemen, I
leave it to you, I pray God direct you.

It was further insisted upon That such was the charge against the Prisoner,
and so unusual his Crime, that it did concern them to vindicate the Cause of
God, of Religion, and of our Dread Sovereign, which ^uch a disp^cable Villain
had s^ught to Ruin, that it was admirable that such a silly Wretch durst be so
Impudent to think to make himself great, by gathering a Rabble to Entitle
themselves by his Name, it was left to them, and it was not to be doubted but
God would give them Direction, upon which the Jury withdrew, and found this
Great Imposter Guilty. After Sentence past upon other Malefactors, he received
judgment, in a phrase more eloquent then I dare presume to Judge my self able to
rehearse, but in words much to this effect; that such a Superlative Monster of
Wickedness, should dare to Belch forth such horrible Blasphemys against the
great God, Creator of Heaven and Earth; that such a despiseable Fellow here
should gather a party, and set himself up in defiance to his Maker, and so
proceeding to his Sentence, it was as follows: Thou art now, thou Blasphemous
Wretch, to receive the moderate Sentence of this Court, I call it so because
set in the Balance with thy Crime, it is extremely mild, Bbut why is it so? is
it in respect to thy Person, or compassion to thee, no surely, it is because
the honesty and goodness of our Ancestors was such, that they thought the Earth
could never bare such a Monster as thou art, and now thy Sentence is, thou art
to stand three several days in the Pillary, in three of the most eminent places
of this City, whereof the Royal Exchange is to be one, and thy Books that are
already found, and which contain thy wickedness, to be divided in three equal
parts, and one part of them to attend thee every time thou so stand, and
because thy Proselytes shall see thy Doctrine suffer with thee, thy Books shall
be burnt by the hands of the Common Hangman, thou art also judged to pay five
hundred Pounds, and to find Suretys before thou art discharged from Prison, for
thy good behavior dureing Life, but they must not be of thy own party
(Muggletonian) but men of sincere and honest conversation, and this is the
moderate Sentence of this Court.

And hear it will not be amiss, that we admire at the Patience and long
suffering of our good and gracious God in permiting such a Rabshack to go so
long unpunished, so unwilling is that Divine being that any of his Creatures
should be miserable, but wishes all to Repent, but if his Patience be abused,
he has whet his Glittering Sword, and bent his Averging Bow, so that all shall
say, Righteous art thou Oh Lord, and just in all thy judgments.

FINIS.

