BLOODY NEVVES FROM THE Scottish Army, CONCERNING The late bloody Fight upon
Monday last, six Miles on this side Carlisle, between the 2. Armies of England
and Sctoland, the one Commanded by Major Genesis Lambert, the other by his
Excellency Duke Hamilton. With the number that were slain and taken prisoners
on both sides, and the Resolution of the Scottish Army thereupon, and the names
of the (...) Commanders of Scotland, which were wounded in the Fight. Likewise
the Scottish Message to the English Army, and their Answer and Resolution
thereupon. With the Declaration of the County of Kent, concerning the Landing
of the Duke of York, and the coming in t of he Scottish Army.



LONDON, Printed for geneall satisfaction, of the English and Scottish (...)

A Great fight on Sunday last between two Armies of England and Scotland.
Honored Sir,
SInce my last to you, dated the 14. of this instant, The Scots Horse are
advanced from Carlisle, toward our Quarters at Perith, and thought to have
fallen upon our Out-guards, and surprised our men in our quarters, but by the
vigilance of our Scouts, they were discovered, and notice were given to our
Horse Guards, who were kept 4, miles from Perith in the Road to Carlisle:
Whereupon C^ptain Bethel (a man of known valor and integrity) receiving the
Allarm, caused his Troop immediately to mount, and with 5. Troops more, and 2.
Troops of Dragoones advanced toward Warwick bridge, to receive the Scottish
^ockies, which accordingly they did; for about 2. miles on this side the
bridge, a party of the Scots horse; and 4 Companies of foot, were drawn up in a
Close, and stayed only for Orders, their horse who gave the Allarm, retreated
another way, so that they had not the least notice of our coming, but upon our
near approach, they cried out, Horse Horse, Arm Arm; but notwithstanding all
their preparatives, our Dragoones dismounted, and got the hedge, and the
English ground; they fired again, and kept their ground, and after a sharp
dispute, and furious conflict gallantly maintained on both sides, we gained
ground, and beat them out of the field, where they first charged us, they be
took themselves to another field, (the sense thereof being only supported by a
small stone wall) breast high, where they fired very resolutely, but our
Dragoones pursued, and made way for the Horse over the wall, which the Scots
perceiving, betook themselves to flight, our men pursued them 2. fields, but by
reason of fresh supplies coming to them, made good their retreat, with little
loss.

In this conflict we lost about 8. men of the enemies, we found dead in the
place above 20. who might easily be discovered by their gray shootes and blew
Bonnets.

Its said that Lieutenant Col. Hames, and Major Ennis, who commanded in chief,
were mortally wounded, for ndeed they fought resolutely, charging three times
through our body of horse, a gallant breakfast at their first coming; This
action happened upon Sunday morning last about 2. of the Clock in the morning,
The Armies of Duke Hamiltons are marched on this side Carlisle; the said Duke
entered England with about 9000 horse and foot, about 50. Troops, and 70
Companies, their horse not so big as ours in England, excepting those brought
thence, there were not so many at the Randevouz at Dunfreese, but more came up,
there are very few much affected to the cause, and therefore escape as fast as
they can back, which being foreseen, necessitated a degree of raising
continually, the Cannon was not come up, nor was there much need, for though
speed was made to get upon English ground, yet is it not like they will advance
far before they have settled Garrisons in Barwick and Carlisle (according to the
large Treaty) which are to be delivered up to them, and out come the English to
join with Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and so there will be ^. Armies: The Scots
Forces are come as far as Roase Castle, a fine house belonging to the Bishop
of Carlisle, and 5. miles on this side the City, but now burnt down because not
tena^ble. Major Genesis Lambert lies at Perith about 12. miles from Carlisle, and
seven from the Scots, from which place he intends not to budge, expecting 600
horse and dragoones daily, who came from Wales by the way of Chester, also what
Yorkshire can afford, the Magistrates of Barwick sent to Scotland (and it is
like Carlisle will do the like) to know what terms they should have if the
Scots Garrison come in: Sir John Morley being escaped from London, is a gallant
golden man in Scotland, as any Covenanter of them all, and is now with the
Duke, the Kingdom of Scotland generally disaffected to this War, the Ministers
speak broad and say, the Divill is Genesis D. Hambleton is but Lieutenant Gen,
and that he nevr prospered in any undertaking and they hope he will not in
this, and they have a strong faith that way, the Royal English say, get they
their ends, the Seots shall be little the better for coming into England. Two
Troops only left in those parts, all the rest gone to Lambert, the Letters
which were interchanged between Duke Hambleton, and Major Genesis Lambert, being
the Harolds that past before entrance may not unfitly follow.

Perith July 16. 1648. Noble Sir.
THe Parliament of the Kingdom of Scotland, upon consideration of the great
danger eminent to Religion, his Majesty's sacred person, and the peace of this
Kingdom, from the prevailing power of Sectaries and their adherents in
England, did lately send to the Honorable Houses of Parliament such demands,
as they conceive just and necessary, whereunto not receiving any Satisfactory
answer and finding the danger still increasing, and great forces drawn
together upon their borders. The Committee of the Estats of Parliament have
thought fit to lay their commands upon me, with such other Noble personages as
they have joined with me in this service for prosecuting their just desires in
pursuance of the ends of the Covenant, according to the joint Declaration of
both Kingdoms, 6. Jan 1643. and 1644. for settling Religion liberation his
Majesty from his base imprisonment, freeing the Honorable Houses from such
constraint, as have been by forces long upon them, disbanding of all the armies
whereby the Subject be free from the intolerable taxes and quarter which they
have so long groaned under, and for procuring the settlement of a Sollid peace,
and firm union betwixt the Kingdoms under his Majesty's Gogovernment. These
being the true intentions and desires of the Kingdom of Scotland who will most
faithfully observe on their part their engagement by government and Treaty to
their brethren of England; except you will not oppose their pious, loyal, and
necessary undertakings, but rather join with them as the prosecution of their
ends. I shall desire that the bearer, my Trumpter, may not be long kept, but
returned with your present and possitive answer, that accordingly I may move as
I am commanded.

Sir. I am your Servant, J. Hambleton.
A^an July 18. 1648.

To his Excellency Duke Hamilton, and General of all the Scottish forces by Sea
and land.
MY Lord, I received a letter from your Lordship, by your Trumpet, which
mention that the Parl. of Scotland (having upon consideration of the danger to
Religion, his Majesty's Person and Kingdoms, Sectaries in England) addressed
themselves to to the Parl. of England for redress, and have not received a
satisfact^ry answer therein, To which (my Lord) I shall not take upon me to
give an answer, seeing the late Ordinances concerning the settlement of
Religion, their sundry addresses and propositions tendered to his Majesty in
order to the peace and well being of his Kingdoms are published, and laid open
to the view of the whole world, and which I doubt not but are well known to
your Lordship. To what your Lordship mentions concerning the increasing of
danger by the drawing of some forces upon the borders of Scotland, I can more
fully answer, having the charge and conduct thereof, by Commission from his
Excellency the Lord Fairfax, and have his positive Command to be most tender in
acting anything, such might give any seeming occasions of offense to our
brethren of Scotland, which Commands I can confidently say I have hitherto most
consci^ntiously and punctually observed, and further that I do b^lieve it never
entered into the Parliament or his Excellencies thoughts to act any thing
prejudicial or harmfull to the Kingdom of Scotland; And what the true reasons
are which do occasion the drawing of these forces so near the borders, I shall
not need to mention: All men knowing it to be for the suppressing of Sir
Marmaduke La^gdale and his adherents, who are many of them Papists; and grand
Delinquents, and are lately risen in Rebellion against the Parl. and have ever
and still are notorious opposers of the ends of the Covenant, according to the
joint Declaration of both Kingdoms 6. Ian. 1648. for settling Religion, his
Majesty in his due rights and Prerogative, and for the procuring a firm Peace
and Union betwixt both Kingdoms.

Signed I. Lambert.


Joyful News from Kent.
Endired Sir,
THe Tide is now turned, our Countrymen begins to thwart the Sands; for upon
the Intelligence of the Duke of Yorks landing with an Army from Holland, and
the Scots coming into England, they resolved to adhere to their late
principles, and to stand for the defense of the liberties of their unconquered
Nation, and have declared their joint resolution to oppose all forces
whatsoever that shall endeavor to make an inroad within the Bowels of this
County, to disturb the Peace thereof, being resolved to display their Banners,
in opposition to the Van of the new raised Royalists.

Waymer Castle July the 20. 1648.
FJNJS.

