THE BLOODY QUAKER OR The Gloucestershire Murder discovered.

Being an exact and true Relation of a bloody Murder, committed by one Farmer
Restal a Quaker of Stoke near Tueksbury in Gloucestershire who with his Son
murdered the wife of one Robert Hamond to whom he was indebted the sum of
Thirty pound, as also another young woman which had been married but four days
before, and how the murder was discovered by the means of a Boy which over run
them, likewise their arraignment at Gloucester Assizes, their condemnation, with
the Execution of the Son, the 7th of this present July and how the Father is at
present repreived.

Exodus 21. v. 12. He that smites a man, so that he dye, shall surely be put
to death.

With Allowance.

London, Printed by P. L. 1668.

THE Bloody Quaker, OR The Gloucestershire Murder discovered.
WEll did the Apostle say that Covetuousnes was the root of all Evil, there is
scarce any vice whatsoever but has covetuousness for his source and original,
it is covetuousness which causes the breach of almost all laws both Humane and
Divine; men woulsd not steal, did they not covet other men's goods. Trade men
would not cousen and cheat, did they not covet to grow rich by unlawful
practices, though most commonly what is bad gotten is as evily spent: it was
covetuousness which caused Judas to betray our Savior, Subjects since to sell
their King, some for covetousness have betrayed their Masters, others detected
their dearest Friends and relations is that which causes so m^^^ ^^its in law,
so many dissentions and devisions among^^ ^^hem which should be Brethren, it
makes many to wear a mask of Religion, and to have God in their mouths, and
the Devil in their heart, nay to so great a height does covetousness come that
it reaches even to life it self, causing cruel and horrible Murders to be
committed as shall be instanced in a most sad and lamentable example lately
committed in Gloucestershire, by one who carried a vizard of Religion, and
seemingly served God, but really had the Devil to his Master.

This Miscreant of whom we thus write, was one Farmer Restal of Stoke near
Tueksbury in Gloucestershire, a great follower of the sect called Quakers, a
seeming Saint but real Devil, one that could thee and thou it with the best,
turn up the white of the eye, and exclaim against the ungodliness of the
times, when Satan had taken possession of his heart, and was no further
religious then only to serve his own wicked and covetous ends. I do not speak
this against any that are zealous professors of the truth, I wish the number of
them were more, who do worship God in the sincerity of their hearts; but only
to show you how that many people take upon them the vizor of Religion only for
sinister ends, some that are poor to get maintenance by it, others under the
color thereof to rebel against their superiors, some that they may cosen
with the less suspicion, and others not to be afraid to act the h^ghest
villainies thereby, thinking the pretense thereof would carry them above the
thoughts of being suspected for such persons.

This Farmer Restal was indebted to one Robert Hammond the sumn of thirty
pounds, for which Hammond had his Bond and the time of payment being now
expired, and he then in Ireland, and wanring money to go forwards with his
business, he sends his wife over into (...) get the ^ame, thinking her presenc^
(...)veil more for the procurement thereof then if he (...)nd Letters, which
many times miscarry, and if rece^^^ ^^^yer oftentimes fail of what they are
sent for, as wanting that moveing force which a man's presenee may procure.

Over into England comes this innocent woman, little dreaming the date of her
life was so near exspiring, the poor woman was glad she had escaped the dangers
of the Sea, little mistrusting a far greater danger attended her on land: and
that an English man's heart should be more bloody then an Irish woolves, who
only seize to satisfy hunger, and not to kill whom they pretend to love. Being
come to Stoke where this Restal lived, she demands the money of him due to her
Husband, Restal gives her very good words, pretends he is heartily glad to see
her, and thou (says he) shall not fail to have thy money, the woman being
something earnest for the same, as desirous to return quickly again to her
Husband, he bid her go to Cheltnham, a Town some three miles distant from
Stoke, and to carry the Bond with her, where he would not fail to come unto
her, and give her full satisfaction.

O damned hypocrisy! O deep dissimulation! O that men should be of such a
bloody merciless disposition, as to seek the ruin of their fellow Creatures,
man was born without any offensive weapons, and yet none more cruel against
those of his own sex then he, serpents bite not each other: Wolves will not
kill Wolves, Bees sting not but their Enemies, but man (far worse herein then
beasts) for the lucre of a little gain will not fear to deface Gods Image in
man, and to imbrue his hands in his brothers blood.

Now the devil begins to work, the Father and Son lay their heads together, and
as Pharaoh said, come let us work wisely when he did the most foolishly of all,
so they consult together, they have away to pay the bond without money. it is
but killing the woman and taking it from her, they can do it privately and not
be seen, never considering the allseeing eye of God from whom nothing is hid,
nor regarding that old but true saying, that murder will b^ revealed, by
whomsoever committed.

Fraught thus with murderous intentions, having Bills in their hands away they
hie to overtake the poor innocent woman, who to secure her Bond, had put it in
her bosom next her skin, they having overtook her, demand it of her, she poor
woman (little dreaming the price of her life lay thereon) denies to give it
them. The Devil who had gotten possessioo of their hearts,, prompts them to
take no denial, but to ad murder to their intentional theft, better not to
begin at all then not to go thoroughly on, thus when men are going down the road
to Hell, they run amain, they made no more ado but with the Bill cleft her
head, so that the poor soul presently dyed, and now the two murderers think
with Jesabel to kill and take posession, they question not now the having of
the Bond, and think by this act their debt is fully and wholly satisfied.

But whiles they were searching for the Bond, they were affrighted with the
fear of discovery by the appearance of a young woman, one that had been married
but four days before, and now accidentally came by that way, what shall they
do now in this case: the Devil puts it into their hearts that they had no ways
but to proceed on in murder, as much danger of being hanged for one as two,
they res^^^^ ^^e shall tell no tales of them, her mouth must be (...) death,
the woman perceives what they had done, (...) intentions, and flees away so
fast as she could, but alas her legs could not carry her away fast enough, she
is overtaken and by those bloody inhumane villains murdered also.

O monsters of Nature, more savage then Lions, Bears or Tigers, O viperous
brood fleshed in wickedness; whose hearts are hardened, and consciences seared!
O cruel hypocrysie that men who carry the vizards of Religion should so
degenerate from all goodness, that neither the love of God, nor fear of
punishment can deter from such barbarity! O who can think of ye without
horror, or speak of ye without detestation, you have purchased ye a lasting
name by infamy, and without the greater repentance, everlasting torments in
hell fire.

When they had thus murdered the two women, looking about they espied a Boy who
was also coming that way, whom when they saw they intended to have sent him on
the same errand with the two former, for now their hands was in the shedding of
blood was not a tertour to them; but providence disapointed them of their
thoughts, the Boy perceived what they had done, and thought he also should be a
guest at that bloody banquet, he therefore to prevent it betook him to his
heels, and fear adding wings to his feet he out ran them, who pursued him
hastily, being vexed that they had lost their prey, the Bird being thus escaped
out of the hunters nets, the Townsmen are raised, the murderers are taken, and
had before Justice, the matter was too manifest to be denied, they are
committed to Gaol, the whole Country being filled with wonder and admiration of
so horrible a murder.

O that men professing Religion should dare to commit such horrid actions, had
they not spilt the blood of those two helpless innocent women, with what face
could this Restal have taken away the Bond from Hamonds wife, knowing the money
justly due unto her, had it not been a plain th^ft, may we not justly say the
Devil has stolen such men's consciences away,! O how does these times outstrip
the former in wickedness, sins of a scarlet dye, hardly to be paraleld, nay
even amongst those Nations whom we term barba^ous.

At the assizes at Gloucester they pleaded not guilty, when suddenly the young
man's mouth (whose hands had been so deeply imbrued) now gushed forth with
blood, to the great astonishment of all the people, and to the horror and
confusion of that bloody murderer.

In brief they were both proved guilty, and therefore had justly the deserved
sentence of condemnation pronounced against them, and in execution thereof, the
young man was executed the 7 day of this instant month of July. the old man
was for the present repreived.

I wish their sentence and the young man's untimely end, may be a warning to all
that are alive, to beware of covetuousness, which brings with it a chain of
other sins, and was no question the original of these Restals, or rather
Rascals bloody acts, and let all people be warned to provide for their latter
end, seeing though we rise well and lusty in the morning, we know not by what
accident the thread of our life may be cut off before night, and take this for a
true maxim that there is no man whatsoever that never so much despizeth his
own life, but yet is master of another man's.

FINIS.

