BLOODY NEWS FROM THE BARBADAES, BEING A true Relation of a great and terrible
fight between the Parliaments Navy, commanded by Sir George Ayscue; and the
King of Scots Forces under the conduct and command of the Lord Willoughby.

With the particulars of the Fight; the storming of the Island; the manner how
the Parliaments Forces were repulsed, and beaten off from Carlisle Bay, and the
Blockhouse; and the number killed and wounded.

Likewise, a dangerous Fight in Scotland, between the Parliaments Forces, and
the Redshanks; the manner of the Fight; and the event and success thereof.

Published for general satisfaction.

London, Printed for G. HORTON, 1652.

A bloody Fight in Scotland between the Redshanks, and the Parliaments forces,
the particulars thereof, and the number killed and taken prisoners.
SIR,
THe reducing of the Wild Scots, we fear will prove a work of great difficulty;
for many of them are brake forth into new distempers and Rebellion, being
headed by the Clans and Mac-Donals; and on the 12 of this instant Feb. advanced
as far as Innerness, where they fell upon the Parliaments forces, and put
almost all to the sword that they met withal. However, we have since pretty
well paid them home; for on the 14 instant a party of Col. Okey's Dragoons met
with them near Chivy-chase where they hunted them handsomely, killed about one
hundred, and took about two hundred prisoners. Yet notwithstanding, they
declare high for their King; but we doubt not, but (in process of time) to
bring them low for the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England. And upon
these principles, we may presume to build our foundation, viz. For whereas the
Commoners of England in this Age of the world are risen up in an Army, and have
cast out that Invasion of the duke of Normandy, and have won their Land and
Liberties again by the Sword, if they do not suffer their Councels to befool
them into slavery again upon a new account. For if so be that Kingly Authority
be set up in your Laws again, King CHARLES has conquered you and your
Posterity by policy, and won the field of you, though you have seemingly cout
off his head. for the strength of a King lies not in the visible appearance of
his body, but in his Will, Laws, and Authority. But if you remove Kingly
Government, and set up true and free Commonwealths Government, then you gain
your Crown, and keep it, and leave peace to your Posterity.

Dundee 16 Feb. 1652:
POSTSGRIPT.
SIR,
SInce the close of this Letter, we have received an Abstract, or Narrative, of
the Transaction of Affairs in France; a breviate whereof take as follows:

Since my last of the 14 inst^nt, The Prince of Conde has obtained a great
Victory against the Kings Forces, having routed a great part of the Cardinals
Army, and killed and taken above 3000 men. But by r^a^on of a great Con^piracy
in the City of Angiers, for delivering up of the Town to the King, his Highness
was in forced to desist from from his further pursuit, to endeavor the
composing of all differences, and extinguishing the flames, which were so
unhappily broken forth amongst them. For effecting whereof, the Duke of Rhone
seized on the persons of the Earl of Monta^g, the Lord Marshal, and diverse
others, and immediately brought them to a Trial before a Council of War, where
a Charge of High Treason was r^^d against them, For their perfidiousness, in
betraying their Trust, and r^^olting from the Parliament to the King, etc.
After the erading of the said Charge by the Judge Advocate; the prisoners at
the Bar were required to answer unto the Articles exhibited against them: But
they denied to acknowledge the Authority of the Court, saying, That here was no
lawful Judicature in any Kingdom, that took Rebellion to be their Ba^mer:
Whereupton the Court resolved to proceed to Sentence; and accordingly the Judge
Advocate denounced the same; which was, That the Earl of Mont^^g should have
his head severed from his shoulders; and the Lord Marsh^l, to be sh^t to death.

The King of Scots has sent a Letter to Sr Jacob Middleton, and diverse other
Gentlemen in Waler, imploring them to use the utmost of their endeavors for his
restoration, and to fight for a just King, an oppressed Country, and for a
Religion truly Christian, against all those who endeavor to alienate the Crown
from him and the royal Posterity. These fair adjutations and persuasions
wrought upon the hearts of man discontented spirits, who began to talk high,
saying, That before Easter her doubted not, but to see her good King in her own
Country again with 40000 fighting men: Whereupon the Well-affected rose,
apprehended diverse, and has quelled the humors of the rest.

A Declaration for Freedom.
Whereas if an Army be raised to cast out Kingly oppression, and if the Heads
of that Army promise a Commonwealths Freedons to the oppressed people, if in
case they will assist with person and purse; and if the people do assist, and
prevail over the Tyrant, those Officers are bound by the Law of Justice (who is
God) to make good their Engagements: And if they do not set the Land free from
the branches of the Kingly oppression, but reserve some part of the Kingly
power to advance their own particular Interest, whereby some of their friends
are left under as great slavery to them, as they were under the Kings; Those
Officers are not faithful Commonwealths soldiers, they are worse Tyrant and
Thieves then the King they cast out; and that honor they seemed to get by their
victories over the Common wealths Oppressor they lost again, by breaking
promsie and engagement to their opressed friends who did assist them. For what
difference is there between a professed Tyrant, that declares himself a Tyrant
in words, laws and deeds, as all Conquerors do, and him who promises tofree me
from the power of the Tyrant if I Will assist him; and when I have spent my
estate and blood, and expect my bargain by his Engagements to me, he sits
himself down in the Tyrants chair, and takes the possession of the Land to
himself, and ealls it his, and none of mine, and tells me he cannot in
conscience let me enjoy the freedom of the Farth with him, because it is
another man's right?

Such a soldier as this Engagement-breaker is neither a friend to the
Creation; nor to a particular Commonwealth, but a self-lover, and a hypocrite;
for he did not fight to set the Earth free from the bondage of the Oppressor,
as he pretended by his Engagements; but to remove that power out of the others
hand into his own. And this is just like the Beasts who fight for mastery and
keeps it, not relieveing but still Lording and Kinging over the weak. These are
Monarchical soldiers, not Commen-wealths soldiers; and such a soldier is a
murderer, and his warfare is unlawful. But soldiers of true noble spirits
will help the weak, and set the Oppressed free, and delight to see the
Commonwealth flourish in freedom, as well as their own gardens.

There is none of this true Nobility in a Monarchical Army, for they are all
self-lovers; the best is as a bryar, and the most upright amongst them is as a
Thorn: speak you Prophets of old if this be not true.

A Monarchial Army lifts up Mountains, and makes valleys, viz. Advances
Tyrants, and treads the Oppressed in the barren lanes of poverty.

But a Commonwealths Army is like John Baptist, who levels tha Mountains to
the Valleys, pulls down the Tyrant, and lifts ^p the Oppressed; and so makes
way for the spirit of Peace and Freedom to come in to rule and inherit the
Earth.

And by this which has been spoken, an Army may see wherein they may do well,
and wherein they may do hurt. Therefore you Army of Englands Common wealth look
to it; the Enemy could not beat you in the field, but they may be too hard for
you by policy in council, if you do not stick close to see Common Freedom
established.

From Holland they write, That Mr Lilburns declares high concerning the parl.
but we may give losers leave to talk; The Hollander seems to fly high against
England and the English are warned not to come upon the Exchange, left they
should be taken for Spies. O horrible ingratitude! What have you forgotten the
days of old?

They give out, that they will set forth 150 Men of War in six weeks, and 100
more with Letters of Mart; telling the people, that the parl. demands 800000
li. for Amboyna business, besides the tenth Herring, Flushing, Rammekins, free
Trade to Antwerp, and through the Zound: It seems they love their money, better
then ancient courtesies.

By an Express from the Parliaments Fleet lying before the Barbados, it is
certified, that Sir George Ayscue finding the Lord Willoughby to be very
resolute and obstinate, called a Council of Officers; whose result was,
forthwith to storm Carlisle Blockhouse; for effecting whereof, about 60
Long-boats were completely manned with Seamen, who endeavored to storm the
fort, and to enter the Bay; but so great was the Repulse which they received,
that they was enforced to make good their Retreat, with the loss of 15 men, and
to betake themselves for sanctuary to their ships again. However, the loss is
supposed to be equal on both sides: And the Lord Willoughby is exceeding
vigilant, to make the best of a bad cause; for he rides the Rounds (in person)
every Night, from Fort to Fort, promising his soldiers the free prize of the
Parliaments Navy; but with this provisoe, I befeech you, when they con catch
it.

FINIS.

