BLOODY NEWS FROM Southwark: OR, A perfect RELATION How the Master of the
Ship-Inne near Deadman-place, was found barbarously killed upon his Bed, on
Tuesday the 15th of this Instant February.

And several other remarkable Circumstances of the Fact.

With Permission, Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON: Printed for D. M. in the Year 1676.

BLOODY NEWS FROM Southwark, etc.
MR. S. the person that is thus unhappily come to an untimely end, has for
about five or six years last past kept the Ship-Inne in Southwark near
Deadmans-place, and in all things demeaned himself so justly and civilly, that
he was generally beloved and esteemed of amongst his Neighbors as a very
honest fair-conditioned man. He had been married many years to his wife, and by
her had several Children; but there is now only one (a Daughter) surviving, of
seven or eight years of Age. His Wife was always counted a civil woman, as far
as I can hear by the Neighbors; and they seemed to live very lovingly
together; without any reflections on her Reputations, before this unfortunate
Accident.

Besides the Inn, they kept a Strongwater-shop in the Borough or High Street
in Southwark; and this Tuesday (the last day of his life in this world) he had
been a considerable part of the day there drinking with his Wife and a woman
(who is now her Fellow prisoner upon suspicion, said to be her Kinswoman, whose
Dwelling was in Fetter-lane, London) and it is reported and alleged by them,
that he was somewhat in drink, and that thereupon his Wife sent this other
woman home with him to get him to lie down and sleep.

For about two or three of the clock, Mr. S. and this Mrs. L. came home
together; the Servants, that is to say, a Maid, the Tapster, and the Hostler
being then at Dinner, they past through the Room where they were, and went into
a low Room where he usually lay, and one of them shut the door after them. And
this woman staid with him a considerable time, about an hour, as near as they
can remember. And the Maid says, that having some occasion into a Buttery
joining to her Masters Lodging-room, she opened that door, but they were not
there, but gone out of that Room into another darkish Room beyond it, where
there was a bed; but he never used to ^ie down there, but was afterward found
dead upon that further bed.

After this Mrs. L. came forth of their Masters Room, and bolted the door after
her on the outside, telling the Maid, that she had laid her Master to sleep,
and covered him up warm, and laid two Pillows upon his feet, and bid her not to
go in for fear of disturbing him; and if any body came to speak with him, not
to call him, but say he was gone abroad. And the very same order she left the
Tapster at the door as she went forth, and so went her way. And the Servants
according to her directions did not go near him; and though they were but the
breadth of one Room distant from him most part of the time afterward, they
heard no noise or disturbance at all, but concluded him fast asleep.

About seven a Clock, or somewhat before, this woman came to the house again,
and said to the Servants, she would go in and see if their Master were awake
yet or not; and so opened the outward door and, went through his Lodging-room
into the other Room where he lay, and immediately came out again, and calling
to the Maid, told her, she thought her Master was dead or killed; whereupon the
Maid and Tapster went in again with her, and found him lying dead upon the bed,
the greatest part of his body covered over with the bed clothes, and two
Pillows on his feet, as she had said she left him, but very strangely wounded
about the Neck and Head; one very large wound or slash behind his Ear down
toward his Throat, another before his Ear upon the Cheek, and a third behind
upon his Neck. A great quantity of blood lay in the floor of the Room at some
distance from the bed, and not very much upon the bed-clothes. The blood had
run a great deal upon his right Arm, which lay hanging down over the bed, and
his left hand placed upon his breast was very much bruised, so that it looked
black.

This unexpected ghastly sight much affrighted the Maid and Tapster, nor did
the other woman seem less concerned: but seeing a Pistol lie upon a kind of a
Cupboard or Chest of Drawers in the same Room, though at some distance from the
bed, they concluded that he had therewith murdered himself, and presently sent
to the shop to his wife to have her come home; who upon the sad news expressed
some trouble, but (as many people thought) not so much as might be expected
upon such a dismal occasion.

However, concluding with her Kinswoman that he had murdered himself, and
consequently that his Goods would be seized upon as forfeited, they resolved to
keep it as private as they could, till they had got away the most considerable
of them; and accordingly fell to work: But the matter could not be carried so
closely, but notice of it was given to the Bailiff of the Borough, to whom it
seems such forfeitures belong, who forthwith came to the house, and opened a
Vein of the body, and considering all Circumstances, declared his opinion
(though it seemed contrary to his interest so to do) that he feared there was
something more in it than self Murder, and that he doubted some other person
or persons had a hand in it; whereupon a Constable was sent for, and Mrs. S.
and her Kinswoman, together, with the Maid, Tapster, and Hostler, were all
carried before one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace dwelling hard by,
where the Maid and Tapster related the truth of their knowledge in manner
aforesaid.

The woman relates, that her Husband for some time had been melancholy and
discontented, and particularly that on Munday-night last he lay and could not
sleep, but sighed most part of the night; which made her inquire of him the
cause of his trouble; who answered her, that he was to pay several sums of
money, and could get none in; and that he should be undone, and wished himself
out of the world: and that on Friday last he bought some Bullets for this
Pistol now found with him in the Room; and being asked where, she answered
Hounsditch, but some time afterward she said it was in the Minories.

There was found in the other woman's Pocckets a Knife, which she said was her
own, and also the dead man's Keys, silver Tobacco-box, and some Money of his;
which she alleged she took out of his Pocket after he was found dead, by his
Wives consent, and to secure them for her use; and being examined where she was
from the time she put him to sleep till night, she answered, amongst other
places, at her Washerwomands in St. Tooly-street, but that she did not stay
there at all; but the Washerwoman being sent for, affirmed that she was there
about half an hour, but denied that she brought her any Linen or other things.

In fine, after a long Examination, it appearing not probable that such Wounds
could be made by a Pistol, as they pretended, or that he should shoot himself,
and the Servants not hear the Report; and several other Circumstances seeming
very doubtful and suspicious, it was thought fit by the Magistrate to secure
the two women; and accordingly they were the same night both sent to the
Marshalsey (where the County-Goal is now kept) and the Servants bound over to
give Evidence.

The matter yet seems dark and doubtful; but if any persons are guilty of his
death, it is not to be doubted but God in time will bring their wickedness to
Light, at present his Wife and her Kinswoman are in Custody upon suspicion.

FINIS.

