BLOODY NEWS FROM SEA: BEING A perfect Narrative, and exact Relation, of the
great and desperate Engaging, between Two hundred Sail of English and Dutchmen
of war, upon the Coast of Scilley: With the manner how Genesis Blake, and Sir
George Ascue, drew their Fleet into Battalia; the Resolution of the Hollander;
and the number of ships taken by the English.

Also, the chasing of diverse ships to the Downs; the taking of some English by
Captain Bradshaw; the sinking of the London Faulcon; the number of ships
surprised in Sole-Bay near Yarmouth; and above one hundred sail of Colliers
coming into the Downs, bound for LONDON.

With the seizing of all the ships and goods belonging to the English Merchants
at St. Mallows in France; And the Kings Proclamation to all his subjects.

London Printed for G. Horton, 1652.

Bloody News from Sea.
SIR,
ON the 9th of this instant September. Genesis Blake, and Sir George Ascue called a
Council of Officers to consult about the engaging of the Dutch Fleet; And
accordingly with great alacrity and mutual affection it was resolved to fight
them; in pursuance whereof, his Excellency gave direction for a squadron of
ships to be drawn forth, to be commanded by valiant Capt. Coppin, who sailing
toward them, soon surprised about 18, laden with Salt, Wines, strong-water,
and other rich Merchandises, and bound from Nants;

About two in the afternoon, the whole Navy advanced; and within ten Leagues of
Scilley they discovered the enemy, who made a show as if they would immediately
fight; but toward the evening declined Engagement: The next day they appeared
again in sight, but keep off at a distance; so that the Gen: is in daily
pursuit of them; Their lying off at the head of our fleet is thought to be in
policy; for by a Scout that we have taken, we are informed that Mich. de
Ruttier their Admiral is resolved to fight us, only he waves the dispute,
until the coming up of Vice Admiral Evarson from Zealand, whose Mariners are
said to be famous both for courage and policy. In the interim, we have taken
ten more of their Merchants, viz. The Lion of Flushing, the Prince, the
Hopewel, etc. each ship carrying between 20 and 30 Guns.

Several Merchants ships having staid at the Isle of Wight for a convoy, at
last obtained one from Portsmouth; and being all bound for London, they had not
been long at sea, ere they met with the Holland Fleet between Beachie and this
Town; but the Frigate and a ship bound from Morlaix being most to the windward
than the rest, keeping the shore close, run aground; the rest being a head of
them got away: These two being run aground, the enemy left them, and followed
the rest above two hours; but all in vain, for they got safe under our Castle,
and the other two got clear off the next Tide. About which time, the Bachelor
and Ann frigates gave fight to four Dutchmen of War, but being not able to
maintain the dispute, declined engagement, and recovered Mary sound, getting
off safe, though above 100 Guns were fired at them. The famous ship called the
Faulcon of London, laden with Iron and Lemons from Bilbo is sunk near the
Lands-end.

By the KING.
WE have with unspeakable grief of heart long beheld the distractions of this
our Kingdom; Our very soul is full of angnish until We may find some remedy to
prevent the miseries which are ready to overwhelm this whole Nation by a civil
War. And although all Our endeavors tending to the composing of those unhappy
differences betwixt U, Our Unele, and Cozen the prince of Conde (though pur^ued
by Us with all zeal and sincerity) have been hitherto without the success We
hoped for; yet such is Our constant and earnest care to preserve the public
pe^^e, that we shall not be discouraged from using any Expedient, which by the
blessing of the God of Mercy, may lay a firm foundation of peace and happiness
to all Our good Subjects. To this end, observing that many mistakes have arisen
about the expelling of the Cardinal, which happily may be prevented for the
future, We have thought fit to propound to you, That some fit persons may be by
you enabled to tre^t with the like number to be authorized by Us, in such a
manner, and with such freedom of Debate, as may best tend to that happy
conclusion which all good men desire, The peace of the Kingdom: Wherein as we
promise in the word of a King all safety and encouragement to such as shall be
sent to Us, if you shall choose the place where We are for the Treaty, which we
wholly leave to you, presuming of the like care of the safety of those We shall
employ, if you shall name another place; So We assure you, and all Our good
Subjects, that (to the best of Our understanding nothing shall be therein
wanting on Our part, which may advance the true Catholic Religion, securing
the Law of the Land, (upon which is built as well our just prerogative, as the
propriety and liberty of the subject) confirm all just power and privileges of
Parliament, and render Us and Our people truly happy by a good understanding
betwixt us and Our subjects.

Bring with you as firm Resolutions to do your duty, and let all Our good
people join with us in Our prayers to Almighty God for his blessing upon this
Work.

If this proposition shall be rejected by you, We have done Our duty so amply
that God will absolve us from the guilt of any of that blood which must be
spilt. And what opinion soever other men may have of Our power, We assure you
nothing but Our Christian and pious care to prevent the effusion of blood has
begot this motion, Our provision of Men, Arms, and Money, being such as may
secure us from further violence, till it please God to open the eyes of Our
people.

LEWIS, Rex.

This Declaration being presented to the Duke of Orleans, it was with great
alacrity resented by his Royal Highness, yet notwithstanding, many
giddy-headed and factious spirits there are, who desire to be obnoxious to this
present Treaty: Which to prevent, the new Cardinal of Retz does take great
pains, and endeavors what he can to mediate Affairs, not sparing his tongue or
pen to come to an Agreement.

We have received further advertisements that the English and Dutch fleets are
engaged, and that a bloody conflict has happened, diverse ships sunk, and many
taken; the dispute being maintained with great resolution on both sides; but no
just particulars can be given at present, by reason they are still in continual
action: Providence sometimes smiles upon the one: and soon after frowns upon
the other. We have taken about 30 of the enemy in all; and many of ours are
taken by Captain Bradshaw near the Western Channel. The Patrick and Francis,
two of the Scots Kings frigates, do much infest those Coasts: The like does the
enemy about Yarmouth Roads, who desperately atempted the taking of two ships
riding at anchor in Sole-bay; Upon which sad tidings, we received this
comfortable news, that 100 sail of Colliers are coming into the Downs, bound
for London. The French at St. Mallows have seized on all the ships and goods
belonging to the English Merchants.

FINIS.

