An ADVERTISEMENT to All Learned Gentlemen, JUNE21. 1690. There is Newly
Published a BOOK, Entitled, CENSURA CELEBRIORUM AUTHORUM: SIVE TRACTATUS in
quo Varia Virorum Doctorum de Clarissimis cujusque Seculi Scriptoribus judicia
traduntur. Vnde facillimo negotio Lector dignoscere queat quid in singulis
quibusque Istorum Authorum maxim memorabile sit, and quonam in pretio apud
Eruditos semper habiti fuerint. OMNIA in Studio-sorum gratiam collegit, and in
ordinem digessit secundum seriem Temporis quo Ipsi Authors floruerunt
THOMAS-POPE BLOUNT, Anglo-Britannus Barronettus. Cum Indice Locupletissimo.
Containing near Two hundred Sheets in Folio, of a fair Character and Paper (the
same as Fasciculus Rerum Expetendarum, lately Published.) Printed for RICHARD
CHISWELL at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul 's Churchyard. BY WHOM, for the
Benefit and Encouragement of GENTLEMEN, it is propounded as follows: viz.
I. That whereas the Book is now sold for Eighteen Shillings in Sheets; whoever
will come in as a Subscriber, and pay to the said Richard Chiswell Sixteen
Shillings and Four Pence, shall receive One perfect Book in Sheets.

II. Whoever shall subscribe, or procure Subscriptions, for Six, shall have a
Seventh Book Gratis: So that he that takes this Advantage, will have every Book
for Fourteen Shillings in Sheets.

III. That this Subscription-price shall continue to the first day of
Michaelmas-Term next, and no longer: And after that, what remain of the
Impression shall not be sold under Eighteen Shillings in Sheets.

1. The Impression is but small; no more than Five hundred Printed. 2. The Book
is now completely finished, and ready to be delivered, in Sheets or Bound.
Binding, Two Shillings Plain. 3. Booksellers shall have the same Allowance for
their Collecting Subscriptions, as was made in the FASCICULUS RERUM
EXPETENDARUM.

