THE LIFE OF Sr THOMAS BODLEY, THE HONORABLE FOVNDER OF THE PVBLIQVE LIBRARY
in the UNIVERSITY of OXFORD.

Written by Himself.

ACADEMIA OXONIENSIS
printer's device consisting of the blazon of Oxford University

June 9th OXFORD, Printed by HENRY HALL Printer to the UNIVERSITIE. 1647.

To the READER.
WHEN the Great Restorer of Learning, our Munificent Benefactour, Sir THOMAS
BODLEY, made the happy Exchange of the troubles of this life, with the Glories
of a better; The University, according to the greatness of his merits, and
their loss, in solemn grief and sadness, attended at his Obsequies. But
lest the uncharitable censure of the world should apprehend our thankfulness
buried in the same grave with him, and cold as his dead ashes, in that we pay
no after tribute to so engaging a desert; We bring to the Altar of Eternity
that part of him which yet, and ever must survive. A Monument freed from the
laws of time and ruin; Supported with the vigor of that name, which has a
seminall strength within it self, to make whole volumes live. But lest the
judging and severer eye, viewing the nakedness of this relation, may thence
despise the poorness of our endeavor: That I may speak the work above all
scorn, above all praise; it was his Own. Nor durst we call that draught in
question, which felt the hand of so exact a Master; but with awe looked on it,
as on the fabrique of an ancient Temple, where the ruin furthers our Devotion;
and gaudy ornaments do but profane the sad religion of the place. It Is true,
it savours not the language of our age, that has the Art to murder with a
smile, and fold a curse within a prayer, but speaks the Rhetoric of that
better world, where virtue was the garb, and truth the complement, Those
action are of low and empty worth, that can shine only when the varnish of our
words does gild them over. The true Diamond sparkles in its rock, and in
despite of darkness makes a day. Here then you shall behold Actions with the
same integrity set down, as they were first performed. A History described, as
it was lived. A Counselor that admitted still Religion to the Cabinet: and in
his active aims had a design on Heaven. A spirit of that height, that
happiness, as in a private fortune to out-doe the famed magnificence of mighty
Princes: whilst his single work clouds the proud fame of the Egyptian
Library; and shames the tedious growth o'th wealthy Vatican. I know how hard a
task 'twill be to persuade any to copy out from this fair pattern; however
we cannot yet so far despair of ingenuity, as not to expect even from
th'unconcern'd disinteressed Reader, a clear esteem and just resentment of
it. If we gain but this, we shall in part rest satisfied: In an age so wholly
lost to vice, conceiving it a great degree of virtue to confess the luster of
that good which our perverse endeavors still avoyde.

THE LIFE OF SIR THOMAS BODLEY.
I Was borne at Exeter in Devonshire the second of March, 1544. descended both
by Father and Mother of worshipful parentage. By my Fathers side, from an
ancient Family of Bodley, or Bodleigh of Dunscombe by Crediton; and by my
Mother, from Robert H^ne Esquire, of Otterey Saint Mary, nine miles from
Exeter; my Father in the time of Queen Mary, being noted and known to be an
enemy to Popery, was so cruelly threatened, and so narrowly observed, by those
that maliced his Religion, that for the safeguard of himself and my Mother,
who was wholly affected as my Father, he knew no way so secure, as to fly into
Germany: where after a while he found means to call over my Mother, with all
his children and family, whom he settled for a time at VVesell in Cleveland,
(for there, as then, were many English, which had left their Country for their
conscience, and with quietness enjoyed their meetings and preachings;) and
from thence we removed to the Town of Franckfort, where was in like sort
another English Congregation. Howbeit we made no long tarriance in either of
those two Towns, for that my Father had resolved to fix his abode in the City
of Geneva, where, as far as I remember, the English Church consisted of some
hundred persons. I was at that time of twelve years age, but through my
Fathers cost and care, sufficiently instructed to become an Auditour of
Chevalerius in Hebrew, of Berealdus in Greek, of Calvin and Beza in Divinity,
and of some other Professors in that University, (which was newly then
erected) besides my domestical teachers, in the house of Philibertus
Saracenus, a famous Physician in that City, with whom I was boarded: where
Robertus Constantinus, that made the Greek Lexicon, read Homer unto me. Thus I
remained there two years and more, until such time as our Nation was
advertised of the death of Queen Mary, and succession of Elizabeth, with the
change of Religion, which caused my Father to hasten into England, where he
came with my Mother, and with all their family, within the first of the Queen,
and settled their dwelling in the City of London. It was not long after, (...)
was sent away from thence to the University of Oxford, recommended to the
teaching and tuition of Doctor Humfrey, who was shortly after chosen the
chief Reader in Divinity, and President of Magdalen College; there I followed
my studies till I took the degree of Batchelour of Arts, which was in the
year, 1563. within which year I was also chosen Probationer of Merton
College, and the next year ensuing admitted Fellow. Afterward, to wit in the
year, 1565. by special persuasion of some of my fellows, and for my private
exercise, I undertook the public reading of a Greek lecture, in the same
College Hall, without requiring or expecting any stipend for it; Nevertheless
it pleased the Fellowship of their own accord to allow me soon after four
marks by the year, and ever since to continue that Lecture to the College.
In the year of our Lord 1566. I proceeded Master of Arts, and read forth at
year in the School streets Natural Philosophy; after which time, within
less then three years space, I was won by entreaty of my best affected
friends, to stand for the Proctourship, to which I and my Colleague, Master
Bea^blocke of Exeter College, were quietly elected in the year 1569. without
any competion or countersuite of any other. After this for a long time, I
supplied the office of the University Orator, and bestowed my time in the
study of sundry faculties, without any inclination to profess any one above
the rest, insomuch as at last I waxed desirous to travel beyond the Seas, for
attaining to the knowledge of some special modern tongues, and for the
increase of my experience in the managing of affairs, being wholly then
addicted to employ my self, and all my cares, in the public service of the
State. My resolution fully taken I departed out of England Anno 1576. and
continued very near four years abroad and that in sundry parts of Italy,
France, and Germany. A good while after my return, to wit, in the year 1585.
I was employed by the Queen to Frederick Father to the present King of
Denmark, to Julius Duke of Brunswicke, to William Landgrave of Hesse, and
other German Princes: the effect of my message was, to draw them to join their
forces with hers, for giving assistance to the King of Navarre now Henry the
fourth King of France. my next employment was to Henry the third, at such time
as he was forced by the Duke of Guise to fly out of Paris; which I performed in
such sort, as I had in charge with extraordinary secrecy: not being accompanied
with any one servant (for so much I was commanded) nor with any other Letters,
then such as were written with the Queens own hand, to the King, and some
selected persons about him; the effect of that message it is fit I should
conceal. But it tended greatly to the advantage, not only of the King, but of
all the Protestants in France, and to the Dukes apparent overthrow, which also
followed soon upon it. It so befell after this, in the year 88. that for the
better conduct of her Highness affairs in the Provinces united, I was thought
a fit person to reside in those parts, and was sent thereupon to the Hague in
Holland, where according to the contract that had formerly past, between her
Highness and the States, I was admitted for one of their Council of Estate,
taking place in their Assemblies next to Count Maurice, and yiedling my
suffrage in all that was proposed. During all that time what approbation was
given of my painful endeavors by the Queen, Lords in England, by the States
of the Country there, and by all the English Soldiery, I refer it to be
notified by some others relation; since it was not unknown to any of any
calling, that then were acquainted with the State of that government. For at my
first coming thither, the people of that Country stood in dangerous terms of
coffeehouse, partly for some courses that were held in England, as they
thought, to their singular prejudice, but most of all in respect of the
insolent demeanor of some of her Highness Ministers, which only respected
their private emolument, little weighing in their dealing what the Queen had
contracted with the States of the Country; whereupon was conceived a mighty
fear on every side, that both a present dissolution of the Contract would
ensue, and a downright breach of amity between us and them. Now what means I
set a foot for redress of those perils, and by what degrees the state of
things was reduced into order, it would require a long treatise to report it
exactly; but this I may aver with modesty and truth, and the Country did
always acknowledge it with gratitude, that had I not of my self, without any
direction from my Superiors, proceeded in my charge with extreme
circumspection, as well in all my speeches and proposalls to the States, as in
the tenor of my letters that I writ into England, some sudden alarm had
been given, to the utter subversion and ruin of the State of those Provinces:
which in process of time must needs have wrought in all probability, the
self-same effect in the state of this Realm. Of this my diligence and care in
the managing of my business, there was, as I have signified, very special
notice taken by the Queen and State at home, for which I received from her
Majesty many comfortable Letters of her gracious acceptance: as withal from
that time forward I did never receive almost any set instructions how to
govern my proceedings in her Majesty's occasions, but the carriage in a manner
of all her affairs was left to me and my direction. Through this my long
absence out of England, which wanted very little of five whole years, my
private estate did greatly require my speedy return, which when I had obtained
by intercession of friends, and a tedious suite, I could enjoy but a while,
being shortly after enjoined to repair to the Hague again. Nevertheless upon
a certain occasion to deliver unto her some secret overtures, and of
performing thereupon an extraordinary service, I came again home within less
then a Twelve-moneth: and I was no sooner come, but her Highness embracing the
fruit of my discoveries, I was presently commanded to return to the States
with charge to pursue those affairs to performance, which I had secretly
proposed; and according to the project which I had conceived, and imparted unto
her, all things were concluded and brought to that issue that was instantly
desired, whereupon I procured my last revocation. Now here I can not choose but
in making report of the principal accidents that have fallen unto me in the
course of my life, but record among the rest, that from the very first day I
had no man more to friend among the Lords of the Council, then was the Lord
Treasurer Burleigh: for when occasion had been offered of declaring his
conceit as touching my service, he would always tell the Queen (which I
received from her self and some other ear-witnesses) that there was not any
man in England so meet as my self to undergo the office of the Secretary. And
sithence his son, the present Lord Treasurer, has signified unto me in
private conference, that when his father first intended to advance him to that
place, his purpose was withal to make me his Colleague. But the case stood
thus in my behalf: before such time as I returned from the Provinces united,
which was in the year 1597. and likewise after my return, the then Earl of
Essex did use me so kindly both by letters and messages, and other great
tokens of his inward favors to me, that although I had no meaning, but to
settle in my mind my chiefest desire and dependence upon the Lord Burleigh, as
one that I reputed to be both the best able, and therewithal the most willing
to work my advancement with the Queen, yet I know not how, the Earl, who
sought by all devises to divert her love and liking both from the Father and
the Son (but from the Son in special) to withdraw my affection from the one
and the other, and to win me altogether to depend upon himself, did so
often take occasion to entertain the Queen with some prodigal speeches of my
sufficiency for a Secretary, which were ever accompanied with words of disgrace
against the present Lord Treasurer, as neither she her self, of whose favor
before I was thoroughly assured, took any great pleasure to prefer me the
sooner, (for she hated his ambition, and would give little countenance to any
of his followers) and both the Lord Burleigh and his Son waxed jealous of my
courses, as if under hand I had been induced by the cunning and kindness of
the Earl of Essex, to oppose my self against their dealings. And though in
very truth they had no solid ground at all of the least alteration in my
disposition toward either of them both, (for I did greatly respect their
persons and places, with a settled resolution to do them any service, as also
in my heart I detested to be held of any faction whatsoever) yet the now Lord
Treasurer, upon occasion of some talk, that I have since had with him, of the
Earl and his actions, has freely confessed of his own accord unto me, that
his daily provocations were so bitter and sharp against him, and his
compatisons so odious, when he put us in a balance, as he thought thereupon he
had very great reason to use his best means, to put any man out of hope of
raising his fortune, whom the Earl with such violence, to his extreme
prejudice, had endeavored to dignifie. And this, as he affirmed, was all the
motive he had to set himself against me, in whatsoever might redound to the
bettering of my estate, or increasing of my credit and countenance with the
Queen. When I had thoroughly now bethought me, first in the Earl, of the
slender hold-fast that he had in the favor of the Queen, of an endless
opposition of the chiefest of our Statesmen like still to wait upon him, of
his perilous, and feeble, and uncertain advice, as well in his own, as in all
the causes of his friends: and when moreover for my self I had fully
considered how very untowardly these two Counselors were affected unto me,
(upon whom before in cogitation I had framed all the fabrique of my future
prosperity) how ill it did concur with my natural disposition, to become, or
to be counted either a stickler or partaker in any public faction, how well I
was able, by God's good blessing, to live of my self, if I could be content
with a competent livelihood; how short time of further life I was then to
expect by the common course of nature when I had, I say, in this manner
represented to my thoughts my particular estate, together with the Earls, I
resolved thereupon to possess my soul in peace all the residue of my days,
to take my full farewell of State employments, to satisfy my mind with that
mediocrity of worldly living that I had of my own, and so to retire me from
the Court, which was the epilogue and end of all my actions and endeavors of
any important note, till I came to the age of fifty three. Now although after
this, by her Majesty's direction, I was often called to the Court, by the now
Lord Treasurer, then Secretary, and required by him, as also diverse times
since, by order from the King, to serve as Ambassador in France; to go a
Commissioner from his Highness, for concluding the truce between Spain and
the Provinces, and to negotiate in other very honorable employments, yet I
would not be removed from my former final resolution, insomuch as at length,
to induce me the sooner to return to the Court, I had an offer made me by the
present Lord Treasurer (for in process of time he saw, as he himself was
pleased to tell me more then once, that all my dealing was upright, faithful,
and direct) that in ease I my self were willing unto it, he would make me his
associate in the Secretaries office; And to the intent I might believe that he
intended it Bona fide, he would get me out of hand to be sworn of the
Counsel. And for the better enabling of my state to maintain such a dignity,
whatsoever I would ask, that might be fit for him to deal in, and for me to
enjoy, he would presently solicit the King to give it passage. All which
persuasions notwithstanding, albeit I was often assaulted by him, in regard of
my years, and for that I felt my self subject to many indispositions, besides
some other private reasons which I reserve unto my self, I have continued
still at home, my retired course of life, which is now methinks to me as the
greatest preferment that the State can afford. Only this I must truly confess
of my self, that though I did never repent me yet of those and some other my
often refusalls of honorable offers, in respect of enriching my private
estate, yet somewhat more of late I have blamed my self, and my nicety that
way, for the love that I bear to my Reverend Mother the University of Oxford,
and to the advancement of her good, by such kind of means as I have since
undertaken. For thus I fell to discourse and debate in my mind, that although I
might find it fittest for me, to keep out of the throng of Court contentions,
and address my thoughts and deeds to such ends altogether, as I my self could
best affect; yet withal I was to think, that my duty toward God, the
expectation of the world, my natural inclination, and very morality, did
require, that I should not wholly so hide those little abilities that I had,
but that in some measure, in one kind or other, I should do the true part of a
profitable member in the State: whereupon examining exactly for the rest of my
life, what course I might take, and having sought (as I thought, all the ways
to the wood) to select the most proper, I concluded at the last to set up my
Staff at the Library door in Oxford; being thoroughly persuaded, that in my
solitude and surcease from the Commonwealth affairs, I could not busy my
self to better purpose, then by reducing that place (which then in every part
lay ruined and wast) to the public use of Students; For the effecting
whereof, I found my self furnished in a competent proportion, of such four
kinds of aides, as unless I had them all, there was no hope of good success.
For without some kind of knowledge, as well in the learned and modern
tongues, as in sundry other sorts of scholasticall literature, without some
purse-ability to go through with the charge, without very great store of
honorable friends to further the design, and without special good leisure to
follow such a work, it could but have proved a vain attempt, and
inconsiderate. But how well I have sped in all my endeavors, and how full
provision I have made for the benefit and ease of all frequenters of the
Library, that which I have already performed in sight, that besides which I
have given for the maintenance of it, and that which hereafter I purpose to
add, by way of enlargement to that place (for the project is cast, and whether
I live or dye it shall be, God willing, put in full execution) will testify so
truly and abundantly for me, as I need not be the publisher of the dignity and
worth of mine own Institution. Written with my own hand Anno 1609. December
the 15.

THO: BODLEY.

Thus far our Noble Author of himself. Who like to the first Penman of the
sacred history, seems to survive his grave, and to describe unto us his own
death. For having finished that great work which future times shall ever
honor, never equal, he yielded to his fate. As being unwilling the glory of
that deed should be deflour'd by the succession of an act less high then it.
On the 29 th of January in the year, 1612. his pure Soul attained the
freedom of its own divinity: leaving his borrowed earth, the sad remainder of
innocence and frailty, to be deposited in Merton College: Who had the
happiness to call his Education hers, and to be entrusted with so dear a
Pledge of immortality.

FINIS.

