A BLOODY PLOT Discovered against the INDEPENDENTS: WHEREIN Is laid open, the
manner of this horrid Conspiracy, and how it should have been executed. With
the place and hour when this fatal Blow should have been given.

Whereunto is annexed: Six Propositions presented to his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax; concerning certain Arguments held and maintained by the
Independents.

LONDON: Printed for G. E. January 21, 1647.

NEVVES FROM THE ARMY.
FRom the Army it is certified, that his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax does use
his utmost endeavor for the appeasing of any Tumults or Mutinies that are
(diverse times) at their full height and growth, by reason of some contrary
Opinions: And is also very desirous that all differences whatsoever may be
composed, which are too much springing up in the hearrs of diverse Officers and
Soldiers in the Army.

Nay further, diverse malignant Spirits in the Countries are too busy in sowing
of Discord in this unparalleld Army, by covering their gallant actions with
calumnious aspersions.

Therefore to be brief, and to instance some of these unto you, I shall in the
first place intimate unto you, a thing worthy of recital, and fit for public
view, viz.

Upon the last Fast day, diverse honest and well affected persons had appointed a
meeting within a mile of Northampton, resolving, to express and declare the
Scriptures each to other, which accordingly they did: but (with some
difficulties) they plunged through certain distempered waters: For, when they
were at this holy Exercise, and laying open the Word, comparing chapter with
chapter, and text with text, diverse of the townsmen seemed somewhat offended,
desiring their Minister to send for the chief Instrument of this private
Assembly, and to have some conference and disputation with him, concerning
their opinions, and the arguments they held, which was accordingly done; and
immediately one Mr. Gregory made his apperance at the Ministers house, where it
seems some expressions were uttered, that gave him offense; thereupon he
declared himself to the General, his Excellency (after some consultation
thereupon) referred the business to a Council of War (so ready was his
Excellency to redress all grievances of this nature) the Parson presents his
Articles to that Council, viz.

I. THat the said Mr. Gregory had said, that the Parson was a Minister of
Antichrist, and not of Christ. II. That he thought he was bound to unfold the
mind of Scripture, as it was revealed to him. III That he had preached not long
before in two tubs in Oxfordshire. IV. That he would preach in the steeple
house-yard. V. That he hoped to see free trading on the Sabbath day. VI. That
he said, that the Psalms were no Scripture.
The Council of War had a long debate about these Articles, and upon
examination of them it was resolved, that none of them were against the Laws
and articles of War except only the first article, which (that they might no
ways seem to connive at any offense) they brought under that attickle of
reproachful speeches, and ordered Mr. Gregory to make an acknowledgement to
the Parson. And for further satisfaction, examined the particulars of the other
articles (of which few could be proved) yet he made a satisfactory Declaration,
concerning what he published in them, and what not, and that he did not deny
the Psalms to be Scripture, etc. (as was suggested) so that this judicious
Council discharged him upon this acknowledgment, and committed him to prison
for one night, leaving the Parson to accuse him elsewhere, if he thought fit.

Another passage I shall think meet to intimate unto you, which happened very
lately in Buckinghamshire, where one Mr. Ives a trooper, preached at the
request of some of his friends, and was by diverse very well approved of. But
the inveterate malice of the Malignant party were grown to such an aspiring
height, that most wickedly and barbarously a great number of them had
complotted together, to cut of those precious Saints, who had assembled
together, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, for the searching and laying open his
sacred Word, that so they might be the better able to discover those sweet and
soul-saving Notions expressed therein, and to know the Will of their Redeemer.
The complotters came to the place where the Independents were, giving out many
reviling words, and threatening language, saying that they should all suffer
very suddenly. Whereupon, some of the Parliaments forces being near, and
hearing of it, came immediately to rescue them, and to apprehend the
Conspirators, but being over-powred, they received the worst, diverse of them
being dangerously wounded. For the Malignant party had got a word, (for the
King) that so they might know all those that would side with them against the
Roundheads. And being somewhat powerful, and too strong for the Parliaments
Party, they got the day, making their escape, and wounded a Captain, and diverse
others. There is great care taken, though out the Parliaments quarters, for the
apprehending of these Complotters. Some of them are men of eminency; but its
hoped a short time will produce their appearance.

FINIS.

