THE Honest Citizen, OR, Faithful Counselor to the City of LONDON.
THe City of London, before these Civil, or rather Uncivil Wars, was accounted
richer then either Amsterdam, Paris, Venice, or any other City of Christendom:
How much it is drained since these Wars, in glory, power, and wealth, I do
leave it to all judicious men to judge. It had the glory and honor of
Christendom, for its faithfulness to the Cause of God, and redeeming of the
decaying Liberties of the Kingdom; yet retaining their loyalty to their King,
and affection to the Kingdom, nay unto all three Kingdoms; of which, ample
testimony has been given. But how much it has suffered by giving too much
credit unto fair pretenses of those, who have not only deceived it, but also
Parliament and Kingdom; nay, have enslaved all three Kingdoms in a perpetual
War, if not by the providence of Almighty God timely prevented, and a speedy
resolution both of both of Parliament and City to resume their virgin
Principles; all being acted by the Grandees, under pretense of Religion; which
indeed is not only now, but long ago discovered to be nothing else but Pride,
and Covetousness, to subvert the Fundamental Government of the Kingdom, and
bring all the wealth and power into a few men's hands, which will make a
perpetual War between England and Scotland, and bring all Nations into this
Kingdom upon the King's interest, and his Posterity; leave Ireland to it self,
whereby the Pope and Spanish Council will there prevail, the old native Irish
naturally loving both Pope and Spaniard; which made the Lord Inchequin draw
unto him the Lord Taaf and his party (being of the British Irish) from the
Oneals and mac Carta's and the rest, who are for the Pope and Spaniard* only.
These Grandees will bring confusion upon all three Kingdoms, and destroy the
whole Protestant Cause of Christendom. For prevention of this, London may have
a great share in the deliverance of this Kingdom, if it will stand stoutly to
its first Principles, and intended Reformation, and not be cheated out of its
Religion, Allegiance, Power, and Liberty. London has done well of late; the
great providence of God having discovered many plots for its ruin, as well as
against the King, Monarchy, the three Kingdoms, and subversion of the
Fundamental Laws of the Land, which all subjects are sworn unto, and bound to
observe, all being hatched by the traitorous Grandees. London being now the
only place that must be subdued by them, having already subdued both
Parliament and Kingdom to their traitorous commands: And if the Scots enter not
the Kingdom, which undoubtedly they will do, and it may be sooner then we think
for, London must be brought to better obedience, or laid in the dust, as
Cromwell has often said: an act so bad, as to be abhorred in any traitorous
thoughts, unless in such great ones as Cromwell and his accomplices are. But if
London does no better, they must drink of the dregs of their fury. The Grandees
seeing there is no reconciliation with them, therefore they have changed much
Silver into Gold, and sent great store beyond the Seas against their slight, if
their pr^j^cts do not take; having no hopes to reconcile with the King, who
will be tampered with no more, nor cheated by them. No hopes to cheat or buy
out the Scots; no hopes to reconcile with the Parliament if once it comes
again to its virgin constitution; no hopes to be reconciled to the Kingdom,
having laid such unjust and forced Impositions upon the subjects thereof,
especially in time of Peace, when no enemy appear th, unless such as oppose
their treason and unjust commands; the Army being voted to disband in time of a
free Parliament: no hopes to have any reconciliation for the Protestant blood
they have caused to be shed in obstructing Irelands relief, and the distressed
members of Christ in that Kingdom: no hopes of reconciliation with the
Levellers, Cromwell having so often changed his principles. The Grandees knowing
they cannot fight with the Scots, and leave London on their backs, having for
this end increased their Army to such a number, that the new Establishment will
not maintain them; nay, in stead of Six and twenty thousand which they enforced
the House to vote, have made them fifty thousand: therefore they must come up
to London with such a Plot as the last was, to raise a million of money, or
else plunder them: Also seeing themselves apparently ruined upon the coming in
of the Scots, if they leave London in its freedom behind them, the Kingdom
rising about them; and if once they receive a foil, they know there is no
recruting again; therefore, as Cromwell said, London must be brought to better
obedience, or laid in the dust. Therefore honorable, valiant, and dear City of
London, be not cheated: Will you fight your selves into Slavery, and not stand
for your Freedom? You relieved Cloucester under the Command of that most
excellent and valiant General the Earl of Essex, whose memory* will be ever
precious to the Kingdom; and fought with the Kings Royal Army, when not only
yours, but the whole Kingdoms Liberty depended upon that valiant, faithful, and
never to be forgotten Commander, Major* General Mass^y; and will you not
maintain your selves against these traitors to God, the King, and three
Kingdoms, which are far worse then the former Spanish faction that abused the
King, and made him serve their lusts, pride and ambition. You can never have
Peace by yielding unto them; their reconciliation is only to enslave you, and
bring you into a perpetual War, destroying Religion, Laws, and Government, and
bring in all Christendom upon you; and in this very time if you stand not to it
both wisely and stoutly, the House being full, having made an Order for their
Members not to depart for fourteen or fifteen days; and before that time is
expired, you may hear of some news may affright these Grandees, and traitors to
City and Kingdom. Remember what that shitten fool Atkins said in the Common
Council of London on monday night last. Enquire what news the Mayor of Barwick
sent to the House, desiring their direction therein: Enquire also what that
bloody villain Sir Arthur Haslerigg sent to the House, or Committee at
Derby-house, from Newcastle. All the Kingdom is ready to help you, for settling
of Religion, Laws, and just Liberties. You have had some thoughts of
Major General Skippon to be your Major General; he will merely cheat and gull
you, and bring in a second Trojan-horse amongst you, as he was accessory in
bringing in the former, and marching through your City in triumph with the
Grandees and Rebels of the Army; who deceived not only the Kingdom, but their
own Soldiers, being willing to disband, and willing to obey the Parliament
that set them up, but that Crumwel and his accomplices seduced them. But I hope
in God those honest Christian souls, I mean the Soldiers, will no more be
deceived by their traitorous Commanders, who are traitors in the highest form;
when the Soldiers may have an Act of Oblivion for what is past, and all their
Arreres paid and ensured them by the Parliament, City, and Kingdom; as has
been formerly offered them, and will be willingly made good unto them upon
their disbanding, settling of, Peace and all just Interests, and relieving of
Ireland with such as will go, and those that have no mind to that service, may
have their Arreres paid and ensured them, to follow their Trades and Callings.
Skippon is the very picture of Synon, who brought in the Grecian horse to Troy,
causing the Trojans to break down part of their walls, that the horse might
enter, saying, Synon, who I, the gods do know that Synon cannot lie. Skippon
has said many times, that Cromwell's ways are not the ways of God. When
Adjutant-General Gray was questioned for his life, knowing his cause to be good
and honest, only for reading and countenancing the City-Remonstrance. Skippon
has often said, that any man, let him be never so deserving, or unblameable in
his life, unless that he complied with Cromwell and his faction, he must be
blasted in his reputation, and expelled the Army. His appearance in Gray's
business (knowing the innocence of his cause) was only because he hoped the
Parliament would have been able to make good their thanks they gave the City
for their Remonstrance; for which continuing a little while in that opinion (as
he is very subject to change) he was sequestered the Army, but not expelled,
because Cromwell thought that would too much displease the City, being in a good
and courageous temper at that time. But Skippon seeing Cromwell's side to be
most profitable, collogued again with him, and was restored to his many gainful
places in the Army, whereby he has got many thousands out of the ruins of the
Kingdom, having three or four places in the said Army, and enjoyed them ever
since the Army should have been disbanded by order of free Parliament. But
still the City having a good opinion of him, desired the House that he and that
faithful and valiant Commander, who has not a whit started from his honest
principles neither in fair or foul weather, I mean Major General Massey, to be
chosen for Ireland, which was done accordingly; Massey telling Skippon several
times, that he would be as observant of him and his commands, for the public
good, as any Commander or Officer in the Army should be. Whereupon Skippon and
Massey were sent down to the Army with the Committee of Parliament, to draw it
off for Ireland; wherein Massey did most faithfully, but Skippon most coldly
delivered the Commands of Parliament, and did not heartily press the
Commanders and Soldiers to the obedience of Parliament, who set them up; but
upon his return and account to the House, seemed to comply with Cromwels
design in the business, on purpose to keep the Army up, to enslave the
Kingdom, having got the Scots by fair and false pretenses to return into
Scotland; who were willing to have both Armies disbanded together, whereby the
charge of both Kingdoms might be taken off, and a just Peace settled between
King and People, as you see they still maintain it in their Papers and Desires
delivered unto the Parliament, standing stiffly for a personal Treaty with the
King. And now Skippon is Cromwe^'s soul and body, until a stronger side
appears, having declared himself that he will fight against the Scots, if
they come against the Parliament and Army (as our new Government is called) for
which last week they gave him a thousand pounds per annum; the Scots being
enforced to come into England again, to redeem Religion, King, Parliament and
Kingdom from the Lord Says, Cromwell's and their accomplices cruelties, who
would subvert Religion, Monarchy, Laws, and our just and well-established
Government, only for their own pride and covetousness. Now if you will have
Skippon, take him; you have a good morsel of him. Major General Brown is your
fittest man, I suppose a Citizen born, but I am sure a Citizen bred, and one
that loves the City heartily, and that in conscience too: he is faithful,
able, and valiant, of a dexterous body and spirit, and one that loves
Government and Order, and not with too much ceremony neither; one that has
given a sufficient testimony of his valor and parts, and one that did not
indent with you as Skippon did when he was made Major General of the City, who
would have a great salary, and a great house to live in; a good house would not
serve his turn: But Major General Brown went out freely, of his own accord,
and at his own charge, to suppress the rising in Kent and other places: no man
in the City so fit as he, and one that has done more personal service for the
Public since these unhappie Wars then Major General Skippon. Colonel West is
the fittest man to be Lieutenant of the Tower, where now that peevish Sectary
Lieutenant Colonel Tichburn is, alias Cromwell's sirreverence, or a n^w
confiding light; I will not profane the word Saint: I will not call him
Colonel, his Commission being illegal, and he fitter for a warm bed then to
command a Regiment or Citadel; one that not above a month before he was chosen
Li^utenant of the Tower, held an opinion that it was not lawful for men to
fight or kill men, thinking that fighting would be in fashion again. And
indeed, when he was first made Lieutenant Colonel of the Auxiliaries in London,
if he durst have marched down only for a Guard of three or four Pieces of
Battery to Bazing house before it was fortified, he had saved many a thousand
men's lives: but he loved then nothing tending to fighting, and therefore he
discouraged his Soldiers, and took a journey himself under a color to
Brainford, and then came home in triumph, that he might pray that the walls of
B^zing house might fall down like the walls of Jericho. And truly, until the
w^lls fall down that support this milk-sop, no Merchant either at home or
abroad will trust his Bullion within the Tower-walls; so that the Mint-anvils
grow quite rusty, trade being never so decayed, as since he came into his
preaching Government. But Colonel West is faithful, honest and valiant, and one
that stood as well to his Regiment, as he has done since to his Principles:
witness Gloucester-Expedition, where if the Newbery-ground could speak, it
would say his body was turned into a rock in the face of his enemy: upon whose
fidelity both Merchants at home and abroad will venture their treasure.
Therefore, most famous, valiant, and dear City, for the Cause of God, yours and
the three Kingdoms Cause, nay the whole Protestant Cause of Christendom, be not
gulled nor cheated; trust nothing that comes from the Lord Say, Cromwell, or
their accomplices; they will only deceive and enslave you: and knowing
themselves lost men, their ills are so great, they cannot be safe without doing
greater. They are lost with the King, with England, Scotland, Ireland, nay all
Christendom. Never trust counseit Skippon, nor apostate Marshal, he is Says
Factor: know your faithful men and Commanders: keep your Arms, secure your
estates, when the whole ship is sinking: let not every man look to his own
cabin; in preserving the ship, you preserve your cabbins: suppress unlawful
tumults your selves; defend your selves against all traitors and rebels
whatsoever: be faithful unto God, the King, the Parliament, the three Kingdoms,
and the Protestant Cause of Christendom: down with the Grandees that enslave
King and Parliament: stand to your Allegiance, Protestations, Solemn League and
Covenant: be wise and valiant; it will be but a brush, you will afterward have
power of conscience, comfort and renown for it: the raising of your spirits in
a just and resolved way, makes your enemies fall. The law of Nature teaches
you to defend your selves: you have power enough among your selves, if you will
use it. If your silly Mayor will not stand for the safety of the City, he is a
traitor: your Sheriffs have the Posse Comitatus by an established Law. The way
to make a just Peace, is to have power, and equally to dispute the justness of
your Cause against Rebels, else your enemies will break both Laws, Conscience,
and all just Treaties. Trust none of your new lights, as Fowk, Gibbs,
Wollaston, Andrews, Estwick, Noel, Player, and the like; they are only new
cheats. I say again, Be wise and valiant, and the Lord of heaven and earth
bestow his blessings from heaven upon your courage and resolution, whereby a
just and well-grounded Peace may be settled. And so I heartily pray for you, and
bid you farewell.

FINIS.

