THE BLOODY PERSECUTION OF THE PROTESTANTS IN IRELAND, BEING The Contents of
several Letters brought by his Majesty's Post from Ireland, November the 21.
1641,

Wherein is related, how the Rebels forces do daily increase, and how the
Protestants still are destroyed by fire and sword, without any Mercy.

Also, how many good Towns and Castles in the County of Monno, have been
consumed by fire.

With a true Relation of the cruelty which the Rebels used to Sir Patricke
Dunson, by ravishing of his Lady before his face, spurning of his Children to
death, and slaying his Servants and himself after an unheard of bloody manner.
And how his Lady was Rescued by Sir Thomas Moore.

London, Printed for Richard Melvin, and are to be sold in Grubstreet, near to
the Flying Horse. 1641.

THE Bloody Persecution of the Protestants in Ireland.
O What a bloody age is this! Nothing almost but news set forth in a red
character, comes abroad to be divulged unto the eye of the whole world.
Trochery only upon the Irish Stage does act its part, Treason daily has a
proceeding offspring, begot upon the bloodthirsty bodies of Jesuiticall
Papists, Peace is exiled, and Prorestants in Ireland seek comfort, but cannot
find it. Much News has been brought over into England, and all has bin
nothing but a packet of cruelty: many times has godliness bin expected, but
the event has bin bad, which does cause great lamentation, and horror to all
well-affected Protestants, whose unhappy estate, it is our piety to condole.
Shall the Irish Seas be made partakers for ever of Aegypts Curse; shall the
effusion of Protestants blood bring it into a sanguine hue; shall Crimson never
be converted into a snowie dye, the great God of heaven forbid it.

Take comfort, take comfort, you which are of the house of Judah: for although
the Gentiles boast and brag for a time, they shall not do it for ever: God
suffers you to be afflicted to try you, he lets you be wounded, but he will
not suffer you to be eternally slain. but Oh! ye miserable happy men of
Ireland, give me license to make your woeful fortunes known unto the
well-affected English, that they may haste to your Rescue, and manger the
maliee of the Babylonish Whore, and set a period to your sorrow: and thus I
begin.

Upon the 27. day of Novem. 1641. came this News unto England by his Majesty's
Post: how that the Papists in Ireland do daily excrease their forces, and from
other foreign Nations do ho rely receive aid.

Upon the 21. of the last month, being Novem. the Re^els hearing of the
Red-shanks approach, seemed much perplexed, but were encouraged still to
continue in their b^oudy restitutions, by that Aruckhile, Sir Hugh Oneale, who
has stained his Fathers former service, which he did for the prosperity of
the renowned Queen Elizabeth: who although he were a Recusant, yet was he
never known to be a Traitor unto her, but a true and loyal Subject: but this
Sir Hugh Oneale, his Son being chief Commander of the Rebels, desired nothing
but the sinall destruction of true Christian Protestants.

He gathered all his Companies together in the woods, and as the Redshanks
entered into one place, they issued out into another, and having an Army of
about 15 thousand, divided them into four parts, and so whilst one part was
resisted, the other were doring mischief: their aim has always bin at the
destruction of the County of Monno, there have they depopulated the
Inhabitants, and destroyad fifteen Towns and three Castles by fire, the
Protestants which have bin taken there, have bin put to unheard of torments,
women have bin slain in their husbands arms, and husbands embracing of their
wives, the brains of children they daily dash out, and in a most damnable
manner trample them under their feet, and he accounts himself happy that can
get a limb to show what he has done, their skeanes they never sheath, unless
it be in the body of some piout Protestants. And then do they bear them up
toward the Heavens, as if the King thereof would accept them as pleasing
Sacrifices.

But oh! Now must I come to relate the bloudiest Tragedy that ever eye beheld.

Upon the 22. of November; the Rebels made a privy search in the City of Armagh,
that they might in a moment destroy all those which were true Protestants there.

And in the first place, they beset the house of Sir Patrick Dunson, who was
always known to be an upright man, and a worshipper of the living God.

This Sir Patricke Dunson perceiving how his house was surrounded, and knowing
what would presently ensue, called all his servants to prayers, the Rebels in
the mean while being in number about five hundred, broke down the Gate, which
led unth his house, and as the said Knight was making his supplication to the
Almighty God, they seized upon him, his wife, children, servants, and goods,
asking Sir Patrick if he would do as they did. else should he be sure to dye,
who answered them thus.

I had rather be a Doore-keeper in the house of my God, then to live in the
richest tents of the wicked. Which when the Rebels heard, they took his wife
and ravished her, perforce, before his face, slew his servants, spurned his
children until they dyed, and then swore to do the like to his wife, if that
speedily be would not recant his former words: but he laughed them to scorn,
saying, that their cruelty would be the means to bring them to eternal
felicity.

When they perceived, how he had derided their proffer, they did run upon him,
and bound him with rowles of match fast to a board, so fast, that his eyes
bursted out of his head, then did they cut of his ears, then his nose, then
seered off both his cheeks; after that they cut off his arms, after that his
legs, and yet (a wonderful thing to hear) was not this good Knight dead,
although he were in body so inhumanly mangled: will, eye and vital spirits
remain; then did they cut out his tongue, and afterward to put him out of his
pain, they ran a red hot Iron into his bowels, and so he dyed.

His Lady they killed not; but because she was a fair woman, did intend to
keep her, that they might abuse her delicate body when they pleased: but God
which brings all things to light, revenged the cause of this good Lady thus.

Sir Thomas Moore having intelligence, how that the Rebels were in the city of
Armagh, with a thousand men marched to the Protestants rescue, breaking down
the City gates, which were barred against him: which the Rebels hearing,
prepared them selves for fight, but before they would setle their ranks, and
foyles, they were all surprised by Sir Thomas Moore, and many of them were
slain, and the Lady redeemed; whom Sir Thomas Moore carried home to his own
house.

But yet do the Rebels commit very much slaughter both by fire and sword: no
sooner are they driven out of one place, but they arise in another.

Wherefore let us all with an unanimous consent pray unto God, that he would be
pleased to weaken their enemies, and confound their foes, that the pure milk
of the Gospel may have its free passage amongst them: to which, let all true
Protestants say, Amen.

FINIS.

