A HOLY LIFE DESCRIBED, And enforced on Professors of CHRISTIANITY, IN A SERMON
Preached at BISHOPS-CASTLE in the County of SALOP, Jan. 31. 1674/5.

By SAM. BOLD Minister of SHAPWICK in DORSETSHIRE.

LONDON, Printed for Hen. Brom, 1675.

TO THE READER.
READER,
AS it is not my design to endeavor the abuse of your candor or credulity, by
being so absurd and uncivil as to strive to impose on you a persuasion that the
ensuing Sermon comes into the World only to gratify them whose importunate
requests would not admit of a denial; or only to testify my obedience to the
forcible commands of them, whose Authority might exact as much as Honesty could
grant; or to prevent some surreptitious and false Edition, (let those who have
these or the like occasions to excuse and patronize their appearing in Print,
make the best use of them they can) for as I have none of these to Apologize
for me, so I will not be so morose and humoursome as to expose it to a public
view, without giving an hint of what did induce, or rather force me to this
publication.

When the entreaties of some persons had extorted from me a promise to preach
in the place, and at the time the Title Page does inform you, I did resolve to
make use of the Sermon I had preached last amongst them, to whom I am more
especially related in Dorsetshire. And thus I thought I had no more to do, then
to mention to those who should assemble there, what I had lately delivered to
others in another place. But it seems the Sermon, or else some passages in the
Sermon which take notice of the Vices of the Times, were so ill resented on one
hand, or so misrepresented on the other hand, or both, that it was not long
before I met with a severe check and reproof for my pains, before some company,
in a public place, and from A worshipful Justice of the Peace. He was one who
neither did live in the Parish, nor had heard the Sermon, but as it was related
by one or two very inconsiderable and impertinent persons. I thought that
person of quality had been so ingenuous that he would have been satisfied when
he perceived I did disown the expressions with which I was charged, because I
never used them, (though the expressions I think were warrantable enough) when
I offered my Sermon to his perusal, and freely promised to acknowledge my
mistake or error in the same Church, would he prove any expression unfit to be
used in the Pulpit. This seemed to appease his fury for the present; a fair
Copy he must have, which was in a short time prepared for him. Nothing was
objected against it (as I could hear) till such time as it seems he was
resolved to quarrel whether he had cause for it or not.

After that I had some intentions to print the Sermon because the report was
spread abroad that it could not be maintained; I did resolve to forbear, till
greater incivility did force me to let the World understand how unreasonably I
was abused. One would think a Gentleman should scorn to be uncivil; but there
are some that pretend to Gentility, who do strangely besmear themselves with
very ungentile acts. If it were true that words are but wind, yet every one
that has experienced the latter clause of the Proverb, can certify that blows
prove unkind.

The Prophet Isaiah informs us, Isa. 29.21.
that there were some who made a man an offender for a word, but now there is
such a complexion, that a man shall be made an offender, and punished as such,
for the words he never spoke. Did Gentility and Justiceship direct to, and
warrant such things, the ingenious (I suppose) would deem it a privilege to be
exempted from both. Those who are honest and sober could not but wish they
might be delivered from the cruel paws of them who were thus obliged, I do not
in the least question but that both the forementioned particulars do dictate
more rational procedures. And I verily believe that he is unfit to be esteemed
either Gentleman or Justice, or else he acts as neither, who measures his
Justice by the Will of his Mistress, and takes an account of his Gentility by
the costly Paint, and the Expensive Attire of his Whore. So unhappily are some
worshipful Titles dispensed, that some men will claim them, who have little to
deserve them, but the Picture of an Ancestor, and a little more then the name
of an Estate, neither merited, nor purchased by themselves; or the notorious
expense of some Orphans Portion to amend the deformed face of a wanton Minion.

Had I discoursed on some disputable and controversial Point, I could not have
thought it strange to have met with some opposition; I might with reason have
expected that some one or other would have been displeased with me, because I
had not been of his persuasion. But when I only treated on a subject which did
tend to enforce the observance of those Rules, which direct us to live better
then those who neither own a Savior, nor think themselves obliged to lay any
restraint on their vicious inclinations, I did not conjecture I should meet
with any one professing Christianity, who would quarrel with a Clergyman
because he spoke against Vice and would not applaud Debauchery.

It has long since been observed that he who follows Truth too near the heels,
had need take care lest his teeth be dashed out. I am sure that nowadays, he
that speaks against Vice has reason to think he scapes very well, if some
Hectoring and Majestic Sir, does not on a false information labor to box his
ears for his pains, especially if he will not father every absurd and spurious
sentence or word, such an ones or his Informers malice dare adventure to charge
him with.

The Psalmist has deciphered an untoward person, Psalm. 55.21.
the words of whose mouth were smoother then Butter, but war was in his heart;
whose words were softer then Oil, yet were they drawn swords. Too many there
are now who seem to be resolved that the present Age shall not be exempted from
the like Monsters.

In the Primitive Times none were to be acknowledged Christians, Ad Diog.
but those who lived suitably to the Profession they made. And Justin Martyr
informs us that the Heathens who persecuted and hated the Christians, could not
render any reason why they did so. And now it seems some who profess they are
Christians, will act like Heathens under that color, toward those that will
not own that Christianity allows men to be as bad as the Heathens were, or they
can desire to be.

These are those Gentile Creatures who admire none but persons of very mean and
base extractions, Persons of no improvement, and as little reason: who intimate
by their carriages and respects that they esteem none persons of worth, but
such as at their best are only accomplished to rub the heels of a Horse, who
dare swear for a Glass of Wine that their Patrons are the greatest Saints on
Earth, because their Devotions do all center at their Miss. These surely are
they who think it below them to be honest, who conclude every one a Clown that
will not drink the health of a Drab, and a ridiculous person who must make a
pause before he proclaims to the World that he is a slave to one whose vileness
may render her a Prodigy in Nature.

Profane and debauched persons cannot endure that their sins should be spoken
against; whoever speaks but an ordinary truth, must be thought one that
disrespects their persons. They are much of Ahabs mind, 1 King. 22.8.
they hate them, for they do not speak good unto them, but evil. None are fit
to speak before these Worthies, but those who will sew a Pillow under their
Arm-holes, and daub with untempered Mortar. They are well acquainted with
Zedekiah's carriage, he that speaks not to please them, shall be smote on the
cheek by them. These men by their actions seem desirous to persuade us to
believe the Transmigration of souls; and that as to their own parts, they are
Tigers and Goats inspired with their Parents breath. These are they who carry
their Reason in their Scabbards, and have their Arguments at their fingers
ends: who have made a football of their Religion and Honesty, and given their
Strumpets leave to spurn it into the Confines of Forgetfulness: who drink as
though they were resolved to make their souls sops for the Devil: who live as
though it were an Article of their Creed, to believe that there is greater
happiness in the Embraces of a Courtezan, then in the enjoyment of God
Almighty: who talk as though they thought it their greatest Rhetoric to rail
at the Ministry. Their speech does please them best, when they tell, their
Companions, they hate the Cloth because the Clergy does wear it: who can laugh
till their sides ache, when they or their Parasites strain to mention them with
a term of disgrace. These are surely our Pert ones, who think they are
Gentlemen, because they can look big, walk with state, wear a Dagger by their
sides, drink profoundly, and love a Wench better then their Wives. From these
and the like we may well pray, Good Lord deliver us.

I appeal to all the intelligent persons who heard me preach, whether the
following Sermon be not a punctual account of what was spoken in the Pulpit.

I wish no worse to all who are disposed to quarrel at the Sermon, or with its
Composer, then that they may know themselves, love, honor, and serve their
Maker; let Reason have its due, value their souls aright, profess more, and
live better.

And now Reader, no more is requested, but that you will read without prejudice
and judge as you shall find cause, by him who is

Yours to serve you SAM. BOLD.

1 PET. 1.15. But as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all
manner of Conversation.


WE may easily conjecture that matters of extraordinary importance, will oblige
us to an inquiry after the most expedient methods, in order to our securing our
own interests in them. And there being nothing that in reason should have an
influence equally effectual on man's affections, with that salvation which the
preceding part of this Chapter represents, both as noble for its Author,
eminent for its Nature, and very worthy on the account of its transcendent and
wonderful Discovery. Our Apostle thinks it is fit to prevent Enquiries, by an
immediate discovery of what will infallibly lead to the fruition of it.

In the Text you have an account of that deportment which does best become
Christians, does most suit with their Profession, and will most conduce to the
salvation of their Souls.

There is first a Duty enjoined. Be ye holy. Then the extent of that Duty. In
all manner of conversation. And lastly, the Reason (as some conceive) to
enforce the performance. Because he which has called you is holy.
But (as I conjecture) the degree of holiness we should aim at, as much as may
be, to resemble the holiness of him which has called us.

It concerns the Professors of Christianity to demean themselves suitably to
that Profession they make, or to what they be called. There ought to be a great
difference betwixt the behaviors of men when they come to know and own the
Doctrines of the Gospel, and what they were whilst they fashioned themselves
according to those lusts which domineered in their ignorance, as the Apostle
speaks in the 14. Verse of this Chapter.

When I have discoursed of the Import of a persons being holy, and have
mentioned the obligations which do more especially enforce a holy conversation
on the Professors of Christianity, I will proceed to enquire into the Extent of
the Duty; that being the second particular the Text does afford.

I will neither trouble you nor my self with a particular enumeration of those
various and fond notions, which men of different persuasions have broached,
when they have undertaken to certify the World of the true meaning of a
persons being holy. Some of them either have framed very odd conceits, or else
they have seemed to please themselves with what they have judged a
Sanctimonious phrase in their discoveries. I leave these canting and wordy
persons to ruminate on their own language hoping that time will make them out
of love with such unintelligible Gibberish.

A persons being holy (if I mistake not) does note his peculiar demeanor,
which distinguishes him from men of looser principles, and which explains to
others his readiness to strive after a greater exactness in his conformity to
Gods will. In the 20. of Leviticus and the 24. verse we have God himself giving
us the description of a holy people by their separation. I am the Lord your God
which have separated you from other people, and ye shall (...) holy unto me,
for I the Lord am holy, and have severed you from other people that ye should
be mine. The learned Mede tells us, that Holiness consists in discretion, and
distinction from other things by way of exaltation, and pre-eminence.

Those who can jollily take the liberty to be debauched, do (indeed) difference
themselves from men of another strain; but this distinction is not any mark of
their holiness, though holiness do necessarily require a discrimination. For
that appropriatedness in a man's demeanor which does betoken his Piety, is such
as does become remarkable on the account of its eminency or conformity to rule.

For any one to be holy, is as much as to resign himself to an endeavor, as
much as may be, to resemble Gods perfections. This cannot but express it self
chiefly by laying a restraint on all the extravagant propensities he shall
discern in himself, by denying admittance to the suggestions of Satan, by not
allowing any temptations to master him, and by disposing and inciting him to
Religious duties, Spiritual exercises, Righteous dealings, and Temperate usages.

I would not be mistaken by any when I describe a persons holiness by his
demeanor, as though I meant that holiness did consist merely in some outward
acts, for it does principally consist in the frame of the heart, and the inward
temper of the person.

To prevent that idle and easy excuse men are apt to make for their
miscarriages, viz. that their hearts are as good as the best, though (it may
be) their actions and lives are very little better then those of the worst. It
may be requisite to delineate holiness in its peculiar, though outward dress.
There cannot be a commendable temper in the person, but it will express it self
by those worthy acts which be the genuine offsprings of so refined a spirit.

It will appear,

2. That Holiness or a godly conversation is variously enforced on all who
profess Christianity, if you observe its agreement with the divine nature. The
advantages which Christians have above others in order to their being holy; the
import of their Profession; and the more remarkable destructiveness of impiety
to such pretenders.

1. Its agreement with the Divine Nature. No Argument was strong enough to
persuade our first Parents in their innocence to offend, but that which came
masked with a pretense to make them more eminent resemblers of a Deity. If a
devilish Imposture did at first ruin us, when conveyed under a godly
Vizard, what should hinder but that the truth of what was then only pretended,
should make us vigorous in the pursuit of our recovery by the same means? It
would be the best use we could make of Satan's treachery to worst him and save
our selves by the right management of his own weapon. Could we argue our selves
into holiness by reason of its tendency to promote Gods Image in our souls, we
should greatly improve our selves, we should baffle Satan at his own Topic.
When malice and envy had wracked the penetrating intellects of the fallen
Spirits to make choice of the most plausible motive, with which they might
prevail with man's unerring nature to disobey; this being pitched on, was deemed
without doubt, the most probable to effect the design. Innocence not suspecting
the fairest offers, might be entrapped most easily with a disguise; but when
falsehood does not lie in the bottom, only Truth appears in its own garb (one
would think) it should then be most attractive.

Those discoveries which our shallow capacities do admit of a Deity, certify
that holiness is most explicative of it. If the most rude and barbarous explain
the apprehensions they have of a God, their account will be, that he is holy.
Those who can own any thing at random for their God, will notwithstanding,
ascribe to him an incommunicable eminency, and a transcendent sanctity. And men
of all sorts and persuasions can strive to overvote one another with the most
sounding acknowledgments that God is holy.

That man must be more then ignorant, who has conversed with the Scripture, and
will not own that God has placed his Image in holiness; and that the only way
by which we can attain to resemble his perfections, is to be renewed in
holiness and righteousness. Whether this do not oblige them who profess
Christianity to be holy, I will resign to your free and ingenuous determination.

2. The advantages which Christians have above others in order to their being
holy. The increase of helps does add much to the obligation to performance. He
that lies under an equal obligation with others to any concern, may with reason
conclude, that it is his duty as well as his interest to improve more
propitious opportunities in order to his acquitting himself commendably in them.

There can be no dispute about the certainty of men's being engaged in general,
to abstain from gross enormities, yea from whatever is any way displeasing to
their God, and injurious to their souls, unless such an one should interpose,
whose improvement in vice, were enough to make Impudence it self blush.

Who, or where is the man who dares deny the obligation to be as universal as
mankind, to withhold our hands from robbing our neighbors, slaying our
friends, and murdering our parents? Who doubts of all men's being obliged to
abstain from Whoredom, Drunkenness, and such miscarriages? No man will scruple
matters attended with such notable evidence, unless it be one whose accustomary
concernedness in Vice, has either benighted his understanding, or else
persuaded him to believe that his honor does require him to vindicate what he
has done, though he would have condemned it in another for a misdemeanour, had
not his own example made it authentic.

If all men in general are obliged to a careful and observant demeanor,
without doubt the Professors of Christianity are much more obliged.

They have the advantage above others to know more distinctly what things are
obliging, and what are not.

They have more persuading Arguments to enforce on themselves.

They have greater assurance of assistance and relief.

They have a more full and certain rule for the guidance of their lives by.

And they have their own voluntary obligations, the result of their profession,
which bind them to a more worthy deportment then other persons.

3. The Import of their Profession. The very Profession of Christianity does
oblige men to renounce every sin, and to lead a holy life.

Whoever he be, that either calls himself, or allows others to term him a
Christian, and strives not to abstain from every sin, and to behave himself in
his several affairs and concerns, godly, righteously, and soberly, is as great
an offender (I think) as he who makes it his business to poison the Air he
breaths in with the most open and horrid blasphemies, or with the most
prodigious execrations and makes no Religious pretenses.

That you may not think me over-impudent in begging the Question, I will
briefly give you an account of what the profession of Christianity does mean,
from whence you may with ease conclude, that that Profession does indispensably
oblige to a holy life.

The Profession of Christianity does note the resignation of our selves to be
commanded by Christ, and to be imitators of Christ. By having his name called
on us we certify the World that we own his commands to be obliging. We profess
we will subscribe to the Doctrine of the Gospel, and that we will answer the
design of our Saviors life, sufferings, and death.

The great duty he enjoins us, is to take care that both our souls and our
bodies may be preserved pure, 2 Cor. 7.1.
and unblameable; and that we cleanse our selves from all filthiness both of
flesh and spirit, yea that we strive to perfect holiness in the fear of God.

The Doctrine of the Gospel, take it which way you will, does only teach us
this Lesson, viz. To be holy in all manner of Conversation. And whoever does
subscribe to that, is concerned to be as good as his word, or else it will be
time for him to quit the name of an honest man.

The encouragements which are laid down in the Gospel, aim at the more
effectual incitement of us to the discharge of this duty. The disswasives do
all center at the very same point.

The Presidents and Examples of one kind or of another, do design the more
eminent advancement of our practice, by an exemplary warning of us to eschew
those miscarriages that our own propensities, or external allurements might
hazard our sliding into; and by a happy directing us to detain our selves and
our several exertions, within the Confines of morality and Christianity.

What you would have for a more clear discovery of this I know not, unless you
would exact the Expostulations and the Sighs of a compassionate Savior, when
any persons do appear refractory. And whoever consults the Gospel, will find a
plenary satisfaction as to this particular.

St. Paul in the second Chapter of his Epistle to Titus, and the 14. Verse,
does assure us that the design of our Saviors life, sufferings, and death, was
to destroy our corruptions, and to purify us to himself a peculiar people,
zealous of good works.

If we acknowledge and own these things, we are concerned to walk circumspectly
and to be careful that the tenor of our lives may bear a correspondency with
the Import of our Profession. How can we be debauched under the Profession of
the Christian Faith, but we must confirm that aspersion which entitled our
Savior a Wine-biber, or a Drunkard? Can we be proud or cruel, passionate or
revengeful, and yet imagine that we believe the Gospel and that we follow the
spotless example of our Savior? Christianity does oblige us to the constant
amendment of our lives according to the directions of the Gospel, and the
faultless pattern of the Holy Jesus.

4. The more remarkable destructiveness of Impiety to such pretenders. Impiety
can befriend no man, but it will be most displeasing in its consequences to
them who pretend best. God will call the Heavens to attend, the Earth must hear
when Israel will not know, Isa. 1.23.
when his people will not consider.

When a difference in circumstances does augment the sin, Justice cannot admit
of an equality in the punishment. He who disobeys wilfully must have many
stripes for his correction, Luke 12.46.
when his offending partner miscarrying more ignorantly, shall suffer but a few.

It is not a bare profession that makes men really good in Gods esteem: whilst
men have so little of Christianity, as that they will adventure to maintain,
and converse with their Minions, will be drunk for company, will oppress and
grind the faces of the Poor, and commit the like offenses. The profession of
Christianity with which they would flatter themselves into a good and leasant
opinion concerning themselves, does serve to no other purpose, then to post
them more unconcernedly to their own destruction. He who obeys God sincerely,
is the person who secures himself from that vengeance which will overtake the
mere Professor with a witness. St. Peter tells us, 2 Pet. 2.21.
It were better for us not to have known the way of righteousness, then after
we have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto us. Impiety
under a Religious Mask, does seal ruin irrevocably to its Patron.

2. We are now to consider the Extent of this Duty: In all manner of
conversation. The Professors of Christianity should take a care that their
several behaviors, and in their different capacities, be rendered comely, by a
suitableness to that Profession they make.

The profession of Christianity does not only oblige us to abstain from the
gross enormities of them who can persuade themselves to believe it is a
privilege to have their Bastards bend their knees and ask them blessing;
(...), etc. Macar. Homil. 3.
or of those who waste their Time and their Estates by an unnecessary
continuance in Taverns and Alehouses who drink till their heads are so
distempered, that they make the very stones in the streets become their
Pillows; or of those who Emboss every sentence they speak, with a God damn
them; or who think they can say but little to the purpose, unless they can
frame each syllable (almost) to bid their Maker defiance. The profession of
Christianity (I say) does not only oblige us to abstain from these, and such
prodigious offenses, but also from many of those particulars which be generally
accounted trifles, and very pardonable. The more we profess, the better we
should be in all circumstances. I wish heartily that they would better digest
this truth, who think themselves too good, and too holy to think well of our
English Conformity. And that those who fancy it too defiling a business to
speak a favorable word of our Government, Discipline, and Service, would learn
to be more clear from Disobedience to the lawful and warrantable, Religious and
commendable Praescripts and Institutions of their lawful and godly Superiors
and Governors; from lying, backbiting, cheating, and what are too generally
accounted Peccadilloes, then those who be of the other persuasion.

Though singularity, when rightly applied, is an aspersion that leaves a very
foul stain behind it, yet a restrained and singular deportment properly
considered, is so far from being any ones blemish, that it is his greatest
glory and beauty.

Men may be ('it is true) and usually are scoffed at by a generation of Monsters,
because their behaviors are different from theirs, and by that means more
becoming Christianity. And the profaneness of these late Times has promoted
impiety to such an height, that a holy conversation, and so Religion it self,
are made the great, or rather the only objects for wanton wits to try their
Mettle on. Those who are stupid to admiration, when otherwise concerned, must
be cried up, and applauded for the most ingenuous persons, and greatest wits,
merely because they can curse, swear, and damn; because they can talk
obscenely, and act irregularly; because they can flirt at Religion, and jear at
the regular demeanors of them, who have digested the principles of Christianity.

All this proceeds from the dissoluteness of men's lives and their unwillingness
to be restrained and tied up by the injunctions and rules of what they may term
a severe holiness. We are not to regard the extravagant and harsh expressions
of them who have biased their Judgments by their Humors; but we should rather
incite our selves from thence to a more diligent observance of what St. Paul
says, when he directs us, Whether we eat or drink, or whatever we do, to do
all to the glory of God.

Though I might much enlarge my discourse by giving an account of what
deportments according to the diversity of men's conditions, would most approve
their piety to God, yet I will confine my self (to prevent tediousness) and but
briefly mention how we ought more especially to demean our selves in these
following instances.

1. In our Religious Exercises.

2. In our ordinary employments.

3. In our common converse.

4. Under the variety of providential administrations.

5. In the general course of our lives.

1. An holy awe and reverent respect to God and our souls, should ever attend
us in our religious affairs; our greatest concernedness should express it self
principally on those occasions which do present us with the most convenient
opportunities to testify our due resentment of Gods favors, and the true
value we set on our own better part.

In the several particulars in which Religion does branch forth its Exercises,
we ought to manifest such a posture of Soul, as is correspondent. For though
holiness be ever one and the same, yet it does diversifie its acts according to
the alteration of the persons condition or duty.

When we address our selves to God by a Religious presenting our Petitions to
him, we ought to accompany our approach with the greatest humility and self
abasement, yet with the most importunate and earnest reverence. In our
entreaties for these inferior matters with the truest submission and
resignation.

In our Praises we must principally express our gratitude for spiritual
blessings; and we must learn to ascribe them, and all our other enjoyments, to
the free goodness of him who gave them.

In hearing the Word, and attending on God in his other Ordinances, we must
keep our hearts, thoughts, and affections, within the enclosures our Religion
has appointed them; we should strive suitably to answer the design of such
Institutions. The sense of our wants should affect our hearts, the enjoyment of
such means and advantages should exhilerate our spirits. Our desires should be
much enlarged after the receipt of what was intended in the appointment, and
what is promised to the right performance. We should treasure up truths in our
breasts, and we should intimate the genuine entertainment we give them, by the
conformity of our lives to them.

2. We should behave our selves in our ordinary employments with a freedom from
over-troublesome and disquieting thoughts and cares. We must strive to manage
our concerns with prudence and discretion. We must keep these in a due
subordination to more noble objects. We must strive to abstain from those
miscarriages, which too commonly attend persons so employed. And we must learn
to make them conduct us to matters of a sublimer nature.

3. In our common converse. Christianity does not deprive us of our
sociableness, but whilst we are in the World, we must converse with those who
have an abode in it as well as we, but let us converse with what sorts we will,
we must not forget our Christianity.

In our converse with those who are good, we must mutually endeavor the
promotion of grace both in our selves and them. Our words and actions should
aim at the glory of God, the honor of our Religion, and the encouragement of
one another to labor for an increase in our Piety.

In our converse with them who are mastered by worse qualities, we must
testify a dislike of their miscarriages by forbearing to imitate them in their
mistakes, by a seasonable and rational discovery of the obliquity of their
actions, according to our capacities and places. We should strive to divert
from what is unbeseeming, by a fit proposal of something more convenient.

4. Under the variety of providential administrations. Gods disposing of us
into different capacities, does call us to a more particular composure of our
selves, most agreeable to such a condition. When we are enriched with blessings
we must be sober, temperate, and meek, merciful, compassionate, and
tenderhearted toward those who are otherwise exercised. When we lie under
troubles and calamities, we must beware of murmuring and distrust. We should at
such times strive to behave our selves with so much Evenness, that others may
have occasion from thence to observe much of a sanctified frame in us. We
should be patient, submissive, and contented. We should learn to exercise more
grace, and more eminently.

5. In the general course of our lives we should act inoffensively toward all
men: so as not to give them any just occasion to be displeased with us. All the
passages of our lives should intimate an unwillingness to exasperate or provoke
any men, unless our forbearance to sin be that which will incense them. We
should be cautious of injuring others in their Names, Estates, or any other
ways. We should strive to be generally good. We must learn to set a right
estimate on godliness, so as to account it our Great, rather Only gain. We
must use Creatures with Moderation, and beware more especially of being
ensnared by the over-plentiful use of those things which are good, commendable,
and profitable, when used with a due observance of those limits which are
constituted by Necessity, Religion, or a lawful Recreation.

I shall now labor to persuade you who profess Christianity to observe the
Apostles advice, viz. To be holy in all manner of conversation; and by urging
these following considerations.

1. How unbeseeming it is for any men to live unanswerably to that Profession
they bare the World in hand with. Men's mistakes and miscarriages are most
notorious when they dissent from what they principally pretend. Should any one
who pretends to Limning annex very considerable blemishes to his several
Draughts, he might with reason be deemed much more fit to adhere to some other
pretension. Such an one might (indeed) be accomplished to flourish at random
with good Pencils, but it is pity he should be reckoned amongst them who are
their Crafts-masters.

When we profess to delineate Christ, and to give (as it were) a visible
draught of the Gospel by our lives, is it not very unhandsome that our actions
should only represent the deformities of Satan, or that our demeanours should
manifest nothing, or at most, what is but little better then the obliquities of
Hell? Our outward behaviors should be so ordered that men may have good reason
from thence to conclude well of our more secret principles.

Whilst we pretend to be instructed by the worthiest Master, and to be
Proselytes to the most holy Institutions, so long as we profess to imitate the
best Presidents and certify the World that we have the most satisfactory
encouragements to the practice of our duties, as well as the most forcible
Arguments to confirm our belief, we are concerned to live in a more exemplary
and innocent manner then they who pretend no such things. Why do you not inform
the World that you are Heathens, or Atheists, rather then Christians, if you
resolve that you practices and lives shall be no better then theirs?

That man is as ill shaped as may be, to pretend Allegiance to an earthly
Sovereign, who by his frequent Conspiracies, and his manifold acts of Rebellion
dot manifest a disrespect to his Person, and a contempt of his authority,
whoever he be that is intemperate, or unclea^ covetous or malicious, proud or
revengeful under the Profession of the Christian Faith, is as really
disrespective to his Creator, as he is to his Sovereign, who merits the
severest penalties due to a Rebel.

It is a disparagement beyond parallel to a Professor of Christianity, to have
it truly said of him that he makes no conscience of his dealings; that he is
mastered by his lusts, that he is guided and governed by his passions; and that
he makes no more use of his Religion then merely to serve his selfish designs
by it.

2. What an affront you offer Christ, what contempt you show to the Gospel, and
what occasion you give the Enemies of the Gospel to persist in their enmity to
it, and to open their mouths in derision of it, if you be not holy in all
manner of conversation? Christ has suffered most from his counterfeited
friends, and Religion has received the deepest wounds from the bad lives of
its Professors.

The misdemeanors of them who have born the Christian name, have writ Impostor
on the Savior of the World; and as long as you profess Christianity without
endeavoring to be holy in all manner of conversation, you do no less then
approve that Inscription, by subscribing your own names to it.

Whoever he be who believes the Doctrines of the Gospel as he ought, can never
act with an equal disagreement to them, with those who neither assent to the
Existence of a Deity, nor the truth of a future Estate. For the sound and
rational belief of those things, would engage the affections and all the powers
of the soul, both by virtue of the intrinsic loveliness of the Objects of our
Faith, and the transcendent worth and merits of the Institutor of our Creed.

Malice it self, were it stretched to the height, could not find out a more
untoward way to affront our Savior, than to profess his Faith, and then spit
in his Face; to own his Gospel in our words, and then to term it a Romantic
Story by our lives. It were much better (I think) for men to speak out, and
tell the World plainly, that they judge him a Cheat, and all his Doctrines the
idle Fancies of an addle brain, then by their words to own him for their King,
and presently to recreate themselves in rebelling against him.

How greatly may we be amazed to hear men make a very commendable Confession of
their Faith in Church, and presently see them live at such a rate, as to invite
the very Turks and Heathens to dart forth their invectives against our
Religion, Trypho objects against the Christians on this manner, (...). Just.
Mart. Dial, cum Tryph.
because of their profaneness? In what manner ought we to resent the Infidels
telling the World that they would become Christians, would those who profess
Christianity live better then they do?

3. How great the danger is which you incur, if you do not measure your lives
by your Profession? Others may be damned at a cheaper or easier rate, then
those who will swim to Hell and destruction in nothing but the blood of Jesus.

If there can be an addition to sorrow and misery amongst the tormented, surely
he must have it for his share, who has lived a wicked life, under manifold
obligations to the contrary, and his own acknowledgments of them. To act
against forcible engagements, and in opposition to acknowledgments, does as
well expose to a more severe punishment, as it does render inexcusable for the
fact.

The professed Enemies of the Gospel may escape more easily then those who have
made it their business to stab the common Savior under a pretense of respect;
for treachery does always augment the crime.

It were better you had been amongst them who were punished in Sodom and
Gomorrah, or that you had belched forth, Crucify him, Crucify him, amongst
the Jews, who did it ignorantly, or that for the present you were Heathens and
Infidels, then to be Christians in name and no more: Because the aggravating
circumstances which now increase the offense, could not have concurred to
heighten the guilt; and consequently Justice would take care that the sentence
should abate the extreme rigor of the punishment.

4. How ready those who are profane and debauched be, to be unholy in all
their converses, and this without any obligation at all? The propensity of a
different sort to different actions and behaviors, should be a strong
persuasive to them who have the advantage on their side. Should you discern any
one so inconsiderate, as to throw away his Estate with pleasure and speed, and
by that means ruin himself, could you not with ease argue your selves into
such an humor as might dispose you to seek after the improvement of your own
fortunes with a more notable pleasantness? And whence is it that when you
observe others taking much pains to get their final confusion ratified, you do
not persuade your selves to be more concerned to gain a greater certainty of
your own safety.

Can others prevail with their mouths to belch forth Oaths and Curses, can they
even fall on their knees and wish they may be damned, that Satan may take them,
and that Hell may swallow them up before their time? Can they lie and cheat,
murder and commit adultery? Can they slander and defame? Can they work all
sorts of wickedness with greediness, and accomplish diligent searches for to
find out sin? and have no obligation or encouragement to these things, unless
it be the pleasure of being denied happiness, and excluded Heaven, unless it be
the Recreation they shall take in reflecting on the toil they have put
themselves to, to gain the very next residences to the Prince of Devils? and
cannot you persuade your selves to be active according to those rules which
will direct you to a much better issue? viz. to resemble your God.

3. The Text does certify us in the last place, at what degree of holiness we
ought to aim. As he which has called us is holy.

The Apostle does not mean that we should dream of an absolute, essential,
independent, and infinite holiness; but that we should constantly aim at higher
seize in a derivative holiness, and that we should be thriving in our
spiritual estate. We are called on to add one grace to another, till we be made
perfect. And St. Paul persuades the Corinthians to perfect holiness in the fear
of God. We must not take up our rest at some lower degrees, for (to use the
Apostles words) we are not perfect men in Christ, at our first smaterings in
Religion.

If holiness be worth our pains and endeavors at all, then the more holiness
is without doubt more worthy. For additional degrees of what is valuable or
desirable, do merit an increase of our industry.

A proficiency in Holiness does bring us more nigh to our primitive happiness.

This makes us more to resemble the Divine Purity. This sets our hearts and our
souls at liberty from their Slavery to Sin, and their inthraldom to Satan.

This preserves us from those Relapses and Declines in which otherwise we
should be ensnared.

And this becomes a convictive Argument, to assure us of, and an excellent help
to confirm us in the certainty of our being Holy.

How vigorously ought we to apply our selves to the observance of what concerns
us so much as this advice of the Apostle does?

Must we presently give up the ghost? must we suddenly have our last breath
tossed to and again in the empty Air? or must we forthwith approach the
Tribunal of God, that there might be a survey of our lives? Can we think we
should find any cause to complain of our striving to be good?

Were we but to be exercised with some of Satan's more rough assaults, could we
fancy our selves injurious to our selves, because we had not given him those
advantages against us which he sought?

When we reflect on our lives, can it be our trouble that we can spy but few
flaws in our past conversation? May not the increase of our bliss persuade us
to strive after an eminency in Holiness? If there be degrees of happiness in
the presence of God, he is the likeliest person (I suppose) to be most glorious
and happy hereafter, who is most holy here; and he cannot in reason be judged
the least happy at present.

Let us therefore have our souls over-awed by the divine Majesty, and let us
frequently renew in our selves the sense and belief of Gods purity and
omniscience.

Let us study the life, and labor to have our hearts affected with the
sufferings of Christ.

Let us keep our eye connstantly on the demeanor of him, who came to be an
example for our lives, as well as a propitiation for our sins.

Let us converse much with our duties, and take heed of Cloystering up the
Commands of our Religion.

Let us not approach too nigh the borders of Sin, nor be too free with our
Christian liberty.

Let us be readier to amend faults in our selves, than to spy them in others.

Let us frequently and fervently implore Divine Assistance to help us to an
improvement in grace.

And let it be one great business of our lives thoroughly to digest Divine
Truths, and effectually to press our selves to the observance of them in our
several capacities.

By thus doing we may attain to answer the Apostles design, we shall be Holy in
all manner of Conversation.

Which God of his infinite mercy grant, for the merits of the Holy JESUS: To
whom with the Father, etc.

FINIS.

