THE BLOODY PARLIAMENT, IN THE REIGN OF AN Unhappy Prince:

LONDON, Printed in the Year of much Bloodshed. 1643.

The unhappie Prince.
THis present occasion, serving so opportunely sir, I thought it a labor well
worthy the Observation to lay down a true Narration of that memorable
Parliament begun in the tenth year of Richard the Second, both for the great
wonders that it wrought in the subvetsion of the Malignants who were near unto
the King, and had distilled much pernicious Counsel into His sacred cares: As
also that every good and careful reader might learn thereby to avoid
diversities of miseries, and the fear and danger of a cruel death. I will
therefore give a true and short Narration of that which has lain hid a long
time in the shadow of forgetfullnesse, concerning men of great and eminent
Authority in this Kingdom, who has been led away in the deceitful path of
Covetousness, and have come to an untimely and ignominious end; being famous
examples to deterr all men in authority, or whom favor shall raise near unto
the King, from practicing those or the like courses.

When Richard the Second of that name about the prime of his youth, swayed the
Imperial Scepter of our Realm, there flourished in his Court certain Peers,
viz. Alexander Nevill, Archbishop of York, A man more favour^^ by fortune
then by the honor of his Decent. Robert Vere Duke of Ireland, Michael de la
poole, Earl of Suffolk, and then Lord Chancelour, Robert Trissilian, Lord
chief Justice of England, and Nicholas Brambre, a man though low in parentage,
yet sometime Lord Major of London. These men being raised by the special
favor of the King, and advanced to the degree of privy Councelors where the
men who had the only rule of the Commonwealth, which they for a little while
governed under the King with great care and diligence meriting thereby deserved
commendations, but this not long did continue for overcome either with
ambition, or with Covetousness (...) with the pleasures of the Court; they
despised the Au^^^^ity of their too easy King, and neglecting the com^^dity of
the Realm in a short time, the Revenewes of (...) Crown began to wast, the
Treasure was exhausted, (...) Commons murmered at the multiplicity of Levyes
and ^^^^^ies and new ways of taxations, the Peers repine (...) themselves
disgraced, and in one word the whole ^^^gdom endured an universal misery. The
Nobility se^^^^ the miserable estate wherein themselves and the King^^^ was
involved, urged the King to Summon a Parlia^^^^, which was done shortly after;
in which, amongst ^^^^y other Acts Michael de la poole was dismissed of his
^^^^cellorshipe, and being accused of many crimes of Instice as bribery,
extortion, and the like, he was com^^^ed to Windsor-Castle, and all his lands
confiscated to ^^^^ing. Neither did the Parliament here give over but ^^^ided
for the whole state by a mutual consent betwixt ^^^ Majesty and the prelates,
the Barous and the Com^^^^, and with an unanimous consent, they chose a com^^^^
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal to depresse (...) will discentions, and
to appease the grudgings of the ^^^ple. Of the Spiritua^ty was chosen the
Archbishop of ^^^erbury, the Archbishop of York, the Bishop of Ely.
^^^^ishop of Winche^^er etc. Of the Layalty were elect^^^^ by the Duke of
York, the Earl of Arundell, the Lord ^^^^ham, the Lord Scroope etc. these as
men eminent in (...) were chosen by general suffrage and (the Parliament being
then to be dissolved) were sworn to carry himselves as dutiful and obedient
subjects in all their ac^^^^. Soon after the aforenamed Chancellor, Michael
(...) poole buzzed in the Kings ears (being, moved with ^^^placable fury
against the Parliament) that the statutes (...) enacted, were prejudicial to
the Crown, and much ^^^^ogarory to his Princely Prerogative, insomuch that he
should not have the power in his own hands to preserve ^^^^vant or to bestow
a largess etc. By these and other the like impious instigatious, with which
ihe Devil did ^^^^i^tually supply them, they practiced to annihelate these
(...) of the Parliament, or whatsoever might seem by the liberty of the
Subject to reflect on the royal Prerogative of the Prince: And first by their
serpentine tongues, and a nabitious Proiects, they so bewitched the noble
instination of the King, that they induced him to believe that all the ill they
did was a general good, and so wrought you him, that he begann to distaste and
abhore the passed Acts of his Parliaments as treacherous plots and wicked
devices. Next they studdied to ingrosse the riches of the Kingdom into their
own Coffers, and to the same and deal so cunningly, yet pleasingly with the
King, that to some he gave ransomes of royal captives, taken in the late warts
in France; to some towns, to some cities, to some Lands, to others money
amounting to the sum of a hundred thousand marks to the great impoverishment
both of King and Kingdom. Thirdly contrary to their allegiance they vilisied
the Dignity of the King, they caused him to swear that with all his power
during his life, he should maintain and defend them, from all their enemiss
weither Foreign or demestick. Fourthly, where it was enacted that the King
should sit with his Parliament at Westminster to consult of the public
affairs, through the preswation of the aforesaid Conspirators he was drawn
into the most remote parts of all his Realm, to the great disparagement of his
great Counsel, and the general dissatisfaction of the Kingdom. And when any
of his great Counsel came to make relation of the state of the Realm unto his
Majesty, they could not be granted access, unless they related the business
in the presence of the conspirators, who was always ready to upbraid them, if
they uttered any thing that displeased them, and though they seemed to advance
it, they did as much as in them lay, to hinder the King from excercising his
Royal Prorogative. But though there were so many Plots, Conspiracies, and
Treasons against our State, our ever merciful God inspired into the hearts of
the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Arundell and Warwick, the spirit of
valor and magnanimity, and every man accordin gto his ability Levied a power
for the preservation of the King and kingdom, all which forces being united,
amounted to the number of ^0000. And though the Conspirators by virtue of a
certain Spiratuall Commission, Proclaimed throughout the ^^^y of London. That
no man upon the pain of the loss ^^ his goods, should sell any victual or
ammunition to the ^^^^y of the Earl of Arundall, they could not debar (...)
from it. wherefore they counseled the King to ab^^^ himself from Parliament,
and not consuls of the as^^^ of the Kingdom, unless an Oath were taken that
^^^y (the said Conspirators) should have no accusation ur^ed against them, and
they caused it to be proclaimed ^^^oughout London that none under pain of
confiscation (...) all their goods, should speak any upbraiding speeches ^ing
the King or the conspirators, which was athing ^^pos^able to hinder. In the
mean time the three noble (...) the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Arundall
and ^^^^icke having mustered their troops, sent an accusati^^ in wrighting to
the King against the said conspirators ^^^^ch B. of York, the Duke of Jreland,
the Earl of ^^ffolke, Robert Trissilian and Nicholas Brambre, wherein ^^y
accused them of high Treason for Proclaiming through ^^^all the shires where
the King Iournied, that all Barons Knights and Esquiers, with the greatest of
the commonal^y able to bare arms should spedily repare to the King ^^or his
defense against the power of the Commission. As ^^so that contrary to the said
Acts they caused the Duke of ^^^land to be created chief Justice of Chester
hereby sel^^ing Justice as they listed and for giving pardons under the ^^^^d
Seal to Fellons murderers and such like: as also they ^^^ght. Ireland to look
back on her pristine estate of ha^^ing a King; for they ploted to have the
Duke created K. (...) Ireland: and for to have the confirmation of this design
^^^y allured the King to send his letters to the Pope.

When these things come to the Kings cares he sent unto (...) requiring to know
what their demands were: An^wer was returned, they desired that the Traitors
who ^^^ily committed insufferable crimes and filled his cares with false
reports to avoid the effusion of more blood; (...) receive that reward their
crimes deserved and that ^^^^y might have free liberty of going and coming to
his ^his the King gave consent unto and sitting in his ^hrone at the great hall
is westminster the Poor appelants with humbler everence bowed three times low
before his Majesty on their knes and again asked the aforesaid conspirators
guilty of high-^reason whereupon nor long after the Duke of Ireland withdrew
himself and marching unto Chesshire Lancashire and wales raised a power of
6000. men in the Kings name to overthrow and confound the appellants and
marching toward London when he found the army of the appellants was marching
down the mountains near whitney like a Hive of Bees such aviolent and cold
palsy cowed them that they slung down their arms and yielded themselves to
the mercy of the appellants the Duke of Ireland himself putting spures to his
horse took the River where he hardly escaped drowning the conspirators hearing
of this stricken with sear under the coveat of the night did fle by water to
the Tower and seduced the King to go alog with them.

Nor long after, there was conference in the cower, betwixt the King and the
said appellants, at the end of which the King did swear to adhere to their
counsels, so fare as the rule of Law and Reason and Equity did require. and
because the Harvest was now ripe, presently diverse of the Officers of the Kings
household were excluded, as John Benechamp Peter Bourt^ey Knights and many
others end of the clergy John Blake Deane of the chapel John Lincoln
chancellor of the exchequer John Clifford clerk of the chapel were kept under
Arrest: and thus this hideous brood of monsters so oftene shaken was quite
overthrown.

On the second of February the King came to his Parliament, and after him
appeared the five noblemen appellants who leading one another hand in hand with
Submissive gestures they reverenced the King, and by the Mouth of Robert
Pleasington their Speaker they thus declared. That the Duke of Gloucester and
themselves came to purge themselves of the Treasons laid to their charge, by
their conspirators to whom the Lord Chancellor by the Command of the King
answered, that the King conceived honorably of them all especially of his
cousin the Duke of Gloucester who being of affiniy to him in a collateral line
could never (he said) he induced to attempt any reason against his Majesty. On
this, atfer thanke^^^ly given to the King, the appellants requested the ^^^ing
that sentence of condemnation might be given a^^^^ the conspirators, but the
King being moved in con^^^^ and in charity perceiving that in every work they
(...) remember the end destred that the process might (...) but the Peers
again importuned him that no busi^^^ might be debated until this treason were
adjudged: (...) which the King at longth graciously granted his assent (...)
when nothing could be produced by the conspirators (...) instifie themselves.
they were adjudged this heavy ^^^^^e. That the Arch Bishope of York, the Duke
of (...), the Earl of Suffolk Tressilum and Brambre should ^^^^wne from the
Tower to Tiburne, and there to be ^^^^ged upon a Gibber until they were dead,
and all their (...) and goods to be confiscated that none of their Po^^^ity
might by them be any way enriched. After this ^^^^y more of their accomplices
were taken and indicted ^^^high Treason, whose names here follow underwritten.

The Names of such as were charged and condemned of high ^reason an the before
memed Memorable Parliament.
^lexander Nevill Arch Bishop of York, Robert de Vere ^^^ke of Ireland who
being bannished into Franse was kill (...) with a wild Bore. Michael de la Poole
Earl of Suffolk ^^^high Chancellor. Robert Tressilian L. chief Justice of
(...) Kings bench. Sir Nicholas Brambre sometimes Lord ^^jor of London made a
privy Counselor. John Blake Ser^^^^ at Armies. Thomas Vske an intelligencer of
Tressili^^^ All these (except the Duke of Ireland) were hanged (...) drawn at
the Elmes now called Tyburne.

^^^re Belknap, John Holt, Roger Falthorpe, William Bur^^^^ John Locton, John
Carry were Judges and although ^^^^mnded, yet their lives were saved at the
in^ercession (...) the Lords Spiritual and Temporal; and were after^^^ds
bannished into Ireland. Sir Simon B^^^^eigh, who (...) condemned and beheaded.
Sir John Branchamp Stew^^^^ of the Household to the King. Sir James Beversous.

There was also condemned and detected of the aforesaid treason. The Bishop of
Chichester, the Kings confessor S^^ Thomas Trinit Knight, Sir William Ellingham
Knight, Sir Nicholas Neyworth, John Slake, John Lincoln, which last, were
three of the Clergy. Behold these men who feared not God not regarded men, but
having the Laws in their own hands wrested them now this way and now that
way, as pleased best their appetites: wresting them at their pleasures for
their own Commodities, were at the last brought down to the depth of misery,
from whence they were never able to free themselves.

Richard, Son of the valiant and victorious Edward the black Prince was
borne at Bordeaux and grandchild to King Edward the third being eleven years
old, began his Reign the twenty one day of June, in the year of out Lord
1377. and was Crowned King at Westminster the 16 day of July, in bounty,
beauty, and liberallity, he fare surpassed all his Progenitors, but was over
much given to ease and quietness, little regarding the seats of Arms And
being young, was ruled most by young Council regarding little the Council of
the sage men of the Realm, which thig turned this Land to great trouble, and
himselfs to extreme misery; For being first disgraced by his Cozen Henry of
Bullingbroke, Duke of Herford, Son of John of Gaunt, D. of Lancaster; he was
at length by the general consent of Parliament deposed from his crown and
Kingdom, the 29. of September 1639. and committed to prison and and afterward
wickedly murdered for being sent to pomfret castle to be safely kept and
Princely mainetained, he was shortly after by King Henry's direction and
command (who feared least his estate might be shoken while King Richard lived)
wickedly assaulted in his lodging Sir Pereu of Exton and 8. other amed men from
one of them which with a Princely courag he wrested abrome bill and therewith
slew 4 of them, fought with all the r^st until coming by his own chair (in
which the basse cowardly Knight stood for his own safety) he was by him
struck with a Pole-axe in the hinder part of his head that presently he fell
down and died, when he had Reigned (...). ye^r^ 17. weeks and 2. days.

FINIS.

