HIDDEN THINGS Revealed and brought to Light: OR, Plain and Honest Dealing WITH
WILL. LAMBOLL and JOHN BUY, OF READING in the County of BERKS, In some Material
Queries Proposed to them to be Answered, etc.

WITH The Rest of those that were instrumental (in too large a degree) of the
former or first Separation wrought among Friends here in this Town, and who are
found still as instrumental for the upholding and continuance of the same, by
their not returning with other Friends to the ancient public Meeting House,
the Doors thereof having been opened ever since the 10th of the 9th Month,
1693. which is now about 9 Months since, for all Friends to meet together
therein, as a peaceable Christian Society ought to do, in the true Love, Fear
and Worship of Almighty God, that so there might be no longer two divided
public Meetings held and kept up in this Town, both to the great reproach of
Truth, and stumbling of many of the Tender Inquirers after it.

James iij. xiv, xv, xvi, xvij. But if ye have bitter Envyings and Strife in
your Hearts, glory not, and lie not against the Truth, etc. LONDON: Printed in
the Year, 1694.

To the READER
Friendly Reader,
IT was a true observation of wise King Solomon in his time, Prove. 13.10. That
only by Pride (especially that which is spiritual) comes Contention; and Chap.
26.24, 25. And that he that hates, dissembleth with his Lips, and lays up
deceit within him; when he speaks fair believe him not, for there are seven
Abominations in his Heart, etc.

Is it not high time now, therefore (after so long silence and forbearance) to
deal plainly with, and testify against all Deceit and Dissimulation, wherever
or in whomsoever the same is found? And, Reader, as thou will find plain
downright Dealing in these following needful and material Queries, so please
also to observe how widely inconsistent William Lamboll and John Buy's present
Practices are to their former Pretenses; and of all the rest (for the most
part) that act with them: Are they not Implicitly led to do as they do, and say
as they say, and not to see nor act by their own Sense, Reason nor
Understanding, either as Men or Christians, as especially in this of keeping up
a separate and distinct Meeting from other Friends, etc. and so in many other
things too large here to mention) as also how contrary to the blessed Truth
they profess, which admits of no such Confusion, Contradiction or
Dissimulation, under what specious Pretenses, Reasons or Excuses whatsoever, as
they have been and are still found engaged in? And, Reader, thou may
perceive to Demonstration, if not too much swayed by Interest, or blinded
through personal Affection, or engaged to join with Parties more than Truth,
what confusion and contradiction these Men have brought upon themselves, as by
the aforecited Queries; so with other their Deeds and Designs contrary to the
simplicity of Truth, which they in their own human Wisdom have been and are
acted in; which may be in time farther manifested and brought to Light, and
that for the Truths sake, and also for the sakes of those poor simple People
that have been too long beguiled and misled by them, and others like
themselves, whom nothing less will please than to be Lords and Masters, etc.
There will, I say, be a necessity, as kinted, of a farther Discovery, and more
plain dealing with W. L. and J. B. than hitherto has been; unless the truly and
sincerely repent of these and other the like Evils they stand guilty of before
the great God, as with respect to their uncharitable and unchristian Dealings,
hurtful and evil Methods, with and toward Friends, and for the future approve
themselves as Men of Peace, by unfeigned Humility, which I pray heartily the
Lord may grant and incline their Hearts unto, which is the worst I wish to any
one of them, who am a Lover of the Truth, and of all the true and
upright-hearted; but as I have done, so hope I ever shall, stand a Witness for
God against all Lies, Falsehood, Oppression and Deceit.

A. Bonifield.

Hidden Things Reveald, etc
Query I. WHerefore, and to what end and purpose was J. Buy and my self
appointed by your Meeting, and the general consent of Friends (now several
Years ago) to go to T. C.'s Meeting, I say, and that by the Order and in the
Name of the aforesaid Meeting, to offer unto them in the Audience of the whole
Assembly (as accordingly we did on the 3^st of the 5th Month, 1687. and that on
the first day of the Week) all their Moneys (of the Living) that they were out
upon the Meeting House, proportionable for the time behind and unexpired of the
Lease, as may be seen (by such as desire it); yea, the very same Paper that we
read among them as forecited and written with John Buy's own Hand, and all this
in order for the getting of the Meeting housedoors opened again, to the end we
might go in and meet in the aforesaid Meeting house, etc. And, therefore, does
it not look (and that at best) but like pretense only, but not in Sincerity at
all, to so much pretend for, but not at all intend, for either going in or
meeting with Friends there, seeing now they refuse and will not though the Doors
are opened, and that voluntarily and free, without either Money, Purchase,
Condition or Bargain in the least?

Query II. Whether it was at all or in any wise according to Truth, or the
gravity and solidity of it, or not rather on the other hand as apparent Fallacy
and Dissimulation in J. B. when we were just ready to leave the Court or our
Meeting from before the Meeting-house-doors, and to take our farewell of it in
respect to our meeting any longer there (where we had been held too to long by
the resolute Wills and politic Industry of W. Lamboll and himself) for J. B. I
say, to so call the People, both Friends and others, to witness or take notice,
that although we did then, or at that time, remove our Meeting and go away from
that Place, yet that as soon as those Doors (meaning the Meeting-house-doors)
were opened again, that we should or did intend to return thither again, and to
claim our Rights and Properties therein; which Rights, etc. was to go in and
meet in the said House (and if this were not the Rights you intended, pray
modestly answer what others); and was not this spoken in the Hearing and
Audience of George Whitehead and James Sparks, who with several others were
concerned in the removing the said Meeting from the Court, or from before the
Meeting-house-doors, and that had, with other Friends, the hearing of our
grievous Dissentions, public Jumbles and Discord about it; that yet now,
nevertheless, when rather entreated (so would come in a christian and peaceable
Spirit) than in any ways hindered, that neither he, they nor others he seemed
to personate and speak in the behalf of, will notwithstanding return, go in nor
meet with Friends there (tho happily some that heard him might be ready to look
at it, expecting his performance of it, especially under such solemn
Circumstances) as expressed (if but to prove himself a Man of Truth and of his
Words.

Query III. And to what end and purpose was Andrew Hall, John Buy and Daniel
Bullock appointed, and that by the Order and Agreement of the Monthly Meeting,
to go to Thomas Curtice, R. P. etc. and to desire of them, in the Name and on
the Behalf of the said Meeting, either to open the Meeting house Doors
voluntarily and freely for Friends to go in and meet together in the said
Meeting House; or if they refuse it, then for to offer them all their Money that
they were out upon the said House, both of the Living and of the Dead. Seeing
that now the Doors are opened for all to come that will, that they do yet
still, notwithstanding, refuse, neither do nor will return, come in nor meet
with Friends there, though no Money desired for either the Living or Dead,
neither in whole or in part, or any thing so much as like Purchase, Condition
or Bargain in the least?

Query IV. To what End and Purpose was our so many Meetings, Considerations and
Consultations relating to the Way and Method, what to do, and how to advise in
the Case relating to the getting of the Doors opened again, in order for our
going in and meeting in the House, our Address to and Solicitation of an
eminent Friend, to use his utmost Endeavors and entreat on our behalf with the
K -- as also with the C -- of the same time by the means of a Friend that was
his Baily, together likewise through the making use of one as our Counsel in
it, that was likely to marry his Daughter? O what Turmoilings, proposing of
Ways and casting of Thoughts were there amongst us, too many to recite as well
as troublesome to repeat for our obtaining a Way and Means how to get the
Meeting house Doors opened again, in order for our going in and keeping our
Meeting there, as before, (viz.) in the said House; and yet how they are opened
both voluntary and free, and that without Money, Charge, Counsel's Fees,
Interest with any, or Influence upon any in order to obtain it, that you will
not yet, notwithstanding return, go in nor meet with Friends there (viz.) in
the aforesaid Meeting House, though as cited, they are now opened voluntarily
and free, etc.

Query V. And to what End and Purpose did we likewise so earnestly call for and
desire the Advice, Help and Assistance of the Friends of the Meeting for
Sufferings, in order for the getting open of the said Meeting House Doors,
seeing that now they are opened, you will not go in, neither lay Claim of
Right, nor take possession of Property there? And is not this contrary to the
Intent or End of the aforesaid Advice and our desiring it; for did they not
only advise us to get them ( viz. the Doors) open, but also when opened to
continue them so, by keeping Possession, etc. And was not my self and William
Spikeman appointed by our Meeting (and that in pursuance to their aforesaid
Direction) to open them, and the which accordingly was done by us, and 2
several peaceable Meetings also held and kept in it, and therefore why will you
not go in now, nor meet in it, they being opened to receive you gratis, seeing
you sought and so eagerly pursued their opening before both by Money and
Interest; or was it well done, or Wrong or Right in the said Friends to advise
us for their opening, or in us to prosecute what they advised relating
thereunto, or for us so to go in and hold two several Meetings therein, after
opened? Pray answer and be plain in these things, for they are Matters of great
weight and moment.

Query VI. And to what End and Purpose did you agree and appoint, as farther
advised thereunto by the aforesaid, the opening of the Doors the second Time,
after their first opening, as cited, and shutting up again, and William Lambol
appointed by the said Meeting to see it done or effected, or he to be so far
concerned as to bespeak an Iron Instrument to open them withal, if when they
were, as now they are, opened, you will not, and others must not go in and meet
with Friends there; or, if any do, to be so judged and sentene'd for it? And
were it not far better and more Christian-like, in you to go in and meet there,
etc. now the Doors are opened, the thing so much sought, endeavored after,
desired and called for before, and that then as the main or principal Matter,
etc. whatever new ones you have added since their voluntary opening of them,
seeing that it may be with Freedom and Acceptance so as cited in Peace and the
Spirit of forbearance than by any of the aforesaid Ways or Methods of the Use
of Instruments, Violence or Force; and if yet, you will not (after so many
Labors and Endeavors of your selves in Appearance and others for it) for how
can it be thought by any that are impartial or in their right Senses, but that
the contrary proceeds from your hard-heartedness, a Spirit of Bitterness and
Revenge, etc. Whatever your Coverings and Pretenses may be, and W. L. of all
men, one would think, might have so much respect for Friends of London, etc.
(so overmuch venerated by him formerly) to be as ready to do as to say, for in
this case how can he possible but remember what ye aforesaid positively
enjoined him in their said Letter of Advice, and that as the Person most
capable and concerned to do it, as he stood in the condition of a Trustee for
Friends on that behalf; for, say they, in the forecited, We cannot see how
William Lamboll can be clear without using his utmost Endeavor for Friends
Relief in this Case: Which Case and Relief was his getting open the Doors, in
order for their Repossessing, Holding and Enjoying of their Rights and
Properties therein, viz. in the House. But have we not reason to think, that as
too good cause for it, That as formerly, in reality, so still he rather
discountenances than incourages Friends Meeting together, seeing now the doors
are opened, and that without (as supposed) either Endeavor or Desire of his
Assent or Approbation of what has been the Christian Care and Labors of others
in order thereunto, that he yet, nevertheless now they will not come thither,
go in nor yet appear there, to either maintain or possess others with their
Rites, or to take, demand, make use of or possess their own.

Query VII. And to what end and purpose was our standing and remaining at the
Meeting House Doors, and keeping and continuing our Meeting so long in the
Court but as pretended in Witness and Testimony against them that were the
cause of their shutting up? And has it not been preached publicly there, and
that as point of Faith and Duty too, to be both believed and received, viz.
That we ought and were to stay and continue there, and keep our Meetings in the
Court, or at the Meeting House Doors until they were opened again? And
therefore were we indeed to go in or not, when or if they had opened them then,
seeing you will not, and others in your Sense ought not to do it now? And as it
may be observed how fabulous (though connived at) such Preaching was, yet the
event of the matter proved it, as it is stated; so also to be noted, that all
these were but Words and mere Pretenses in them, but neither Truth nor Reality,
seeing that now they are opened, and that through the Labors and hearty
Endeavors of Friends on so many hands both of the City and Country, and my
self and others in Print, that you will not yet neither go in your selves nor
meet with Friends that do but on the contrary as much as in you lies to both
Discountenance, Discourage and beget a Scruple in the Minds of those that are
willing and inclinable to it? All which seems to me both inconsistent with
Truth and sound Reason.

Query VIII. And to what end and purpose had ye such farther Advice again from
the said Friends, etc. to try what might be farther done in it, by making use
of and interest with the Magistrates of the Town in order for the getting of
the said house recorded by them for or as your public Meeting house,
accordingly as required by Authority for recording of public Meeting houses in
the former Reign, and thereby to engage them to be to your Assistance in the
getting and obtaining the said House, and keeping Possession of it; and that in
order for to keep, hold and continue your Meetings therein, seeing that now
they are opened, and that without these Helps, Recordings or making use of such
Men to your Assistance, you do yet, nevertheless refuse, deny and will not go
in nor meet with Friends there, etc. I say to what End therefore were all the
Labors, Troubles and Turmoils of our selves and others, both on the one hand
and the other for their opening, seeing that now the thing designed and
intended by the truly honest and plain-hearted, viz. for the Doors to be opened
again, etc. is done, and you may go in if that you will or please, that now the
case is so much altered from what it was formerly, the Cry being Open the
Doors, open the Doors, etc. that now opened, the Benifit and End of their
Opening is declined and deserted by you, and to the view of Reason it appears
that you are rather offended than pleased with their opening, which naturally
occasions me to add another Branch to this Eighth Query; which is, viz. How
came it to pass that you were in so great an Error before in all the aforesaid
Endeavors concerning their opening? for it seems as if you were, that now
their such need of so hasty a Retract; and may I not say, and that in Truth
too, O what Childhood, Confusion and Contradiction is here, for if it was
Christian and well done of us formerly to ask Counsel and advice, and to
prosecute the same, and that so far as to go in and meet in the said Meeting
house, when obtained, as in a manner by the way of Violence and Force, how can
it be wrong, amiss and unlawful now to go in and meet there, now they are
opened to us freely in a better way and after a more Christian manner than by
or with the Force or Strength of our own Hand?

Query IX. And to what end and purpose did we seem to so seek, countenance and
encourage our Friend Robert Huttson of New England, who did so earnestly
endeavor, on our behalf, the opening of the Doors, and to use his utmost Power
and Interest with T. C. etc. in order thereunto, and with the Six Friends of
this Town, concerned in the like Endeavors for some better Accommodation in
order to Peace and Reconciliation, etc. and meeting all together again in the
ancient Meeting House, and in the Spirit of Forbearance and Love one toward
another, as in the beginning and passing by and forgiving Offenses and
Unkindnesses past, and to be found in inoffensiveness for the time to come, by
which at Two several Meetings, at Robert Pains senior, matters were brought to
so good and hopeful an Issue, that if not unhappily obstructed by J. C. might
have been to all our Good's, to Truth's Advantage, and whiping away the
Reproach that through such unchristian unwariness had been brought upon it and
William Lamboll, and John Buy, etc. did likewise promise (ere we would
prosecute the matter any farther) That if T. C. etc. would sign the said
Agreement, that then they would sign it also; but to what purpose was all these
Endeavors, as before cited, with many more of diverse kinds, seeing that now
they have opened them freely, etc. that you will not, nevertheless, return,
come in and meet with Friends there?

Query X. And was it not the Christian Labor and earnest Endeavor of George
Whitehead, when here, as likewise the end of the Meeting of Conference at A.H.
so to accommodate Matters that the Doors might be opened, and that we might all
meet together again in the ancient Meeting House in the Peace and Love of God,
and as becomes a Christian Society, etc. as likewise approved of, That such
that were so minded might not be counted of as bad or dark Spirits, etc. And
was not this his aforesaid Endeavors, when here backed with an Epistle of the
like nature and tendence from Gilford the next day after he went from hence,
and that with the highest Style of Christian Obligation, viz. If there be
therefore any Consolation in Christ, if any Comfort of Love, if any Fellowship
of the Spirit, if any Bowels of Mercy, fulfill ye my Joy; That you be
like-minded, etc. being of one accord and of one mind; let nothing be done
through Strife nor vain Glory, but in lowliness of Mind; let each esteem others
better than themselves; do all things without Murmuring and Disputing: And thus
concluding, The Lamb must have the Victory and Reign.

Query XI. And has it not been your Work and earnest Endeavors, and that on
all hands, ever since the Doors were opened, to get and procure as many public
Friends from all parts as possibly you could, that in being with you to
encourage and uphold this your continued Division and Separation, for does not
the Separation among us here lie now at your own Doors, seeing you do wilfully
deny to come and meet with the rest of Friends, now the Doors are opened, and
they hold their Meetings as formerly, in the ancient public Meeting Place?
Does therefore, I say, the Separation, as to this branch or part of it lie now
in them that meet in the ancient Meeting House, or in you, that uphold,
encourage and continue a Meeting in another apart, distinct and separate both
from it and them, etc. And you also have been observed to have more Visiters
since the Doors were opened than happily in many Months, if not Years before:
And did not John Buy acknowledge it for truth to a Friend of Hendly, and that
the reason of it was to hold and continue the People with you (to use plain
Words, in Division and Separation) because that so many deserted, left and went
away from you daily? and does not these things, with several of the like nature
and tendence, found upon you, plainly declare you to be the very Womb of
Strife, Authors of Discord and Mother of Division and Separation amongst us
here in this Town and place?

Query XII. And were not you, viz. W. L. and J. B. the chief Instruments and
occasion of the first Separation in our monthly Meetings, for Business, when
together, and that long before that the Doors were fastened up, and which I am
apt to think was none of the least occasions of it? for did not you divide, go
away and separate from them, as the like by us since, etc. and that upon no
other occasion than their altering of the Place of the Meeting, viz. from one
Room to another, that is, from the upper Room, where it was formerly kept, to
the Meeting House Room below? And was not my self denied by William Lamboll,
etc. and that many Years ago, at one of your monthly Meetings, to be a Member
of the said Meeting, or to be in any capacity for to do or act as such, and
that barely and alone because dissatisfied with, and could not be one with you
in so wilful and resolute a Separation, looking upon the Provocation to be but
small to excite to so great and unchristian an extreme? And did not John Buy
propose, at one of the said Meetings, for a Minute to be made in the monthly
Book, That whatever I offered, or had to say, no body should speak to me, or
take notice of it, or give me any answer, saying; That if they could not bind
or tie my Tongue that they would their own? therefore to what degree of Pride
are these Men arrived, that have so much cried out against Persecution, and
imposing on others that are now for Binding or Tying up of Tongues, if they
could or had Power in their Hands to do it, (though as far as they have they
have used it, and that to the utmost) the Tongue being the principal and most
intelligible Instrument of my own or any other Man's just and innocent Defense?
I say, to what degree of Cruelty, Oppression and Persecution this Spirit of
Tongue-tying, imposing on and Conscience-binding has arrived unto, though from
a seeming small Beginning, the mournful Cries of the Sufferers under it have
loudly sounded forth through every Age? And lastly, and to be mostly lamented
of all, and that if it could be even in Tears of Blood, that it should be thus
found even as from and amongst our selves, as has been exposed too publicly
by our Friends, the Sufferers in America, from the Hands of Loyd, Cook,
Jennings, etc. I say has it not come in time to the tying and binding of both
Head, Hands and Feet also, and in process of Time too to the use and cruelty of
the Gag, whereby the Lords Innocents have been forced to stand as mure and dumb
under all the Cruelties and false Accusations of their implacable Adversaries,
as if guilty, and that at last not sufficient neither, but the Coat and Hat of
fearful and affrighting painted Devils, Hell and Hell Fire put upon them, when
ready to encounter the Flames for Righteousness and a good Conscience Sake?
Well Friends, what a great Flame has so small a Spark, or little Fire kindled,
and how far this of either yours or theirs might have burned, had not the want
of Power and Opportunity prevented, God only knows. And bear with me, for I
cannot but be plain in this Matter, for the Zeal of the Lord burns as a Fire
within me, against all such Cruelty and Imposition, though in its least and
smallest degree, etc. where ever, or in whomsoever it is found, and that it is
no other than the Root of Persecution, Womb of Cruelty and Mother of Bloodshed
and Inhumanity, as has been clearly and evidently manifested from the effects
thereof, and that in every Revolution of Time, Age and Generation, and how far
short of the aforesaid, the Gag and Fire excepted, this Lording and imposing
Spirit has manifested itself likewise in our Days by that common ignominious
Badg or Mark, cast on us by some, viz. of Troublers, wrong Spirits and out of
Unity with Friends, etc. toward some; and that for their Fear and tender
Conscience toward God, let them judge, speak and tell, that have known, felt
and long born the Weight and heavy burden thereof.

Query XIII. And was it not your earnest Endeavors with O. S. and others, in
party with you, that as soon as you heard that the Doors were opened, or to be
opened, to make all the Party you could both in Town and Country; in order to
prepossess, fill and fortify the minds of Friends against the Thoughts of
Reconciliation (unless upon your own Terms, as reasonably could not be thought
would be condescended unto by T. C. etc.) or that which in some degree might be
in ordes unto it; which was a Christian Mind and Disposition in them to meet
altogether again, with Friends, as formerly, in the ancient public
Meeting House, in the tender Love of God, and Spirit of Forbearance and
forgiveness one toward another? I say, has not this evil Work of continuing
the Separation been eagerly carried on, managed and promoted by you, and that
with Diligence, yea and great Industry, both in private as well as at your
quarterly Meetings, and the ill effect of the aforesaid, as thus managed by
you, now brought forth to more public view, contained in a Paper, styled, as
from the quarterly Meeting, signed by O. S. with a Postscript annexed by W. L.
and J. B. and directed and sent to the aforesaid T. C. wherein is raked
together and brought up all the old former Matters relating to both the
Occasions, and particularly of the difference, which seems clearly for
Aggravation rather than Peace, Reconciliation, etc. by so exacting of them the
utmost Farthing; I say has it not been your Work, ever since the aforesaid, to
raise up and lay as many Mountains and stumbling blocks in the way as possible
you could, in order to stop and prevent Peace (if just-spirited Men, that know
the true Lines, and measure by the right Balance of the Sanctuary, you
sometimes make mention of as a Cloak to cover and hide your selves under from
Judgment and Shame, be your Judges) for whosoever reads or views your said
Paper may clearly observe, that instead of intending it in order for
Reconciliation that you have rather made an absolute Fence and Defense against
it, or any further Thoughts concerning it, etc. for was it your former Cries
to, or demands of them, O open the Doors, burn your bad Books and condemn your
evil Actions, for shutting of them up, etc. or was it John Buy's and my Message
or Commission from you or the Meeting, to the aforesaid, as mentioned in the
First Query, to tell them of Condemnations and Book-burnings, etc. or Andrew
Hall's or Daniel Bulloc's either, when sent by the Order of the Monthly Meeting
unto T.C. etc. as cited in the Third Query? or was our Commission, Order or
Demands more, or any thing further than only for them to open the Doors for
their Friends to go in and enjoy their Rights and Properties in the House, and
to excite them thereunto, to both bid and offer them in Money very considerably,
as both my self, J. B. A. H. and D. B. do full well know; and therefore
whatever is added more, is besides, over, above and beyond our former or first
Propositions to them; and therefore to be suspected as the Work and Contrivance
of the abovementioned O. S. W. L. and J. B. in order to obstruct Peace, carry
on and continue Division.

Query XIV. And was not your imposing on my and other's Consciences, with
denial of my self and them an equal Right and property, in the way of Purchase,
with you, in your new Meeting House, as great or a greater Evil than the
fastening up of the Doors? And has not the forecited, with what else remains
(and lies at present as dormant concerning you) of as bad or worse a
Consequence showed you to be full and altogether as fast and as hard, if not
harder, shut up against my self and others in your Hearts, though without any
just Cause for it, than ever the outward Doors were, etc. And do you not
remember what cannot be so easily forgotten by some, viz. what an Unchristian,
Unequal and Unjust a Superiority, Injunction and Spiritual kind of Test was
projected, managed and carried on by you, viz. W. L. J. B. etc. both against my
self and others, who could not be wrought upon to be so tame as to bow our
Necks to any such Evil and Antichristian Yoke of yours, in your such binding
Imposition and lordly way of Insulting over my self and them, and that for only
witnessing against what is so plain and apparently wrong, etc. And why were not
those weighty and necessary Queries sent you about it, viz. relating to your
Clandestine Underhand Dealings, Designs and Evil, as well as Arbitrary
Management of Matters relating, as cited, to your said new Meeting House; which
may rather be called, as things have been thus unjustly unchristianly, managed
by you, a House for Strife, Discord and Contention than in the least for Peace
and the Worship of God, answered by you before those so often repeated and
continued Outcries and Exclamations against others, who at the very same time
were acting as bad Wrong, if not far worse, your selves, and that deliberately,
which makes some distinction, and aggravates your Sin, and that highly too? And
why were you so shy and mute before George Whitehead, at the Meeting at Andrew
Halls, when he asked you, What you said to those Queries then proposed? which
were but a little part of the whole, and which may happily yet again see the
Light, with the rest of them, unless you change your Ways, be humbled and
repent, and turn from these and such your fond and lying Vanities, to fear and
serve the true and living God? And although it be granted, that they did not do
well in shutting up of the Doors; yet on the other hand, How can it be that you
or any of us can be excused or did well to give them the occasion that provoked
unto it? And, as for my part, things being weighed in the true and equal
Balance, I cannot but impartially conclude and say, Let him that has been
wholly without Fault therein cast the first Stone at his Brother; for was not
yours and others imposing on them, and over driving in matters relating to
outward Orders, etc. a great, or the greatest occasion of it?

Query XV. And have not my self and others, as well as you or any of you, stood
in our Testimony and Witness for God against all, that in any, wherein I or
they have thought such to be wrong or acted contrary to the Truth in any
respect (and do think, and for my own part may say) and that to the full too,
if not in too forward a Zeal, exceeding my Bounds in it, as you your selves
have done, of which, if you think it not your Interest to be thus naked and
plain in the matter, for my own part I think it to be mine, though not for any
self end or Applaud of Men, God knows, but the answering of a good Conscience
toward him, being neither afraid to own, nor ashamed to stand by and justify
what I have thought and do still believe to be just and right; nor on the other
hand to disown and condemn whatever either then or since I do believe or am
sensible either was or is wrong, whether through Ignorance or otherwise, and do
hope that I may and shall still do the like for time to come, in whatever may
yet appear to be contrary to God, Justice and the Holy Truth that we profess,
however thus evilly handled by you, etc.

Query XVI. And whether if you should be plain-hearted, naked and speak the
Truth, that the main or chief cause of your obstinacy, in refusing to come to
the ancient Meeting House, and to meet with Friends there, be not for fear that
then you may be in danger to both lay down and lose your Crown, and be shortened
in your Power, so as that you could not any longer exercise such a high and
lordly Power over others of your Friends, etc. as has been your long and
frequent Practice toward them, and that for this several Years, even to the
making or occasioning of another or second Discord or Division among us, and
that since whilst a part by our selves and from the others, or long before they
had opened the Doors for us to meet altogether again, etc. and that as great a
one too proportionable to our number, as was wrought in the first or former
Division in this place, with the like evil and bad effects, and unchristian
practice of keeping on the Hat in time of Prayer to Almighty God, with the like
disturbances, opposings, breakings up of Meetings, viz. both on me and others,
and Confusions hardly in any point or thing short of or inferior to the former,
together with most bitter, severe, cruel and hard-hearted Words, Sentences and
Expressions, both in Testimony and Prayer hard to be thought of, as uncomly to
be heard in a Christian Society, toward any, especially those of the same
Faith and Persuasion.

Query XVII. And now you having got a Meeting House, and that by your own means
procured, and according to your own Wills have managed the same from first to
last; have you not framed to your selves a deal of Comfort and Satisfaction?
And are you not, as it were, at your Hearts-ease therein? Are you not very
loath to be disturbed, so as to remove from thence? And do you not consult more
your own quietness and ease, than a public Good, or the promotion of Truth in
the general, or the exaltation of the pure divine. Power and Seed of Life over
all, etc. May it not be feared that you will never be much instrumental (in the
Minds you are in) ever to promote the work of Truth in this place or elsewhere,
especially as with respect to a Reconciliation one with another, to the
repairing of Breaches, that have and do still continue to widen them so much?

Query XVIII Whether it may not conduce more, both to the Honor of God and of
his Truth, and likewise tend more to the Reputation of us as a People, to be
kept in Peace as a Christian Society, rather for you (and such like minded with
you) to continue where you are by your selves, than to come in such an
irreconcilable or prejudiced frame of Spirit, as too evidently you manifest
your selves still to be found in; and so thereby the cause of fresh and new
Disturbances, and if not of worse Confusion and Distraction, than formerly?

Query XIX. Is it not sad we must needs say so, That because of your not
coming, and for your sakes, Friends should be deprived of the benefit of the
Labors and Testimonies of public Friends, who labor in the universal Love of
God for the Good of all? And are they not prevented many of them upon your
account, from coming to the ancient public Meeting House, where they might (as
I conceive) have a far greater Service among so many that come thither, being,
as I suppose, at least three to one of convinced People and others, to the
small number that meets with you?

Query XX. For truly Friends, to be naked and plain, the best adornment of our
Christian Profession, when I seriously weigh and consider of the many ways,
means, endeavors and contrivances used by you, in appearance, relating to the
opening of the Doors, it naturally occasions me to place some Remarks and
Observations upon it, viz. That notwithstanding the thing desired, and
seemingly so earnestly sought for, viz. the Doors to be opened, is now
obtained, and that both voluntarily and free, without either Means, I mean as
from you, or Charge, Help, or the Use of any of you, that you should yet
notwithstanding refuse to go in and meet with Friends there, and take, make use
of, or enjoy what seemingly was the Main and Tenor of all your Pretenses.
Indeed, it makes me amused, as well as difficult to find out, what you did or
do really intend, design, or would be at; for was not the opening of the Doors
the chief and principal Matter insisted on? Now done, for the Doors are now
opened; what you sought, is so far obtained; what you asked, it is so far
given; and what you expected, is so far performed; and that yet for all this
you appear as far from Satisfaction or Content as you did before: In plain, as
if nothing you demanded or sought to have done, were done (were at all yours)
or ought to be taken notice of by you, though the main or principal of your
Demands, as cited, etc. Therefore, what can one say, or how may I conclude, but
that every part, yea, all, and the whole of all, was but Shows, Words and
Pretenses only, but neither Reality nor Truth in any of them all? and,
therefore, may conclude, and wind up the whole Matter in this my last Query,
viz. How can it possibly be that such things as these should be well pleasing
to God, or at all, in any wise, consistent with the Truth and his Will, that is
so vastly wide, so untrue, and altogether inconsistent with it self?

POSTSCRIPT.
Friends,
I Doubt not at all but that I may be both apprehended, thought and adjudged of
by some to be too plain as well as too particular in the foregoing Queries and
Inferences thereupon; but as in my Title Page I do affect Plainness, etc. so I
have (and who can answer to God for me if I do not obey him?) more cause to be
plain to these Men, than happily many do know of. But this, in short, for the
removing of all Scruples wherein I can or may, from such as are truly conscious
in them; to such let me, therefore, further add, write and say, viz. That both
the present Age and Time, Circumstances and Occasion, requires Plainness. And,
in truth, my Eye, and the Eyes of all that are truly single and upright to God,
looks not so much at the Praise or Approbation of Man or Men (a Snare, and
that a great one too, although so taking with some in this Age) as to or in
comparison to Peace and a good Conscience in his sight; for this I can (and
that truly) say, as in the sight of him too that is the alone discerner and
searcher of all Hearts (whatever any proud or exalted Persons may imagine of
themselves he is only so) that the aforesaid has been both my only end and
aim, and the occasion of my being thus far concerned at this time with them,
and to speak as I find it to spring and rise in my Heart, so let me say, O
Friends, the time is come, yea, high time, and the full and set time and season
(after so long silence and forbearance) to be plain and speak, yea, and to
Tell, Revile, and to Preach too, and that upon the House top, what has been
long hid and kept secret in the dark; for as Solomon well says, As there is a
time to keep silence (but that time is going over) so there is a time to speak,
and that time is come; and to bring the secret Work and Works of Darkness to
Light; though as one once said, That the very Eyelids of the Morning are unto
such Workers as the shadow of death, though the Children of the Day rejoice in
the Light, and in the Day, and seek not after darkness or the shadow of Death,
or the Night to hide and cover themselves and their Deeds under; but on the
contrary, rather desire that as their own, so also that all Men's Deeds may be
both brought to, and be tried by the Light; for the Light discovers all
things, and is True and is no Lie, neither changes as Men change; and in it
has the honest and sincere hearted trusted even unto this day, who have not
sought themselves nor their own Glory, but the Lord before and above all
things: Else had they and such been overcome, confounded and brought to naught
long before this day. But oh! Glory and Honor, true and everlasting Praises be
given to and returned unto him, who is the God of Truth, and Lord, yea, and the
only holy one in Sion this day, who is alone able and sufficient for these
things, and a help in the needful time, on the behalf of such that are poor
reject of Men, and of no Might, yet found to be the Lords, and of a broken
Heart and contrite Spirit in his sight, whose Groans and Sighs have been heard
in his holy Ear, and mine and such's Tears is put up into his Bottles. I say,
Praises be to his Name, for that he has been and is the help of true and
spiritual Israel, in this needful, trying and shaking Day, wherein Men have
forsaken the true fear of the Lord, and the proud Boaster has lifted himself
up a time indeed; in which may it not be said as J. B. did some Years ago (so
but rightly explained) viz. In which a wrong Spirit has entered the Camp, the
Fruits of which is it not spiritual Pride, Partiality, Imposition and
Oppression? And is not this the accursed thing found therein, and like to
Achan's Wedge of Gold and Babilonish Garment, which caused Israel to fly before
their Enemies, as altogether unable to prevail or stand before them? The Lord
purge it out from among us, and that sour evil Leaven of the Pharisees, which
as Christ our Lord has said, Is Hypocrisy (and great and deep Deceit too)
whatever Men may say or do profess; a little of this Leaven, in whom it is
found, we see is too apt to work and infuse it self into the whole Lump. So
having thus, in some degree, eased my self, and discharged my Conscience for
the present relating to these Things, I shall commend them to the Consciences
of all Friends, but more and in particular to the truly judicious and innocent
Ones, whose Consciences are impartial, and truly tender to both God and Man;
and so do remain (as I trust ever shall) a Lover of the Truth, and of all such
that keep their Habitation in the innocence and simplicity of it.

These Queries, with what else is annexed to them, are intended for to go among
the Professors and Friends of Truth only, and no others.

A. Bonifield.

FINIS.

