A BOOK WITHOUT A TITLE.
HAving long observed the folly of this Nation to be taken most with highest
Titles, and lowest Matters, in all weekly Transactions; and much pitying the
People in this Delusion, could find no other way herein for their future
prevention, then to present them with A Sheet without a Title: And as it may
seem strange to some [though not so strangeas true] because not usual: so it
will appear honest to all in speaking truth without fear to every Interest for
undeceiving the people, [which others dare not do] though never so prejudicial.

I shall begin with the Act this day published for setting a part a day of
Public Thanksgiving; which recites, How God has appeared in the Cause of the
Parliament and People against the Common Enemy since the first beginning of
these late Wars: [God is still put in the Van, to maintain and support the
unjust Causes of all people under the Sun as the Scripture is to prove all
Religions best and sonndest.] But why the Peoples Cause? [They are not the
Original of your Authority, and therefore you nor any other, can pretend to
hold out their Cause, unless entrusted and required by them: But all still must
go in the name of the People, because there is no other way to ruin and enslave
them: But they did well to put the Parliament and People together, though they
are very impudent to put Parliament before People; as if the People, the
Supreme, were Inferior to a few of their pretended Servants [whom they own not
either as to call, or enforcements. They go on and judge of the Cause by
success [which is both absurd and ridiculous] against the Common Enemy both of
the true Religion and the Liberties of the Nation: [but who so common an Enemy
as they that sit by an unjust power (the original whereof being cut off) and
style themselves the Supreme Authority of England, Tax, Assess, and Dispose of
all the Estates of the Free Commoners without then consent, making them believe
they sit for restoring their Freedoms, to give them ease, set up a true
Religion, reform all things in Church and (...) are, whereas (like cuning
Cheats) they sit only to enrich themselves with all the vast Receipts of the
Public; upon Excise, Customs, Dean and Chapters, and Bishops Lands,
Assessements, Forest Lands, Parks, Chases, King, Queen, and Princes Revenue,
sale of all the Royal Goods, etc. [which though it amount to near a hundred and
sifty thousand pounds a mouth] yet they lay greater Assessements upon the
people then ever they did before they had these Revenues in their possessions,
and continue Fre-Quarte upon them [though all Assessements paid] and yet the
whole Charge of the Army and Navy is under the incombe of their Public
Receipt: And does it not appear by their daily purchasing great Estates,
sending over Coffers of Silver beyond Sea, marrying their Children to the
greatest for. tunes in the Nation (though most of themselves had but small
Estates before) that (with these Public Moneys, and the great benefit they
have by all the great Places and Offices in the Nation which they have bestowed
upon themselves, but ought to be employed for the public good of the Notion)
they still sit to Delude the people, and enrich themselves with the ruins of
the Nation; and can the people have greater Enemies or sadder Judgments then
these Catterpillers that devour all before them? And are they not good
preservers of the Liberties of the Nation, when as they destroy all the Laws of
the Land which only gives Liberty to the Nation, and Act by Arbitrary Acts and
Ordinances whereby no man has any certainty of his Estate, Life, or Being;
mixing the Martial power with the Civil, as in the time of the cursed
Conqueror, seizing the Persons and Estates of the people with Soldiers, for
pretended Civil offenses; and killing the pour Watermen and others with
Musketeers for Rowing upon the Sabl^^^, though they had not any Prohibition
before for so doing, (yet they willingly allow of Coaches on that day, an
offense every ways equal to the former) Examine men upon matter of Fact
against themselves, and commit them close Prisoners [without any allowance]
only upon suspicion of Treason, and continue them so without Trial or
Discharge, contrary to the Law of the Land, and in violation to our chiefest
Liberties and Freedoms?

Then they tell us of another Cloud that threatened a Storm by the list, Summers
Insurrection, the Scors Invasion, and the Revolt at Sea, [is al which most of
themselves by subtle connivance, private assistance, or public action, had as
deep a finger therein as the Common Enemy, by wh^^^ many of them had both
assurance of Pardon and Reward] And yet they say they cannot but transmit the
memory of these Mercies to Posterity, that the Generations to come may praise
the Lord; [and still the name of the Lord must be used profanely, to make the
people believe all their vain Delusions, though they make it their sole work
and end of all their Designs to impoverish and enslave them, which is most
clear and apparent, if you consider the substance of what L. G. C. lately
delivered upon Discourse with other Officers of the Army, viz. That the only
way to settle and maintain an Arbitrary Power and Government in this Nation,
was, To oppress the People with Assessements and Free Quarter, and when they
were in a low and poor Condition they should submit to any thing. And if we
compare the present proceedings of the Army with those of [the things called]
the Parliament and Council of State, we shall easily find those Expressions now
put in Execution, for the ruining of the Free People of this oppressed Nation.

Then they tell us, That after all these Deliverances and strange providence
of the Almighty carrying on the Parliament in execution of Justice on the chief
Author [not the hundredth part so great an Oppressor and cruel Tyrant as
themselves] and some of the eminent Instruments of both these Wars [which they
did on purpose to exalt themselves into the Throne, and style themselves the
Supreme Authority of this Nation, whereby they might the better exercise their
Tyranny and cruelty upon the People] And that some hopeful Progress has bin
made in settling the Government of this Commonwealth [upon the rotten
Foundations of Injustice, Oppression, Self-Interest, Blood, Tyranny, and what
not?] in such a way as by Gods blessing [well, jest not too long with your
hypocrifie, for God will not be mocked] as may secure it from the like Tyranie
for the future [not a greater then now we are under] and be a foundation of
Happiness and Freedom: [why do you jeer the poor people so often with those
most desired words, and never intended things, Freedom and Happiness? You know
well their Freedom will be your ruine] And that the Parliament having by these
Troubles in England [occasioned only for your own Promotions and
Self-Interests, as we now find by woeful experience] bin ^^nterrupted for
sending relief to Ireland] What, do you now plow with Hollis and Stapletons
heifer? that when they could not disband the Army under pretense of Ireland,
therefore the honest party must be then (as now) ^iled the interrupters of the
relief of Ireland, which they then as much ^^tended to relieve, as L.G.C. does
now] did now resolve, by Gods assi^^ance [which you have little cause to
expect] to speed a considerable force or reducing that Land to the obedience of
the Parl. of England [But (...) by so fast? Do you really intend to reduce it,
or is it your old Design to ^^sen the People, to advance moneys upon the
purchasing the Deans and Chapters lands, as you did handsomely fool them before,
in selling th^^ the Rebels lands before they were in your possession, or their
persons conquired^ It could hardly have bin suspected that any, especially such
as have professed zeal for God, his Truth, and People (you do not surely mean
your selves) should have retarded so good a work, but rather should have given
assistance thereunto (what for? to suppress one enemy, and pla^^ anuther; or
else to make it a Sanctuary for you to fly to against a Free ^^presentative is
called; Do you think men will venture lives and estates, rain their wives and
families, only to support your Tyrannies and private Interests in that Nation
as this, before they have eased the people of (...) oppressors and oppressions,
and settled a sure foundation of a just Government by an equal Representative?)
the security of England, and Religion is self being so much concerned in it.
(Are you not ashamed to mention Religion as to a Martial Engagement, or if not,
what Religion do you mean! the Peoples eyes are opened now, you cannot longer
cheat them with these specious pretenses of Religion, unless your selves were
guilty in some measure of being religious; which if some say you are, yet your
works will give them the ly, and disclaim it) Yet at this time a new distemper
discovered it self (no marvel, when the whole Body of the Commonwealth is sick
even to death, by murders, oppressions cruelties, tyrannies, etc. that
distempert shall break out, kindle, and foment) by some turbulent spirits
(before whom never any tyranie could yet stand, and by whom you and yours shall
fall, such (when none of you durst appear to assert and own the Peoples
freedoms) did, like faithful Patriots, maintain them in times of greatest
danger and prosecuted the obstructers thereof, till death had satisfied his
indign^ri^^ upon them) act^d by Jesuitical Councels and Principles (and those
(...) your own! I am sure none have more right to patronize those bruts of Rome
then your selves) destructive to Government (You dare ^ut say destructive to
Just Government, but only to your usurped Tyranie whith you call Government)
who disliking every thing whereof themselves might not have the honor (when as
they never yet propounded any thing for honor or profit to themselves (though
you do all for both) but such (...) may be essentially good for all the Free
people of the Nation) did design (...) pluck up all that bath bin planted (you
mean all the weeds or tries th^^ bring forth bad fruit, which ought not only to
be plucked up, but cast (...) the fire) to bring the Nation into consusion;
(what? by relieving the distressed, easing the People of their burdens and
Oppressors!] destroy (...) Propriety (not by declaring this Nation a
Commonwealth, as you have lately done, which must of necessity destroy all
interests, if you understand it as it is really, and not nominally; for the
best Authors define it, a wo^^^ equally common to all the Inhabitants of that
Land which holds forth that Government: But besides, Do you not find the
greatest Provision made in their Agreement, for preserving Interest and
Propriety? how then can you but blush to mention it?) Eradicate the Law, and
true Liberty at once; (All that they stand for, as the maintenance of the Laws
of the Land, and destruction of your Arbitrary power against Law; but surely Mr
Prideaux meant in stead of Law and Liberty, they would have destroyed the
benefit of his Two Places of Attorney General for the State, and Master of the
Post and Currcers, which run him in 10000 l. per annum profit, although he
never did the Nation 10000 pence benefit:) and obstruct the Relief of Ireland,
[you are resolved I see to wear this old and false aspersion thread bare before
you leave it] which by this might otherwise have been sent thither: And to that
end by traducing the Actions of Parliament in the things which before they were
done, themselves Petitioned for; (what were those? are you afraid to name them,
or shall I do it for you, and tell your meaning, viz. The taking off the Kings
head and the Lords? but were they ever against taking them off without Law, and
legal proceedings, if they were, did not they expect thereby to be made a Pree
People by having the Normand yoke taken off, the Land eased of their burdens,
and a new and equal Representative soon after called, an Act of Oblivion past,
and Account given of all the spent Treasure, etc. and not to lie under greater
oppressions and misery then formerly?) And upon unjust scandals of some chief
Officers of the Army, the General himself being not exempted, whom God had made
Instrumental in so many Victories and preservations of the whole Nation; Why so
much fawning and clawing upon his Excellency? you love him as well as a
Leveller, and both as one: But speak really, are not you ashamed to mention
what these scandals were, for fear this (with the rest) should have been
disproved? or did you only flourish these generals to beg a belief in the
people, having no particulars to mention) and by holding such specious
pretenses of Liberty and benefit to the People (as you have done for eight
years together) had seduced some few of the Infirior Officers of the Army, and
a considerable number of the Soldiery to decline the Service of Ireland, (till
this Nation was settled upon Foundations of Justice and Freedom) and wrought a
dis-affection thereunto in many of those who were designed to that work: How
dangerous that Design was in it self, and how deeply laid, to the apparent
hazard of Ireland, (What again!) and the imbroyling this Nation in a f^^ther
and most desperate War; (for the recovery of their Lives, Liberties, and
Estates which are now daily taken from them, and which only is the just Ground
of any Martial Engagement) The Parliament of England being very sensible, and
considering the special providence of God in the timely discovery of it, (and
why must God still be thus profaned in his Providence, as if some secret
discovery was made by it, when as all the Nation knows the Engagement was
public and open, and the just grounds thereof several times published in Print
to the view of all) and the seasonableness of the Mercy, in crushing the
Serpent in the Egg; (or rather the unseasonableness of this Judgment in
murdering and pouring out the precious Blood of so many of Gods dear children
and true assertors of Englands Freedoms) and by his good hand (which doubtless
will in time be avenged of these bloody enemies to their shame and confusion)
upon the Forces under the General, suppressing that Rebellion and Insurrection;
(so could the Conqueror brand the People with Infamy and Rebellion after
Conquest, though himself was the greatest Tyrant and archest Robel (from whence
the present pretended Parliament had successively their first Institution) that
ever lived in this Nation) and so preventing the sad and fearful Consequence
which it might have produced (no question it had been a sad and fearful
Consequence to you, in dissolving your pretended power, but the happiest
consequence that ever befell this Nation, by having you called to an Account for
all the millions of Public Treasury which you have bestowed upon your selves
and Creatures; for easing the people of all their pressing and unsupportable
burdens, for making us really, and not verbally, a Free Nation, but not
Commonwealth, for settling a just Representative, and redressing all the
Peoples grievances, disposing of your great Places and Offices for the good of
the Nation, etc. all which to you would have been of sad Consequence, and
therefore you have just cause to complain) held themselves in duty bound to
acknowledge Gods goodness therein, (still Gods goodness must be (as it has
always been) abused, to cover over all Traiterous and devilish Designs) and
to look upon it as a pledge of future Mercies to this poor and unworthy Nation:
(which may in time be enriched again out of those vaste Estates which your
selves have stolen from it, and then it may retort your jeer upon your selves,
and call you poor unworthy Oppressers) and of his willingness to heal it, it
we will be healed. (well, jeer on?) And therefore the Parliament do Enact and
Ordain, and be it Enacted and Ordained, that a day of public rejoicing (Sure
they mean public feasting) and Thanksgiving to our gracious God (who says he
will not hear the prayers of the wicked, and their Sacrifices are an
abomination unto him) for this wonderful and singular mercy (was it a wonderful
morcy in that 3000 Horse and Foot well armed and accomodated, should take 300
naked men in their beds! or was it not a greater wonder and mercy that 400
should escape out of their beds, though 3000 armed men had surrounded them? If
truth was known, this was surely the cause of their thanksgiving and Feasting,
or should be so at least wise) be observed on Thursday the 7. of June 1649. in
all Churches and Chapels within the City of London, Westminster, and the late
Lines of Communication, and Weekly Bills of Mortality (but we find most of them
had more grace and honesty then to be so profane to rejoice at so great a
judgment) and in all other Churches and Chapels within England and Wales, on
Thursday the 28 of the same month (what, for murdering and butchering the
People of God! away for shame, and blush at this great blasphemy, and unheard
of cruelty!) They require the said days to be solemnly and religiously
observed, that God be not provoked and dishonored thereby (as if they knew God
was not much provoked and dishonored by some of their Gluttenies, Drunkenness,
and (as I was credibly informed) Whoredoms on that day; and will not God be
re^enged on such ae blasphemous people, who call his infinite Majesty to
patronize all their Tyranie, Oppression, Murders, and Cruelties, by their
Solemn, Hypocritical, and Vainglorious days of Thanksgiving? I profess my
heart does melt to think of Gods heavy judgments that will ere long, I fear,
be executed on them.

4. June. A motion was made against M. Case, and others, that prayed for Charles
the second; The crutelties of all other Tyrants are mercies to these. The
Quorum for relieving persons grieved in Articles, ordered to be 9. because they
may never meet; 9 years time would not get 9 of a Committee together, unless
they were seasted (as in the business of the (...) almost daily) The Prisoners
of Dobt petitioned the (...) passing their Ordinance (which is now so altered
by the C^^^pillars, the long-robe men of the House, that it will little or
^^thing avail them when past) Many Members this day ad^^^^, There is a
necessity for it, because else they could not ba^^^ a House. Ninteen thousand
pounds of the Speakers own money in the Rolls, borrowed by some in nec^lity;
none are grieved it it, because got so unjustly: 15000 l. ordered for supplies
of shiping provisions; and when their present stock is exhausted, then C. will
pray and weep again, to be reconciled to those called Leveilers. Capt. Bishop
ordered 100 l. per. Annum for himself, and and 12 d. per diem a piece for his
Deputy Catch-poles, to serze all those called Levellers, as disaffected
persons to the present Tyranical proceedings of the Juncto and their Council of
Chea^^. 3000 l. ordered Mrs Blaikeston in respect of her late husba^^s losses,
which were never 300 l. he lately purchased 7000 l. in the Bishoptick, but
never worth the seventh part of that sum: 4000 l. per annum to be settled on the
General; you are very free of the Peoples Revenues; Did the people ever give
you power thus to dispose of the Treasury of the Nation to on^^ your selves and
your creatures? Do not many of the meaner far: sell their clothes from their
backs to pay Assesments, and must the rich swallow it up at your pleasures?
Think you not we expect an account from you? The Sword of the City to be
delivered up to the Speaker when the Juncto comes to reast with their
Custard-bellies: a wise City, and well governed. A large Debate about Knighting
the Lord Mayor, the stinking Alderman, and M. Isaac Bull, because some were
cowards, others knaves and fools; these words of course were laid aside. The
Lieut. General and his Excellency, the Council of Cheats, and the petty Junct^
feasted by the City Loggerheads. The Lieut. General, and the General, had Gold,
and Plat besides, presented to them; but all this kindness was more for fear
then love. The Army and Juncto feared a surprise by the Levellers, and
therefore most of the forces in or near the City must Gu^^d them, under
pretense of an honorable Attendance.

FINIS.

