The Treacherous taken in his Treachery, etc.
AND Friends, although I have said enough, and sufficient already, viz. in my
two former, to manifest and lay open both the Ridiculousness as well as the
Weakness and Rashness of the Judgment of my Seven unjust Jugdes, viz. James
Potter, Oliver Sansom, William Austill, William Cooper, Benjamin Antrobus, John
Gidding, and Richard Vokins, junior, as particularly in page 25. to the 32d. of
the Cry, etc. Yet since there is this fresh occasion given me through their
hardiness, by attempting an Answer to it, I think it most proper, as needful,
to make this short and farther addition to the former, both to continue, as
well as to make it yet the more apparently obnoxious to the Eye and view of the
Impartial, before I enter upon the direct Answer to his and their said Book,
for shake and remove but their Foundation, viz. their wicked and unjust
Judgment, and this, and all the rest of his and their Babel's building, will
soon disjoint, sink down and tumble of it self, and therefore shall be somewhat
the larger on this part here, to the end I may be the briefer on the rest, though
I intend not to leave either Stone or Material unturned, shaken, removed or
thrown down; and this of their said unjust Judgment being the chief, the
principal, or as the Hinge or moving Wheel, upon which all the rest or the most
material of it does stand, hang and depend, and by which all the rest of their
Actions and Works may be the better guessed at, and inspected.

I shall begin with their Preamble to their said Paper of Judgment, and then
place again my further Remarks and Observations upon it; the aforesaid
beginning thus, or after this manner, viz. We whose Names are hereunto
subscribed, at the request of Abraham Bonnifield, and by the consent of the
Quarterly Meeting held at Redding the 4th. of the 3d. Month, 1691. were to hear
the Complaints and Grievances of the said A. B. and others, against W. L. and
J. B. and to put an End to all Differences between them, etc. I shall first
begin as with respect to their way and manner of hearing them, the which was
managed at no other, better, nor juster rate then that before I had read much
above the half of my Papers that contained them, viz. my Charges, ever I was
interrupted by Benjamin Antrobus, that hot and careless Zealot, who I as since
Broke for I know not how many Thousand Pounds, that my self am likely to (...)
several Pounds the worse for him; who standing up, or appearing, signified to
the Meeting, that it rose in him, or in his heart, That they or those my said
Papers were but fuel for the fire: Surely a very unjust and no less then a
Cruel and Barbarous way and method, for either hearing or ending of Difference;
but may add, as I said in Page the 30th. of the Cry, etc. When hinting at their
Injustice, what other could I expect from such Burning and Destroying Judges;
who doubtless, would even every one of them count it hard, rash and unjust if
any Court of Judicature, throughout the whole Nation, should require their
Causes, Allegations, etc. to be Burnt or Destroyed before Read or Heard, and
much the harder too, if the Judge should pretend a motion from God to do it;
but how weak, as well as ridiculous, this unconscious and conceited Man has
rendered himself by thus rushing and stamping his Idle and Childlish
Imaginations for the Movings and Motions of God, and no less than such, would
have believed and received (doubtless) then both Prophetic and Divine;
notwithstanding have thus acted below and short of all Rules amongst Men, both
as with respect to Law, Morality and Religion, of which I shall leave the
Impartial to judge. But again observe, that it is acknowledged and granted by
them, that there were both Complaints and Aggrievances; and in the second
place, that they were to both hear and redress them; but yet instead of either
impartially hearing, or at all, or in the least to endeavor any redress, they
have multiplied and made them more, and instead of doing me Justice and Right,
by impartial hearing and ending the Difference, the thing and end for which
they were so nominated, requested by me, and consented unto by the Meeting,
they have both Judged, Sentenced and Condemned the Complainant, and Aquitted
and Excused W. L. and J. B. the Accused, the Criminals, the Causers and
Occasioners of the aforesaid Complaints, etc. and this is all the Justice,
Redress or Amends that they have made or given me, in satisfaction for all the
so many Wrongs and Injuries that have been done me; and are any so silly as to
think, as silly as O. S. counts me, as to either desire or request them, to
thus farther wrong and abuse, evil handle and entreat me, instead of doing me
Justice; or the Meeting to be so out, and besides the matter, as to consent or
appoint them to any such end or work, or to account any at all of such their
evil and treacherous Ones, for Apostolical or Divine, or other than mere
mockery both of God and Man, and tending to no other than the hurt and
deceiving of their own and others Souls; for to thus insinuate and tell, as in
Page the 15th. of his Reviler, etc. viz. As if the Sense and Judgment that they
had received in their waitings in the Light of Christ our Lord, etc. as if he
were both the Author and Dictator to such their Treachery and Deceit, who have
thus divined a Lie, and then spoke it as if in the Word and Movings of the
Lord: And in the last place, as with respect to their making of Peace, working
Reconciliation, the ending the Difference, the end, (and end only) for which
they were so nominated, as owned, granted and acknowledged by themselves in
their said Paper, and Signed under every one of the forementioned Hands, yet
how far they have fallen short of performing their Trust in the said Matter and
Case left and committed unto them, any one that is desirous to see, may see;
and they that desire to know, cannot but understand; for that neither Peace nor
Reconciliation is either made or wrought by them, but rather, as in page 26. of
the Cry, etc. they have much increased the Difference, instead of ending of it,
and have made it greater, and the Breach far wider than before, and not so much
as any one of them rightly ended, or ended at all, but instead of it, or any
thing really in order to it, they have wholly mistook their Work, mist the
Matter, betrayed their Trust, and violated all Rules, Ways and Methods
practicable, or in order to it; and have cause and ground to believe that their
wilful Ignorance, mixed with Malice and Prejudice toward me, for my
withstanding and opposing of such their Injustice and Treachery, was the cause,
and wholly and alone the occasion of it; and therefore their said wicked, evil,
and unjust Judgment, which they have brought forth and given in against me,
instead of ending the Difference between the aforesaid and my self, being as
the chief, the main, and the principal, the Pillar and Support; yea, and
Finishing or Top-stone of this their so weak, and so wicked, feeble and
tottering Building, all others being but as Accidental, or Circumstances
depending; I having thus shown the weakness of, shaken and cut down their
Props, hewn down their Pillars, taken away the Stones, and razed the
Foundation thereof, without doubt, gainsay or contradiction, down will sink,
and unavoidably will and must fall, this their Babel, and confused Structure
and Building like a broken Wall altogether, and that with both force and weight
upon their own Heads.

And although, as I said in the beginning, I have said enough and sufficient
before; yet, notwithstanding, for the sakes of the Poor and Innocent Ones, who
have a love in their Hearts to God and his Holy and Blessed Truth; I say least
such, or any of them, should be beguiled, caught or taken in any of his, or
their, cunning and crafty Snares, I thought good to a little further onraval
this Man O.S's. own fine spun Spiders-Web, as in his Book, A Reviler, etc. with
the Subtelty and Craft of both the Hands and Heart that wrote it, which to add
to and to make it further appear, to be yet more Notorious and Wicked, and that
especially on his part, viz. O. S. that pretends to be both the Author and
Writer of it, and that in both the Matter, Manner and Circumstances, I thought
good for to give the Reader this farther Account and Relation, and that as it
more immediately or particularly relates unto himself, and then of the rest
concerned, as it falls in its order and course before me.

And first, as in relation or with respect to the said Judgment, that this very
Man O. S. the Chief or Principal of the said Seven, etc. did himself, and of
his own accord (so far as I know, or ever heard to the contrary) make an offer
and propose, yea, and that to the very next Quarterly Meeting, held and kept at
Newbery, it being, (I say) the next in Course, after that wherein their said
Sentence was given forth, for a farther hearing or reference before a certain
number of Ancient Friends at London, satisfiedly and equally chosen by us the
Parties concerned; and who was also so particular and distinct in it as to
nominate two of the very Persons I might pitch upon or choose to make use of on
my part, if I pleased or thought well of them, as stated by way of Appeal to
George Whitehead and Benjamin Antrobus, in Page the 48th. of the Cry, (and
which in Page the 45th. of his, A Reviler Rebuked, he confesses as Confused
and Whimsical) it being thus, or to this effect, viz. Whither that seeing O. S.
did so propose for a farther Referrence, and that for this reason, that he did
not see that the said Difference was like to be ended there, viz. at the
aforesaid Meeting. Observe, (which plainly shows and demonstrates, that it
neither had been or was ended before, unless they would have two endings) and
farther as cited, that he himself should be so the proposer of it (Pray
observe, who but just or a little before pretended, and that solemnly too; That
what they did therein, was as they received it in their Waitings in the Light
of Christ their Lord, etc.) And again, That it would in his thoughts be best so
to do, viz. Refer it. I do therefore appeal and say, Has he not plainly and
evidently shown therein, not only his own Instability, Confusion,
Whimsicalness, as well as Falsehood, Treachery and Inconsistency, thereby but
Invalidated, as well as Undone, Overthrown and Reversed that Wicked and Unjust
Judgment of himself and the rest of the Seven; but also thereby given testimony
unto, and approbation of something more Impartial, Equal and Just then that of
theirs; as likewise according to Method and Manner of Law, put a stop, or made
Replevey to both all, every or any farther Procedure or Prosecution of the
matter in any other Meeting or Court, (to speak after the manner of Men) except
what is higher, or of more Power and Authority than his or there is; so it is
evident, apparent, and plainly to be seen, that as the Wise Woman, as Solomon
says, builds up her House, so O.S. like the Foolish one, pulls his down,
and that with his own Hands; all which (as said) were enough and sufficient,
one would think, to convince any Conscious or impartial Reader of both his
Falsehood and Treachery, as also to show what little Cause or Right O. S. has,
or had, to charge me thus, and so often with Confusion, Whimsicalness, etc. as
in page 2. of his, A Reviler, etc. as well as in diverse other Places that
appears thus, and so shattered, broken and confused in himself.

And unto what is here inserted and alleged, I shall yet add and annex as a
farther weight of both Shame and Condemnation upon him, and them that employed
him in this Evil and Unchristian Work, (by thus adding of Sin unto Sin, instead
of Condemnation) out of the Book entitled, Reflections and Maxims, supposed to
be written by W. P. as in page 42. and 116. of the aforesaid, where it is thus
written and inserted, viz. If thou have done an Injury to another, rather own
it than defend it; one way thou gainest Forgiveness, the other thou doublest
the Wrong and Reckoning. And more to the same import in page 43. and 119. We
should make more haste, says he, to Right our Neighbor, than we did to Wrong
him, etc. And in page 120. True Honor will pay trebble Damage, rather than
justify one Wrong by another. Methods surely wholly and only, and alone
approved of and justified by the Rules of both Divinity and true Morality; all
which still condemns you in this, as well as in all the rest of your Rash and
Unchristian Work.

But a Word more, as with respect to the said Judgment; If you had seen or
found that you could not, or that you were not likely, or at least at that
time, to have made Peace, and ended the Difference betwixt us, the matter could
but have stood and remained as it was, (and not have been thus made worse) but
have left and refered it to another time or further opportunity; and who is it
that knows not, (that knows any thing of this nature) that although the thing
proposed has not at first been wrought or obtained, viz. The Peace between the
Parties differing, yet that through the Prudence, and Patient Forbearance of
the Parties chosen or concerned in it, with the use of true and Christian
means, it has notwithstanding been effected and accomplished in the end, as
many and frequent are the Instances that might be cited and alleged in the
Case. Neither had you, of Right, either Power or Authority from either God or
Man, whatever you pretend, and Father it upon the Lord, or your Sense in your
Waitings, etc. (which is a Lie, and a Divination of your own Brain, for that
God neither gives Sense, nor excites Men to pervert Justice, or do wickedly)
or to either act, do father or otherways than as before, since Peace, Ending
the Difference, was the matter proposed, and both the Subject and Substance of
your Business and Work; and which no doubt might have proved as effectual in
our case, as well as in others, had they been in sincere reality and earnest to
have done it in its right and due Method. And farther, as to their false and
malicious Aspersion, as informed, by charging me to act or behave my self like
one, or a Man distracted; though there was cause of temptation enough given me
for it by that days work of yours (I mean when you pronounced or gave it) had
not the Lord stood by me, and been my support and help by that days work; I
say, as I then told you, and do the same again, That it shall stand and will
stand in charge and witness against thee O. S. and you all, and that for ever,
unless you return and repent, for it was a Day and an Hour of the strength and
power of Darkness; yea, and a work of Cruelty, Force, and of sore Oppression,
as my Soul can say of it that bore the burden and felt the heavy weight of
your Merciless Hard-heartedness, etc. And which in addition to the rest of your
works brought, as may be supposed, Thomas Gilping, a Man of like temper with
your selves, who neither belonged to the Meeting, nor yet of the County,
neither had any thing to do, or to meddle or make with those Concerns amongst
us, to so proudly insult and domineer over me, and as if one appointed as Head
and Master of the Meeting and Work ye intended that day to be at, viz.
Judgment, Sentence, etc. who first discovered himself by Preaching through
Mercy, not my Funeral, though my Sentence and Judgment-Sermon, and such a one
too, as I think in relation to the nature and subject of it, as was never yet
preached by any Quaker before, which I leave to the just Judge of all to reckon
with him; for when and where such his Flams and Idle Fables will not stand or
pass for Apostolic, or Divine Authority, being far short of the Priests or
Ministers of the Church of England in the like Case, for they Preaching before
the Judge when ready to ascend the Bench or Judgment-sear, who generally rather
excite to Mercy with Justice, than Judgment, Condemnation, etc. But T. G. for
neither of them, but for you I mean the seven to be one, and to stand and hold
together, and not to be daunted, but to resolve and fix the matter, viz.
Judgment notwithstanding, as the Reader may observe was neither of the Meeting
nor County, to the shame and reproof of his Gray-Hairs be it spoken, and stand
in Record against him; and I could say more, both with respect to this and
other matters, particularly relating to himself, as he knows I can, and of his
scornful and insulting Temper. All which have been observed, and he spoken to
about it, as have been informed by Friends of his own County; and farther
observe, that a Friend that was at the aforesaid Meeting, gave in his Testimony
against their such unjust and evil Proceedings, saying, That he had been at
several Meetings in his time, and no doubt but he had, for he was both Ancient
and a Man of Gray-Hairs, but that he had never seen or had been where the like,
as with respect to Arbitrariness, Injustice, Force, etc. had been done before;
and therefore may be the better excused, if like the Prophet, of Old my Face
was made as of Brass, and my Brow as a Flint to withstand and testify against
such great and notorious Wickedness, so publicly done and acted in the Gate,
and such gross Oppression amongst the Men of Age; and to be plain in it, the
very strength of my Loins was as unloosed, and the substance of my Life as
dissolved within me, and in the cry of my Soul, and the woundings of my Life
was it uttered forth unto him, though your Hearts and Ears were hardened and
shut against it; but in fine, as I then told you as before, so again, that that
Case of yours and mine will yet have and come to another hearing, and that
before the great Tribunal of the great God and Lord of Heaven and Earth, where
my Cause shall be heard and determined in Justice, Righteousness and Truth, for
unto him and his Righteous Court of Heaven I both have and do appeal.

And therefore, Christian Reader, if I had indeed, (though false, and a Lie)
seemed as a Man or one distracted, as these envious Men have accounted me, for
my true and sincere Love and holy Zeal unto my God, Justice and the Truth, yet
considering that such their Injustice and Oppression was none of the least,
when only for and on the ground and score of Religion, if as Solomon said, That
Oppression makes a wise Man mad; I say the better to be born and allowed of in
me, that he counts such for a silly one; though whether he, or they that thus
wronged and abused me therein, let others judge, that though both spoke and acted
like a sober Man and a Christian, as others were Witnesses also as well as
they; and it was a hard thing to be thus risen up against (as it were) of all,
especially by them that should and ought to have done me Justice, and yet for
no Mouth or Tongue to move or speak on my behalf, Justice, etc. except the
forementioned, that wholly unknown to me, and merely as accidentally happened
to be there; Of which and the whole of it, let me add and further say:

A Woe, a Woe, this Plant of Pride, that is risen and grown so high,
Yet though so tall, it wither shall, Root, Branch, and all must dye;
For he the Lord will Pride rebuke, and break their Iron Bands,
And ransom the Afflicted Ones out of such Cruel Hands:
Yea, he he will bring Men's honor down, and hide their Pride in the Dust
That Lord it, and do thus oppress to satisfy their Lust.
And now in the next place, as with respect to the Title of his Book,
entitled, A Reviler rebuked, etc. I think that all that know O. S. and are
Impartial in their Judgment, cannot but know and conclude that his said Title
is fittest for, and most proper and true upon himself; for I know not a Man
that have practiced it more: But if I had said nothing, the very Fruits of his
Tongue and Pen does apparently manifest it, for that moreover and besides his
so foul and notorious Reflections, Flouts, Jeers, Scoffs, Scorns and Deridings,
both frequent and common throughout his whole Work, I shall yet add more to his
Account, to fill up the sum, and make good my Charge against him, both out of
his own Book, and manner of Behavior like unto it, both in his open and
public Testimonies amongst us, and other ways; and in order thereunto, shall
begin with the first and second pages of it, in which amongst the rest, he
counts me, yea, and that more particularly too, as an Instrument in the
Devil's hand to cast Calumnies, Reproach, and False Accusations against the
Faithful Followers and Ministers of Christ (whom I right dearly and truly
esteem and love, though cannot account so of him, them, or any else that walk in
the like crooked and perverse ways.) And further, as one that broke the Peace
of the Church, stirred up Discontents, Divisions, Enmity, etc. a Backslider, and
an Apostate from the Way of Truth, and at length into open opposition, a yea,
that even to both write, print and publish Books, stuffed with Falsehood and
Defamation. And again, (and to the same import) Amongst the too many that Satan
has beguiled, corrupted and hardened to that degree (says he) Abraham
Bonifield of Reading is one; But for what cause, unless speaking the Truth and
testifying against their Hypocrisy and Deceit, is left to the Reader to judge,
seeing there is nothing but his Say-so for it. And to the second part of his and
their evil and inconsiderate management of matters, as fore-hinted, as with
respect to his and their open and public Testimonies, when he and others of
them have happened or chanced to come amongst us; yea, and that too when the
Meeting House Doors were shut up against us, and when we kept our Meeting in
the open Court; was it not (I say) after a most harsh and barbarous manner; I
say again, when so exposed by the aforesaid, for him and them on the other hand
to so come out and thunder forth such their Sentences against us as they did,
as of Black Devils, and White Devils, as in page 6. of my Epistle to the Cry,
etc. and more than that too, for one or such that had cast off the Cross of
Christ, fallen from and denied our Testimony, gone into the Liberty of the
Flesh, etc. And all this for, and upon no other score or account then our
barely and alone being for the removing of the said Meeting from thence, viz.
the Court, though notwithstanding afterward done by G. W. and J. P. and that
in pursuant to the Order, Appointment, Consent and Agreement of a Meeting of
Ancient Friends, held at London on purpose about it at the time of the then
Yearly Meeting, and who (as said) appeared for, and was one with us therein,
and gave it too in, in our case; and therefore what at all to be mattered, or
notice taken of these, and such Men's pretended Sense and Receivings in their
Waitings, etc. whose Sense is their Will, and Receivings Resolution to
prosecute it, as elsewhere more at large of as bad or far worse by T. G. W. S.
and J.L. etc. And therefore I pray and entreat thee, O Christian and Impartial
Reader, to consider what treament my self and others have met with all along
from them, considering our Crime, which was only for being as before of the
same mind, and for the same thing and no other then our aforesaid Friends were
for, and which indeed was the main and principal occasion of all the future and
succeeding Differences: And if O. S. and the rest he undertakes for, accounts
my Conscientious and sincere concern herein, in Love to God and Holy Zeal for
his Precious Truth, for Billingsgate-Rhetorick, what may or can any think or
account of his or their's, though as floutingly charged, (their wits like mine)
should be of the least or smallest size) and this may serve in answer to his
Fraudilent and ^alacious Title, and also to that part of the first and second
Page of his before repeated, in all which there is as much and no more of Truth,
than of Proof, and that is nothing at all; and what I have written or charged
upon him, I mean as to the major or principal part of it, he knows to be so,
and the truth, and neither Revilings nor Scandal, and therefore no occasion for
his Rebuke.

And then goes on and tells his Reader, that this, viz. his said Book, (which
may, and ought of right to be counted a piece of Craft or Artifice, then either
Religion or Piety) was written by himself, but yet so covert and clandestine,
as not to tell him in Truth and Plainness, who he or they were that were the
Original or Authors of it, for several that have seen it, are of opinion that
its none of his own, nor like his Style; but however, he is worthy and deserves
to bear both the blame and shame of it, seeing that he has so far appeared for
it, and not to tell of any other Father.

And further, to his so common and frequently charging me, as being a Troubler,
one of an unruly Spirit, a breaker of the Churches Peace; it is to be remembered
and observed, that the truly Tender and Conscious were ever so accounted of by
such as he and they, that were so for Rule and Pre-eminence, I say, by such,
both in former times and ever since, who truly and sincerely loved and feared
the Lord, and hated and testified against False-heartedness, Oppression and
Deceit; and as then, so now, neither could nor can by any means be prevailed
upon by any such, their Rules calls them, Lines of Truth, Balance of the
Sanctuary, or what you will that were not in Truth, according to Truth, and
Truth in themselves; and therefore were so used then, Persecuted and abused
ever since, by such that lived and acted in the like evil and envious mind,
viz. the Flesh, first Birth and Nature, and at which door, the Apostasy in
Spirit crept in at first, and which likewise has proved the Misery and
Calamity of this present Age and Day.

And then goes on, and tells his Reader, that for the aforesaid Causes, viz.
of my being a Troubler, of an unquiet Spirit, etc. I was reproved and testified
against by the Quarterly Meteing; whereas its apparent, as in Page the 8th, of
the Cry, that W. L. J. B. W. S. and others, were the cause and trouble-makers,
through such their insulting Arrogance and Pride, unless such things are good
and to be justified, and the Detectors of them for reproof, and to be testified
against; and besides, if true, these were not the cause but the effects of the
aforesaid Cause or Causes, and the Meetings Reproof, if it had been true, when
groundless of as little weight as the rest; but enough and sufficient in the
foregoing, concerning their testifying against Sentence, Judgment and the
wickedness and unjustness of it. And then goes on and tells him again, of my
leaving the Meeting of Friends, to which I used before to resort (observe, not
belonged too) and of joining my self with them that some Years ago separated
from Friends, etc. forgetting, else not so impartial, to insert, that his
Friends (if must call them so) first seperted from the others, and kept a
separate Meeting several Years together, at the Widow Trusses in
London-street; and what enconragement to so resort, that permitted them of such
bad and scandalous Lives, viz. W. S. E. B. and A. M. as in Page the 9th of the
Cry, to so interrupt, bid me be silent, and that it was not my place to speak,
that had never by such courses, or any thing that was indirect forfeited my
Christan Privilidge amongst them; Meetings frequently disturbed and broken up
upon me, and in fine threatened with the tying up of my Tongue, at their Monthly
Meetings; let their meaning be what it would, tying up of Tongues, whether in a
Natural or Spiritual sense, are both Persecution and Popish; and therefore O.
S. has not so great cause so to make such a bustle, or to seem so uneasy, for
my adding to, or mentioning the use of the Gagg, seeing such evil and
unchristian beginnings seldom ever centered or ended in any other, as more at
large in Page the 36th of the Cry, etc. And therefore what would this Man have
or be at, if he knew what himself; and if such a Crime with O. S. (that
Makebate and Enemy to Peace) and his Companions, for me to meet with the
aforesaid, when have opened the Doors in order as was hoped for Reconciliation,
and if so, why not as great and notorious a Crime in George Whitehead, John
Kilburn and Benjamin Antrobus that advised and excited us to it? and who were
also both our Presidents and Example to what we did or acted therein; for if he
charge me with any other or farther joining then in order to Reconciliation,
he and they have done me much wrong, and abuse me in this, as they have done in
all the rest: And what need either he or they to either care or be concerned
about me (unless to swell his Book for a greater gain, or dally with his Reader
in it) what became of me, or whether I went any where or no, where if such a
Devil, a Dog, a Woolf, a Swine, etc. as in Page the 19th and 20th, as
forecited, as olso in the Paper he fixed to my Book of Queries, as in Page the
34th viz. one of such an unruly Spirit, following the steps of Rogers, a raging
Wave of the Sea, foaming out my own shame, a Murderer, etc. Pray, therefore
observe how unfit O. S. as before, to thus publish me for a Reviler, and to be
rebuked; that have thus exceeded all both Christian and Civil bounds himself,
as more at large notorious, severe and cruel upon the same Subject, in the
foregoing, in the Cry, etc. as likewise in the following; and therefore whether
(and that as good and sufficient reason for it) that all his caluminating
Clamours he creates, and then charge upon me and others, ought not of right
to be returned back, and to his own shame and reproof affixed and fastened upon
himself, and that with double reprehension of Blame and Reproof, and as
unworthy also of further spending of Time, Ink and Paper about it,
notwithstanding he makes such a noise, and beats both Earth and Air (as I may
say) as on purpose to raise a Dust to blind both the Eyes and Heart of his
ignorant Reader. And farther, that although, as I have said, am truly tender of
the Truth, and do both love and esteem the Faithful Followers and Ministers of
Christ, yet nevertheless cannot be so easily decoyed to your end, or charmed to
your interest, as to credit or believe that such your fallacious Fictions or
lying Vanities are the fruits or proof that makes you appear to be such, as
particular with W. L. and J. B. so Insulting and Lording it over me and others,
pretending to the seeing my inside, and in fine to the discerning of my Heart
and inward parts; but more of this hereafter; nor yet no more of William
Spikeman's feigned Prophetic strain, to use his own Phrase, in order for Faith
and Obedience, viz. to stay, and for the continuance of our Meeting in the
Court, or before the old Meeting House Doors, until the Shutters of them did or
were minded to open them again. All which was to have been taken upon trust,
received and believed too for Truth, and Profound and Apostolic Doctrine, as
well as owned, acknowledged and obeyed for, and as such had not wiser Heads,
and prudenter Tongues and Hands, reproved and corrected the Error, and cleared
the Innocence of my self and others from such, his, and their false and foul
Reflections, so often and frequently thrown upon us by them, and by the Author
too amongst the rest accounted so, for Black or White Devils, such as had
denied our Testimony, etc. But what Testimony, if continuing longer at the Door
were not it? though notwithstanding altogether false; for that we refused
neither to meet nor to sit with them there, but not as an Article of our Faith,
neither could we be so implicit as to let them see and act for us, and if by it
found denying our Testimony in the liberty of the Flesh and Spirit of the
World, for that nothing else was our Crime, or laid in charge against us; and
if so, I say, and be true as they have said, then pray what were the Ancient
Friends at the time of the Yearly Meeting guilty of that gave it in our Case,
and in contradiction to their said Faith or rather Fancy in the matter? But if
any one should object and say, But by what Friends was this matter so heard and
given in your Case against them? To it I do answer, by some of the most chief
and eminent Friends in the Nation, as in particular Stephen Crisp, George
Whitehead, William Penn, John Osgood, John Kilburn, etc. and George Whitehead
and William Penn appointed by the aforesaid, at the said Meeting, for to come
down to see done, perform and to do it; observe, none of all which is either
denied by him, taken notice of, neither excused or answered, and yet for him to
be so treacherous and hardy as to charge me for a Smiter of my Brethren; but
yet not so much as any one particular mentioned or named when, how or wherein;
and if my Modest and Christian Words were and must be such a Smiting, than what
can or may be accounted of theirs, but Maiming, Wounding, if not Slaying;
neither yet of James Lavill's Prophecy, Actions, Deportment, etc. though so
Rediculous and Notorious, as in the 6th Page of my Epistle to the Cry, all
which O. S. slips over, gives the go-by unto, and passes in silence, as
elsewhere, and frequent when at a straight, he being, as supposed, either
afraid or ashamed to meddle with it, as well he may, it being so bad manifestly
contradictory and confused; but what that is not allowed and digested, if but
through paced and true to Party and Intrest, nor no other of any of you the
Seven unjust Judges, who with the rest have so abetted, stood by, and justify
notwithstanding have done and acted such things, but rather as an aggravation
upon you to be of such hardiness of mind, as to pretend as if had received it
from the Lord, as more to the same in the foregoing; neither is it nor can it
be thought I should count otherways of my Antagonist O. S. in particular, or to
be so much as thought to be one, viz. a Minister or Follower of Christ, seeing
as I have already proved, and shall yet again, that he is so far from being a
faithful Follower or true Minister, etc. that he is scarcely, or not faithful
at all, nor yet really true to either God or Man upon a Religious score or
account, nor yet of any or either of the rest of his party, unless that such
things as have charged, proved, and in part confessed unto, as in page 26. of
the Cry, etc. be the tokens, and owned as the badges of the faithful Followers
and Ministers of Christ, and what they be, both my Book of Queries, tituled,
Plain and Honest Dealing with W. L. and J. B. etc. And The Cry of the Oppressed
in Sion, does both of them give a full and large Account, viz. Arrogance,
Pride, Insulting, guilty of speaking and asserting Blasphemy, by assuming the
Attributes only and alone, proper and peculiar to the Omnipotent and All-seeing
Eye of God, and my Book or Books that contained them, are in Verity and Truth,
and so close, so simple, and so plain upon him, viz. O. S. and the rest, to
either receive or bear, surely else he would never have had the hardiness to so
outface his own Conscience, to so asperse them, and suppose that he is not so
ignorant but to know they are Truth, and neither Lie nor Falsehood in either the
whole or any part thereof: And again, let me say of that and those innocent
Book and Books thou and you so mutter and envy against, speak evil of, abuse
and vilify, that it does stand, will stand, and also in after Ages may stand
and remain as a witness for God, Truth and Righteousness A. B's Innocence, and
against thee, you, and all other your such hidden subtle Crafts, Works, and
Deeds of Darkness, Hypocrisy and Deceit, unless you return and repent, and
that in Truth and Sincerity: And I know full well what I have done, and whom I
have obeyed in the Writing of them, and such Peace, and that Satisfaction in
it, that neither thee, you, nor any Man or Mortals are able to remove, bereave
me of, or take away from me, Hallelujah's and Praises be to the Name of the
Lord my God, and to the Lamb, who has been and is my support and strength both
in it all, and through it all. And it is to be further noted, that although they
have charged the aforesaid to be stuffed with Lies and Falsehood, yet has not he,
they, or any of their Assistants, proved so much as one, though thus made a
noise and an outcry about it. And again in the same page, after his accustomed
manner to criminate and abuse me for a restless and unruly Spirit, and what
for, but barely and alone testifying against their Injustice, Insulting,
Lording, etc. crying and calling for Justice, as cited all along and throughout
the whole, and that to according to the allowed of and established good Order
owned and advised to be done and practiced among them, as in page 44. of the
Cry, etc. and in several other places. And pray observe what a disturbance it
is to O. S. and the rest of them, to either seek or endeavor for Justice or
Relief; and if this be to break the Churches Peace, what Church is it that
crying for Justice, breaks the Peace of it? surely can hardly be thought any
other than such a one as O. S. or such an other or others is the Chief and Head
of, and not the true Church, or Church of Christ that is the Pillar and Ground
of Truth, or the Foundation and Upholder of it, the truest Rule and best
Looking-glass for O. S. W. L. and J. B. and the rest of such fond conceited and
imaginary Men, for to look, see, and to take a true view of themselves by, who
thus seek to both pull down, root out and destroy Truth, Justice, Equity, the
principal and chief Materials of this Heavenly and Caelestial Structure, or at
least in too large a degree; and therefore O.S. of all Men, (one would think)
might have forborne of thus charging either my self, or others, of endcavouring
Discord, or taking occasion to break the Peace of the Church, if he had known
or truly understood what it was, or took a right and serious view, and well
considered of himself, who has been the beginner, and chiefest and principal
Instrument of most, if not all the Discord, Contention and Divisions that have
happened and broke out amongst us, both on the one hand, and on the other, as
well as the hinderer and obstructer of Peace, Reconciliation, etc. in this Town
and Country; and that when George Whitehead and others endeavored it, as at
other times, I say again, not only the beginner of it, but the continuer, and
principal and chief Agent of the promoting and upholding of it, as is doubtless
known to all or most of the Intelligible Friends in the same, as more at large
and in particular in the 10th. and 13th. Query of my Book of Queries, and in
diverse and several places in the Cry of the Oppressed, etc. And again in the
same page he calls his Book, says he, (speaking of me) The Cry of the
Oppressed in Sion; And then adds, But by the Confusion that is in it, he
manifest himself to be in Babylon; But what those Confusions are, you have
little but his Word, and Say-so for it, as ready to conclude that if W. L. J.
B. and himself, had not been in Babylon, or near the Territories of it in these
matters, he, they, and the rest of their Associates, would never so appeared,
or been found so deeply involved in such their Divisions of both Heart and
Tongue, as is too apparently manifest you were and are as in the aforesaid,
entitled, Hidden Things revealed and brought to Light; or Plain and Honest
Dealing with W. L. and J.B. etc. As also of O. S. in particular in the Cry of
the Oppressed, etc. too large to rehearse so over and over again, especially of
thee O. S. that art for punishing the Body, and that puts the matter altogether
out of doubt, those being the Punishments of Babylon, in whom was found the
Blood of Saints and the Martyrs of Jesus: But of Sion it is said, Isa. 11.9. as
cited by himself, Nothing shall destroy or hurt in all my Holy Mountain, says
the Lord: And can the Body be punished or punishment upon it, and not hurt, I
confess its a Mystery and a Riddle to me. And again, my said Title, viz. The
Cry, etc. so impertinently inferred on by him, and that as if groundless too,
there being so much and such Cause for the said Cry; for that of Oppression and
Oppressions chiefly was, and is the cause and occasion thereof, as appears at
large in the forecited; and am sure that from the Scripture cited by him, Isa.
11.9. that there is no President, Practice, or Example for it, but on the
contrary, that is in Sion, there shall, neither is their indeed any that can
either hurt, terrify, or destroy; and if so O. S. where have thou, you, and
the rest of you been? and what the work you have done, and been doing, that
have thus been hunching at, smiting and beating of your Fellow Servants, and
that under the pretense of Truth, Innocence? and what not, which I shall leave
to the Reader to judge of, whether such your Actions and Doings be the tokens
of Sion, or the Fruits and Works of Babylon? And whether, as thou have said of
me, thou have not hereby run thy self aground, and made and prepared a Rod for
thy self, and then goes on, and says, That I should have told what I meant by
Sion, to which do return the City and Habitation of Peace, where neither such
Works nor workers are either to be seen or found, as to the same import in
Isaiah the Scripture cited by him. And again, and further of her, Such a Rest
and Holy Habitation, which neither thee, them, nor any such ruff hewn, and
unhammer'd Stones that are thus for the punishing of the Body, tying up of the
Tongue, etc. until better hewed, and Caelestially pollished, are fit to be laid
or made use of in her Building. And then goes on again, and says, Whence then
has he fought his Cry of the Oppressed, he says is to be sounded forth aloud
in the Camp? but he does not say in what Camp.

Answer; O. S. it is from thy and your own Camp and Borders, for there and in it
is both the Oppression and the Cry, as plain and apparent; and therefore from
thence it is fought, and from thence arises and proceeds the Cry, and
therefore the easier to conclude whether from the Camp of the Uncircumcised, or
the Uncircumcised in the Camp, and the more, for that a wrong Spirit has
entered the Camp, as John Buy has given as his Testimony, and that many Years
ago, as in the Postscript to my Book of Queries.

Page 26. where it is thus annexed, viz. The Fruits of which is it not
Spiritual Pride, Partiality, Imposition and Oppression? and is not this the
Accursed Thing found therein, and like to Achan 's Wedge of Gold and Babylonish
Garment, which caused Israel to fly before their Enemies, the Lord purge it out
from amongst us; to which let my Soul with the rest of the sincere in heart say
Amen. And then proceeds and says, Besides his Cry, he has given another Title
to his Book, he calls it also An Appeal from the wicked and unjust Judgment of
Men, to the Judgment Seat of Christ, that just and upright Judge, and to his
holy Witness in the Hearts and inward parts of all the real Professors and
possessors of the holy Truth.

Answ. And what if another, and another to that, or whether conjunct or
distinct, all little enough, and to little too, to show and lay open the nature
and degree of his and their Injustice, Wickedness, Treachery, etc. And then
again, I think to lay open (says he) and unravel his Spider's-Web, not
doubting to manifest to the indifferent Reader, that his Account which he calls
true and impartial, is untrue and partial, and that his Cries of Oppression by
Unchristian forcing severe ways, etc. is causeless, as he is clamorous, etc.
Answ. Which is but a playing and dallying with the Reader, unless he did or
could do as he says; and whether he has done, as he pretends I shall also
leave it to him to judge, viz. Whether he has done it, or any thing more
throughout his whole Work, than only to beg the Question, and impose upon the
aforesaid; and this further, that I have both written and spoke the truth;
neither have knowingly wronged him or any other in the aforesaid Account,
unless in being thus plain and close upon him and them; and if he count that
for abuse or personal Reflection, I cannot help it. And again, in the latter
part of the third, and beginning of the 4th page, He begins (says he)
speaking of me with as much smoothness as he can, to insinuate himself into his
Reader pretending much Truth and Plainness, etc. but he quickly falls into
Heats, Anger, Revilings, and bitter Language. But what those Heats, Anger,
Revilings, etc. he is short and sparing in for want of proof to his matter of
fact: But to make good his matter with only this poor come off, by telling his
Reader of my running into a sort of Prophetic strain, denouncing of Judgments
against others, and undertaking to foretell what shall befall them. Answ. And
if a Prophetic strain and denouncing of Judgment against others, be to him
such a Crime or (...) pray tell me and the Reader, who it was that told thee
so? or do thou only run at adventure, thy frequent and usual manner and way
of Paraphrasing; yet however and whatever O. S. or W. L may judge or account of
John Kilburn or John Osgood's Honesty or Wisdom, that were the Persons
appointed, or they to be more Honester or Wiser than to make Remarks upon his
Person, Qualification, etc. yet let me tell both him and thee, that they were
both the honester and wiser too for the doing of it, though it is to be
observed, and always noted, that it is a hard thing for either O.S. W.L. or
others of the same sort, to either suppose or account any Man Honest or Wise
that runs not with them for Company; as G. W. I know met with some of it when
he came to Redding with J. P. to remove the Meeting from the Court or
Meeting House Doors, and happily not much better when he prevailed with T.C.
etc. for to open them again, and advised for our meeting altogether therein:
But to return to the matter and to proof, after that the Meeting was ended, at
which our said Difference was heard, before the aforesaid J. K. and J. O. John
Kilburn as he and I was coming down the Street together, from the Widow
Trusses, where the said Meeting was held, the aforesaid J. K. took occasion
(and that of his own account) from the Remarks and Circumstances he had placed
upon the aforesaid, to speak unto me after this manner, or to this effect,
Abraham (said he) I would not have thee to so mind, be concerned, or take so
much notice of this Man, viz. W. L. for that as in my judgment and thoughts I
look upon him as no other than as a discomposed Man, and I would not have thee
or Friends to look upon or esteem of him as any other.

(Friends, this is true, and J. K. knows it to be so, for all this Man O. S.
has the hardiness and confidence to belly them, and evade and falsify their
Judgment in it, and by his snearing Insinuations to suggest and impose upon his
Reader, as if J. K. and J. O. were both wiser honester than to make such or any
Remarks upon W. L's. Person, Qualification, etc.) And an account too not much
unlike to this (of his) was likewise given me by Guely Penn, viz. of his
franticklike Carriage when he was with, or lived with, her Father Isaac
Pennington, and that in the presence and hearing of her Husband W. P. when they
sojourned with William Simmons at Hammersmith, and I could be more particular;
from all which it may be observed and seen, that there were others besides J.
K. and J. O. that were both so honest and wise as to place observation both
upon the aforesaid Person and Qualification; and as to the other part relating
to J. O. take the Testimony as by Letter under his own Hand, sent and given
concerning him, and that in order to stop and prevent their said mistating and
false explanation upon it, which was thus or to this effect, viz. That there
were several Articles drawn up and in charge against W. L. Note, the which he
neither said was either false, or made appear to them as such so much as in any
one particular of them; but further that there was none alleged or exhibited
in charge against A.B so it is plain and aparent to be seen as before, that
there were both Remarks and Observations made, and they that knew him knew that
his Words used to be short, but authentic. And then again, But if (said O. S.)
by the aforesaid he means himself and his pretended several others concerned
with him, it shows what a cavilling Spirit he and they were of, etc. and thus
again how it may be observed, as I hinted before, that its hard for him or them
to be accounted Wise or Honest that oppose or run not with him and them, and no
doubt had O.S. so much as thought that J.K. and J.O. had been and were realy so
concerned as they were, or placed their Observations so as they did, but he
would bave been more modest and sparing than to have thus (conclusively)
accounted them for Cavillers, or Men of so quarrelsome Qualifications. And then
again says he. But A.B. I think might very well have let W. L's. Person and
Qualifications alone, notwithstanding the big Words and empty Flourishes that
A.B. has used to set forth the greatness of the Capital Difference as he calls
it, seeing that the Difference (says he) was but slenderly grounded against
W.L. if it wanted to be made out by Remarks upon his Person and Qualification.
To which I do return as before, that the aforesaid were both so Wise and
Honest, that they thought it not altogether so slender, though O.S. has counted
it so, and there were Charges too as well as Remarks, as specified by the
aforesaid J.O. and as also so expressed, and that in particular in Page the
6th. of the Cry, viz. their Remarks upon his Charges, Person, Qualification,
though O.S. has been thus Treacherous and Perfidious as to pass by and give
the slip unto it, though the main part and principal Head and Branch thereof,
and the like has frequently done, as I shall observe when in Course; and is
this a doing O.S. as thou would be done unto? or according to that Truth thou
pretends to be so concerned for and to vindicate? but if so and of thy Truth,
yet am sure that it is not according to the real and sincere Truth, which is
plain, innocent and void of the beguiling Crafts of Men, and shall leave it to
the Impartial to judge whether Charges, Person and Qualification be a good or a
slender ground for wise and honest Men to place their Remarks and Observations
upon, though so slenderly accounted of by O.S. as also how unfit O.S. is or
would be, or such as he, to make either a just Jury man or Judge, that
accounts the aforesaid as so slender and groundless.

And again, as in Page the 4th. and further in Page the 6th. Who but one of a
restless and unquiet Mind, and evil and contentious Spirit, (says he) would
have renewed and revived the remembrance of an old ended Difference, etc. and
then to his work of Scoffing again, saying, And by this the Reader may see some
of A. B.'s. Qualifications, and by this guess at the rest. To the first do
answer, it is granted and allowed so to be in the Person that did it, but O. S.
has widely mist the matter, a thing too frequent and common with him, in that
he did not propose and state this Question to W. L. the Person, him and him
alone, that renewed and revived it, and who could not be quiet or contented
that the matter should stand and remain as ended and left by the aforesaid; but
he must needs place such his new and untrue imaginary Explanations and
Perversions upon it, whereby, and by which only and alone, the former ended,
and which ought to have been forgotten, Difference was again revived and
renewed amongst us; and to use his own Words, as in Page the 4th. of his
Reviler, and whereby the Reader may see and observe what a quarrelsome Man he
has been, as also that all the aforesaid Severities and Reflections of O. S. is
found true and due unto and upon W. L. and himself, and by which to use O. S's
phrase, may I not safely say, if he had any true regard for the honor of
Truth, and the Reputation of that Christian Society he professes himself to be
a Member of, it would no doubt have stopped and prevented him from doing it; as
likewise much to the same by endeavoring to invalidate and undervalue the
Labors and Endeavors of S. C. G. W. W. P. and several others of the Ancient
Friends of the Nation, that approved of, appeared and were for the removing of
the Meeting from the Court, or before the old Meeting House Doors; and I do not
and cannot forget the Remarks that G. W. (and that at his own House, and before
his Wife) placed upon the churlish and ill deportment that he met withal from
him, and some of them, when he and J. P. came down by the appointment of the
aforesaid, in order thereunto, viz. as if endeavoring thereby to draw them
from their Faith and Testimony; as likewise to be farther noted, how they
accounted that it was such a Temptation that had befallen them when G.W. etc.
had prevailed with the others to open the Doors again, and advised to meet
altogether therein, etc. as that the like had never met with, happened or
befallen them before: by all which the Reader may see the end, and what a kind
or manner of concern, and from whence it came, that has induced O. S. to thus
applaud as well as approve of this his such and other the like evil and
contentious Work, which is doubtless but to hide and cover it; if there were
not, as there need not, any further or other Remarks or Observations to be made
or placed upon it, in order to prove or farther evidence the same.

And to the end it may be better understood and known that the said Difference
was not so slenderly grounded as he insinuates, or on such small and petty
matters as they placed their Remarks upon, I think it proper and expedient in
the first place, to give a short yet a true and particular account thereof; and
in the second, that there were, and who they were that were concerned, and
likewise offended, grieved and hurt as well as my self, and the more because of
his Taunts, Provocations and Aggravations, as if what had been said were false,
or that no others troubled or offended but my self, abusing my Civility for my
forbearance, or by mentioning them only in general, as if on purpose, and to no
other end than to hide my self in the dark, and to flam and deceive my Reader,
as in Page the 4th. of the Reviler, That Generals serve Slanders best to lurk
under, etc. the which take as follows; some time after the said Differences
had thus happened, I going one day to W. L.'s. House on purpose to know of him,
if willing to comply with those Christian Methods most proper to be used in
order to the more privater ending of it, or if not, that it was my intention to
bring it before the Monthly Meeting, who thereupon, as his Answer, retorted
back upon me after this proud and insulting manner, Thee, (said he) why, what
art thee? the which I looked upon as no less than imperious Pride and Arrogance
of Spirit, I say, for one Brother or Member to insult so over another.

And at another time (unto and) before several other Friends, after the ending
of the Meeting, thus, viz. either that they (viz. the said Friends) were all
Mad, or that he thought that they were all Mad to Day, meaning as with respect
to their deportment and managment of matters there, the which neither in my
presence nor hearing, though of others, and of such that were not only troubled
at it, but placed both their Remarks and Observations upon it; neither was it,
as I may say, to the Younglins or Novices, but to some of the Chief and
accounted most Eminent and Ancient amongst us, that met apart after the
Separation; and the which I count and charge as a second.

And then again, at another time, and after the ending of another Meeting of
the Friends then present upon the aforesaid or like occasion ( viz not so
managing of matters (in their sincere approach and devout Worship to God)
according to his Mind or Will) thus, viz. That they acted like a company of
Poppets, adding withal (to the aforesaid) with your up's and down's; meaning by
it when Friends stood up in Testimony, and fell down on their Knees to Prayer.
But how great his Pride and prophain his Comparison herein I shall leave the
(...) such my so great and large Condescension, in that notwithstanding I had
been at such loss of time to Compose, and the Charges of Printing the said Book
of the Cry, to be yet nevertheless so at the loss and charge of all, and that
with content, in case he could have prevailed with them to have consented unto
any fair or Christian way or condition of Peace.

And in page 8. speaking of me, Now having drawn up his own particular
dissatisfaction that I presented the Monthly Meeting with a Paper of Complaint
of my Grievances, etc. And then thus infers upon it, This Paper of Complaint,
says he, one might reasonably expect should have been the first in his Book,
but not brought forth till his 7th page; but his Book begins with another
Paper, as pretended to be the Complaint of several Friends, etc. In Answer to
this part, first, that as by the following it is apparent that it was and is a
reality, and not a pretense; and that I also have sufficiently proved it so, by
inserting the Names of some of them, and could have said more, though he thus
insinuates with his own beguiling Crafts, etc. And as to the other, did think
it proper to be brought forth first, as being first in course, and more
general; and too for that it had been laid before the Quarterly Meeting, the
other not. Secondly, that of mine being but the private or particular
dissatisfaction of my self, the other as said of diverse and several. And he
might have spared his Remark and his Thought too, one would think, seeing there
are cases and instances so frequent and often in his, and as frequently hinted
in my Answer, that are brought forth neither first nor last, nor indeed at all,
though it is to pass, and you must or ought to take it, and that both for
Answer, yea, and a Rebuke too. And as to his endeavoring thus as before to
insinnate into his Credulous Reader, as if the Friends I hinted, as concerned
in the said Complaint, were only R. S. and my self, I think it both proper and
expedient to add to our number one more, and no more now; though I could have
further enlarged, but this may be sufficient at present to evidence it for a
truth, and that it is nothing but the truth that I have asserted or said
concerning this matter; and that is Andrew Hall; and this also further of him,
that he was not only one of the Complainants and aggrieved, but also he and the
Man that drew up the first method or draught of it; and therefore A. B. for
all, still found to be and remains in that Truth which is plain and innocent,
etc. and not using as falsely accused by O.S. any such evil and beguiling Crafts
to beguile and deceive his Reader. Again, says he in the same page, Whereas he
charge W. L. (and it is the main part of his Charge) that he refused to
record the Complaint in the Monthly-Meeting-Book, etc. Answ. The which shall
leave the the Impartial to judge of, whether so as he has said, seeing I have
alleged so many as well as material ones besides it, as in page 1, 2, 7, 8 and
9. of my Book of the Cry, both in this and of the former Differences.

And again says he, I do not remember that it was made appear to us, that the
Monthly Meeting did order W.L. to Record it. But O.S's Memory is often short,
when the matter inconsistent with his Ends and Interest, else he might have
recollected what I have inserted and alleged in my Observation on the first
Head of their wicked and unjust Judgment, as likewise to be observed, not at
all denied by him as in page 29. of the Cry, it being this, viz. The Substance
and principal of all the said Charges against W. L. was not only proved by me
before the said Seven, but also both confessed, owned and acknowledged unto by
W. L. which was that he had denied or refused to record what was the absolute
and positive Agreement and Order of the Monthly Meeting, etc. And I have not
forgotten the Apology neither that he made for his excuses before them, which
was that he was loath to trouble the Quarterly Meeting with it; Though should
rather have said, to have had his Nakedness and Shame for such his Insolency
and Pride laid open before them, and therefore O. S. in his saying, That the
Substance of the Matter was answered by W. L. in agreeing with the Monthly
Meeting to refer it to the Quarterly, is no more nor other than a mere piece of
Craft. For gave them before to understand, that it was none of his design or
intention, whatever his seeming agreeing, or the substance of the matter, etc.
But pray further observe, how that in the very same page O. S. both owns and
confesses, viz. That the Monthly Meeting did refer it to the Quarterly Meeting
to end it; and if so, if it were not Recorded in the Monthly Book, ought it not
to be Recorded there? And in that it was not, where must we conclude the Fault
but on W. L. that had no disposition to that kind of Work. And again, in page.
27. of his citing my Words out of page 7. of the Cry, viz. That when so made
and Recorded, that afterward they deny it to be the act of the Meeting; and in
the conclusion of the same Paragraph, makes this his Notation upon, viz. And
well they might, for there is no such Record thereof in the Book, etc. So that
if no Record, no truth, though he both confesses and confuteth himself into
the bargain; but what of that, if his Reader care not, or dare not to be so
nice Eyed as to see it, and if the Recording, more weighty than the Truth, or
the business to be recorded, which way will you steer, and whither will you
run? And though he flouts me in his A Reviler, etc. with
Billingsgate-Rhetorick, yet if this be not Babylon's, and that in no small or
mean degree, I must confess I am as silly a one as he charge me, and
understand not any thing that relates to either Religion or Reason.

And then again, in page 9. of his A Reviler, etc. Its worth the Reader's
notice how falsely (meaning of me) he dealt with the Monthly Meeting, etc. But
in what, or wherein, he is short and sparing for want of Reason to back his
Charge; for after a great Round-about and Ramble, the chief ground alleged by
him, was only because that I did not immediately, I mean at the next Quarterly
Meeting, bring forth my Charge and Allegations against the said W. L.
notwithstanding there were neither time nor limitation set or given when or
where to do it, nor yet either care or notice taken for the same to be
signified to the Quarterly Meeting either by Word or Writing. And how could it
be thought that they would credit or take any more notice without it, than when
I presented the Paper of Complaint, containing the Offense and Grievances of
diverse and several of us? And therefore it is better worth the Reader's
noticing, how strange and at what a venture and random-rate he runs, in thus
Stigmatizing and Calumniating a Man for Falsehood, that neither broke Promise,
Engagement, or any Obligation of his own, or any thing so much as like it from
any other.

And in the same page further undertakes to give an Impartial Relation of the
manner of my presenting of my said Paper of Complaint to the Quarterly Meeting
at Ore the 15th of 7th Month, 1690. And first by telling That the said Meeting
did not think fit for to trouble the whole Quarterly Meeting with our private
quarrels, but committed it to eight Friends, which when the Names of them were
read unto him, he objected against but one of them. But O. S. not so ingenuous
or plain as to tell and let them know, that I objected against, and was
dissatisfied with any other hearing, but the knowledge of and the sense and
approbation of the whole, and besides if not the whole, how then the Meeting,
as in page 3. of the Cry, etc. And how that several times one after another I
told and signified unto them, That if the said Seven did not end it fairly and
impartially, that I was resolved to make my Appeal to the Yearly Meeting; and
yet this Man has the hardiness to say, and with which A. B. seemed satisfied
and contented, which never seemed other or further to consent than as before,
and that as only by constraint and force, there being no further or other
privilege offered or allowed me but that or none, and if but a mere matter of
Oyer and Termer, as his own phrase is, yet ought it then to be open and free,
and both the Plaintiff and Defendant with like equal privilege admitted to
appear, and be heard Face to Face before the whole: And as to my objecting
against one of the eight, it was when I saw that it must and would be so, and
no other way, and this is true, and he knows it; and yet observe, that
notwithstanding my objecting against the aforesaid, he was nevertheless chosen
(though allowed and approved my exception) and concerned too, and had a Hand in
it, and that from first to last, though as forehinted, one of another County.

And again, Of the Seven (says he) to whom this Service was by the Quarterly
Meeting committed I was one, and though A. B. is so violently set, and so
bitterly against me now, I suppose I stood fairer in his Opinion than
otherways, having the liberty of Exception allowed him, and making use of it as
aforesaid to exclude one, he might have also excepted against me. To the first,
it was but his Supposition, and if it had been as he fondly supposes, I know
not in the least of any just Cause for it, but was doubtful he was treacherous,
as since have found to be to true; and if I had objected against him, there
would have been as much and no more in it than in the other he mentions, and
that was nothing at all, for that as before notwithstanding my Objection and
their allowance, he was still kept and continued with the rest.

And again, However, says he, we undertook this Service I can truly say for my
self, and believe I may safely say it for the rest of my Friends concerned,
with a conscious regard to the Honor of God, the Prosperity of Truth, and the
Peace of the Church in that place. To which let me say and return, that you are
vastly and widely out, and besides the matter in this, and such your Confidence
for to either conceive or think that by any such Works of Injustice or Evil,
any peace or good should come of it, and how other than to conclude it as no
less than Deceit and Craft, and that in the largest and highest degree, to thus
tell and talk of the Honor of God, Prosperity of the Truth and Peace of the
Church in the doing and practice of those things so apparently unjust, wicked
and manifestly contrary unto both God and his Truth, Honor, etc. And in which,
as apparent you have only sought and served your selves, but have neither
regarded him, the Truth, his Name or Honor, let thy and your fluent and lavish
Tongue and Tongues say or pretend what you will or can to the contrary; for
that tried you are, seen and known by your Fruits, for Words and Pretenses will
not serve, for the Day is broken forth that has and will yet more and more
make manifest and discover you and your Works and Evil Deeds. And further,
After this manner, and accordingly (says he) on the 7th Month 1690. we met at
Reading, and being gathered together waiting upon the Lord, etc. we desired A.
B. who was present amongst us to bring forth what he had to offer to our
Consideration; whereupon he stood up, and made a Speech, telling us he was
dissatisfied with the proceedings of the Quarterly Meeting, because they
refused to let him read his Paper, and instead of giving us his Charges against
W. L. and J. B. he read to us a Writing containing something which he called
Reasons, why he was not satisfied to bring his Case before us, etc.

Answ. And that they were Reasons, and just and weighty ones too, I think that
neither he nor any of the rest can refute, or are so hardy as to deny, as in
page 5. of the Cry, too tedious to so over and over again, to take up time, and
swell my Book; and if dissatisfied, why so in haste impatient as not to give me
time of further Consideration, seeing I have told you that I was in truth and
reality dissatisfied, and so free as to tell and acknowledge before you, that I
was sorry that I had placed such a disappointment upon you, as also that I was
willing to pay you for your loss of Time and Charges; and what could I have
said or done more without wrong and abuse to my self? Which shall leave to the
Impartial to judge.

And as to the other part, as in page 10. wherein he accuses me with
reflecting foully upon the Quarterly Meeting, he has wronged and abused me
therein, for that all that I said or did allege, was only thus, or to this
effect, viz. Forasmuch as I conceive that the Meeting was oversway'd by
Personal Affection in some particulars toward the Party complained against, to
act so directly contrary to both common Justice and Charity, by their refusing
the public reading or hearing of the Petition, as in page 5. of the aforesaid;
and is a conceiving a thing a matter of such crime, or so immodest an
expression, or reflecting foully upon the whole, as he has thus insinuated? If
I had affirmed, or charged it on them all, he might have said something. And
again, in the forecited, what is here written relating to the Quarterly
Meeting, is not in the least intended by way of reflection upon the same, etc.
notwithstanding the great noise and clutter that he makes about it to fill the
Ears of his Reader withal. And a word or two more, and that is, Is it likely,
do you think, or any in their right senses, that the Quarterly Meeting did,
would, or could refer to them the said Seven they knew not what? though I
cannot, and dare not deny but that O.S. and others in party might do it, in and
with a mental reserve to themselves, viz. as the Hand, the Head, and the Eyes
to the rest; for that as in page 3. of the Cry, The Meeting was held and wholly
kept in the dark: And as to the other part of his, page 11, 12. wherein he
gives a further relation of my refusing the committing the hearing of the said
Difference unto them, the which I have given my Grounds and Reasons for before,
as also referred the Reader to those pages and places where he may see and read
them, not intending, as I said, to fill my Book with such over and over, should
I every where follow and trace him; and that if they had such power, and so
large allowed or given them, as to call and appoint Meetings at their pleasure,
the which I much questioned, as well as think that they are not at all able to
either demonstrate or prove, however that they might have had the conduct of
more and longer patience and forbearance, if as they pretend were so weighty
and sensible in their Meeting of the fear and presence of God, as to have
waited in the sense thereof for a longer time, than so upon the have,
especially in a case where the party was Conscientiously scrupulous, than to so
soon after a disappointment in the Morning, to immediately appoint another to
the same end and purpose in the Afternoon; and as in respect to the
Constitution and Qualification of it, I refer the Reader to page 3. as before,
as also do yet, and still affirm that, as acted by them, they were contrary to
all Methods, Orders, Practices or Presidents in the case: and as he has not, so
neither he nor they are able to refute it, or give evidence or proof to the
contrary; neither yet had you any such power either given or allowed you to so
convene, it being a method so manifestly contrary to Peace, the end proposed,
or to ask or demand any such Matter or Question of them: And seeing, as you
say, that their Judgment was that A. B. was the occasion of those Disturbances
and breach of the Peace, though never looking so high as to the Cause, but
accounted the Effect for it, or as if you wanted others to give the sense you
pretend to have received in your Waitings, etc. Why were you not, I say, as
zealously circumspect as to ask of them how and wherein it appeared I was so, I
mean as with respect to either Words or Actions originally in themselves; but
you had gained the point, and your end, and that was enough and sufficient, and
then there had been no need to have written such a Paper in order to be quiet,
that was never yet proved to be either Cause or Occasion of Trouble, unless for
meeting amongst you, and using my Christian Privilege. And as to that of
Smiting, etc. I do challenge all and every individual of you, to show and prove
where, when, or that ever any Unchristian or unseemly Word or Expression came
out of my Mouth, though have largely and apparently shown, as in page 20. of the
Cry, and elsewhere, such harsh Bitterness or Words of Cruelty, as would even
astonish one to hear, as well to the shame and defiling the Mouth that spoke
and uttered them: And yet for all this, they do go on notwithstanding, and
continue their feignedness after their old manner in their Paper or Letter sent
me, as in page 13. A Reviler, etc. and dated Reading the 24th of the 7th Month,
1690. with their Hands to it, and Edmund Orpwood's to it too, though I have not
observed it to be any where else, and yet still the Seven, and we the Seven,
etc. though sometimes one Seven, and sometimes another, and yet this and all
the while in their Waitings upon God, and in the Love, and tender Love of God,
and its Rising in their Hearts, etc. And wherein they do again advise me to
forbear any more smiting of my fellow Servants, and disturbing the Peace of the
Meeting, that had never broke it, except by the discharge of my Conscience,
though W. L. J. B. and W. S. etc. have often and frequently done it, as in my
Charges against them, page 8. and 9. of the Cry, etc. and in diverse other
places; and yet all this, as they pretend, under the most weighty and ponderous
sense of the Love and Counsel of God and Tendrings, etc. Yet never did it so
much as come into their Hearts, nor the least of their Intentions, to either
blame or rebuke them for it, the chief and principal Authors and cause thereof;
and yet in the Conclusion of the aforesaid to be so deceitful and hardy, as to
so dissemblingly subscribe, We are thy Friends, heartily wishing thy welfare.

And after this they sent me another, and signed by W. S. on the behalf of
himself and twenty one more, as they say; though it is pity that we may not
know them, wherein they charge me afresh with breaking the Peace of the
Meeting, and smiting my fellow Servants, but yet alleged not so much as in one
particular case, how and wherein (though I have been open and plain in my
Charges against them, as told them where done, the Day of the Week, the Day of
the Month, the date of the Year, with both Circumstances, Words and Actions, as
in page 8. and elsewhere of the Cry) as if their Words raised Matter of Fact,
and their only Say-so's were proof sufficient to it. And therefore to the end
the Reader may know how little Credit, and less Example of the Christian Life
the aforesaid W. S. is of at home to his Wife and amongst his Family, that has
thus assumed and taken upon him as a Ruler or Governor of the Church, by his
thus Signing, or personating the signing of Papers, and that not only for
himself, but for and on the behalf of others, viz. one and twenty more of his
hid and obscure Associates, and which, to judge of them by their
Representative, may not reasonably be thought to be either better or more
conscious than their Foreman, who with him have all of them charged me with
Matter of Fact; but if you will have Proof, and Say-so will not do, you wholly
mar the matter and mistake, they are none of that sort; and although I was so
modest in my former, viz. the Cry, as only to mention things in generals, yet
seeing he has made no better use of my Civility, shall now be more plain and
particular in them, which as alleged, and in charge against him, take as
follows. The first by his Daughter, and the other by his Son, as also to be
observed how just with the Lord that it should be so, that his own Children,
the fruit of his Bowels, should be thus permitted to discover and bewray his so
bad and evil Conversation; and if not so, or true, why did he not instruct and
educate them better, before he had took upon him thus to sway and rule: But to
the matter, the Daughter being abroad, or out at Service, and her Master and
Mistress intending for her discharge and turning home, she did thereupon fall a
Crying, and made a fearful noise and ado, saying, That she would not go home,
for if she did, her Father would knock her on the Head, or kill her: With
further adding, That he had knocked her down stone dead in the place; and that
he had been so severe toward her Mother, that she was about to make away with
her self. The second the Account of his Son, and the which he declared in the
presence and before several Witnesses, which was, That his Father had been so
cruel and severe toward him that he had kicked him from one side of the Wall
to the other like a Football, and thereupon falling into a rage, he cursed
both his Father and all the rest of the Quakers in Reading, etc. But if as
nimble with his Fist and Feet as rude and lavish with his Tongue, there is no
doubt at all concerning it, that was so bereft of common Civility, as to call
me Brazen-face, Impudence, etc. and that in public too; and did O. S. etc.
ever hear such Billingsgate Rhetoric, to use his own phrase, from A. B. by
either Word or Writing?

And then goes on, and in page 15. he gives further account, that upon a second
and further Consideration, that I did notwithstanding consent, etc. at a
Meeting held at Reading, the 4th of the 3d Month 1691. But how far, and to what
end did I consent, but according to what is in their own Paper, viz. For them to
hear, and put an end to the Difference, that being their Business and Concern,
as owned and acknowledged by them, and not for Sentence or Judgment. And going
on, The which Charges of mine, (says he) being attentively heard, duly
weighed, and well considered of in the Fear and Counsel of the Lord, (observe
their solemn Protestations to a Lie) we gave our Judgment, etc. I say again,
pray observe what a Latitude and Liberty these Men can and do take, who dare so
confidently to tell of their Attentiveness, duly hearing, weighing well,
considering and that in the Fear and Counsel of God: Notwithstanding one of the
said Seven, viz. Benjamin Antrobus by Name (as forehinted) did, and that before
my said Paper of Charges were much more than about half read, break forth into
the following Imprudent Interruption and apparent Disorder, by insinnuating as
if that it rose in his Heart, that the said Paper of Complaint or Charges was
but as Fuel for the Fire, as in page 30. of the Cry, etc. Therefore what will
or can Men think of him, them, or of the Relation they have given, that have
thus and so played the Idle-like, false, and treacherous Men, by speaking and
making mention of the Name of the Lord, and their duly waitings in his Fear and
Counsel, to give the face of Truth and Authority to these and such things, as
if he were such another, or like unto themselves. But remember Men and Mortals,
that he is not, nor will not be mocked; but such as you sow, such most
assuredly must you reap, and that although he wait and tarry long, yet that a
Reckoning Day will come, and an account to be given both by you, and all of the
Deeds done in the Body, whether they good or whether they be evil, and remember
that you have been warned.

The next thing that follows, as in page 16. A Reviler, etc. Is the Paper of
their wicked and unjust Judgment, which has been spoken to sufficiently
before, and the thing he therein recites, is my exclaiming so extremely against
it, as in page 15, and 16. which I doubt not but the Reader will conclude with
me, that if I did, I had cause enough given me for it.

But a Word further, this being, as said, the Hinge or main of your All;
therefore again (do not I say) so mistake, if should be so Charitable, as to
count it so, for that your Work was neither to determine or give Judgment, or
do any thing more further or otherways than only and alone as signed under your
own Hands, the ending or putting an end to the Difference; for of this side, or
short of it, ye did nothing as in the true sense of doing; for as you know its
so and true, so a Word as common and phrase frequent amongst men, chosen to the
like end, when asked by any, What have ye done? Is the matter ended between
such and such? Which if not, their answer is usually, We met so and so, etc.
but could do nothing. And that what they meant by doing nothing, was because
that they did not, or could not end the Difference, make Peace, the alone work
or business they were to do, chosen and appointed for, is clear; for here is no
room at all for determining, etc. or any thing more or less, than only ending
the Difference.

And therefore what further alleged, as with respect to the satisfaction or
dissatisfaction of either the one or the other of the Persons or Parties
concerned, is foolish, frivolous and impertinent to be offered or made use of
in the Case, they all and every one of them being things and matters only
depending, the others being the main, and sum, and substance of the whole. But
it may be that O. S. and his Companions in this Work, were in such a Popish
Dream, that they imagined themselves so Divinely qualified (though thus short
of and below the Common Justice of Men) and in such a station as ought to be
both taken and believed for Apostolical, and that whatsoever they do or act as
unaccountable, or being questioned any further about it, I am afraid, I say,
that they are for a thorough fixing of what they imagine, and that for no less
than a divine and irrevocable Church, Censure or Decree: And as to the power or
disposing Power that rest's and resides (as his imports) with Reflection on the
Quarterly Meeting in such Matters and Cases, I matter not how little I know,
nor how much I am wanting in my Judgment concerning them, or any at all, if you
propose or intend not Justice, more than Method, Truth than matter of Form,
therefore shall not trouble my self to dispute Prerogatives or the Power either
of the one or of the other, till I find a better management.

And again, if O. S. do account it such a starting aside, because I at first
refused to refer it to their hearing, yet one would think he might have been
more sparing, since as it is granted by him, I have so strated in again.

And as to that part quoted by him out of page the 4th of the Cry, relating to
my refusing the committing of it to the said Seven, where he alleges as if
there were nothing in it of Reason, or that looks like Reason; And a little
further, so far is he (says O. S.) from Offering of Reason, that it rather
shows his resolute Will than Reason. And further saying, let Him assign any
Sentence out of it if he can, etc. therefore shall only Cite what have there
alleged and proposed for such in page the 5th. of the Cry, etc. viz. As I am
herewith (alluding to the foregoing) very much dissatisfied, so I cannot with a
clear Conscience be free to the bringing in such an evil President for time to
come, without Witnessing against it. The President dissatisfied with, was a
Condescension to have the matter thus gone upon or prosecuted, until first
publicly Read and Communicated to their said Meeting, to whom it was directed
and intended, and the Reason for it, I being denied of that which I conceive
common Justice amongst Men, leads and teaches to do according to both the
Law of Nature, and the Law of God, and which likewise common Charity obliges
all sorts of People of whatever Nation or Profession of Religion, unto which is
to give at least the hearing of any ones Petition or Complaint, if they do not
care or think fit to take any further notice of it.

Now if there be nothing of Reason in all this, nor that looks like Reason,
when as in the first place I have assigned common Justice, in the Second, my
dissatisfaction, etc. in the Third, my Scruple as with respect to Conscience;
in the Fourth, the Law of Nature; in in the Fifth, the Law of God; in the
Sixth, the Law of Charity, then indeed I must be forced to give up the Case,
and acknowledge that I know not what is Reason, neither can I believe that
there is such a thing as it in the World.

And as to the other part of the page, or pages, he is so at, in and out, to
and fro, ramble and round about, that it is hard for a Man to trace or follow
him in such his Crooked and uncertain Paths; and to what he further spends
time, and wastes Paper upon, by telling his Reader, that sometimes I call my
Paper of Complaint a Complaint, and anon a Petition and Complaint, etc. its not
worth the further nothing, than only to denote the humility of his and their
Supplicant, who in hopes to be prevalent, was willing to put himself under the
Circumstance of the meanest and lowest State he could think of or find out. And
further to this says he, He adds a Postscript, as in page the 6th. in which he
says are two weighty Reasons for a Public hearing of the Petition, first
because the Grievances therein contained, relate to the Monthly Meeting, so not
a private nor personal Concern, and if this be true (says he) it makes against
him, for its evident, that the Monthly Meeting did not employ nor empower him
to make a Complaint.

To which do return, that both my self and the rest were free Men, and could do
it without either Power or a License from either O. S. or them; and further,
that it might relate both to the Monthly and Quarterly too, notwithstanding not
employed either by the one or the other of them, and also both can, and still,
dare to Exhibit a Complaint without either the leave or knowledge of any, or
either of the aforesaid, when Managed after this Rate and manner, for that we
are Men and not born Slaves, as he and some would make us, but perceive he is
still upon the mistake, for I never nor no where have said, that it was the
aggrievance or Complaint of the Monthly Meeting, but of Friends belonging unto
it; and what if it had come but only from one Man or a single Person, must it
therefore have been denied to have been heard or Justice done him in his Case?
therefore let me further say, as in page 13. of the Cry, etc. I pray God break
the Bands of all such Oppression, and deliver every honest Man, etc. from
having need or coming under their Hands in expectation of either Justice or
Relief.

And than again says he, Its worth the Reader's noting, how falsely he dealt
with the Monthly Meeting, etc. But in what, or wherein, he is short and sparing
for want of Ground for his Charge, and which after a great round about, the
chief Ground of the accusation from no other Cause, but only because that I did
not immediately or at the next Quarterly Meeting at Ore, bring forth my Charges
against W. L. J. B. yet did the Paper of Complaint containing the grievances of
several others beside myself, as most proper to be first, though no Limitation
given or time set me by them, nor either set or proposed by my self, therefore
better worth the Reader's noting, how strange and at what a venture rate this
Man acts, and runs in his Stigmatizing and Calumniating; for how could I deal
falsely by them, or any when under neither Promise or Obligation, as in the
foresighted.

And then goes on, and makes as if that the only alone Cause and Reason of
Friends refusing to record their said Paper, of wicked and unjust Judgment, at
the ensuing Quarterly Meeting held at Newbery, was partly or only because of my
troublesome Behavior there, and partly because some Friends were willing to
try what might be done, as with respect to my Repentance and Recovery. As to
the first, I was it may be a trouble and a troubler unto him, for so asserting
and undauntedly constant to the Truth and my Principles, and could not by any
means be prevailed upon to submit or truckle under his and other the Seven,
such wicked and corrupt Designs, and crying against their Oppression, and
telling of my appealing to the Yearly Meeting, in case I could not have Justice
there, which its most probable did so startle and awaken him, that he, even he
himself, did then and there, and at that very time, offer for another Meeting,
and proposed both the Method and Manner of it, and mentioned the Names of some
of them he thought most fitting and capable to be assistant in it, as
occasionally, is elsewhere hinted, though left wholly out in his Narrative, and
which makes good and fixes the Truth of my Title upon him, The Treacherous
taken in his Treachery, etc. And as to the other part, of some being
disatisfy'd with the Reading of the aforesaid and the whole against the
Recording of it, is nothing but the Truth, and truly and really so; and if
not, seeing he is such an Artist at it, why did he not procure a Certificate
from the Friends of the said Meeting to testify to the contrary, as was
procured by him from them of Charlow, of which you may hear more hereafter; and
yet for all this, he goes on and tells the Reader, That he had given a plain
and true Account, etc. So hardy and void of Shame is he, that although he
pretends to tell of A. B's. shifting Tricks, yet in the mean thus apparently
laying open and discovering his own. And yet after all this, to so confidently
outface and deny it, viz. As being the Proposer of the said Appeal; and what
value has such a one of his Credit, that is so void of Truth with his Tongue?
And this further, what if through his subtilty and craft, the Writer to the
Meeting was so prevailed upon, as not to Record it, he being one of the Seven
also, which whether, as he has said, remains still as a Question, seeing he
can so say, and unsay to serve himself and ends, and the which he uses as a
trick to invalid the force and truth of my Narration; yet if not Recorded, and
should grant it so, there is a Record of the Truth and Verity of it in his own
Heart and Conscience that will not be blotted, nor never can be razed out
neither in Time nor Eternity, except he be humbled and repent, how short soever
he does or may pretend as with respect to his Memory; but treacherous and false
as in one, so in all; for neither was Stephen Crisp or George Whitehead either
mentioned or proposed by me, or any one else, but wholly and alone by himself,
as can and do appeal to the Friends that were there for my Witness.

And what if by my Letter afterward, I mentioned a necessity to appeal, does it
at all invalid the Truth of what I have asserted, as with respect to the
proposing of it at the Quarterly Meeting at Newberry? surely no, and but an
Insinuation and Imposing upon his Reader; and whether, as my words were, if he
had honestly cited them, viz. necessitated as it were to appeal from time to
time, both plain and apparent that the Appeal was not new, but old and
depending.

Again, He has, says he, represented things in his Book for otherways than in
truth they were, but he is hobled in the doing it, that from his own Book, his
falsehood appears, etc.

Answ. But shows not either how or wherein, and further makes the ground of my
refusing to stand Trial before the said Seven, whom the Quarterly Meeting upon
my Complaint had referred it to, because my Complaint was not openly read, etc.
To the first part O S. is still, as always besides the matter, to so tell and
talk of Trial, Trying, etc. for I was no Criminal, then no need of trial, but
the Plantiff or Accuser, nor a Prisoner for Sentence, Judgment; but the matter
as rightly stated, is truly and only thus, viz. Two or three Friends are at a
difference, and they choose Arbitrators of their Neighbors to make up the
Breach, and set them at Friendship again; in the which case, as thus truly
stated, there is no need of either Judge, or Judges, Jury, or Trial, but Wisdom
and Honesty in the Persons so chosen for to both do and answer the end of their
Choice, viz. to set the Offended at one again; which had the same been found,
and that in the least degree in you the said Seven, the matter had been, no
doubt, made up, and the Difference between us ended long ago; but O. S. and the
rest are so much for Oyer, in their own Case, and more for Terminer in
another, that they have mist the Point and lost the Case again: And as to the
other [a word more] you being only such, viz. Arbitrators or Peacemakers, why
may not a Person so concerned, especially when can give a good and sufficient
Reason for it, as in page 45. of the Cry, and part of which is also cited by
him, viz. If dissatisfaction with the first Choice, the said Seven be permitted
the privilege of a Second before a great number: And is it not common and
frequent among Men both to allow and do it? and yet what a Criminal would O. S.
make me to be, for but desiring or requesting the same. And why was not the
Complaint read in the said Meeting? And ought it not of right to have been read
there, and in the Audience and hearing of them to whom directed and intended?
And are they not set up and held to that end and purpose? But O. S. you may see
is for no such just and impartial Methods, whereby each, all, and every Member
may be made partakers of the like liberty and privilege: And again do say,
that the Quarterly Meeting could not appoint them a Work that they neither knew
nor understood themselves, as more at large in page 3. of the Cry.

And what Justice do you think in Reason may be expected from O. S. and such as
he, in case it should be granted as the Meeting's Act, that so accounts of an
Appeal, and that in a Religious and Conscious concern, and that to the most
Ancient and Reputable of the Society?

And further, out of page 6. of the Cry, viz. That I did not refer the matter
to the said Seven, etc. without a Conditional Reserve: Which is true, and I own
it so, but yet but the same, and no other reserve than what I had told and
signified unto Friends at the said Meeting, both over and over again; and
therefore if a Reserve, not a private or secret one, but such as was not only
sincere, but honest and reasonable too; if it be either Honesty or Sincerity
for a Man to look for and expect Justice and Impartiallity from you in his
case, especially when he made Request for Justice against Offenders; and
therefore how so prone to Contention and Quarrelling in it, he idly charges
me with for telling the Meeting, and continuing in the same mind, that if not
ended fairly and impartially, etc. yet I intended to make my Appeal. And what
Sincerity can Men reasonably think is in the Minds and Breasts of such as would
put a limit, and lay a Bar to hinder an Appeal for Justice, which is permitted
by the Laws; and the privilege of every Englishman, and allowed of in all the
Courts of Judicature in England, and by those agreed on good Orders too;
acknowledged and allowed of by themselves: And when I, as before signified my
said Intention of Appeal, did not John May, one of the said Meeting, both
second and allow it, by saying at the same time and Meeting, viz. or that I
might bring it back to them again; therefore it is to be thought that O. S.
wanted Matter to help make his Book bulky, else would never have been thus
found, as the Proverb is, Building Castles in the Air; And had I not good cause
given to suspect their Sincerity, viz. the Seven, who have since proved
themselves so Treacherous.

And again, so fraudulent and falacious is he in his still continuing, doting
and dreaming about the Authority of their Wicked and Unjust Judgment, as in p.
20. to use his own Phrase, That he runs himself a Ground most shamefully, by
not making any manner of distinction between Doing and Acting a thing with
Judgment, that is, discretion, and passing, pronouncing, or giving of a
Judgment, Sentence; I think that sober People should be very cautious of being
over credulous to the Words of any that dare use such Sophestry and Craft, lest
they hazard putting out of their own Eyes, and then made to grind at their
Mill; and then scoffingly draws the like crafty Conclusion from it, viz. That
it is a sign he is a Man of small Judgment himself, and if have a mind to have
Business done without Judgment, they may send for him, etc. To the latter part,
And if any of Treachery and Craft, I know not the Man under the like
Circumstances that can exceed him at that work. And again in the same page, To
what purpose do Persons hear Differences, but to end them? I say so too, and
the only Point in Differance betwixt us, for had thou O. S. and the rest of thy
Companions done that, you had done all the whole, and the Controversy had soon
been ended, but you did not Rightly hear as fore-hinted, nor at all or in the
least end it, and therefore with a twofold witness you are found Guilty, and
Condemned by your selves, even out of your own Mouths.

And then further, tells his Reader, that A. B. has another exception against
them, meaning of the Seven, and is angry that we gave any Judgment at all,
alleging that we were not appointed for Judges, but Reconcilers.

Answ. And, if he were angry, shall appeal to the Reader, if not cause for it,
seeing what he alleges, is both true, owned and acknowledged, confessed, yea,
and signed to by themselves, as in page 15. of his Reviler; and therefore as in
his to me, whether O. S. does not show his own Folly (it being as cited, so
granted) as both the former and the latter does his falseness. But enough of
this, it being as I may say in a manner the subject of the whole, and every
part of this his Work, viz. The Treacherous taken in his Treachery, And
therefore may I not further add, and that justly too, and return upon him and
all the rest in his to me, viz. What a Contrivance has he and they made
through such there Partiality by respect to Persons more then either Justice or
Truth, to both continue and perpetuate Discord and Strife, etc. that as
confessed, as before hinted, were chosen to make Peace, and put an end to the
difference, as also to be observed, there is as little occasion, except to swell
his Book, for his so telling of flying off, or one on either hand, by one or
the other of the party concerned, seeing the thing as proposed, and the matter
assigned was never done, nor never endeavored in a true and Christian method
in order thereunto. But to O. S. one thing more, for it is pity but he should
have his due, seeing he so much deserves it, and that is in such his Falseness
and Treachery, in his quoting or citing out of mine, which at present take only
these two following Instances, the first of them out of page 6. of the Cry, and
inserted in page 5. of his A Reviler, etc. where he thus words it, viz. That it
seems that the difference was but flenderly grounded (alluding to my charge
against W. L.) if it wanted to be made out by Remarks made upon his Person and
Qualification. Whereas, as forehinted, my words were these, viz. Remarks made
upon both his Charges, Person and Qualification; where it is to be noted, that
the principal and most material Branch, or part, is wholly left out and omitted
by him; as the like in what he has cited out of page 13. of the Cry, where he
words thus, viz. A Meeting intended for Judgment and Sentence, etc. (though I
question not that he and the rest of them intended o^ denied it for any other,
as their Actions make appear, whatever they have said or signed) whereas my
words were these, viz. a Meeting not intended for Judgment, Sentence, etc. but
hearing and ending the Difference. And again, because he tells me, as with
disdain, in page 4. of his A Reviler, Of the profane Hands that mine (meaning
my Books) may happen to come into, shall therefore discover to the Reader the
Qualification of one, what if I should said, an Author of his, but am sure can
prove an Informer, who upon occasion happening to be speaking of our honored
and esteemed Friend George Fox the Elder said thus, or to this effect of him,
viz. Either that he was a Rogue, or a very Rogue, or that he believed him to be
so. But a Word more, which is enough, and do think more than enough to this
matter I have been so often, and large upon, as with respect to O. S. comparing
of himself and the rest to a Judge in Commission for Oyer and Terminer, is also
as wholly wrong, and a false and Treacherous comparison, and they widely out
and besides the matter, as often hinted and alleged, for that you were not
for, or to be as Judge or Judges at all, but Reconcilers; and one would think
that there were no need for to tell you so often what your selves have told
others, and have signed and given forth to, and that in Print under your Hands,
as in page 15. of the Reviler, etc. Neither was your Commission, if I may call
it so for Oyer and Terminer, viz. to hear and determine, but to hear the
Grieviances, and to put an end to Differences; And therefore, rather to be said
for Oyer and Salvo, to hear and unite, or Oyer Salvo expiato, to Hear, Unite,
Satisfy, Pacify and Appease: but instead of making use of Salvo, applying a
Plaster, or at all for healing, you have made such Corrosive Incisions in the
Wound, that have laid open to the very Bone-like unskilful Empericks, then good
Physicians to disect, cut off, and destroy the Life, then endeavoring to
either Salve or save it, and yet how often and frequent is O. S. still and all
along even throughout his whole book, a harping upon this String, though it
gives such a false and uncertain Sound. But yet nevertheless and for all this,
let me say the Foundation of God stands sure, notwithstanding the Sandy
Foundation of Men's Building are thus shaken, do totter, reel and and are ready
to fall. But if any should ask and say, What then do thou count as the
Foundation of God, that is stable and unmovable. To which do answer, Truth,
Righteousness, and Justice, and that through all Generations, and the which
these Men having so knowingly ommitted and thus swarves from, have thereby
plunged themselves as into a Labyrinth of Confusion and Darkness, I mean as in
respect to the Case and Matter depending betwixt us. And yet for all this, in
page 20. of his, A Reviler, he is so void of Reason, rash and desperate, that
he affirms, that it is a folly next to Madness to say as I did, that they,
viz. The seven were to hear and end all Differences but not for Judges, or to
give Judgment, on which shall leave the Reader to make his own Observation,
when he takes a view of their own Paper, in so many words, that says To hear
and end the Difference, was the end for which they were appointed, as in page
15. of the forecited, as also in the Cry: and surely no rational Man that shall
read this, but must conclude of him, that if not Mad, yet little less then
discomposed.

And then proceeds further, as in page 12. of his Reviler, with which
endeavors to insinuate into his credulous Reader, as if I had abused him at
pleasure, because I affirmed his proposing the Appeal and the Originally, and
Author thereof, which I account no abuse, if he does, because its so and the
truth; and he knows it too, as well as I, what ever may pretend, as with
respect to his Memory, if his Heart were honest, and his mind sincere? But of
this before, and more as it falls in course.

And further, citing what I charged upon him in page 42. of the Cry, which was,
as with respect to his amazement and seeming great Surprise, endeavoring for
flight and obscurity, when I met and spoke with him at Grace Church Street
Meeting. Answer to the which he does but as beg the Question, as with respect
to his Innocence, or not knowing that he had done any thing for which he need
hide himself from me, and further with this Addition to it, viz. that he did
not know before that I counted my Self such a terrible Body, that the sight of
me should affrighten him. To which do return, and if not afraid O. S. why in
such have for to get a way to hide? as in page 42 for I had neither Whip nor
Rod in my Hand, nor so much as Thought in the least of any outward Punishment
on thy Body; but as the good man says, so its found and made good in thy Case
viz. That the wicek flies when none pursues, etc. save the invisible Hand
from which neither thee nor any can hide, which is more terrible and
affrighting to the Wicked then a thousand Witnesses of Men; and it was that
without doubt, and not me, that made thee so afraid, and to seek for a place to
hide.

And as to his charging me with, In and Out, Staggering and Inconstancy, I
think no one under his Circumstances has less cause to Charge another with, the
thing he is so Guilty of himself, as witness his Proposing for a Reference
before Ancient Friends, as before, and yet his afterward declining and denying
it both, as well as in his offering me ample and free Forgiveness that he
counted such a Criminal, as in a Letter sent me from Abington, dated the 6th of
the 12th Month, in 1695. Yea, and that three or four Years after their said
Judgment they placed such a Weight upon, and annexed the Divine sense and
Counsel of God to it with such Confidence, for so much as offering or
attempting the Reading of a Paper in the Monthly and Quarterly Meeting, after
it was given forth against me as in page 22. of his A Reviler, etc. And page
23. as one of as little Conscience, for my more then ordinary Condescension in
the Offering of forgiveness to those that had in no small degree offended me,
yea, and that after my said Book the Cry, was both Printed and good part of
them Published and given forth; his words being these, viz. I desire and
entreat thee to call in thy Books again, and it shall be Excepted, be
Satisfaction, and so Let the Controversy be ended. Therefore with what
Conscience or Face, I say, can this Man thus charge and calumniate others, with
of in and out, Staggering, and Reflection on the account of Conscience too,
that is so in and out, staggering; yea, and reeling too, and not only go
Inconsistant with himself, but with the Truth, good Conscience and sound
Reason: And as for my offering such a free and Voluntary Forgiveness to them,
as in page 18 of the Cry and p. 22 of his A Reviler; if their were nothing else
to be said for it, yet the Prudence of them they have seemed to have their
works in such esteem, might be Satisfaction, who that after they had Lanched so
far as to account some no less then Devils in flesh, yet have in process of
time and on further consideration, moved and endeavored for a free and
Voluntary passing by. But enough of this, seeing I have to do with such as are
accounted Christians; and what if after this, they slighting and refusing my
True and Christian offer, and begin to examine and Catechize me, etc. when I
came to pass by and forgive, if Conscious of it then; for as there is no room,
so as little Reason, I mean without a change to either tender or offer it any
farther; And therefore if Rightly considered, whether it stood me not upon to
secure my Conscience, by continuing my Testimony; for who is he or the Man that
would not keep a reserve in respect to the safety of a good Conscience, I think
none that ever knew the Testimony of one, and their Testimony continued, if
they had any to bear, and rather the more in this case, seeing that W. L. did
not only continue, but renew and make addition to his Pride, the groundcause of
my bearing it against him, etc. And how can the Effects cease, until the Cause
be removed, notwithstanding I endeavor Reconciliation, yet again after the
Meeting at London had prevailed upon me to sign their said Paper in order to
it, and yet, and still refused by them; and it may be also further observed the
small esteem that O. S. has to either Conscience or Testimony, that makes such
a remark to both, upon my reserve to keep and preserve them; but I bless God
that my Conscience is not placed upon the reward of Man or from Man, nor my
Testimony to get me interest amongst them, and it were well if O.S. could say
so too, if in truth; but his Actions shows to the contrary, to all that have
not their Consciences in these as large as his own, notwithstanding his
pretended concern, etc. to thus stand by and abet such things that are both a
shame to Men and Christians, as first by his proposing for an Appeal, and
afterward denying it, by his offering of me Peace, Forgiveness freely; yea, I
say, and to so desire and entreat to it too, as before, after that my Book was
published, and a great part of them dispersed abroad, who but a little before
they accounted me as little other than a Reprobate. Oh the depth of Darkness,
deep Hypocrisy and Deceit: But more of this hereafter, and yet for all this,
to tell another of Babylon, In and Out, Confused, Shattered, etc.

But to return to make good my second and fresh Charge against W. L. as with
respect both for continuing and renewing his Pride, doaffirm and allege by,
and in his so assuming such an absolute prerogative, and passing such an
imperious and controuling Sentence, and Repremand upon the Action and doing of
the aforesaid Ancient Friends at their said Meeting, etc. and who were the most
of them accounted as the Principal Friends in the Nation, G. W. A. R. and J. S.
viz. with diverse and several others, and that by and in his saying, That what
they had done at the aforesaid, relating to this matter, signified nothing. But
this not so strange neither, when we consider his frequent Practices in these
and the like Case, as particularly, in refusing to be assistant to Friends, in
the endeavoring the getting open of the Old Meeting house Doors, as he stood a
Trustee on this behalf, but on the contrary, stirring up and raising of
Scruples and Dissatisfactions in the minds of others, in order to their
Discouragment, notwithstanding that the Friends for the County had written and
advised for it; yea, and further expressed themselves after this manner, viz.
And we do not see how W. L. can be clear without using his utmost endeavors to
give Friends relief in that case: as more at large in page 6. of my Book
entitled, Hidden things revealed, etc. And at another time, when the aforesaid
Friends had upon occasion advised us here, as with respect to choice of
Burgesses to set in Parliament, viz. that we would endeavor and take care to
Choose or Vote for such as might be hoped to be fit Persons for that Service, do
good in their place. But W. L. instead of promoting of it, as desired, did
wholly and with all his Interest and Power, oppose and withstand it all, which
if O. Sampson accounts of it but as small, as with respect to me, yet in
respect to the aforesaid, and more to Truth, he might have counted them, one
would think as A. B. has done, viz. not as such small, but rather great and
Capital ones, and such as most plain and apparently manifest his self-will and
conceitedness, as well as his Emperiousness and Pride, and the which three last
Instances to any impartial Reader, were enough, one would think, without any
thing further (though there may be so many more) to both prove and affix upon
him, the Substance of all, or the whole matter in Charge and alleged by me, as
with respect to his Arrogance and Pride, and what I suggested, as with respect
to the loss of my Papers at London, it is true, and as I have said; and as to
the other part of the same Paragraph, there was no Reason at all, or in the
least as before, but that the Friends at the Meeting at London, should and
ought by the Rules of Equity and Reason, as I conceive, to have found
themselves concerned, etc. and much more to have brought W. L. J. B. etc. the
Offenders to a Sense and acknowledgment of their Unchristian carriage and
deportment; yea, and to have repented of it too. As for A. B. to sign the Paper
in Compliance to their advises and desires, though I dare not say, neither
would give way so much as to think, but that the aforesaid intended and
designed well in what they did; and as in order to the effecting and promoting
of Love and Peace amongst us; but yet on the other Hand, as hinted, cannot but
must needs (likewise) conclude that their was a shortness somewhere (and to
provable to be on O. S. and their part) in that their was no farther care taken
(or at least that ever I could find) in the ordering and managing part, for the
true and hearty going on and through it, in its due Method and Order, and
according to the way of Truth and those good Rules, both owned, acknowledged
to, and commended of amongst us, yea, and that a double Reason for it, ( viz.
so to think) for that I had yielded and condescended so far, and so largely on
my part; but neither did my Signing the said Paper at all, or in the least
bespeak the aforesaid to be Innocents; for if Innocent, their was neither
Ground-room for, cause or occasion, to either desire or advice, to pass by or
forgive, if they had but so much as imagined or thought that their was no
offense committed, and therefore the more apparent that O. S. (as his Phrase
is) entered thus into a Rage himself, to see that neither Policy, Subtilty nor
Craft, could abate my true and sincere Zeal, nor weaken the Stroke of due
Judgment and Reproof that is, I say, come upon, and that has thus Surrounded
him, and that on all and every Hand for his thus temporizing and playing the
Hypocrite. And as to what I have said in respect to G. W. if I have missed the
Truth in it, so much as in one Jot or Tittle, I should be sorry for it, (but if
not, have no cause to Repent, though as a Nathan to a David) the said Paper of
his, being as follows viz. Having heard some of A. B's. Complaints, etc. Then
it seems there were some, and seeing but some of them heard it, naturally
imports that there were remaining, etc. and for all this, without any further
Hearing or Notice taken, whether those heard or those unheard, were true or no,
A. B. in the first place is to be advised, as in page 23 of the Cry, to behave
himself Peaceably, and as a Man of Christian Charity.

Note, Though the aggrieved and complianant, and that against others for their
Unpeaceableness and Incivility to, as well as Uncharitableness, and that in
Deportment, Words, and Actions, both in Meetings for Worship and others, as at
large in page 3.4, 5, 6. of the Cry, where its plainly made appear that they
and they only were the Cause, the Ground, and Occasion of the said Difference.

But again, And as he approves himself a Man of Peace, to own him and record
him as such. Which to me is in a degree an apparent, assent to and an
approbation of their so Wicked and Unjustdoings, in casting out or
Excommunicating me, and upon as unfair and unreasonable Terms, as rightly
considered, to receive and to take me in again, and which would be and prove no
other at all then to give my Heart, my Conscience, and my Testimony to the lie,
that the Lord has raised up, and concerned to stand and to bear against such
gross Impiety and Wickedness; neither was it accounted Unchristian, or want of
Christian Charity in the Ancients in the beginning of the Reformation, nor in
times past among our selves, to Testify and Witness against the Pride and
Lording of the Prelates (and this we know, whoever shut their Eyes) and will
not see that it is not Profession alters Quality, nor Name; the Nature of
things, etc. Yet notwithstanding Stephen Cripes was quite of another mind and
Apprehension, concerning me and them, who only advised me to Patience in the
exercise and management of it toward them, and then (said he) Thou will come
to Reign over them viz* the aforesaid; and then Seconded it, Isay again thou will come to Reign over them; who had both the sight of my Paper and the
hearing of my Complaints, as well as G. W. And my said Paper, as hinted, was in
the Custody of the aforesaid when he Dyed, and through which means the
perfectest Copy came again to be lost. And as to what I further said, as with
respect to the fixing of Judgment, I do still stand by and affirm with this
Proviso, viz. when appointed and intended for Judges or Judgment, that then it
ought and of right it should be fixed upon the Head of the Transgressors,
though as it is most evident and apparent, the aforegoing have Wittingly and
Wilfully spared the Transgressors, and affixed it on the Head of the Innocent.
And as to what he has fondly surmised at the latter end of page 24. of his,
viz. As if my affixing of Judgment in my own case, were not upon what was
wrong, but upon what I called wrong. To which do return, viz. That if what I
have alleged and proved, as well as charged be not wrong, then may the truly
impartial conclude with my Self, that their is nothing that is true or right in
the whole World, but Pride, Insulting, Overruling, Lording over others; yea,
and even Blasphemy it self, are not at all as in the least Vicious or Vices,
but the choicest and highest degree of Virtue and Perfections; neither is or
has it been my drift or end in the least, as insinuated by him, to make my self
Judge in this or any other Case of Difference, but to evidence and prove what I
have, or do allege both from the Rules of Justice, Truth; yea, and in the
accounted order and method of it, to and when have done all, if that will not
prevail, to commend it to the Witness of God in the Consciences of all both of
Friends and Enemies, thinking and believing it to be nothing less then Impiety
and Persecution, to affrighten any with Threats; for if there is nothing that
shall hurt, etc. I am sure no Punishment there. And again in page 25. A
Reviler, etc. to his old story, and continue in still doting about their Wicked
and Unjust Judgment, and insinuating, as if commissionated by the Quarterly
Meeting to do what they did: To which there is no need toretnrn any other
Answer to them then their own Paper, which plainly shows and proves the
contrary, and that they had neither Order nor Commission to do as they did, if
you can or dare believe themselves; but I have been both large and particular
in the foregoing, though can hardly meet with such their Ignorant Dotage, but
to place a reproof upon it, pray read their Paper, and then judge of their
Commission, and whether O. S. to use his own words as in page 24. Has not
broke his own Head, by so contradicting himself? And further, as to his and
their pretended Beseeching Bowels, etc. as in the foresighted page, they are
only words of Fraud, Craft and Deceit, as their Fruits makes appear, and that
as if on purpose to deceive and beguile the unwary Reader, for how a more
favorable Comparison or Construction, but that to like to the Crocodile, that
after he has Ravened upon and Devoured the Body, is observed, as its said, to
shed Tears and weep over the Head, nor indeed used to no other nor better end
than as in page 25. of the Cry, than for me to deny my Testimony, rack my
Conscience, sin against God, and hazard my Soul, seeing I had so often told
them that I was so concerned, and if any thing more or besides this, no doubt,
but for me to fall down, Beg, Beseech, Pray and Entreat them that have so used
and abused me, to be reconciled, etc. and although have so done, as may say in
too large a Degree, in my so far condescending in order unto it, yet have they
nevertheless Refused and Denied, as more at large in the aforesaid, and
therefore I think I have well said, as in the page cited by him, viz. That it
rather bespeaks the Scorn and Detestation of all, then any notice to be taken
of it, by such that cannot be thus Boweled and Beseeched out of their right
Wits and Senses; and therefore let the Reader judge, whether such Boweling,
etc. deserves any better Observation then I have made upon it: and although
thus plain and tite upon them, for their Hanging so together and acting in such
Hypocrisy and Deceit, yet never dare to either say or think of them, or any of
them, as that Heart-discerning Man J. Buy did of those he and they account as
Serpents, which was, that they hung together like a Company of Serpents, etc.
And then as before (after a Frivolous and Crafty preamble about the Weakness
and aggravting my Charges against the aforesaid) he pretends to enter the
Encounter and to prove them so.

But a word or two further, to what he so fondly insinuates concerning the
Weakness of my Observations upon their said Paper of Judgment, before I enter
upon the replying to his less then a quarter, I cannot say by halfs, Comment
upon my Ten Articles or Charges, as in page 25. on that Subject where (says
he) That which follows next in A. B's. Book, is observations both generally
and particularly, upon the Paper that we Seven gave as our Sense or Judgment,
upon the Difference without any Solid matter or fair Reasoning, but a continual
Justifing of himself by mere saying so, without Proof or Demonstration, that I
do not think that any Sober Man can read them without great dislike, etc.

Answ. And if so slender and weak, why did he not recite them, that the Reader
might have Seen and have Judged for himself, but as it has been so, its still
his way to impose such a implicet Belief upon his over-credulous Reader, though
no Sober or Discreet Person, whatsoever he or she be, cannot, I think, but
dislike of such his cunning Subtle Wiles and ways of deceitful Insinuatings,
and yet out of all the aforesaid, that by his own Confession takes it up no
less than some Eight pages, which is near the Sixth part of it, there being but
Fifty in the whole Book, he undertakes to make Answer but to Two of them, viz.
the Second and the Seventh, the weakest and most inconsiderable of all. And
Reader, pray observe how O. S. has done the like in giving the Go-by to the
Principal, as may say or most material of all, as I could mention in several
and diverse Cases, but in particular of that of James Lauels, in such his
Confused and Frantic like Carriage and Behavior (yea, and that in the open
Court, and before all the comers and goers there) as in page 7, 8. of my
Epistle to the Cry, is more at large, nor yet in the case of W. Spickman
neither, who also have pretended with the aforecited for, or as a Person
prophetic, nor yet of himself and others (that in the midst of our such
exposing by T. C. and the rest) had it nevertheless that severe Temper and
Hardiness of mind as to Preach us, so Openly and Publicly there for such Black
Devils, or White, etc. But to return to the foreintended, I think it not amiss
for to let the Reader see, so it be but in one or the first part or Branch of
my said observation, as in page 25. of the Cry, and by it (to use his own
phrase) for him to Judge of the rest, my words being these. And now as to the
matter in Charge against W. L. and J. B. etc. considered, which were all of
them true and no lie or falsehood in any one of them, neither any scruple or
doubt in the least ever shown or objected as to the truth of them, or any one
of them: Was ever the like wicked, corrupt and unjust Judgment thus given forth
before against any one, by Men under your Circumstances, from the beginning of
the World to this day, etc? Unto which shall add, that I think their's hardly
any other besides O.S. that will account this an unfair way of Reasoning, void
of solid Matter, Proof and Demonstration that compriseth as I may say, the
main, the principal, and the whole of it all; for if those my Charges against
the aforesaid, were all of them true (and allowed as such, by their passing
them over with silence) and no Lie or Falsehood in any one of them, neither any
Scruple or doubt in the least ever shown or objected as to the truth of them,
or any one of them, then what have you been adoing all this while (seeing as
before, Silence gives consent to the Truth of it) either in your said
Judgment, or otherways, then only as Men beating the Air, or rather worse, by
your thus endeavoring the acquitting of the Guilty, and by giving such a
Wicked, Corrupt and Unjust Judgment against the Guiltless and Innocent, which
the like was scarce ever given before by Men, under your Circumstances ( viz.
such serious as pretends) consideration and weighing in the Light of Christ,
your Lord, the sense and judgment that we have received, etc. as in page 10. of
the Cry, since the Beginning of the World to this Day.

1. And as to the first of the two Observations, which falls under the second
Head, as in page 28. of the Cry, I having spoken to it before in my Answer to
his Comment upon it, their is no occasion for to further enlarge, shall
therefore only enter upon my Answer to the Seventh, as in page 26 of his, Where
he Cavelleth (says he) at our delivering of our Sense viz. that until he be
reconciled to his Brethren, he ought not to offer his Gift upon God's ALtar.
Unto which may I not say as to that of the forecited, under the second Head,
viz. the greatest piece of Folly, Weakness, and ridiculous Nonsense, I think,
that ever any Man was enjoined, and so ridiculous, the case considered, that it
rather bespeaks the Scorn and Detestation of all, than any notice to be taken
of it.

But if any should object and say, But pray then what is the main, or chief of
the matter you so often hint at and mean, and thus insist upon?

Answ. W. L. J. B. etc. strong Wills and Imaginations, who by and through the
same, have given me to just an occasion of Offense. And if it should be further
Queried, though little cause for it, But pray how and wherein? My answer to
them, as frequently and often hinted, is by such their spiritual Pride,
Lording, Blasphemy, etc. Yet I the Person for all that, that must and shall
crave, seek and cry unto them that so offended me, for Reconciliation, Pardon
and Forgiveness, but in a plainer or more familiar comparison or simily thus,
viz. I being earnest and zealous for my Father's honor and attributes, and
grieved at the breaking of his Laws and Precepts, these Men meeting with me in
the way, have not only seized, but fallen upon, beaten, and fore wounded me for
it; and yet for all this, will they in no ways be Friends and Reconciled,
unless I will come, fall down, submit, and cry to them for the Pardon and
Forgiving of my Trespass, the which I think not any, except O. S. and
themselves, that will account of it otherways, viz. than as before, the
greatest piece of Folly, Weakness, and ridiculous Nonsense as ever any Man was
enjoined, and to much like the dealings of Joseph's Brethren toward him, for
telling of his Visions that the Lord had showed him concerning the Day of
Bowing and Humility, that they could no ways allow or bear to hear of,
therefore sold into Egypt he must and shall be for it, (and a Bondman, though
was born free. And as to that of the Altar, do say of it as I did before; and
what has O. S. offered in the least, to either invalid or disprove it?) That
it is the first time I do believe that ever any one was forbidden the offering
of their Gifts upon God's Altar, and Christ be that Altar: Note, and Christ be
that Altar, I mean under a Gospel Dispensation. And what do O. S. and others
invite and gather unto, if not to him? and yet must they when they come, be
stopped or forbidden to offer! And as to that Scripture cited by him, Matthew.
5.23, 24. it only relates to the Jewish or outward Altar, as he that reads may
see, or that built of Brick or Stone, and not of himself, the inward and
spiritual Altar, as by the precedent and following does most evidently appear,
where our Savior speaking to the same import, says, For I came not to destroy
the Law, [Note, the Law] or the Prophets, but to fulfill. And further, as in
verse. 18. Verily I say unto you, till Heaven and Earth pass, one Jot or one
Tittle shall in no ways pass from the Law, (observe, from the Law) till all be
fulfilled. And again in the following, Whosoever therefore shall break one of
the least Commandments, and shall teach men so to do, shall be least in the
Kingdom of God. And therefore whatever I did by Letter, or otherways in the
forbidding of them, viz. W. L. and J. B. etc. of the offering of their Gifts
until reconciled, it was but a Simily, and a managing of them by their own
methods: And put case I should grant that I was mistaken in it, as O. S. seems
to be, yet I think it not to soon to acknowledge it, nor I hope to late to
learn better; but the outward Altar and Offering is one thing, and the Inward
or Spiritual is another, and the one but the Shadow or the Type, but the other
the Antitype or Substance. And therefore if O. S. or any of them, do think or
account otherways, may I not justly return upon them the Scripture cited by
him, Matthew. 22.29. viz. Ye err, not knowing the Scripture nor the Power of God.
Neither do I, or ever did deny the outward Altar to be God's Altar in its
season and time; but that which was added by me in this present case, was, And
Christ be that Altar, etc. But now to return to the Charges.

The which, says he, He divided into Ten Articles, of which the first is in
their Arbitrary-like, overruling the Monthly Meetings, etc. His proof for this
is, that they positively affirmed, that a matter under debate at a Monthly
Meeting in the first Month, 1690. should not be made the act of the Meeting;
and when so made and recorded, that afterward they still, as apparently,
denied it to be the Act of the Meeting; This was it seems (says O. S.) about
treating with T. C. about opening the Meeting-House-Doors, which T. C. and the
rest of the Seperates had wrongfully shut up; and A. B. in a forward, busy
mind, having got a few others to join with him therein, would needs be
tempering (as I understand) with T. C. about opening of them, and would have
done it in the Name of the Monthly Meeting, (Pray observe, though W. L. the very
Man, as before, that was enjoined it by the Friends that correspond for the
County,) which W. L. ( not J. B. for John Buy was not present at the Meeting,
as appears by the Monthly-Meeting-Book) objected against, that if they would
needs be meddling in that matter, it might not be done as the Act of the
Monthly Meeting, but as their own act; and surely, says he, in a case of that
importance; for it was as A. B. says, to desire them to open the Doors freely,
or upon refusal, to offer them all their Money.

To the first, O. S. has again mist the matter, by supposing what is false, and
a Lie, for a Truth, a practice to common and frequent with him, for that it was
not A. B. that in a forward or busy mind either apart, or by getting others to
join with him that did make the aforesaid Proposition, (though not to be
condemned if he had) it being nothing other or more than what J. Buy and my
self was sent, ordered and commissionated to do by the said Meeting, and that
long before, and did accordingly as ordered, as in Query 1. in my Book of
Queries, Hidden Things revealed, etc. And that in their public Meeting for
Worship, being the 21st of the 5th Mon. 1687. and on the First Day of the Week,
so zealous and earnest were we for and in it, though since deserted by the one,
and denied by the other. And if you would know, and can believe when you do,
the said Proposition was not made by A. B. nor by any he had got to join with
him, but by Andrew Hall, and by him alone, and that wholly and altogether, both
unknown and unthought of by me, as them of the Meeting can witness; though it is
to be noted, that if any thing that looks so much as like Peace, or that tends
to it, is irksom and offensive to him. To the second, where he again insinuates
another Falsehood, by saying, That J. Buy was not present at the said Meeting,
and that it appeared so by the Monthly Book.

To the first, I do affirm that he was there, as also that it was not done by
A. B. and a few others, but by the Monthly Meeting and their Order, and J. Buy,
A. Hall, and D. Bullock, were also ordered and appointed by the aforesaid to
treat with T. C. and R. P. about it. [Note, that this was another, or second
offer, and done too by the Orders and Appointment of the said Meeting.] and by
which the untruth and uncertainty of their Book and Books, (and that no
Recording where no Intrest) as well as of themselves, may be clearly seen and
discerned, therefore no great wonder if what O. S. proposed for an Appeal at
the Quarterly at Newbery, as hinted, as well as of the premised in their
Monthly, be not Recorded, or to be found in them: So what has he vaid or in
the least proposed to either weaken or invalid my first Article or Charge
against them, except Falsehood and Lies will do it?

2. And then to the Second which is, Their passing such a rash and unchristian
Sentence against him, as being a Man of a wrong Spirit, Brother to Bugg, and
like to Rogers and Story; and if they have (said he) judged him a Man of a
wrong Spirit, he has saved them the labor of proving it, having too evidently
proved it himself by the work he has employed himself in.

Answ. And what that work is, the Reader may easily judge to be my witnessing
and testifing against their Insulting, Lording, Overruling, Blasphemy, etc.
And has not both the Papist and other Persecutors, accounted of such as O S.
has done of me, viz. as Envious, Contentious, Railers, Backsliders, Slanderers,
Liars, etc. whose Charity, as well as sight and discerning herein seems much
one and the same, seeing that instead of clearing them of the said Charges, he
has wholly missed, and gives the Go-by to it; and instead thereof seeks
rather to bury with Reproach and Calumnies, etc. And if all the matter of fact
or Crime that you had to lay against W. R. and J. S. was only for the same, the
aforesaid, and no other Cause, I am ready to believe that you have as much
wronged them as its apparent you have done me.

And as to the other part relating to T. C's. meeting me, and thus accosting,
viz. Canker, go thy way Canker: It matters but little to me what T. C. or O. S.
either has or can say, or however falen in or joined with him or them, as
fasly accused, but what they either has or can prove. And this further, had I
been so and such a one, I might happily have been better esteemed by both the
one and the other. And if it should be asked of O. S. or the rest, Why what is
the matter, the crime, his charge? or what has A. B. done? What other Answer
in Justice and Honesty can they return, then only this, Why, he has Charged W.
L. and J. B. which we to Dearly Love, and to great infirmly to either hear or
bear the hearing of any thing he has Written or Spoken against them, as
charging with Lording, Overruling, Pride, Blasphemy, etc. the which although
we are no way able to either acquit or clear them of it: yet notwithstanding
that we may do something, and as much as we can or are able, we will return him
Railing instead of Reason, and Censures instead of Argument; for what more
further or other than this, in all and throughout the whole of his Reviler?

3. The third Article (says he) is against W. L. only, and that for refusing
him the Sight of the Monthly-Meeting-Book; this may be easily answered (says
O. S. because W. L. had no order from them in the Meeting so to do, etc.

Answ. And as much Reason or Power, and no more had he to either keep back or
refuse it, then my self or any other, he neither being Clark, nor the Trust or
Office of Clark, conferred upon him by the said Meeting, as hinted in page the
1st. of the Cry, and acknowledge and confessed unto by himself; and therefore he
being no Clark, but a common Propriator, I had as much aright to as well as
Reason, for to ask and have the Sight of it as himself, or any other: And his
thus telling of the Meeting, and the Meetings Order, etc. there is no more of
Truth in it, as apparent, then in his affirming, that it was A. B. and a few
others he had got to join with him, that so proposed to T. C. etc. or of J.
B.'s. not being at the Meeting; and what a Meeting would O. S. make of the
Monthly Meeting, to deny and refuse to either my self or any their due Rights
or Properties; but it is like the Line and the Balance that is ppprov'd of, and
used by himself, etc. neither have I streached it to far.

4. His Fourth Article (says he) is against W. L. and J. B. jointly, falsely
charging them with endeavoring to Dismember him, and the tying up of his
Tongue, etc.

To which do return, in what manner and degree of the tying up of my Tongue,
etc. was intended, the Fruits of their work do to evidently make appear; as
first, in their Meetings for Business, if I spoke or offered but to speak a
word, however concerned, no notice is to be taken of it, nor answer to be given
by any, no not in any Case, and more apparent in those for Worship, by their so
often and frequent breaking out against me, uncivil Interruption, bidding me to
be silent, and that it was not my place to Speak, as more at large in page 7,
8, 9. of the Cry; And what difference I pray betwixt tying up of the Tongue and
binding the Conscience in a Religious concern? and whether both (pretend what
they will) be not plain apparent Persecution, and as the Seed and Root of it,
and whether bears not the Image and perfect Shape of the Spanish Inquisition in
it is Degree, I shall leave the Impartial to Judge? as also, whether those that
were of the like mind, were not the first contrivers of, as well as centered in
no less than the use of the Gagg, and kindling of those Cruel and Distructive
Flames, etc. as hinted in the aforesaid?

The 5th Article, Their disorderly breaking up and leaving of Monthly Meetings
before the Business depending had been near done; and when Matters have been
just under debate amongst us (for which he gives, says he, several Instances)
one of the 26. of 6. Month, 1690. when he laid these Charges against them, for
which he refers to his Paper of Complaint; but that Paper of Complaint gives
no account of any such Disorderly or Indirect breaking up of that Meeting that
I observed, says he.

Answ. And who could help it if he did not, seeing it is so, and really and
alone the Truth, and as the Reader may satisfy himself, if he please to Read
the middle part of the first Paragraph in page 1. of the Cry, etc. And what if
it had not been there, their were other places and times Sufficient enough to
prove it.

And further, I think, says he, if Friends should hold and continue their
Meetings as long as such Make-Bates would hold them in debate, they would find
that more disorderly.

Note, though it were, as said, in the midst of their Business, and when
Matters have been just under debate by all, which it is most evidently seen,
that whether order or disorder, it is all one and alike to him, and they
Justified and Excused in their disorders by one, and him that pretends to be so
much for them, and so thereby have rather confirmed and made party with them in
it, then either Blaming or Seeking their excuse, which may be taken as a double
Confirmation of their Truth and Verity; yea, and though have made such a manifest
distraction by their resolute Ways and Wills, that they have even left the very
Room where the rest of Friends have been in their Business, and have begun to
settle and go forward with theirs in another; and again after a very little
while, have wheeled about by a back Way, and come into the same Meeting again;
yet all both grave and profound in the sense and view of O. S.

And again, He gives another instance, says he, of a pretended disorderly
breaking up of a Meeting in the 5th. Month 1691. which appears no more then the
former.

Answ. How so? when the first, was in the 6th Month, 1690. and the other in the
5th Month, 1691. near eleven Months difference. And what other proof does he
expect, than the Name of the Persons and Place, when and where acted, I cannot
tell, neither do I know; and seeing that they the Parties so charged be thus
Silent, and stand mute, with respect to their own Defense, it is none of the
least Demonstration of their Truth, and it is being so; And as to the varying,
if their be a Disconcurrence, as before, with respect to the dates, may I hope
both Easily and Reasonablly be excused in me, that had my most perfect Copies
and Papers taken or kept from me, lost, or pretended to be lost, as in page 18.
of the Cry, etc. But what is that material or to the purpose, since accounts
not the thing it self, as either evil Crime or Matters of Fact; and if he
desire Witness, or plead Ignorance of those Disorders, the whole Meeting, who
at one time or another have seen and believed, can give witness of its Truth,
which he questions not, but quibbles.

6. His Sixth Article, says he, Is their encouraging and promoting at least,
if not first projecting, as he conceives several Papers drawn up and signed
against him, etc. This is very idle and silly, says O. S. for he grounds their
projecting, etc. of those Papers but upon his own conception, but for there
encouraging and promoting them, he offers not so much as that.

To the first, although I placed in such easy and modest manner, (yet I might,
and could have been more Positive and Particular in it) as in page 8. of the
Cry, where I have told them that it was drawn up at a private Meeting held at
J. Buy's, and in the which I was Positive, and observe O. S. has not in the
least denied it. Secondly, That as certainly informed that W. L. and J. B. were
both of them present at the said Meeting. And Thirdly, That they would have
Signed it too, had not some Judged it not proper, they being Parties; and if
all the forementioned Instances and Circumstances be not reasonable and enough
to induce one to Believe that they were both the Projectors and Promoters of
them, I shall be contented to be thought as idle and silly as they count me.
And as to the Second, of their encouraging and promoting them, says he, He
offers not so much as that, as little worthas it is. Therefore surely O. S. is
fallen into a Dream, and Groaping as one that is benighted.

But to be yet more plain and particular in it, A. Hall was one of them that
refused or denied to Sign the aforesaid, when carried about to get Hands to it,
as may be further proved, if occasion be; but O. S. need not thus seek to
Create ways to excuse or evade it, seeing in the conclusion of his answer to
the said Article, he has both Owned and Justified them in it, and the thing it
self by saying, But if they had encouraged the Signing of those Papers (yet so
long as those Papers contained nothing but what is true) what evil had they
done in that? But how idle he is in it, shall leave the Reader to Judge, that
accounts it not in the least as matter of fact, though through and by the means
of which, viz. such their Dark and Underhand-dealing, they have as apparent
thus rent and torn us to pieces; and in the which he has but only begged the
Question, and as silly to use his own toward me, to so take and receive as may
say for Truth the main and matter in Controversy, without more or further
proof to it, but it may be W. L. and J. B. have said it, and what need of any
more, and yet what evil is this with him or them. Oh thou contriver,
countenancer and incourager of Strife and Debate, what will be thy Reward for
this work in the end!

His seventh Article, says he, is their causing of great discords and
distraction in our public Meetings for Worship, by breaking up and dissolving
them in the time of his Testimony and Prayer. Note, the which O. S. does not in
the least either deny or seek to excuse, but tells of Discords and Smiting, and
all the Disorders assigned, is only my so appearing, and of Smiting, you have
only his Word for it, for he tells neither how, when, or wherein, nor yet
mentions any one Particular, that I have observed, in all this Noise and
Clamor be has made, therefore may I not return again upon him in his own
Maxim, viz. That Generals serve best for Slanderers to hide under. And
concerning my Testimony, thus further adds, Which was his Testimony indeed,
says he, not Truth's, and therefore was by Friends in Truth testified against.

Answ. But that not my own, but Truth's Testimony, both the nature, matter and
manner, I hope will give Testimony of it is self, for surely hardly any one,
except O. S. and his Associates, that is so hardy and wilfully Blind that
cannot or does not see it, especially such that have Read and Considered my
Articles and Charges against them, and what they are, as Pride, Lording,
Insulting, Blasphemy, etc. and for which my Mouth is to be stopped, and counted
for a Smiter, Disturber one of a wrong Spirit, out of unity, Brother to Bugg,
and like to Rogers and Story. And then back again to there Law of force or
unrevokable Argument, or what else can I term it, viz. their Wicked and Unjust
Judgment, this being, says he, after Judgment had been given against him, etc.
Surely he thinks he has hit it now, he has said enough, and that their is
neither need nor occasion for any more; And all this it seems as would have
thought for my such Contention and Reflection on faithful Friends, but shall
leave others that Read not O. S. to judge of the Contentions, etc. And how
faithful by their Fruits not his or any one's words, as also do call to both
him, them, and all Men that ever heard me or was there, when at any time I
opened my Month, that has heard any such wicked, vile, hard-hearted, cruel and
merciless Words or Expressions, come out of it toward or concerning any, or
either of them, or of any Man else; no, God forbid, for my Heart has been kept
and stood more in awe and fear of him, then as before, to frequent and to often
have had occasion to speak and write of their's, viz. as Divil, Dog, Lion,
Swine, Vulter, Bear; base Abortive, Illigetimate Brat, who have made Shipwreck
of Faith and a good Conscience, and whose Conscience is seared as with a hot
Iron, and for whom is reserved the Blackness of Darkness forever, betraying
Judas's, etc. As more at large in page 20. of the Cry. Oh, how can or dare this
hardened Man, or any of the rest, thus charge or criminate other for Contention,
Reflection, etc. that are found thus idly evil, foul and outrageous
themselves, and that beyond the bounds of all Mortality or Civility as amongst
Men: Oh be astonished, and blush for shame, ye men of falsehood and pride.

Again, in the close of this Article, meaning of me, Then he comes, says he,
to the other three, viz. W. Spikeman and the two Women, for no other cause so
far as I see, says O. S. but that he might thence take occasion to throw some
of his Dirt upon them.

Answ. From whence it may be observed, that he counts them both clear and
clean enough, as with respect to themselves. The First of which has been
charged, and that by his own Children, as before, with Barbarous Severity
toward his Wife and them (and not by A. B. or any invention of his.)

The Second of being with Child before she was Married, the last as a professed
Quaker, and that for nigh this twenty Years, and permitted for a Preacher
amongst them too, that is so unfaithful even in the beginning part of our
visible Profession, viz. the plain and single Language, therefore think there is
no occasion for my casting of more Dirt, where so much and to much before; and
I hope the Reader will place his Remarks, and also observe how ready and
dextrous O. S. is to personate and espouse their case, without the least
Sentence, Censure, or Crimination of wrong Spirit, or out of Unity; surely men
of Sobriety will blush to hear or see them, though O. S. is so double-eyed and
dark-sighted that he cannot.

And then goes on and tells of E. B's Blameless Conversation, though a Person
under the aforesaid foul and evil Circumstances, notwithstanding permitted and
allowed to so oppose and interrupt (and praised too for it, I do not question)
the which I charge upon her as a second matter of fact, if she has owned and
repented of the first. And to that of Ann Moore, thus further, If any (says O.
S.) after so long profession of Truth, is not come so far as to speak Plain
Language, such a one is greatly to be blamed: But yet A. B. is more to blamed,
who after a longer time of profession, is so far gone from it, if ever he was
come to Plain-dealing, as to deal abusively and falsely by others, as his late
Book makes appear. And that is all his Answer to it.

Is not this both an Honest and Ingenious proof, and sufficient, do you think
in so large and so great a Charge, wherein I am concerned both as a Man and a
Christian, for to only tell as his late Book makes appear? Surely he has cause
enough to be ashamed, if he had any in him: And yet to tell, that Generals
serve best to Slanderers to hide under. But that general of his, is but such a
scrap of one, if may account it so much, as that it rather discovers, then
any ways hides or obscures him; and if A. B's late Book has so discovered him,
how lavish is O. S. of others Purses, to run up his Reader to six pence charges
upon his. And as to my Dealing, that it has been plain and honest, I can and
do appeal to all and every one that is honest and impartial, that I have had to
do withal as a Man or Christian. And so dare not he, (and to mention but one
case instead of many, let him remember himself of the subtle Wiles and cunning
Craft that he used toward the Friends of Newberry, he elsewhere mentions to
his defense, when he removed from Boxford thither, under pretense of a Call.
But what should I mention or enter into particulars, in a case so obvious and
manifestly known by Friends of that place, save in one only, and that as with
respect to the House that they had taken for him. And how his Actions, if not
pretended Call, went out like the Snuff of a Candle that leaves a stink behind
it: If he desire more, he may have it in the next, otherways but to plain both
in Heart, Tongue, and Dealing, to be fit for your turn and use, as more at
large in my Book, Hidden things revealed, etc. And by which the Reader, to use
his own to me, may judge of the rest, viz. At what an easy rate both as with
respect to Religion as well as Civils, men are and may be thus exposed by such
silly and reasonless Arguments, and yet for all this, J. B. a Man as ready and
quicksighted as himself, especially at judging at heart and inward part
discerning, told J. W. a Friend of London of that, excepting in that which
related to the difference, None could say Black was my Eye, or to this effect;
and how black in the other, he that runs may read, seeing that I have witnessed
against nothing in him, them, or the rest, but what is so black, and to black
too, if Spiritual Pride, Lording, Insulting, Blasphemy, etc. can or may be
accounted so, and by which their Sense, Discerning, etc. may be also observed,
that censure and judge so apparently contrary one to the other.

And then proceeds, In the other part of the Charge, (says he) relating to
W. Spikeman, he is both envious and unjust, etc. And yet three or four Lines
lower he makes as if but John Veals charge, and he the only author and alledger
of it, and that the aforesaid brought it in a Paper (says O. S.) as he finds
it by the Monthly-Meeting-Book the 26th of the 5th Month, 1692. But how these
two can hang together, I shall leave the Impartial to judge; and upon what an
easy rate I am judged for both envious and unjust, though acted and done by
another, as by his own Confession. And then goes on and tells how that the said
Meeting had ordered Andrew Hall, Daniel Bullock, John Buy, and John Thorn, to
hear and examine the matter at Daniel Bullocks House; and having heard and
examined the matter on both sides as fully as they could, they made report
thereof to the next Monthly Meeting, and then annexeth to the foregoing a kind
of a Certificate, signed by D. Bullock, A. Hall, and J. Buy, and who therein
signify to the like import, viz. That upon the best Inquiry that they could
make, that they did not find W. Spikeman was guilty of the said Complaint.

To which do return, that it may be that they were so just as to ask the Person
charged, whether he were guilty or no, and thought it to be enough too and
sufficient in the case.

But what Inquiry I pray? What hearing and examining the matter on both sides,
and as fully as could be too, when the Witness not there, the Witness not
heard, the Witness not examined? Oh, how to the ruin of Justice and shame of
Religion, have these Men done and acted amongst you, and that under the notion
and pretention of Meeters and Meeting, hearing, examining, and that on both
sides, and that as fully as you could: Oh, I say, would not some we account as
Heathens or Infidels, both blush, be ashamed, and spit and wash their Mouths
after it.

And further, say they, We understand that J. Veal brought forth this Charge by
the Instigation of others. And if so, happily by such that had less Envy, and
more love to Truth and Justice then themselves, it being evident they had
little or none to either.

And as to the Certificate of E. S. following and annexed concerning her dear
Husband, the which she begins with a Lie, by saying, that A.B. in his Book,
printed 1695. has charged W. S. her Husband with barbarous Severity toward
his Wife and Children. For that it is not so, nor none of A.B's Charge, but the
charge of one of their own Children, as in p. 9. of the Cry; and O. S. no doubt
has seen it so, only Ignorance with him in this, as in the rest, is to be the
Mother of Devotion: And yet for all this, in the conclusion thus insinuates,
viz. Judge now Reader, if A. B. be not a bad Man for thus publishing the
aforesaid?

But before do return any farther in Answer to her, I do query of W. L. and J.
B. whether the said E. S. be a Woman of such credit with them, and amongst her
Neighbors, as to have her Name inserted thus in public to a Certificate, or
indeed to or in any thing else, to thus pass as authentic amongst you, one I
say, of so mean and ordinary manner of Life and Conversation, for that (as
charged) she is neither true nor just in her way of Trade and manner of dealing
at home, nor much better when abroad. For was it not told us, as alleged by
some of her Neighbors, that she stole Corn out of the Cock or Sheaf, when in
the Field and a Leesing amongst them, and the which was testified unto us as
so, and for Truth, as you both know, at a Meeting appointed (as I remember) on
purpose for the Hearing of a Difference between E. H. and her self, and
therefore may I not return upon him (that seeming serious Man W. L.) in his own
Language, what he formerly had said of another in the like Case. I believe less
blameable in Life, as well as nearer related, which was, that those the
aforesaid pleaded for or belonged unto, would not so much as touch the said
party with a pair of Tongs: W. L. knows who I mean, but to serve their ends
and interest by them. But again, if her Husband now so dear, the worst that I
wish them that it may continue; for if true, as her own Child have told and
affirmed, she was not so dear to him, if she was, the more unworthy Man he. But
to return by all what I have said, the Reader may see what Tools and
Instruments they are forced to make use of to sign Certificates when put to it,
and thus at a Straight, etc. And no doubt but there was several more of the
like sort amongst her Husbands, nameless One and Twenty he signs in the behalf
of, as in p. 14. of his, A Reviler, etc. But more of this, and such their Paper
and Certificate signing when I come to that of Charlon, given on the behalf of
O.S. and signed by Relations only. I could say much more of W. S. and his Wife,
and the Disorderliness of his Family, as observed and taken notice of by his
Neighbors, and a great deal too, but I think it not worth my while to spend
time and foul my Fingers and Paper about it. And one thing more about their
Certificate signing, as in p. 9. and the 14. of his, A Reviler, etc. in the
case of W. L. which intended to have spoke to before, how it may be also
observed what a Work and a Bussel they made, with what fencing and defense they
beforehand prepared, in order to the managing of the matter, and carrying on
their Clandestine and underhand designs, in order to bespeak his Innocence,
whom both Truth and Justice does condemn; for had it not been time, and time
enough for him and them (if they had been void of beguiling Crafts) to have
given in their temporizing Testimony or signed Certificates on W. L's behalf,
when they saw that in Justice, and according to Truth he deserved it.

8. His Eighth Article (says he) as in p. 31. against W. L. and J. B. is there
setting up an open Standard of Opposition and Division in our, public
Meetings, by their sitting and keeping on their Hatts in time of Prayer, and
the which (says he) in p. 19. of the Cry, he calls an evil and irreverant
Practice, but does herein condemn himself, and strike at them through his own
Sides; for as Evil and Irreverant as he thinks it, it was his own Practice
formerly toward those Separates, with whom he now joins, and therefore he
should have published his own Recantation for that, before he had fallen so
foully upon others; and they do not use to sit (says he) or keep their Hats on
when any is in Prayer whom they have Unity with, etc.

Answ. Though shall undertake and prove, and that in particular, in the
following, that they did it to one, and he none of the meanest, that was out of
unity with them, notwithstanding their such feigned and pretended sense and
discerning, and that in the case when one John Anslow was here, whom they
numbered among the Seperates, and a Ringleader too; but it is to be noted, that
it was before that they knew his Name, so likewise to be observed, that their
discerning is more by Name than any sense of them otherways: But of this more
hereafter. But to the first, that it is an open and public Standard of
opposition, is not denied by him, but what the occasion, or for what that
opposition, no other Reason is assigned by the tendency of his Argument, than
as only being one out of Unity; and I pray you for what so out of Unity, except
for testifying against that in him and them, which is not only out of Unity
with the Spirit of Truth, but all honest and sincere Christians, viz. their
Pride, Lording, Overruling, etc. And that it is an irreverant Practice in all
cases, I mean as with respect to our public and Christian Assemblies, is
apparent; and he has not offered any thing to the contrary, and more
especially in this case of mine, being only for the Reason aforesaid; for if
they have any other ought or charge against me, than only for testifying
against the aforesaid gross and notorious Evils, why do they not bring them
forth, and let the World know what they be? And whatever was my Practice
formerly toward those, I accounted Seperates, yet when I come to see it to be
an Evil, it would be a double one to do it as its usual and frequent with
himself and them, viz. to go on and persist in it; neither do I care how
public my Recantation be, when conscious that I have been in a fault, as in
page 12. of my Book of Queries, Hidden things revealed, etc. more at large,
where I thus say in Query 15. If you think it not your Interest to be thus
naked and plain, for my part I think it to be mine, etc.

And also, before this more fully to W.L. J.B. and the rest, in a Paper I writ
and sent them, and in the which I also cited out of a Paper of George Fox's,
the very sharp and most severe Setence and Judgment that the aforesaid gave
forth against the Practisers of it, and the Spirit that excited them to it in
the case of John Parrot, and the rest that followed him in such his irreverent
and uncomly practice in it. And as to the other part, in his charging me with
joining with those he and the rest counts Seperates, he does but continue his
abuse toward me, as before, for that there was no other joining, or intention
of joining with the aforesaid, then what was advised unto and endeavored by G.
W. viz. in the Way of Truth and Holiness, etc.

6. His ^th. Article is their refusing, says he, to take his Money he laid
down at a Monthly Meeting toward a Collection, etc. Note, the said Collection
was for the general Service of Friends, as directed by the af^^esaid Yearly
Meeting, and another toward the Relief of Friends, in Ireland, who were at
that time under very great Sufferings.

Though O. S. has been thus short in his truly stating of it, least he should
thereby the more discover his own Weakness as well as theirs; for is an act of
Charity evil in it self, if should grant that the Person acting in it, were not
other ways so good as they ought, or could wish they were, although as cited in
the said Charge, as in p. 9. of the Cry, that they had yet nevertheless took of
those whom I suppose they did not own as Members of their Meeting. And as to
the other relating to the Case of Ireland, have both heard and been credible
informed that the Friends of London, had both received and taken toward it, of
other well disposed and Christian minded People, though neither called nor
reputed as Quakers, and was it not rather a manifest token of the hardness of
their Hearts and him, in Justifying of them in it, in being so injurous toward
the Poor Sufferers, upon so trivial and small an occasion as a private Pett,
and no cause for that neither toward me, except for being so plain, and
telling them the Truth, though notwithstanding as in the aforesaid of the Cry,
it was both taken and with mine the Contribution of several others, and well
excepted of to by the Friends of London, appointed the Collectors of it, Men of
as quick discerning and of far more Prudence then themselves; and then to thus
Weakly and Childishly concludes what reason had he to expect they should take
his Money, when as in his second Article he says they told him they saw him to
be a Man of a wrong Spirit. But I think that O. S's. actions neither in Spirit
nor in Purse does entitle him to be accounted as one of a Right.

10. His 10th and last Article of his Charge is against J.B. in particular for
his Wicked and most Blasphemously affirming, that he did see my inside, as
likewise that he discern my Heart and inward parts, which Wicked, Proud and
Presumptious words of his, I do not look upon, says he, or can conceive to be
at all less or other then plain or apparent Blasphemy, and taking to himself
the Power and Attributes only and alone, proper and due to the immortal God,
etc.

To which do Answer, Where is the Man, or who is the Woman, except O. S. and
himself, that either conceives or believes otherways of them. Again, says O.
S. This he harps upon in other parts of his Book, and makes a great noise
about; And then further, I think (says he) he will be hard put to it to find
it Blasphemy.

In Answer to it, I do think if I had harped upon it in every Line and make a
greater noise about it, there was no more noise then cause, for both, he being
the first Man in the World that ever I read or heard of, that was so
presumptious as to give forth or pass such an assertion, except Ranters or
Atheists that care not what they say. And yet for all that O. S. will venture
at it, and under take to prove and that from the Scripture, that their were
others that had the like gift of discerning, and the Scriptures he cites for it
are those following, viz. the 1st of Samuel the 9th and 19 ver. Psalms the 5th
and the 9th. Acts the 5th. 3 and 4 verses, the 8th. and 21. The 1 Corinthians the
12th. and the 10th. ver. Psalms the 5th. and the 9th. Acts the 5th. 3 and 4
verses the 8th. and 21. The 1 Corinthians the 12th. and the 16th. verse. Ans. As to
the first, where Samuel told Saul, Hearken, and I will tell thee all that is in
thy Heart; which proves not the point at all, unless he could have also proved
that he did it by a spirit of discerning, for that Samuel might tell Saul all
that was in his Heart, and that no otherways than he had been told it, and
given him as his Errand or Message from the Lord, whether by Vision, Angels, or
vocal Voice; and that it is not reasonable to think or believe that Samuel
spoke it any otherways, appears from Chap. 16. verse. 6. when the Lord sent him
to anoint one of the Sons of Jesse to be King in the room of Saul, for that
when the aforesaid were come before him, and he looking upon Elihab, said,
Surely the Lord's anointed is before me? but the Lord said, Look not on his
Countenance, or on the height of his Stature, for the Lord sees not as Man
sees, for Man looks on the outward appearance (the Hebrew as in the Margent,
On the Eyes) but the Lord looks on the Heart. But if the Prophet had been as
conceited as J. B. is of himself, no doubt but he would have retorted back, and
said, Ay, but I cannot only see his Heart, but discern it, yea, and his inwards
parts too. And as to Psalm 5.9. it proves no further or other discerning in
David than the forecited has in Samuel, and that is only from the outward
appearance, or rather as Christ says, viz. That the Tree is known by his
Fruits; for speaking their of his Enemies, he says in plain, That their is no
faithfulness in their Mouths, they flatter with their Tongues. And is this any
other than by the outward appearance or fruits? The other, Acts 5. and verse. 3.
is in the case of Ananias and Saphira his Wife, which proves no more than the
other, unless he had also proved that the way whereby the Apostles knew that
they had so kept back part of their Possessions, was by the Spirit of
discerning, and not by outward Information. The other Acts 8.21. far less than
either of them, it is in the case of Simon's offering the Apostles Money, in
order to his purchasing the Gift of the Holy Ghost, which was such evil Fruits,
and manifestly so, even to the outward appearance, which occasioned the Apostle
in verse. 23. to say, I perceive (Note, Perceive) thou art in the Gall of
Bitterness and Bond of Iniquity, etc. The last is out of 1 Cor. 12.10. where
the Apostle treating of those extraordinary gifts of the Spirit that they and
they only were endowed withal, that were the first publishers of the Gospel;
says, viz. To one is given the gift of working Miracles, to another Prophecy,
to another discerning of Spirits, to another diverse kinds of Tongues, now I do
confess that if J. B. or O. S. can prove or demonstrate that either of those
gifts, viz either of working of Miracles, speaking with diverse Tongues or
several Languages, or the interpretation of Tongues, or the gift of healing be
proper, or has been practiced by us or any in our days. I shall and will
readily both conclude and grant that he has proved the thing designed, viz.
that God has given a further or more secret way of discerning then by the
outward appearance or Fruits.

And now having showed the Reader both the impertinency of the Scriptures cited
by O. S. and his Inference from them, I intend in the next place to show and
prove, and that in too plain and particular Cases and Instances, whereby it is
apparent that J. B. has no such Spirit of discerning of the inside of the
Heart or inward parts either, and then shall endeavor to prove from plain and
evident Scriptures, that such a way and manner of discerning as he the said J.
B. has thus proudly taken and assumed to himself, is only and alone proper,
due and peculiar unto God. And therefore one of his Attributes. And that the
said J.B. by his so taking or assuming the same unto himself, has thereby
committed no less than plain and apparent Blasphemy; though before, I was so
modest as only to say, which I look upon or conceived it to be such.

The first of which take as follows; some time ago, and before the Old
Meeting House Doors were shut up, there came a Friend thither to visit us,
whose Name was John Anslow, (as hinted before) the which without any scruple,
the least doubt or mistrust concerning him (that I could in the least perceive)
was received, owned and allowed of also, both by J. B. and the rest of them,
(and if any, it was but because they could not at first tell who he was) and
aforesaid accounted not only for a good Friend, but one in Unity too in the
Morning Meeting, and his Testimony likewise approved of as both fresh and
living, both Hats off, and standing up too at his Prayers; But yet in the
Afternoon, when they had learned his Name, then both their Seats and Hats on
again; as to all others when they know them to be such, they accounts for
wrong or bad Spirits, etc. Then I pray where was now the Heart and Inward
discerning Part of W.L. J.B. or any the rest of them? a foolish, idle,
ridiculous Imagination and Fable, and yet O. S. you see, and the Seven, have
near as much pretended to it in such their serious Waitings in the Light of
Christ our Lord, etc.

The other is in the ease I mentioned before, concerning the Pride and
Imperiousness of W. L. when the Friends for the County sent down by their
Letter to the Friends here, to Vote for such Men for our Burgesses in
Parliament, that we thought might be the most likely to do good in their
places, and the which said Letter being directed and sent to me, I first told
and imparted the matter to J. B. on the Night before, and who seemed to be well
pleased, and approved of the same, but in the Morning, the next day after he
had spoken and conferred with W. L. about it, he was quite another Man, and his
Mind and discerning changed, and became as much turned against it as W. L.
could be; and by the way, let the Reader also observe what a Sense of Sight and
discerning these Men do pretend unto, insomuch that they can both see and
discern more clearer, and beyond the aforesaid, though the most Ancient and
Grave amongst Friends, that shall undertake either to council or advise them.

And having thus plainly shown you that J. B. is so far from the discerning of
the Hearts and inward parts of others, that he neither knows, can, nor is able
to discern his own. I shall in the next place cite those Scriptures that prove
the aforesaid way of discerning, viz. of the Heart and inward parts, as only
and alone proper and peculiar unto God, and then I shall leave the Reader to
judge whether J. B. has not spoken both plain and apparent Blasphemy, by
assuming the aforesaid to himself (though so light or trivial as O. S. accounts
them) that is, truly and alone the peculiar attributes proper and due alone
unto the immortal God himself; as also shall appeal whether the matter be so
light, he floutingly counts I have made such a noise about. The first from
Jeremy 17. v. 10. I the Lord search the Heart, I try the Reins (note, as an
Appellation alone proper and due unto himself) Psalm. 7. v. 9. Oh! let
wickedness of the Wicked come to an end, (and so says my Soul with his) but
establish the just, for thou the righteous God tryest the Heart and Reins,
Prove. 17. v. 3. the fining pot is for Silver, and the Furnace for Gold, but the
Lord tries the Heart, from whence it may be observed, that although by the
cunning and curious Arts of Men, both the Silver and the Gold may be tried, and
the Dross separated from them; yet that they, by all their Art, though never so
secret or hidden, can neither try nor discern the Heart of Man, but Lord, and
he alone, Acts 1. v. 24. and they prayed and said, Thou Lord that know the
Hearts of all Men, show whether of these Two thou have chosen, etc. Observe
thee, which they need not to have been so earnest or so much concerned in the
matter, if they had been as sharp and as ready at Heart and inward parts,
discerning as J. B. pretended to, Romans 8. v. 27. and he that searches the
Heart knows what is the Mind of the Spirit, ( viz. Christ) because he makes
intercession for the Saints, according to the will of God, I could add more
Proofs to the truth of my Assertion, but I do think what have cited, are enough
and sufficient; let him account of them as in p. 32. for such wicked proud and
presumptuous Words, or what he will, the matters deep, he had need be aware.
And as to that other scoffing flout of his in p. 33. of his, A Reviler, etc.
cited out of p. 26. of the Cry, viz. by insinuating, that there appears so
little Wit in me, as to say that there seems but little substance in them, viz.
my Charges against W.L. and J. B. in the which I shall leave the truly
conscious and impartial to judge, when they have well considered of it, as
stated in the foresaid; and besides he has not dealt fairly nor Christianly by
me, by his so citing only a piece or part of my Words, and letting alone and
leaving out of the rest, as if he did it on purpose to ridicule me, by making
them Nonsense and Confusion, that so he may with the fairer gloss deceive and
beguile his Readers, and load me with such his frequent Scoffs and Jears, by
his so importing as if my Capacity of the smallest Size, one of as little Wit
as in p. 33. such a silly one, etc. as also in p. 37. of his, A Reviler, where
reciting what I had mentioned in the case of Dorothy Hall, relating to the
incurable wound, etc. where he takes occasion to joak thus upon it, viz. that
the incurable wound that they speak of in their Heads, and that it has
distempered both their Brains. But as informed concerning the aforesaid D. K.
and that by her own Sister that was with her in the time of her Weakness, and
until her departure out of this World, that from her Head it went lower and
fixed nothing short of her Heart, and that it proved no less then the occasion
of her Death, and that which she expressed to those that were about her, but a
little time before her Decease; and it were better if O. S. were so truly
serious as to turn his Flours into Tears, for it proved not a jesting matter
unto her. But to return to what I said, with respect to the littleness of the
substance that was in their Charges, it was but in the way of returning their
own, back upon themselves; my words, as truly cited, being these as apparent in
p. 26. of the Cry, viz. whereas they say there appears but little of
substance in them, my Answer to it is, and if so, then the less to be blamed,
but you have laid neither little, nor any at all upon them.

And then in the next Paragraph in the same Page, I come says he to that part
of his Book which is levelled more directly and particularly at me, as in page
33, where he says, seeing that O. S. one of the aforesaid unjust Judges has
taken a fresh occasion thus to run out against me through some Offense he has
taken at my late Book of Queries; it has come into my thoughts to further
discover and manifest him, and that in his Plain and naked Shape, etc. Answer;
As to my further discovering him as I promised, I think I have done it, and
that sufficiently too, but if in any thing I have been too short, I intend to
do it more fully before I have done with him, and as to the Scripture cited out
of p. 44. of the Cry, viz. report, and we will report it relates to false
reports only, and not to honest Friends, as he would falsely insinuate, but to
himself and the rest, and not to such as mine of him, etc. that were and are
true ones, and therefore as the Proverb is, Truth may be blamed but not shamed,
so the Shame will and must unavoidably return upon himself, which he seeks to
affix on A. B. and as to his further frivilous and needless story about my
former Friendship and Unity with him, etc. The which in the best and strictest
Sense was but my mistake of him, for, as I told the Reader, before that I was
always doubtful that he was treacherous, as since I found him, and that in a
double Sense, as clear and apparently manifest by the foregoing matter, and
more to follow in its Course. And further, as to what I said relating to his
Malice and Bitterness, and of its being inherent to his Nature, I need not I
think say any more to it, seeing as cited, his Actions are Evidence and Proof
sufficient to it, and in the case, and I think I have manifested him to be as
charged (though he seems so offended at it) and that not only from his Mouth
and Pen, but the relation and account of others, and as before, wherein too
short shall mend it in the following.

And then proceeding, says, the occasion he here takes for his particular
cavills at me, is for my returning him a former Book of his he had sent me, and
which I had written something upon; it was a Book of Queries, and one part of
the Title of it was Plain and Honest Dealing; When I had read the Book, (says
he) I found it to be so far from plain and honest, that I struck out those two
words, and in their place wrought two others more agreeable to the matter and
substance of the Book, viz. False and Treacherous, I writ also something on the
Book, and something on a Paper fixed to it, etc. And having so done, sent the
Book back to him again, in all which I conceive I did him no wrong, and it was
at my choice either to keep or give it away. Answer, Pray observe what an
ingenuous way he has at Art and Tooling it for to make a bad cause seem
better, although in the best Sense both Treacherous and Fraudulent, and that in
the greatest and highest Degree, especially as being in a case relating to
Religion and Conscience, and which if I were for the scaring with the threats
of bodily punishment or Pillory, I scarce know a thing that deserves it more;
but again, And it being at his choice as he says, to do with it what he would,
you may see what he has, and that is as by his own Confession to blot out
plain and honest dealing, (such an Eye sore, and offense unto him, that he
neither loves, nor cares to see in another, nor to practice in himself.) And
then goes on, and when I had read it, and found it to be so, says he, I
struck out plain and and honest dealing, etc. Answer, But if he had so found
it, why not also so fair as to show it unto others before he had done it, that
they might also have known and seen his findings, and whither so or no, but to
keep it so to himself, and what more or other then as in his to me, viz.
Generals, such generals that serve slanderers best to lurk under; but it is to
be noted, that it was too nice and too critical a point for him to venture
upon, or any of the rest of them, or else I should no doubt have seen their
Answer to them long before now, it being now near three years since. And there
was another part relating also to the Title, which no doubt he relished as ill
as the other, and that was hidden things revealed and brought to light, but the
evil doer such as he, affects the shade of the Evening, and so is afraid of the
approach of the day, but no doubt he concludes that his Reader is so tame and
implicit in his faith, that he takes all for Truth and Gospel. And yet for all
this, conceives that he had done me no wrong, which must necessarily follow to
rise from one of these two Causes, viz. either that he thinks there is no Truce
to be held or kept with those he accounts for Heretics, dark or bad Spirits,
and me as such, for so laying open, and discovering them, or that the custom of
Evil has taken from him the Sense of it.

And then again in Page 34. says he, to make manifest the Folly as well as the
Malice of this cavilling Man, he has picked two passages out of these two
Papers of mine, (meaning of those he had so clandestinely affixed as before to
my Book) neither of which says he, was he willing to undertake to answer. To
which I return, nor as little Reason that I should, unless he would a come
forth and appear in the open Day, (having something else to do then to tend
every sleeveless impertinency of his or other,) the which if he had, he should
quickly have seen that I would have done more then only to a nibbled at it, as
his phrase is; yet as little as I made trial of, I have made apparent to be of
an evil and bitter taste, as shall yet further show when it falls in due order
and course.

And then goes on, saying again, Wherein I cannot justly blame him, etc.
Answer, If so, and it be true, its the better, having so often and frequently
without cause; but lets try how much he is mended; Again, (said he) for his
most dishonestly resting of them, to a ridiculous as well as to a wrong Sense,
to fill two Pages, the 34. and 35th. of his with empty noises and clamours in a
confused manner, and a nonsensical heap of Words, one of which he takes out of
the latter part of my beforementioned Paper, etc. To which I Answer, that I
took not out of it (for that it was the whole, and every part thereof
transcribed verbatim, and as he sent it me; and again, it was the first part
and not the last, he affirms and avers it to be, and from thence do conclude,
that his Frensical Zeal, or what shall I call it, has thus caused him so to
fall, yea, and that into three several Errors or Falsehoods all at once, (and by
which it may be seen O. S. before, that he is not so wholly infallible, no not
O. S. himself, which may deter him for the future thus proudly to insult,) as
First, in asserting that I had taken it out of the latter part of his said
Paper, whenas it was the first. Secondly, by saying that I had taken it out of
the aforesaid Paper, when as before it was the Transcription of the whole of
all and every part. Thirdly, by saying that I filled two Pages with my noises,
clamours, etc. whereas I have (...) (as most apparent in the forecited ^^y,
etc.) not so much as filled one, and if it be with empty Noises, Clamours, in a
confuted manner and nonsensical heap of words, its apparent that one Page
thereof is his own, and therefore may thank himself for his own Rashness and
Folly, and if so empty, etc. it appears so to be only in his own, since he has
not assigned, no not so much as one particular in mine. But again, wherein does
it so appear that I have rested his or either of their Words in the Case
forecited, relating to the tying up of my Tongue, or in that of O. S.'s either,
in his counting me for a Murderer, or of his affrightning threats of corporal
punishment? Seeing I have said no more, or otherwise of him and them then what
was spoken by, and came from themselves, for that they told of neither Mystery
nor Allegory, they intended, and if we may take them to mean what they say, or
to say as they mean, how can we think or conclude otherways, or where shall we
have them or rightly know what they intend or would be at. And that Bodily
punishment and no Misery was intended by O. S. In his threats is most apparent,
as in Page 35. of his Reviler, where speaking afresh of it, he says it is well
he is so apprehensiye of Bodily punishment, that the fears of that may deter
him from ateempting that which might subject him to it, pray what more clear or
can be plainer then this, though he quibbles so much about it, and as to that
of the Tongue, it has been spoken to be before in my Answer to his Alligation,
relating to the 4th. Article, as in Page 8. of the Cry, and where I have said
of the tying up of the Tongue, whither in a natural or spiritual Sense are both
of them persecution. And yet for all so confident and hardy is he in Page 35.
as to say that all this Noise and Outcry I have made about Persecution is for
nothing, or without any Cause or ground given for it, and therefore how little
to be regarded? Oh! O. S. hang down thy Head again as at W. L's. and blush for
shame, if not grown too impudent, as thy Language is to me. But what need I
have spoken so much to this point or any otherways, then as the Case is so
material and the President so wicked and preposterious, relating to the tying
up the Tongue, or at all, seeing that its plain and apparent, that O. S. is not
only like minded with them, but has far exceeded them in it, for they proposed
but for the tying up of one particular Member, but he for punishment upon the
whole Body, viz. not only upon the Tongue, but on the Head, Hands, Feet, yea,
on all and every part, etc. for as much as the word Body concludes and
comprizes them all (especially when so spoken in the general, without either
limitation or restriction) and every member of it, of which it is made and
composed, for that is an imperfect Body that has not all and every one of its
Members, as to the same import in the Cry, and if that be not Persecution, I
know not what is, and therefore he might (one would have thought) spared such
his flouting scoffs and jears in his Comment, on what he has cited out of Page
49. of the Cry, (and the which he counts for such impertinent Nonsense,
Whimsical, etc.) where intending of me, he very gravely (says he) if there be
gravity in so great Folly, viz. that it might not I believe be amiss, if but
for the Truths sake, that some ancient and grave Friends would be and were so
concerned, (...). (and I am of the same mind still) as to examine and know of
O. S. what manner or degree of punishment is to be, or must be, that my Body is
to suffer and be punished withal, and the which I am ready to think that none
else, except O. S. and such as he will account either in gravity or so great
folly, and therefore may the safer conclude with him as in Page 36. of his
Reviler, concerning his Husbandry in the Lord's Vineyard, of which says he, I
have nothing to boast of, etc. the which is too true, as well as apparently
proved, and this further let me add, that if his Heart were not as hard as the
flinty Rock, and his Spirit as the Nether-Milstone, he would have found cause
to have both sorrow'd and mourned for what he has done; yea, and to have rent
his Heart instead of his Garment, and to have sat him down in Ashes, and hid
his Face in the Dirt, if it were but for this one rashness alone, as being the
first Author, mover or proposer for Bodily punishment amongst us, especially in
a case that relates wholly and alone to Religion and Conscience, and however in
this of mine, there being no other provocation to them, but only my witnessing
against such plain and apparent wickedness, Lording expression, etc.

And to the other part relating to my Charge, as being a Murderer, he would
fain get out of it, under pretense that he only meant of my slaying of their
Christian Reputation: To which I do answer as before, he may say what he will,
and mean what he pleases, for who can find out the depth of his and such their
politic and mental reserves, that can thus riggle and scriggle to use his own
Terms, and thus turn both any and every way, and if the discovering of such
their horrid Pride, Lording, Blasphemy, etc. be counted no less then Murder,
or a slaying of their Christian Reputation. I shall leave the Reader to judge
of what and wherein it stands, and yet further to show and make appear how
little these Men do value or esteem their Reputation. I shall give you in a
Case or two more, and among the rest, of one John Giding, and who was also one
of my seven unjust Judges, who being at the Quarterly Meeting at Newbery, it
being at the same time too that O. S. proposed for an Appeal, etc. he was not
then nor there ashamed to affirm and assure to that they, viz. the Seven had
been more hard and severe upon W. L. and J.B. then they had been upon me (and
if so, why? and for what? seeing A. B. is such a Criminal, and they so harmless
and innocent) but suppose I should grant it so, yet wherein does i^ so appear,
seeing they though thus found in such their evil Actions and Conversation
toward me, and to the Reproach of the holy Truth, has been and is nevertheless
so appeared for still, and they to that it seems deserved such hardness and
severity to be showed them, Justified and Acquitted I say; And on the other hand
to be thus and so Sentenced, Calumniated and Condemned; and is this a doing as
you would be done unto, and as I observed in the Cry, etc. surely there was
cause for it, viz. for such hard and severe Treatment toward them, and
consequently the greater cause too, where there is the greater Blame or
Punishment to be inflicted, or else you have dealt as unjustly toward them, as
it is apparent you have done by me. And therefore may I say of him, them, and
the rest, as O. S. does of me and of D. H. in the case of Sion, in page 36. of
his, viz. That if they were truly acquainted with Spiritual Sion: I doubt that
is so long ago and they have showed so much unkindness to her since, that the
acquaintance is worn out and lost, whatever they may say or do, pretend to
hide, and cover themselves and deceive others.

The next is in the case of John Buy, upon whom some time ago I had a Bill of
Ten Pound, and the which was to be paid upon sight, but yet because that I owed
his Son seven Shillings and two Pence for wharfage of Goods, and some of them
such too, that was not usual to be charged, nor never was to me, by any other
wharfinger before; I say that barely, and alone upon the Score, and account of
the aforesaid seven and two Pence, and the which I never denied the payment of,
either to him or his Son, and yet did he the aforesaid J. B. the elder, refuse
and put off paying me the said Bill, though the time was and has been, as I
signified to his Face, that I had given him more then seven times seven
Shillings together, and that Gratis and free; and was also instrumental by
endeavors with others to the making of it up to a competent Sum, when J. B.
was lower I suppose both in Mind and Purse. And if A. B. has not so much of
this world as he, yet I believe that he can be trusted with as much, and make
as good and as honest payment to the full; and how is it reasonable to be
thought that they have, or do so much regard or esteem of their Christian
Reputation that are thus so short of, and far below Men of common Ingenuity, in
that which relates to very Morals.

And further, that I have hit it right in the explanation of D. H. so innocent
simily, concerning the incurable wound that the aforesaid has given her, as
page 36. and 37. is both clear and apparent, and too truly fulfilled upon her
self, poor honest Soul, for that it has been the occasion, as hinted, of the
costing her her Lise, though O. S. as in page 37. of his, makes but a flouting,
scoff, and a mere jear of it, his words as before being these, viz. The
incurable Wound says he they spoke of ( viz. D. H. and my self) is in their
Heads and that it has distempered both their Brains, and therefore whether the
Scripture he cites out of John be not of right, more proper and applicable unto
himself then to me, the which I shall forbear to insert, least it should prove
to his greater injury, though so barefaced toward me in his so vile and wicked
assertion in his said Papers. And in page 38. thus further, but A. B. is more
then ordinary to be blamed, says O. S. in this Case, for before he published
those false Charges against me, he knew that they had been heard three times
over, and I each time declared innocent. And Hall was blamed for his causeless
clamours; to which I do answer, that I was so far from knowing that they were
heard three times over, or that Hall was blamed, that I knew not so much as
that they were, or never heard, or at all, or that Hall was blamed by the
aforesaid; or indeed how should I? (for had I been there, I should not have
been permitted to have either heard or seen what was done or who blamed.) But
if O. S. be no better at Accounts then in this, its a question whether instead
of three, etc. it was heard so much as once, or indeed by any at all. For how
(to use his own Phrase) this his confused nonsensical Noise and heap of words
can in any Sense be true or hold together, for my part I cannot tell; where he
says, viz. that before I had published chose false Charges, etc. I knew they
had been heard three times, and then proceeding to the proof of it, says he,
first at a Monthly meeting, and afterward at a Quarterly meeting. Answer, and
what does a Monthly and a Quarterly Meeting make three? yet observe, any thing
will serve with one that neither cares nor fears what he says, and therefore
shall return upon himself in his own style, as in page 4. of his Reviler, viz.
and wherein he stumbles, falls and foils himself most shamefully, as also in
the foregoing, where he also falls into three untruths and apparent errors all
at once, but if it should be alleged that he meant a hearing three times a
piece at each meeting, viz. Monthly and Quarterly, which instead of mending
would mar it the more, and instead of his pretended three, would make it
apparent six, though in page 38. he makes his three but two again.

And in the next, as if I had encouraged Hall in his clamours against him, his
proof for it, cited out of page 36. of the Cry: And because I there said that I
had received near a dozen Letters from Hall, etc. but he does not tell, says
he, how many I had sent unto them. To the first, if I had encouraged Hall in
his clamours, how came it to pass that I moved for a hearing (as owned and
acknowledged,) and to what end, but to understand whether clamours or truths?

And as to the other, about the said Letters (to the best of my Memory) I
rather advised him to forbear them, for that I thought I knew as much of O. S.
as he could tell me; and the which may likewise serve in answer to his
Comparison of the foul humors in the Body gathering together, since I took the
best method according to Truth in order to disperse them. And which also may
show O. S's mistake in supposing I had occasion to fish out of them as he
charge in page 36. of his Reviler.

And in page 33. he seems to have done having given an Answer as would have it
thought to all those Charges and Alligations of mine in particular against or
relating unto W. L. J. B. etc. though I have skipt over several both weighty
and material ones; (but more of that hereafter Proceedings;) I now come, says
he, to that part of his Book which is levelled more directly and particularly at
me, beginning at page 33. of the Cry; where he says, seeing that O. S. one of
the seven unjust Judges has taken a fresh occasion thus to run out against me,
through some offense he has taken at my late Book of Queries; it has come
into my thoughts further to discover and manifest him, and that in his plain
and naked shape, not only from the evidence and proof from his own Mouth and
Pen; but also from the Allegation, reports and accounts of others concerning
him, and in page 35. does hint again at the cause or occasion thereof, and that
was for my altering with my Pen, says he, the Title of his former Book from
plain and honest Dealing, to false and treacherous, etc. Answ. To the first: of
manifesting him in his plain and naked Shape, as I thought so to have done, and
have been as good as my Word; and also do believe that nakeder was he never
stripped, nor his nakedness made appear; for why should his Sheeps Clothing be
a means to deceive or beguile the simple?

And as to the other part: of proving him to be as charged, and that from the
Evidence of his Mouth and Pen. I think there is no occasion to add further proof
to the manifesting the Truth of it, then what is spoken, written, contained and
published of him in this and my other two Books. The first forecited by him,
viz. Hidden things revealed and brought to Light, or plain and honest Dealing
with W. L. and J. B. the other, The Cry of the Oppressed in Sion; and if I have
been too remiss or short therein, I intend to mend it in the next.

And as to the other part of it taken from the Allegations, Reports and
Accounts of others; I have given him both my Authors and Evidence, and neither
of which has he refuted, (that I observed) or proved for a falsehood or lie.
And as I told him before in an other case of the Scripture he Cites out of mine
of the Cry, viz. Report, and we will report; It chiefly relates to such, and
the like groundless Lies and Falsehoods too much in use with him and other of
his Associates. And a Word further, that if it should be thought that I have
not been so large as is Judged or thought proper and needful concerning the
said Alligation s of N.H. etc. I do give the Reader thus further to understand,
that N. H. does follow the said O. S. and that from Meeting to Meeting, up and
down those parts of the County, in order to make good his said Charge, and to
prove it to his Face; and besides, I do understand by a Letter I have seen of
his, dated no longer ago than the 12th. of the 7th. Month, 1697. that he has
new and fresh Matters to allege in charge against him and another; also of a
latter date, and some of them, for his wilful and downright Lies he has put
in Print, meaning in his, A Reviler, etc. and therefore what ever he has
further to say, of or concerning the aforesaid, unless it be in those Matters
or Things that more immediately relate unto my self, I think neither to Answer,
or take any further notice of them; But to refer both the Reader (and himself)
for their proof and truth, that, as said, attends it, and would be glad of the
opportunity to do it. And again, says he, in page 37. speaking of me, He
begins his inquiry in a high and lofty Style, viz. First, I shall demand of
him to Answer for himself in the case of D. and N. H. in the Vale of White
Horse, etc. and how well this becomes him, says he, (meaning by my being so
bold, etc.) Answ. And had I not cause to begin my inquiery, as I did in the
case and cases alleged? I having, as said, received near a dozen Letter from
the aforesaid, as in page 37. of the Cry, and all of them chiefly and
principally relating to O. S. Falsness, Unjustice and Treacherous Dealing
toward the aforesaid, as he cited for Oppression, with cries for Justice, is
the Tenor of the whole, and as reported, the same infect throughout the whole
County. (But at Farington more especially, the place of his former abode, where
I have seen with my own Eyes and heard with my own Ears, the mournful
Complaints of some toward whom, through such his moross Carriage and
Conversation, he had given so great an offense, as that they had left both the
Societies and Assemblies of Friends; and which caused some of Abington, no
doubt, to precaution of the like toward them, when he came to inhabit there,
as hinted in the Cry. But how lofty and imperious himself, when I have told
all, I shall leave the Reader to judge, seeing that in the first place (as by
his own Confession) he thus Metamorphized and abused my Book, by scratching out
of my Title to it, Plain and Honest Dealing, and putting in of his own False
and Treacherous, instead of Plain and Honest, as in page 37. of the Cry, the
which I account as both Fraudulent, and Imperious, and no doubt, punishable by
the Law; and though he has so frequently charged me with Malice, Envy,
Quarrelsom, etc. yet who can at all, or in the least account or think otherways
of this, I say to thus mar, metamorphize, and confuse my Title or Book, and
then to send or return it back again unto me, that I might see what he had
done; and not at all better in them that first tore one of my said Books into
pieces at John Buys, and after committed it to the Flames, as cited in the Cry;
and in which O.S. is likewise mute and silent; nor it in the forenamed, or
those others that advised the Friends of Windsor for to follow their evil
Example, which all comes from one and the self-same ground and cause, viz. the
Spirit of Persecution; and is no other than the Seed and Ground of it,
notwithstanding in p. 35. he seems to so wipe his Mouth, and say of it, viz.
That there is nothing that we are more against, viz. Persecution. To which I do
Answer, That it may happily be so in Words, Say-So's; but his Practice above
all others has too apparently showed and proved it by his Deeds. And in the
second, by his so wickedly and visely charging, sentencing, or condemning me
for a Murderer, and to add Authority to his said Wickedness, to make as if the
Apostle John had done it, or accounted me as such, etc. And in the next place,
in his so threatening or affrighting me with his Corporal or Bodily punishment,
and by which the Reader may observe how one wicked Deed or Action makes way for
and ushers in another; I say as first so Enviously to alter the true and proper
Title of my Book, which both he and they were afraid to meddle with and ashamed
to Answer; neither is it Answered to this Day, though the matter contained
therein was only Queries. And in the next so to Judge, Sentence me as before.
And in the third, to so endeavor to affrighten me with the punishing of my
Body, and yet for all this, to so Insinuate as before, viz. which there is
nothing that we are more against; but I pray what after the Burning of
Heretics Books, or such they account as such, but in the next place to take
hold of the Body, where power, and is grown to that degree of Cruelty as to do
it (as are many and frequent Instances in the case) and what more Hardy or
Cruel then for him, or others to so account his or their Brother for a
Murderer, a Devil, a Dog, a Wolf, a Swine; yea, and no less than one too for
whom is reserved the Blackness of Darkness forever, etc. And are not these the
Seeds, yea, and the grown Seeds too of it, viz. Persecution; and which although
it appears at first but as a Grain of Mustard Seed, the least of all Seeds, but
at length into a Root and a Blade, and then into a tall and flourishing Tree.

I say these, with the aforesaid account out of the Vale, of the same or like
nature toward them, that I had met with from him, toward my self, made me
take the Boldness, or the Impudence, as he elsewhere calls it, for to thus
demand and inquire of him, as I think well I might, and had cause enough for
it; and to understand of his Conversation as well as of his Power, that had so
taken and assumed unto himself, such an unaccountable Authority and
Prerogative, yea and more then barely this too, as in page 36. of the Cry; and
the which I have also alleged, as part of the Reason of my so demanding and
enquiring; and that was for his so thundering forth, and that like so many
Curses, the Wrath and Vengenance of God against me; the which, with a great
deal more of the like nature and tendency, O. S. slips over and hides in
Silence; being either afraid or ashamed, or both, to either recite or
transcribe.

And again, To back the Business (says O. S. meaning of me) for my only
endeavoring for a hearing, in order for Justice to be done the poor man N. H.
in his case) he infers, how that I had sent a Letter to the Counselor, viz.
Counselor Mallet at the same time, and by the same Bearer, etc. And what is my
offense I pray in it, if so? And of which having obtained a Copy (says he) I
inserted it here, that the Reader may see how much this envious Man busieth
himself in that which did not concern him.

Unto which I do return, that if Equity and the craving of, crying or standidg
for Justice, makes me appear to be so envious, then let it be so; or on the
other hand, that if it be nor is to be none of O. S's concern, yet I do look
upon and think it to be mine; and that under a double Consideration in this
present case, and not only mine in what is or ought to be the common concern, I
mean as with respect to Justice toward all, but the like of all other true
hearted and sincere Christians with me. And what have I moved for, or
endeavored to be done by the Counselor in the case of the aforesaid, or on
their behalf, farther or other than barely it, I shall leave the Impartial to
judge; (my Words in the aforesaid) to him being these, I therefore entreat thee
to do the poor Man justice. Observe, Entreat, for that it is to be feared, that
it has been hard for him to obtain it hitherto. Observe again, that it appears
it seems as Envy and Envious in O. S's thoughts, though if it be but so much as
to either desire, cry, entreat, or request for Justice, etc. either in my own
or another case.

And then again in p. 39. so wickedly to insinuate, (and to place an
Observation upon it too) as if I had reflected upon the Monthly and Quarterly
Meeting; whenas I have told him before that I did not hear that the matter had
been brought before, or heard by any, or either of them; and if I have written
at any time what may seem to import it, I do declare that it was not so much as
in my thoughts, or ever intended by me, of any or other than of himself, and
the rest of them that so claimed, and that taken upon themselves to be it or
them, by their so swaying, ruling and overruling, as they list or please, and
then to cry out and make a noise as if the agreement, order, and act of the
Meeting, and the which I have rightly styled but a Ruling Party, etc.

And as to the Letter sent me by Counselor Mallot (my esteemed Friend) as in
p. 40. of his, A Reviler, etc. in or with relation to the Paper or Writing of
O. S's, that the aforesaid had but transcribed for his better Vindication, etc.
and the which no doubt, but the Counselor intended well, in and for that end,
though in O. S. a mere piece of Craft, the which nevertheless O. S. has
inserted, and that no doubt too but as anundeniable proof of its truth, though
in it self, as may be seen, and that, as we use to say, with half an Eye; that
it was no more or other, viz. then the Counsellor's building upon the
Foundation of O. S's laying; for that the said Paper, or the Counsellor's state
of the case, etc. was no other then O. S's own Paper, or of his own drawing,
that the aforesaid had transcribed, or written his Paper by; and can any Man
reasonably think that O. S. of all men, will either state or write the most or
worst of things, that are against himself or his own Vindication, that so can
and do take the privilege and liberty to use such Crafts and Sophistry to
excuse and clear himself and others, he undertakes for, in things that are so
apparently notoriously bad, evil and unjust, all which may therefore serve for
no other or further use, then only to discover his said Crafts, and to bring
his secret and hidden works to the Light, and discovery of the Day.

And again, in page 41. But so far has his Envy carried him, says he,
intending of me, that he sticks not to pervert the Judgment given by the
Counselor; For thus says he of him, page 38. And as to Counselor Mallet,
though he say that thou have dealt fairly by them, as in respect to Law, but
did not, nor could not as in respect to tenderness and Christianity, it being
in the case of N. H. And now the Reader (says he) may observe that these
terms, viz. in respect to Law, to Tenderness, and Christianity, are not
Counselor Mallot's words, but words thrust in by A. B. Counselor Mallot in
the judgment that he gave, did not say that I had dealt fairly with them, as in
respect to Law, though A. B. has the Impudence to charge him with saying so.

Answ. Indeed it is strange Language, and which the like I do not remember that
ever I met withal from any, unless John Reasons and William Spikeman, Men of
the same sort and morose temper, who to Impudence have added Brazen-face too,
and yet for all this, O. S. can write a Book, and Title it, A Reviler Rebuked,
and scoffingly tells me of Billingsgate Rhetoric, etc. But

Again, neither did A. B. say that the Counselor had said so in the Judgment
that he had given, as most apparent, though so rated and abused for nothing;
for my Words were only these, as in page 38. cited by him, viz. And as to
Counselor Mallot, though says that thee have dealt fairly by them, as in
respect to Law, but did not nor could not as in respect to Tenderness and
Christianity, wherein I only mentioned what the Counselor had said, and not so
much as in one Jot or Title of either Judgment, or of his giving of it. And
therefore to the end that the Reader may the better be informed in the matter,
I shall add this true and further account of it, and whereby O. S. may see his
own Incivility and abusive Rashness, and be ashamed for it too, if he would be
persuaded to it, or had any shame in him.

I being one day at the Counselors House, and if I mistake not, lodged there
the same Night, and we happening to be speaking of the Difference between the
forementioned; the Counselor took occasion from thence both to show and read
unto me what he had drawn up as his Sense and Judgment in the case, though I
should have said O. S's. Whereupon I did make him this Answer, viz. O.S. That
although I could not say, but that the aforesaid, viz. O. S. had dealt fairly by
them, with respect to Law, yet proposed this as a further Question, whether he
might not have been more kindly dealt by and treated, as with respect to
Christianity, and Tenderness, considering the Circumstances they both were
under? unto which the Counselor did both consent and agree with me, viz. That
they might have been more tender in that respect; and which I do believe the
Counselor does still remember, (And this is all, and the whole of the matter
that O.S. has thus shamefully harrased and abused me about.

And again, in p. 42. he insinuates another Charge against me, says he, by way
of Question, viz. And was it not plainly proved against thee at Meeting held at
W. Lambel 's, the 26th of the 10th Month, 1694. and that before several of thy
own Friends, and others also that thou have been both remiss in, and False and
Treacherous also in thy Trust, in the case of Richard Daniel, late of Redding,
in which Thee wast concerned as an Executor with L. K. to the Will of the
aforesaid Daniel. And unto which O. S. answers No; and his Reason for it, in
only believing that not one of his own Friends had any such thoughts in the
least, but were satisfied that he had acted uprightly both as a Man and a
Christian in that affair, etc. And thereupon thinks he had said and done
enough, and that he needed say nor do no more in it.

In Answer to the first; And if do so insinuate a Charge by way of Question,
yet such it seems as he will not so much as touch upon directly, or in the
least undertake to Answer, though his Credit and Repute depends so much upon
it. And pray observe how another, (viz. a Charge) when has confessed both in the
same page and paragraph, That it had been a Charge against him no less than
fourteen Years ago, and how an Insinuation, seeing as before he has both
acknowledged to and confessed unto it; I mean to be a Charge against him. And if
O.S's Firends that he thinks will say so, I am sure neither to Justice nor
Truth if they did. But if so, where is his Witness? seeing that they are mute,
and have said and testified nothing for or on his behalf in the case: or will
this pass for an Answer to it, and sufficient for to clear him of the Crime,
and that from one to that in page 25. of his, A Reviler, so Brandeth A. B. for
his placing his Observations both in general and in particular without solid
matter, fair Reasoning, Proof, or Demonstration, that has alleged none of them
all in this of his; I say neither in Argument or Evidence, but a merely
justifying of himself, as his Words are of me in the page forecited, I say by
his merely believing so, and concluding that his Friend did the like of him.

And again, If so as have said, and it be true, why does he not produce the
Record of the Minute made by the aforesaid upon it? But it is to be noted, that
he dares not so much as to look, touch, or to meddle there, viz. at Newberry,
that had been so false and treacherous to them as before. And again, as to that
of the Meeting at Newberry about fourteen Years ago, he has cited, in order to
his further clearing and vindication; and the which he also endeavors to
insinuate, as if a wilful forgefulness on my part: To the which do return, that
as to the aforesaid, I remember no more or further of it, than only that there
was such a Meeting at the aforesaid place, and about the same time; but as to
the Meeting's business, or the occasion thereof, I had wholly and altogether
forgot, but that as mere accidently upon search, I found by a Letter that was
sent me along time ago, by one of the Friends that was at it, and which gave
this following Account, viz. That the said Meeting was wholly, only and alone
as on purpose for Tho. Curtis, to make good and prove a Charge that he had
alleged and in charge against the aforesaid; and the said Charge was, that the
said T.C. would undertake to prove O. Samsom to be a corrupt Man, and the which
has somewhat revived it afresh in my Memory, and by which it may be seen that
O.S. has been formerly charged very hard and high too by others; yea, and that
no less than fourteen Years ago, far before that I either meddled or was
concerned with him, in relation to any of these things; and this of the
aforesaid case of Daniel's, (if I mistake not) was alleged, to make good and
affix the truth of this Charge upon him. As likewise to be observed, that any
thing must and is to do for Evidence with him in his case, if but so long, and
long enough as to be forgotten by the Person or Persons that is engaged with
him, though a matter of a quite contrary nature and quality; and how that one
thing must give Evidence and make Proof to another, when exposed to such a
strait, as often he is, that he knows not what to either allege, offer, or say
for himself.

And then again out of p. 41. He taxes me (says he) with the serving him a
base and unworthy deceitful Trick, about the things that he was to buy for the
Friends that were Prisoners in Newgate, and which for the better accommodating
of them, he desired my assistance in it, yet nevertheless I, (he says) for my
own Ends and Intrest, acted quite contrary to the said Ends proposed by him, as
well as to the Friends disadvantage.

Answ. And the Lord knows that I was conscious in it on their behalf, and the
deceit of it lay on O.S's part, in pretending that he would do as I had desired
and directed him, and that was to buy the things for the aforesaid, where most
probably he might have had the best Choice, the best Goods, and the best
Pennyworth: But instead thereof, and that upon so poor, low, and so base an
account, as may be supposed as the only taging of a few Laces for one, he went
and bought them of another, a very poor and sorry Man, and one of them too that
he counts for Seperates, and who in a little time after Broke both in mine and
several others Debts, and that not all in the case, but his so confidently
denying afterward, that I had so ordered and directed him, and as was also
charged with the same by T. C. and that before the Monthly Meeting, as in the
page forecited, and where so greatly offended with me, because that I could not
Dissemble, Lie, and play the Hypocrite like himself, and at last so wicked and
base as to solve it over again with this cunning Prank of Subtilty, viz. To
commit and leave it to the Lord as Judge betwixt us, being afraid of its
further Examining, as well he might, and ashamed too lest I should have laid
him open, naked, and a discovered him to them all, for I ever hated such a way
of a false disguise in any; and therefore whether or not to his own Ends, as
well as to the Friends injury, shall leave to the Impartial to judge, as also
whether, as his Words are in the Conclusion upon that subject, that the Lord
will ever rebuke me for my so testifying against such hidden and mysterious
Subtilties and ways of Craft and Deceit, as he calls upon him for.

And again, He has shot another of his Bolts at me, as in page 42. (says he)
about my Brother's Widow, which he brings in thus: And again, as to his
Treachery, Heard-heartedness, etc. what need I a troubled my self to have
fetched such a Circuit round to prove O. S. Treacherous, Hard-hearted, and
without Natural Affection to others, when seen, found and known to be so at
home as I may say, even to his own Relations, as witness his hardy, sour, and
morose carriage toward his Brother's Wife; and for proof thereof, alleges
that my carriage toward her was sour, hardy, and morose; And now if this were
as true as its false (says he) it does hardy, sour and morose prove a Man to
be Treacherous.

Answ. Yes, for that the word Treachery in a Person, (as by the English
Dictionary) signifies and imports to be one that is Perfidious, or Disloyal:
And is it not both Perfidiousness and Disloyalty in O.S. and especially as
being a Relation, who instead of visiting of the Fatherless and Widow in their
Distress, viz. the Widow when she had lost her Husband, and the Children when
so near a Parent, the which the Apostle also counts both for the pure
Religion and undefiled, etc. And what the end I pray to be given them at such a
time? Is it, I say, to further oppress, grieve, and to add Sorrow to Sorrow to
the already afflicted; or not rather, or on the contrary Hand, to endeavor to
be a Help, Support and Comfort unto them? And whether O.S. has been so toward
her, the effects does too evidently show and make appear to the contrary, who
instead of making the Widow's heart to rejoice, as in page 42. of the Cry, He
has caused here is to ache, to sorrow, and to mourn, and some of her tender
Relations with her; some of which my Eyes have seen, and my Ears have heard;
and when troubled at it, and asked the Cause, the Answer that has been made me,
was, O. S. has been here, etc. The which if not both Perfidious and Disloyal,
for my part I know not what it is. And if this not it, what shall we say of his
thus so perfidiously and evilly surmising of her, viz. as if unless he had an
Eye of Care and Watchfulness over her in the case of the Legacies he is, as he
says, in trust for, for the Children, that there was a doubtfulness or danger
of their being deprived or wronged of them.

In his so jealously suspecting her, as before, of Treachery, that was so
honest, upright and true, shall therefore only refer the Reader for his better
satisfaction concerning her and the truth of it, viz her Fidelity, to the
account of an Ancient Friend of those parts, sent me in a Letter in the Year
1696. (though I could say a great deal as to my own sense and knowledge of her,
as an honest and sincere Woman) which is as follows, viz. I have not seen
(says the aforesaid) Oliver Samson's Book, but hear that as to the passage
about John Samsom's Widow, he says that what he had done, was to have Justice
done to the Children; which implies as if she had not done justly by them,
which is such a base Insinuation, that it is well known that her Motherly care,
tenderness, and affection was such, that she exceeded most own Mothers; and
this is so well known not only to her own Relations, but Friends, Neighbors
and Acquaintance can testify the same. I could say something of his, viz.
O.S's corrupt and false dealing about our former Concerns here at Newberry,
which would be a great Blow to him; but for several Causes and Reasons I am
willing at present to forbear.

And then proceeding, says, I have now gone through his Book, so as to Answer
whatsoever seems to have any appearance of weight in it; and I hope to the
Reader's satisfaction.

Answ. But if so, it must be supposed to be only him and such that has not had
the oppertunity, or cares not, or regards not to examine it.

And further says he, As to his confused Clamours with which his Book abounds,
especially the latter part of it, vented in a style of Billingsgate Rhetoric,
I do not think it worth my while to trouble my self, or my Reader any further
about it.

Answ. Although so far beyond it in himself, and that throughout his whole
Work, or either the Order or Rules of Christianity, or Humanity: And yet would
fain thus wipe his Mouth at last, as if so modest and demure, that there is
neither ground nor reason to be jealous of or suspect him as guilty of any such
thing.

But again says he, I shall subjoin a Testimony from the Friends of the
Monthly Meeting of Farrington, and their-away, which might of it self, I
suppose, have been sufficient to have cleared my Reputation in the judgment of
the impartial, from the Muck and Dirt he has endeavored to cast upon it, etc.
And then come to a Conclusion.

Answ. But whatever he concludes or believes of the matter, yet I am
nevertheless of the mind, that when examined, that instead of being sufficient
or to the clearing of his Reputation, and cleansing from the Dirt already cast
upon him, that it will rather create more scruples, bestain in the first, and
give a greater cause of further casting of his deserved Dirt upon him in the
last.

And now as to his Farrington or Charlow Certificate, as in page 45. That he
has thus gotten and procured, and doubts not but it will do his Business, and
be sufficient to clear his Reputation, and cleanse him from his Dirt too in the
judgment of the Impartial, etc. Pray Note, that it is no more nor no other than
a mere and plain piece of Craft, and a no Sociation Pardonership or Faction
belonging to him, etc. held, kept up and maintained amongst them, and that
merely or only as if on purpose to serve and answer their Ends and Intrest as
often as shall have need and occasion for it. Or is it to be so much as
supposed, or in the least questioned or suspected, but that O. S. has both
Power and Interest, and that sufficient and enough to procure as many of them,
viz. such Certificates as their are Months in the Year, if need be or occasion
for them; and yet for all that, for them to so go for or under the Name, Guise
and Notion of a Monthly Meeting; I say, though so Signed but with four, yea, and
all and every one of them to his Kindred and Relations: and further than this,
that if the Question might be but truly answered, I have cause to believe that
the aforesaid Certificate was written to by no other than himself, as was the
foregoing that Counselor Mallot transcribed in order for his better
Vindication, as in p. 40. O the depth of such hidden and gross Hypocrisy and
Deceit, what shall I say, Muck, Mire, and Dirt; which was there ever the like
committed by any? a thing to be both abhorred and condemned in all the Courts
that bare but so much as the Name of Judicature, when as instead of twelve of a
Man's equals, which the Law of the Land allows to be thus only Tried by four of
the Kindred and near Relations of the Person accused. And are not near
Relations prohibited by the Laws; so just are they therein as not to be allowed
as Evidence or Witness thus one for another. Again, and was there not as many,
his Relations excepted, or more that appeared for me, and denied the Signing of
vour said Paper of Association, than appeared for it. And did not Francis Clark
of Childred in particular, and who was one of their near Neighbors too, that
both denied and refused to Sign it, and the reason that he gave for it, for
that he had not heard of any one that could charge or allege any thing justly
against me, as with respect to my Life, Conversation, or otherways; but that I
walked according unto or as become the Profession of Truth; or words to this
effect, though he did not so of O. S. But no more as to that at present; and
were you not angry and much offended with him for it?

And further observe how implicit and dark both in their Sense, as well as
Certificate (through their said Interest, Partnership, Consanguinity, etc.) as
to so and thus ignorantly infer and conclude, viz. that what I had done, as
before, in order to the discovery of such their Wickedness and Deceit, etc.
tended to the dishonor of the Name of the Lord, and the defaming of Ancient
Friends; implying thereby no less then as if both the Name of the Lord, and the
repute of Ancient Friends stood in the connivance at hiding and concealing of
such Corrupt Gross and Notorious Evil, whereas in realty and truth, both the
Honor of God and the repute of true and upright hearted Friends, both Ancient
and others then stood, I mean Anciently and every sense in the judging and
keeping down and under, every the least appearance of any such evil and corrupt
Tree; for that (I say) as before Judgment ever was, and still is, and ought and
should be kept and continued upon the Head of it; yea, and that both Root and
Branch; for so it was in the beginning.

And further say they, Particularly our dear Friend O. S. in his aforesaid Book
(viz. mine of the Cry) in two remarkable matters, viz. in the case of Nicholas
Hall and the Widow Bounce, etc.

Answ. But I pray wherein? for have I done more or any other in them, or either
of them, than to ask a Query, or demand of O. S. in the aforesaid Case, and the
reason of such my boldness too, was upon the score and account of his so
wickedly perverting the Scriptures, in counting or judging me for a Murderer,
with his threats of Corporeal Punishment, and the pronouncing of such his
dreadful Threats and Curses against me, as more at large in p. 36. of the Cry,
etc.

And to the end, the Reader may yet further see what a sort of Certificate
signers he has gotten, and they be, and how in Affinity in Spirit as well as
in Blood, pray observe how they further tell you, and that upon their
conclusion of the aforesaid, viz. that I being false (as they say) in the
matter relating to N. H. and the Widow Bounce, that they were also satisfied,
that all my other Alligations against the aforesaid, were also false, the which
I hope the Reader will take good notice of; and how unfit O. S. as before, or
any of his said Certificating Relations are, for either just Judge, Judges or
Judgment, that do thus rashly conclude (if should grant it for Truth) that
because I have wronged them in the aforesaid, that therefore have done the like
in all the whole, and every part of the rest of my Charges and Alligations, of
which I can say no less then that it is like O. S. and their Line of Truth and
Balance, etc. that they used to measure and weigh by, and yet for all to thus
insinuate, as if concerned for the Honor of God, and the holy Truth, etc. And
therefore pray let them show themselves so much like Men, as to ask their
Neighbor the Counselor, if such corrupt unjust, dirty Stuff and Trash would
not be even hissed out of the Courts and Judicatures of all Men; yea, and that
with both Notorious abhorance and scorn, and which were indeed ineffect for to
say, that because a man is found Guilty (if as before should grant the case,
which in no way can in mine, they having first created one Falsehood, and then
made use of it as a Foundation for another) of the Stealing of a Cock, a Hen,
or some small or trivial thing, yet he standing indicted for Burglary and
Murders as as well as such petty Felony, and the first only being proved
against him, (I say) though no more or other then in the case forecited, yet
that, and for all that he is to be, must be, and shall be fourd as Guilty of
them all by the Jury, and Sentenced and Condemned too by the Judge; the method
and way indeed of O. S. and his four Associate-Relations, Oyer and Terminer,
and all the Justice that is to be expected from them or any such.

And a Word further, as to that in the case of the Counsellor's transcribing of
the aforementioned Paper of O. S's. as in page 40. as the true and right state
of the case; and for his better Vindication, I shall propose this only as a
Question, viz. Is it ever seen, known, or at all usual, or ever practiced in
the method and custom of our Law, for to admit or allow the Accused or
Criminal, to draw up or give in to either Judge or Jury, the Matter of Fact, as
in charge against him, and for which he stands indicted or accused; and what he
so draws up, etc. to be accounted or allowed for truth, or authentic; and if
so, there will soon, I do think, be no occasion for either Judge or Jury, Oyer
or Terminer, viz. when the Prisoner, or accused, is to be them both, viz.
Accuser and Judge; and therefore O. S. in the aforesaid being no other or
better then this in his case, I shall leave it to the Impartial to judge,
whether what the Counselor has done in order for his better Vindication, has
not been much for the worst, and tends only to the further discovery of the
aforesaid in his case, far more than if the Counselor had let it wholly end
altogether alone, and never have meddled with it at all; for who indeed can but
so much as touch with O. S. in this his Pitch, but he or they will be sure to
be defiled therewith.

And further, as to my Charge against him, as with respect to his so hanging
down of his Head at the aforesaid Meeting, held at W. L's the 2d. of the 10th.
Month, 1694. It was true, and is really so; yea, and that too as one, or a man
condemned in himself, and also as true and certain that he slunk, hasted, and
shifted away as soon as ever had gained his Earthly and Coverous Ends, viz.
gotten the Money he so unjustly, yet so eagerly pressed for, sought and coveted
after; though as in the Cry, but the effects of his Partner Excequitor
industry, care, hazard, etc. And in the which, as was then made most evidently
appear; yea, and that to his Face, that he would not so much as touch with him
in it, or be in the least concerned, either to the proof of the Will, its
improvement, or hazard in the putting forth Money; and if not so, and this not
true, as have charged him, why did he not then procure a Certificate of those
he so accounts for his own Friends, seeing so acute and such an Artist at it,
as in the case forecited, in that of the Charlow one.

And further, as to his jocular Flout about my keeping of my Shop sometimes
shut, and sometimes open, on those Days they call Fast Days, I do not remember
that I kept mine shut above once or twice at the most, and that too was upon
the altering or change of the Government from a Roman Catholic to a Protestant
one; and I think as with respect to those matters, that I have been as steady
in it, and suffered more both by Imprisonment, daring Affronts, and the
breaking of my Windows, than either O. S. W. L. J. B. or any of them all;
though as before, that since the Change, I have not seen, or at least in my
thoughts altogether so much Reason for it, as in time of our Persecution, when
our Persecutors by the same Law that they enjoined us to keep them shut, did
likewise require us to go to Church and to hear that they called Divine Service
too.

And again, after his frequent and usual way of Scoffing and Derision, thus
proceeds: And after he (meaning of my self) had brought his Book, says he) to
an end, and set to it the End, he adds four pages more, showing himself
confused, and whimsical in the manner as well as the matter, etc.

Answ. Of which shall give the Reader an impartial and true Account, and to
leave him to judge, I having as he says, ended my Book, yea, and set to it the
End also, it came into my Mind, and that for Peace and the Truth sake, for to
try them again, and yet further for to see that if by any way or means they
might have been prevailed upon to have removed the Cause, and thereby stopped
and prevented the going forth and publishing of the aforesaid, and in order
thereunto, I writ a Letter to George Whitehead, with entreaty for him to use
his utmost Interest and Endeavors with them; in order thereunto observe, yea,
and that as often hinted, when I had not only been at the loss of time and
pains to write it, but at the cost and charge of the Printing of it: But when I
saw that nothing was likely to be further done in it, I then added by way of
Appendix unto the aforesaid, the Copy of the said Letter, with the annexing of
some remarkable Observations upon the inconsistency, uncertainty, unsound and
changeable temper of the said O. S. and in particular in his so forwardly and
largely proposing for the referring of the said Difference, to the hearing of
the Ancient Friends of London, as in page 13, 14, and 48. of the Cry, etc. And
yet for him to so afterward appear against, oppose, withstand, and at last too
denied it (a Man so ready and forward for to charge others with being so
shattered, confused, whimsical, etc.) And a Word further still remains with me
concerning the aforesaid Act and Action of his, give me leave therefore to thus
express it before I end and conclude with him, viz. Oh thou wicked one, and
full of all Subtilty and Craft, thou have not lied herein only unto men, but
unto God, and unto him shall thou give an account for it, with the rest of thy
wicked and evil Deeds, a Man that art so hardy and so void of true Sense, as
not to be afraid of some eminent and immediate stroke from his just and
impartial Hand, as an Example of his displeasure and wrath, upon thee for such
thy deceit and wickedness, which I even dread to think of, and am even as
astonished to consider. And yet for all this, to thus and so talk and tell in
the conclusion of his Book, as in page 46. of another appearing before the
dreadful Tribunal and Judgment Seat, etc. But again, as likewise desiring that
some Ancient Friends would or might be so far concerned (if but for the Truth's
sake) as to examine or know of O. S. what manner or degree of Punishment is to
be, or must be, that my Body is to suffer or be punished withal, seeing that he
had used such scaring Threats of Corporeal or Bodily Punishment. As also to, or
concerning his so wickedly perverting and corrupting that Scripture, cited by
him, 1 John 3.15. it being thus, viz. And so art Judged, says he, by the
Apostle to be a Murderer. And from the aforesaid occasion, did likewise advise
him in the Words of the Apostle Peter, Acts 8.22. Repent therefore of this thy
Wickedness, and pray to God, if perhaps the thoughts of thy Heart may be
forgiven thee, for I perceive that thou art in the Gall of Bitterness, etc.

And for this, and no other cause, that can think or know of, has he so
branded me as in page 44. with Billingsgate-Rhetorick, and which happily he may
think to be both Argument and Answer sufficient to all those Charges contained
in the aforesaid four Pages, he mentions in page 45. of his, the which
nevertheless with the rest of them does stand, will it stand and remain, as
both Charges and matter of Fact, and that as found proved and fixed upon him,
unless he answers them by deep and unfeigned Repentance, for all the Clutter
and Bussel that he makes at the end or conclusion of this his said Evil and
Envious Work, viz. as if he could look God, Heaven, Eternity, Men and Angels in
the Face.

And then again in the same page in that says he, which he calls a short
addition, he says thus, viz. Neither this nor any other difference of any
nature or kind whatever, is or can in truth be said to be ended until the
Reconcilation be wrought, and Peace be made between the party differing, and
this, (says he, meaning of me) one would think is so plain and clear, that no
capacity, though never so weak or small, but must needs discern, believe and
see it, etc.

Answ. And is it not as I have said, and Truth what I have said, for how can it
in Truth, or at all be said that a Difference is ended, before it is ended, or
when it is not ended, neither Peace nor the Reconciliation made, etc. And what
kind of Rhetoric O. S. counts as authentic or profound, if this be false
and profane; I confess I know not.

And then proceeds in a scoffing way, and further says, If his capacity had
not been of the smallest size, be might have discerned what a Foundation he has
laid, should it be allowed to perpetuate Differences, and render them
impossible ever to be ended.

Answer; Should it be allowed, what allowed O. S. that a difference of this or
any other kind, is not nor cannot in truth be said to be ended, when in truth
it is not ended. Shall therefore leave the Reader to make his own Observation
upon it, and also whether this be like the Language of Sion he mentions in page
2. of his, or the confusion that is found in Babylon? as also, whether it does
at all or in the least render any difference impossible, as before, ever to be
ended, because that I said that it cannot in truth be said to be ended, when in
truth it is not. And then again says he, It Is too frequently seen in such
cases, that one or both of the differing parties do obstinately refuse to be
reconciled.

Answer; And what and if it be so, does and must their said obstinancy so
change the case, and alter the State and Condition of things, as to thus
empower you or those which were but Arbitarors or Referies before, and that in
order to Peace, Reconciliation, etc. That thereby or for that cause of either
the one or both's obstinancy, to make you or any else become their Judges and
Sentencers; and what a Foundation of intolerable Thraldom, Vassalidge,
Slavery, Oppression and Injustice, if should be granted, has he thereby laid,
and that this and such is both the Foundation and Structure that O. S. and
these Men are for laying and building his and there House upon, both their
Language and Speech bewrays them, and their Words and Works do too evidently
manifest and make appear. But if any one should ask and say, Why what then is
to be done in the case, when either one or both of the parties differing, be
obstinate and refuse to be reconciled? Answer (though have spoken to it before)
all that the Referies have to do, or can do further in it, is only to endeavor
and persuade them to Condescension and Compliance; and if they cannot, or that
will not prevail, they should, ought and must still patiently wait till either
they, or one of them, be of a better mind, and as often seen that although not
presently done or at first, yet not so wholly ineffectual, so the aforesaid do
their parts, but obtained and accomplished at last. But thee, even thee O. S.
and the rest of the Seven, etc. were not truly so exercised as they ought, and
the state of the case required, whatever have said or pretended, or at all as
men truly using the right way and means in order thereunto, as more at large,
and in particular in page 27. of my said Book, the Cry, etc. And then further,
at the lower end of the said page, says he, (speaking of me) He grants at
length thus, viz. That if the Parties or Referies to whom the matter in
difference is referred, be in good earnest and do use their utmost endeavor for
Peace and Reconciliation, yet if any one of the Persons or Parties concerned,
do stand out and be refractory, etc. all the rest are clear and to be excused,
and the blame wholly and alone to be placed upon the obstinate or refusing
Person or Party, in case that partiality and injustice be not the cause of his
averness. Answer; To which do again return, and say, as before, viz. that in
Justice and Partiality, and that yet, and it only and alone was the cause and
occasion of my noncompliance, and besides, I was the Plantiff or Accuser,
although to be observed and noted as often and frequently hinted, that those,
viz. the said seven were not chosen or intended for either Judges or Judgment,
but Reconcilers, etc. and besides there is a great deal of difference too
between a Person being blamed, and the passing and giving of Judgment and
Sentence against him; and then proceeds on and says O. S. This I like well,
and am so fully assured that we whom he unjustly calls the seven unjust Judges,
to whom the matter in defference betwixt W. L. J. B. and himself were referred,
were in very good earnest, and did use our utmost endeavor for Peace and
Reconciliation. Answer; A mere Conceit and vain Ostentation, for if were so
chosen, why did you not do it, and answer the end of your choice? what
hindered, except partiality, partiship and interest? nor his fully assurance
worthy the taking any notice of, or serves more or otherways than only for
himself; and in their and his own case, else the contrary both plain and
apparent to all that have Eyes of their own, and will not be bound to make use
of or see by his or theirs, as appears, and that from first to last by both
Words and Actions, etc. And then again proceeds, faining and insinuating to his
Reader, viz. with what a great Satisfaction and Peace of mind he can and do,
leave and submit it to the Judgment of God's holy Witness in the Hearts of his
People here, and to the Judgment Seat of Christ hereafter, etc. Answer: And
therefore let me say, oh how can this confident and hardy Man thus dally, dare,
and jest with God, his holy Spirit and Eternity, as thinking or believing him
and them to be such another, or others as himself; but let me return back upon
him the conclusive Words of his own Book in page 46. viz. that he must
certainly for all this be rewarded according to his doings, for fair Words and
Sayings will not then and at that day excuse him, nor stand him in any stead,
nor yet wipe of the guilt either from his or any such evil corrupt and defiled
Heart and Consciences. And then proceeds, But seeing, says he, it is so
plainly proved by positive Evidence and most clear demonstration which cannot
be denied, (but pray observe whether and how far this man leaves it, and with
what limitation and injunction) viz. that A. B. is deeply guilty of doing him
great Wrong. Answ: But if so, I pray wherein and by what? for I know not,
neither is it apparent or proved, except by thus discovering and laying open
his Craft, False-heartedness and Deceit, as thus acted under the guise and
notion of Truth, Sanactity, Divine Sense and Religion. And this farther,

That as in my said Book and Books, it is truly and alone on my part, in holy
Zeal for the truth of God, and the Answering of a good Conscience in his sight,
and not for Name, Praise, Interest or Profit; (though do much question, as have
cause so to do, whether O. S. be not guilty of them all,) has been, was, and is
the Principal cause, that have thus concerned and engaged me with him, etc.

And then proceeds, And therefore, says he, God's holy witness in the Hearts
of his People, which is just and true, must needs Judge and Condemn him.
Answer: I say again as I did before, pray see and observe how this man leaves
it to the witness of God, etc. and how he also mocks, and as we use to say,
makes a mere Nose of Wax of the Holy Witness of God, to be thus bowed both any
and every way to serve his Ends and Interest; for though he pretends to so
leave and commit it, viz. to God's Holy Witness, as twice or thrice over and
over again in the aforesaid page, and yet at last see how he prescribes,
directs, and dictates unto it, and tells what it ought and must needs do, and
be done, and that is for to both Judge and Condemn A. B. so it may be still,
and it further observed, that though he so mockingly and in such deceit
commiteth it, etc. that yet notwithstanding does at last deprive and exclude
them both in it, viz. both the Judgment Seat of Christ, and Witness of God,
etc. and enters upon the Judgment and Determination of the matter himself,
and in a manner to let them both-know like a Judge on the Bench (especially
when pretend, like himself to such a prerogative) to the Jury in what they are
and ought to do, and which is, viz. that they cannot avoid, but must, needs and
ought to both Judge, give Sentence against, and Condemn A. B. And as to the
rest of his Fallacies and Hypocritical and feigned Insinuations, as if all this
and such his evil Works, Treachery and evil Treatment toward me, were in love,
and for the good of my Soul. To which I shall say little more at present,
rather leaving and commending the impartial Reader for his better Satisfaction
to the Reading of my former Books, so often and frequently cited, and then for
to make his own Observation upon the aforesaid Actions; for his Words prove
little, and his Inconsistency less, and withal in his comparing to join and
annex unto it the many shameful Flouts, Jeers, Scoffs, Scorns and Deriding
Words and expressions he has given forth and made by way of a Game or Sport
upon me, in order to reproach and vilify me; I say as before, in this Book of
his he has Titled, A Reviler Rebuked, etc. And the which he intends for an
Answer unto mine, of The Cry of the oppressed, etc. and which the Reader by
comparing together, may soon find out, and see how far this Man's Heart and
Tongue does agree and hold together, as likewise whether the love and good he
is for or pretends by Word, be at all or in the least any other then the tender
Mercies of the Wicked, which is Cruelty.

And now to draw toward a Conclusion, having, as I conceive, gone through, and
either Answered or shown the Impertinency and Inconsistency of all, or at least
of every material branch or part of this his Evil and Envious Work, I do in the
next place think fit to give my Reader this following and further Account of
the said O. S. which I doubt not but may prove to the further confusing and
total marring both of all the whole, yea, and every part of this his confused
and envious Work, which take as follows, viz. After yet, I had Printed and
Published a great or the greatest part of my Books, Titled The Cry of the
oppressed, etc. O. S. sent me a Letter dated from Abingdon the 6 of the 12th
Month, 1695. And unto which I returned him a plain and judicious Answer, and
with equal Terms and Conditions according to the Contents thereof.

The Tenor or Principal Contents of the aforesaid Letter of his to me being
thus, or to this effect, viz. To both earnestly desire, request, and entreat me
for to call in my said Book or Books again, and assuring that by such my
Compliance, and so doing, it should be accepted, be Satisfaction, and so the
Controversy to be ended, etc. The which I do desire and earnestly entreat of
the Reader to observe and to take good notice of it, viz. that after the
aforesaid O. S. W. L. and J. B. etc. had so violently and outragiously
clamoured, highly charged, thus notoriously branded and abused me, together
with the rest of the Seven (his Companions) in the second to thus and so
arraign, pass Judgment, give Sentence, and Condemn me, and that for such a
Criminal, etc. and farther in so accounting of me and others, as hinted, but
for or no other than as Trees that cumbered the Ground, and good for nothing
but to be plucked up, and to be cast into the Fire; Thrives that entered not in
by the Door, but such as only came for to Kill and to Steal, Wells without
Water and Clouds without Rain, for whom is reserved the Blackness of Darkness
forever, betraying Judas's, Brother to Bugg, and like to Rogers and Story;
Dogs, Wolves, Swine, Lions, Bares, etc. base Abortive Illigetimate Brait,
Devils, sometimes White, sometimes Black, sometimes like a Roaring Lion,
sometimes in a Mystery, and sometimes, known by his Cloven Foot, who have made
Shipwreck also both of Faith and a good Conscience, and whose Consciences are
seared as with a hot Iron, accounted as a Murderer, threats of Corporeal
punishment, (pray bare with my so often over and over with it) as more
particularly inserted in a Letter to W. L. and J. B. as in page 20 of the Cry.
And then again, as with respect also to the aforesaid Seven (as in their said
Paper of Judgment, O. S. in page 10. to this effect, viz. That after their
waitings (say they) in the light of Christ our Lord, the Sense and Judgment
that we have received is on this wise, viz. That A. B has not been exercised
in the pure peaceable Wisdom that is from above, but in the Earthly and sensual
Wisdom has been watching over his Brethren with an evil Eye, and seeking
occasion against them, and thereby has much hurt and darkened himself, etc.
Observe, implying as if that those Articles I had drawn up and given in, in
charge against the aforesaid, viz. W. L. and J. B. etc. had been gathered up
together and treasured up not by that Spirit, wherein the fellowship of the
Gospel stands, and Bond of Peace is kept, but in a wrong Spirit, out of the
Counsel of God, etc. and more over and besides O.S's. thus and so thundering
forth like so many Curses, the Wrath and Vengeance of God against me, as in
page 36. of the Cry.

I therefore desire and entreat it again, the Reader to observe and consider
how that though as Solomon says, as before hinted in this Treatise, that the
wise Woman builded up her House, yet how like the Foolish one this Man O. S.
has thus pulled down his and theirs, and that with his own Hands, and to prove
it so and the matter true, as charged, pray give me leave to a little further
Reason and Expostulate the matter more closely and plainly with him, and
therefore shall add to it, and say what O. S. Is a A. B. indeed and in reality
guilty of those so many, so high, so gross, so great and notorious Crimes and
Wickedness; yea, and that both against God, and his Brethren, as to be so and
thus judged and accounted as deserving of all those most horrid and unparelell
Cruel and Severe Reviling, Vilifying, Branding, Stigmatizing and Reproaches,
etc. as also of such hard and severe Threats, Sentences and Amersments by O. S.
W. L. J. B. etc. and the rest of the said Seven, and that too as if but what
they had received the sense of, as in the power, etc. and with or in Commission
from the Lord himself, in their waitings upon him, as in page 10. of the Cry;
and page 15. of his A Reviler, etc. to so pronounce and give forth their said
Judgment and Sentence against me, and yet for all this my Crime and Crimes to
be found at last, when he and they are brought to a Pinch to be it, no greater
nor no more in it, and the business so slender and slight, as that barely upon
the condition only of my calling in of my Books, that came so close and hard
upon them all should be at the end, all to be hushed up, quiet, still, and the
matter solved up, etc. or in plain, my self absolved without any
Father-Confession. Friends bare with me, for my Soul and Life detests, abhors,
defys and surgeth against all such Gross, Subtle and Perfidious wicked
Hypocrisy, great and deep deceit, a piece I think as great and notorious (the
Circumstances considered) as ever was done or acted by any Man or Men before,
as likewise to the same import, in page 26. of the Cry. And further observe
Reader, that although this man O. S. were so hardy and confident, in the Hearts
of his People here, and to the Judgment Seat of Christ too hereafter, as if so
innocent, that he could look both God, Eternity Men and Angels in the Face; yet
after all, notwithstanding to be thus appealed and so struck into and under
such a Dreadful fear and manifest Consternation, at the very appearance and
coming forth of my said Book into Print, a piece that so openly discovers and
makes manifest his own and the rest of his Faction and Associates Treachery,
Oppression, Unjustice, etc. that rather then he will stand the Judgment so much
as of a Man, Men, or the appearance of the Day, he as manifest thinks it now
more safe and far better for him to lay by such his scaring Threats of the
punishing of Body and Ireful Judgments, both on the right Hand and on the left,
poured forth and pronounced against me, as contained in a Letter which he sent
me but a little before, and to Anvil out another way, and to his Craft again,
if he can but, as no doubt he will outface Shame, and what else relates to
either Men or Conscience, etc. having reflected so much on A. B. though
Innocent as by his own Inconsistency; for how can A. B. or any other, though
their c^pacity be of the smallest Size, etc. be Crafty and Silly both, and yet
for all that to so now come down, stoop and appear so humble and so low, as to
thus desire and entreat, and it shall be accepted, be satisfaction, and so for
the Controversy to be ended.

And therefore Friendly and Christian Reader, upon the whole matter and
circumstances of it, may I not break out in this astonishment, open my Mouth,
and say, O blush, oh Heavens! and be astonished oh Earth, at these things! And
this further, so that by all what has been said, written, and apparently and
plainly proved upon them, viz. O. S. and the rest, the true and conscious
Reader may plainly see and discern as before, how contrary both to themselves
as well as unto the Truth, I mean the real Truth of God, these Men have acted
in the premised, by being thus false to God, false to Men, false to their own
Consciences, and false to what they have Signed and given under their own
Hands, and which stands, will remain, and will be in Witness against them until
they acknowledge by Repentance; for indeed how can that be according to God, or
consistent with his Will, that is so vastly wide and altogether inconsistent
with its self, as in p. 14. and last Query of my Book of Queries. And therefore
says my Soul, Oh that the Lord for his Name, for his Truth, and for his
Mercies sake, would be pleased to both root out, and to drive and chaste away
out of his Church and Camp all such evil and deceitful Work and Works, and all
such double-tongu'd and false-hearted ones, and to cause it to exterminate, and
its Remembrance to End and cease amongst Men, and especially all the Professors
of his Holy Name and Truth. And therefore his, viz. this O. S's bad,
treacherous, evil and deceitful Ways and Circumstances considered, may I not
further add and thus infer concerning him.

Oh, Treacherous Heart! Oh, hardened Mind!
That can such Crafty Ways invent,
Without remorse or Wound of Soul,
Or any Token of Relent.
Where shall I seek? Where can I find
At all the like of thee?
Amongst all pretenders to the Faith,
And for the Unity?
For thou art him, thou art known by Name,
The Hinge and Man of Strife,
That secretly does persecute,
Oppress, and wound the Life.
And as to those general Charges as with respect to the Wickedness on the
Persons forementioned, that I intended no further or otherways to any O. S.
and B. A. excepted, than in respect only to those particular Charges alleged,
and not in the least as to the general or series of their Lives.

And now a few Lines more in Answer to his needless and unprofitable
Postscript, which chiefly relates to my placing, as he says, some unnecessary
or impertinent et setera's, or more than happily convenient or proper, the
which I shall not so much dispute or stand the Test of the Controversy with
him, the whole aim, end and bent of my Spirit being more for and with respect
to Truth, Justice, Substance, etc. then to either Puctilio's, or the Rules or
Use of Grammatical Methods, having neither pretended to either Skill or
Scholarship in those and such things, and wherein I have missed or been short
in them, or any I think that he silly and a witless'd me enough about them. But
in this I have rather rejoiced, and have cause still to rejoice, and to both
bless, to magnify and praise the Name of the Lord my God, my Rock and my Stay,
in that he has so far taught and learned me in the School of Christ, his dear
Son, Truth, Righteousness, and in the Book of an innocent and a good
Conscience, so as that I could not, nor cannot in the least abet, close with,
cover or connive at any such wicked, false, deceitful and evil doings, that is
so too frequently and often found both in him and them he personates and
undertakes for; but as to the case of the Widow Bunce and her Son, which he
ci^^s as his first Example, I think necessary to annex these two or three Lines
further. And first, as with respect to the Offense that the said John Bunce had
taken, it is to be noted that it was taken upon, or through the occasion of O.
S. and the rest refusing or denying his Mother a just and fair Hearing by her
Neighbors that best understood the Nature and Circumstances of the case, and
which only related unto outward Concerns, wherein she apprended as in the
aforesaid, That she had the due right of Claim, etc. and not that they had any
thing otherways or further against him; and therefore the case, with the
Circumstances depending, rightly and duly considered, whether it may not give
both cause and room to conclude, or at least to think that he went to the
aforesaid, viz. the Priest for something else, than only for a Wife; for that
it appears not at all unreasonable, but to both suppose and think that he might
go to him for to learn Religion also, yea, and something else besides that too,
he seeing and finding such unfair and unjust dealings in the aforesaid toward
his Mother, that pretended to that degree of Sense, Light, and Spiritual
Discerning above and beyond all others; so that if no more impertinency in my
overplentious, etc. then appears in this he places, as the first of his
Examples, he might have staid out his time in the Country where he was, if a
doing of any good there, then to a so hasted, to a thus only showed his own
Skill and Scholarship; and if such a Fault in A. B. by a few overplus or
impertinent, etc. though not so many as appears that he accounts of neither,
was it not an impertinency, not short of it in O. S. for to send unto me such a
Book, viz. his A Reviler, etc. to one I say that he looked upon, and accounted
as his Enemy, that had so many both false and confused Misplacings, both
troublesome to read, and much more to Answer, they being as follows, viz.
after page 30. follows p. 33. after p. 34. follows 31. after p. 32.
follows p. 37. after p. 38. follows p. 35. after p. 36. follows p. 39.
But these not altogether so material neither, either on the one hand, or on the
other, as his so hipping and skipping, as I may say, over Mountains and Hills,
and thus stumbling, or rather quarrelling at mere Turfs or Mould-Hills, my
meaning being by his so skipping, evading, and giving the Go by to those more
material and substantial parts of my aforesaid, without either Notice taken, or
any answer or return at all, as at large have mentioned and hinted in the
foregoing. But to God I shall leave both he and them that will reckon with them
all for such their merciless Heard-heartedness and Unchristian outrage against
their Brethren, and my self in particular, and that for no other cause that I
know of, than standing up and being for the Holy Truth of God, and witnessing
against such their unholy, open and apparent Works and Deeds of Darkness,
account or call them as you will or please. And thus having somewhat eased my
grieved Heart and wounded Spirit, because of these things, and enlarged therein
beyond Intentions, I do leave and commend them to the righteous Judge and true
witness of God in every Conscience, and remain a true Lover of all the honest
and sincere in Heart,

Abraham Bonnifield.
Let this neither go nor be communicated to or amongst any but Professed or
Reputed Friends.



THE END.
The ERRATA.
PAge the first of the Bo^^, line 35. after the word Pounds, add and. page 4.
line 14. after forth add etc. line 21. for confesses read counts; page 19.
line 20. for account read accord. line 31. after wiser add and. and instead of
from the Remarks and Circumstances, read from the Circumstances and Remarks.
page 22. line 14. for the, read his a. page 26. line 11 for this read thus.
page 28. line 6. after approved, add of. page 38 line 39 for yet, read that.
page 40. line 26. after Words, add it. page 41. line 14. after Bone, add more.
page 42. line 31. after it, add and me. page 44. line 10. to add as. page 53.
line 17. after and, add in; and for Infirmly read Affinity; and after Affinity
add with. page 58. line 30, for to read for. line 35. after been, add both.
page 59. line 14. for and read buy. page 60. line 17. for so read too. page 64.
line 1. for those read these. page 65. line 28. after and, add the. page 67.
line 21. after of, add (...) page 72. line 33. after and, add I. page 75. line
5. before Proceeding add and. page 76. line 22. after for, add of. page 80.
line 2^. after them, add as. line 32. before Meeting, add a. page 87. line 1^.
after farther, add the. page 92. line 36. after A. B. add etc. page 93. line
10. after then, add as. line 20. for yet read that. page ^4. line 38. for the
read an. page 96. line 3. between he and silly, add a.


