A TASTE OF The Spirit of God, AND OF THIS WORLD, AS THEY Have appeared in
opposition heretofore, so now latest of all at New-Windsor.

Occasioned through the violence, and reproach of evil men, against the Temple
and Tabernacle of God, and them that dwell therein. Presented in a Narrative to
the Honorable Committee, for the propagating the Gospel.

By ROBERT BACON, Preacher by the allowance of God, and the Nation, now these
five years there.

Psalm. 50. I kept silence, and thou thoughtest I was such a one as thy self;
but I will reprove thee, and set [all] in order before thee.

Assiduum cum mundo bellum gerant necesse est, qui propheticam functionem
fideliter and sincere obire volunt. Calv. in Esa. in Epist. ad Edw. 6. Ang. Reg.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign
of the black spread Eagle, at the West end of Paul's. 1652.

To the Honorable, the Committee for the propagating the Gospel, Robert Bacon
of new Windsor, wishes illumination in the things, in the which they are
concerned.
Right Honorable,
IT is meet that to you above all others in the Land, next to those that have
entrusted you, I should present this following discourse and testimony; by
which may appear in part, what the Gospel is, of which men talk so much, and
know so little in these times: as likewise what ado and trouble arises in the
World from men of corrupt minds, concerning it, to whom it must needs be (it
could not be the Gospel else) so great a Rock of offense, that they would
(whether Jew or For as Luther says, the spirit of both remains in opposition
to the Gospel even till now.
Gentile, that believe not) that any other thing should be, then it, allowed,
and found among men; for as much as it does detect, not only other, but the
most hidden and secret evils, are either in the heart and life of men; so that
they hate it, no otherwise then does the Malefactor the Judge, when he comes
not only to discover, but to give judgment on him; wherefore most honorable
men, you and the power entrusting you, will find it no easy, yea a scarce
possible thing, to secure it from the reproach and violence of evil men, as
has been evident from the beginning, even till now: I shall only crave leave
humbly thus much to beg of you, in this your so great undertakement, that in
the things of this nature, as well, and more then others, you rather in your
hearts consult with God, then man, least there be of men introduced another
Gospel, then that which is indeed the power of God unto salvation; wherefore
unless you have been in some measure on the Mount with God, as Moses and Jesus
was, I know not how possible you will, or can be able to determine of things of
so divine and hidden nature; if yet indeed you have not hereunto attained,
without all peradventure, you will find, and the State entrusting you, that
your attaining this, but to a willing mind, that no violence be used of one
Neighbor, or man, against another, as touching these things, is the best, and
most excellent attainment has yet been in the Land, since it was first called
Christian; for you shall find by this discourse, what violence would soon be
used against the truth, as it is in Jesus, unless either it be repeld by force
of humane power, or more Divinely overcome, by the patient love and meekness of
them, with whom is the Lamb Christ Jesus, as their head and guide, to whom I
beseech God you may be willing (with others) to submit yourselves, Amen.

To the Reader, if he understand.
Reader,
I Would advertize thee, however I make mention of the names of many, and those
some of them of the greatest note, and eminency among men in the Land; yet I
have done it, not in prejudice to any, or to defame, even the meanest, to which
this discourse does relate; for there is nothing in the World I mind more; then
a healing of all the evil and hearts ( if it were possible in this Land) which
I am infinitely endeared unto, to serve in the Lord, and in particular this
Town, and People of Windsor, to whom I am much endebted, for the love sake of
God unto me, that even to them I am ready, notwithstanding their strong
endeavor to withstand me, to continue to preach the Gospel freely; only this I
have done, I most freely acknowledge, to no other intent, then if by any means,
at least some of them, might awake out of sleep, arise up from among the dead,
in trespasses and sins, that they might have life given them, even that for
evermore: and that they might so do, I have begged of God, that they might hear
his voice, if not in my preaching, yet in my suffering; and if in neither of
them, then in this my writing, which for their sake, I have thus produced,
rather then mine own; I could have been exceedingly well content, to have
continued in the still enjoyment, of my most dear Lord, in my retirement under
the reproach and scorn of men; for there is a secret delight given me of God,
which the World is not a ware of, and which I am sure, through the grace of God
I enjoy, that I am as well pleased with a Crown of thorns, as with one of Gold,
yea, and a thousand fold more: yet it being the will of God, to bear the
affronts don him in me no longer, as heretofore; for he has not hid himself (I
may say truly) here from shame and spitting; I am content at his biding, to go
down as Moses did, to reason the matter about Israel with Pharaoh ( the head
and King of the evil people and things in this place) a service of my self, I
would not, for a World undertake; be it known therefore unto thee, who ever
thou art, that understands, that the time of the true Churches freedom, or
deliverance is come, yea the set time of it is come: Wherefore thus says the
Lord, my sword ( his sore, great, and strong His Word of Might, or his mighty
Word.
Sword) shall be bathed in heaven, behold it shall come down upon Idumea, and
upon the people of my curse to judgment: Wherefore (also) cry out and shout
thou inhabitresse of Zion; for great is the holy one of Israel [Thy King
Jehovah] thy trust and hope, in the midst of thee.

The Heads of this whole Discourse.
Sect. 1. A Brief of the Authors sufferings from his youth, with the Testimony
of the love of God to him therein. page 1. Sect. 2. A very brief Relation, of
whom, and in what manner the Ministry has appeared and been manifest, and
managed in this place, since the Authors first coming. p. 2, 3 Sect. 3. A
Letter of enquiry, directed to the Ministers, after a while combined in a
Lecture at Windsor, together with the event thereof, in conclusion. p. 4, 5
Sect. 4. A discovery of the supposed means, and certain manner of the awakening
of the rude and heady people of this place. p. 5. Sect. 5. The Discourse had at
a certain meeting or vestry of the people, assembled for the having of a Vicar.
p. 6. Sect. 6. Upon what account, and why withstood in this of the Author,
viz. because they went about to make them a Captain, to lead them back again
into Aegipt. p. 6. 7 Sect. 7. A second letter, with the occasion of it,
directed as a case of Conscience, to be determined of the Preachers, and of
their silence as to it. p. 8, 9 Sect. 8. A Relation of the Discourse had with
the new desired Vicar, together with a taste of his Doctrine, and manner of
thrusting himself upon the people. p. 9, 10, 11. Sect. 9. How this matter was
represented to the Lord Whitlock, and Mr. Holland the Burgess of this place, by
a letter to the latter, with the event thereof. p. 12, 13, 14 Sect. 10. A
digression touching an exception taken at the Authors Sermon, by the Preachers
here, with the account and ground why. p. 14, 15 Sect. 11. An account of the
Authors Journey for a visiting of the people that know and fear the Lord in
some part of the West, and how it does relate to this discourse. p. 15. Sect.
12. The offense taken at his unexpected return, and for what cause likened of
some to Moses his sudden coming down from the Mount, with the manner of the
rude people, their behavior toward the Author, with the event of his being
among them, as to the Sacrament, and their taking the name of God in vain, with
their leader, in that thing. p. 16, 17, 18, etc. Sect. 13. Of the endeavor of
the people, by all means to defame the Author, especially by a note procured
by one Mr. Baker, from, as it is said, the Assembly of Divines; concerning
which, something is spoke as to vindication, with a Letter of Mr. Bachilers to
Mr. Holland, upon that occasion, p. 21, 22 Sect. 14. Of the great abuse of all
humane, as well as of the divine Authority of God (his Word) at Windsor, with a
Letter to the Mayor from the Burgess of this place; and the Authors
Observation, Testimony, reproach, and Reason of his crying out under all, now
at last. p. 23, 24, 25, etc.
The first Postscript.
Containing, A Letter, giving light to the fore-past Discourse, to the Council
of State. p. 29. A Letter to the Lord General Cromwell. p. 30, 31 A Letter to
the Governor C. Whitchcot. p. 32, 33. A Letter in the name of the Town to Mr.
Holland. p. 34, 35 The Authors two Protestations, p. 36, 37.
The second Postscript.
Touching a report given out by one Mr Wood, now of Eaton, against the Author,
with a true Relation of the manner and ground of it. p. 38, 39, 40, etc.
Errata.
Page 17. lin. last, read (...). Page 28. l. 35. for una r. vera. Page 37. l.
8. r. as I and some others.
A taste of the Spirit of God, and of this World, as they have appeared in
opposition heretofore, so now latest of all at New Windsor.
SECT. I.
HAving been now these many years conversant, through the Grace of God, in
giving testimony in the things that concern the life that is for ever, as in my
youth at Oxford, afterward at Bristol, Wiltshire, Gloucester, London, and now
these last five years at Windsor; in all which as I have tasted, felt, and
found opposition, wrath, fury, yea Frenzy, from some of all sorts and degrees
of men, the chief and Ringleaders being in all places some of those commonly,
though abusively enough, called the Clergy, See ancient Gildas his epistle. the
latter end.
for so it is, as it has been said, Clerus Angliae stupor mundi; for as for
others in comparison of these, it may be said, alas, what evil have they done?
so I have had in all these places and conflicts, a seal of Gods love, and
powerful quickening presence, to enliven me in death (for I have been in
deaths often) and to enlighten and support me, in the midst of those many clouds
and darknesses, have so often come upon me; so that as the Almighty has been,
and does remain, and ever will the same to me, so have I through his grace and
most effectual love, remained (being kept in his Son) entire and true to him,
though through many difficulties, dangers, temptations, trials, weaknesses,
reproaches, contradictions, as are and has been the faithful in all ages more
or less.

SECT. II.
I have judged it in my heart before the Lord, meet in this juncture of time,
for the furtherance of the cause and Kingdom of God, now much talked of, and in
some degree come in our own Land, to make public this last encounter I have
met with now last of all, from the combined and fully (it seems) resolved and
rude people of New Windsor.

But as leading to that I will mention the matter briefly, as it has related
to me there, from my first coming to this place (to which I was importuned by
the then, and as yet Governor of this Castle, as likewise by the Mayor and
Gentlemen of the Town and others, in the which Mr. Bachiler now Fellow of Eaton
College was principally isntrumental) there was then living one Mr. Cleaver,
who according to the account of the Nation had the Name, Title, and Place of
Vicar, during his life almost constantly I taught every morning on the Sabbath
day in the Castle, a while in the stead of Mr Bachiler, but his Chaplainship
failing, I continued in so doing for the continuance of the solemn meeting,
upon mine own offer, and the Governors acceptance and desire, almost till the
death of Mr. Cleaver, and till a little after the coming of Mr. Simons. About
this time there was offense taken, and no little ado made, as touching my
Doctrine, Purpose, Faith, manner of Life. the particulars whereof I lift not
now to make public, but shall if God will hereafter; but the event was, that
as to Ministry and preaching I was to be no more in the Castle, for it was
determined, none was better, then that which was judged worse, even worse then
nothing, the price at which the Son of God himself was, and at this day is, of
the world rated. Upon this there being a vacancie in the Town in the morning,
through the death of the forenamed Vicar, I was to my seeming somewhat gladly
as well as oportunly desired, and did offer my self to be with them, then,
as well as in the afternoon; in this service I continued a while, till it was
bruited that I had no Warrant from the Nation in this thing; my former order
expiring, together with Mr Cleaver it being only to continue during his
encumbencie, but this to my hand was renewed, with this clause, To Officiate
there notwithstanding the death of Mr. Cleaver; in this work I continued with
much gladness, and delight in the Lord, who had appointed and called me of his
grace thereunto, till some other and new offenses arose (for it is necessary
that offenses be, but woe unto them by whom) for which cause and upon which
account I was a while suspended, by the Military power here (it being the first
and the last exercise of it that way, as I have heard of in the land) that the
doors were forcibly shut a while against me, and the whole town; so that the
Church it self, as they call it, was for a while, as by the Pope of old
Excommunicate, till it was opened again by the endeavor and authority of that
worthy and faithful Gentleman Mr Holl.
the Burgess of this place. This conflict being over, which yet continued long,
and extended somewhat far, for the debate of it was through complaint against
me had in the Great and high Council of State, in which interim I had
opportunity a while, to visit on the first day the Neighbor Towns, especially
on the morning, for it was agreed on for a while that I should be deprived of
the morning Exercise here; for it was judged it might be for the greater
esteem, honor, and use of the morning Exercise in the Castle, which was a while
upheld by some of the Fellows of Eaton, but not without an Order from (as they
say) the Council of State, which at length centred, but did not long continue,
in Mr Lockier, who was not long after called away for a more public and
special service of the State; so that had there not been a supply by me in the
Town, there had been silence as to matter of preaching either in Castle or
Town: in this I continued faithful to God, this Nation, and this place, but not
in peace or quiet, save only in my heart and life to God: for in this time it
was agreed on, that the people should come together to make choice of a Vicar,
who coming together more headily then advisedly (for their time was not yet)
fixed on a certain man, Mr D.
who was, as they say, faulty, as to the State, and suffered, and does suffer
upon that account, a deprivation (as men speak) of his spiritual promotion; so
that as they were disappointed, so they did disappoint them that set them upon
the thing: so that upon the disagreement they had among themselves (as it fell
out for Paul sometimes) I had a further liberty among this people, though to my
disadvantage greatly, as to my outward estate, yet the Lord being in it, I had
joy sufficient for a recompense of all I had sustained, or should sustain in
time to come. About this time, or a little before, there was a Lecture begun in
the Town, which was judged meet to be the day before that I was assigned and
desired to: I confess I suggested my willingness of the Neighbor-Preachers
concurrence with me, which was a little after laid hold on both of them, and
those that particularly applied themselves to the thing, but so, as that I
might be excluded, as was well agreed on among them, though an humble address
were made to them without either my knowledge beforehand, or desire, and that
by two of the most grave men of the Town; Mr D. and Mr R.
but the Preachers, having a man engaged (as they were engaged to him) to vote
as they pleased, they gave The Gov.
him the chair, that would have had it themselves a little before, to determine
for them; it being indeed his design by them, the better to remove me.

SECT. III.
AFter a while, and being often in their company, invited where they were, and
reasoning with them, as I had allowance and liberty given me inwardly in my
heart of God, not ever intending in the least degree, contention or strife with
them, or other; I at length writ as follows to them, to which I had no Reply.

Sir, In the behalf of God, his Church, this Nation, and in particular this
Town and my self, I desire by this Assembly (in account, and I hope in truth,
the Ministers of Christ) to be resolved by the Word of God in this Enquiry:

Whether my forced silence in this place, as to the work I was conversant in,
and exclusion from your Company in that work, be according to the Scriptures,
and the mind of God there declared?

This I humbly desire for a double cause: 1. Because if I should be, and
willingly abide, in Transgression, it would be the damnation of my Soul. 2.
Because you cannot Which I spoke not as out of doubt, but to urge an answer
from them.
possibly be conceived to be only lookers on, but must needs be judged, if not
promoters of, yet such as consent to, the silencing of me in this place, unless
you declare your selves to the contrary: but if you have consented, this I lay
at your feet, begging you to show cause by the Word of God, why; that if I am
in an error, I may by the Grace of God be Revoked.

Yours in the Truth of our Savior, R. BACON.


It was not long after this, but there was an endevor to invite, and bring in,
sometimes one, and sometimes another of the Lecturers, and at length the broad
Seal was got, and 5 li. (more then ever was given, I think, for a Bishops
License) paid by a very forward Gentleman of the Town, one (as will anon
appear) more hasty in his undertakements, then believing or successful, though
in this they say his wisdom has secured him, for he has got his money again of
our body corporate: This undertakement failing, rather through the ill
accommodation and undesire of the people, then by any endevor of mine to oppose
it, it has been, upon second thoughts of me, which they say are best, agreed
on at length I should take my turn, which, as not being ashamed of my
Testimony, rather then of a willing mind otherwise, I yielded to: In this I
have been thrice only in their hearing, and have at least appearingly, and I
hope in truth, some acceptance with them, which I desire not for mine own sake,
so much as theirs, lest they should become guilty of disowning the Love of God,
which is true in me to them.

SECT. IV.
THese things I have written briefly, as Introductory to that which follows,
these being only the wounds I have received in the house of my friends, for my
Mothers Children have been all along more or less offended with me: But as it
was said of the Lord to Jeremiah, If in the Land of Peace, wherein thou
trustedst, they wearyed thee, or were an offense to thee, How will thou do in
the swellings of Jordan? for behold the Tide is turned among us, and we are as
it were on a sudden as We Were before this War began, I mean, as to attainment
in the matters of God: The people that have been in a sort these many years
asleep, unless only in some few heads of them, to their loss and prejudice, are
anew awake among us, some say, by the sound of the late Act of Pardon: These
people are so many and strong, I mean in their resolves and purposes, as well
as in their Actings among us, that unless God help, as I am sure he will his
people, we shall all be, if not in other things, at least in Religion (which as
it is in God, is after all this ado about it of least esteem with men,) I say
again, we shall be in statu quo prius: for they say, volens nolens, vi and
armis, per fas nefasque, we will have what we will have; the day's our own, who
shall withstand us in the way we have agreed on among our selves to take? This
being of me discerned, I minded them openly of the prayer and request of Hosea,
which is indeed the request of the true Church in all ages, concerning the
false, Give them O God; what will thou give them? give them a miscarrying womb,
and dry breasts: of this they had some sense, though they usually say, of what
they hear of me, they have no knowledge.

SECT. V.
WHerefore a little after we had a solemn meeting of the people, which they
call a Vestry, having made all ready beforehand, both as to persons and
purposes, at which by the will of God I was, at which they had, as in effect
they did express, as no expectation, so no desire: much reasoning and debate
they had as to the power by which I stood among them; I thought only to mind
them of, and content my self with declaring this, That the authority by which I
stood was the same by which I am, even that of the grace of God: Wherefore,
said I, since we profess our selves, as we do, Christians, let us together in
sobriety, calling upon the Name of God, having too the Bible among us, make
trial of the warrant by the work I have been hitherto taken up with; but they
waved this discourse, being indeed altogether unfit for it, as it appeared by
the uncivil and rude behavior of some at that meeting. Wherefore an Order I
must produce in all haste, which as I neither then had by me, so neither did
they meet for that intent; but what they came for, they did at that time
frustrate themselves, which was the subscribing a Petition, already drawn, for
a Vicar; for a Vicar they must needs have, what ever came of the Truth among
them.

SECT. VI.
WHat in words they did express, that they had in their paper, That they were
in very great distress, for (the more is the pity) food (poor people) for their
souls, even altogether in such another condition, as the mixed multitude were
said to be, when they wept again for the flesh, and other the fish, and the
like good things they before had in Egypt; but now their Soul was dried up,
and nothing left but this Manna, whereof they had no knowledge, for the color
of it was and is like Bdelium, that it dazzled their eyes to look on it, yea
they were (they are) not able to look upon it at all: besides, before it become
food, it will cost them not a little labor, for it must be either ground in a
mill, or pound in a mortar, and after all baked well in an even, before there
can be any taste or true relish of it, as they well know, whose daily food it
is; for which cause it is wholly disliked among us, that the people are fain to
go for the bread that is for their tooth, some to one place, some to another;
some to old Windsor, where doubtless they meet with many a good meal of onyons
and garlic, the savor of which is manifest every where among them; others, or
the same at another time, to Dotchet or Cluet, concerning which persons and
people I will only say this, That a man may sufficiently, that has any
discerning of the things that differ, take knowledge of the Priest by the
people, or, which is in effect the same, the people by the Priest they adore:
for without all peradventure, neither of all these three (call them what you
will, Parsons, Vicars, or Curates) are of such attainment, either in point of
knowledge or any good and virtuous life, that they should have so many followers
of them, unless it be for the cause abovesaid. Wherefore, as I was concerned,
as sometimes Moses was, I declared, that for their good I would wholly deny, as
much as in me was, what they did with such eagerness endevor after, even as a
father has no regard, but is rather seemingly cruel to the child he loves,
when he desires, though with importunity, not bread, but a stone, not fish but
a scorpion, a snake, a poisonous hurtful thing: yet their importunity at
length, which was so great, that I confess I was ashamed (as the Prophet spoke
somewhat in alike case) that I consented by such a time to produce the Order,
as I had it, for my being there, which I have had, as to this place, now these
five years, a Copy of which I got for money, and accordingly at the appointed
time it was read among them.

SECT. VII.
AT which, things were for a while hush and still, when upon a sudden news was
brought that one Mr Woodson had chanced on a man for the turn of all the rest;
at which, though some seemed offended, yet after a sight of him he proved in
their eye, as the Scripture somewhere speaks, a desirable young man; worthy of;
and therefore it was reported that he had the great Seal of England for this
place, but it proved not true, neither then nor as yet, only they say they
have a good mind to the thing, and some hope of it; however he had enough to
bring him here, through doubtless the importunity and solicitation of that woman
spoken of in the Proverbs, that led aside the young man to his hurt, as he will
it may be in time find; but he having no authority, I could not, I would not,
give him my consent to stand in my stead.

At this second meeting, when I was by promise engaged to give them a view of
the paper, by which I had warrant, as to this work, from the Nation; And having
considered, and indeed spoken beforehand, that this formality and tradition,
which I could have wished to have been removed as a stumbling block out of the
way of Christ, long ere this, I mean the Vicaridg, it being in this place, that
I say not in the whole Land, a seed of strife among the people: as a Case of
Conscience I proposed this to the people then assembled, and in particular had
some long debate with our late Knight Mr Richard Bream about it, he contending
in effect, that pretense of Conscience was a ground and seed of much trouble
and evil in a Land, which is true, unless we come to some certain Rule for the
well guiding and right regulating of it; for we that profess our selves
Christians, ought in all things to have the consent and allowance of God, and
his Son our Savior, in all we undertake: Wherefore Conscience being nothing
else then to concur with another in knowledge or consent, as the word
Conscientia does denote, it is necessary, and cannot be but that all men have
warrant and ground for what they are and do, either of or from God, or his and
our adversary the Devil, and consequently have in all things either a good or
an evil Conscience; which good Conscience, that I might retain, and the people
with me in this place, I propounded to them, and a Gentleman that that stood by
read this Proposal, which being of no regard with them, I presented it, as
follows, by one, to the rest of the Preachers there.

To the Reverend Preachers combined in a Lecture at New-Windsor.
Much honored men, For as much as it is preached, professed, and believed, that
you are such with whom the Word of God (i. e.) his mind, is, as the Apostle
says, but we have the mind of Christ: It is humbly desired (because it must
need be judged that you are concerned) to give Resolution to this Demand, now
in debate among us in this place:

Whether (as it is acknowledged As it was of all the people.
) if all things done amongst this people (by him that is yet among them) be
according to God and the Scriptures, the said people ought to be (for a
Circumstance or Tradition not approved in the Bible) countenanced to oppose the
same, or make the same void unto themselves, since no good thing can be opposed
unto it self, and no evil thing ought of good men or believing to be allowed so
to do; both which are enforced from that saying of our Savior, He that is not
with us is against us, and he that gathers not with us scatters.

This was, as far as I could hear, put up in the pocket of him that received it
Mr W.
, as likewise was the former, and communicated to none of the rest, at least so
as I could hear of it again.

SECT. VIII.
UPon this all was hush again a while, at least as to appearance, though a
strong endevor, but secret, still they had to obtain their end, the man they
had so great a liking to, who at length appeared at Windsor, with a brute of
his having a recommendation, some said from Mr Holland, others from the Lord
Whitlock; but neither proved true, as himself confessed, coming to my lodging
with two of the then Churchwardens, who with great importunity desired my
allowance of his preaching the next day, to which I promised within a little
while at the Gentleman's lodgings to give him my answer, and desired them after
some discourse to suspend it till then; accordingly I came, and after some
speech had with him of the College of which we both were, as he says, he
knowing me, though I have no true remembrance of him, I told him, as I had
purposed, that I was content to hear him to morrow, not only once, but twice;
wherefore I would he should in the morning read a Chapter, and give as he was
able the mind and scope of it, and as I and the Congregation liked it, he
should preach in the afternoon as I in the morning, and I would read: To this
he somewhat solemnly replied, That he was sorry he had not had beforehand
knowledge of my desire, for then he would have prepared himself for the thing:
To this I said, I did not disown the use of reading books, and other means, but
this I would say, as our Savior does, Every Scribe instructed to the Kingdom
of Heaven, brings forth out of his treasury things both now and old; so that a
good man, much more a good teacher, is more or less always ready; but this he
liked not, for which he would appeal to the judgment and censure of all the
most orthodox and learned men of this age, and in particular mentioned the
Judgment of Mr Owen, Mr Owen.
whom he served a while, he says, at his Cure in his absence in Ireland: but I
believing Mr Owen of the same mind with me in this thing, told him, that
surely what I said could not be denied, upon good grounds, of any; and
therefore told him, that upon that alone account of his expounding after this
manner, as we speak, ex tempore, I would consent to his preaching here, or
otherwise not at all; for who is it (said I) that is notable, and may not get a
Sermon ready to say by rot upon all occasions? Wherefore I advised him to be in
good earnest, for if he came not in the Name of God, I would not, I should not
say Amen to what he said: at which he was not a little offended, for, said he,
I preach the Truth; at which I replied, that the Truth is one thing, and the
shadow, form, and picture of it another; now where the former is not, the
latter cannot be as it should; but he would not, he said, learn of me: To which
I replied, that he that is not willing to learn even of the meanest, is not (as
I judge, though I would not offend) meet or fit to teach any, unless you be of
any greater attainment then was Paul. By this discourse I had acquitted my self
before the Lord in my heart, and was at once eased of the burden of him, and
the whole Town, that before upon that account lay heavy upon me; for upon these
terms he parted, so that I thought we should have had his company no more: late
in the Evening came again our two Churchwardens to mind me that the Gentleman
was now willing to expound, so he might preach immediately after; but I gave
them no other answer then before: wherefore after some menacing of me, that if
there were any disturbance I should bear the blame, (though you indeed make it,
said I,) for he should preach, said they, whether I would or no; which indeed
the next morning came to pass accordingly, for I coming somewhat sooner then
usual to the place of meeting, found the people speeding thither, and our new
Vicar forcing himself, without any kind of power warrantable, to the
accustomed place of speaking, where when I saw him, I confess I was offended,
and therefore (there nothing of service being yet begun) I went up to the
pulpit to him, and told him, Sir, methinks you do very boldly to thrust your
self upon the people, having no allowance either from Heaven, or of Men: He
told me he had the warrant of the Churchwardens; To whom I replied, it was no
less presumption in them: where I left him in possession quiet enough, unless
it were in his own spirit, though he has since, against the testimony of his
own heart, given out a report, I should in a sort assault him there, and lay
hands on his cloak, as though I would per force have pulled him out thence by
the head and shoulders: Truly for this, as I had no mind, as well as I had no
warrant, so neither had I, or have, strength to such a beastly brutish
business, it is enough that God is with me, the security of that Word and mind
of his, is committed to me; for sure it seems much more becoming a Christian,
then a Heathen, to profess, as Horace did, Non egit Mauri jaculis nec arcu,
integer vitae, scelerisque purus.

Who faultless is, and walks with God,
Needs not, as others, use the rod.
My best strength, through grace, is the doing in Christ the most holy Will of
God: wherefore I retired my self to a place convenient for a hearing of what
would be said, and made observation especially of these two things in his
discourse, he endevoring after the acceptance of the people, though it were to
the prejudice of the most holy Word and truth of God; The first was his bending
his speech to a justification of the observation of days and times, especially
according to the form and custom of the late much-talk'd of Church of England,
for which intent, according to the rubric, were the Chapters read, and his
discourse thereon, assuring, That as such things were of old in the first and
best times, so they ought of good Christians to be with no less esteem
respected now; not considering either the Apostasy that has been now yet of a
long time, nor yet the express forbidding of the Apostle the Church of the New
Testament, as it is Gal. 4. and Col. 2. The second was his Charity mistaken,
that all were to be reckoned of the brotherhood (for that was his subject, Love
the Brotherhood) that had the outward Baptism: a very quick and easy way of
uniting all Opinions of men, all Europe and the World over; for if the
brotherhood be alone upon that account, I may truly say there is no such thing
at all, as that of which the Apostle speaks; but the truth is, the world, or
which is all one, the Synagogue of Satan, whether in Rome or England, have, for
a deceiving of themselves and others, the more securely and without control
possessed themselves, as Babylon did of old, of these and the like most holy
utensils, or vessels of the Temple, or true Church of God; so that he that
describes the Brotherhood by any such like outward observation, it is to me a
sure sign that he has little or no skill of the thing of which he speaks, for
as much as these things are found with much more glory in Babel, then any where
else.

SECT. IX.
BY this Sermon, the people of this place had again a taste of that, which
their Souls have these many years much lusted after, but have been of God and
Man in a great degree deprived of, yet in this encounter the matter was,
through a cross endevor of other the people of this place, almost as soon at an
end as begun, for they by Letter to Mr Holland, as the other by Petition to the
Lord Whitlock, gave occasion of a debate in private above, of the matters were
more public here, in so much that their expectation became for the present
wholly frustrate, as to this man and meats; yea some there were, undesired of
me, though not without my knowledge, thought good to put an end to the strife
arising in this place, as touching the formality, name, and title of Vicar; for
as for the thing it self, the matter of preaching, and the officiating in all
things relating to the glory of God, and the good of the people, as the
Parliament by their Authority have allowed and continued me here, so I have
with all gladness, as to the Lord and them, been faithful in the thing and
trust have been committed to me, according to the measure of Gods grace and
presence with me, which is indeed the rule according to which I walk: I say,
there was upon this occasion, by the consent of some for this intent, this
Letter writ to the Burgess of, and for this place, Mr Holland, the import of
which I have been of many of all sorts, almost ever since the death of Mr
Cleaver, much urged to accept of, but still refused upon this alone account
that the matter needed not, for it could add nothing to the thing I was
conversant in, saving only a certain foolish, and some say, Antichristian
name, which I was not willing, after all this war and trouble and struggle
about matters of this nature, to accept; yet now at length through importunity,
and the consideration that as it could add nothing to me, so it could indeed
derogate nothing from me, for let men call me what they please, I shall
notwithstanding through the help of God remain still the same; as upon a like
occasion being sometimes asked of one of the now chief Fellows of Eaton
College, whether it were lawful to be a Fellow there yea or no, I gave him
only this answer, that set a light, whether of a Candle, or the like, in the
dark Cellar, or elsewhere, it will afford light as freely there as in the
Chamber, for certainly the Motto of every good man is, as his was, semper idem,
the same in one condition and place, as another: I say, upon this account I
consented to the writing and subscribing this Letter in the words and form
following.

Very worthy Sir,
A Letter to M. Holland.
We are encouraged again the second time to present to you our desire as
concerning Mr Bacon, that having had an experience of his manner of life,
purpose, faith, doctrine, and diligence in the work he delights in, and we by
him partake of, we have judged our selves concerned, and do in a manner fully
persuade and assure our selves of your furtherance of us in this endevor, that
the Broad-seal, sought for so often for others, might be through your means and
our charge fixed now at length on him, not because he of himself either desires
or needs it, for a justification of him, or the work he labors in, but rather
first to put an end to the strife is already here upon that account; and
secondly, thereby is conceived hope of perfecting of the good is by him,
through the help of God already begun; and finally, it is conceived worthy of
the State and you, and this place, to fix him to this place with suitable
encouragement, that has to his outward prejudice, so faithfully and so long
served the Lord and you among us: This if you procure, we shall acknowledge our
selves further bound to you; and for that cause are bold to subscribe our
selves,

Your humble servants and friends, to serve you in the Lord, at Windsor.


This was after a while seconded by the voluntary offer and endevor of one of
the chief men of our Town, who took opportunity at his being in London to apply
himself both to Mr Holland and the Lord Whitlock, from both which he had, as he
did profess, encouragement as to my continuance here; only this they were
pleased to say, as well the one as the other, that they did judge it meet not to
burden me with any such thing, as the name and title of Vicar, yet not
expressing themselves as willing of Mr Kind's coming, to a concurrence with me.

About the same time I had occasion in London (coming not at any time there
merely upon the account of this business, to which this discourse does relate)
Mr Holland (which I crave leave of him to make public) professed it was his
Judgment (as it was and is, I am sure, my desire) that this Name and Title of
Vicar may be in the Land wholly at an end, as indeed it is high time it should:
at this I confess I was not a little glad, for it seemed somewhat strange, and
a matter indeed much to be lamented, That after all this ado, and turning as a
door upon the hinge, we should be found both in form and practice, not one Iota
moved, from what we were ten years ago.

SECT. X.
HAving had this account given me, I returned, as heretofore, with delight and
diligence, to the work I was concerned in, and as I remember was in particular
engaged to the Tuesday Lecture, where I confess I appeared, though few were
there to hear me: I will not refuse to make mention of the Text which I judged
meet to be minded, especially in the times that now are, Zeph. 3.18. I will
gather them that are sorrowful for the solemn Assembly, those that are of thee,
to whom the reproach of it was and is a burden: At this discourse some offense
was taken, but alone of the Preachers, for opening that of Solomon's Song, as I
did, Chap. 3. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. especially Verse. 7. That the Spouse never
found her Beloved till she had gone one step beyond the Watchmen, of whom she
sought him, but found him not. Verily I was greatly moved and grieved in my
heart, that they should take offense at this; for without all doubt such as
they are should not seek their own, but the honor of him they say have sent
them, that is to say, the Lord himself; which gave me occasion to remember and
present the speech of that old dying, but wicked Bishop in Queen Mary's time,
when one it seems pressed in spirit said to him, Doubtless it were better that
the Scriptures were allowed in English, replied with some heat, If that door
were once open, then indeed farewell all; as though nothing were more
prejudicial to the Clergy, then the knowledge of the People: At the house of Mr
Bream.
At this meeting I came, being particularly invited thereto, which is, I
confess, the rule I have hitherto walked by, as to those entertainments.

SECT. XI.
WIthin a little while after this, I had occasion and was bent in my heart for
the West, not only so much for the cause of other matters, as to have a
renewed taste of the fruit I hoped, and have much longed after, to partake of
among the people, with whom I have had my conversation in times past, upon the
account of the testimony of the Coming and hope of our most dear Lord and
Savior: Among them I was a while with great delight, finding them in full
expectation of what was much in my heart, the dawning of the Day of God, and
their gathering together in one in him, upon that account. Before I undertook
this, I had some promise of supply of one suitable to me, and known and much
desired of the most enlightened of the people in this place; Mr S.
but to make it yet more sure, I endeavored with some of our Neighbors at
Eaton, whom I have with a ready mind heretofore served upon the like occasion,
that in my absence, if they thought meet, they would stand in my stead: but
having no promise, I could not assure my self of any; wherefore, as upon the
account aforesaid, viz. my longing after the people in the West, as also
because of my assiduity and diligence among the people here ( unthankfully,
that I say no more at present, entertained of them) I resolved to take the
opportunity, and leave the event and guidance of the matter and people to God
himself alone, the great Shepherd of the sheep, in whose custody alone I am
sure we are all safe.

SECT. XII.
YEt being as far as Newport and Cardiff in Wales, I was of the Lord, after the
second Sabbath, strongly moved in my heart to return, so as to be at Windsor on
the third, which was the time, is as yet called Easter Day; for we have in the
Land, as yet, so little of the substance, that we are fain still, and do with
much zeal, as elsewhere, so especially here, retain, not the Jewish, by no
means, forsooth, that must be said, yet it cannot be denied but that we hold
fast to the Popish new-invented Jewish, as well as the Heathen types and
shadows. In my absence they were destitute of one to fill the Pulpit the first
day; on the second they got with much endeavor, having a fit opportunity, Mr
Kind, having been all this while as it were to this place fast asleep, but he
is awake of them, and brought with all speed here, when (doubtless upon
consultation had one with another) he gave notice of a Sacrament should be on
the next day, (sure as a seal of that union of theirs, which was not, is not,
in God,) for which intent all things, at least without them, were made ready,
the Innen washed, and the plate and other utensils made bright for the purpose,
and the wine bespoke, because such as they would have was not ready, for they
must needs have Muskadine, there was to be something, at least like it, made of
the Vintner that week; at the end of which, I unlooked for, and unwelcom as to
these people, came; some saying, I was sent for, and came post-haste, though I
had no intimation, saving only in my heart from above, neither was it possible
I should: Wherefore others, that were as glad of my return, likened it somewhat
to the man Moses his coming down from the Mount, when in his absence Aaron and
the people had agreed to make them a Calf in stead of God in Christ, to go
before them: Hence there was not a little ado and talk of the people, some
advising, and they none of the meanest of them, to defer it (at least) to
another time; others were as much resolved, have it they would now, what ever
it cost them! I hearing this on the next day minded to have sent to the Mayor,
or rather to have come unto him, and to have got some five or six more of the
chief of the Town to have conferred together, to prevent any inconvenience that
might hereby arise; and for that intent the chief man in this cause, as to
activeness, came to me into a place in town, to which I sent for him, and told
him my resolve; wherefore we going together, he indeed unwillingly, but I of a
ready mind, Rand.
to an ancient man and Professor, but he not being within, some say willingly,
I was urged to go to, and speak with the Steward, but staying a while in the
street, he being called, came to me, with whom after a little discourse I
abruptly (I confess) left him, he calling in question that which was to me
certain, and I am persuaded to him also in his heart; By all which I understood
an agreement was already made, and backed by all the power they had or could
(but secretly) make, to meet the next day to the purpose abovesaid: wherefore
on the morrow I came somewhat timely, willing not to be prevented as I was
before, I found the doors shut, but within a while came the Sextons boy, and
told me the Churchwardens had secured the keys, that the doors could not be
opened till they came; wherefore staying a while there, not a few persons of
very rude and unbecoming behavior came near, reproaching and reviling me openly
to my face, one of them at length swearing, but not in truth, that what ever
come of it, they would I should have naught to do there that day, for however
it was with me, yet their conscience was to do as they said: but said I, is
your conscience well informed? to which was made this answer, they could not
tell whether it were yea or no: at length came one more ancient then wise, whom
God forgive, Mr. G.
upbraiding me with teaching them what he said they did not at all understand,
unless it were this, that I made them to be all either Jews or Gentiles, yea
plainly telling me (as I remember some have said of old they called the
Disciples first of all Christians (i.e.) (...) (i. e.) Christ's Asses, at
Antioch, it being given (as is believed) as a name of reproach there) that I
was one of the veriest Asses that ever he knew, or to that purpose: Now O God,
said I in my heart, yea and tongue, this people talk of what they understand
not, speaking evil of what is the alone help and healing of them, the Lord and
his love. The Churchwardens coming and seeming to entreat my allowance of them,
had in mean time at another door let in Master Kind to the Pulpit, where he no
sooner came, but he had his guard of rude men about him to secure him there;
which when I had perceived I withdrew to a place convenient to hear, having a
little before had occasion to tell them, that sure enough it was manifest they
wanted what they could not deny was needful at such a time as that, to wit,
Love; or as it is rendered and now termed charity; they, I mean two of them
that were Churchwardens, for so they will needs be called, though I am sure they
are no such thing as the word imports, told me indeed that for that alone cause
they purposed (as they said) that day not to come to the Communion, meaning the
Idol they had made ready to fall down to, and adore: For I had a little before
told them, however they made boast of amity and love, it was manifest enough
they had none in their heart to afford me, which indeed they did not refuse to
confess; yet forsooth they could notwithstanding pray, and do other things well
enough pleasing to God, though in mean time they remained professedly in the
hate of him in me, and me for his name sake. After the lesson read, by one that
has in like manner forced himself to that service, I took my opportunity when
there was some silence in the Congregation, to speak as follows, sitting in
the gallery and seeing every thing carried on there by force, through a
manifest opposition against the authority both of God and man, as is evident
and confessed. I desired the Preacher would give out to the people the mind and
meaning of this text, and words of Samuel to Saul, which he spoke upon his
rebellion against God and him, To obey is better then sacrifice, and to harken
(as I am sure they did not to God) then the fat of Rams; upon this one stood
by, and said I disturbed the Congregation, others began to make a noise under
the gallery, and our singing man calling to Master Kind to go on, which he did
having yet no warrant either the one or the other, and might with as much
pretense possess the Castle, yea the whole Nation, to which it does directly
tend, and to which it must needs come in conclusion, if it be thus let alone,
but I held my peace; Sermon ended in the which was an exhortation to the
Sacrament, which they had in their way, made ready for them, I went as the Lord
knows in love to the Vestry, where I no sooner appeared but Master Kind as
moved at my coming, being putting on his gown (which for the greater solemnity
of the business he had brought down with him) for where the truth is not, it
must be piec'c up with such toys as these, he demands of me, preventing me,
what I had to say to him? Why truly said I, that you read over your text again,
which was this, for an Easter days Sermon; Come see where the Lord lay: Now
said I, your text is not as you expounded it, an exhortation to come to Christ,
much less to the Sacrament, unless in another sense then you meant it, but that
the women should see, as the Disciples did afterward, that he was not in the
Sepulcher, where they thought to have found him; now said I, as your text led
you, to show where Christ is not, so if you be able to show where he is, you
say something, or else you do nothing at all: at which he seemed much moved,
and would, he said, dispute with me about the matter before the Assembly of
Divines; distinguishing immediately upon our discourse of the Sacrament,
betwixt, as they say, Corpus Christi Sacramentale and reale, professing his
knowledge and power only to meddle with the former, but having no sense or
perceiving of the latter: now the former without this latter is naught at all,
spells nothing, is nothing, save a bare sign or cipher which makes no number;
Neither is there any Christian, whether Popish or Protestant, Lutheran or
Calvinist that does or ever did hold the Supper of the Lord to be a bare and
only sign; so that I might truly say the thing was not there, Christ was not
there, of which he spoke (i. e.) the Lord or his body, or which is all one,
caena domini, the Supper of the Lord, which is no other then as himself says,
the daily, but supersubstantial and caelestial food of them that believe or are
born from above: whilst I had thus speech with Master Kind, came in looking
pale our Unknighted Gentleman, Master Bream, charging me with a disturbing of
the Congregation, and letting of the Preacher in the service he was bound for,
and they both together multiplied in their unbelief and ignorance of God many
words, oppressing me as much as they could with them; that I sought out a place
convenient, where to retire my self, till their speech should have an end; but
Mr. Bream denied me that rest which he could not give unto me, laying hold on
my arms and cloak, and by force ( I not much I confess resisting) thrust me out
of doors; at which I said in my heart, and not only so, What Communion Sir will
you have, from which you will excommunicate me? He with much heat affirmed, the
whole Town would agree together, and draw up Articles against me, as since I
hear from him they have done: There followed many rude men after us, repeating
and justifying what the Gentleman said; moreover he told me the people and boys
of the street would stone me, and that Heretics were wont worthily so to be
dealt with, (of which number Sir, said I, you remember holy Steven was one;)
but I departed home, only telling him I was sorry to see him in so great a
passion. I perceive the number of Communicants were very few, they say (since)
I was a let unto them, truly I did not appear upon that account, or for that
end, but merely since I saw they were heady and resolved in the business, I
thought it my duty to God and them, to take the opportunity to give them some
light in what they did so headily and upon the alone account of custom thrust
themselves upon, even as the horse that rusheth into the battle.

SECT. XIII.
OF this I confess the next day I gave notice by letter to the Burgess of this
place, yet my letter went by Boat, wherefore I could not, neither had I a
thought of doing prejudice to any, as it was generally reported, I was the
cause of Mr. Bream his sending for by a Messenger from the Council of State
that evening; yea one of our grave women (forsooth) very confidently reports,
Mis. M.
I was met in the returning from the great City, and told, that that had been
my business there: this is like as true as is the report now fresh in Town,
that there came a man at the Church door to speak with me, but I admitted him
not to it, who told one of our Neighbors, as stout as I was, I had taken of him
above two hundred pounds for making of Hats for him, which I would it were
true, I confess I would not refuse the employment; for I am very well content
(were I able) to work for my living as the Apostle was, yet shall not, cannot
look back from the work I have been hitherto conversant in; but had it been for
hire, I would have left it long ago. About this time was reawakened a certain
something, for what it is I cannot tell, produced as heretofore, so upon this
occasion, by one Mr. Baker, who were he as good as rich, might be of great use
to this Town and Nation, having it seems, as I have been told, and is certainly
true, procured of some of the late Assembly of Divines about the time of my
first coming to this place, some kind of subscribing, that I was not of them
approved, as it seems this Gentleman was, and is, as very sound to God and Man,
both in his heart and life, as it appears he had a great deal more favor with
them then I; they would not otherwise have fortified such a man against me:
this note, or whatever it be, has of him been made use of, if by any means, to
alienate the people of all sorts from me, in the which he has not a little of
late prevailed, many in the Town having taken Copies of it, though I could
never see any; yea, they have, as the people of like nature and spirit
heretofore, sought by all means, into all places, where I have been, to search
and find out the forepast history of my life, making special and particular use
of my sufferings at Gloucester, yea at Oxford, when I was a youth there, as well
as of the wrongs and losses I have sustained heretofore in the case of the
Common Prayer and Ceremonies from the Bishops, so that the evil that was in
them all, is risen up and allowed here, or connived at, at Windsor, to the
dishonor of God, and the shame of the pretended high attainment of Reformation
in the things divine and of God; but whether this be under the hand of the
Assembly, or of some of them, I cannot tell: this they know, that I refused not
to come before them to a giving testimony of the truth. I believe, as they well
know, the great matter they seemed to be offended with, was my nontaking the
Covenant, which I only refused as upon that occasion, as though it were even
essential to the matter of preaching. Some other things they said as to the
Catechisms; but all they took notice of as displeasing them, as may appear
afterward, as unsound, was the business of Baptism, which they say, as indeed
I do, as to the outwardness of it, judge to be in esteem with us of like nature,
as are other outward rites and observations, not such as in them consists the
Kingdom of Heaven, or the true knowledge of God: this was only mentioned as an
error, in a little Book writ by those convened at Sion College, for detecting
of the supposed error and false Doctrine of many worthy men in the Land: it is
true, Mr. Rutherford of Scotland in a large Book of his seems offended, not
only at it, but other passages; but the story of the times, and the reproach
cast of him upon others more eminent a thousand fold then my self, as the Lord
General, Mr. Burton, Mr. Dell, etc. may save me the labor of speaking, as to
the vindication of my self as to the Assembly: yet I will add what will give
some hint of the offense, they have it seems taken at me viz. my being here
without either their allowance or order, which yet was not through either my
desire or endeavor, as it does appear partly by my being with them in
conference from about two till after seven of the Clock; but also by the
following letter written to Mr. Holland upon that occasion, whereby may appear
what esteem the Author of it had of the Assembly and me, in those days.

Sir, The Bearer hereof Mr. Bacon, is that good man which the Town has chosen
for this place, as you will understand further by a Letter from the Mayor and
his Brethren, Sir Robert Bennet, the Governor, and diverse others: we doubt not
of your best assistance, according to the Contents of the said Letter: we have
also written to Sir Henry Mildmay, hoping that both of you may so carry it, as
to get him passed by the Committee, without any reference to the Assembly, etc.
Subscribed your Servant in Christ John Bachiler. Windsor Castle, April 13.
1647. which it seems was done accordingly.

SECT. XIV.
BUt the people to perfect their work of my, or rather the truths, remove far
from them, it being Easter week, they chose two others, but most falsely called
Church wardens (rather truth and Church opposers, which is the pillar and
ground of it) men much more for the purpose, Mr. M.
these with others get hands not a few, some through fear, and some for
advantage, as has been confessed of one eminent in the Town, though a Reed
indeed shaken with every wind, for the obtaining the man and Vicar they
endeavor after, whose contention about him is like the strife had of the
people heretofore about their idol Maypole, for a Maypole they must have, and a
Vicar these must have, nec possunt dicere quare, hoc tantum possunt dicere amo
te, for their lusts sake: this they prosecute at London, but had a present
repulse from the Burgess of the place; but yet have had, they hold all men in
hand, no little encouragement from the Lord Whitlock, of whom they report they
have his countenance, yea the promise of the great Seal, which yet as I do not
believe, so I have cause to the contrary, as the testimony of Mr. Cokayn, whose
abiding is in the same house with him: as likewise the Relation of the Lord
Whitlock himself, not only to Mr. Holland, but also to a Gentleman of good note
and account in this place, who went in particular to him upon this occasion;
yea it should seem strange, and indeed impossible, unless the Lord Whitlock
should be contrary to himself, to allow and permit any violence of the people
to be used in any thing, least of all in things of this nature, as the case is
here; so the people do in professed opposition against the pretended, if not real
endeavor of the Mayor, and the power civil here, as it came to pass the next
Sabbath day, or rather the third after it: the Preacher having in the morning
with no little devotion, doubtless, prayed for the Right Worshipful the Mayor,
and the Worshipful the Aldermen his Brethren; yea for the High Court of
Parliament; and yet as I spoke in the afternoon (when only these rude men allow
me there) he not only himself did act, but professedly allowed others in an
opposition against the express authority of both: wherefore I do confess I had
with much struggle at length obtained leave of God in my heart to appear again
in that place, especially the Pulpit, which seemed to me as most polluted and
defiled, with the lies that flow out from thence to the deceiving of the whole
Land: this I did not refuse, when I came there to make known to the people,
that then were present; I was holp in this thing of God, for through him I came
to understand, however I stood in the same place, yet I was not there upon the
same account with him and others that speak there, sed non a Deo, but not from
God: there were present at this discourse, as I have been since told, two
Parliament men, that seem, as Mr. Bream says, much offended with what ever I
said or did at that time; they never heard (as he says they say) such
expounding, such preaching, such catechizing, yea there was not (which it seems
they earnestly looked after) so much as a Psalm. Now I confess, its sufficient
for me, to mind the work I am conversant in as to God, whether it take, and be
accepted with men, yea or no: yet I have thought, whoever these Gentlemen were,
for I know, neither their persons or names, that though they had no great
liking to other things, yet they should very well resent the discourse I had to
uphold and justify the just power and authority of Parliament, whereof these
were Members, unless as some would have I confess (as it has been the case of
the powers of the Nations of a long time) that the power of the Parliament
whether subordinate or supreme, should only be manifest and made use of to the
upholding of evil, both men and things and customs in the Land, rather then the
good: I am sure there is no exercise of it in this place at this time; as to
the thing, I have been now these five years conversant in; the power, whether
Martial or Civil, laying at the feet of rude men, who have and do beat all the
sway in this particular, to the great shame and reproach of the Government, not
only of this place, but Nation: indeed they hold the people in hand, yea they
have told me, and the Mayor of the Town, and Mr. Mills, that none have power in
that place but the Churchwardens, they mean a power of force, that of Bulls
and Bears: now these men may upon the same account make the Church a Castle,
and carry Guns and Swords to secure themselves in what ere they do, as set
Ruffians there per force to rule: Indeed, as I once declared, even to the Mayor
himself, that in the true Church the authority of one is as great as is the
authority of another, there being acknowledged in it no other authority then
that of the Word, which is the Scepter of Christ, by which its ruled, not a
power of Beasts, or a beastly power of force, as these men like brutes, not
either as men or Christians, lay claim unto, and have been and are allowed in.

The next Sabbath was sent down a letter from the Burgess of this place to the
Mayor of the Town. A Copy of which I thought worthy here to express.

SIR,
I Understand there is much disturbance in the Town of Windsor, about preaching
in the Church; and therefore I thought fit to write to you, to desire you, that
the peace may be kept amongst them by your Authority: That so he, that yet has
the sole authority that I know of, to preach there, may not be disturbed in the
performance of his duty, who is Mr. Bacon, a man of a pious and peaceable
Conversation, and so judged by all good men that know him, for ought I ever yet
heard. And the Parliament by their Authority having appointed him to be
Preacher there, I think it is your duty to see that he may peaceably execute
that which the Parliament has directed him unto. Sir, I shall heartily desire
that all the people of the Town may have such a teacher as may lead them into
truth through the goodness of God. And wish they would quiet their own spirits
until the Parliament shall settle such a course both there and elsewhere in the
Nation, as shall be I trust for the glory of God, and good of all his, which
they are endeavoring with all convenient speed to do, and had sooner done, if
the public preservation of the Nation had permitted. Sir, I have no more at
present, but to subscribe my self, Your very affectionate friend and Servant,

Cornelius Holland.
Kinsington, May 1. 1652.

This Letter being delivered on the evening of the Sabbath, the next morning as
I passed by toward the public place, Mr. Mills standing at his door, desired
me to step a little out of my way; said I, that I shall not do by any means,
yet shall not refuse to come to you, with whom I found the Mayor, who together
told me of this Letter, and how they had endeavored to the utmost, but could
not (or rather without all peradventure would not) let or hinder the people
from their rude resolved purpose, confessing they were greatly ashamed, yea
that it was the shame of the Town and place, that such violence of rude men
should be so allowed: the Mayor went before, and I came immediately after and
found Mr. Kind in the Pulpit with his guard of rude men attending him, among
whom when I appeared, and the Mayor, they looking pale, I fear with wrath and
envy, being resolved, as it came from the mouth of one of them, to have laid
hands on me, the Mayor entreated them, but left his Mace and his heart behind;
but they knew his mind, and their other Rulers too, though they did pretend
some of them to some other thing: I asked them what these rude people meant,
they told me they came there to hear, nay rather to disturb, and if need be, to
fight, to maintain their lust and evil; some threatened, others persuaded me by
all means to leave these parts, for they had no desire of my company.

This day I went to Eaton, and heard a good and seasonable discourse there, I
beseech God they may make good use of it; in the afternoon I spoke somewhat
large by way of exposition on the 3. of Jam: especially on these two heads,
Brethren be not many Masters, for thereby ye shall receive the greater
judgment; for we that believe acknowledge one only in Heaven, even Christ: and
that 2ly, which follows in the chapter, that out of the same Fountain cannot
proceed bitter waters and sweet, as we find (as the Apostle does declare) that
the same tongue is exercised, as well in cursing as blessing, praying or
preaching: my Brethren these things ought not so to be: yet then the which
there is nothing more common, as is evident among us in this place: the
following week being in London, I went, the Lord directing me, in love (seeing
Mr.-late-Sir- Richard Bream in Westminster Hall) and had much speech with him,
he telling me of his own accord, that the people, many of them of Windsor, had
brought up some nine Articles to swear and prove them against me; and that the
first of them, or at least one of them, was this, That I should affirm, that I
should be one of them should judge them at the last day; and should confirm it
with this Scripture, whose sins ye do remit, they are remitted, and whose sins
ye do retain, they are retained; the residue he could not tell, only he said,
he had rebuked them for it, and would not allow them to go on in their purpose
by any means.

The next day not looking for Master Kind again, he having no warrant neither
heretofore, nor as yet: Yet I found him here, with his company fortified, and
ready to go on as heretofore, with whom having some discourse, after that I had
told them, which in effect I had done before; since they would needs that Mr.
Kind should teach or speak unto them, he having yet no authority so to do, I
would descend and be willing, that he should speak one part of the time, in the
morning, and I the rest; and so again to do the same in love and submission to
the Lord in the afternoon, and let the truth prevail and have dominion over
both: but this they would not (I know) they dare not, cannot yield unto, for
though the truth does not, error does seek to secure it self in a corner, or at
least with some outward force, as the preaching and doctrine of this young man
does. This day coming into the Castle, and seeing the soldiers at the Guard,
as I passed by, I said, I think I must speak the Word of God to you, which they
readily accepted, and after a little while sent for me, by order of the
Leivtenant, to the Chapel; where I spoke about an hour, out of the third of
Luke, in the which I was much refreshed, especially in memory, of the soldiers
readiness to hear the Word of God at the beginning of these times, above other
men, of whom I had occasion to speak from the Soldiers asking John, And what
shall we do?

This last day, coming as heretofore at the appointed time, I found the doors
shut; our men that will needs be called Churchwardens present, said, the time
was not yet, (but said I) you render that for a cause, which is none, the cause
is sure your Exclusion of me, which they could not deny; there were many
present and much offended, especially when I told them, that what they did, was
of the same nature, with that which did Corah, Dathan and Abiram; and taking
aside Mr. Kind, told him, That what he did was not well, not only to break the
Commandments of God and man (himself,) but even to teach men so to do, as
indeed he does; upholding the people in evil and sin, both against God and his
Christ, which they in their own Consciences cannot deny.

Now it is very mavelous, this evil spirit and power (thus to the dishonor of
God, and his most holy Spouse or Church) should find, as they say, and as it
seems it does, so great encouragement and strengthening, not only from hence,
but also from elsewhere; insomuch as they boast of Committees, Parliament Men,
the Assembly of Divines, Mr. Peter's, the Governor of our Castles approbation of
them, the Lord Whitlocks; yea I am confidently told by Mr. Cokayn (that I name
not many others of equal, yea of greater note then he) whose word I suppose we
may believe, that this whole matter, is supported with much endeavor, even by
some of our neighbors at Eaton; yea I have some, or rather great cause to
believe it, for as God is witness, whom I serve in the Spirit of him in the
Gospel of his Son, they have withstood me in the truth of God, almost ever
since they came into these parts, having in manner whispered me, and my many
little young and innocent babes to death, with their lies and false reports,
and not a few concerning me; making me guilty, and a transgressor, in the
things wherein I have been found faithful to God and men: This I speak as of
necessity, the truth of God, for the vindication of it self in me, forcing me
so to do; that I may say, as Craesus son did, that never spoke before, What,
kill my father! kill and crucify my Savior, yea the Savior of the Land!
which I am sure they have done in me; they that believe not, may come and see,
as Thomas did, and thrust their hands into the wounds made in his sides, for he
bleedeth even afresh among us, as it is said, they crucified the son of God
afresh unto themselves. This last Sabbath, the Governor came himself into the
Castle, otherwise peradventure I might have had opportunity to have spoken to
the people, and the soldiers, as before in the Castle; but I shall conclude
with this wish, God have mercy on the power of the Nation, that they may not
suffer any power of theirs, much less any earthly power opposed to theirs, to
oppose it self against the power of God and his anointed One our Savior, Amen,
Amen.

Quae tua sunt facias, quae functio una requirit
Comittas soli, Caetera cuncta Deo.
Thy duty do, and Calling just fulfill
In both thee safe keep, Jah, Jehovah will.
The first Postscript.
BEing a Transcript of certain Letters, with a double Protestation made and
annexed, for a further light to this discourse, and mine own just and true
intent in it.

A Letter by way of Petition to the Council of State, occasioned, as it does
declare.
To the Right Honorable the present Council of State, by Authority of
Parliament.
Right Honorable,
HAving this last night had intelligence by a worthy Member of this Council of
an information and complaint made against me by Col. Whitchcot, the present
Governor of Windsor Castle, I humbly beg to represent before you, that I have
been in a constant way of suffering wrong from the said Governor ( at least
from him as an Instrument) as many of great note, and some deserving Members of
this Council can I am sure attest) even ever since immediately before the
Armies last march to London, for the establishment of the present power as now
it is, which I pray God to continue in Righteousness and Peace, for the quiet
and Profit of the Commonwealth; but as becomes my Profession, I have with
patience and silence as to men, born the reproach, and suffered the wrong,
crying yet in my heart to God the most righteous judge of all men and actions,
to bring forth my righteousness, even in the Conscience of mine accuser, and
this Nation, which I am confident he will now do before you, he having given
the occasion.

Wherefore I most humbly implore the Almighty God, whose presence is with you,
that according to the wisdom given you from above, you may go down after his
example into a narrow view, and search after the nature and ground of this
complaint, for the like has not yet come before you, that it may be as a sign
to the Nation, which I heartily wish in the first year of your Commission, that
there is in you of that wisdom of God was sometimes in Solomon, the first year
of his Reign, to that intent and purpose, that as he was to that, you may
appear to be designed of God (by righteous judgment) to give to this Nation
rest in Righteousness, Peace and Plenty, so prays

Your Petitioner to God for you. ROBERT BACON.

A Letter to the Lieutenant General, now his Excellency the Lord General
Cromwell (whose favor I humbly beg in the publication of it, being nothing at
all to his dishonor) occasioned as the Contents do declare.
SIR,
THe light of the Lord be your guide, to lead you into those ways that conduce
to his glory, the Kingdoms good, and your own internal-eternal peace and rest
in Christ, Amen.

The last night, being April 30. the two late Captains of this Castle, Robinson
and Beale, came and represented to me the ground of their remove hence, as your
self (they say) declared it. Now because I am also under the same, or a greater
charge, as they report, I undertake with your leave and their request to lay
the matter of my accusation, and my own clearing of my self before you, though
the Lord will clear me; that is, his own truth and image in me: for nothing
else do I desire to vindicate, the innocence of which must and will appear:
there be two particulars, I understand, in order to the late remove charged on
me, I think he mentioned Mr. Lockier was the man possessed you with it; The first
was mine adhering to the Parliament Men prisoners here. The second my provoking
the Soldiers to take the Castle for them. Sir, I am not in the least measure,
through the grace of God, so much as inclining to any such thing, but do
altogether abominate the endeavor both of the one and the other. The Lord is
witness how I suffered, and was oppressed by the late Presbyterian power so
called, which yoke was by you, as a principal instrument in the hand of God,
broken in pieces, I suppose to the joy of all good men. And therefore I cannot
be in reason thought to promote that which indeed I waited upon God to remove:
concerning the persons of those prisoners I never had speech with them but
once, and that was not for above half a quarter of an hour, meeting them in the
yard: Cancerning the provoking of the Soldiery to any kind of design
whatsoever, it is to me a very great marvel, there should be any such
suggestions; but that this is not strange to me, what our Savior says, they
shall speak all manner of evil against you falsely, for my names sake: this has
been my lot from the Bishops, Presbyters, and now last beyond all thought by
some of them commonly cast'd Independents. There are of your own Family, I
suppose, can give some testimony concerning me; but I seek not the testimony of
men, God will witness for me, as he is witness in me; that as in the fear of
God, with all good Conscience both toward him and men, I have behaved my self
in this place, seeking by all means in public and in private to advance the
testimony of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ in faith and love, waiting for
the effect and fruit of it in peace. Truly Sir, I have prayed unto the Lord,
and to that I press, that there might be no more war in the Land, and therefore
would that every man (I would be an example therein, as well as a Preacher
thereof to others) would begin to war against himself, which I am sure would
make the other war soon to cease. You have it likewise (they say) and not only
upon report, for your self ( they say, you say) have been a hearer of me, that
I seem to deny all Ordinances, yea they say the very Scriptures. Truly Sir, it
is not what you say, or what others report, but what is, that I must have
establishment in. By the Ordinances I understand the Commands of God, that
concern my self, which whiles in his power I submit to; I judge my self one of
them through grace that keeps the Ordinances of God: But it may be some call
their own inventions and Idols by that name, as you know the Jews did; And
such like Pharisees there be now not a few: But that I may be calumniated to
some purpose, it is said, I deny the Scriptures. Truly Sir, there be many in
words confess them, but in life and deed deny them: I find of those, that will
needs be offended with me, even whether I will or no, that say the Scriptures
are the word of God; but I bless God I know them to be so, because I find the
effect and tenor of them in my self. And I am confident others find and feel
the same in my word, life and Conversation, and therefore are offended with me,
as those of the like spirit have been heretofore. Sir, how I have in my heart
prayed to God for you, is secret alone to him before whom all is open. Yea what
joy I have had in you, he only knows; but now I fear, I fear, I fear, you are
like to be, if not already, ensnared of the world and men. Our Savior says,
beware of men: Your name, power and prowess have drawn all men's eyes upon you;
some, and surely of that Company you will find the most, will not only act as
you would have them, ( to get your favor, and thereby honor and wealth;) but
over-act your will and Commands to your prejudice and dishonor: this upon my
life will be the effect of the late complaint from Windsor, if you countenance
or connive at it. There be others have their eyes and hearts too, toward you;
but it is in the way of pitying of you, I have always thought men in high place
(since high places are slippery places) have more need of pity and prayer then
applause.
and praying for you, being forced to stand aloof from you though the
reproaches cast on them, and the prejudices had against them, of which sort of
men, I could name not a few, whose counsel would be ( I speak what I know) the
Council of God to you. Sir, I beseech you, do not think therefore all is well
with you, because all about you applaud your sayings and doings; many mighty
Emperors and potent Kings, have been undone this way.

I could name a third sort of men, that look upon you only with an eye of envy:
against this kind of enchantment, an evil eye, there is no better antidote, then
the true fear and knowledge of God, (i.e.) a union with him, against whom all
contests must needs be in vain. Sir, These things I have written as to the
Lord, to whom not in all things to approve my self, I know no greater or worser
death: I live not, unless the Lord live in me, whereby I become his, and

Your servant, for his Sons sake Rob. Bacon.
Windsor Castle May 1. 1649. Poscript, If you neglect to clear us, and give a
right judgment in the thing, God himself will do it, and our reproachers shall
be ashamed.



A Letter to the Governor, after that he had threatened me, first to depart the
Castle, secondly that he would shut the Church doors against me, as indeed, he
afterward did.
Honorable Sir,
I would not offend any man, much less you, least of all the present power and
authority of the Nation, yet you are offended with me, and go about to suspect
me, and to deal with me as an enemy, not only unto you, but to the Nation; And
so by you, am I put into this condition, not to be in expectation of any
further likelihood of subsistence in the Land; The Lord forgive you this wrong
you do me, and my whole enlarged family; but this I am prepared through the
grace of God to sustain, and much more, even to death and bonds for the Gospel
sake; for which I am under so great contempt with you: If I have offended you
upon any other account, why do you not deal with me accordingly? but it seems
nothing troubles you, but my preaching and testimony, which yet is not mine,
but the testimony of Christ himself. And therefore on that behalf I am
exceeding glad; for so persecuted they the Apostles and Prophets that were of
old. Sir, I adjure you before the living God, and those that promote the same
thing with you, before whom you shall be accountable within a very little
while, whether this Engagement and endeavor against me be not rather to fulfill
your will, and satisfy your lust, then for to please and serve the State
thereby. That it to the former, and not the latter, will be made apparent to
every understanding wise Christian man, and that thus you are doing nothing
now, but what you with others have been endeavoring ever since before the
Armies last march to London; and that by sundry means and ways, as will be made
evident; so that this is but idem agere, hoping you have an opportunity to
effect that now, which you sought then, though upon other grounds: But as for
the latter, it cannot be; for God is witness against you, and will be witness
to them, the present power, as he is in me, that you do them great dis-service;
for what do you else hereby, but make them, as much as in you is, like your
self, offenders with that which is good? so that you debase, and as much as in
you is, hinder what they profess to promote, the free and open preaching of the
Gospel; and no other Gospel is there, or can be preached, then that which is,
and has been by me, unworthy in this place: this I speak, as not prejudicing
those that give out the same testimony with me; for the way of life and peace
is but one, one Christ.

Sir, as being in a great strait betwixt God and mine own heart in order to
your Command, which is as to acceptance of the world a present snare upon me, I
would be satisfied by some testimony of Scripture, as a Case of Conscience by
Mr. Simonds, or Mr. Batchiler, or any other, whether in this point I can be any
ways warranted to sit in silence to morrow, notwithstanding your Command. And
that for these causes; first, for that I testify no other thing, then that
which did the Prophets and Apostles, and Christ himself; If I do, or have done
otherwise, let it be made to appear by the opposers and deniers of it.
Secondly, as for this public place and liberty, with all thankfulness I
acknowledge, I have for it the present Authority of the Nation, as you know,
and did your self consent to, and promote, and they have not as I know revoked
the same; whether your will, or their Order ought, by me to be bowed down to, I
have consulted with God in mine own heart, and the testimony of the Scripture,
and the practice of believing men, that in obedience to God, especially having
too for it, the Authority of men uncontradicted, saving by your only word, I
find my self necessitated, though in the midst of many temptations as to the
outward man, to go on as in times past in public, unless I am hindered by your
outward force: to which I shall willingly yield my self a Captive in this case,
even one in bonds for the Gospel. In which Captivity I shall have more freedom
then mine opposers. Sir, hearken to the secret word of God in your heart; And
be not offended with him, as you are causlesly, who is, Sir,

A true Lover and Servant of you, but in the Lord, ROBERT BACON.

This Letter was penned (I suppose by Mr. Bachiler,) and sent by Mr. Mills in
the name of the Town to Mr. Holland.
Honored Sir,
WIth all respects and thankfulness returned you for that great care and
unwearied pains taken for us in that which is (and should be) the chiefest
means of our happiness, the planting of the preaching of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ amongst us, and your procuring for us toward it 50 l. per annum from
the Committee of plundered Ministers, out of the Dean and Canons Lands of
Windsor, in this Borough of new Windsor: we further imbolden our selves upon
you the only Instrument, whom God in his good providence has preserved to
forward so glorious a work; And do give you a short account of our endeavors
and proceedings therein: we had an eye upon Mr. Symonds of Holland, and made it
our business to have brought him to this place; but God has otherwise ordered,
first him, and then our selves. Providence, after our longing desires to settle
this work of the Gospel in this Town of Windsor, has ordered, that Mr. Robert
Bacon, Master of Arts, coming to supply the Being indeed of him to that intent
invited there.
room of Mr. Bachiler in the Castle, where he being well approved of, and well
known; some ten days past we made our desires known unto him, to preach also in
the Town this last Lords day: so that not only that good report we have had of
him, but also that experience we now have of his sound Orthodox judgment in
the truth of Jesus Christ, preached unto us, confirms us of his ability and
worth; so that we meeting together upon the debate of the whole business, he is
made choice to be (nemine contradicente) the Minister to preach in the
Parish Church twice every week, viz. once on the Lords day There being then a
Vicar in being.
and once in the weekdays, and hope to raise this 50 l. you have so honorably
procured for the work to The fifth part yet, I scarce ever had there, in any
such way.
50 l. more, by our voluntary subscriptions. Therefore we request you further,
to perfect this work for us, and to present him to the Committee of plundered
Ministers, that they may accordingly appoint him to be the person to officiate
in this Parish Church, according to their Order of the 23. of Jan. last; and
that also you will be pleased to obtain for us the continuance of the yearly
payment of 50 l. from the said Committee; for which and all your faithful and
continued care and respects of us in the saving of souls, the Lord multiply
blessings upon you, which are the earnest desires and prayers of,

Sir, Your very thankful loving friends to serve you, Christopher Whitchcot.
Charles Burges, Mayor. John Spenser. Math: Day. Rob. Bennet. George Starkey.
Thomas Baker. Thomas Redding. William Botterel. Will: Mills. Will: Church.
Andrew Plumpton. Thomas Chapman.

Windsor Castle the 13. of April, 1647. The Copy of the Order of the Committee,
we have sent you now by Mr. Mills, who is further to wait upon you, concerning
the Premises.



The first Protestation.
An humble and true Testimony or Protestation concerning the manner and end of
my Conversation, October 7th. 1649.
(as elsewhere) so since I came to Windsor, which I was necessitated to give,
and read this day in the Congregation, for the silencing (if it may be) of the
hearts and minds of all that conceive evil of me.

HAving been conversant the space of two years, or thereabouts at Windsor, by
the Authority of Parliament, and the importunity and desire of many of the
chief of the Inhabitants of that place, as the Governor Col. Whitchcot, the
Mayor that then was, Mr. Day a Justice of Peace for the Town, Sir Robert Bennet
since dead, Mr. Mills, Mr. Cleaver since dead, Mr. Bachiler, Chaplain then to
the Garrison, Mr. Beak, Dr. Spenser, Mr. Redding and others. I have all this
while (as God shall bear me witness at the great day of his appearing) minded,
designed, prosecuted, sought to magnify, and bring forth, into the hearts,
lives, and Conversations of all sorts and Sexes of persons, no other matter or
thing whatsoever, then the pure and naked testimony of the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, for the Reconciliation of men to God, and one to another in him,
that there might be peace on earth, as there is good will in God, and those
that are born of him, to men. Neither do I know, or shall hereafter through the
Grace of God, design, or pursue, any other thing. So help me God.

ROBERT BACON.

A second Protestation made in secret before the Lord, and put thereupon in
writing, and now published, as much as in me is, for a remora, or let to the
flowing in of evil in the Land, that I, and as many as the Lord our God shall
call, may not be overtaken, or overwhelmed therewith; in the which, doubtless
there be to whom this shall come, will with the like readiness, and upon the
like ground I mean, vow to God and keep it; for there be a people, that are
able so to do.
do, and some others have done.

Gather my Saints together unto me, those that have made a Covenant with me by
sacrifice, Psalm. 50.
I Do hereby promise and protest, that by the help of God Almighty, and the
obedience and grace of his only Son, revealed in me in some measure, through
his most holy Spirit of light, life, and love, in all things uprightly to
demean my self, both toward God, inwardly revealed in me; and man, outwardly
appearing unto me; according to the most holy Law, and will of God, as it has
been, and is witnessed unto, by the Scriptures of Moses, and the Prophets, by
Christ and his Apostles, and the remnant of the Seed of Abraham, that are till
now, the blessing of all Generations: To this of a ready mind, in the hope of
eternal life in Christ, I subscribe my name, together with the rest of those
are made willing in this day of Gods Grace and Power, Amen.

ROBERT BACON.

The second Postscript, touching a report with great confidence given out by
one of our now Neighbors at Eaton, not any of the fellows, but one whose
abiding is there among them; concerning whom I will only say this, that he
being a Companion, and a daily guest there, as well as their Tenant; yea, not
only a fellow-Member, but of late, in the great City an Elder of a select
Church and Congregation: it has been to me of a very sad and lamentable
import, that after all these pretenses, no better fruit then the causless and
most unjust reproach of his Neighbor, against the mind of the whole Law of God,
should be yielded of so eminent a plant as he would seem to be: truly it minded
me of the Text I of late heard the new conduct on, there, Cut it down, why
cumbreth it the ground? for certainly the ground that brings forth naught, as
says the Apostle, but Briars and Thorns, is near unto cursing, yea it is even
cursed already.

This Gentleman has had some 3. or 4. particular things of offense to charge
me with, which he did not at all in private open unto me, according to a Rule
they pretend to demean themselves in things of this Nature by, but in the
presence of diverse, especially one whom he knew had some respect unto me; for
which he seems to be not alittle offended, upbraiding him of it, as an evil
scarce to be allowed, rendering for his reason in general, his countenancing not
only here, but appearing openly in London, on the behalf of one, that though he
seemed (said he) to walk according to rule, yet he is indeed a very great
seducer, and a mavelous let to all good in this place: which when he
understood to be spoken of me, and that with great heat, he told him that he
should take time to consider of it, but could not for the present give credit
to it, unless he should understand more then ever he could believe concerning
me hitherto.

The first was this, That I should borrow Col. Okeys Horse sometimes, and when
I had it in my Custody, should go with it into Smithfield, to sell it there.

The second was this, That I should be present where I saw a man in bed with
another man's Wife.

The third, That Mrs. Ceenee sometimes lodged at my house.

The fourth and the last, that no man can tell that hears me, whether I will
speak from, or of God, or the Devil.

All these were named of him with this profession, that he would make proof of
them, telling it him, as glad to have somewhat of this nature to report of me.

1. Now as touching Col. Okey, I scarce ever had any speech with him, save only
once, he spoke to me at Slow going to meet the Lord General coming out of
Ireland.

2. As concerning his Horse, I never borrowed any of him, he and the Lord knows.

3. Yet I will not deny, but being in Gloucester, I came to London upon a Horse
which Colonel Okeys Wife said was hers.

4. This Horse Col. Massy, now prisoner in the Tower, when he seized on me
with some 16. of his Troop, ordered for my use in this Journey, which as I did
not, so I had no cause to take notice of, whose it was, being his prisoner, and
so wholly in this business passive.

5. This Horse trotting altogether, I road not on till I came to Warwick, being
till then in the custody of the Corporal, and one Trooper, two most honest and
Christian men, riding till then on the Corporalls Horse, and he riding on that
appointed for me, both which did of their own minds offer and endeavor to
exchange it for me, that I might have one more easy, nothing suspecting, but
that it had been the Governors own, who had done me all this wrong, which ten
Horses could not give me reparation for.

6. Col. Massy did himself before the Committee, promise to accommodate me
well, and with a good Horse, to London.

7. This Horse, as I have heard, as well as these men, were the States; for
whom, and in whose cause, I had suffered great loss before at Bristol.

8. This matter is fully enough spoken to in a Book I writ of that relation of
my sufferings, and wrong I sustained in that place, Mr. Bachiler giving a
ready, and full approbation of it, being the then Licenser of Books.

9. When this Book and suffering was, I was then justified of the Independents
(so called) as an Independent; but many of them have seen cause to do since,
more unwarrantably, what they then condemned the Presbyter for, whence it is my
lot to suffer under some of them, as I did of their Fathers that went before; I
mean those, whether Prelatical, or Presbyterian, of like spirit with them.

10. This Horse I refused in London to deliver at the first challenge to Mrs.
Okey, as I had cause to do; neither did I deliver it, she being a stranger to
me, till I had an Order from the Captain-Lievtenant under Col. Massey so to do:
which when I saw, she had her Horse, as she desired.

11. This Charge was in particular once also brought against me by my loving
Neighbor Mr. Bachiler, who had himself justified me, and the thing, in the book
he licensed; but indeed I was then related to my Honored Lord Say, and he a
man then of great power, and Mr. Bachiler was not yet fellow of Eaton, nor had
as yet by a full Table left off, trusting in God; for from his own mouth it
came, (as God is witness, I was told by the Governor, in the presence of his
Wife, and some others) that he had trusted in God so long, that he was once
like to be starved.

12. I bless God through his grace I am innocent, and without blame, in my
heart and life, as touching this business, both as toward God and man. I do
confess I have thought of some further recompense for this my suffering and
wrong at Gloucester, which has been so judged heretofore, especially of Mr.
Bachiler, and those of the Independent way: that I say not of the whole Nation
as it is now; but as sure as God is, this adulterous and wicked Generation,
having through Apostasy from God and his people, enriched themselves by the
spoils of others, care not what become of the Israel of God, so they may sit in
quiet, feeding themselves full with the Onyons and Garlic, and other the
fleshpots of Egypt.

Lastly, let it be judged of God and man, what spirit this is that thus boldly,
and with a most impudent face, reproacheth the truth of God, manifested in the
extreme sufferings of his Saints and people.

Mr. Wood, for I will not refuse now to name him, his second charge is, That I
should be present where there was a man in bed with another man's Wife.

To this I will say, first in general, that where the good man sows as
becomes him good seed, there comes the Enemy and sows tares: That which I
have innocently, and for the furtherance of the truth as it is in God,
declared, That this adversary of God and me has somewhere picked up to fling
as dirt into my face: wherefore, as the Lord is witness in me, I will return it
back from whence it came, and give out the report truly with the foundation of
it, whence it has and does arise.

It Is not unknown to some, that being to see a Brother sometimes in Wells; when
I came, his Wife, my Wives Sister, told me, he was then a prisoner at Taunton,
by the means of Mr. Pine, which indeed I think cost him his life, though he was
put forth again, and nothing laid to his charge; which freedom I obtained by a
Letter from the L. Fairfax, that then was General: wherefore my Sister rode
behind me to Taunton, but she had ordered it to take Horse at one Garmans, a
poor man, yet much talked of, who came now and then to her house.

At this man's house I stayed about half a quarter of an hour, I had the rather a
mind to see him, in that among others, I had heard Mr. Peter's as well as
others, particularly speaking of him: This man about some two or three years
after, with his Wife (as they said) came to London, of whom I only heard, but
saw them not; but having again, with my Wife, a Journey into the West, we
overtook, and left behind on foot, some half a dozen of men and Women on the
Road; the next day, or the same day at even, we having stayed by the way, we
overtook them again, about Marlborough, when, of the man that was with us, they
enquired my name, which when they knew, they stayed and spoke to me, going over
a Bridge; I willingly went softly to have some speech with them, they telling
me in effect they were, yea, that they were Jews, and that the time of their
gathering together, out of all Lands, especially this, was come, and that they
should away for Jerusalem; yea, that they must be circumcised, and so forth:
To all which I replied, that in a sense I approved of all this, but not in
their sense, or as they applied it; but said, that he is a Jew, and of the seed
of Abraham that believes, whose praise is not of men, but of God: yea, the very
same too, said I, are the Circumcision, which worship God in spirit, and so
have the true Circumcision, which is yet that made without hands. Lastly, the
place of these I judged to be no other then Jerusalem; but that I mean come
down from Heaven, into which no unclean thing shall be admitted: as they liked
not mine, so I disowned their sense of these things, as I am sure I had the
greater cause, after about half a miles riding, I left them, I going another
way; about a twelve-moneth after, I came to London, and as I was going to
dinner in Fleet Street, about eleven of the Clock, or a little after, there met
me a Merchant, that formerly I had knowledge of, and some acquaintance with,
told me, that there were some at his house had a great desire to speak with me;
I left my dinner, and went with him to a fair and great house, where I had
never been before, he had me into an upper Room, where when I came, I heard a
very great noise, of one speaking I knew not what, with exceeding great
fervency; I would have stayed, and heard further there, but he urged me to go
where it was into the next Room, where I saw at the Table, the forenamed Garman
writing, having before him an Hebrew Bible: there was some two or three men,
besides this Gentleman, whose house then it was, and my self: in the Room was a
Bed, and one sitting up in it, speaking as I said before, and claping his hands
with exceeding seeming height of confidence; but the words he spoke I did not
understand, only they seemed to me, to be a mixture of Latin, and some other
tongues, (they said Hebrew) and all other Languages) I confess, I remembered he
mentioned often Melchise deck, the High Priest, or Priesthood, the name Judah,
and Jesus, with such zeal, that the fire seemed to me, even to sparkle out of
his eyes: he did besides, I remember, curse with great bitterness the
Priesthood, as he said, that was not after the order of Melchisedeck: by his
side there lodged a Woman, which I confess I did suspect was the Woman I had
seen before at Wells, and after that upon the Road; but not understanding, and
indeed, not approving of, yet wondering I confess, at the business, after less
then a quarter of an hour, I departed, and have never seen them since.

Now the truth is, as I have had opportunity, I have related the matter, as I
here have done, to such as I thought good, and in particular, did so now in my
last journey, to one at Bristol, from whom peradventure Mr. Wood has had this
Relation, or else I know not whence it should arise; and peradventure, this man
would I should have gone and made some complaint of these people, as the manner
of some is, to be very severe in complaining against, sometimes, but the
seeming evils of others, but in mean time, very sparing of their own abominable
lusts, the Seed and Posterity of Saul, who kill and make an end, with great
zeal forsooth, the lesser Cattle of the Herds and Flock of Amaleck; but in mean
time, save alive the fat and strong.

The Scriptures we all know declare, how that our Savior was himself, not only
in the Company, but left alone in the presence of an Adulterous Woman, whom the
unseen Adulterers had brought there before him to accuse; so that certainly
there is no cause of blame for my being (as I was) and coming as I did to this
place; wherefore they have the greater sin, who have made it first evil and
wicked in their own hearts, out of which as the root of all filth, they have
cast it again forth, if it were possible, for the staining the innocence and
truth of God in me: so that I confess, I do not reject the story as I have
given it, and as it is, as the spirit and end for which it is produced.

The third is, Mrs Ceenee's Lodging sometimes at my house.

Mr. Wood, by this minds me of the rule which they say was Matchiavels, if a
man be never so innocent, yet the way effectual to ruin him, is audacter
calumniare and aliquid haerebit, lade him with reproach, and some, if not all,
will be believed of most: verily, I have been so dealt with to some purpose, by
this and some other my friends at Windsor: the Scriptures speaking of these
latter times, says among others, there are these two Characters of the evil men
found in them, that as they are such that have eyes full of adultery, or the
adulteress; so they have an heart exercised with covetous practices. Mr. Wood
shall find where the latter is in the heart (sure it will be found in his)
which is Adultery as to God; for it is covetousness (forsooth no sin in these
times) which yet, says the Apostle, is Idolatry and the very radix and root of
all sin; there I say without all peradventure is the other, if not in the body,
yet in the eye: this sure at least was in the eye of Mr. Wood, he would else
not have reproacht me with the entertainment of this Woman; for assuredly, she
was in my account, yea doubtless in the account of those made her the Matron of
the Savoy, a Woman sober, and of good report; yea, I suppose, with the
Governor and others here, who had speech and acquaintance with her, as well as
I, she having two Children in these parts, and one of them at Eaton-School: as
touching her entertainment at my house, I am confident, it was designed, if by
any means they might by her ensnare me, a practice used by the Heathen of old,
against the holy men and Martyrs of God, to find occasion against them to take
away their lives; she came I confess in an affright to my dwelling in the
Castle, she being denied of the Soldiers, to return (as she said) to her
Lodging, I advised her, that being innocent, she had no cause to fear to go
before the Governor, before whom they told her, she must appear; she did
accordingly, when being as she said, threatened to be put into the custody of
the Marshal, she desired she might have leave to go to her wonted Lodging,
which was at one Harrises in the Castle, by no means this might be, but says
the Governor, you may see whether you may not stay at Mr. Bacons; wherefore at
his moving, she came to desire me to go to him, when I came, the Governors
first demand of me was, whether I would pass my word for Mrs. Ceenee, I told
him no, nor ye for any one else: the next was, whether to prevent her going to
the Marshal, she should abide at my house, I said, I thought rather then that
she should be in distress, my Wife would provide some Lodgings for her, which
she did, and I consented to, in the simplicity and uprightness of our hearts;
it was a frequent charge, the Pharisees brought against Jesus, that he was a
friend of Publicans and Harlots, God has had mercy on me in this, to drink of
the same Cup from men of like spirit with them; but rejoice and be exceeding
glad, for this has been the lot of the just from the beginning of the World.

The last of Mr. Woods good speeches of me, is, that he and others cannot tell,
when if at any time they come to hear me, whether I will speak either from, or
of God, or the Devil: say we not well, said the Jews to our Savior, thou art a
Samaritan, and have a Devil; yet we know (that believe) of what spirit our
Savior was, how by the finger of God he cast out Devils, yet they said, it was
by Beelzebub; wherefore said he (and I say the like to Mr. Wood) all sins and
blasphemies shall be forgiven unto men, save that against the holy Spirit; but
I will conclude with only these two sayings, They that are of God, hear, and
can hear alone his word, and he that knows God, and is born of him, hears
us, and he that is not of God, hears not us: in this, or by this, we discern
betwixt the spirit of God, and the spirit of this World, the spirit of truth,
and the spirit of error. Mr. Wood, and others of the same mind with him,
professes in this charge, that he has no discerning of the one of these from
the other, and so must needs be a piece of that man of sin, of which the
Scripture says should come, and even now is in the world.

FINIS.

