A General Idea OF THE EPITOMY OF THE WORKS OF Robert Boil, Esquire; To which are
Added General HEADS FOR THE Natural HISTORY OF A COUNTRY.

By R. BOVLTON, Of Brazen-Nose College Oxon.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1700.

THE PREFACE.
HAving already Epitomized the Honurable Author's Works, I thought it might not
be amiss to give the Reader a short View of what has been taught in the
foregoing Epitomy; for though I question not but that most Readers are
sufficiently able to remember what is contained in those Volumes, yet it may be
of use to some to recollect their Memories, by putting them in mind of the most
General Doctrines contained therein: I say, the most General, because in this
short Abstract the Reader must not expect that I should comprize the Contents
of the whole Epitomy, since the greatest part of that consists of Experiments
laid down as Proofs of what the Author has, upon particular Occasions,
asserted; which Experiments could not be decyphered in much fewer Words than I
have made use of: All therefore that I now pretend to, is, to show what is
generally taught in those Papers, without laying down any Proofs at all, and
without making use of more Words than are sufficient to express his General
Assertions. So that if the Reader questions the Truth of any thing contained in
these Sheets, he is desired to turn to the Epitomy, where he will find the same
things laid down more largely, and abundantly proved by Particular Experiments.

Note, That every Chapter contains a Book of the Epitomy, and every Section the
Contents of a distinct Chapter.

As for the General Heads laid down for the Promoting of the Natural History of
a Country, the Reason why I have annexed them to this General Idea, is, That
they might be bound up alone without the Epitomy, for the sake of those who go
beyond Seas, and desire only to carry along with those Directions General
Notions of Mr. Boyle's Philosophy: Which if it may be of use to such, it will
answer the Design of the Reader's

Humble Servant, R. BOVLTON.

A General Idea OF THE WORKS Of the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Esquire; EPITOMIZED.
CHAP. I.
SECT. I.
HAVING already so far Epitomized the Honorable Author's Works, that the
Reader might have an entire View of what that Learned Promoter of Useful
Knowledge had writ, without being at the Pains and Trouble to read over so many
distinct Tracts, and those less useful Digressions and Prolixities which most
People complain rendered that Author's Works too tedious; I shall now, for
Reasons already offered in my Preface, proceed to give a General Idea of that
Epitomy.

And first he teaches, That the Matter of all Natural Bodies is the same, viz.
A divisible, impenetrable, and extended Substance.

And since, were all the Parts of Matter perpetually at rest, there could be no
Change in Matter, in order to form a Variety of Natural Bodies, it was
requisite there should be a variously determined Motion in all the Parts of it,
or at least some of them; and Matter being naturally divided into Parts by
Motion, the Parts divided must have a peculiar Size and Shape, and either Rest
or Motion; so that Matter has these Three, Primary Affections, Magnitude,
Shape, and either Rest or Motion. And

These Primary Affections of Matter being allowed, it will follow, that there
must be a certain Position or Situation of the Parts of Bodies so divided; and
the Disposition and Contrivance of the Parts of the Whole may reasonably be
called their Texture or Modification; and consequently as that Texture or
Modification is different, the Qualities of that Body will vary; for as the
Disposition of the Parts of a Body are peculiarly adapted to cause such or such
Effects, its Power to cause them gives us Reason to say it is endowed with such
Qualities, in reference to the Bodies acted on.

And as for the Forms of Bodies, so much disputed by Philosophers, we may
easily suppose them to be owing to an Association of Accidents requisite to
compose a Body of this or that kind, the Texture of which, united, may
reasonably be called their Form; and that a Convention of Accidents is capable
of performing what we usually ascribe to a Form, is evident, since they are
sufficient to discriminate it from all other Species of Bodies.

Nor will it be difficult to explain Generation, Alteration, and Corruption by
the aforementioned Doctrine; for when there is such a Concurrence of Accidents
as are requisite to constitute any Species, a new Species is said to be
genreated, pre-existent Matter acquiring a new kind of Existence or
Modification; and when that Essential Modification is dissolved, the Body is
said to be corrupted: And as for Putrefaction, it seems to be but a slower kind
of Corruption, where the essential Qualities of a Body are only more slowly
altered, but not destroyed.

SECT. II.
These things premised in General, concerning the Origin of all mixed Bodies,
it may be seasonable to note farther, in Reference to Particular Qualities,
That in Compound Bodies they are very much different from those belonging to
the separate Ingredients; so that Qualities may result from Mixtures as well as
from an Alteration of the Texture, and Motion of the Parts of the Ingredients.

But we are not always to consider the Effects of mixed Bodies as the bare
Result of the Parts of Matter of such a determinate Texture, but placed amongst
other Bodies, on which they may variously act and be acted on, as the Agents
and Patients differ amongst each other, in respect of their Size, Shape,
Posture, Order, Texture, Pores, or Effluviums, Rest or Motion; upon which
accounts they are able to produce a great Variety of Effects: For we see a
strange Variety of Sounds produced alone by Musical Instruments, not to mention
a vast Number of other Accidents owing to it. But there are not only Qualities
very various in Effects in several Bodies, but even in the same that are
homogenious as to sense. Instances of which are at large produced in the Second
Chapter of the Epitomy, Vol. I. p. 26.

SECT. III.
In the Third Chapter of the Epitomy, Vol. I. Book I. Reasons are offered
against the Aristotelian Doctrine of Forms; from whence it appears, That the
substantial Forms urged by the Schools are not the Causes of the various Forms
of Mixed Bodies, but that they really depend on the different Textures and
Modifications of the Compound.

SECT. IV.
Chap. IV. shows, That though the Ingredients of a Compound uniting, make one
Form, yet each of the Ingredients retain their peculiar Attributes and
Qualities, and have each their peculiar Forms; which though they are subordinate
to the General Form of the Composition, yet they are nevertheless Specific, in
respect of those Ingredients they belong to, as each Part of a Tree has its
peculiar Forms, distinct from the Form of the Whole, accordingly as the Juices
and Virtues of the Salt of those Parts differ, and as their essential Textures
vary.

And in this Chapter we are farther told, That the Faculties and Virtues of
Animals and Plants depend not wholly on the Forms of mixed Bodies, considered
as such, since the Effects of a Compound Body may be attributed to the mixed
Action of the Compound Ingredients, each of those Bodies cooperating and
modifying each others Actions; and this is evident, since, upon a Dissolution
of that Union, each Body has its determinate Form and Virtue.

But here we must take notice, That sometimes, when the Specific Form of a
Body is destroyed, the Qualities remaining may not always be the Result of
united, subordinate Forms, but depend on the determinate Forms of particular
Parts of that Body; and sometimes several new Qualities may be added to a Body
upon the Abolition of a specific Form, by the Influence of external Agents.

And to what has been said concerning subordinate Forms, we may add the
following Particulars.

I. That it is no difficult Matter to determine the Nobleness of Forms.

II. Though several Alterations are made in Bodies by a Recess or Access of
Qualities, yet they retain the same Denomination, and are said to have the same
Form, by reason of some Eminent Quality or Use.

III. Several Effects will be produced by Compound Bodies, upon the account of
the Union and Joint-Action of their Ingredients.

IV. Sometimes a superadded Form is accidental to a pre-existent; yet it
modifies the Operation of it, without altering its Nature.

V. Besides the Operations of a Body, which are specific, in respect of the
whole, it may have several Effects depending on the separate and particular
Properties of an Ingredient.

VI. That is often called the specific Form in Bodies, which is not the
presiding, but the most eminent.

VII. The Forms of a Body, generally called Subordinate, may with more Reason
be called Concurrent, since upon their Coalition depends the Form of the Whole.

SECT. V.
The Fifth Chapter shows, That a slight Variation of Texture produced by
Motion, is able to discriminate Natural Bodies, and to cause them to have
different Effects; as Ice and Salt will freeze other Liquors, though Water and
Salt will not: Where it is also made to appear, that the Productions of Art are
really the Effects of Nature, since the Artist only puts Natural Bodies
together, but their Effects are really produced according to the Laws of Nature.

SECT. VI.
The Sixth Chapter teaches, That the curious and various Figures of Salts may
be produced without the Assistance of a Plastic Power, and may result from a
bare Connection of Metalline and Saline Bodies; and their Figures may vary
according to the different Quantities of Liquors, or the Space of Time they
shoot in. And as for Acids, they are observed to shoot into Chrystals,
variously figured, according to the Nature of the Menstruum, or the Bodies it
works upon; and that by slight Alterations, without the Assistance of
substantial Forms, Salts may be obtained, appears from several Experiments laid
down in that Chapter.

SECT. VII.
The Eighth and Ninth Chapters, containing several Experiments, from whence it
appears, consonant to what has been already delivered, That by Alteration of
Texture, and a new Modification of Matter, several Changes may be wrought in
Bodies, without the Help of substantial Forms: From which Experiments several
Inferences are drawn to show the Absurdity of the Aristotelian Principles.

SECT. VIII.
The Tenth Chapter contains several Experiments, to show, That by an Alteration
of the Textures of Bodies, several Qualities may be destroyed in a Body, and
regained again, and particularly in Saltpeter: As also, That the same
Particles of Matter may have different Effects, when in a fluid Form, from what
they have when solid. And in the same Chapter it is made to appear, That
Chemistry rather destroys than discovers the Principles of Natural Bodies.

SECT. IX.
In the Eleventh Chapter, which contains the History of Fluidity, we are told,
That a Body is said to be fluid, because it consists of Parts which easily slip
upon one another's Surfaces, to which they are inclined by their porous
Interstices; and because, by the Motion of their Parts, they spread and diffuse
themselves on every side, till opposed by some solid Body, to the Superficies
of which they adapt themselves.

And in the same Chapter we are farther taught, That in order to render a Body
fluid, it is requisite the Parts of them should be very minute, as also of a
determinate Figure; That there should be Pores betwixt their Parts, and that
their Parts should be in a perpetual and a variously determined Motion. It also
shows us how a Fluid may be obtained from a Consistent Body; and having
illustrated the Doctrine of Fluidity by Experience, it farther makes it
evident, That the Reason why some Fluids will not mix with others, is only
their particular Textures, and peculiar Motion of their Parts.

SECT. X.
The Twelfth Chapter shows, That the Superficies of Liquids pressing one
against another, give each other different and determinate Figures.

SECT. XI.
The Thirteenth Chapter gives us the History of Firmness, and tells us, That
Solidity consists in this, viz. That the gross Parts of solid Bodies are so
interwoven together, that they are unapt to diffuse themselves several ways,
like Fluids; and that the Figure of their Superficies is chiefly owing to the
Connection of the Parts that compose them, rather than to outward Bodies; so
that these Three Things seem chiefly to be the Causes of Solidity, Grossness of
Parts, Rest, and the Implication of their Constituent Parts.

In this Chapter he also teaches, That a Juxta-Position of Parts is not the
only Cause of Cohesion, but that the weight and spring of the Air is one great
Cause; nevertheless a Juxta-Position of the Parts of Glass seems requisite and
sufficient to make so compact a Substance, the Parts of the Matter of which it
is composed being first minutely divided by the Fire before their Union. And

In this Chapter he farther teaches us, That the Figures and Textures of the
Parts of a Body may not only contribute to their Solidity, but that some
Liquids may become solid upon the Interposition of the minute Parts of another
Body; and that a Liquor may become solid upon the Addition of a Powder only. And

In the same Chapter we are farther taught, That fluid Bodies consist not of
Parts divisible into Fluid, as Quantity into Quantity; That there is a Plastic
Power inherent in several Bodies, and that Mixture is sufficient to produce
Petrification.

SECT. XII.
The Fourteenth Chapter contains several Instances, to show, That there is a
Motion in the Parts of Consistent and even Solid Bodies.

SECT. XIII.
The Fifteenth Chapter, treating of the great Effects of languid and unheeded
Motion, brings several Instances and Observations to prove

I. The great Efficacy of Celerity in Bodies very small, especially if the
space they move through be but small, as in Lightning.

II. That the insensible Motion of so soft Bodies as Fluids, may have a
sensible Operation upon solid Bodies, as in Sounds, when they shake the Windows
of a House, etc. at a considerable distance.

III. The Number of the insensible Parts of Matter put into Motion, enables
them to perform several things.

IV. That Local Motion may be propagated through several Mediums, and even
Solid Bodies.

V. The Effects of particular Modifications of the Invisible Motions of Fluids
on Animal Bodies disposed to be worked upon by them, are very considerable, as
when a particular Note of a Musical Instrument has a peculiar Effect upon
particular Animals.

VI. The Effects of Fluids upon inanimate Bodies, upon the account of a
particular Texture and Modification of the Agent and the Patient, are also
considerable.

VII. Some Bodies are looked upon to have their Parts absolutely at rest when
they are only in a State of Tension or Compression.

VIII. We are too apt to take notice of the visible Effects of Bodies one upon
another, without considering the intestine Motion of their Parts.

CHAP. II.
SECT. I.
THE First Chapter of the Second Book, treating of the Cosmical Qualities of
Things, teaches us, That Cosmical Qualities depend partly on the Influence of
external Agents, as well as the primary Affections of Matter. So that

I. Some Bodies are altogether inactive, till they are acted on; and that
others are put into Action chiefly by the Influence of Catholic and unheeded
Agents.

II. There are several Bodies, which, when put into Action, are subtle enough
to insinuate themselves into the Pores of other Bodies, which they are forced
to act on by the established Laws of Nature; an Instance of which we have in
the Expansive force of Beans soaked with Water.

III. An Alteration of the Mechanical Texture of a Body, is enough to dispose
it, or render it unapt to be worked on by those unheed-Agents.

SECT. II.
In the Second Chapter he proposes the following Suspicions or Conjectures.

I. That there are several Parts of Matter in the Ether, which are variously
disposed to work upon Bodies, according to the various Textures of those Bodies
they chance to work upon, or according to the difference of the Agents they
work concurrently with.

II. He tells us, That several People have discovered Pestilential Steams in
the Air, before they began to act as such upon other Bodies.

III. He suspects, That there have been Changes considerable enough in the
Internal Parts of the Earth, from whence may be deduced a Reason of the
irregular Variation of the Mariners Needle.

IV. He supposes the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, and such like Phenomenon,
to proceed from some Cosmical Law of Nature; or that the Planetary Vortex may
be not a little concerned in the producing such Effects.

V. He supposes all Endemical and Epidemical Distempers to be chiefly owing to
the Influence of those Globes which move about us, and the Terrestrial Effluvia
of our own Globe.

SECT. III.
The Third Chapter, treating of the Temperature of Subterraneal Regions, as to
Heat and Cold, divides them into Three Regions, and tells us, That the Bounds,
as well as Temperature of the First, are very different.

That the Temperature of the Second seems to be colder than that above or that
below it, being remoter both from the Influence of External as well as
Subterraneal Heat.

In several Places, which may be referred to this middle Region, the
Temperature of the Air is different at the same Seasons of the Year; besides,
the different Temper of Subterraneal Regions may be varied by the Soil.

And farther, The Temper of the Third Region is warm, which Warmth varies in
several Places.

SECT. IV.
In the Fourth Chapter he only assigns Two Regions to the Sea, the one extended
from the Superfices of the Water, as far as the Sunbeams penetrate, and the
other from thence to the utmost Depth of the Water; so that the upper-Region
must vary, as to its Extent, according to the Difference of the Climate, and
the Heat of the Sun, or the Nature of the Soils about the Shore; as for the
lower-Region it is generally cold.

SECT. V.
The Fifth Chapter informs us, That the bottom of the Sea is very rough and
unequal; That the Water gravitates considerably upon Bodies immersed in it;
That the Bottom of the Sea is not disturbed with Storms, but that the Water
almost stagnates.

SECT. VI.
The Sixth Chapter gives the following Account of Coral, viz. That when first
taken up, it is soft, flexible, and very pale; but when the Bark is taken off,
and it has been exposed to the Air, its natural Redness presently appears. It
is much paler on the Inside, than on the outward Superfices.

This Chapter likewise informs us, That several Trees in Africa are observed to
grow under Water.

SECT. VII.
The Proportion of Salt to Water in Seawater, is observed to be as One to
Forty; which Salt is supplied by Salt-Rocks, contiguous, or near the Water; or
by Salt washed away and carried along by Springs and Rainwater, which float
into the Ocean, or by Latent-Springs.

As for the Bitterness commonly observed in Seawater, it probably proceeds
from some bituminous Bodies, carried along with Spring Water into the Sea. And
to these Observations he adds, That Agitation is very requisite to keep
Seawater from stinking; and as to its Saltness, That it is observed to differ
much in the Degrees of its Saltness.

SECT. VIII.
The Eighth, Ninth, Tenth, and the Eleventh Chapters, chiefly consists of
Queries proposed for the Natural History of Mineral Waters: Therefore I shall
only take Notice here, that he gives the following Directions in trying Mineral
Waters.

1. To observe the Changes of Colors made by Tinctures, in a good Light, which
may help to distinguish what Mineral Tinctures they are impregnated with.

2. To vary the Shades of Colors produced by Mineral Waters, either by
dropping such Waters upon Paper, whose Pores are salurated with powdered
Vitriol, or tinged with a Decoction of Logwood. Several Variations in Colors
may be also made by dropping other Medicinal Liquors either into the Mineral
Waters, or the Infusion of Galls, either before or after.

3. He recommends for such Trials, not only the Parts of Astringent Plants, but
Animal, and especially Mineral Substances.

SECT. IX.
In the Twelfth Chapter he tells us, That the Natural States of Bodies vary
according to the Difference of Climates; so that it is the Natural State of
Water in some Parts and Seasons, to be froze, and turned into Ice, and in
others to be always fluid. And he farther adds, That all violent States of
Matter are not preternatural; and that it is a common Error, That nothing
violent is durable, since it is evident, that the Atmosphere we live in is
always in a forced or a compressed State.

SECT. X.
The Thirteenth Chapter contains a Description of Mr. Boyle's Pneumatick
Engine, as also several Experiments tried with it; from whence it appears, That
the Air acts upon most Bodies, by virtue of its Springiness, by which it is
inclined always to expand; and by its Weight, by which it in its Gravitation
presses upon Bodies below it, proportionably to the Weight of an incumbent
Pillar of Air: And by virtue of this Weight it is that Mercury is raised in
Weather-Glasses, and Water in Pumps.

And by several other Experiments made in an exhausted Receiver, it appears,
That though Gunpowder will not explode when the Air presses not upon it, nor will
Fire burn: Yet in the exhausted Receiver it is observed, That a Loadstone has,
externally applied, considerable Effects on Bodies contained in it; but Sounds
are not propagated in vacuo.

In this Chapter he likewise farther teaches why two flat polished Marbles
adhere to each other, viz. By the Compression of the Atmosphere. As also, he
tells us, That the Weight of the Atmosphere was able to raise a Hundred Pound
Weight, tied to the Sucker of the Pump, depressed, when the Receiver was
exhausted.

And in this Chapter he farther adds Experiments, which show, That the Pressure
of the Air is the Chief Cause of Filtration: And as for the Distinction of the
Proportion betwixt the Weight of Air and Water, he proves it to be but as 1 to
938; That the Proportion of Quicksilver is as 14000 to 1.

And besides these, he has made several Experiments and Observations, which
prove what Effects the Exhausted Receiver has on Animals included in it, and
how long they are able to continue alive without Air.

SECT. XI.
The Fourteenth, Fifteenth, Sixteenth, and Seventeenth Chapters, only contain a
Defense of what has been delivered in the foregoing Chapter; or Objections
against what other Men have taught. And the Subjects of the following Chapters,
to the Twenty ninth, being of the like nature, I shall not here tell what
Notions he has confuted; but since he has taught nothing, but only defended
his former Assertions, I shall refer the Reader to the Epitomy.

SECT. XII.
The Nineteenth Chapter only contains a Description of an Engine made use of in
the Experiments which fill up the next Chapter; where it is made to appear,
That Air is able barely by its Spring to raise Mercury in a Tube; as also, That
Heat may be caused by a bare Attrition in an exhausted Receiver; That the
Spring of the Air is able to burst Bladders, and to raise a considerable
Weight; as also, That such one is able to raise Mercury no higher than the
Weight of the Atmosphere is able to impel it; and likewise to what height
Mercury and Water may be raised proportionably to their Specific Gravity.

And in this Chapter we are farther told how to discover the Pressure of the
Air by the Touch, and how to make portable Baromelers; as also we are here
taught, That in an exhausted Receiver a Spring may be raised without any
difficulty; yet when the Air is let in, it will be violently depressed again,
and not be raised again so easily.

And in the same Chapter it is likewise made to appear, That Cupping-Glasses
are caused to stick by the Pressure of the Air.

There are several other Particular Experiments contained in this Volume, which
I shall not here take notice of, for Reasons offered in my Preface.

CHAP. III.
SECT. I.
THE First Chapter of the Third Book, beginning the Second Volume, contains
several Experiments to prove farther the Weight and Spring of the Air; from
whence it appears, That the Cause of the Ascent of Water in Syringes is to be
derived from the Pressure of the Air; That Light may be produced in vacuo
Boyliano; That by a small Quantity of included Air 50 or 60 Pound, or a greater
Weight, may be raised in the exhausted Receiver.

SECT. II.
The Second Chapter contains Descriptions of several Engines made use of in
succeeding Experiments.

SECT. III.
The Third Chapter shows, That the Productions of Air may be helped several
ways, and that it may be obtained from Bread, Grapes, Raisins, Plumbs, Mustard,
boiled Apples, etc.

In this Chapter we are likewise told how the Production of Air may be hindered,
as by Cold, by making use of Spirit of Wine along with the Body included in
vacuo; or by employing Vinegar, by Compression; by Water, or Leaven.

And in this Chapter we are farther taught, That the Effects of Artificial Air
are different from the Effects of Common Air; as also, That the Effects of
Compressed Air are different from those of Common Air; That Animals cannot live
in Artificial Air; That the Consumption of Combustible Matter is promoted by
the Condensation of the Air; That Air is produced from dried Fruits, without
any Regularity; That Bodies afford as much Air as they can before they
putrify; That Artificial Air may be destroyed; That Liquors may acquire a
Sourness, though no Spirits evaporate; That fermented Liquors may preserve Fruit;
That Beer may preserve Beef; and, That though Fishes yield not so much Air as
Flesh, yet they will corrupt, though not affected by the outward Air; That Butter
may be preserved a long time, if kept from the Contact of the outward Air; That
Sugar does not preserve Fruit as well as fermented Liquors; Flesh may be kept
fresh, if kept in a strong compressed Air, in a Receiver.

SECT. IV.
The Fourth Chapter shows, That Bodies may be preserved a long time in Vacuo
Boyliano, without boiling.

SECT. V.
The Fifth Chapter shows, That Air may become unfit for Respiration, and yet
retain its usual Pressure; and also several Experiments, to show how long some
sort of Animals may live without Air longer than others.

SECT. VI.
The Sixth Chapter contains Animadversions on Mr. Hobbe's Problemata de Vacuo;
and proves, That the Atmosphere is the chief Cause of the Rise of Water upon
Suction.

SECT. VII.
The Seventh Chapter delivers the Cause of Attraction by Suction, and tells us,
That it chiefly depends on the external Pressure of the Air, when it is taken
off the Internal Surface of the Liquor in a Tube: And farther,

I. That a Liquor may be raised by Suction, when the Pressure of the Air,
neither as it has Weight, nor Elasticity, is the Cause of its Elevation.

II. That the Weight of the Atmospherical Air is sufficient to raise up Liquors
by Suction.

SECT. VIII.
The Eighth Chapter contains Observations and Directions about the Barometer;
and the Ninth contains only a Description of a new kind of Baroscope.

SECT. IX.
The Tenth Chapter contains a Discovery of the admirable Rarifaction of the
Air, without Heat, it being rarefied so as to possess 8232 times, its former
Dimensions, and sometimes to 10000.

SECT. X.
The Eleventh, Twelfth, and Thirteenth Chapters, show, That the Duration of the
Spring of expanded Air is very considerable; That the Air may be compressed
into an eighth part of its former Space; That the Proportion, as to the Degrees
of Rarification and Condensation, is as 1 to 70.

SECT. XI.
The Fourteenth Chapter gives us a brief Account of the Utilities of
Higgroscopes, and tells us, That the General Use is to estimate the Changes of
the Air, as to moisture and dryness; and the particular Uses of them is to know
the differing Variations of Weather in the same Month, Day, and Hour; To know
how much one Season is drier or moister than another; To discover and compare
the Changes of the Temperature of the Air, made by Winds, strong or weak;
Frosty, Snowy, and other Weather; To compare the Temperature of differing
Houses and differing Rooms in the same House; To observe in a Chamber the
Effects of the Presence or Absence of Fire in a Chimney or Stove; To keep a
Chamber at the same Degree or assigned Degree of Dryness.

SECT. XII.
The Eighteenth Chapter shows the Efficacy (...) the Air's Moisture, in
contracting Ropes, ^elling of Timber, and bursting of Marca^s.

SECT. XIII.
The Nineteenth Chapter contains an Account of some unheeded Causes of the
Insalubrity and Salubrity of the Air, under the following Propositions:

I. That it seems probable, that in diverse Places, the Salubrity or Insalubrity
of the Air, considered in General, may be in good part due to the subterraneal
Expirations, especially those called Ordinary Emissions.

II. It is probable, that in diverse Places some Endemical Diseases do chiefly
or partly depend on Subterraneal Steams.

III. It is likely that diverse Epidemical Diseases are in great part produced
by Subterraneal Effluvia.

IV. It is probable that most of the Diseases that Physicians call New ones,
are caused either chiefly or concurrently by Subterraneal Steams.

SECT. XIV.
The Twentieth and Twenty first Chapters show, That there are several Latent
Qualities in the Air, which arise from the Union and Conjunction of other
Bodies with it, some of which may possibly be raised by the Heat of the Sun
Beams; and also, That the Air seems to contain in it all sorts of Seminal
Principles.

SECT. XV.
The Twenty second Chapter contains an Endeavor to Improve Artificial Magnets.
And the Twenty third and fourth Chapters show, That Magnetical Qualities depend
on a Mechanical Construction of the Constituent Parts of a Body, since that
Quality may be altered by the Effects of Fire, and other Concurrent Accidents,
which can only Mechanically affect it.

SECT. XVI.
The Twenty fifth Chapter proves, by several Experiments, That Electricity may
be Mechanically produced or destroyed.

SECT. XVII.
The Twenty sixth Chapter contains a General History of the Air; in which,
since nothing is contained but what is Historical, it is not possible to relate
the Substance in less room than it is there contained.

CHAP. IV.
SECT. I.
THE First Chapter of the Fourth Book proves, That Tastes may be Mechanically
produced.

SECT. II.
The Second and Third Chapters prove, That Odours and Colors depend on a
Mechanical Texture of the Body endowed with them.

SECT. III.
The Fourth Chapter contains an Experimental History of Colors; from whence it
appears, That Diversity of Colors frequently denote different Properties in
Bodies, and that the Perception of Colors depends on a particular Motion given
to the Spirits in the Retina, and communicated to the Brain.

As for the Cause of Colors, it depends on the various and differently
modified Superficies of Bodies, or the various Figures of the superficial
Parts, and their Situation, and sometimes the Motion of a Body, by which it is
enabled to reflect the Rays of Light variously to the Eye.

As to Particular Colors, in the Fifth Chapter we are told, That Whiteness
depends on such a Superficial Texture as reflects the Rays of Light, not upon
one another, but upon the Spectator's Eye, by reflecting them without
Refraction; and that the Surfaces of White Bodies are Specular, and by a Change
of the Texture of its Parts, a Body may be deprived of that Color.

Blackness differs from White, in as much as the Rays of Light are reflected
inwards, and not upon the Eye, the Pratuberant Parts yielding to the Impression
of those Lucid Rays.

The Sixth and Seventh Chapters contains several Experiments, which prove, That
Whiteness and Blackness may be Mechanically altered or produced.

CHAP. V.
SECT. I.
IN the First Chapter of the Appendix to the Fourth Book, he teaches, That Cold
may be Mechanically produced or destroyed, by a bare Change of Texture, or
Alterations otherwise Mechanically brought on, without the Assistance of the
Aristotelian substantial Forms, or the Hypostatical Principles of the Chemists.

SECT. II.
Shows us, That not only Weather-Glasses but our Senses may misinform us about
Cold, and the account of several Predispositions and the Temper of our
Sensories; as we feel it colder in the Air, when we come out of a hot Bath,
than when only out of a warm Room, etc.

SECT. III.
The Third Chapter contains Observations about the Deficiencies of
Weather-Glasses, etc. which since they teach us only how to learn to improve
the use of them, and since they cannot be expressed in fewer Words, I must take
no farther notice of them.

SECT. IV.
Tells us, That the Cause of the Condensation of the Air in Weather-Glasses,
and the Ascent of Water by Cold, depend on the Pressure of the external Air
gravitating upon the Surface of the Water without the Pipe, and over-powering
the Spring of the Internal Air, weakened by Cold.

SECT. V.
The Fifth Chapter contains a Natural History of Cold, which, since it will not
admit of being otherwise related than Historically, I must refer the Reader to
the Epitomy.

SECT. VI.
The Sixth Chapter contains a Confutation of the Received Notion of
Antiperistasis. The Seventh, an Examination of Mr. Hobbe's Doctrine of Cold;
which being only Controversial, I must pass it by. And as for the Eighth and
Ninth Chapters, they likewise containing bare Historical Truths, which admit of
no Contraction, and this small General Recapitulation will not admit of
Transcribing the whole Epitomy.

SECT. VII.
The Tenth Chapter teaches us, that Cold is only a Privative Quality, depending
on a Privation of the Motion of the Parts of a Body cooled.

SECT. VIII.
The Eleventh Chapter shows, That the Expansive Force of freezing Water is so
great, as to be able, when froze in a Brass Cilinder, to raise 254 Pounds, though
the Cilinder was none of the largest. And in the same Chapter we are likewise
told, That a cold Ebullition, or (if one may so speak) Effervescence, depends
purely upon the Texture of the fermenting Liquor.

SECT. IX.
The Twelfth Chapter contains several Experiments, which prove, That Heat
depends upon, and is caused by a variously determined and a rapid Motion of
this minute Parts of the Body esteemed hot.

SECT. X.
Contains an Account of a particular sort of Mercury which grows hot with Gold.

SECT. XI.
From several Experiments made and contained in the Fourteenth Chapter, it
appears, That the Particles of Fire may be detained in Metal, and by that means
add to the Weight of it. And the Fifteenth Chapter contains Experiments which
have the same Tendency.

SECT. XII.
The Sixteenth Chapter contains a Discovery of the Perviousness of Glass to
ponderable Parts of Flame; and also proves, That Flame may act as a Menstruum,
and make Coalitions with the Bodies it works upon.

SECT. XIII.
The Seventeenth Chapter contains new Experiments concerning the Relation
betwixt Flame and Air, from which it appears, that it is very difficult to
produce Flame without Air, and impossible to preserve it.

SECT. XIV.
The Eighteenth Chapter contains Experiments about the Relation betwixt Air and
the Flamma Vitals of Animals; from whence it appears, That it is as impossible
to preserve Animals without Air as Flame.

SECT. XV.
The Twentieth, Twenty first and second Chapters, contain several Experiments
which show, That shining Flesh and Fish, as well as Worms, cease to become
lucid, if deprived of the Contact of the Air.

SECT. XVI.
The Twenty third Chapter contains several Experiments made with a Diamond
which shone in the Dark.

SECT. XVII.
The Twenty fourth and fifth Chapters give an Account of an Aerial and Icy
Noctiluca, whose Lucidness depend on Fumes raised by the Saline Parts of the
Air, which being united with the Air, affect the Eye jointly.

CHAP. V
SECT. I.
THE Five first Chapters of the Fifth Book, and the First Part, show, That
Bodies have only a Relative Levity under Water; That the Air, by virtue of its
Spring, presses on Bodies under Water; and that the Effects of the Air on such
Bodies vary according to the differing Weight of the Atmosphere; and likewise
contain an Invention for estimating the Weight of Water in Water.

SECT. II.
The Sixth Chapter contains the following Hydrostatical Paradoxes made out by
several Experiments.

I. That in Water, and other Fluids, the lower parts are pressed by the upper.

II. That a lighter Fluid may weigh upon a heavier.

III. That if a Body contiguous to the Water, be altogether or in part lower
than the highest Level of the said Water, the lower part of the said Body will
be pressed upwards by the Water that touches it beneath.

IV. That in the Ascension of Water in Pumps, etc. there needs nothing to raise
the Water but a competent weight of an external Fluid.

V. That the Pressure of an external Fluid is able to keep an Heterogeneous
Liquor, suspended at the same height in several Pipes, though those Pipes be of
very different Diameters.

VI. If a Body be placed under Water with its uppermost Surface parallel to the
Horizon, how much soever Water there may be on this or that side above the
Body, the direct Pressure sustained by the Body is no more than that of a
Column of Water having the Horizontal Superficies of the Body for its Basis,
and the prependicular depth of the Water for its Height.

And so likewise

If the Water that leans upon the Body be contained in Pipes, open at both
ends, the Pressure of the Water is to be estimated by the weight of a Pillar of
Water, whose Basis is equal to the lower Orifice of a Pipe, and its height
equal to a Perpendicular reaching thence to the top of the Water, though the Pipe
be much inclined toward the Horizon, or though it be irregularly shaped, and
much broader in some Parts than the said Orifice.

VII. That a Body immersed in a Fluid sustains a lateral Pressure from the
Fluid; and that increases as the Depth of the immersed Body below the Surface
of the Fluid increases.

VIII. That Water may be made to depress a Body lighter than it self, as well
as to buoy it up.

IX. That a parcel of Oil, lighter than Water, may be kept in Water, without
ascending in it.

X. That the Cause of the Ascent of Water is Siphons, and of flowing through
them, may be explained without having recourse to Nature's Abhorrency of a
Vacuum.

XI. That a solid Body, as ponderous as any yet known, though near the top of the
Water, will sink by its own weight; yet if it be placed in a greater depth than
that of Twenty times its own thickness, it will not sink, if its Descent be not
assisted by the weight of incumbent Water.

SECT. III.
The Eighth Chapter contains a Description of a new Hydostratical Instrument,
to estimate the difference of Metals in goodness.

SECT. IV.
The Ninth Chapter contains a short Account of the Increase and Growth of
Metals. And the remaining Chapters of the First Part of the Fifth Books, lays
down a Method to estimate the Goodness of Ores, and also of Medicinal
Substances; by which it may easily appear, That if a Body be heavier than
Crystal, it must contain more or less of a Metalline Ingredient, as it exceeds
that in weight.

CHAP. VI.
SECT. I.
THE Second Part of the Fifth Book contains several solitary Observations and
Experiments, both Chemical, Medicinal, and Physical; which, since nothing can
be inferred from them, but what has been already taught, it will be needless
to mention what is contained therein, especially since Historical Relations
cannot be more contracted than in the Epitomy.

CHAP. VI.
SECT. I.
THE First and Second Chapters of the Third Part of the Fifth Book, teach, That
all Gems have been once in a fluid Form, and that they receive their Virtues
and Colors from Mineral Tinctures.

SECT. II.
The Second Chapter shows, That even solid Bodies continually emit Effluvia.

SECT. III.
The Fourth Chapter shows the strange Subtlety of Effluvia; a Grain of Silver
Wyre, consisting of 64800 true Metalline Parts, and a Grain of Leaf-Gold being
capable of being divided into 2000000 Squares. And Fillings of Copper will give
a Tincture to 613620 times their Bulk of Water.

SECT. IV.
The Fifth Chapter shows the great Efficacy of Effluviums, as in Lightning; and
other Effluviums which affect Humane Bodies.

SECT. V.
The Sixth Chapter proves, That the Effluviums of Bodies act according to the
determinate Nature of the Body they come from.

SECT. VI.
The Seventh and Eighth Chapters show, That not only Animal, but other solid
Bodies are porous.

SECT. VII.
The Ninth and Tenth Chapters contain a Natural History of Humane Blood; for
which I must refer the Reader to the Epitomy, it not admitting of a
Recapitulation of the Contents in much less room than they are there contained
in.

SECT. VIII.
The last Chapter of the Third Volume shows, That the Operations of Specific
Medicines are Reconcilable to the Conpuscular Philosophy.

What he has delivered concerning the manner of their acting, it may be
comprised under the following Heads.

Prop. I. Sometimes a Specific Medicine may cure by discussing or resolving
the Morbifick Matter, and thereby making it fit for Expulsion by the greater
common-Shoars of the Body, and the Pores of the Skin.

Prop. II. Sometimes a Specific Medicine may mortify the over-acid, or other
immoderate Particles that infect the Mass of Blood, and destroy their
Coagulatory, or other Effects.

Prop. III. Sometimes a Specific Medicine may help the Patient, by
precipitating the Morbisick Matter out of his Blood, or the other Liquors of
the Body in which it harbors.

Prop. IV. Sometimes a Specific Medicine may work by peculiarly strengthening
and cherishing the Heart, the Part affected, or both.

Proy. V. Sometimes a Specific Medicine may act, by producing in the Mass of
Blood such a Disposition as may enable Nature, by correcting, expelling, or
other fit Ways, to surmount the Morbifick Matter, or other Cause of the Disease.

Prop. VI. Sometimes a Specific Medicine may unite with the Morbifick Matter,
and compose a quid Nutrum, which may be less offensive to Nature, though not so
easily expelled.

SECT. IX.
The First Chapter of the Fourth Volume contains the Invitation of the use of
Simple Medicines: First, Because their Effects may more easily be foreseen than
the Effects of a Composition, and therefore safer. Secondly, A greater Quantity
of a good Medicine may be taken, without being offensive. And, Thirdly, Because
the Effects of the Materia Medica may be sooner brought to a Certainty. The
Second Chapter contains Historical Observations about Vitiated Sight.

CHAP. VII.
SECT. I.
THE First Chapter of the Fourth Book contains the Author's Chemical Works, in
which it is made to appear, that Chemical Principles are transmutable; That a
Substance looked upon to be Homogenious, and a Chemical Principle, may afford
very differing Substances, when acted on by the Fire; That Fire is not the True
and Genuine Analizer of Bodies; That the Pipe does not separate the Principles
of a Body, but variously compound and alter the Texture of Body a exposed to
its Action; That Bodies obtained from Substances exposed to the Fire, were not
pre-existent in those Substances in the same Form.

SECT. II.
The Second Chapter shows the Insufficiency of the Arguments used by the
Chemists and Aristotelians, in favor of their Doctrine; and the remaining part
of the Fifth Book in General shows, that Chemical Principles are producible,
and depend on a Mechanical Structure and Texture of Parts.

And farther, That the differing Substances into which Bodies may be divided by
Fire, are not of a pure and elementary Nature; nor is their Number either
precisely 3 or 5. And, lastly, That there are diverse Qualities which cannot be
referred to any of these Substances.

SECT. III.
And in one of the Chapters belonging to the Fourth Part of the Fifth Book, he
considers and confutes the Doctrine of Acids and Alkali, showing the
Insufficiency of that Doctrine.

SECT. IV
The Sixth Book, which makes up the Remaining Part of the Epitomy, contains an
Abstract of some of his Phisiological Essays of the Usefulness of Experimental
Philosophy: But it is impossible to give any shorter Account of them than what
is contained in the Epitomy.

General Heads FOR THE Natural HISTORY OF A COUNTRY.
COnsidering the great Improvements that have been made in Natural History by
the Travels of Gentlemen, Seamen, and Others; And the great Disadvantage many
Ingenious Men are at in their Travels, because they know not beforehand what
things they are to inform themselves of in every Country they come to, or by
what Method they may make Enquiries about Things to be known there, I thought
it would not be unacceptable to such, to have Directions in General, relating
to Particular Countries, in as little Bounds as possible, presented to their
View.

As for the General Heads, I shall offer them to your Consideration in the
following Order, viz. As they respect the Heavens, or concern the Air, the
Water, or the Earth.

First. Under the first kind may be reckoned the Longitude and Latitude of the
Place, and that in respect to the Changes made in the Air; the Climate,
together with the Length of the longest and shortest Days, and the Parallels
come here to be considered; the Retrogradation of the Sun upon Dials, within
the Tropicks, and that naturally; what fixed Stars, and what not seen there,
etc.

Secondly, The Temperature of the Air is to be considered, as to Heat, Dryness
and Moisture, and the Measures of them, its Weight, Clearness, Refractive
Power, its Subtilty or Grosness, its abounding with, or wanting an Esurine
Salt; its Variation according to the several Seasons of the Year, and the Times
of the Day: How long the several kinds of Weather continue, what sort of
Meteors it breeds most commonly; in what Order they are generated, and how long
they usually last: Especially what Winds it is liable to; whether any of them be
stated, and ordinary, etc. What other Diseases are Epidemical, that are
supposed to flow from the Air: What other Diseases the Country is subject to,
wherein that had a share, e.g. the Plague and contagious Sicknesses: What is
the usual Salubrity or Insalubrity of the Air: And with what Constitution it
agrees better or worse than others. As also the Specific Gravity of the Air,
compared with the other foregoing Qualities: For this Effect it will be
convenient the Traveller be provided with a Travelling-Baroscope, having the
Divisions usual in the other Baroscopes, marked upon a sliding Ruler, which
being once exactly marked for London, may serve for other Places; and for
observing the Difference between the Air here and in other Places, and in most
differing Climates, as in the Torrid and Frigid Zone, it has another Ruler
coming out perpendicular from the lower end of the Sliding-Ruler, that it may
mark the height of the Mercury in the lower Leg of the Siphon; so the
Divisions of the upper end will show you the Specisick Gravity of the Air at
that time.

Thirdly, About the Water are to be considered: 1. The Sea, its Depth,
specific Gravity, Difference of Saltness in different Zones, the Plants,
Insects, and Fishes to be found in it, Tides, with respect to the adjacent
Lands, Currents, Whirl-pools, etc. 2. Rivers, their Bigness, their Course,
their Inundations, their Saltish Taste, as they report observable in Jordan,
Subterraneous Passages, Fruitfulness of their Waters, etc. Their Lakes, as that
of Schernitzer in Carniola, Ponds, Springs, and especially Mineral Waters, what
sorts of Earth they run through, their Kinds, Qualities, and Virtues, and how
examined; the sorts of Fishes, their Bigness and Goodness, compared with the
Ground at the bottom, their Plenty, their Seasons, their ways of Breeding,
their Haunts, and the ways of Taking them, especially those that are not purely
Mechanical.

Fourthly, In the Earth may be observed, I. It Self. II. Its Inhabitants, and
its Productions, and those Internal or External.


I. As to its Self: What are its Dimensions, Situation, East, West, South, or
North; its Figure, its Plains, Hills or Valleys, their Extent, the Height of
the Hills, either in respect of the neighboring Valleys, or the Level of the
Sea; as also whether the Mountains lie scattered or in Ridges, and whether
those run North or South, East or West, etc. What Promontories, Fiery or
Smoking Hills, etc. the Country has or has not; whether subject to
Earthquakes or not. Whether the Country is coherent, or much broken into
Islands. What Declination the Magnet has in several Places at the same Time,
and how much it varies in difrent Times at the same Place: Whether before the
Turnados or Hurricanes, the Magnetical Needle loses its Direction toward the
North, and turns to all the Points of the Compass; and if this Declination is
influenced by Subterraneous Fire, destroying it within, or by Water overflowing
the Surface of it, or by its Vicinity to Iron Mines. What kinds of Soils are
there, whether of Clay, Sand, Gravel, etc. What are its Products, as to
Minerals, Vegetables or Animals: And moreover, how all these are or may be
farther improved for the Benefit of Man, what are the Qualities of that Soil
peculiar to it.

II. The Inhabitants themselves are to be considered, both Natives and
Strangers, that have been long settled there; particularly their Stature,
Shape, Features, Strength, Ingenuity, Diet, Inclination, that seem not due to
Education. As to their Women, their Fruitfulness or Barrenness, their easy and
hard Labor, with their Exercises and Diet; the Diseases both Men and Women are
subject to, peculiar to themselves, compared with their Diet, Air, etc. that do
influence them.

The Products External are Plants, Trees, Fruits, etc. with the Peculiarities
observable in them ( e. g. that of the Poison-wood, called Machenil in
New England, with its Cures) and what Soils they thrive best in. What Animals,
Terrestrial or Volatile, or Insects of all sorts they produce, and to what use
applied by the Inhabitants, as to Meat, Physic, Surgery, or Dying, etc.

By the Internal Production of the Earth are to be understood here, Things
procreated in the Bowels of the Earth, either for the Benefit or Hurt of Man;
where Notice is to be taken what way the one may be best found out, and the
other most easily avoided or cured. Under these are comprehended Metals,
Minerals, Stones Precious or Common, and how these Beds lie in reference to
North or South, etc. What Clays and Earths it affords, e. g. Tobacco pipe-Clay,
Marles, Boles, with their Physical or other Uses, Fullers Earth, Earth for
Potters Ware, Soap, Earths, Axungiae, etc. What Coals, Salts, or Salt-Mines, as
Allom, Vitriols, Sulphures, etc. it yields. As for Mines, you are to consider
their Number, Situations, Depths, Signs, Waters, Damps, Quantities of Ore,
extraneous things, and ways of reducing their Ores into Metals, etc. Where, by
the way, you may inform your selves of the Truth of what is reported by
Agricola, Kircher, etc. of Apparitions, and their Operations under Ground.

To these General Articles of Enquiries (says their Proposer) should be added
Enquiries about Traditions, concerning all particular things relating to that
Country, as either peculiar to it, or at least uncommon elsewhere.

II. Enquiries that require Learning or Skill in the Answerer; to which should
be subjoined, Proposals of Ways to enable Men to give Answers to these more
difficult Enquiries.

After the General Heads now proposed, we shall mention those that concern
Navigators into Remote Places.

The First agrees with what has been said before, viz. The Observing the
Declination of the Compass, in the different Longitudes and Latitudes the Ship
comes to, and setting down the Method by which the Observation was made.

2. To take notice of the Dipping-Needles, and their Observations in the like
manner.

3. To observe the Odours, Colors, Tastes in Seawater, and what are the
Particularities of that Seawater, where Ships do soonest rot, as in the
Streights of California the Sea looks red, with innumerable Worms that are in
it.

4. To remark, if (as is reported by Kircher) there be near the South Pole a
constant Current, setting from the South, so forcibly, that Ships with a stiff
Gale are hardly carried up against it; and near the North a Current forcibly
carrying Ships toward the Pole, or if this Motion reciprocate once in half a
Year.

5. To observe what subterraneous Passages there are, whereby Seas communicate
with one another, as the Caspian is supposed to do with the Black Sea; and the
Dead Sea with the Red Sea.

6. To examine the Map made of the Straits by Captain Bolland, and the Account
of the Tides he there gives.

7. The Effect the Winds have upon the Seas, and how far down from the Surface
they agitate the Waters.

8. To take notice of the Tides, of the Ebbings and Flowings, with the Age of
the Moon when the Neap and Spring-Tides do happen, to what height it does ebb
and flow at these Times upon the Coast of the Terra Firma, or upon the Islands
far off in the Sea, as at St. Helena, and if it flow there with difference from
the Tides near the main Land, and how much sooner it begins at one side than
another.

9. To take notice of the Coast, and to make narrowly the way of coming into
particular Creeks and Harbors, with their Bearings and Distances from the
neighboring Places, as you come in.

10. Not forgetting at the same time to sound all along as you come in, and to
mark the Depths and Shallows near the Shore, or farther off from the Coast,
near Shelves or Banks, and whether it increases or decreases in any Order.

11. To mark in the Sounding all Grounds, whether Clayie, Sandy or Ousie, etc.

12. To take Notice of the Winds, their Changes, or set Times of Blowing, and
in what Longitude and Latitude, especially the Trade-Winds; upon what Coast the
Trade-Winds are most frequent, and by what Signs they may be foreseen.

13. To Observe and Record all extraordinary Meteors, Lightnings, Thunders, and
their Effects, Ignes Fatui, Comets, etc. marking the Places of their Appearing
and Disappearing.

14. To be provided with a nice pair of Scales, and exact Weights, for
examining the Weights of the several Waters that occur, which I think may be
most exactly done after the Method proposed by the Incomparable Mr. Boil, in
his Medicina Hydrostatica, viz. weighing a Viol close stopped with a Glass
Stopper first in the Air, then in Liquor: If the Vial be about two Ounces in
the Air it will do the better: For the whole Method, because it is too long to
insert into the Tract, I refer you to the Book it self. This I propose as the
most subtle and accurate. If you like a plainer way, you may use the Method
practiced by the Noble Author elsewhere, viz. To fill a Glass Vial of four
Ounces or more, with a small Neck, full of the Water to be tried, and to
examine the Weight of it, which you may compare with another.

15. 'Twill be convenient both for the Navigator and Philosopher, to be
provided with an Instrument for fetching up Water from the Bottom of the Sea,
first published by the Ingenious Mr. Hook, and transferred hither for the
Benefit of the Curious Traveller; for by this he may know whether the Water at
the Bottom be heavier and salter than at the Top; or whether there be fresh
Water at the Bottom, occasioned by Springs of fresh Water there, as some
presume there are, having observed in some Places Springs of fresh Water a
great way within the Sea-marks. The Contrivance is this: A Wooden Bucket is
fastened to an Iron Rod, with a Weight to sink it; this Bucket is shut at top
and bottom with two Valves or Clacks, so contrived, that when it descends, it
may open and let the Water pass through; but when it is pulled up again from the
Bottom, it may shut so close as to keep in all the Water it has at that time,
by the under Valve, and the ambient Water over it, from getting in by the upper
Valve.

Having gone through the General Directions both for Sea and Land, we come to
more Particular ones, and shall begin first with those that concern Mines; the
Knowledge of which, though it began very early, and has been continued to our
Times, yet is still found improveable by Humane Industry, as Experience has
taught us, and therefore worthy to be considered in the next Place, especially
seeing the Arts and Inventions most useful for Man's Life, depend more upon
this than any other; and that without it, the World should want little of
returning to its former Barbarity. All shall be reduced to Six General Heads,
as has been done by the worthy Patron of Ingenious Arts, the Honorable Robert
Boil, now in Glory.

The First, The Neighboring Country about the Mines.

The Second, The Soil where the Mines are.

The Third, The Sign of Mines.

The Fourth, The Structure, and other Particulars relating to the Mines
themselves.

The Fifth, The Nature and Circumstances of the Ore.

The Sixth, The Reduction of the Ore into Metal.

QVERIES about the First Title.
I. Whether the Country be Mountainous, Plain, or distinguished with Valleys?
And in case it be Mountainous, what kind of Hills they are, whether high or
low, or indifferently elevated? whether almost equal, or very unequal in
height? whether Fruitful or Barren, Cold or Temperate; Rocky or not; Hollow or
Solid? whether they run in Ridges, or seem confusedly placed; and if the
former, what way the Ridges run, North or South, etc.? And whethey run any
thing parallel to one another?

II. What the Country produces, and what is most plenty?

III. What Cattle it produces? whether they have any thing peculiar in point of
Bigness, Color, Longevity, Fitness or Unfitness to make good Meat, and other
Things, which may rather be attributed to the peculiar Nature of the Place,
than the Barrenness of the Soil, or other manifest Causes?

IV. What Health the Inhabitants enjoy? what Diseases they are subject to, and
to what not? for it is said, that such as dwell near Quicksilver Mines are
seldom troubled with the Plague: And lastly, what Remedies are found for the
Epidemick Diseases of the Place?

V. What plenty of Rivers, Brooks, Lakes, Springs, N. B. Mr. Boil says
somewhere, That a Reddish Mineral Water has been drunk to satisfy Thirst,
without any Hurt.
etc. in these, and how these are in Color, Taste, etc. and how they affect
the Health of those that use them?

VI. How the Air is disposed, as to Heat or Cold, Calms or Winds; and whether
these Winds do proceed from, or are infected with Subterraneous Steams? whether
Clear or Foggy?

About the Second Title.
VII. Whether the Soil that is near the Surface of the Earth be stony; and if
so, what sort of Stones it abounds with, whether it be Clayie, Marly, or
Chalky? and of how many kinds this is, and by what Properties they are
distinguished?

About the Third Title.
VIII. By what Signs they conjecture a Mine to be in a Place?

IX. And seeing these Signs are either above or beneath the Surface of the
Earth, Quaer. Whether the Ground be barren where these Metal Mines are?

X. What Trees or Plants do most plentifully grow in these Places, and do
thrive well or ill in these Places? whether they be more dwarfish, more
discolored in the Leaves, or have any preternatural Color in them?

XI. What Alteration is produced in the Waters that run from them, either as to
their Color, Taste, Smell, Ponderousness, or the Matter that they leave upon
the Stones they run over.

XII. Whether Snow or Ice continue as long in these Places as they do in the
neighboring Places?

XIII. Whether the Dew that falls on the Ground will discolor a white Linen
Cloth, spread on the Surface of the Earth? and whether the Rain brought thither
from other Places will discolor such Clothes, or afford any Residence of a
Mineral Nature?

XIV. Whether Thunder, Lightnings and Storms do abound there? and if there be
any Fiery Meteors and Nocturnal Lights observed there?

XV. Whether Mists do arise from such Mineral Grounds; what is observable in
them; what Minerals they signify, and may be supposed to be produced by?

XVI. Whether the Virgula Divinatoria be used for the finding out the Mines,
and with what Success.

As for those Signs that are beneath the Surface.

XVII. Quaer. Whether there be any Clays, Marles, or other Mineral Earths, and
of what Consistence they are that give Notice of the Ores; and if there be more
than one, and at what Depth they lie, in respect of one another, and how thick
they are.

XVIII. What Stones, Marcasites, etc. there are to be found near or not far
from the Surface, which give Signs of those Mines, as it happens in the
Tin-Mines of Cornwall, where Marcasites are often found above the Ore; what is
the particular Shapes, Bigness, Color and Weight of such Stones, whereby they
are distinguishable from others.

XIX. Whether Heat or Damps are a Sign of a Mine.

XX. Whether Water found in Digging be a Sign of a Mine.

XXI. By what Signs the Nearness of a Mine is known; and whether by any Sign
one may know whether he is above, beneath, or at the side of the Mine.

XXII. By what Signs the determinate Kinds of Metals are known, with their
Plenty or Goodness.

XXIII. What Signs there are of the Depth of the Mines; what Signs there are of
the Mines being hopeless, or at least unlikely, to find a Vein in the Place
where it is dug for, and what these are.

About the Fourth Title.
XXIV. What is the Depth of the Shaft or Groove, till you come at the Vein or
Ore; whether the Vein run or lie horizontal or dip; and if it dip, what
Inclination it has, how deep the lowest part lies, and consequently how much
deeper than the uppermost.

XXV. As also what its Flexures, if it have any, are; and whether it runs
directly North or South, East or West, or seem rather to have a casual Tendency
than any Determination by Nature, and how far it reaches in all.

XXVI. What is the wideness of the Groove at the top and elsewhere; whether the
Groove be perpendicular or crooked, and if crooked, after what manner, and with
what Distance it winds.

XXVII. How the Groove is supported; what are the kinds, length, bigness, and
way of placing the Timber, Poles, etc. that are employed to support it; and how
long the Wood lasts, without being spoiled by the Subterraneous Fumes and
Waters, and what Wood lasts longest.

XXVIII. What Air-shaft belongs to the Mine; whether it be single or more than
one; of what Breadth the Air-shaft is at the Orifice; whether it be convenient
enough or not; how near it is placed to the Groove, and in what Position; if
there be several Air-shafts, what their Distances and Situation are, in
reference to the Groove, and to each other; and how Air is supplied, if there
be no Air-shafts.

XXIX. Whether they meet with Waters, and what Plenty there is of them; at what
Depth they are found, and how qualified, and what way they spring, etc.

XXX. Whether they are constant or temporary; whether they increase or diminish
notably in Summer, or at any time of the Year; and what that Season is, how
long it lasts, and the Proportions of Increase and Decrease.

XXXI. What Engines or Contrivances are made use of for drawing up the Water,
and conveying it away, the Materials they are made of, the Parts, the Bigness,
the Coaptation, and in short the whole Structure, number and way of applying
the Instruments that are made use or to free the Mines from the Water.

XXXII. What are the Conditions, Number, etc. of the Adits.

XXXIII. Whether the Mines be troubled with Damps, and of what kind they are;
whether they come often or seldom at any Time of the Year, or altogether
irregularly.

XXXIV. What Signs forerun them; what Mischief they do; what Remedies are the
most successfully employed against them, as well in reference to the Clearing
of the Mine, as to the Preservation and Recovery of the Men.

XXXV. What Methods the Mine-men use in following of the Vein, and tracing
their Passages under Ground (which they call Plumming and Dyalling) according
to the several Exigencies; and whether they employ the Instruments made with
the Help of the Loadstone, the same way that is usual; and, if not, wherein
they differ in the Use of the same Instruments; and what Instrument they
substitute in their place.

XXXVI. What ways they secure themselves against the Uncertainty that the
Magnetical Needle is subject to when it comes near to Iron Ore, of which yet
perhaps there is not so great Danger as one may imagine, as far as I could find
by a Trial purposely made by a Groove, where I was sure there wanted not Iron
Ore;) and what other ways may be used, besides a Lodestone, to help a Miner.

XXXVII. How the Miners deal with the Rock and Spar they meet with before they
come at the Ore; and how they use Fire to soften, calcine, or crack them; with
what Success they employ it.

XXXVIII. By what means they free the Mines and the Workmen from the
Inconveniences arising from the much use of the Fire.

XXXIX. With what Instruments they break the Rock, how long they are used, and
how long they last.

XL. How the Miners work, whether clothed or naked, and what Lights they use
to work by; what Materials they are made of, and what Light they give; how long
they last, and by what ways they are kept burning in that thick and foggy Air.

XLI. How Veins are followed, lost, and recovered; and how several Miners work
on the same Vein, and what is the best way of getting all the Ore in a Vein,
and most conveniently.

XLII. How they convey out their Ore, and other Things that are to be carried
out of the Mine; whether they do it in Baskets drawn up by Ropes, or upon Men's
Backs; and if this last kind of way, what kind of Vessels they use for Matter,
Shape and Capacity, and whether the Workmen deliver them one to another, or the
same Workmen carry them all the way; and whether they descend and ascend by
Ladders of Wood or Ropes, etc.

About the Fifth Title.
XLIII. Whether the Ore runs in a Vein, or lie dispersed in scattered Pieces,
or be divided partly into a Vein, partly into loose Masses, or like a Wall
between two Rocks, as it were in a Cleft, or be interspersed in the firm Rock,
like speckled Marble, or be found in Grains like Sand or Gravel, as store of
excellent Tin is said to be found in some Parts of Cornwall, at the Sides and in
the Channels of Running Waters, which they call -- or whether the Ore be in a
softer Consistence, like Earth or Lome, as there is Lead Ore in Ireland,
holding store of Silver and Iron Ore in the North Parts of Scotland, and
elsewhere, and what is observable in it, as to Weight, Color, Mixture, etc.

XLIV. Whether any part of the Metal be found in the Mine perfect and complete
(as I have had presented me good valuable Copper, and pieces of perfect Lead,
that were taken up, the one at Jamaica, and the other by an. Acquaintance of
mine, that took them out of the Ground himself, in New England.)

XLV. Whether the Mine affords any parcels of Metal that seem to grow like
Plants, (as I have sometimes seen Silver grow, as it seemed, out of Stone or
Spar, almost like Blades of Grass, as also great Grains of Metal, which
appeared to me, and which those that tried some of it, affirmed to be Gold,
abounding in a stony Lump, that seemed chiefly to consist of a peculiar kind of
Spar.

XLVI. Whether the Vein lie near the Surface of the Earth, and at what Depth;
whether the Vein have not any peculiar concomitant Coats, (if I may so call
them,) and if any, what they are, and in what Order they lie, as the Veins of
Lead Ore with us have frequently annexed to them a Substance called Spar, and
next to that another called Caulk.

Whether (besides these Coats) they have belonging to it any other
Heterogeneous Substance, (as in Tin-Mines we often find that yellow Substance
they call Mundick)

XLVII. What are the principal Qualities of these extraneous Substances, (as
that Spar is white, but almost transparent, like course Crystal, heavy,
brittle, easily divisible into Flakes, etc. Caulk is of a different Texture,
white, opacous, and like a Stone, but much more ponderous. Mundick I have had
of a fine golden Color; but though it be affirmed to hold no Metal, yet I found
it in weight and otherwise to differ from Marcasites, and the Mine-men think it
of a poisonous Nature.

XLVIII. Whether the Vein be enclosed every way in its Coats, or whether it lie
only between them.

XLIX. Whether the Vein be every way of an uniform Breadth and Thickness; and
if it be, what these Dimensions are; and if not, in what Places it varies, and
in what Measures; (the like Questions are to be made concerning the Spar,
Caulk, and other Mixtures of the Ore.)

L. Whether the Vein be uninterrupted, or in some Places broken off; and
whether it be abruptly or not; and whether it be by Vales, Brooks or Gullets,
etc.

LI. How wide the Interruptions are; by what Signs the Veins are to be found
again; whether the ulterior part or division of the Vein be of the same nature
and hold on in the same course, as to its tendency upwards and downwards, or
horizontally, Northward or Southward, etc. with the Vein from which it is cut
off.

LII. Whether in case the last end of the Vein be found, it terminate abruptly,
or else end in some kind of Rock or Earth, which does as it were close or seal
it up, without leaving any Crack or Cranny, or otherwise; and whether the
terminating part of the Vein tends either upward or downwards, or neither. Or
whether in the Places where the Vein is interrupted, there be any peculiar
Stone or Earth that does, as it were, seal up the Extremity of it.

LIII. Whether it be observed that the Ore in Tract of Time may afford any Gold
or Silver, which it does not afford, or more than it would afford if it were
not so ripe; and whether or not it have been found that the metalline part of
the Vein grows so, that some part of the Ore will afford Ore or Metal in Tract
of Time, that did not so before; and whether to this Maturation of the Mine,
the being exposed to the free Air be necessary; or whether at least it conduce
to the acceleration of it, or otherwise.

LIVE. Whether all the Ore contained in the Mine be of the self-same Nature and
Goodness, and if not, what are the differing kinds, and how to be discriminated
and estimated.

LV. What is the Fineness and Goodness, by which the Mine is wont to be
estimated. And,

LVI. What are the Marks and Characters that distinguish one sort from another.

LVII. What Proportion of Metal it affords; (as in our Iron Mines is observed,
that about three Tons of Iron Stone will afford one Ton of Metal: And I have
had Lead Ore, which an Ingenious Man, to whom I recommended such Trials,
affirmed to me to afford three parts in four of good Lead)

LVIII. Whether the Ore be pure in its kind from other Metals; and if not, of
what Metals it participates, and in what Proportion, which is especially to be
inquired into, especially if the Mine be of a base Metal, that holds a noble
Metal, (as I have known it observed, That Lead Ore, that is poor in its own
Metal, affords more Silver than other; and I remember, that the Ore lately
mentioned, being rich in Lead, scarce afforded us, being cupell'd) an Atome of
Silver. And Mathesius informs us, That a little Gold is not unfrequently found
in Iron Ore: And I have by me some fine Gold that never endured the Fire, taken
out of Tin Ore.

About the Sixth Title.
LIX. What Preparations are used before the melting of the Ore, as Beating,
Grinding, Washing, Tosting, or Parting, as is most frequently used in Copper
Ore, and sometimes in Iron Ore; if they use this Burning more than once, how
often they do it, (for Copper Ore is in some Places washed eight or ten times,
and in other twelve or fourteen,) and with what Circumstances, as how long the
Ignition lasts at a time; whether the Ore be suffered to cool of it self, or be
quenched; whether it be washed betwixt each Ignition; or whether the Ore
requires no such Preparations, as it often happens in Lead Ore, and sometimes
in Iron.

LX. Whether Mercury is made use of in separating the Nobler from the Baser
Metals, (as in Peru, etc.

LXI. Whether (as I have seen done in Iron Stone) the Ore be exposed to the
Air, as a Preparative.

LXII. What Flux-Powders they use for reducing their Ores in small Quantities.

LXIII. Whether in reducing or melting great Quantities they use any Addition
of Flux-powder, (or Fondant, as the French term it,) or only by the Force of
the Fire, or in any way between both, (as throwing in of Charcoals when they
melt Iron Stone, does not only serve to feed the Fire, but by the Alkali of the
Ashes to promote the Fusion: So Limestone, etc.) What is the Contrivance of
the Furnaces, and if they be all of one sort or bigness, or differing; what
Tools are used in Smelting, and how contrived.

LXIV. What Fuel they use, and how much is spent in a Day or Week, and what
Returns they have in Metal, in a proportionate Time.

LXV. Whether the Ore be melted in a Wind Furnace, made by the Fire's own
Motion, or by Bellows; what their Dimensions are, and what way u^'d.

LXVI. What way they take or let out the Metal that is in Fusion, to cast it
into Bars, Sows, Pigs; and what Clay, Sand, or Mould they let it run or pour it
through; and after what manner they refrigerate it.

LXVII. Whether or not, to facilitate the Fusion, they mix several Ores of the
same sort together, (as in some Places it is usual to mix rich and poor Ore, and
at Mendip they mix two or more of these differing kinds of Lead Ores, that they
call Firm Ore, Steel Ore, Pottern Ore, etc.)

LXVIII. Whether or not, after it is once melted, they melt it again, to make it
more pure; and if so, with what Circumstances they perform it.

LXIX. Whether they have Signs to know when the Fusion is well or ill
performed, and the Metal have obtained a Perfection requisite in such a Fusion,
and in such a Furnace.

LXX. Whether they observe any difference in the Goodness of the Metal that
comes first, from that which comes last; and whether the Rule holds constantly,
(for though they observe in the Tin Mines, that the best Metal comes first, yet
an industrious Friend of mine informs me, that the best Metal comes last.)

LXXI. Whether the produced Metal be all of the same Goodness; and if it be,
how good it is in reference to the Metals of other Mines, or other Parts of the
same Vein; and if it be not, what difference are between the produced Portions
of Metal, and what disparity that amounts to in the Price.

LXXII. What are the ways of distinguishing them, and estimating their Goodness.

LXXIII. Whether there be not elevated Flowers to the upper parts of the
Chimney, and whether they are barely Excrementitious or Metalline; (as in the
Cornish Tin Mines, after some Years they pull down the Thatched Houses, in
which the Ore has been melted, to get the Stuff that adheres to the insides of
the Roof, out of which they melt store of excellent Tin.)

LXXIV. Whether, when the Ores are brought to Fusion, they have any Recrements,
(as Iron Stone affords store of a dark Glass or Slag, the like does Tin; and if
it do, what these Recrements are, and how to be separated from the baser Metal)

LXXV. Whether after the Metal has been melted, the remaining part of the Ore
will in Tract of Time be impregnated with more Metal; (for this is affirmed to
me of the Cornish Tin-Ore; and what remained after the Fusion of the Iron Ore
in the Forest of Dean, is so rich in Metal, that a Tenant of mine in Ireland,
though he had on the Land he held for me an Iron Mine, found it less profit to
work it, than to send to the Forest of Dean for this already used Ore, which
having lain for some Ages since it was thrown aside, in great Heaps, exposed to
the Air, he affirmed to yield a very great store of Iron and very good; though
I somewhat doubt.

LXXVI. Whether this be totally to be ascribed to the Air, and length of Time,
or to the leaving of Metal in the Slags in old Times, before great Furnaces
were in use.)

LXXVII. Whether the Air appears really to be cold in Summer, and hot in
Winter, by more evident Truths than the Testimony of our Touch.

LXXVIII. Whether they find the Stones and Ground actually hot, so that
sometimes they can hardly stand upon the Place, as Glauber says, and from
whence that proceeds.

LXXIX. Whether there be Mineral Jucies that harden into Stones or Metals, upon
the Touch of the Air called Gur; of this Helmont relates an Observation.

LXXX. What Laws, Constitutions and Economy is observed among the Miners.

LXXXI. What way the Trees and their Leaves are affected by the Mineral Fumes
and Juices, and if they be gilded or silvered as along the River Meine in
Germany is observed; and if these Trees be more ponderous than others; if they
have any Metals or Metaline Concretes lodged in their Pores.

LXXXII. Whether there be Waters and Springs observed to rise near the Mines,
and run their whole Course under the Ground, without ever appearing above it.

LXXXIII. Whether Subterraneous Springs do rise with any Wind, or determinate
Change of Weather.

LXXXIV. How much heavier the Atmosphere is at the Bottom than the Top; and
whether Damps considerably increase the Weight of it.

LXXXV. Whether they find any strange Substances in the Mines, as Vessels,
Anchors, Fishes enclosed in Spar or Metal.

Having gone through what belongs to the Mineral Kingdom, in as full a Method
as we could, the next Head of Enquiries shall be about the Vegetable Kingdom,
which though more proper for one that has his Abode fixed, may yet be
acceptable and useful also to the curious Traveller.

I. What Vegetables there are which, having the wrong end of them set down into
the Ground, will yet grow, as it is said Elders and Briars will.

II. Whether the Branch of a Plant (as of a Vine or Bramble) being laid into
the Ground, whilst yet growing on the Tree, and there taking Root, being cut
off from the Tree whilst so growing, will shoot out forward and backward.

III. In Tapping, Cutting or Boring of any Tree, whether the Juice that vents
at it comes from above or below.

IV. What part of the Juice ascends or descends by the Bark; whether what so
ascends, ascends by the outward or inward part of it.

V. Whether if a Zone of about two or three Inches be cut off about the bottom
of a Branch, that Branch will die or cast its Leaves, or bleed out a Juice from
the upper or lower part of the Bark so cut, or be apt to shoot out Leaves or
Branches, or Knobs, either above or below that boring.

VI. What the use of the Pith is; whether the Juice ascend or descend by it;
and what Effects will follow, if the Trunk be bored to the Pith, and a Peg
droven hard into the Hole of the Pith, both above and below; this to be tried
in the most pithy Plants.

VII. Whether the Points or Ends of the Roots being cut off, will bleed as
copiously as Branches of the Trunks do, when bored.

VIII. What side of the Tree affords most Sap.

IX. Of What Age Trees afford most Sap.

X. What are the best Seasons of the Air for taking the Sap of every kind of
Tree in greatest Quantity, and how long that Season lasts.

XI. Whether the Sap comes more copiously at one Time of the Day or Night than
at another.

XII. Whether Trees afford any considerable Juice in the Fall.

XIII. What Effect, Copiousness, or Scarcity of Rain has upon the Saps of
Trees.

XIV. Whether or no the Nature of a Tree may be changed by Applications of
Juices or Liquors to the Roots, or other Parts.

XV. Whether a Tree, whose Root is covered from Rain, and not watered, if the
Branches of it be exposed to the Air, will grow.

XVI. Whether inoculated Roots of a Tree will grow.

XVII. How short the Arms of the Roots of a Tree may be cut, and the Tree still
grow.

XVIII. How deep the several kinds of Trees are to be set in the Ground to grow.

XIX. Whether or no, a Seed being planted either way, it will grow equally.

XX. Whether the Stem of a Tree being set in the Earth, and the Root turned up
into the Air, the Tree will grow, etc.

Enquiries concerning the Use and Culture of the Kitchen-Garden and
Winter-Greens.
I. What Roots First Shoots Sprouts Stalks Buds Flowers Fruits Kernels Seeds
to Eat Raw Boil Roste Bake Pickle Preserve Candy Dry whole Dry to Powder,
serving for Spice make Wine -- Cider -- Perry -- Ale and other various Drinks
-- Vinegar and Verjuice -- Thick Juices like Honey -- Concrete Juices like
Sugar -- Bread -- Cakes, Puddings and baked Meats. -- Broths give pleasant
Colors to Meats and Drinks what Herbs are fit to make Sallads, and how to be
ordered for that purpose.


II. The best Season to sow every sort of Seed.

III. How often every sort of Seed ought to be sown for the Use of the
Kitchen-Garden.

IV. How the Earth is compounded and ordered for several kinds of Seeds and
Plants.

V. What to be sowed on Cold Grounds.

VI. What to be sowed on Hot Beds.

VII. Several ways of making Hot Beds, and their Attendance.

VIII. How and what to be transplanted either into Cold Ground, or into New Hot
Beds, and how ordered after.

IX. What Observations on the Sun, Moon and Weather, for Sowing, Planting and
Transplanting.

X. How to water and shade Plants new planted and Seeds sowed.

XI. What thrives best in the Sun.

XII. What thrives best in the Shade.

XIII. What and how such as will not prosper in the Green-House, may be covered
and preserved abroad.

XIV. The several Names of Worms, Vermin and Insects that are noxious to the
Gardens.

XV. The Remedies.

XVI. The best Form and Dimension of the Green-House; as also of what to build
and cover it.

XVII. What to be housed in Winter.

XVIII. How to order the Pots or Tubs before they are used.

XIX. When and in what Weather to open and close the Green-House.

XX. What Observations at the first setting abroad of the Winter-Greens in the
Spring.

XXI. How to Prune and Dung the Winter-Greens.

XXII. What may be increased by the Root.

XXIII. What by Layers.

XXIV. What by Slips or Cuttings.

XXV. What grows best of Seeds that shed and sow themselves.

XXVI. What to be Grafted and Inoculated.

XXVII. The several ways of Ingrafting and Inoculating.

XXVIII. How to alter the Shape, Smell, Taste and Color of Vegetables, by
joining different Roots together.

XXIX. How and what may be changed by Grafting, Joining or Inoculating Shoots
or Buds on different Stocks or Cyons.

XXX. How to compound several Liquors to Water, and feed Vegetables, whereby
they may be much altered.

XXXI. Of what Roots, Stalks, Barks, Leaves, Flowers, Fruits, Seeds or Downs,
may be made either Cups, Boxes, Baskets, Mats, Callicoes, Cloths, (as Nettle
Cloth) and the like, all which will be most useful for the Life of Man, from
the Garden.

XXXII. How to prune Vines, how many Joints to leave, and of what Age the Vine
must be that is cut away.

XXXIII. How to prune Standard-Trees.

XXXIV. How to prune Wall-Trees, and with what to be best fastened.

XXXV. The Places from whence the best of the Vegetables, that are either
Winter-Greens, or fit for the Kitchen-Garden, may be had, and the Marks of
their Goodness.

XXXVI. How to discern good Seeds from bad.

XXXVII. The Times of Gathering, and the Ways of Preserving them.

Though we have by Journal-Books a fuller Account given us of Turkey than of
many other Countries, yet because there are in these but imperfect Relations of
many Things, which yet are needful to be known, it will not be amiss to make
known here the Account of these Things, that the Curious Traveller may inform
himself of them, as he shall find convenience for it.

1. In what Part of Turkey the Rusma is to be found, and in what Quantity;
whether the Turks employ it to any other Uses besides that of taking off the
Hair; whether there be differing kinds of it; how it is used to take off Hair,
and how to get store of it.

2. Whether the Turks do not only take Opium themselves for Strength and
Courage, but also give it to their Horses, Camels and Dromedaries, for the same
purpose, when they find them tired and faint in their Traveling; what is the
greatest Dose any Men are known to have taken of Opium, and how prepared.

3. What Effects are observed from their Use of Opium, as also of Coffee,
Bathing, Shaving their Heads, using Rice, and why they prefer that which grows
not, unless watered, before Wheat, etc.

4. How their Damasco Steel is made; and,

5. What is their way of Dressing Leather, which, though thin and supple, will
hold out Water.

6. What is the way they breed those excellent Horses they are so much famed
for.

7. Whether they be so skilful in poisoning, as is said, and how their Poisons
are curable.

8. How the Armenians keep Meat fresh and sweet so long as it is said they do.

9. What Arts or Trades they have worth learning.

10. Whether there be such a Tree about Damascus called Moustac, which every
Year, about the Month of December, is cut down close by the Root, and within
four or five Months shoots up again apace, bringing forth Leaves, Flowers and
Fruit also, and bearing but one Apple, an excellent Fruit, at once.

11. Whether at Reame, in the South Parts of Arabia Foelix, there be Grapes
without any Grains; and whether the People of that Country live, many of them,
to an Hundred and twenty Years in good Health.

12. Whether in Candia there be no poisonous Creatures; and whether those
Serpents that are there are without Poison.

13. Whether all Fruits, Herbs, Earths and Fountains are naturally saltish, in
the Island of Cyprus; and whether those Parts of this Isle, which abound
naturally in Cyprus-Trees, are more or less healthful than others.

14. What store of Amianthus there is in Cyprus, and how they work it.

15. Whether Mummies be found in the Sands of Arabia, that are the dried Flesh
of Men, buried in those Sandy Deserts in Traveling; and how they differ in
their Virtue from the embalmed ones.

16. Whether the Parts about the City of Constantinople, or Asia Minor, be as
subject to Earthquakes now as they have been formerly; and whether the Eastern
Winds do not plague the said City with Mists, and cause that Inconstancy of
Weather it is said to be subject to.

17. Whether the Earthquakes in Zant and Cephalonia be so frequent, as to
happen now and then nine or ten times in a Month; and whether these Isles be
not very Cavernous.

18. What is the Height of Mount Cacasus, its Position and Temper in several
Parts, etc.

19. With what Declivity the Water runs out of the Euxian Sea into the
Propontis, with what Depth; and if the Main Tides and Eddies, so famous by the
Name of Euripi, have any certain Period.

20. If in the Euxine Sea there can be found any Sign of the Caspian Sea's
emptying it self into it by a Passage under Ground; if there be any different
Color or Temper, as to Heat or Cold, or any great Emotion in the Water, that
may give Light to it.

21. By what Inland Passages they go to China, there being now a Passage for
Caravans throughout those Places, that would formerly admit of no
Correspondence, by reason of the Barbarism of the Inhabitants.

22. Whether in the Aqueducts they make, they line the Inside with as good
Plaster as the Ancients did, and how theirs is made.

23. To enquire after the excellent Works of Antiquity, with which that Country
is full, and which by the Ignorant are not thought worth Notice or
Preservation; and particularly what is the Structure and Bigness of the
Aqueducts made in several Places about Constantinople by Solomon the
Magnificent.

24. To enquire whether the Relations of a whole City's being turned into Stone
be true; and if not, what gave the first Rise to it; and whether it lie so near
the Sea that those Bodies so metamorphosed may be easily brought into Europe.
Here I beg the Reader's Leave to digress a little, and give him the Information
I had of it from one who was upon the Place, did see this strange
Metamorphosis, and had an Account of it from one who lived near to it, which I
the rather adventure to do, because I have had good Proofs of his Veracity in
other Relations, and also because I had the same confirmed to me in great
measure by a Gentleman who had been long a Chaplain to the Factory at Smyrna,
who assured me, That there is no doubt of it. It Is this: Being obliged to go
with the Army sent by the Bassa of Tripoly to reduce a City that had rebelled
against him, in the way, he and some others, after Leave got from their
Commander, did turn aside to see this so strange Metamorphofis; at his first
coming into the Place he saw a Sheep lying upon her Belly, as if it were
chewing the Cud, whose Head he broke off from her Neck with a Stone, and in the
Gullet he could perceive some remainder of the chewed Grass all petrified,
which he took up, and sold afterward to one of his Fellow-Slaves, who, having
sent it to the Pope, had his Ransom returned for it. A little farther they saw
a Woman sitting on her Knees, with her Hands in a Trough, as if she were
kneading Dough, her Mantle that was clasped about her Neck being cast backward,
and all turned to Stone, so hard, that they could lift her and the Trough in
which the Hands were, without parting them or breaking any thing. When he asked
a Priest that was sent from the City to treat with the Commander, what way this
did happen; he answered him, That all the Inhabitants of that Place were
Sodomites, and that God rained down Fire and Brimstone from Heaven upon them;
upon the which they were all turned to Stones: And for Proof of this, he
desired him to dig in the Sand, with his Hand, a Foot deep, which he found like
blue Ashes; which, said the Priests, were the Remainders of that Fire.

But to return to our Subject, the next Enquiries shall be for Egypt. And,

1. Whether it rain at any time; and if so, at what time of the Year; and what
Influences that Rain has upon the Air, as to the making it Wholesome or
Pestilential, or otherwise Unwholesome.

2. To consider the Nitre that is made there, to try what Affinity there is
between the Nitre we have and theirs, whether it discover an Alkaly Nature by
its Colluctation with Acids, as some report, and whether after dissolving in
Water, Filtration and Evaporation, it give Chrystals like to Nitre.

3. Whether the Earth of Egypt, adjoining to the River Nilus, preserved and
weighed, daily keeps the same Weight, till the seventeenth of June, and then
grows daily heavier, with the Increase of the River.

4. Whether, if the Plague be never so great before, yet on the first Day of
the Nile's Increase, it not only not increases, but absolutely cease, not
one dying of it after; and whether this be justly attributed to the swelling of
the Nile, or the cool Winds that happen about that Time, and come from the
dissolving of the Snows on the Riphaean Hills behind Greece, which being
impregnated with the Nitrous Particles of the Snow, does both fan the Air of
Egypt, and communicate to it an Anti-pestilential Quality; which I the rather
am inclined to believe, because Judicious Men do attribute in part the swelling
of the Nile to these Etesiae, that blowing hard on the Mouth of the Nile, force
its Waters back again into its Channel, which meeting with the Land-flood, that
is at the same time occasioned by the great Rains happening at that Time on the
Mountains of the Moon, do make the River overflow its Banks.

5. To enquire particularly into the manner of hatching Eggs in Egypt; how the
Camels Dung is prepared, wherein they are laid; how often the Eggs are turned;
how covered; whether they hatch in one and twenty Days, as they do with us
under a Hen; whether the Chickens be as perfect as ours; if imperfect, whether
that may not happen to them with rough handling, while they are removed, being
very tender, out of the Place where they are hatched; to take the Design of the
manner, how by the Pipes the Heat is conveyed to several Rooms; how they ^reat
them betwixt the time of their Hatching and Taking away by the Owners; whether
they do not also use to hatch Eggs under Hens.

6. To enquire if the Yellow Amber that is sold in Egypt in great quantity, be
the Gum of a Tree growing in Egypt, or Ethiopia, as Bellonius, after Diodorus
Siculus, affirms; and whether, besides several Animals, that are found enclosed
in that Amber, there is frequently found some part of the Bark of a Tree
sticking to it.

7. To enquire of a certain Tree, growing not far from Cairo, which bears a
Fruit stuffed with Wool, that is finer than Silk, of which the Arabs make
Linen that is softer than Silk, and whiter than Cotton.

8. Whether Crocodiles that are found to be sometimes thirty foot long, are
hatched of an Egg no bigger than a Turkey's.

9. Whether the Ichneumon, or Egyptian Water-Rat, can kill a Crocodile, by
skipping into his Mouth, and gnawing his way out, as Old Writers affirm.

10. Whether it be true, That the Arabs can charm the Crocodiles, or whether
there be on the Nile's side any Talismans, or Constellated Figures, beyond
which the Crocodiles cannot pass, as some would make us believe.

11. To enquire at Cairo for several Druggs, which are common there, and much
in use, yet not brought into Europe, as Acacia, Calamus Odoratus, Amomum,
Costus, Ben Album, and diverse such others.

12. Whether the Female Palm Tree be not Fruitful, unless she be planted by the
Male, as some would bear us in Hand.

13. To enquire whether the Appearance of Legs and Arms of Men, related to
stand out of the Ground, to a great Number, at five Miles from Cairo, on
Good Friday, do still continue, and how that Imposture is performed.

14. Whether Children born in the Eighth Month do usually live there, contrary
to what is believed to happen elsewhere.

15. To take an Account of the Wooden Locks there, which are said to be made
with as great Art there, as our Locks here.

16. To observe the Course of the Waters both in the Mediterranean and the Red
Sea.

Enquiries for Guiney.
1. Whether the River Niger overflows the Country yearly, like Nilus.

2. Whether Rain, when it falls, be often very hot; whether it rots the
Clothes, if not presently dried, and breeds Worms in them.

3. Whether the Gold there differs in the Fineness, and that which lies
uppermost in the Mine be the finest.

4. Whether the Palm yields Wine, Oil, Vinegar, Soap, and Bread; and whether
out of the Leaves they pick Threads, making thereof very curious Works.

5. Whether they have besides their Palmwine, a Drink made of Grain, like our
Ale; what Grain that is, and how prepared.

6. Whether some People on the River Gambra be only Tawny, as others very Black.

7. Whether the Negroes have such sharp Sights, that they discover a Ship
farther off at Sea than an European can.

8. What Reason there is to conclude, That the Common People being accustomed
to drink Water, is the Cause that they are troubled with Worms in their Bodies,
very painful to them, and difficult to get out.

Enquiries for Poland, and the adjacent Country, especially such as are more
Northerly.
1. What is the way of making Potashes in Poland.

2. What is to be observed about Succinum or Amber; whether it be an Exudation
of the Sea; whether it be soft when it is first cast on Shore; at what Season of
the Year, and in what manner it is taken up, etc.

3. What is to be observed in the digging of Sal Gemmae in Poland; and what is
the Depth of the Mines stored with the Salt; and what their Distance from the
Sea.

4. What Truth there is in that Relation, of Swallows being found under Waters
congealed in Winter, and reviving, if they be fished and held to the Fire.

5. Whether there be in the Bodnick Bay a Whirl-pool, as is related to be in
the Sea of Norway, which is commonly called the Mealstroom; and whether there be
any Signs that relate the Communication of these Gulphs with the Subterraneous
Passages, as Kircher says in his Mundus Subter. T. 1. p. 146.

6. To what Depth the Cold in these Parts pierces the Earth and Water.

7. Whether their Watches go slower by the intense Cold.

8. Whether their Oil, in great Colds, is turned into true, that is to say,
hard and brittle Ice.

9. Whether they can freeze there a strong Brine of Bay Salt, a strong Solution
of Sal Gemmae, or Soot, or a strong Solution of Salt of Tartar, or Sugar of
Lead.

10. Whether they can congeal mere Blood, all the serous Part thereof being
severed. Item, Canary Wine, Solutions of all Salts, and strong Solutions of
Metals.

11. Whether an intense and lasting Frost makes any Alteration in Quicksilver,
exposed very shallow, in a flat Vessel.

12. Whether the Purgative Virtue of Catharticks be increased or diminished, or
even totally destroyed by a strong continual Cold.

13. Whether Harts-Horns thawed will give the same Quantity of Spirits, by the
same Method of Distilling which they use to yield, when not frozen.

14. What Cold operates in the Fermentations of Liquors.

15. Whether Birds and wild Beasts grow white there in Wintertime, and recover
their Native Color in Summer.

16. Whether Colors may be concentred by Cold, e. g. a strong Decoction of
Cochineal in a fit Glass.

17. Whether the Electrical Virtue of Amber, and the Attractive Force of the
Magnet be changed by a vehement Cold.

28. Whether Pieces of Iron and Steel, even thick ones, be made brittle by
intense Frosts; and therefore Smiths are obliged, for Prevention, to give their
Iron and Steel Tools a softer Temper.

19. Whether accurate Observations evince, That all Fishes die in frozen
Waters, if the Ice be not broken; where it is diligently to be enquired into,
Whether the Cold it self, or the want of Changing or Ventilating the Water, or
the Privation of Air, be the Cause of the Death of Fishes.

20. Whether any skilful Anatomist has enquired, by Freezing to Death some
Animals, (as Rabbets, Pullets, Dogs, Cats, etc.) after what manner it is that
intense Cold kills Men; whether they have found Ice in the inward Parts, as the
Brain and Heart, and in the greater Vessels.

Enquiries into Hungary and Transylvania.
1. What is observable in Hungary, Transylvania, and the neigh bouring Parts,
as to Minerals, Springs, Warm Bath, Earths, Quarries, Metals, etc.

2. Particularly, to enquire into the several sorts of Antimony, or Antimony
Ore, to be found in Hungary, and to inform us of the several Places whence they
are dug, to the End they may be sent for.

3. To enquire where the best Hungarian Vitriol is to be found, and the
Cinnabaris Nativa.

4. To give us a right Account of the right Gold and Silver Earth-Ore, said to
be found at Cranach in Hungary; whence the Gold is called Cranach Gold, first
lighted upon by the Care of the Emperor Rudolphus, and chimically wrought by
his Order and Inspection.

5. To enquire, and send over some of that kind of Vitriol, which by credible
Persons is affirmed to be found Crystallized in Transylvania; as also after the
Vitriol, said to yield Gold.

6. To inform us of the Salt Pits in Transylvania, said to yield two sorts of
perfect Salt, the one being a Sal Gemmae, the other a common Table-Salt; to
observe how deep these Salt-Mines lie from the Surface of the Ground; how deep
they are dug hitherto, and what Damps are met with in them.

7. To enquire after the Veins of Gold and Quicksilver at Cremnitz in Hungary;
and the Vein of Silver at Schemnitz in the same Kingdom.

8. To enquire whether the Waters of the Thermae that pass by Schemnitz, depose
a certain Sediment, which in time turns into a yellow Stone.

9. Whether in the Mines of Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, Lead in Hungary, there
be generally found Quicksilver and Sulphur.

10. Whether it be true, That in the Copper-Mines of the Place called
Herren-Ground in Hungary, there be found no Quicksilver at all.

11. Whether it be true, That in some Parts of the Vpper-Hungary the Ores of
Copper, Iron and Lead, be sometimes so commixed, that there is often found in
the upper of the Concrete Matter of Iron, in the midst Matter of Copper, and in
the lowermost Lead; and that in other Parts of the Country, Copperish Fluors
are mixed with Leaden ones.

12. Whether it be true what Athanasius Kircher writes from Relation, That the
Ductus of Metals do sometimes run North and South, and sometimes cross-ways.

13. Whether it is true what Busbequius reports, Of a River in Hungary, whose
Water is so hot, and yet so full of Fish, that he says one would expect that
all the Fish drawn thence would come out boiled.

14. Whether there be Springs about Buda, or Alba Regalis, that rise at the
bottom of the River, so hot, that those who go to bathe, dare not put their
Feet so low as the Sand, for fear of having them parboiled.

15. Whether there be in Hungary an Avernus, that exhaleth always such
poisonous Steams, that Birds flying over it do oftentime fall down, either
stupefied or quite dead; what are the Particulars of this, as to Taste, Smell,
Color, Heat or Cold; whether any Waters run into it, and what Minerals are
found near about it, to which these Qualities can be mostly attributed.

16. Whether the Iron that is said to be turned into Copper by the Vitriolate
Springs at Cremnitz or Schmolnitz in Hungary, do, after that Transmutation, or
Precipitation, contain a pretty deal of Gold.

17. Whether the Depth of the Gold-Mines of Hungary be Two thousand four
hundred Feet.

18. What Quantity of Gold is got out of an hundred weight of Ore, and whether
it be got alone, or mixed with other Metals in the Ore.

19. Whether they find Trees, or any other Salt, in the solid Salt of their
Salt-Mins.

20. Whether there be a great Lake in Moravia, whence the Waters at a certain
Time of the Year are all drawn away, by great Holes in the middle of it,
leading through subterraneous Passes, and that so suddenly, that the Fish are
left on the Ground, which afterward becomes good Pasture for another part of
the Year, the Waters then returning by the same Passages they went out, and
that with so much Force that it rises like a Jet of Water.

21. Whether it is true, That in some Parts of Hungary, near the Gold Mines,
the Leaves of their Trees have their lower Superficies, if not their upper
also, gilded over with yellowish Exhalations.

22. What is the way said to be used in Hungary and Austria, of extracting the
Perfect Metals out of their Minera's without Lead, performed by casting a
Powder upon the Minera, which makes a quick and advantageous Separation,
Sulphur being supposed to be an Ingredient of it.

Enquiries for Suratte, etc.
1. Whether it be true, that Diamonds and other Precious Stones, do grow again
after three Years, in the same Places where they have been dug out.

2. Whether the Quarries of Stone near Fettipore, not far from Agra, in the
Mogul's Dominions, may be cleft like Logs, and sawn like Planks to ciel
Chambers and cover Houses therewith; likewise whether about Sadrapatan, on the
Coast of Cormandel, there be a Stone of the like nature, so as setting a Wedge
upon it, one may cleave it with a Mallet, as thick or as thin as one pleases;
and whether it be of the Nature of our Fire-stone, that is prepared by the
Stone-cutters for Ovens.

3. Whether upon the same Coast of Cormandel, about Toutoucourin, and that of
Ceylan at Manar and Jafanapatan, they fish Pearls as good as those about Ormus;
whether those Pearls are the better, the deeper they lie; what is the greatest
depth they are known to have been taken at; and whether it be true, that some
of the Natives there can stay under Water half an Hour without any Art.

4. Whether the Iron in Pegu and Japan be far better than ours; and if so, what
is to be observed in Melting, Forging and Tempering of it.

5. Whether in Sumatra there be a Fountain running a very Sanative Oil; and
whether the Ignivomous Mountain in the same Country do burn continually, and
cast out Stones so eaten by the Fire that they swim.

6. What is the Opinion of the more Inquisitive Men in these Parts of
Ambergris, and whether the greatest Quantities of it are found about the Isle
Mauritius.

7. Whether it be Winter on the East Side of the Mountain Gates, which comes
from the North Cape Comorin, whilst it is Summer on the West Side, and so vice
versa.

8. Whether it be true, That upon the Coast of Coromandel, sixteen Degrees
Northern Latititude, between Peleacate and Maselupatan, fifty Leagues in
length, the hot Winds blowing from the Landward, from eight in the Morning till
four in the Afternoon, with such a suffocating Heat, that the Inhabitants are
not able to endure it, without extraordinary Helps and Refreshment: Every one,
for his Provision of Drink, daily hangs his Bottle, made of common Pot-Earth,
and filled with Well-water, or other potable Liquor, upon some Post, Tree or
Wall, in Places where the Sun and Wind are most piercing, leaving it all the
Day long there in the scorching Heat; and then taking it up about four a Clock
in the Evening, the Drink is more cool than any depth of Cellaridge can make
it: And whether, on the contrary, the Bottles being suffered to continue in the
Air, as before; the cool Sea-Gales, which come in after the said Hour, and
continue all Night, till eight in the Morning, to the Refreshment of all
Creatures, the Liquors grow hot and unfit for Drink.

9. Whether the Tide, near Mindana, going from the Molucca's to the
Philippina's, are so swift, that neither contrary Winds nor Anchors can save a
Ship from being carried away by it; and that it rises about three or four Feet;
and whether the like be observed in the Bay of Cambaia, and in that between
Martagan and Pegu: And particularly, whether in the said Bays the Tides come in
with that Impetuosity and Swiftness about the Quarters of the Moon, that the
Watchmen from high Towers must give Warning to the People to retire; and that a
Horse, in his swiftest Course, when such a Tide comes upon it, as Isaac Vossius
observes, lib. de motu Marium and Ventorum, c. 15. And what other Particulars
are observable in all these Coasts about the Tides.

10. Whether there be any Discoveries newer than the newest Painted Maps of the
Parts of the World North-East of Japan; and whether Japan be truly an Island,
or no.

11. What is the true way of Making and Coloring China Dishes, and how in
China and Japan they make the Black Varnish.

12. With what Materials, and how they paint on Cloth, commonly called
Pintados, and likewise upon Canvas, etc.

13. Whether Lignum Aloes be the Wood or Root of a Tree; in what Country it is
found; and how to know the best of the kind.

14. Whether the best Tea be that which comes forth at the first of the Spring,
and are the Top-Leaves; in what manner it is dried, and whether the too hasting
drying thereof hurts it.

15. Whether there grows a Wood in Java, that naturally smells like Humane
Excrements; and if so, what kind of Ground it grows in.

16. Whether in the Malacca Islands there be a Red Wood, which burns, sparkles,
and flames, without being consumed, yet may be reduced to Powder, by rubbing
between ones Fingers.

17. Whether near the Fort of Ternate there be a Plant called by the
Inhabitants Catopa, whence fall little Leaves, which are turned into
Butterflies.

18. Whether in Pegu and other Places they use a Poison that kills by smelling,
and yet the poisonous Smell is hardly perceived.

19. Whether it be true, That the only Antidote, hitherto known, against the
Famous and Fatal Macassar Poison, is Humane Ordure taken inwardly; and of what
Substance that Poison is made of.

20. Whether there be such a Vegetable in Java, called Mangas Bravas, that is
so poisonous, that it kills presently, and for which no Remedy has been yet
found.

21. Where the best Calumba Wood, or Palo d' Aquila; whether the Palo d' Aquila
be much inferior to Calamba, and how they are distinguished; whether the latter
be the Pith of the former; whence the best sort comes; whether it be stored
with a Rich and Gordial Balm, and that be the Cause of its great Rate, being
much used in the Decay of Spirits, and the Lameness and Impotency of Nerves.

22. Whether they draw an Oil, resembling Oil of Camphire, from the Roots of
the Cinnamon-Tree, and how they draw it.

23. Whether the Camphire of Borneo be not the Exudation or Gum of a Tree.

24. Whether the Indians can so prepare that stupifying Herb, called Dutroa or
Datura, that they make it lie several Days, Months and Years, according as they
design it, in a Man's Body, without doing him any Hurt, and at the end kill
him, without missing an Hour's time.

25. Whether the Betele has such a Contrariety to the Durion, that a few
Leaves of that, put to a whole Shopful of Durions, will make them all rot
suddenly; and whether those that have surfeited on Durions, and thereby
overhearted themselves, do, by laying a Leaf or two of Betele upon their
Breasts or Stomachs, immediately cure the Inflammations, and Recover.

26. Whether the Papayat, which bear Fruit like a Melon, do not bear unless
Male and Female (as the Vulgar distinguishes them) stand together.

27. Whether there be two sorts of Trees called Arbor Triste, one by the Name
of Triste di Die, the other Triste die Notte, whereof the former sheds his
Flowers at the Rising, the other at the Setting of the Sun; and whether the
distilled Water thereof (called Aqua di Mogli by the Portugals) may not be
transported into these Parts.

28. Whether one of these Trees, called Arbre de Rays, propagates it self into
a whole Forest, by shouting up and letting fall its Branches into the Ground,
that spring up again, and so on; and whether there be any single ones of these
Trees, that are above fifty Feet in Diameter, as some affirm.

29. What Particulars are observable in other Plants of those Parts.

30. Whether those Shel-fishes that are in those Parts plump and in Season at
the Full Moon, and lean and out of Season at the New, are found to have
contrary Constitutions in the East Indies.

31. Whether the Animal that yields the true Musk, be like a Deer, horules,
found in the high Country between Pegu and China; and whether the Musk grows in
Bags, Blisters, or Swellings, which the Beast rubs off against Trees, it being
affirmed to have been found in the Woods by the Scent; whether True Musk is
discerned from the False by its Yellowness, when rubbed upon ones Hand, and by
its keeping that Color and the Scent.

32. Whether there be two sorts of Gum Lack, one produced by an Insect, a
certain winged Ant, the other the exsudation of a Tree.

33. To enquire after the Fish called Cabala, said to be very powerful in
staunching of Blood.

34. Whether at Java there be Oisters, or other Shell-fishes, of that bigness,
as to weigh 300 Pounds.

35. Whether in Malacca there grows sometime a Stone in the Stomach of a kind
of Porcupine, called Pedro Porco, esteemed for its Cordial Virtue above Bezoar.

36. Whether there be found in the Head of a certain Snake, a Stone, which laid
upon a Wound of any venomous Creature, sticks fast to it, and draws away all
the Poison; then, being put into Milk, voids its Poison, and turns the Milk
blue; and then applied again, draws the rest of the Poison that may be behind,
till the Wound be perfectly cured.

37. Whether the Rhinoceros have such an Antipathy against Elephants, as is
commonly reported.

38. Whether in the Island of St. Helena, the Tide be at the same time round in
the several Coasts of it; and what is the Hour of full Sea, and what the Age of
the Moon at the Time of Observation.

Enquiries for Persia.
1. What are chiefly the present Studies of the Persians, and what kind of
Learning they now excel in.

2. What other Trades and Arts they are now skilled in, besides that of making
of Silk and Tapistry.

3. Whether, there being already good Descriptions in Words, of the excellent
Pictures and Basse Relieves, that are about Persepolis at Chimilnar, yet none
very particular, some may not be found sufficiently skilled, in those Parts,
that might be engaged to make a Draught of the Place, and the Stories there
Pictured and Carved.

4. How they make that Plaster, wherewith in India and those Parts they line
their Tanks or Cisterns, and which, when dry, shines like Marble, and is much
harder.

Enquiries for Virginia and Bermudas.
1. Concerning the Varieties of Earths; it is said there is one kind of a Gummy,
Clear Consistence, White and Clear; another White, and so light, that it swims
upon Water; another Red, called Wapergh, like Terra Sigillata: Quaere, What
other considerable Kinds are there, and to send over a Parcel of each.

2. What considerable Minerals, Stones, Bitumens, Tinctures and Drugs.

3. What Hot Baths, and of what Medicinal Use.

4. What is the Original of those large Navigable Rivers which empty themselves
into the Bay Chesapeak; and whether on the other side of that Ridge of
Mountains, from which they are supposed to proceed, there be not other Rivers
that flow into the South Sea.

5. How the Silk-Grass is prepared.

6. To give a full Account of that Vulnerary Root called Wichacan of Pocone, a
Root of a red Juice, a good Tincture: Of Musquaspem, a Root of a red Tincture:
Of the Plant Maricock, whose Fruit is said to be fashioned like a Lemon,
exceeding pleasant to the Taste, of a Blossom most beautiful: Of the Chincomen
Tree, whose Fruit is said to have a Husk like a Chestnut, Luscious and Hearty
Meat, both Raw and Boiled.

7. Whether there be in the Bermudas a Poison-Weed, like our Ivy, whose Leaves
do by the Touch cause Blisters; and a Reed whose Juice or Infusion causes
Vomit.

8. What kinds of Trees these Barks are taken from, that are used instead of
Tile or Slate, in the Covering of their Houses, being cooler in Summer and
warmer in Winter than Stone.

9. To give a particular Account of the Spider in the Bermudas, said to be
Large and Beautiful for its Colors, weaving a Web betwixt several Trees, which
is affirmed to be for Substance and Color like perfect raw Silk, so strong,
that Birds like Snites are snared therein.

10. Whether Deer have generally their three or four Fawns at a Brood; and
whether any of the Cattle, transported from hence, becomes there more Fruitful
than they were here.

11. Whether the Relation be true, of a Glue made of Hartshorn, that will not
dissolve in Water; and if so, how made.

12. Whether, at the Bottom of the Bay of Chesapeak, Northward, the Natives be
still of ^uch a Gigantick Stature, as has been reported; and whether there be
another, not far from these, Easterly, of a Dwarfish Stature.

13. Whether round about the Coast of the Bermudas the Tides keep the same
Time, and at what a Clock, precisely, it is High Water on the Days of Full and
New Moon, and how high the Water rises then; and the like on the Coasts of
Virginia and Florida.

Enquiries for Guaiana and Brasil.
1. Whether about Orabba, near Oronoque, some eight Degrees Northern Latitude,
and about the Town Darien, Toads may be produced, by throwing a kind of Moorish
Water, found there, upon the Floors of their Houses. Linschotten.

2. Whether it be true that the Locust of Brasil, called Caayra, changes in
the SpringTime into a Plant, and withers away like a Plant; and whether, in the
same Country, that kind of Eruca, which is called by the Portugals Legartas des
Verias, turns into a Bird, admirable for Color and swift flying, the Change
thereof being made so leisurely, that one may for a while see half of the
Insect, and the other half of the Bird, which the Natives call Guianumbi, the
Portugals Pegafrel. Piso.

3. Whether upon the Leaves of that Brasilian Tree, called Cereiba, there is,
in a Sun-shiny Day, found a white Salt in that Quantity, that one may gather as
much from two or three Leaves as will salt a good Pot of Broth. Piso.

4. Whether there be found about the Mouth of the River Amazones, a green
Argilla, which, though very soft under Water, grows almost as hard as a
Diamond, insomuch that the Natives make Hatchets of them, strong and sharp
enough to cleave Wood; for which purpose also it is said those Indians are said
to have used it, before they got Iron ones; and whether this Argilla become
Stone, have a peculiar Virtue against the Epilepsie, when carried by the
Patient. Pelleprat, in his Relation of the Islands, and Terra Firma of the
Southern America.

5. Whether the black Bees in Guaiana, about the River Orenoque, make black
Honey and Wax; and whether they have no Stings, as the same Pelleprat affirms.

Enquiries and Directions for the Antisles, or Caribe Islands.
I. Of Vegetables.
1. Whether the Juice of the Tree Jumpa, being as clear as any Rock Water,
yields a brown Violet Dye, and being put twice upon the same Place, makes it
look black; and whether this Tincture cannot be got out with any Soap, yet
disappears of it self in nine or ten Days; and whether certain Animals,
particularly Hogs and Parrets, eating of this Fruit, have their Flesh and Fat
altogether tinged of a Violet Color.

2. Whether Ring-Doves, that feed upon the bitter Fruit of the Acomas Tree,
have their Flesh bitter also?

3. Whether the Wood of the Acajou Tree, being red, light, and well-scented,
never rots in the Water, nor breeds any Worms when cut in due Season; and
whether the Chests and Trunks made thereof keep Clothes, placed therein, from
being Worm-eaten.

4. Whether the Leaves of a certain Tree, peculiarly called Indian Wood, give
such a haut Goust to Meats and Sauces, as if it were a Composition of several
sorts of Spices.

5. Whether there be two such sorts of the Wood called Savomer or Soap-Wood, of
the one of which the Fruit, of the other the Root serves for Soap.

6. Whether the Bark of the Paretuvier-Wood, tans as well as Oak-Bark.

7. Whether the Root of the Tree Laitus being brayed, and cast into Rivers,
makes Fishes drunk.

1. Whether the Root of the Manioc is so fertile, that one Acre planted
therewith, yields so plentiful a Crop as shall feed more People than six Acres
of the best Wheat.

9. What Symptoms do usually follow upon the taking the Juice of Manioc, or
upon eating the Juice with the Root, and what Effects are thereby produced upon
the Body, that infer it to be accounted rank Poison; whether worse Effects than
these may be caused by mere Crudity, as by Turnips and Carrets eaten raw, and
much more by raw Flesh, in those that are not used thereto, or at most some
nauseous or noxious Quality, as might be corrected in the Taking or
Preparation, which Correction, if effected, might perhaps render the Bread much
heartier, the Juice being likely to carry off the Spirit and Strength, leaving
the Remainder Spiritless.

10. The Palmetto Royal being said by Ligon to be a very tall and straight
Tree, and so tough, that none of them have been seen blown down, and withal
hollow; in all which Respects they may serve for special Uses, and particularly
for long Optic Tubes.

11. Whether the Oil expressed out of Ricinus or Palma Christi, be used by the
Indians to keep them from Vermin; to send over some of that Oil.

12. Whether in the Passage of the Isthmus, from Nombre de Dios to Panama,
there is a whole Wood full of Sensitive Trees, of which, as soon as they are
touched, the Leaves and Branches move with a rattling Noise, and wind themselves
together into a winding Figure.

13. Whether there be certain Kernels of a Fruit, like a white Pear-plumb,
which are very Purgative and Emitick; but having the thin Film, which parts
them into halves, taken out, they have no such Operation at all, and are as
sweet as a Jordaine Almond.

14. To send over some of the Roots of the Herb, called by our Author L'herb
aux Fleshes, (the Dart-Herb) which being stamped is said to have the Virtue of
Curing the Wounds made with poisoned Darts.

15. To send some of the Grain of the Herb Musk, putting it up carefully in a
Box, which being in it, will keep its Musk Scent.

16. To send over a Specimen of all Medicinal Herbs, together with their
respective Virtues, as they are reputed there. Item, Particularly the
Pricklewith at the Barbados; Macao, Mastick-Tree, Locust, Black-wood, Yellow
within, Five Sprig, Tidle-wood, White-wood, Barbados Cedar.

17. Whether the Fruit Mancenille of the Mancenillier-Tree, though admirably
fair and fragrant, yet is fatal to the Eater, and falling into the Water kills
the Fishes that eat thereof, except Crabs, who yet are said to be dangerous to
eat, when they have fed upon this Fruit; whether under the Bark of this Tree is
contained a certain glutinous Liquor, as white as Milk, very dangerous, so that
if you chance to rub it, and this Juice spurt upon the Shirt like a Burning, if
upon the naked Flesh, it will cause a Swelling, if upon the Eye, Blindness for
several Days; and whether the Shadow of this Treee be so noxious, that the
Bodies of Men reposing, it will swell strangely; and whether the Meat it self
that is boiled with the Fire of this Wood, contracts a Malignity, burning the
Mouth and Throat: Farther, whether the Natives use the Milky Juice of this
Tree, and the Dew falling from it, and the Juice of its Fruit in the
Composition of the Poison they infect their Arrows with.

II. Of Animals and Insects.
18. Whether the Skin of the Taton, and the little Bone of his Tail, do indeed,
as is related, cure Deafness, and Pains of the Ears; and whether this Animal be
Proof, not only against the Teeth of Dogs, but also against Bullets.

19. Whether the Birds called Canides, be so docile, that some of them learn
not only to speak Indian, but also Dutch and Spanish, singing also the Airs in
the Indian Tongue, as an Indian himself.

And whether the Bird Colibri have a Scent as sweet as the finest Amber and
Musk; both which is affirmed by our French Author.

20. To procure some of the Fat of the Birds called Fregats, reputed to be very
Antiparalytical and Antipodagrical.

21. To send over a Land-Pike, which is said to be like the Water-Pike, but
that instead of Fins it has Four Feet on which it crawls.

22. Whether the Skin of the Sea-wolf, which they otherwise call the Requiem,
be so rude and stiff, that they make Files of them, fit to file Wood; and
whether it be usually guided by another Fish, that is beautified with such a
Variety of lively Colors, that one would say, That such Fishes are girt with
Necklaces of Pearls, Corals, Emeralds, etc.

23. Whether the Skins of the Sea-Calfs, otherwise called Lamantins, be so
hard, when dried, that they serve the Indians for Shields.

24. Whether the Ashes of the Fresh Water Tortoises do hinder the falling off
the Hair, being powdered therewith.

25. Whether the Land-Crabs of these Islands do at certain times hide
themselves all under Ground, for six Weeks, and during that time change and
renew themselves; and whether in hiding themselves thus, they do so carefully
eover themselves all about with Earth, that the opening thereof cannot be at
all perceived, thereby shutting out the Air, by which they might else be
annoyed, when they are quite naked, after they have shed their Shells, there
then remaining no other Cover on them but a very thin and tender Skin which, by
little, thickeneth and hardneth into a Crust, like the old.

26. Whether the Serpents in these Parts, that have Black and White Spots on
their Backs, be not Venomous; send over some of such Serpents Skins.

27. To send over some of the Skins of those huge Lizards, called Ovayamaca,
which, when come to their full Bigness, are said to be five Foot long, Tail and
all; and especially that are said to have the Scales of their Skins so bright
and curious, that they resemble Cloth of Gold and Silver.

28. Where the shining Flees, called Cucuyes, hide almost all their Light, when
taken, but when at Liberty afford it plentifully.

29. Whether there be a sort of Bees, Brown and Blue, who make a Black Wax, but
the Honey in it whither and sweeter than that of Europe.

30. Whether in those Parts the Indians do cure the Bitings of Serpents by
eating fresh Citron Pills, and by applying the Unguent, made of the bruised
Head of the Wounding Serpent, and put hot upon the Wound.

31. Whether the Wood-Lice in those Countries, generated out of Rotten Wood,
are not able, not only to eat through Trunks in a Day or two, and to spoil
Linen, Clothes and Books, (of which last they are said only to spare what is
written or printed,) but also to support the Props, which support the Cottages,
that they fall; and whether the Remedy against the latter Mischief is, To turn
the Ends of the Wood, that are fixed in the Ground, or to rub the Wood with the
Oil of that kind of Palma Christi (a Plant) wherewith the Natives rub their
Heads, to secure them from Vermin.

32. Whether that sort of Vermin they meet with, commonly called Ravets, spare
nothing of what they meetwith, (either of Paper, Clothes, Linen and Woollen)
but Silk and Cotton.

33. Whether the little Cirons, called Chiques, bred out of Dust, when they
pierce once into the Feet, and under the Nails of the Toes, do get Ground of
the whole Body, unless they be drawn out betimes; and whether at first they
cause but a little, but afterward having pierced the Skin, raise a great
Inflammation in the Part affected, and become in a small time as big as a
Pease, producing innumerable Nits, that breed others.

Enquiries for Greenland.
1. What and how much is the Heat of the Sun there in the midst of Summer,
compared with the Heat of it in England, to be observed with a Thermometer.

2. What is the most constant Weather there in Summer, whether Clear, Cloudy,
Rainy, Foggy, etc.

3. What Weather is most usual at such and such Times of the Year.

4. What Constancy or Unconstancy there is of the Wind, to this or that Quarter
of the Horizon, or to this or that Part of the Year.

5. What the Temperature of each particular Wind is observed to be, and
particularly whether the North Wind be the coldest; and if not, whether is
coldest, the East or the West, etc.

6. What Wind is observed to bring most Ice, and what to make a Clear Water at
Sea.

7. What Currents are there, how fast, and which way they set; whether these
Currents are not stronger at one time of the Moon than of another; whether they
always run one way.

8. What is observable about the Tides, High Spring or Neap; how high the
Water-Mark is above the Low Water; which way it flows, which way it Ebbeth;
what time of the Moon the Spring-Tides fall out.

9. Whether the Ice that floats in the Sea, be of Salt Water or Fresh.

10. What Rivers there are in the Summer, and what fresh Waters can be had.

11. What Fowl are found to live there, and what Beasts; how they are thought
to subsist in Winter; how they Breed and Feed their Young.

12. What Vegetables grow there, and whether they yield any Flowers or Fuits,
etc.

13. Whether there have been any Thunder or Lightning observed in those Parts,
as is observed in Norway.

14. How deep the Cold penetrates into the Earth, and whether there be any
Wells, Pits or Mines so deep that the Cold does not reach the Bottom thereof.

15. How the Land tends, and whether the Parts under or near the Pole, be by
those that have gone farthest that way, thought to be Sea or Land; and how near
any has been known to approach the Pole; whether the Cold increases with the
increase of Latitude.

16. To make, if possible, some Experiments and Observations about the Magnet
or Needle; and particularly how much the Declination is there, and whether they
exactly observe the Degrees of Declination in their Course; likewise to make
Observations about the Height of the Sun and other Celestial Bodies, and their
Diameter, Refractions, etc.

17. What is their Opinion concerning the North-East Passage.

18. What Fish do most frequent those Seas besides Whales; what is observable
in their Fishing, as the usual or unusual Bigness and Strength, and the several
sorts of Whales, and particularly to observe whether that kind of Whale they
call Trompa, have in their Heads the Sperma Coeti, and in their Intrals the
Ambergreese, looking like Cow Dung. Purchat.

19. What observable Difference there is of the Coldness of the Winds, when it
blows over great Boards of Ice that are seen in these Seas, and when not.

20. To give an exact Account of the Whalefishing, throwing the Harping-Irons,
following the Fish.

21. To describe the whole manner of making the Oil of Whale.

FINIS.

