A DISQUISITION ABOUT THE Final Causes OF NATURAL THINGS: Wherein it is
Inquired, Whether, And (if at all) With what Cautions, a Naturalist should
admit Them?

By T.H. R. B. Fellow of the Royal Society.

To which are Subjoined, by way of APPENDIX SOME Uncommon Observations ABOUT
VITIATED SIGHT.

By the same AVTHOR.

LONDON: Printed by H. C. for John Tailor, at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1688.

THE PREFACE.
THere are not many Subjects in the whole compass of Natural Philosophy, that
better deserve to be Inquired into by Christian Philosophizers, than That which
is Discoursed of in the following Essay. For Certainly it becomes such Men to
have Curiosity enough to Try at least, Whether it can be Discovered, that there
are any Knowable Final Causes, to be Considered in the Works of Nature. Since,
if we neglect this Inquiry, we live in danger of being Ungrateful, in
Overlooking those Uses of Things, that may give us Just Cause of Admiring and
Thanking the Author of them, and of Losing the Benefits, relating as well to
Philosophy as Piety, that the Knowledge of them may afford us. And if there be
no such Things, we are more than in danger to Mispend our Labor and Industry,
in fruitless Searching for such Things as are not to be Found. And an Inqury of
this kind is now the more Seasonable, because two of the Chief Sects of the
modern Philosophizers, do both of them, though upon differing Grounds, deny
that the Naturalist ought at all to trouble or busy himself about Final
Causes. For Epicurus, Illud in his rebus vitum vehementer inesto, Effugere
illorumque Errorem praemedit^^us, Lumina qui faciunt Oculorum clara Craeata
Prospicere ut possimus -- Lucr. de rer. ^^t. lib. IV. sect. 824.
and most of his Followers (for I except some few late ones, especially the
Learned Gassendus) Banish the Consideration of the Ends of Things; because the
World being, according to them, made by Chance, no Ends of any Thing can be
supposed to have been intended. And on the contrary, Ita denique nullas unquam
rations circa res naturales, a fine, quem Deus aut Natura in iis faciendis
sibi proposuit, desumemus; qui non tantum nobis debemus arrogare ut ejus
consiliorum participes esse putemus. Cartesius Princip. Philosop. Part prima
Artic. 28.
Monsieur Des Carts, and most of his Followers, suppose all the Ends of God in
Things Corporeal to be so Sublime, that 'twere Presumption in Man to think his
Reason can extend to Discover them. So that, according to these Opposite Sects,
it is either Impertinent for Us to Seek after Final Causes, or Presumptuous to
think We may Find Them. Wherefore, I hope I shall be Excused, if, having been
engaged by some Solicitations, (wherewith it is needless to trouble the
Reader,) I did not Decline to Try, what the Bare, but Attentive, Consideration
of the Subject would Suggest to My Own Thoughts. And, though 'twas easy to
Foresee, by this means my Friend might miss of receiving in my Essay, diverse
things that occurred not to Me; yet I considered on the other side, that such
things would, notwithstanding my Silence, be found in the Authors that
delivered them: and 'twas very possible, that by the Course I took, I might
light upon some Thoughts, that I should have missed, if I had prepossessed my
Mind with the Opinions of Others; which I was the less Tempted to do, because
an easy prospect of my Theme sufficed to let me see, I was like to have the
Epicureans and Cartesians for my Adersaries, not my Assistants. And for the
School-Philosophers; the very Slight Account that their Master Aristotle gives
of One of my Four Questions, (for of the rest, as far as I remember, He says
little or nothing,) gave me small hopes of being Aided by Them; especiaily
since in This, as in many Other Questions, they proceed upon Grounds that I
cannot Assent to. Anatomists indeed, and some Physicians, have done very
laudably upon the Uses of the Parts of the Human Body; which I take this
Occasion to Declare, that it may not be Suspected, that I do in the least
Undervalue their happy Industry, because I Transcribe not Passages out of their
Books: The Reasons of which Omission are, not only, That I had not any one Book
of Anatomy at hand, when I was Writing; but, That the Uses of the Parts of
Man's Body related but to a small Part of my Discourse: to make which more
Comprehensive, I took in the Consideration of more General Questions, besides
that which was controverted between Aristotle and the Ancienter Philosophers,
who disputed how Bodies, that were devoid of Knowledge, could Act for Ends.

Those that Relish no Books in Natural Philosophy but such as abound in
Experiments, are seasonably Advertised, that I do not Invite Them to Read this
Treatise; wherein I thought it much more Suitable to the Nature of my Subject
and Design, to declare the Works of God, than of Men; and consequently to
Deliver rather Observations, than Artificial Experiments. And even of the
Former of these, though perhaps most Readers may find in the ensuing Discourse
Several that they have not met with in Classic Authors, yet I shall freely
acknowledge, that, upon the Review I made of what I writ, I find, though too Late
to Repair the Omission, that I have left several Things unmentioned, that would
have been very pertinent to my Subject; which may, I hope, be more easily
Excused, because, the Body of the folfowing Disquisition having been Written
many years ago, and Thrown by upon the Death of the Mr. Henry Oldenburgh,
Secretary of the Royal Society.
Gentleman that Pressed me for it; I could not then take notice of those many
Discoveries in Anatomy, and other Parts of Physiology, that have since been
happily made. But perhaps some will think, I may have more need to Excuse the
Largeness of Some Parts of the following Treatise, compared with the Others.
And I should rather Grant than Answer the Objection, if I could not Allege,
that the Contagious Boldness of some Baptized Epicureans, Engaged me to dwell
much longer on the Third Proposition of the Fourth Section, than I at first
Intended. And on the other hand, the Cartesian Opinion having of late made it
Requisite to Handle the formerly Difficult Question, about the Consideration of
Final Causes, after a New Manner; I thought it Unfit, Lightly to Pass over the
Paradox Maintained by so Great a Man; and Judged it Expedient in Some Places
(what I could not do without Enlarging) to Propose Thoughts adjusted to to the
Present State of Things in this Affair: in the Management of which, I have had
so much more Regard to some Other Things, than to the Symmetry of the Parts
whereof this Tract consists, that I will not say, That I fear, I have in It but
Thrown together Materials for a Just Discourse on my Subject; since to Do so
was the Main Thing I Intended. And if the Materials be Good and Solid, they
will easily, in so Learned an Age as This, find an Architect, that will Dispose
them in a more Artful Way, than I was either at Leisure or Sollicitous to do.

AN ESSAY, INQUIRING Whether and How a Naturalist should Consider Final Causes.
To my very Learned Friend Mr. F. O.
SIR,
THough in a Book or two of mine, that you have already been pleased to peruse,
there are some passages, whence you may easily enough gather, what I thought
about your Questions; yet because the Subject is of great moment, as well as
difficulty, and you may suspect I have altered my opinion, I shall, without
referring you to writings, which perhaps neither you nor I have at hand, set
down succinctly, but yet as if I had said nothing of any of them before, my
present thoughts about these Four Questions.

I. Whether, generally or indefinitely speaking, there be any Final Causes of
things Corporeal, knowable by Naturalists?

II. Whether, if the first Question be resolved in the Affirmative, we may
consider Final Causes in all sorts of Bodies, or only in some peculiarly
qualified ones?

III. Whether, or in what sense, the Acting for Ends may be ascribed to an
Unintelligent, and even Inanimate Body?

IV. And lastly, How far, and with what Cautions, Arguments may be framed upon
the supposition of Final Causes?

SECT. I.
TO begin with the first Question; Those that would exclude Final Causes from
the consideration of the Naturalist, are wont to do it (for ought I have
observed) upon one of these two Accounts: Either, that with Epicurus they think
the world was the Production of Atoms and Chance, without any intervention of a
Deity; and that consequently it is improper and in vain to seek for Final Causes
in the effects of Chance: Or, that they judge with Des Carts, that God being
an Omniscient Agent, it is rash and presumptuous for men to think, that they
know, or can investigate, what Ends he proposed to himself in his Actings about
his Creatures. The Ground on which the Epicureans have rejected Final Causes,
has been disallowed by the Philosophers of almost all other Sects; and some
have written sufficient Confutations of it, which therefore I shall here
forbear to insist on; though somethings I shall upon occasion observe, that may
help, if not suffice, to discredit so unreasonable an Opinion. But the
Cartesian Argument has been so prevalent among many Learned and Ingenious men,
that it will be worth while (if it be but to excite better Pens) to spend some
time in the Consideration of it.

Perhaps one thing that alienated that excellent Philosopher, from allowing the
Consideration of Final Causes in Physics, was, that the School-Philosophers,
and many other Learned men, are wont to propose it too unwarily, as if there
were no Creature in the world that was not solely, or at least chiefly,
designed for the Service or Benefit of Man: Insomuch that I remember I have
seen a Body of Divinity, published by a famous Writer, wherein, to prove the
opinion he favors, of those that would have the world annihilated after the
day of Judgment, he urges this Argument; That since the World was made for
the sake of Man in his traveling Condition (homini viatoris causa,) when once
Man is possessed of his Everlasting State of Happiness or Misery, there will be
no further use of the World. The opinion, that gives rise to such presumptuous
and unwarrantable Expressions, did, as I guess by his objection, more choque
Des Carts, than I wonder that it should displease him. But the indicretion of
men ought not to prejudice Truth; which must not be cast away, with the
unwarrantable Conceits that some men have pinned upon it.

Wherefore, since I cannot entirely close, either with the opinion of the
Epicureans, or of the Cartesians, I shall leave each party to maintain its own
opinion, and proceed to propose mine: For the clearing of which, and indeed of
the Disquisition of Final Causes, I shall beg leave to premise a Distinction,
which, though novel, I shall venture to employ, because it comprises and
distinguishes some things, which I think, ought neither to be overlooked nor
confounded.

I conceive then, that when we speak of the Ends which Nature, or rather the
Author of Nature, is said to have in things Corporeal, One of these four things
may be signified, or, if you like that expression better, the End designed by
Nature may be fourfold:

First, there may be some grand and General Ends of the whole World, such as
the Exercising and Displaying the Creators immense Power and admirable Wisdom,
the Communication of his Goodness, and the Admiration and Thanks due to him
from his Intelligent Creatures, for these his divine Excellencies, whose
Productions manifest his Glory. And these Ends, because they regard the
Creation of the whole Universe, I call the Universal Ends of God or Nature.

Secondly, in a somewhat more restrained sense, there may be Ends designed in
the number, fabric, placing, and ways of moving the great Masses of Matter,
that, for their Bulks or Qualities, are considerable parts of the World; since
it is very probable, that these bodies, such as the Sun, Moon, and fixed Stars,
and the Terraqueous Globe, and perhaps each of its two chief parts, the Earth
and the Sea, were so framed and placed, as not only to be capable of
persevering in their own present state, but also as was most conducive to the
Universal Ends of the Creation, and the good of the whole World, whereof they
are notable parts. Upon which account these Ends, may, for distinctions sake,
be called Cosmical or Systematical, as regarding the Symmetry of the great
System of the world.

There is a Third sort of Ends, that do more peculiarly concern the Parts of
Animals (and probably Plants too) which are those, that the particular parts of
Animals are destinated to, and for the welfare of the whole Animal himself, as
he is an entire and distinct System of organized parts, destinated to preserve
himself and propagate his Species, upon such a Theater (as the Land, Water or
Air) as his Structure and Circumstances determine him to act his part on. And
these Ends, to discriminate them from others, may be called Animal Ends.

Fourthly, and lastly, there is another sort of Ends, which, because they
relate particularly to Man, may, for brevity's sake, be called Human Ends,
which are those that are aimed at by Nature, where she is said to frame Animals
and Vegetables, and other of her productions, for the use of Man. And these
Ends themselves may be distinguished into Mental, that relate to His Mind, and
Corporeal, that relate to His Body, not only as He is an Animal framed like
other Animals, for his own Preservation, and the propagation of his Species
(Mankind;) but also as He is framed for Dominion over other Animals and works
of Nature, and fitted to make them subservient to the Destinations, that one
may suppose to have been made of them to His service and benefit.

This Distinction of Final Causes, which I hope will not prove altogether
useless, being premised; I shall begin my intended Discourse, by owning a
dissent from both the opposite Opinions; Theirs, that, with the vulgar of
Learned Men, will take no notice of Final Causes but those we have styled Human
ones; and theirs, that (as they think, with Descartes) reject Final Causes
altogether; since, though I judge it erroneous to say in the strictest sense,
that every thing in the Visible World, was made for the Use of Man; yet I think
it is more erroneous to deny, that any thing was made for ends Investigable by
Man.

It Is a known Principle of the Cartesian Philosophy, That there is always just
the same quantity of Motion in the World at one time, that there is at another:
Of which Assertion this Reason is given; That there is no Cause, why God, who
is Immutable, should at the beginning of things, when he first put Matter into
Motion, have given it such a quantity of Motion, as would need to be afterward
augumented or lessened. But I see not, how by this Negative way of Arguing,
those that employ it, do not (implicitly at least) take upon them to judge of
the Ends, that God may have proposed to himself in Natural things. For, without
a Supposition, that they know what God designed in setting Matter a-moving,
it is hard for them to show, that His Design could not be such, as might be best
accomplished by sometimes adding to, and sometimes taking from, the Quantity of
Motion he communicated to Matter at first. And I think it may be worth
considering, Whether by this Doctrine of theirs, the Cartesians do not more
take upon them than other Philosophers, to judge of God's Designs. For, if a
Man be known to be very Wise, and have various ways of compassing his several
Ends, He that, seeing some of those ways have a direct tendency to some
Rational End, shall conclude That End to be one of those that is intended, does
thereby less presume, and express more respect to that Wise Man, than he that
should conclude, that those cannot be his Ends, and that He can have no other
Design knowable by us, except a certain General one named by the Assertor. And
indeed, it seems more easy to know, that this or that particular thing, for
which an Engine is proper, may be among others, intended by the Artificer, though
never so Skilful, than to know Negatively, that he can have no other than such
or such an End.

And how will a Cartesian assure me, that among the many Ends, that he grants
that God may have proposed to himself in the Production of his Mundane
Creatures; one may not be, That We, whom he has vouchsafed to make Intelligent
Beings, and capable of Admiring and Praising him, should find just cause to do
so, for the Wisdom and Goodness he has displayed in the World? which Attributes
we could not well discern or celebrate, unless we knew as well, that the
Creatures were made for such Uses, as that they are exceedingly well fitted for
them. I know God's Immutability is alleged, to prove that the Quantity of
Motion is never varied: But to me it is not evident, why God's having particular
Ends, though some of them seem to require a Change in his way of Acting in
Natural Things, must be more inconsistent with his Immutability, than his
Causing many things to be brought to pass, which though abaeterno he decreed to
do, are yet not actually done, unless in process of Time. And particularly it
seems not clear, why God may not as well be Immutable, though he should sometimes
vary the Quantity of Motion that he has put into the World, as He is, though,
according to the Opinion of most of the Cartesians themselves, he does daily
create multitudes of Rational Souls, to unite them to Human Bodies: Especially
considering, that these newly created substances, are, according to Descartes,
endowed with a power, to determine and regulate the motions of the Spirits and
the Conarion; which are things clearly Corporeal, I say not this, as if I
absolutely rejected the Cartesian Doctrine, about the continuance of the same
Quantity of Motion in the whole Mass of Matter. For, whether or no it be a
Truth; I think it is no unuseful nor improbable Hypothesis: And I have not so
much argued against it, as upon the Grounds, on which they argue for it.

Wherefore, to come now to the thing it self, whereas Monsieur Descartes
objects, that it is a Presumption for Man, to pretend to be able to investigate
the Ends, that the Omniscient God proposed to himself in the making of his
Creatures; I consider by way of Answer, That there are two very differing ways,
wherein a Man may pretend to know the Ends of God in his visible Works: For, he
may either pretend to know only some of God's Ends, in some of his Works; or,
he may pretend to know all his Ends. He that arrogates to himself, to discover
God's Ends in this latter sense, will scarce be excused from a high
Presumption, and no less a Folly, from the reason lately intimated in the
Cartesian Objection. But to pretend to know God's Ends in the former sense, is
not a Presumption, but rather, to take notice of them is a Duty. For, there are
some things in Nature so curiously contrived, and so exquisitly fitted for
certain Operations and Uses, that it seems little less than Blindness in Him,
that acknowledges with the Cartesians a most wise Author of things, not to
conclude, that, though they may have been designed for other, and perhaps higher
Uses; yet they were designed for this Use. As he that sees the Admirable Fabric
of the Coats, Humors, and Muscles of the Eyes, and how excellently all the
parts are adapted to the making up of an Organ of Vision, can scarce forbear to
believe, that the Author of Nature intended It should serve the Animal, to
which it belongs, to See with. The Epicureans indeed, that believe the World to
have been produced but by the casual concourse of Atoms, without the
intervention of any Intelligent Being, may have a kind of excuse, whereof other
Philosophers are destitute, that acknowledge a Deity, if not also a Providence.
For the very Supposition, for instance, that a man's Eyes were made by Chance,
argues, that they need have no relation to a designing Agent; and the use that
a man makes of them, may be either casual too, or at least may be an effect of
His knowledge, not of Nature's. But when, upon the Anatomical Dissection, and
the Optical Consideration, of a Human Eye, we see it is as exquisitly fitted to
be an organ of Sight, as the best Artificer in the world could have framed a
little Engine, purposely and mainly designed for the use of seeing; it is very
harsh and incongruous to say, that an Artificer, who is too intelligent either
to do things by chance, or to make a curious piece of workmanship without
knowing what uses it is fit for, should not design it for an use to which it is
most fit.

It Is not to be denied that he may have more uses for it than one, and perhaps
such uses as we cannot divine; but this hinders not, but that, among its
several uses, this, to which we see it so admirably adapted, should be thought
one. And I see not, how it does magnify Gods wisdom, or express our Veneration
of it, to exclude out of the number of his Ends in framing Human Eyes, that
most obvious and ready use which we are sure is made of them, and which they
could not be better fitted for. This may perhaps be not unfitly illustrated by
the following Comparison, whereof the application were superfluous: Suppose
that a Country Man, being in a clear day brought into the Garden of some famous
Mathematician, should see there, one of those curious Gnomonick Instruments,
that show at once, the place of the Sun in the Zodiac, his Declination from
the Equator, the Day of the Month, the Length of the Day, etc. It would indeed
be presumption in him, being unacquainted both with the Mathematical
Disciplines, and the several Intentions of the Artist, to pretend or think
himself able, to discover all the Ends, for which so Curious and Elaborate a
Piece was framed. But when he sees it furnished with a Style, with Horary Lines
and Numbers, and in short, with all the Requisites of a Sun Dial, and
manifestly perceives the Shadow to mark from time time, the Hour of the Day;
'twould be no more a Presumption than an Error in him to conclude, that
(whatever other Uses the Instrument is fit, or was designed for) it is a Sun-
Dial, that was meant to show the Hour of the Day.

And here I shall demand of those, that will not allow us to think, that any
Natural Things are directed to Ends knowable by Men; whether, if the Divine
Author of them had really designed them for such Ends, the things themselves
are not so Framed and directed, as in that case they should be? And whether the
Fabric and Management of Natural Things, do really countenance or contradict
our Supposition?

For my part, after what has been already discoursed, I scruple not to confess,
that I see not why it should be reputed a Disparagement to the Wisdom of any
Agent whatsoever, to think, that his Productions were designed for such Ends,
among others, as they are excellently framed and fitted for; unless it did
appear, that those Ends were unworthy to be Designed by the Wise Agent. But
that cannot be justly said in our present Case; since it is not injurious to the
Divine Author of things, to believe that some of the Ends, to which he
destinated diverse of his Corporeal Works, were; To exert and communicate His
Exuberant Goodness, and to receive from his intelligent Creatures, such as Men,
an ardent Love, a high Admiration, and an obsequious Gratitude, for having
displayed so much Wisdom and Beneficence, in exquisitly qualifying his Works to
be wonderfully serviceable to one another, and a great number of them to be
particularly subservient to the Necessities and Utilities of Man.

And indeed I can by no means assent to that Assertion of Mr. Descartes, That
it cannot be said, Nec fingi potest, aliquos Dei Fines, magis quam alios, in
propatulo esse; omnes enim in imperscrutabili ejus sapientiae Abysso sunt eodem
modo reconditi. Resp. Quart. ad Object. Gassendi.
that some of Gods Ends (in his Corporeal Works) are more manifest than others;
but that all of them lie equally hid in the Abyss of the Divine Wisdom: since
there are many of his Creatures, some of whose Uses are so manifest and
obvious, that the generality of Mankind, both Philosophers and Plebeians, have
in all Ages, and almost in all Countries, taken Notice of, and Acknowledged
them. And as to what he adds, (by which he seems to intimate the motive that
led him to make the forementioned Assertion,) That in Physics, all things
ought to be made out by certain and solid Reasons; to this I answer, First,
That I see not why the admitting, that the Author of Things designed some of
his Works for these or those Uses, amongst others, may not consist with the
Physical Accounts of making of those things; as a Man may give a Mechanical
Reason of the Structure of every Wheel and other part of a Watch, and of their
way of acting upon one another when they are rightly put together, and in
short, of the Contrivance and Phoenomena of the little Machine; though he
suppose, that the Artificer designed it to show the hours of the day, and though
he have that intended use in his Eye, whilst he Explicates the Fabric and
Operations of the Watch. I answer, Secondly, That I readily admit, that in
Physics we should indeed ground all things upon as solid Reasons as may be
had; But I see no necessity, that those Reasons should be always precisely
Physical: Especially if we be treating, not of any particular Phenomenon, that
is produced according to the course of Nature established in the World, already
constituted as this of ours is: but of the first and general Causes of the
World it self; from which Causes, I see not why the Final Causes, or Uses, that
appear manifestly enough to have been designed, should be excluded. And to me
it is not very material, whether or no, in Physics or any other Discipline, a
thing be proved by the peculiar Principles of that Science or Discipline;
provided it be firmly proved by the common grounds of Reason. And on this
occasion let me observe, that the Fundamental Tenants of Mr. Des-Cartes's own
Philosophy, are not by himself proved by Arguments strictly Physical; but
either by Metaphysical ones, or the more Catholic Dictates of Reason, or the
particular testimonies of Experience. For when, for instance, he truly ascribes
to God, all the Motion that is found in Matter; and consequently, all the
variety of Phoenomenae that occur in the World; he proves not by an Argument
precisely Physical, that God, who is an Immaterial Agent, is the efficient
cause of Motion in Matter; but only by this, That since Motion does not belong
to the Essence and nature of Matter, Matter must owe the Motion it has to some
other Being: And then it is most agreeable to common Reason, to infer, that,
since Matter cannot move it self, but it must be moved by some other Being,
that Being must be Immaterial, since otherwise some Matter must be able to move
it self contrary to the Hypothesis. And when Descartes goes to demonstrate,
that there is always in the Universe, the self-same quantity of Motion, (that
is, just as much at any one time, as at any other) and consequently, that as
much motion as one Body communicates to another, it looses it self; he proves
it, by the Immutability of God, which is not a Physical Argument strictly so
called, but rather a Metaphysical One; as he formerly proved, God's being the
Cause of all Motion in Matter, not by Principles peculiar to Physics, but by
the common grounds of Reason.

Though Monsieur Descartes does, C'est une chose qui de soy est manifest, que
nous ne pouvons connoistre les fins de Dieu, si luy mesme ne nous les revele.
Et e^core qu'il soit vray en Morale, en egard a nous autres hommes, quetoutes
chooses ont este faites pour la gloire de Dieu, a cause que les hommes sont
obligez de lover Dieu pour tous ses ouvrages; and qu'on puisse aussi dire, que
le soleil a este fait pour nous eclairer, pour ce que nous experimentons que le
soleil en effet nous eclaire: ce seroit toutes fois une chose puerile and
absurd, d'assurer en Metaphysique, que Dieu, a la facon d'un homme superbe,
n'auroit point eu d'autre fin en bastissant le Monde, que celle destre love par
les hommes; and qu'il n'auroit cree le soleil, qui est plusieurs fois plus
grand que la Terre, a autre dessein que d'eclairer l'homme, qui n'en occupe
qu'une tres-petite party.
as I have formerly shown, speak very Dogmatically and Universally, against
Men's endeavoring or pretending to know any Final Causes in Natural things; for
which Reason I have, as well as the generality of his other Readers, and even
his Disciples, looked upon the Sense of those positive Expressions as
containing his Opinion; yet, since I writ the foregoing part of this Treatise,
I lighted on a Passage of his, wherein he seems to speak more cautiously or
reservedly, opposing His Reasoning to Their Opinion who teach, that God has no
other End in making the World, but that of being praised by Men. But in that
short Discourse whereof this Passage is a part, there are two or three other
things wherein I cannot Acquiesce. As first, that it is Self-evident, that we
cannot know the Ends of God, unless he Himself reveal them to us; (he must mean
in a Supernatural way, if he will not speak impertinently:) For what he says to
be evident of it self, is not at all so, to the generality of Mankind, and even
of Philosophers; and therefore I think, it ought not to be barely pronounced,
but (if it can be) should be proved. And next, he does not show how we are
obliged to praise God for his Works, if He had no intention to have us do so,
or that we should discover any of the Ends for which He made them. If a
judicious Man should see a great Book, written in some Indian Language, which
he is utterly a Stranger to, and should know nothing of it, but that 'twas made
by a very Intelligent Physician: He might indeed conclude, that the Work was
not made by chance, but would have no means to be convinced by the Inspection
of the Book it self, that it was composed with great Skill and Kindness, and
deserved his Praise and Thanks: Since he could not know any of the particular
Ends, to which the several Chapters of it were destinated, nor consequently
discover how skilfully they were fitted to reach such Ends. What Descartes
says, that it is childish and absurd to think, that God had created the Sun,
which is many times bigger than the Earth, only to afford Light to Man, who is
but a very small part of It, is somewhat invidiously proposed; there being few
able Writers, that confine the Utility of the Sun directly to the affording
Light to Man; and the littleness of his Bulk, ought not to make it thought
absurd, that God may have had an especial Eye to his Welfare, in framing that
bright Globe; since not only, for ought appears to us, that most excellent
Engine of Man's Body, is a more admirable thing than the Sun, but the rational
and immortal Soul that resides in it, is incomparably more noble than a
thousand Masses of brute Matter, and that not so much as Organized, can be
justly reputed, (as will be hereafter more fully declared.) And since in this
very Discourse, the accute Author of it confesses, that we may know the ends of
God's Corporeal Works, if He reveal them to us; a Christian Philosopher may be
allowed, to think the Sun was made, among other purposes, to inlighten the
Earth, and for the use of Man, since the Scripture teaches us, that not only
the Sun and Moon, but the Stars of the Firmament, which Descartes not
improbably thinks to be so many Suns, were made to give Light to the Earth, and
were divided to all the Nations that inhabit it. Deuteronomy. 4.19.
Perhaps it were not rash to add, that I see not why the Belief, that a Man may
know some of God's Ends in things Corporeal, should more derogate from our
Veneration of his Wisdom, than to think we know some of his Ends in other
Matters, of which the Scripture furnishes us with a multitude of Instances, as
(particularly) that of Job sacrificing for his Friends; and the declared Uses
of the Vrim and Thumim: Since God may, if He pleases, declare Truths to Men,
and instruct them, by his Creatures and his Actions, as well as by his Words:
As when He taught Noah by the Rainbow, and Jonah by a Gourd and a Worm, and
regulated the Incampment of the Israelites, by the guidance of a Cloud, and a
fiery Pillar. Lastly, whereas Monsieur Descartes objects, that those he
dissents from, talk as if they looked upon God as a proud Man, who designed his
Works only to be praised for them; I know not, whether in this place he speaks
so cautiously and reverently of God, as he ought, and elsewhere is wont to do.
For as Humility, though it be a Virtue in Men, is extremely remote from being any
of Gods Perfections, so That may be pride in a Man, who is but a Creature,
imperfect, dependent, and has nothing that he has not received; which would be
none at all in God, who is incapable of Vice, and who may, if he please, justly
propose to himself His own Glory for one of his Ends, and both require and
delight to be praised by Men for his Works; since he is most worthy of all
praise, and it is their duty and reasonable service, which he is graciously
pleased to approve of, to pay it Him.

It Is not without trouble, that I find my self obliged by the exigency of my
design, so much to oppose, in several places of this present Discourse, some
Sentiments of Mr. Descartes, for whom otherwise I have a great esteem, and
from whom I am not forward to dissent. And this I the rather declare to you,
because I am not at all of Their mind, that think Mr. Descartes a favourer of
Atheism, which, to my apprehension, would subvert the very foundation of those
Tenants of Mechanical Philosophy, that are particularly his. But judging that
his Doctrine (at least as it is understood by several of his Followers, as well
as his Adversaries;) about the rejection of Final Causes from the consideration
of Naturalists, tends much to weaken, (as is elsewhere noted) if not quite to
deprive us of, one of the best and most successful Arguments, to convince Men,
that there is a God, and that they ought to Admire, Praise, and Thank him: I
think it my duty to prefer an important truth, before my respect to any Man,
how eminent soever, that opposes it; and to consider more the Glory of the
great Author of Nature, than the Reputation of any one of Her Interpreters.

And to strengthen what I have been saying, give me leave to mind you more
expressly here, of what I have elsewhere Intimated, viz. That the excellent
Contrivance of the great System of the World, and especially the curious
Fabric of the Bodies of Animals, and the Uses of their Sensories, and other
parts, have been the great Motives, that in all Ages and Nations induced
Philosophers to acknowledge a Deity, as the Author of these admirable
Structures; and that the Noblest and most Intelligent Praises, that have been
paid Him by the Priests of Nature, have been occasioned and indicted by the
Transcending Admiration, which the attentive Contemplation of the Fabric of
the Universe and of the curious Structures of Living Creatures, justly produced
in them. And therefore it seems injurious to God, as well as unwarrantable in
it self, to banish from Natural Philosophy, the Consideration of Final Causes;
from which chiefly, if not only, I cannot but think (though some Learned Men do
otherwise) that God must reap the Honor that is due to those glorious
Attributes, his Wisdom, and his Goodness. And I confess, I somewhat wonder,
that the Cartesians, who have generally, and some of them skilfully, maintained
the Existence of a Deity, should endeavor to make Men throw away an Argument,
which the Experience of all Ages shows to have been the most Successful, (and
in some Cases the only prevalent one) to establish among Philosophers the
Belief and Veneration of God. I know the Cartesians say, That their Master has
demonstrated the Existence of a God, by the Innate Idea that Men have of a
Being infinitely perfect; who left it upon the mind of Man, as the mark of an
Artist impressed upon his Work: And also that they ascribe to God, the having
made Matter out of nothing, and alone put it into Motion; which sufficiently
argue the Immensity of his Power. But, though I would by no means weaken the
Argument, drawn from the Inbred Notion of God, since I know, that diverse
Learned Men have Acquiesc'd in it; yet, on the other side, I see not, why we
may not reasonably think, that God, who, as themselves confess, has been
pleased to take care, Men should acknowledge Him, may also have provided for
the securing of a Truth of so great Consequence, by stamping Characters, or
leaving Impresses, that Men may know his Wisdom and Goodness by, as well
without, upon the World, as within, upon the Mind. The bare Speculation of the
Fabric of the World, without considering any part of it as destinated to
certain (or determinate) Uses, may still leave Men unconvinc'd, that there is
any Intelligent, Wise, and Provident Author and Disposer of Things: Since we
see generally the Aristotelians (before some of them were better Instructed by
the Christian Religion) did, notwithstanding the Extent, Symmetry, and Beauty
of the World, believe it to have been Eternal. And though They, whatever their
Master thought, did not believe it to have been Created by God; yet, because
they asserted that Animals, Plants, etc. act for Ends, they were obliged to
acknowledge a Provident and Powerful Being, that maintained and governed the
Universe, which they called Nature: Though they too often dangerously mistook, by
sometimes confounding this Being with God himself; and at other times, speaking
of it as Coordinate with him, as in that famous Axiom of Aristotle, Deus and
Natura nihil faciunt frusta. I acknowledge therefore, that, as I set a just
value upon the Cartesian Proof of God's Existence, so I see no reason, why we
should disfurnish our selves of any other strong Argument to prove so noble and
important a Truth; especially, since the Cartesian way of considering the
World, is very proper indeed to show the Greatness of God's Power, but not,
like the way I plead for, to manifest that of his Wisdom and Beneficence. For,
whereas a Cartesian does but show, that God is admirably Wise, upon the
supposition of his Existence; in our way, the same thing is manifested by the
Effect of a Wisdom, as well as Power, that cannot reasonably be ascribed to any
other, than a most intelligent and potent Being: So that by This way, Men may
be brought, upon the same account, both to acknowledge God, to admire Him, and
to thank Him.

SECT. II.
TO give you now my thoughts of the second Question, viz. Whether we may
consider Final Causes in all sorts of Bodies, or only in some peculiarly
Qualified Ones. I must divide Natural Bodies into Animate and Inanimate. The
former of which Terms, I here take in the larger sense of those, who under it
comprehend, not only Animals, but Vegetables; though I shall not disdainfully
reject the Opinion of those Learned Men, that are unwilling to allow Plants a
soul or life, at least as properly so called, as that which is confessedly
granted to Animals.

Of the Inanimate Bodies of the Universe, the Noblest, and those which on this
occasion deserve chiefly to be considered, are the Sun, Planets, and other
Celestial Bodies. For, when Men saw those vast and luminous Globes, and
especially the Sun, move so constantly, and so regularly, about the Earth, and
diffuse on it Light and Heat; and by their various Revolutions produce day and
night, Summer and Winter, and the Vicissitudes of Seasons, that are so
opportune for the Inhabitants of the Earth: The observers, I say, of all this
concluded, both that these Motions were guided by some Divine Being, and that
they were designed for the benefit of Man Whether this be a demonstrative
Collection, I shall not now debate; but I see not, why it may not have thus
much of Probability in it; that in case a Man shall think, that the Fabric of
the Celestial parts of the World, was the curious Production of an Intelligent
and Divine Agent, the regular Phenomenon of the Heavens will not contradict
him; since there is nothing in that Fabric that misbecomes a Divine Author;
and the Motions and Operations of the Sun and Stars are not such, but that they
will allow us to think, that, among other purposes, they were made to
Illuminate the Terrestrial Globe, and bring Heat and other Benefits to the
Inhabitants of it: So that the Contemplation of the Heavens, which so
manifestly declare the Glory of God, Psalm. 19.1.
may justly excite Men, both to admire his Power and Wisdom in them, and to
return him Thanks and Praises, for the great Benefits that accrue to us by them.

But now, on the other side, it may be said, that in bodies Inanimate, whether
the portions of Matter they consist of be greater or lesser, the Contrivance is
very rarely so Exquisite, but that the various Motions and Occursions of the
parts of Matter may be, without much Improbability, suspected to be capable,
after many Essays, to cast one another into diverse of those Circumvolutions of
Matter, that, I remember, Epicurus calls (...) and Descartes Vortices; which
being once made, may continue very long, by the means expressed by Cartesius,
or by some other as probable Ones. But, without allowing this Hypothesis to be
more than not very improbable, when I consider, what Causes there may be to
fear, that we are not yet sufficiently acquainted with the true System of the
World, and are not usually sensible enough, how small a part We, and the
Terrestrial Globe we inhabit, make of the Universe; I am apt to fear too, that
Men are wont, with greater Confidence than Evidence, to assign, the
Systematical Ends and Uses of the Celestial Bodies, and to conclude them to be
made and moved, only for the service of the Earth and its Inhabitants. And
though, even as a mere Naturalist, I will not deny, that, as Man actually
receives Benefits by the established order and motion of the Stars, so one of
the several Uses intended by the Author of Nature in them, may particularly
respect Men; yet I am apt to think, that by what we hitherto know, 'twill not
be easy to be proved, that some, at least, of the Celestial Bodies and
Motions, may not be intended more for other purposes, than to cast their Beams,
or shed their Influences (supposing they have some) upon the Earth. And at
least, I cannot but think, that the Situations of the Celestial Bodies, do not
afford by far so clear and cogent Arguments, of the Wisdom and Design of the
Author of the World, as do the bodies of Animals and Plants. And for my part I
am apt to think, there is more of admirable Contrivance in a Man's Muscles, than
in (what we yet know of) the Celestial Orbs; and that the Eye of a Fly is, (at
least as far as appears to us,) a more curious piece of Workmanship, than the
Body of the Sun.

As for other Inanimate Bodies, as Stones, Metals etc, whose matter seems not
organized; though there be no absurdity to think, that they also were made for
distinct particular purposes, if not also for Human Uses; yet most of them are
of such easy and unelaborate contextures, that it seems not absurd to think,
that various occursions and justlings of the parts of the Universal matter, may
at one time or other have produced them; since we see in some Chemical
Sublimations, and Christallizations of Mineral and Mettalline Solutions, and
some other Phenomenon, where the motions appear not to be Particularly guided
and directed by an Intelligent Cause, that Bodies of as various Contextures, as
those are wont to be, may be produced; of which I have elsewhere given some
Instances.

If it be objected, that if we allow Chance, or any thing else, without the
particular Guidance of a wise and All-disposing Cause, to make a finely shaped
Stone, or a metalline substance, growing, as I have some times seen silver to
do, in the form of a Plant; it ought not to be denied, that Chance may also
make Vegetables and Animals: I can by no means allow the consequence. There are
some effects, that are so easy, and so ready, to be produced, that they do not
infer any knowledge or intention in their Causes; but there are others, that
require such a number and concourse of conspiring Causes, and such a continued
series of motions or operations, that it is utterly improbable, they should be
produced without the superintendency of a Rational Agent, Wise and Powerful
enough to range and dispose the several intervening Agent's and Instruments,
after the manner requisite to the production of such a remote effect. And
therefore it will not follow, that if Chance could produce a slight contexture
in a few parts of matter; we may safely conclude it able to produce so exquisit
and admirable a Contrivance, as that of the Body of an Animal. What then, if
sometimes in sawing pieces of variegated Marble, men happen, though rarely, to
meet with the Delineations or Pictures (some of which I have beheld with
pleasure) of Towns, Woods, and Men? For, besides that the pleasingness and
rarity of such spectacles inclines the Imagination to favor them, and supply
their defects; would any wise man therefore conclude, that a real Town or wood,
much less numbers of men, should be made by such a forluitons concourse of
matter? What comparison is there, betwixt the workmanship that seems to be
expressed in a few irregular Lines, drawn upon a plane superficies, and perhaps
two or three Colors luckily placed; and the great multitude of Nerves, Veins,
Arteries, Ligaments, Tendons, Membranes, Bones Glandules, etc. that are
required to the completing of a human Body; of which numerous parts (for the
Bones alone are reckoned to amount to three hundred) every one must have it is
determinate size, figure, consistence, situation, connection, etc. and many or
all of them together, must conspire to such and such determinate Functions or
uses? And indeed, though I keep by me some curious ones, yet I never saw any
Inanimate production of Nature, or, as they speak, of Chance, whose contrivance
was comparable to that of the meanest Limb of the dispicablest Animal: and
there is incomparably more Art expressed in the structure of a Dogs foot, then
in that of the famous Clock at Strasburg.

And, though the Paw of a Dog will be confessed, to be of a structure far
Inferior to that of the Hand of a man: yet even This; however Aristotle
prettily styles it the Instrument of Instruments, is a less considerable
Instance to my present purpose, than another Instance, which therefore, since
my intended brevity permits me not to consider many, I shall pitch upon, as
that which I shall almost only insist on, in the following part of this Tract.
And this Instance is afforded me by the Eye. For Though the parts that concur to
make up that admirable Organ of vision, are very numerous, yet how little any
of them could have been spared or altered, unless for the worse, may appear by
that great Number of Diseases, that have been observed in that little part of
the Body. Since each of those Diseases consist in this, that some of the Coats,
Humors, or other parts of the Eye, is brought into a State differing from that
whereto Nature had designed it, and whereinto she had put it. 'Twould be
tedious so much as to enumerate the several distempers of the Eye, whereunto
Physicians have given particular Names; wherefore I shall only mention two or
three things, wherein one would scarce imagine, that a small recess from the
natural state could bring any considerable, or perhaps sensible, inconvenience.
That which we call the Pupil, is not (you know) a substantial part of the Eye,
but only a hole of the Wea: which aperture is almost perpetually changing it is
bigness, according to the differing degrees of Light, that the Eye chances from
time to time to be exposed to. And therefore one would not think, but that,
whilst this hole remains open, it performs well enough it is part; which is, to
give admission to the Incident beams of Light, whether direct or reflected. And
yet I lately saw and discoursed with a woman, who after a Fever, was not able
to debate the Pupils of her eyes as formerly; and though they were so very little
narrower then ordinary, that I should scarce have taken more notice that 'twas
at all so, if she had not told me of it, yet she complained she had thereby
almost lost her sight, seeing Objects in certain Lights but very dimly and
imperfectly. And though the Praeternatural constriction of the Pupil be not a
frequent distemper, yet it is not so rare, but that Physicians have given it a
place among the Stated diseases of the eye. And on the other side though it
appear by what has been newly related, that a competent wideness of the Pupil
is requisite to clear and distinct Vision, yet if it is wideness exceed due
Limits, there is produced that distemper that is called Dilatatio pupillae;
which is worse then the former, because it oftentimes deprives the Patient
almost totally of his sight. And, though it may seem but a slight circumstance,
that the transparent coats of the eye should be devoid of color, and of as
little moment, that the cornea should be very smooth, provided it be
transparent: yet when either of these circumstances is wanting, the sight may
be much vitiated; as we see that in the Yellow-Jaundies, when it is come to a
high degree, the adventitious Tincture wherewith the Eye is Imbued, makes men
think they see a yellowness in many objects, to which that color does not
belong. And I know an Ingenious Gentleman, who, having had a small pustula
excited and broken upon the Cornea, though the eye have been long whole; yet a
very little Inequality or depression that still remains upon the Surface of the
Transparent Cornea, does so affect him, that though he can read well in a Room,
yet when he comes into the open fields or the streets, he for a pretty while
(as himself has particularly complained to me) thinks many of the Objects he
looks on very Glareing, and sees many others, as men do stones at the bottom of
a Brook or running water; which I impute to the want of Uniformity in the
refraction of those reflected beams of Light, that fall upon the Cornea, whose
surface is not so smooth and equal as it should be.

To give some further Proof, that the Eye was made with design, I shall here
take notice of an observation or two, that do not occurr in the dissection of a
human Eye, and therefore are not wont to be mentioned by Anatomists.

I have observed in Frogs, (as I presume some others also may have done) that,
besides those parts of the Eye which they have in common with Men, Dogs, Cats,
and the most part of other Animals, They have a peculiar, whether membrane, or
Cartilage, or both, which ordinarily is not perceived; wherewith they can at
pleasure cover the Eye, without too much hindering the sight, because this
membrane is as well Transparent as strong; so that it may pass for a kind of
moveable Cornea, and (if I may so call it) a kind of false-scabord to to the
Eye. In furnishing frogs with this strong Membrane, the providence of Nature
seems to be conspicuous: For they being Amphibious Animals, designed to pass
their lives in watery places, which for the most part abound with Sedges, and
other plants endowed with sharp Edges or points; and the progressive motion of
this Animal being to be made, not by walking, but by leaping; if his Eyes were
not provided of such a sheath as I have been mentioning, he must either shut
his Eyes, and so leap blindly, and by consequence dangerously, or, by leaving
them open, must run a venture to have the Corneae cut, pricked, or otherwise
offended, by the edges or points of the Plants, or what may fall from them upon
the Animals Eye: whereas this Membrane, as was said, is like a kind of
Spectacle that covers the Eye without taking away the sight; and as soon as the
need of employing it is past, the Animal at pleasure withdraws it into a little
Cell, where it Rests out of the way, till there be occasion to use it again.
This you may see, if you apply the point of a pin, or a Pen, or any such sharp
thing, to the Eye of a frog, whilst you hold his head steady: for to screen his
Eye, he will presently cover it (at least for the greatest part) with this
Membrane, which when the danger is over he will again withdraw. And, because
many if not most sorts of Birds, are wont or destinated to fly, (as more would
do if not kept tame) among the Branches of Trees and Bushes; least the
Prickles, Twigs, Leaves, or other parts should wound or offend their Eye.
Nature has given them likewise such another kind of horny Membrane, as we have
been mentioning in frogs.

It Is known that Men, and the generality of Four-footed Beasts, and of Birds,
have several Muscles belenging to their Eyes; by the help of which Muscles,
they can turn them this way, or that way, at pleasure; and so can obvert the
Organ of Sense to the Object, whether it be placed on the right hand or the
left, or above or beneath the Eye. But, Nature having not given that Mobility
to the Eyes of Flys, (the reason whereof I shall not now stay to consider) she
has in recompense furnished them with a multitude of little protuberant parts,
finely ranged upon the unequal of their large and Protuberant Eyes: So that by
means of the number of these little Studs (if I may so call them) many beams of
Light that rebound from Objects placed on either hand, or above, or beneath,
the level of the Eye, fall conveniently enough upon that Organ, to make the
Objects they come from, visible to the Animal. Which you will the more easily
believe, if you contemplate (as I have often done with great pleasure) even the
Eye of an ordinary Flesh-Fly, (for Bees and other greater Insects have
immovable Eyes too, but I find them not so pretty) in a good Microscope and a
clear Day. For you may reckon some hundreds of these little round
Protuberances, curiously ranged on the Convexity of a single Eye.

But perhaps some, whose partiality for Chance makes them willing to ascribe
the structures of Animals rather to That, then to a designing Cause; will make
them draw an Objection, fit to be here obviated, against our Doctrine, from
what we have observed of the difference between Human and other Eyes: Since
they will pretend that all Organs of Sight ought to be conformed to those of
Men, as those that are the best and most perfect. It Is true, that Man being
justly reputed the most perfect of Animals, it is not strange that he should
(as Men generally do) presume, that His Eyes and other parts of his Body, are
the best contrived of any that are to be found in Nature. But yet I think we
cannot from hence safely conclude, that all Eyes, which in other Animals are of
Structures differing from those of Man, are for that reason defective. For I
consider, First, That the admirable Wisdom displayed by the Author of Things,
in fitting the Eyes and other Organical parts of Animals, for the Uses that
seem manifestly to have been designed in their Fabric, and for the respective
Functions we actually see them exercise, may justly persuade us, that the
things whose Reasons or Uses we do not alike discern, are yet most wisely
constituted: Such an Author as God, having too much knowledge to do any thing
unskilfully; and We having too much presumption, if we think He can have in the
framing of his Creatures, no Ends that are beyond our Discovery. And, Secondly,
We may represent, that the Eye is not to be considered abstractedly as an
Instrument of Vision, but as an Instrument belonging to an Animal of this or
that kind; and who is ordinarily to make use of it in such and such
Circumstances. And therefore I think it ought not at all to Disparage, but
rather highly Recommend, the Wisdom and Providence of the great Author of
Things; that he has furnished various Species of Animals, with Organs of Sight
that are very differingly framed and placed: Since this diversity nobly
manifests his great Providence, and (if I may so call it) Forecast; that has
admirably suited the Eyes of the differing kinds of Animals, both to the rest
of their Bodies, and (which I here mainly consider) to those parts of the great
Theater of the World, on which He designs that they shall live and act. Thus
though diver. Beasts, as Horses, Oxen, and so^^ others, have their Eyes
furnished with a seventh Muscle, besides the six they have in common with Men;
we must not conclude, either that the Organs of Vision are Imperfect in Men, or
that those of these Beasts have something superfluous. For Horses, etc. being
to feed for the most part on grass and herbs of the Field, and, that they may
the better choose their Food, being obliged to make their Eyes look very long
downwards; the seventh Muscle does excellently serve them to do so, without
that weariness, which if they were not furnished with it, that durably
constrained Pasture would be sure to give them; whereas Man who has no such
necessity of looking assiduously downwards, would be but encumbered by a
seventh Muscle.

On the other side, the defectiveness observable in the Eyes of some Animals,
in comparison of those of Man, may be ascribed to the thriftiness (if I may so
speak) of Nature, that, on most occasions, declines doing that which is not
necessary to the particular Ends, She aims at in the Fabric of a Part. Thus
Moles being designed to live for the most part under Ground, the Eyes which
Nature has given them, are so little, in proportion to their Bodies, that it is
commonly believed, and even by some Learned Men maintained, they have none at
all. But though by Anatomy, I, as well as some others that have tried, have found
the Contrary; yet their Eyes are very differing from those of other Fourfooted
Beasts. Which is not to be wondered at; considering, that the design of Nature
was, that Moles should live under Ground, where a Sight was needless and
useless; and where greater Eyes would be more exposed to danger: And their
Sight, as dim as it is, is sufficient to make them perceive that they are no
longer under Ground, (at least so as they are wont to be) which seems to be the
most necessary use they have of Light and Eyes.

Zoographers observe, That the Camelion has avery uncommon structure of his
visive Organs; since, to omit lesser, though not inconsiderable, peculiarities,
his Eyes often move independantly from one another; so that, for Instance, he
may look directly forward with the right Eye, and with the other at the same
time, directly backwards toward his Tail; or may turn the Pupil of the former
straight upwards, whilst he looks downwards with the other. Which peculiar
power seems to have been granted him by Providence, that, being a very low
Animal, and destinated to live for the most part in Trees and Bushes, and there
chiefly feed on Flys; He may perceive them, which way soever they chance to
come within the reach of his long Tongue, by suddenly darting out of which, he
catches his nimble Prey.

Whereas it may be observed, that many or most, if not all, mere Fishes have
the Chrystalline Humors of their Eyes, almost spherical as to Sense, and
consequently far more round than that Humor is wont to be found in Man, and
other Terrestrial Animals. This difference of Figure, though it would be
inconvenient in Us, does very well accommodate Fishes; since they living in the
Water, which as a thicker Medium, does much more refract the Beams of Light,
than the Air through which they pass to our Eyes; 'twas fit, that the
Chrystalline Humor of Fishes should be very Globous, that by the help of their
Figure, the Beams already refracted by the Water, should be yet so much
refracted and made Convergent, as to Paint the Images so near, as upon the
bottom of the Eye.

One that being Curious, had more Opportunity than I have, to survey and
reflect on the various Structures of the Organs of Vision in differing Animals,
may, if I mistake not, be able to find by comparing them with the other parts
of the same Animal, and the Scene he is designed to act on, and the uses he is
to make of his Eyes in his most ordinary Circumstances; such a Person, I say,
may be able to offer a probable Reason of several differences in those Organs,
that, if commonly taken notice of, would seem to the Censorious to be
aberrations of Nature, or defects: To which purpose I remember, that an
ingenious Cultivator of Optics, gives this Reason, of what both he and I, have
taken notice of (though it be usually overlooked) about the Figure of the Pupil;
namely, that, though it be oblong in Horses, Oxen, and diverse other Quadrupeds,
as well as in Cats, yet in the former kinds of Animals, the Pupil lies
transversly from the right side of the Eye to the left, but in Cats its
situation is perpendicular; whereof he ingeniously guesses the Reason may be,
that Horses and Oxen, being usually to find their Food growing on the Ground,
they can more conveniently receive the Images of the laterally neighboring
Grass, etc. by having their Pupils transversly placed; whereas Cats, being to
live chiefly upon Rats and Mice, which are Animals that usually climb up or run
down Walls, and other steep Places; the commodiousest situation of their Pupil
for readily discovering and following these Objects, was to be Perpendicular.
But it is time we proceed in our Discourse.

Other Instances to the same purpose with this are elsewhere delivered: and
therefore I shall now, to strengthen the Apology for Divine providence, take
notice, that the differing structures and Situations of the Eyes in several
Animals, are very fit to show the foecundity of the Divine Authors Skill, (if I
may so speak,) in being able to frame so great a Variety of exquisite
Instruments of Vision. And indeed, if I may presume to guess at any of Gods
Ends that are not manifest, (for some others of his Ends seem Conspicuous;) I
should think, that this delightful and wonderful Variety that we may observe,
not only in Animals themselves considered as entire Systemes, but in those
parts of them that appear destinated for the same Function, as particularly
that of Seeing, was designed, at least among other Ends, to display the
multiplicity of the great Creators Wisdom, and Show his intelligent Creatures,
that his Skill is not confined to one sort of Living Engines; nor in the parts
of the same kind, (as Eyes, Ears, Teeth, etc.) to the same Contrivances: but is
able to make for the same use, a multitude of surprising Organs or Instruments,
though not perhaps all equally Perfect, (since to do so, we may think he must
make no Animals but Men,) yet all of them curious and exquisite in their kinds,
and in order to their differing Ends. To be able to frame both Clocks, and
Watches, and Ships, and Rockets, and Grenades, and Pumps, and Mills, etc.
argues and manifests a far greater Skill in an Artificer, than he could display
in making but one of those sorts of Engines, how artificially soever he
contrived it. And the same superiority of knowledge would be displayed, by
contriving Engines of the same kind, or for the same purposes after very
differing manners. As Weights indeed are of great use and necessity in the
famous Clock of Strasburg; and therefore it recommends the Inventors of
Watches, not only that they can make Clocks of a very little and easily
portable Bulk, which the Strasburg Machine is not, but can make a Clock without
weights, and by means of a Spring perform their Office. And thus, though to fly,
it seems absolutely necessary that an Animal should be furnished with Feathers;
the Wise Creator has shown that he is not confined to make use of them for
that purpose: since a Flying Fish is able to move a great way in the Air; and
the Indies have lately furnished us with a sort of flying Squirrils (whereof I
saw one alive at White Hall.) And though the flight of these is not long, yet
there is another kind of Animals without Feathers that can fly long enough,
namely the Batt; though some of these, as I have seen, be little less then Hens:
and I have been assurd by a credible Eyewitness, that in the kingdom of
Golconda, He had seen much bigger.

But though this consideration may suffice to justify the Wisdom of the Creator,
who being an Agent most Free, as well as most Wise; Men ought not to find
fault, if he think fit to Recommend his Wisdom by displaying it in very
different manners: yet this is not all that may be said on this occasion. For
there are many Cases, and perhaps far more than we imagine, wherein the
peculiar, and in some regards less perfect, fabric or situation of an Eye or
other Organical part, may be more convenient than the correspondent Organ of
Man, to attain the Ends for which was given to an Animal that was to act upon
such a Theater, and live by such Provision. Besides that an Organical part may,
in some Animals, be intended for more uses than in others, and therefore may
require a differing structure; as in Moles, the Feet are otherwise framed or
situated than in other Quadrupeds; because the chief use they were to make of
them was to walk upon the Ground, but to Dig themselves ways Under Ground. The
provident (...) wisely suiting the Fabric of the Parts, to the Uses that were
to be made of them: as a mechanist imploys another Contrivance of his Wheels,
Pinions, etc. when he is to grind corn with a Mill that is to be driven by
Water, than when he is to do the same thing by a Mill that is to be moved by
the Wind. And the Camelion has a Tongue, both pecurliarly shaped, and of a
length disproportionate to that of his Body, because he was to take his Prey,
by shooting out (if I may so speak) his Tongue at the Flies he was to live
upon, and could not often approach them very near without frighting them away.
And in many Cases in which this Reflection does not so properly take place, we
may observe, that there is a wonderful Compensation made, for that which seems
a desect in the parts of an Animal of this or that particular species, compared
with the correspondent ones of a Man, or an Animal of some other species.

Thus Birds, that (except the Bat and one or two more) want Teeth to chew their
food, are not only furnished with hard Bills to break it; and Birds of prey, as
Hawks, etc. with crooked ones to tear it; but, which is more considerable, have
Crops to prepare and soften it, and very strong Muscular Stomachs to digest and
grind it: In which work they are usually helped by gravel and little stones
that they are led by Instinct to swallow, and which are often found (and
sometimes in amazing numbers,) in their Stomachs where they may prove a
vicarious kind of Teeth.

I shall hereafter have occasion to say somewhat more against Their Opinion,
that find fault with those Animated Structures that we think to be Productions
of the Divine Wisdom, under pretense that the Parts of some living Creatures
are not so curious and Symmetrical, as not to have been casually producible.
But in the mean time, I shall here note, for those that ascribe so much to
Chance; that Chance is really no natural Cause or Agent, but a Creature of
Man's Intellect. For the things that are done in the Corporeal World, are
really done by the parts of the Universal Matter, acting and suffering
according to the Laws of Motion, established by the Author of Nature. But we
Men, looking upon some of these parts as directed in their Motions by God, or
at least by Nature, and disposed to the attainment of certain Ends; if by the
intervention of other Causes, that we are not aware of, an Effect be produced
very differing from that which we supposed was intended; we say, that such an
Effect was produced by Chance. So that Chance is indeed but a Notion of Ours,
and such a thing as a Schoolman man might call an Extrinsecal Denomination, and
signifies but this; that in our apprehensions, the Physical Causes of an
Effect, did not Intend the Production of what they nevertheless produced. And
therefore I wonder not, that the Philosophers that preceded Aristotle, should
not treat of Chance, among Natural Causes; As we may learn from Aristotle
himself; who is more just to Them in Suspecting they owned not such a Cause,
than in Taxing them of an Omission for not having Treated of it.

And on this occasion, I shall only add, before I proceed, that whereas some of
the most curiously shaped kind of Stones, as the Astroites, have emboldened
many of the Favorers of Epicurus, to bring them into Competition with these
Animals, or Parts of Animals, from their likeness to which, they have received
their Names; it is fit to be considered, First, that some Learned Men have of
late made it very probable, that some of the curiousest sorts of these Stones
were once really the Animals whose shapes they bear, or those Parts of Animals
which they resemble; which Animal substances were afterward turned into
Stones, by the supervening of some Petrescent Matter, or Petrifying Cause; of
which Metamorphosis I have met with, and do elsewhere mention, more Instances
than are fit to be so much as named in this place. Secondly, Though some of
those sorts of Stones were the Production of the Mineral Kingdom; (for I will
not be Dogmatical in this Point) yet, besides that it would not clearly follow,
that they owe their shapes to Chance, since there is no absurdity to admit
Seminal Principles in some more elaborate sorts of Fossiles; I think it would
be very injurious to make these Productions vye with the Animals, to which they
are Compared.

For the Resemblance of shapes, wherein alone they and the Animals Agree, being
but the Outward Figure, is but a Superficial thing, and not worthy to be
mentioned, in comparison of that wherein they differ: The rude and slight
Contexture of the best shaped Stones, being incomparably inferior to the
Internal contrivance of an Animal; which must consist of a multitude of Parts,
of such a Figure, Bulk, Texture, Situation, etc. as cannot but be obvious to
any that have seen Dissections skilfully made. And it is not only in the Stable
and Quiescent parts, that this great Internal Difference between Stones, and
the Animals they resemble, is to be found; but there is in a Living Animal a
greater difference, than any of the Knives of Anatomists can show us in a Dead
one betwixt a Stone, tho'never so curiously Figured, and an Animal. For there
are, I know not how many, Liquors, Spirits, Digestions, Secretions,
Coagulations, and Motions of the whole Body, and of the Limbs and other parts,
which are lodged and performed in a Living Body, and not in a Cadaver; and are
perchance far more admirable, even than the structure of the stable and
quiescent Parts themselves. So that, though a Stone, outwardly very like a
Shellfish, were made by Chance; yet from thence to Conclude, that Chance may
make a real Living Shellfish, would be to argue worse than he that should
contend, that, because even an unskilful Smith may make a hollow piece of
Metal, like a Watch Case, though he can fill it but with filings of Iron, or some
other rude Stuff, he must be able to make a Watch; there being less difference
betwixt the skill expressed in making the Case of a Watch, and the Movement,
than in making a Body like a Shell, and the Internal parts of a real Fish: Or
to say, that, because Putrefaction and Winds, have sometimes made Trees hollow,
and blown them down into the Water, where they swim like Boats, therefore the
like Causes may make a Galley built and contrived, as well within as without,
according to the Laws of Naval Architecture, and furnished with Mariners to Row
it, Steer it, and, in a word, to excite and guide all its Motions to the best
Advantage, for the Preservation and various Uses of the Vessel. In short, if
Chance sometimes does some strange things, it is in reference to what She her
self, but not to what Nature, uses to perform.

And now, to give you the Summary of my Thoughts, about the Second Question; 1.
I think, that from the Ends and Uses of the Parts of Living Bodies, the
Naturalist may draw Arguments, provided he do it with due Cautions, of which I
shall speak under the fourth Question. 2. That the Inanimate Bodies here below,
that proceed not from Seminal Principles, have but a more parable Texture, (if
I may so speak) as Earths, Liquors, Flints, Pebbles, and will not easily
warrant Ratiocinations, drawn from their supposed Ends. 3. I think, the
Celestial Bodies do abundantly declare God's Power and Greatness, by the
Immensity of their Bulk, and (if the Earth stand still) the Celerity of their
Motions, and also argue his Wisdom and general Providence as to them; because
He has for so many Ages, kept so many vast Vortices, or other Masses of Matter,
in scarce conceivably rapid Motions, without destroying one another, or loosing
their Regularity. And I see no Absurdity in supposing, that, among other Uses
of the Sun, and of the Stars, the Service of Man might be intended; but yet I
doubt, whether, from the bare Contemplation of the Heavens and their Motions,
it may be cogently inferred, at least so strongly as Final Causes, may be from
the structure of Animals, that either the sole, or the chief, End of them all,
is to enlighten the Earth, and bring Benefits to the Creatures that live upon
it.

In what has been hitherto said on our Second Question, it is plain, that I
suppose the Naturalist to discourse merely upon Physical Grounds. But if the
Revelations, contained in the Holy Scriptures, be admitted, we may rationally
believe More, and speak less Haesitantly, of the Ends of God, than bare
Philosophy will warrant us to do. For, if God is pleased to declare to us any
thing concerning His Intentions, in the making of his Creatures, we ought to
believe it; though the Consideration of the things themselves, did not give us
the least suspicion of it; which yet in our case they do. And therefore a late
Ingenious Author did causlessly reflect upon me, for having mentioned the
Enlightening of the Earth, and the Service of Men, among the Ends of God, which
he thought undiscoverable by us. For whether or no we can discover them by mere
Reason, as diverse of the Heathen Philosophers thought they did; yet sure we may
know Those that God is pleased to Reveal to us: And the Persons, I argued with,
were apparently such as admitted the Authority of the Scriptures; which
expressly teach us, Genesis 1.16.
that God made the two great Luminaries, (for so I should render the Hebrew
words (...)) the greater for the rule of the Day, and the lesser for the rule
of the Night. And that He made the Stars also, and set them in the Firmament,
or rather Expansum of the Heaven, to give Light upon the Earth. And a little
above, among the Uses of the Luminaries these are reckoned, ver. 14.
to divide the Day from the Night, and to be for Signs, and for Seasons, and
for Days and Years. And in another place, the Prophet Moses dehorting the
Israelites from Worshipping the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, tells them, that
the Lord, had imparted them unto all nations under the whole Heaven. Deuteronomy. 4.19.
And therefore those Cartesians, that being Divines, Admit the Authority of
Holy Scripture; should not reject the Consideration of such Final Causes, as
Revelation discovers to us; since it is certainly no presumption to think we
know Gods Ends, when he himself acquaints us with them; nor to believe that the
Sun, though it be generally esteemed to be a nobler Body than the Terrestrial
Globe, was made, among other Purposes, to give Light to its Inhabitants. It Is
recorded in the Book of Genesis, Genesis 1.26, 27, 28.
the Design of God in making man, was, that men should Subdue the Earth (as
vast a Globe as it is) and have dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the
Foul of the Air, and over the Cattle, and over all the Earth, and (to speak
Summarily) over every living thing that moves upon the Earth. Gen 9.23.
And the same Book informs us, that after the Deluge, God delivered all
Terrestrial Beasts, and Foul, and Fishes, and every moving thing that lives,
into the hands of Men; and intended that they should eat Animals, Genesis 1.29.
as before the Flood, He had appointed them all the sorts of wholesome
Vegetables for their Food. And since God was pleased to appoint that men should
live on these Creatures, it cannot be absurd to say, that, among other Purposes
to which he destinated the Sun, His Shining upon the Earth was one; since
without His Light and Heat, men could not provide for, or enjoy themselves; and
neither those Plants that Men and Cattle must live upon, could grow and ripen;
nor (consequently) those Animals that were to be their principal Food, and
serve them for many other uses, could be sustained and provided for. Many other
Texts that show, how much God was pleased to intend man's welfare, and Dominion
over many of his Fellow Creatures, might be here alleged. But I shall content
my self to mention, what the Kingly Prophet says in the 8th Psalm, Psalm. 8.56.
where speaking of Man to his Maker, he says; Thou have made him, a little
lower than the Angels, and have crowned him with Glory and Honor. Thou made
him to have dominion over the works of thine hands, and have put all things
under his Feet. Indeed if in Man we consider only that Visible Part, his Body;
the smallness of it may make it thought improbable, that Portions of the
Universe incomparably greater than He, should be at all intended to be
serviceable to Him. But Christians ought not to think this incredible, if they
consider Man, as he chiefly consists of a Rational Mind; which proceeds
immediately from God, and is capable of knowing him, loving him, and being
Eternally happy with him. They that despise Man considered in this capacity, do
very little know the worth of a Rational Soul; and estimate things like Masons,
and not like Jewellers, who justly value a Diamond no bigger than a Bean, more
than a whole Quarry of ordinary Stones. And particularly to those Undervaluers
of their own Species that are Divines; it may be represented, that God, who
will not be denied to be the best Judge in this case, as in all others; was
pleased to consider Men so much, as to give David cause to admire it in the
words lately cited; and not only to endow them with his Image at their first
Creation, but when they had criminally lost and forfeited it, he vouchsafed to
Redeem them by no less than the Sufferings and Death of his own Son; who is
incomparably more excellent than the whole World. And it is not incredible that
God should have intended, that many of his other works should be serviceable to
Man; since by Miraculous Operations he has some times Suspended the Laws of
Nature, and sometimes Over ruled them, upon the account of Man: as may appear
by Noah's Flood; by the passage of the Israelites on dry Land through the Red
Sea, and the River of Jordan; by the standing still of the Sun and Moon (or the
Terestrial Globe) at Joshua's command; by the in efficacy of the burning Fiery
Furnace, on Daniels three Companions; and (to be short) by the stupendous
Eclipse of the Sun at the full Moon, at the Crucifixion of the Messiah. To
which I might add, that the chief part of Mankind, namely the Children of God,
will by their most bountiful Remunerator, be thought fit to inhabit the New
World (for that by an Hebraism is meant by the new Heavens and the new Earth
St. Peter speaks of) which shall succeed the Renovation and Refinement of the
Present World by the last Fire, 2 Pet. 3.10, 11, 12, 13.
that will not only Dissolve, but, if I may so so speak, Transfigure it.

And we shall the less scruple to admit that such vast and bright Bodies as the
Sun and Moon, may be designed (among other things) to be serviceable to Men; if
we consider, that it is so far from being a constant Rule, That a Thing more
excellent cannot (by a wise Agent) be employed for the good of one that is less
so; that not only the first Angel whose Apparition we read of in the Scripture,
Genesis 16.9. etc.
was sent to relieve Hagar, a Slave wandering in a Wilderness; another had
regard to the life of a Soothsayers Ass; Numb. 22.23. Genesis 32.1, 2. 2 Kings
6.17.
and many others (and sometimes Companies of them) were imployd on Earth to do
good Offices to particular persons: but of all the Angels in general; the
Excellent Epistle to to the Hebrews informs us, Heb. 1.14.
That they are Ministering Spirits, sent forth to Minister unto them who shall
be Heirs of Salvation.

SECT. III.
TO handle the Third Question, viz. Whether, and in what sense, the Acting for
Ends may be ascribed to an Vnintelligent, and even Inanimate Body?
It will be necessary for us to clear the grand Difficulty that has, ever since
Aristotle's time, and even before that, Perplexed those that allow in Natural
ral Philosophy, the Consi^eration of Final Causes. The Difficulty is obvious
enough: For, much the greater part of Bodies being ^o^d of Knowledge, and most
of them (as all Inanimate Bodies) of Life it self, it seems not conceivable,
how they should act constantly for Ends, they are not capable of pre^^signing;
and appositely imp^oy M(...) that they have no Knowledge wherewith to make
choice of.

Aristotle, who expressly teaches, that Nature does nothing in vain, and rightly
judged, that the Actions of Natural Agents tended to certain Ends, vid.
Aristot. De Coelo, lib. II. c. 5. and eund. De Genesis and Interitu lib. II. cap.
10.
takes notice of this Difficulty; but seems rather to Shift it off than Resolve
it; The Solution he frames regarding so peculiarly the Words wherein he has
expressed the Objection, that I much doubt, whether it would signify much to
clear the same Difficulty proposed in other Terms. And to me he seems to speak
so darkly, not only in his Translators Latin, but in his own Greek, that, if
he have given a good Solution of the Difficulty, I must ingenuously confess my
Dullness, in not being able to understand it.

But, to consider the Difficulty it self, there are two Accounts, on which the
Actions of natural Agents may be said to tend to a certain End: One, when the
Agent has a Knowledge of that End, and acts with an Intention to obtain it; as,
when a man shoots an Arrow to hit a mark: The Other is, when the Action of the
Proximate Agent, is indeed so directed as it ought to be to obtain an End, and
yet that End is neither Known nor Intended by the Proximate Agent, but by a
Remoter Agent that is Intelligent. In the former of these Senses, I cannot
admit that (not now to Examine whether any Living, but not Rational, Works of
Nature May) any Inanimate Bodies Can, act for an End; for, to do so,
presupposes, that the Agent both Knows the End he is to attain, and Purposes to
attain it; which are things whereof Inanimate Bodies are incapable. And to
fancy with some, that they may have a Knowledge sui generis (as they speak,)
which, though confined to the actions proper to this or that particular kind of
Body, is yet sufficient to determine to those Actions; is to offend against
that rational and received Rule of Philosophizing, Entia non sunt multiplicanda
sine necessitate, and to introduce a sort of Knowledge, which I fear the
Proposers do not well conceive; or at least, I am sure I do not.

It remains then, that I embrace the second Sense, in which we formerly said,
that Natural things may be said to to work for an End; though indeed in this
Case, we must speak somewhat improperly: For, by him that Considers, the Action
will be oftentimes more justly attributed to the Intelligent, but Remoter, than
to the Immediate, Agent, which is but, as it were, the Instrument of the other.
But how this is possible to done, appears difficult to be explained. To me it
seems, it may be thus conceived: The most Wise and Powerful Author of Nature,
whose peircing sight is able to penetrate the whole Universe, and survey all
the parts of it at once, did at the Beginning of Things, Frame things Corporeal
into such a System, and Settled among them such Laws of Motion, as he judged
suitable to the Ends he proposed to Himself, in making the World. And as by
virtue of his vast and boundless Intellect that he at first employed, he was
able not only to See the Present State of things he had made, but to Foresee
all the Effects, that particular Bodies so and so qualified, and acting
according to the Laws of Motion by him established, could in such and such
circumstances, have on one another: So by the same Omniscient Power, he was
able to contrive the whole Fabric, and all the parts of it, in such manner,
that, whilst his general Concourse maintained the Order of Nature, each Part of
this great Engine, the World, should without either Intention or Knowledge, as
regularly and constantly Act toward the attainment of the respective Ends
which he designed them for, as if themselves really understood, and
industriously prosecuted, those Ends. Just as in a well made Clock, the Spring,
the Wheels, the Balance, and the other parts, though each of them Act according
to the Impulses it receives, and the Determination that is given it, by the
other pieces of the Engine, without knowing what the Neighboring Parts, or
what themselves do; yet their Tendencies are so Determined, and sometimes
Overrul'd, and their Motions so Quickn'd, by the structure of the Clock, that
they would not move more conveniently, nor better perform the Functions of a
Clock, if they knew that they were to make the Index truly mark the Hours, and
intended to make it do so. It Is true, that it is not easy to conceive how One
Agent should, by so sim plean Instrument as Local motion, be able to Direct a
Multitude of Agents, as numerous as the Bodies that make up a World, to Act as
regularly, as if each of them Acted upon its own particular Design, and yet all
of them Conspired to obey the Laws of Nature. But if we consider, that it is to
God, that is an Omniseient and Almighty Agent, that this Great Work is
ascribed, we shall not think it incredible; especially if we consider, that,
whereas it is manifest enough, that a Multitude of Bodies Act, as we have
supposed; if we will not ascribe the Direction and Superintendence of the
Motions, that are manifestly fitted for the attainment of Ends, unto God, we
must do it to Nature; which will not Lessen but Increase the Difficulty: And
when I have seen, as sometimes I have with pleasure, a great Engine, wherein
the Works of I know not how many Trades, and a great many other Motions, were
performed by little Puppets, that managed the Tools of the Artifficers; and all
these were set a work by one Spring, which communicated Motions that were
regulated and determined by the particular structure of the little Statues and
other Bodies: when, I say, I consider such things as these, I cannot think it
impossible that the Divine and Great (...), Heb. 11.10.
as both Philosophers and sacred Writers have styled the Worlds Creator; should
be able by the Motions and Structures of Matter, to set a work very many
Partial and Subordinate Engines. For 'twill not, I hope, be denied, that the
Multitude of These does not any thing near so much surpass the number of Those,
which I saw in the hand of an illiterate Tradesman, as the Narrow Knowledge of
that Artifficer is surpassed by the Boundless Understanding of an Omniscient
Artist. And it is more, in the making so many and so various Bodies act according
to their particular Designations, and yet all of them Conspire to the General
Ends of the Universe, that Gods Wisdom, and (if I may so speak) his Skill is
displayed, than barely in the making Bodies Act Appositely for Ends to
themselves Unknown. For, if Moving Bodies be duly displayed, and have a
sufficient connection, it is not difficult to Direct a few of them to the
attainment of an End proposed by an Understanding Agent, though Unknown to the
Immediate Agents: As anciently among the Jewish Husbandmen, (and at this day
in some parts of the East) the Ox, that intended no such matter, did by
Treading the Corn as well Separate the Grain from the Straw, as our Plowmen do,
when they thresh it purposely to make that Separation: And a Horse or an Ass in
a Mill, may as well by his going round Grind the Corn, as the Miller himself
could do.

Nor is this Doctrine inconsistent with the belief of any True Miracle; for, it
supposes the Ordinary and Settled Course of Nature to be maintained, without at
all denying, that the most Free and Powerful Author of Nature is able, whenever
he thinks fit, to Suspend, Alter, or Contradict those Laws of Motion, which He
alone at first Established, and which need His perpetual Concourse to be Upheld.

The Laws of Method would oblige me to conclude here this Section, and pass on
to another: But in regard that all I thought my self obliged to say about it,
leaves it so very short, as to be very Disproportionate in Bulk to the other
Sections of this Discourse; I will crave leave to lengthen it in this place,
with Something, which, though it may be judged to belong more properly to
Another, will not perhaps be thought to be impertinent Here; and much less to
be useless to the design of this Discourse.

Here then you may please to take notice, that in all that I have discoursed in
the second Section, or may elsewhere have occasion to say, against the received
Opinion, that the whole material World was made for Man; I would not be
understood to speak either too dogmatically, or too exclusively: my design
being to deliver, what I thought might probably be represented, to take off the
Prejudice, that Men are generally prepossessed with in their own favor. For,
though the Arguments I allege Against the vulgar Opinion, seem as yet to me more
probable than those I have hitherto met with For it, especially as it relates
to the vast Caelestial Region of the World; yet I am not only willing to grant,
that, among the Ends designed by the Author of Nature in several of his Works,
especially Plants, Animals and Metals, the Utility of men may be one, and
perhaps one of the principal: but I am not averse from thinking, that Humane
Ends, (or Uses that relate to Men,) may have been designed by God in several
Creatures, whose Humane Uses Men are not yet a ware of: And that he may have
intended, that of several of his Creatures, whereof Men do already know, and
make some Uses, they shall hereafter discover other Utilities, and perhaps
nobler Ones.

Those that reflect on the Providence of God, whilst they represent what they
call Nature as a Stepmother to Man, whom She brings Naked, Toothless, and
Helpless into the World; whilst She furnishes the new Born Foetus's of Brutes
with Wool or other Clothing, and both with a Power to Walk and Seek their
Food, and (as to many of them) with Teeth to Eat it: Those men, I say, have
been long ago answered by the Eloquent Lactantius, and other Champions of
Providence. And therefore I shall only add this, that God by giving Man
Necessity and Reason, has effectually Excited him, and richly Furnished Him with
Ability, to procure for himself far greater Accommodations and Advantages, than
those Beasts come into the world with; and by vouchsafing him that Noble
Faculty of Understanding, He has put it in his Power to convert to his own use
those very Things, for which Profane Wits would have the Condition of Beasts
preferable to His. For Man, by his Reason employing skilfully such Admirable
Instruments as his Hands, is able to Master and Apply to his own Uses, the
fierceness of several Wild Beasts, as Leopards (which the Persians Hunt with,)
the vast strength of Elephants, the huge bulk of Whales, the Sagacity of
Spaniels, Hounds, and Setters, the Swiftness of Greyhounds, the Suttlety of
Tumblers, and the Furs of Beavers, Martins, etc. To omit a Multitude of others,
which God, by the single Gift of Reason to Man, has enabled him to master and
make use of to his own advantage. And though at first he be helpless enough, and
unable to exercise his Dominion over inferior Creatures; yet God has
sufficiently provided for Him, by giving his Parents whilst he needs them, that
(...) Natural affection for Him, which engages them to take care of him, till
he be in a condition to take care of himself; and become qualified to obtain
such knowledge and Industry, as may make him Possessor of the advantages,
whereof his Indulgent and Bountiful Creator made him capable.

Those Moderns that think it rediculous to Imagine, that, in framing such Vast
Bodies as the Earth, and some of the Caelestial Globes, their Creator should
have any Regard to so small a Part of the Earth as Man, and designed that They
should be some way or other serviceable to him, look upon Things rather as
Surveyers, who consider mainly their Extent, than as Philosophers, that
Estimate them by their Intrinsic Value. For though it be true, that Man
considered barely as an Animal, is a Creature little enough to be Contemptible;
yet as He is endowed with a Soul Immaterial, Rational, and Immortal, he is a
Creature much more Noble and Excellent than the whole Terraqueous Globe, or a
much vaster Mass of Corporeal Substance that is Stupid and Inanimate. For the
Rational Soul is capaof Understanding and Willing, (which are higher Faculties
than mere Matter can reach to) and which is more, of Knowing, Serving and
Enjoying God. And Man being the only Visible Creature, that is capable to
Understand the Wisdom, Power, and Beneficence of God in the Creation, and in
many ways to Subdue a great Variety of the other Creatures, and Apply them to
his Uses: it ought not to seem strange, that the Wise Author of the Universe,
that made all things so as to bring Glory to himself, should have a more
especial regard to so Noble a Piece of his Workmanship, than to any, that being
merely Corporeal, can neither Understand his Wisdom and his Power, nor Render
him thanks nor Praises for the Manifold and admirable Effects of them. And that
Littleness that is alleged to make Man a Contemptible Creature, is so far from
being a Disparagement to that Noble part of him, the Soul, which makes him a
Man, that is, a Rational Creature; that its Excellency consists in being less
than the Minutest Body; Since not having Extension, it is not Divisible; which
is the Prerogative of Substances, which, for that reason, are Immaterial and
Immortal.

This mention of the Human Mind leads me to a further Reflection, which is, That
many parts of the Material World, whereof Man has not been known to make any
advantage, in the Capacity of a mere Animal, may yet be highly useful to him,
as he is a Rational Creature, that is, Capable, by Contemplating the great and
Admirable Works of God, to Raise his Mind to the acknowledgment of the Divine
Architects Power, Wisdom, and Beneficence, and thereby Find produced in him due
Sentiments of Veneration, Gratitude and Love. And These may be safely reckoned
among those Ends or Uses, which in the first Section we have Styled Human Ones;
Since some of the Heathen Philosophers themselves called the World a Temple,
and one of the more Philosophical Fathers of the Church loftily Styles it,
(...).

And indeed we find, that the Psalmist alone may furnish us with diverse
Instances to our present purpose. Psalm. xix. 1, 2, 3.
For not only He teaches us that the Heavens declare the Glory of God, and that
in a Language, that, notwithstanding what happened at Babel, reaches to all the
Nations of the World; but He imploys the Contemplation of Gods Visible Works,
to excite in himself and others true Sentiments, both of Devotion and of
particular Virtues. Thus the Consideration of his having been wonderfully
formed in his Mothers Womb, Ps. CXXXIX. 14.
moves Him to Revere and Celebrate the admirable Skill of the Opificer. Psalm.
civ. thorowout especially v. 24.
Elsewhere the Consideration of the Regular Vicissitudes observable in the
course of Nature, invite him to Admire and Extol the Providence of God. And
when in another place, He beholds those Vast Bodies and Shining Ones, Psa.
viij. 3.4.
that compose and adorn the Celestial part of the World, he justly falls into
Sentiments of great Humility and deserved Gratitude.

And as to This Use, the Distance; and Vastness of the fixed Stars, the
Immensity of the Heavens, and the Regular Motion of the Superior Planets,
(supposing they can bring Man no other advantage) may do him good Service;
since they afford him Rational and Solid Grounds to believe, admire, adore, and
obey the Deity. For by thus Spiritualizing (if I may so speak) the Corporeal
works of God, there may accrue to the Pious Soul, Uses far more valuable than
they can afford the Body; since they will Perfectionate the Mind here, and
Continue to be advantageous to it, when the Body will not need the World, and
the World it self, as to its present Constitution, shall be destroyed.

But to proceed from this Use of the World, which is Theological, to a Humane
Use, that is more Physical, as relating to the present welfare of Man, as he is
an Animal, as well as a Rational Creature: I shall represent That, as a Nation
is oftentimes, in the account of Providence, considered as one Man,
notwithstanding Its various dispersions, and perhaps long continuance; as the
Israelitish People, during many Ages, notwithstanding its Divisions and
Captivities, was addressed to and treated, by the Prophets and Apostles
commissioned by God, as one Person, named Israel, whom God sometimes in the
Scripture is pleased to call his Son: Exodus 4.22. Hos. 11.1.
so perhaps it will not be absurd to conceive, that Mankind it self may in some
regards, or as to some purposes, be looked upon by its Author as one Man, who,
by Successive Improvements of his knowledge, may from time to time be enabled
to make New and considerable Uses of the things, that the Wise and bountiful
Providence of his Maker had framed, with a Foresight that he would, and with
Intention that he might, make them advantageous to him. And therefore it cannot
safely be concluded That every thing whose Usefulness to Man is not yet
obvious, nay, That every thing that seems hurtful to him, can never be made
beneficial to him. For we see that Opium was for many ages looked on only as a
Poison, but now is employed as a Noble Remedy, (as indeed it is, if skilfully
prepared and Judiciously exhibited) in many Violent, and oftentimes Dangerous,
Distempers. Vipers are Venomous Animals; but yet their Flesh is a main
Ingredient of that famous Antidote Treacle; and being in great part Dissolved
in Tract of Time in good Spanish Wine, I have tried it with Surprising Success,
in an uncommon and very difficult Case. Scorpions also afford, by bare
Infusion, an Oil that not only Cures their own Stings, but is very available in
several Distempers. And I remember, that a learned Professor of Padua, having
Cured the Widow of a Sovereign Prince of a Fit of the Stone, answered me some
few Days after, that the chief Remedy he Employed and Relied on, was a
Preparation (which he intimated to Consist mainly in a light kind of
Calcination) of Scorpions, which, somewhat to my Wonder, he made his Patient
take inwardly. And, though the Roots of Maudioca be reckoned among Poisons, when
the Juice is in them, of which I elsewhere relate a Notable Instance; yet, when
the Juice is Pressed out, and the Firm part reduced to Meal, it affords the
Cassava, which is the Common Bread of a great Part of the Americans: and I did
not scruple to Eat of it here in England. Nay the Poisonous Juice it self, in
Diverse places of the West Indies, is even by the unskilful Inhabitants turned
into an Ordinary, and by them beloved Drink. But enough of this sort of
Instances; I shall be more Brief in those of another Kind, whereof the first is
afforded by the Loadstone, which, though for many Ages admired by Greeks and
Romans, for what is Commonly called its Attractive Virtue, had not its
Directive Virtue known, at least any thing Vulgarly, in these parts of the
World, till within less than four Ages; Since when, of what Vast Use this Stone
has proved to Mankind, the discovery of the West Indies, and of the Way of
Sailing by the Cape of good Hope to the East Indies, sufficiently declares. I
will say nothing of the Uses of the Silk Worm, and the Sugar-Cane, which were
little taken Notice of for many Ages, even by the Civilized and Lux urious
Greeks and Romans; but now, together with the lately discovered Cocheneal,
which is but an Insect, and far less than the Silk Worm, make a good part of
the Trade of Europe, and furnishes the Tables of the Delicate with Sweet meats,
and the Courts of Princes with many of their Finest Ornaments. But not to
insist on such things as these, but to proceed.

It deserves also to be considered on this occasion, That many Things that are
not thought Useful to Men, because we see not that they directly bring in many
Immediate Advantages, may yet be of great Use to them, as they Minister to, or
are Necessary for, other things that are very serviceable to them. As the
excessive Rains that cause the overflowings of Rivers in diverse parts of
Africa, and some other Countries, though they seem rather Destructive than
profitable, do yet, by their seasonable Inundations, make Egypt and some other
Countries exceeding Fertile, that without them would be very Barren: and among
Us, those Clouds that do us no Immediate Service, do oftentimes, by Watering
our Fields and Gardens in Summer, and by Manuring them, as 'twere, in Winter,
do Nourish those Trees, Grass, Corn, Herbs, and other Plants, whereof some
Serve immediately for Aliments to Man, and others are necessary for the
nourishment of Sheep, Oxen, Deer, and other Beasts that Men usually feed upon.

Not only Plants, and Animals, and Stones, and Metals, and such other smaller
Bodies as are within Man's reach, are capable of being made use of by Him; but
to advance a Step farther, to far greater Masses of Matter, and even some of
those remote Caelestial Globes, which he is thought able only to Contemplate;
One of those Ends, to which the Indulgent Creator destinated them, may be To
be serviceable to Man.

To say nothing of the advantage that skilsul Seamen make of the Ebbing and
Flowing of that vast Collection of Waters, the Ocean; The Declination of the
Mariners Needle, and the Variation of it, which probably depends upon the
Motitions or changes of some Vast Internal Portion of the Terraqueous Globe, is
found to be of great Use by Experienced Pilots and Navigators, in their Voyages
through those Vast Seas they use to pass, between Europe and the East Indies;
as I learnt by particular Enquiry, from Eminent Persons, that have more than
once Sailed upon those Seas. The Moon, to omit her Light, serves Men, not only
to make Moon-Dials by, and to foretell regularly the Times and Quantities of
the Various Ebbings and Flowings of the Sea, the knowledge of which is very
Beneficial, if not necessary, to Mariners, but serves Mathematicians for Diverse
other Purposes. The Sun, not to mention his ordinary Light and Heat, and the
necessity of them to the Plants and Animals that afford Man Food and Medicines,
and to the Production of many other Effects; whereon his Welfare depends, do
enable him, by Concave and convext Glasses, to burn with Celestial Beams,
without the help of Culinary Fire; and enable the Gnomonist to make Accurate
Dials, to know exactly how the Time passes; the Cosmographer, to make very
useful Discoveries of the Elevation of the Pole, and Latitudes of Places; and
the heedful Observer of his Rising and Setting, to discover what Artists call
his Amplitude, which is of good use to Astronomers, and more to Navigators, by
helping them to estimate, among other things, the Variation of the Compass,
(from true North and South Points.) And the Conjunction or Opposition of the
Sun and Moon in Ecclipses, though it be a frightful thing to the Superstitious
Vulgar, yet to Knowing Men, that can Skilfully apply them, these Ecclipses are
of great Use, and such as common Heads would never have Imagined; Since not
only They may, on diverse occasions, help to settle Chronology, and rectify the
Mistakes of Historians, that writ many Ages ago; but, which is, though a less
Wonder, yet of greater Utility, They are, as things yet stand, necessary to
define with competent Certainty, the Longitude of Places or Points assigned on
the Terraqueous Globe; which is a thing of very great moment, not only to
Geography, but to the most useful and important Art of Navigation. And lastly,
at how stupendous a distance soever the Fixed Stars are placed, yet their
remoteness cannot hinder the Industry of Man, from making even These
Serviceable to his Uses; Since, if we should admit those determinate Celestial
Influences that are little less than the Idols of Astrologers, they would
enable us to predict the Changes of Weather, the Fertility and Dearth, the
Sickliness, or Healthiness, of any proposed Season; and, not to lay any stress
upon so Controverted a Science, it is plain that Skilful Navigators can make use
of any of the fixed Stars, to know by any of them, what Hour it is of the Night:
And it is more known, that Fishermen and Pilots did generally for many Ages,
till within these four last Centuries, make very great use of the Pole Star,
and other of the Northern fixed Ones, to guide them, when nothing else could, in
the perilous Courses of their Navigations.

I have seen, and been Master of a Telescope, made in the form of a
Walking-Staff, so that it was fitted to serve for several purposes; whereof
though one was very different from the other, yet all of them were in the Idaea
of the Artificer, and intended by him. The like may be said of a Concave
Metalline Burning-Glass; which, though it is employed to magnify the Pictures of
Objects, to cast their Images into the Air, and to Concenter the Sunbeams to a
Focus, in which they will burn several Bodies; yet These and many other things,
which, though they seem to have little Affinity with these, are performed by a
Metalline Concave, were beforehand destinated by the Artist, who foresaw and
intended, that in such various Junctures of Circumstances, it should produce
all those determinate Effects.

And indeed, if we consider Gods Omniscience and Providence, and how Indulgent
a Creator he has been to Man; it may well seem reasonable to think, that as God
foresaw that Men might make very various and profitable Uses of diverse of his
other Creatures, by the help of that Prerogative of Reason, which he had
vouchsafed them; So he designed that Men should reap the Advantages he had made
many of his other Works capable of affording them. And I confess, I think this
Reflection may justly serve to Recommend the Doctrine about Final Causes that
we embrace, to Philosophers that are truly pious: Since it furnishes them with
just Arguments for Gratitude to the Author of so many good things, as the
Corporeal World, by being contemplated or possessed, affords them. For to look
upon the World, as vast and curious a Work as it is, only as a vast and curious
piece of Workmanship; may indeed give a Man a great Idaea of the Power and
Skill of the Divine Architect: But will rather exact his Wonder, than his
Gratitude. And therefore the Ancient Aristotelians, who looked upon the World
as Eternal and Self-existent in a Condition like its present System; did not
use to Thank God for the Benefits they received from things Corporeal: Though
some of them thought themselves Obliged to thank Nature; which they looked upon
as acting with Design, and proposing to her Self for Ends, the Welfare of the
Universe, and of Men. To illustrate this with something, whose Application is
Obvious. If a Traveller being in some Ill-inhabited Eastern Country, should
come to a large and fair Building, such as One of the most Stately of those
they call Caravanzeras; though He would esteem, and be delighted with the
Magnificence of the Structure, and the Commodiousness of the Apartments; yet
supposing it to have been Erected but for the Honor or the Pleasure of the
Founder, He would Commend so staely a Fabric, without thanking him for it. But
if he were Satisfied that this Commodious Building was designed by the Founder,
as a Receptacle for Passengers, who were freely to have the Use of the many
Conveniences the Apartments afforded; he would then think himself obliged, not
only to Praise the Magnificence, but with Gratitude to acknowledge the Bounty,
and the Philanthropy of so Munificent a Benefactor.

SECT. IV.
IT remains now, that we discourse a while of the Fourth and last Question,
proposed at the beginning of this Tract; which was, With what Cautions Final
Causes are to be Considered by the Naturalist?

But the Cases whereto this Question may relate, are so many and so differing,
that, what I shall endeavor upon so diffused and difficult a Subject, will be
rather to point you out some Sea-Marks, that may direct you to shun those
latent Rocks, against which diverse Learned Men have dashed; than to present you
with a Mariners Compass, and a Sea-Card, that may constantly guide you in the
Courses of your Navigation, through so unfrequented a Sea.

And, to make way for what I am to offer by a Distinction, the want of which
seems to have contributed to the Obscurity of my Subject; I shall observe to
you, that there are two ways of Reasoning from the Final Causes of Natural
Things, that ought not to be Confounded. For, Sometimes from the Uses of things
Men draw Arguments that relate to the Author of Nature, and the General Ends he
is supposed to have intended in things Corporeal: As, when from the manifest
Usefulness of the Eyes, and all its parts, to the Function of Seeing, Men
infer, that at the Beginning of Things the Eye was framed by a very Intelligent
Being, that had a particular care, that Animals, especially Men, should be
furnished with the fittest Organ of so necessary a Sense as that of Sight. And
Sometimes also, upon the supposed Ends of things Men Ground Arguments, both
Affirmative and Negative, about the peculiar Nature of the Things themselves;
and Conclude, that This Affection of a Natural Body or Part ought to be
granted, or That to be denied, because by This, and not by That, or by This
more than by That, the End designed by Nature may be best and most conveniently
attained. This latter sort of Arguments I am wont to call purely or simply,
Physical Ones; and those of the former sorts may, for distinctions sake, be
styled Physico-Theological Ones; or (if we will with Verulamius refer Final
Causes to the Metaphysics,) by a somewhat shorter name, Metaphysical Ones.

What has been premised about these Two Ways of Arguing, allows me to proceed
to what I shall venture, though not without much diffidence, to offer you,
concerning our Grand Questtion about; which I shall refer my present Thoughts
to the Five ensueing Propositions.

PROP. I.
AS to the Generality of Celestial Bodies, it seems not safe to propound
Arguments of their Nature, from the supposition of particular Ends, at least of
the Human ones, designed by the Author of Nature in framing them.

I will not only Allow you, but Encourage you, to take a Rise from the
Contemplation of the Celestial Part of the World, and the Shining Globes that
Adorn it, and especially the Sun and Moon; To Admire the Stupendous Power and
Wisdom of Him that was able to frame such Immense Bodies, and, notwithstanding
their Vast Bulk, and (if the Earth stand still) scarce conceiveable Rapidity,
keep them for so ma-Ages, so Constant, both to the Lines and Paces of their
Motion, without justling or interfereing with one another. And I shall most
willingly join with you, in returning Thanks and Praises to the Divine
Providence and Goodness, for having so placed the Sun and Moon, and determined
the former (or the Earth) to move in such Lines, under that Oblique Circle
Astronomers call the Ecliptic, that there needs Skill in Cosmography to be
able to Apprehend, how useful these Situations and Motions are, for the Good of
Men and other Animals; and how disadvantageous it would have been to the
Inhabitants of the Earth, if the Luminaries had been otherwise placed or moved
than they are. But for all this, I dare not imitate Their Boldness, that not
only affirm, that the Sun and Moon, and all the Stars, and other Celestial
Bodies, were made solely for the use of Man; but Presume to ground Arguments, to
evince such a System of the World to be True, and such another Erroneous,
because the Former is, as they think, better fitted to the Convenience of
Mankind, or the other less suited to that End, or perhaps altogether Useless or
unnecessary to it: As when they Argue, that the Sun and other vast Globes of
Light, ought to be in perpetual Motion to Shine upon the Earth; because, as
They fancy, it is more convenient for Man, that those Distant Bodies, than that
the Earth, which is His Habitation, should be kept in Motion. But, considering
things as mere Naturalists, it seems not very likely, that a most Wise Agent
should have Made such vast Bodies, as the Sun and the fixed Stars, especially if
we suppose them to Move with that Inconceiveable Rapidity that Vulgar
Astronomers Do and Must assign them; Only or Chiefly to Illuminate a little
Globe, that without Hyperbole is but a Physical Point, in comparison of the
Immense Spaces comprised under the Name of Heaven; whose Lights might as well
Illuminate the Earth, if They were a thousand times Lesser than they are,
provided they were placed at a proportionably Less Distance from It. And 'twill
be very hard to Assign, what considerable Use the Terrestrial Globe or its
Inhabitants Derive, from that Multitude of Celestial Globes that make the Milky
Way; since each of those Stars is so far from being singly able to Inlighten
the Earth, that Aristotle, and the generality of Philosophers for many Ages,
(therein followd by diverse of the Peripatetick Schools at this day) took the
whole Aggregate of them for a Meteor. And what Light, or other known Advantage,
can the Earth or its Inhabitants Derive from those many Fixed Stars that the
Telescope only can discover, (and which for that reason I sometimes call
Telescopical Stars) among the six or seven Conspicuous Ones of the Pleiades, or
among those that the Naked Eye can see in the Belt or Girdle of Orion? which
(Constellations) I scarce ever look upon, through a good Telescope, without
Wonder.

I foresee, it may be said, that These and other the like Celestial Bodies may
be at least Thus far Useful to Man, as to Discover to him, and give him a Rise
to Admire and Praise, the Greatness and Power of the Divine Maker: And if this
be said, I shall not quarrel with the Allegation, but readily grant, that, though
perhaps his Wisdom shines as bright to Us Men, in the Structure of a Gloworm,
as in the Disposition of the unseen Stars that make up the Galaxy; yet the
Immensity of his Power could not perhaps be so well declared by less Vast
Productions of it. But still these Arguments are not purely Physical, but of
that sort that I call Physico-Theological, whose Inferences Relate to the
General Intendments of God in the Universe, which I therefore Style Cosmical
Ends; but do not reach to Prove any thing about the determinate Nature of
particular Bodies. And since the Utmost that Philosophy teaches us, is, that in
general the Good of Man was One of the Ends designed by God, in so framing the
World as we see it is framed: There may be other Ends designd by the same
Omniscient Author of Nature, of those Telescopical and other Small or Remote
Stars, whose Uses to Us are doubtful or inconsiderable; toward the attainment
of which Ends, those Celestial Bodies and Motions may be admirably contrived
and directed. And, We not being able by mere Reason to Investigate what those
Ends are, though we have not near so much Reason to assure us that there may not
be such Ends, as the Infiniteness of God's Wisdom gives us to think there may
be; it is Presumptuous for Us to Judge of the System of the World, and of the
Destinations of Fixed Stars so Remote, that, though they be probably like so many
Suns, We cannot so much as Discern them without good Telescopes. By That
Systtems Greater or Lesser A^vantageousness to Us: Especially, since though it
were certain that, among other Uses, God intended they should be in some sort
Serviceable to Us, yet he has no way declared to us, in what Capacity, or to
what Degree, they shall be Useful to Us. And therefore if they be so in any
Measure (as for example Mentally,) they are So, for what we know, as much as He
designed they should be: and That it self being an unmerited Favor, deserves
our humble Thanks. And it seems very likely, that God did not design to all the
parts of the Earth it self, Equal, and consequently not the Greatest,
Advantages by the present Systeme of the Universe; since the Countries
Inhabited by the Samoids and Novazemblans, and other Nations that like very
near the Arctick Pole, want many Conveniences and Advantages enjoyed by the
Inhabitants of the Temperate Zones, that lie nearer the Way in which the Sun
moves.

But, though bare Philosophy does not favor the Bold Opinion I dare not assent
to; yet I know, 'twill be pretended, that Revelation does. And I readily
confess, that the Terraqueous Globe, and its Productions, (among which perhaps
the Atmosphere may be reckoned) and especially the Plants and Animals it is
furnished with, do by the Scripture appear to have been designed for the Use
and Benefit of Man, who has therefore a Right to Employ as many of them, as he
is able to Subdue: and that the two Luminaries themselves, the Sun and Moon,
Ps. 104.19.
were appointed by God to give Light upon the Earth, and be useful to all the
Nations that Inhabit it: And that therefore the Kingly Prophet had reason to
exclaim, How manifold are thy works O Lord! How wisely have thou made them all!
Psalm. 104.24.
when in the precedent and subsequent words, he applys this to the Terraqueous
Globe, and its Inhabitants. And He might justly say, as he elsewhere did, That
the Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy Work.
But these General Declarations, Psalm. 19.1.
though they be just Motives of our Wonder and Thankfulness; yet I fear they are
not good Topics to draw such Physical Conclusions from, in particular Cases,
as some Learned Men adventure to do. For I do not remembar, that it is any where
declared in the Scripture, that the Service of Man was the Only, or perhaps so
much as the Chief, Use of all the Celestial Lights, and other Bodies of that
Immense Part of the World. And This Single Consideration ought to oblige us, to
be very wary in making Ascriptions to our selves, as if the Great System of the
World were to be estimated by Our Conveniences. And if it be said, that Things
merely Corporeal have not, and Man alone has, a Rational faculty, whereby to
Refer the great and wonderful Works of God to the Glory of their Maker; I shall
take the Liberty to answer, that, tho this has been Affirmed by Many, if not
also Assented to by All, yet I have not found it proved by Any. And I somewhat
wonder, that Divines should on this Occasion overlook that passage in the 38th.
Chapter of Job, which they generally interpret of the Angels. For the Question,
which God there puts to Job, Job. 38.5.4.7.
may be justly applied to Adam himself; Where wast thou when I laid the
Foundations of the Earth? Declare if thou have understanding. When the Morning
Stars sang together and all the Sons of God shouted for joy. And indeed, if We
even may presume to Conjecture of such things, it seems to me reasonable to
think, that God created the Angels before the Material World, thar He might
have Intelligent Beings to pay him the just Tribute of Praises, for so
Admirable a Spectacle as That of the Riseing World, or rather the Beginning and
Progress of the Creation. However by the words last Cited out of the Book of
Job, it appears, that before Man was made (for that he was not till the 6th.
day) God wanted not Intelligent Spectators and Applauders of his Corporeal
Works. And since the Angels are a Nobler Order of Intellectual Creatures than
Men, and are not Unconcerned Spectators of the Works of God: How do we know,
but that in the Systeme of That Part of Heaven, of which we need Telescopes to
Know that there is such a thing in rerum Natura; and in the Plants, Animals, or
other furniture, what ever it be, of those Particular, and to Our naked Eyes
Invisible, Stars, that serve Us men barely for Declarations of their Makers
Power; such Intelligent Spirits as Angels may discern as Wise Destinations, and
as Admirable Contrivances, as Those, which at the forming of the Earth and its
Furniture, invited their devout Hymns and Acclamations? And in this Case, God
will not loose any thing of the Glory due to the Divine Attributes, displayed
in the Fabric of the Celestial part of the World, tho the fixed Stars, should
be neither Only nor Principally designed for the Service of Men.

To what has been hitherto said, to let you see the Reasonableness of my first
Caution, which represents the Making Particular and merely Physical Inferences
from the supposed Destinations of Celestial Bodies, as a thing Unsafe, I shall
now add in the Second place;

That it is yet more unsafe, to ground Arguments of the Nature of particular
Bodies that are Inanimate in the Sublunary World, upon the Uses we think they
were designed for.

This will not appear an unreasonable Caution if we consider, How little we
know of the Particular Purposes of Nature in those Bodies here below, which not
being Organical, like those of Animals and Plants, cannot by the Curiousness of
their Structure disclose to us the Particular Ends to which they were ordained.
And as for their Motions, since they are extremely far from being so constant
and Regular as those of the Celestial Bodies, the Caution we gave about drawing
Arguments from the System of the Heavens, will not, sure, be thought unfit to
take place when we speak of the Clays, Chalks, and Stones, and the like
Terrestrial Bodies, whose Textures are, comparatively to those of Living
Creatures, very Simple, and Slight, and seldom more Curious than may be made by
Art, See the Tract of the Origin and Virtues of Gems.
by Dissolving Stones and Metals in Chemical Menstruums, and afterward
Chrystallizing the Solutions; of which I elsewhere give Examples. It Is true,
that, though Revelation speaks rather of Gods having destinated Animals and
Vegetables, than Inanimate Bodies, to the Service of Men; yet there is no
absurdity to conceive, that generally speaking, That may be one of the Ends
designed by the Author of Nature, in making Metals, Stones, and those other
Inanimate parts of the Terrestrial Globe that Man is able to master and make
use of. But whereas in this Globe the Surface is distant from the Center, above
three thousand and five hundred Miles; and I do not find that either Men's
Spades or their Plumming Lines have reached above one Mile of that great
number; Nor is it very likely, that Human Industry will ever make its way down
to the Thousandth part of that vast Depth: it seems very improbable, that the
remaining Internal part of the Earth, that is above seven thousand Miles thick,
and may, for ought we know, contain great varieties of Fossils and other
Creatures, should be made Chiefly or Only for the service of Men, from whose
sight they lie hid in a deeper Well than that of Democritus; and who do not so
much as know what kind of Bodies they are. And though it will not hence follow,
that the Terraqueous Globe was made by Chance, no more than that any of the
other Planets was so; because the Admirable Structure of Plants and Animals
evinces the Existence and Providence of a most Wise and Powerful Author of
things, who may justly be supposed to have made nothing in Vain, even among the
Inanimate portions of our Globe, whose Animated portions are so wisely and
exquisitely framed: yet, that those Inanimate Bodies were made for determinate
Ends, is more easy to be deduced from the knowledge we have by oother Mediums,
that they are the Productions of a Wise and Provident Author, than by the
Contemplation of these Inanimate Bodies themselves. And perhaps it may be worth
Inquriry, whether some things may not be made, even by a wise Agent, not out of
a Primary Intention, but as Productions that will naturally follow upon the
Establishment and Preservation of those grand Laws and Rules of Motion, that
were most fit to be settled among Things Corporeal. And it is very possible, that
according to that Cosmical Establishment (if I may so call it,) many parts of
the Terrestrial Globe should be so placed or disposed of, as not to be
serviceable to Men; because the whole Aggregate, or Globulous Mass, could not
otherwise be so well suited to the General Destinations of the Universe, which,
if otherwise Contrived would perhaps have been less serviceable than now it is
to Man himself. To Countenance which Consideration, I shall observe, that, tho
the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon be usually Unwelcom, and if Astrologers may be
credited, often very Prejudicial to Multitudes of Men; Jotzer haccol Jer. x.
16. and. L. 1.12.
yet the great Former of all things, or as the Original will bear it, of the
whole, did not think fit to alter the Tracts or Lines of Motion, that he
assigned the Luminaries, to avoid the Ecclipses that must yearly ensue upon
their Moveing in such Lines. Whence we may also learn, that some Phoenomena may
not belong to the Primary Intention of Nature, but are only the necessary
Consequences and Effects, of the Primitive Constitution of the World, and the
Catholic Laws of Motion. And if it be here demanded, what the Ends are, for
which the Deep and hidden parts of the Terraqueous Globe, and the Telescopical
Stars of the Firmament, were made; if they were not made for the Use of Man: I
shall frankly answer, that I cannot tell: And I know not but such an Answer may
be more expressive of the profound Reverence we owe the great Author of Nature,
than Their Opinion is, that would have all these made for the Use of Man:
since, To say that we know not why some Part of a Work is made by an Artist,
whom other parts proclaim to be most Wise and Skillful, does both Acknowledge
our own Ignorance, and leave it highly probable that such Pieces of Work are
suited to Purposes worthy of Him, and suitable to Them; and seems therefore a
safer and more respectful Opinion, than to suppose Him to have made such things
for a Particular End, which we cannot make out to be in any considerable
measure worthy of his Wisdom, and attainable by them.

PROP. II.
IN the Bodies of Animals it is oftentimes allowable for a Naturalist, from the
manifest and apposite Uses of the Parts, to Collect some of the Particular Ends
to which Nature, destinated them. And in some cases we may, from the known
Natures as well as from the Structure, of the Parts, ground probable
Conjectures (both Affirmative and Negative) about the Particular Offices of the
parts,

To obviate mistakes, you may please to take notice, both That in this
Proposition, I speak only of those Ends and Uses of the Parts of an Animal,
that relate to the Welfare and Propagation of the Animal it self, and which
therefore I formerly called Animals Ends: and yet that I do not thereby deny
any Declaration that is made in the H. Scriptures, That God designed that the
Entire Animals, as well as their Parts, should be in several ways serviceable
to Man. And having premised this to explain my meaning in the Proposition, I
shall now consider distinctly the two parts whereof it consists.

And 1. There is no Part of Nature known to us, wherein the Consideration of
Final Causes may so justly take place, as in the Structure of the Bodies of
Animals. And I confess, that when I assist at a well-administer'd Anatomy, I do
so wonder at the admirable Contrivance of a Humane Body, that I cannot but
somewhat wonder, that there should be found among Philosophers, men that can
ascribe it to blind Chance The Stoic, that in Cicero asked an Epicurean, why
Chance did not make Palaces and other Buildings, seems not to me to have made
an impertinent Question. For the commodiousest Houses Men's Bodies dwell in, are
far less curious Structures, than the Mansions their Souls reside in: which you
will not think a groundless Paradox, if you consider, that, whereas even in a
Palace, the Materials being Wood, Stone, Brick, Mortar, Glass, and four or five
Metals, are but Few in comparison of the Parts of differing Textures, as Bones,
Nerves, Ligaments, Membranes, Muscles, Veins, Arteries, Grissels, Glandules,
Jellys, Humors, etc; and their Disposition is exceeding Slight, in comparison
of the curious and elaborate Contrivance of the numerous Parts, both solid and
fluid, of the Human Body: whereof though the Stable Parts alone have been
reckoned to amount to some Hundreds; yet in Every One of these parts, the Bulk,
Figure, Consistence, Texture, Situation, Connection and Aptness for motion, is
the most Commodious that can be devised; and All of them are wonderfully
Symmetrical, both to, one another and the whole Body; To diverse of whose
Motions, as Leaping, Running Speaking, Swimming, Sneezing etc. a great Number
of them conspire. And this Number of Parts is so artificially contrived and
packed together, that though in a Body where no room is lost, many Parts do at
the same time exercise very differing Motions, yet each of them moves freely,
and does not at all Hinder another, but rather they Promote each others Motions.

I will not suffer Indignation to transport me so far as to wish, That those
that deny the Usefulness of all the Parts of their Bodies may fall Sick, or
receive some Wound, to be thereby at once Convinced and Punished: But I will
venture to say, that Diseases or Hurts alone may show, how excellently all the
Parts of our Bodies are Contrived in order to our Welfare. For, if so much as a
Finger be made Bigger by Tumors, or Displaced by being put out of Joint, or
kept in a Wrong Posture by Contractions, or have its Continuity violated by
Cutting, or its Tone changed by Strains or Contusions, or its Sense or Motion
taken away by the Palsy, or its Membranes fretted by Sharp Humors, or its
Motions Disordered by the Cramp or Convulsions, In any of these Cases we
quickly find, how Commodiously the Parts Affected were Framed or Disposed, when
any Disease or Hurt gives them a Preternatural Constitution; that is, changes
that Figure, Connection, Tone, etc, which, according to the Institution of
Nature, whilst the Body is in full Health, does belong to it.

The Eye (to single out again that Part for an Instance) is so little fitted
for almost any other Use in the Body, and is so exquisitely adapted for the Use
of Seeing, and That Use is so necessary for the welfare of the Animal, that it
may well be doubted, whether any Considering Man can really think, that It was
not destinated to that Use. The six or seven Muscles that move the whole Bulbe
of the Eye, upwards, downwards, to the right Hand, to the left, and to various
oblique Positions; and the several Coats and Humors that make up the Sensory,
Have not only their Bigness, Shape, Consistence, Situation and Connection
admirably Adapted to that End; but the Transparency of the Cornea and the
Humors, the Opacity of the Wea, and the Semiopacity of the Retina, and the
several Motions of the Parts of the Eye, being requisite to Receive, Transmit,
Refract, and Dispose the Visive Beams that come from the Object, after the
manner requisite to make the Liveliest Picture of it in the Bottom of the Eye,
Do no less concur to Complete this matchless Organ of Vision: which is so
rarely Contrived in order to That Use, and comparatively so little to any
Other, that there is no more Rashness to say, that an Eye, than that a
Telescope, was made for an Instrument to See with; that is, to Discover the
Colors, Magnitudes, Shapes and Motions of Distant Objects. And in that
admirable Perforation of the Wea, which we call the Pupil, Nature has much
outdone Art. For whereas We are fain to apply to the Object Glasses of
Telescopes, Opacous Bodies with several Circular Apertures, that Some may let in
less Light, and Others more, according as the Objects are more or less Bright
or Inlighten'd; That part of the Wea that hangs in the Aqueous Humor, is an
Aperture, as the Artists call it, that Narrows and Opens it self in a trice,
according to the exigency of the Objects we look on; Which if they be so
constituted or placed, that they Reflect but a Dim Light, the Curtain is
presently drawn Open, and the Pupil circularly Widen'd, to let in the more
Beams of Light; and the Contrary happens, as often as the Object, being too
Luminous or Illustrated, would offend the Organ, or disturb the Sight, if the
Contraction of the Pupil did not shut out some of Its Beams. But for the Uses
of the several parts of the Eye, I shall referr you to the Industrious Jesuit
Scheiner's Oculus, and Des Carts his excellent Dioptricks; where you will
easily perceive, that, in Framing the Eye, Nature did not only act with Design,
but with so much Skill in Optics, that a more than ordinary insight into that
Science, is necessary to Understand the Wisdom of the Contrivances; and perhaps
no degree of Skill in it, would enable a man to Alter them for the better.
'Twere tedious to mention the Other Parts of the Body, that manifestly appear
to have been preordain'd to certain Uses. The Books of Anatomists are full of
Passages applicable to this purpose; of which I shall say in general, that,
though what they deliver suffices to show, That all the Parts of the Body are the
Effects of an Intelligent Cause: yet, unless their Descriptions and Reflections
be improved by Men versed in Mathematics and Mechanics, and, I shall venture
to add, in Chemistry too; we shall but imperfectly understand, how Intelligent
that Cause is, or how much Wisdom it has displayed, in the Structure of a Human
Body and each of its parts.

I know it is objected by the Epicureans, Illud in his rebus vitium vehementer
inesto Effugere, illorumque errorem premeditemur, Lumina qui faciunt Oculorum
clara creata Prospicere ut possimus, Lucret. de Not. l. iv. Nihil ideo quoniam
natum est in Corpore ut uti possemus, sed quod natum est, id procreat Vsum.
Ibid.
that the Parts of Animals were first made, and their Uses afterward found out
by men's Sagacity. But this is a Sophistical Objection. For, first, as to many
of the Inner parts, as, the Heart, Liver, Spleen, Kidneys, etc, They perform
their Functious without so much as Our Knowledge of their Structure, or perhaps
their Situation; so far are they from being applied to such Uses by Our
Sagacity. And as for the Limbs and other Parts, which we can Move at pleasure;
it is true, that they cannot be actually Employed to the respective Uses, till
they be actually Formed; but That hinders not but that in their Formation they
were therefore so Formed, that they may be in due time fit for such Uses. And
therefore we see, that the Chick is furnished with complete Eyes, and with
Wings and Feathers, before he be Hatched; though whilst he is yet enclosed in the
Egg, he can not make use of them to See or Fly. And why was it, do the
Epicureans think, that Nature provided a whole Set of Temporary Parts for
Pregnant Females, and Animals in the Womb, which, when they are come into a
freer state, partly fall away of themselves, and partly turn to a Ligament,
fitted no longer for the former, but for a more seasonable Use? And it is to be
noted, that the Production of these Umbilical Vessels, and the Placenta or
Analogous Body in the Womb to which they are fastened, is of no Necessity nor
Use to the Female before Conception; and thereby those Temporary Parts appear
to have bin Designed by Nature, not so much for the Personal Preservation of
the Female as for the Propagation of the Species: Which Destination not coming
to be accomplished, till a Woman, for instance, has attained to a competent
Age, appears to have been preordain'd by the Author of Mankind for the
Continuation of It.

And though it be true, that the Sagacity of men may have found out some Uses of
some Parts of their Bodies, that cannot be made appear to have been Primarily
Intended by the Author of Nature; yet That is no good Argument, that those Uses
were not Intended, which either are made Within us, or do, as it were obtrude
themselves Upon Us. And as for other Uses, the Prescience and Goodness of God
are such, that it ought not to appear incredible, That He that gave man both
the Limbs of his Body, and the Rational Endowments of his Mind, and that has
made many Parts, as the Eyes and the Ears, Double, that One may supply the want
of the Other; Did both Foresee what Uses men might, according to their
Sagacitys and Emergencies, make of these Parts, and so Contrive the Parts that
they should be applicable to such Uses. Suppose, a Wise man should send his Son
to Travel, and among other things give him a Pocket-Dyal with a Magnetic
Needle; and this Traveller having lost his way in some wild Plain, or being at
Sea in a Vessel, whose Compass was broken or spoiled by a Storm, or some other
Mischance: If, I say, in this case though the Traveller Ordinarily Employed his
Dyal only to find the Hour of the Day, He shall now Employ it to Guide his
Course, or Steer the Vessel, by the help of the Needles pointing Northward;
though this would be an Effect of His own Sagacity, yet his Father being a Wise
and Experienced Man, may reasona bly enough be supposed to have Foreseen, that
his Son might have need of knowing the Northern and Southern Points of the
Horizon. And accordingly may have given him a Dial furnished with a Magnetic
Needle, rather than an Ordinary Gnomonic Dial. And so a Man that has taught
another to Paint Landskips, when he gives him a Pencil and a Pallet furnished
with Colors, to draw a Particular Prospect, is not to be supposed to have
Designed, that he should not Employ them to any other purpose, if Urgent
Circumstances made it requisite for him to do so.

Having insisted longer than I intended upon the former part of my Proposition,
I now proceed to the latter; namely, That in some cases we may from the known
Ends of Nature, as well as from the Structure of the Parts, ground Probable
Conjectures, both Affirmative and Negative, about the particular Offices of the
Parts. Which I could not seasonably do before, because the Arguments, that
were founded on the Uses of the Parts of Animals, suppose, not only that those
Parts were destinated to Particular Uses knowable by Us, but that the several
Parts of the Body were Contrived as Wisely and Commodiously as Men are able to
Devise, in order to the Ends of Nature; which is always to be understood to
have. United in her Designs, the Uses of the Parts, and the Welfare of the
Whole.

And indeed if we consider, how admirable a Fitness there is in the Parts of
the Human Body, for instance, to those Particular Ends we can discover them to
have been Predesign'd for; it seems allowable to Conjecture, that such a Part
was not Primarily Designed to such an Use, because it is, on the account of its
Structure or otherwise, less Fitted for it, than the constant Wisdom of Nature
seems to require; especially if there be any Other Parts, by which That Office
may be more commodiously performed. And on the other side, it may be a Probable
Ground, though not altogether so Probable as the former, to Conclude that such a
Part was Destinated to such an Use, if the Use it self appear to be necessary,
and the Part better fitted for it than any Other is.

Thus, though Anatomical and Optical Writers, as well as the Schools, did for
many ages unanimously conclude, the Crystalline Humor to be the Principal Seat
of Vision; yet the industrious Scheiner, in his useful Tract entitled Oculus,
does Justly enough reject that received Opinion, by showing, that it Suits not
with the Skill and Providence of Nature, to make that Part the Seat (or chief
Organ) of Vision, for which it wants diverse requisite Qualifications,
especially most of these being to be found in the Retina. And I remember that
when I asked our famous Harvey, in the only Discourse I had with him, (which
was but a while be fore he dyed) What were the things that induced him to think
of a Circulation of the Blood? He answered me, that when he took notice that
the Valves in the Veins of so many several Parts of the Body, were so Placed
that they gave free passage to the Blood Toward the Heart, but opposed the
passage of the Venal Blood the Contrary way: He was invited to imagine, that so
Provident a Cause as Nature had not so Placed so many Valves without Design:
and no Design seemed more probable, than That, since the Blood could not well,
because of the interposing Valves, be Sent by the Veins to the Limbs; it should
be Sent through the Arteries, and Return through the Veins, whose Valves did
not oppose its course that way.

Thus, whereas former Anatomists and Physicians generally believed the
Nutrition of the Parts by the Venal Blood, the more Recent Writers are wont to
teach, that the Parts are nourished by the Blood in its passage through the
Arteries. Not that they Think, the Blood that runs through the Veins altogether
unfit to Irrigate the Parts with that Vital Liquor; but that they Judge the
Veins to be less fit than the Arteries, into which the Blood comes immediately
from the left Ventricle of the Heart, Agitated and Spirituous, and with a brisk
Impulse, which forces out the Particles of the Blood, at those Pores of the
Arteries that they find Congruous to their Shape and Size, and which answer to
the several Parts that are to be nourished by Corpuscles so Qualified. 'Twere
not Difficult, if 'twere Necessary, to accumulate Instances to the same
purposes with those already mentioned; there being nothing more frequent in the
Books of Anatomists, and those that treat of the Physiological and Pathological
parts of Physic, than to draw Arguments, as well Affirmative as Negative,
about the Use of the Parts of the Body, from their Fitness or Unfitness, or
their greater or lesser Fitness, to attain such Ends as are supposed to have
been Designed by Nature. And indeed these Argumentations occur so frequently,
that I think there is less need of my Increasing them, than of my Proceeding to
give you a Caution about them, which I shall do in the following Proposition.

PROP. III.
IT is Rational, from the Manifest Fitness of some things to Cosmical or Animal
Ends or Uses, to Infer that they were Framed or Ordained in reference
thereunto, by an Intelligent and Designing Agent.

Diverse things have Incidentally been said in this Paper, especially in the
first Section of it, and others may hereafter be Occasionally added, that may
justly be employed against that part of the Epicurean Hypothesis, which
Ascribes the Origin of Things to Chance, and Rejects the Interest of a Deity,
and the Designing of Ends, in the Production and Management of Natural things.
But because I observe, not without grief, that of late years too many,
otherwise perhaps Ingenious Men, have with the Innocent Opinions of Epicurus,
embraced those Irreligious ones, wherein (as I was saying) the Deity and
Providence are quite Excluded from having any Influence upon the Motions of
Matter, all whose Productions are referred to the Casual Concourse of Atoms: For
this Reason, I say, I thought it a part of my Duty, as well to the most Wise
Author of Things, as to Their Excellent Contrivance, and Mutual Subserviency,
to say Something, though but briefly, yet distinctly and expressly, to show, That,
at least in the Structure and Nature of Animals, there are Things that argue a
far Higher and Nobler Principle, than is Blind Chance. But, that I may do what
I here intend, with as much brevity as I can, I will do little more than name
some Particulars, that I have not observed to be so usually reflected on, to
the Purpose for which I mention them. And I shall Confirm these Considerations
but with One Instance, and That too, taken from a Sort of Parts that are as
little Elaborate, and therefore seem to be as little Fit for my Purpose, as
almost any in the Humane Body.

I will not now inculcate what has been delivered, and may be farther said, of
that Exquisite Structure of the Bodies of Dead Animals, that is discoverable by
the Knives of Anatomists; (though I shall not Scrupulously forbear to touch
lightly on a few things of that kind, that are requisite to my Purpose:) My
present Design being, to set down very briefly a few Arguments, to Strengthen
the Proposition lately delivered.

First then, I observe, That there seems to have been Care taken, that the Body
of an Animal should be furnished, not only with all things that are Ordinarily
Necessary and Convenient, but with some Superabundant Provision for Casualties.
Thus, though a Man may Live very well, and Propagate his Kind, (as many do,) though
he have but One Eye; yet Nature is wont to furnish Men with Two Eyes, that, if
One be Destroyed or Diseased, the Other may suffice for Vision. And so, if One
Ear grow Deaf, a Man may be Conversed with, by the help of the Other that
remains Sound. In short, Nature has furnished Men with Double Parts of the same
Kind, where that Duplicity may be highly Useful, and can be permitted without
Incongruity to the rest of the Body. And this is the more Considerable, because
in Other Parts Nature appears to Husband things, so, as to Shun doing things
Superfluous: As within the Skull, some Vessels that would in other Parts of the
Body have Double Coats like other Arteries, are much Thinner, almost like
Veins; the Thickness of the Skull being ordinarily a sufficient Fence to them
from External Injuries.

Another Argument, That diverse Things that Nature does about Animals, are done
with Design, may be taken from what Anatomists Observe of Those Parts of the
Womb or the Foetus, that are to be found but at Certain Times, at which there
is Need of them, and not at Others, when they would be Useless. Thus, when a
Woman is with Child, the Vasa Vmbilicalia are produced, to be Channels either
for the Blood or Alimental Juice and Spirits, that then ought to pass between
the Womb and the Foetus; which is to be Nourished, either only or chiefly, by
the Liquors derived to It through those Vessels, assisted by the Placenta, that
Supply to it the want of Eating with the Mouth, which the Unborn Infant either
does not at all, or does but very imperfectly, employ to Feed himself. And
though, as long as he continues Imprisoned in the Womb-state, these Temporary
Parts, (if I may so call them) continue with him; yet, as soon as he comes
abroad into the World, these Umbilical Vessels, particularly the Two Arteries
and the Vein, together with the Membranes they are wrapped up in, and Those
(commonly called the Chorion and the Amnios,) that Involve the Foetus, are
Thrown off, as Unnecessary to the Born Infant's New State; and when It has
quitted the Womb, are Expelled after it, whence they are called the
Afterbirth; there remaining only that Part of the Umbilical Vessels that lies
within the Child's Abdomen, between the Navel and the Liver, where its Use is
Considerable, though New; it Serving no more to convey Blood, or an Alimental
Liquor, to and fro, but Degenerating into a Ligament.

To the same Purpose with this Contrivance, we may mention that other, wherein
Nature employs the Foramen Ovale, that gives Passage to the Blood from the
Right Ventricle of the Heart to the Left; that the Circulation of It may be
maintained, though It cannot in the Embryo, as it does in a Born Child, pass
through the Vessels of the Lungs from One of the Ventricles to the Other. For
this Formen Ovale being but (if I may so call it) an Expedient that Nature
Employs, as long as that which is Intended to be an Infant, remains an Embryo;
this Temporary Conformation is Obliterated, when the Child Breathing the free
Air, is in a Condition to make the Blood Circulate through the Pulmonick
Vessels, according to the Primary Intention of Nature. From which and the like
Instances we may infer, That these Temporary Parts were Framed by a
Forecasting, as well as a Designing, Agent, who Intended they should Serve for
such a Turn, and then be laid Aside; it being utterly Improbable, that an
Undesigning Agent should so Appositely and Exquisitely Frame Scaffolds for the
future Buildings, if he did not beforehand Destinate both the One and the
Other, to concur to the same ultimate Effect.

Another Argument for our present purpose may be drawn, from the Consideration
of those things that in Animals are commonly called Instincts; whereof Some
more directly regard the Welfare of the Individuals they belong to, Others the
Propagation of their Species, and Some again respect both. The Writers of
Voyages, and those that professedly deliver Natural History, recount strange,
and scarce credible, Instances, of the Instincts observable in certain Animals.
But we need not lay the stress of our Argument upon dubious, or suspected
Relations; since what I have met with in Authors of good Authority, or received
from the mouths of Travelers of good Credit, may serve my present turn;
especially if it be allowed, (as I see not why it may not be,) to take the word
Instinct in a latitude, so as to comprise those Untaught Shifts and Methods,
that are made use of by some Animals, to shun or escape Dangers, or to provide
for their future Necessities, or to catch their Preys.

Diverse Strange Things are delivered, not only by Poets, but by more Credible
Writers, about the wonderful Sagacity and Government of Bees, in point not only
of Economy, but of Politics too. But though I shall not build any thing upon
the Authorities that I my self Suspect, yet, having had the Curiosity to keep
for a good while in my Closet a Transparent Hive, whence there was a free
passage into a neighboring Garden; and having thereby had the opporunity to
make frequent Observations of the Actions of these little Animals, and
particularly to see them at work about making their Combs, and filling them
with Honey: I confess I discovered some things that I did not believe before,
and was induced to look upon them as very fit Instances, of Creatures endowed
with natural Instincts and Providence. For 'twere hard for a Mathematician, in
contriving so many Cells, as They make in the Area of one of their Combs, to
husband so little space more Skilfully, than They are wont to do. And not only
They Carefully and Seasonably lay up their Honey, to serve them all the Winter,
but Curiously close up the particular Cells with Covers of Wax, that keep the
included Liquor from Spilling, and from External Injuries. I do not here
mention the Prognostication of Weathers, that may be made in the morning by
Their keeping within their Hives, or flying early abroad to furnish themselves
with Wax or Honey, or by their unexpected Return before a Storm unforeseen by
Men; because I suspect that these things may not be so much the Effects of
Instincts, as of a Tenderness and Quickness of Sense, such as may be seen in a
good Weather-glass, and found in diverse Wounded and Crazy Persons, that are
affected with such Beginnings of the Changes of the Air, as are not yet
perceived by other men. But among the Peculiarities to be observed in the
Conduct of Bees, I cannot but take notice, that after a Fight, I have, not
without some wonder, seen them take up the Dead that lay on the Ground, and fly
away wirh them to I know not what distance from their Hive.

Another obvious Instance of the Instinct that Nature has given even to some
despicable Insects, may be taken from Ants, to whom Solomon sends the Sluggard
to School, to learn the Providence of making Seasonable Provision for the
Future. For it is known, that these little Creatures do in the Summer Hoard up
Grains of Corn against the Winter. And their Sagacity is the more Considerable,
if it be true, what diverse learned Persons affirm, that they eat or bite off
the Germens of the Grains of Corn they lay up, least the Moisture of the Earth
exposed to the Rains, should make it Sprout. But whatever become of this
Tradition, these Insects do some other Actions, resembling Sagacity and
Industry, that are not so contemptible as their Bulk, though I must not stay to
mention them particularly in this Place.

The Untaught Skill of Spiders, in Weaving their Curious Webs, that are so
Fitly Contrived, both to Catch their Flying Prey, and give them immediate
Notice of its being Caught, is a Thing, which, if it were not Familiar, would
be looked upon as Admirable. And this Skill is not, as Some Imagine, an Effect
of Imitation of their Parents: For if the Eggs be taken away and enclosed in a
Glass, when they come to be Hatched by the Heat of the Sun, the little Creature
will Immediately fall to Spinning in the Glass itself, as was related to me, by
an Eminent Mathematician that made the Experiment. And I saw the less reason to
Distrust it, because, having by an External Heat Hatched many Eggs of
Silkworms, in a Place where there had not been any of a long time before, nor
probably ever till then, yet the Worms propuc'd by these Eggs, did in Autumn,
of their own accord, Climb up to those convenient Places I had prepared for
Them, and there Weave those Curious Oval Prisons in which they enclose
themselves, and which are Unrevel'd into Silk, of whose extreme Fineness or
Slenderness I have elsewhere given an Account.

Nor is the provident Industry of Animals confined to Insects, of whom the
Poet, (if his words be taken in a Popular Sense,) truly says; Ingentes Animos
angusto in Pectore versant.

Since it is to be found in diverse of the Greater Animals, particularly in
Beavers; of whom though Some things that are recounted by Authors and Travelers,
are but Fabulous; yet what has been related to me by Sober and Judicious
Persons, that were either Born or Lived in New England, where these Animals
abounding, they had the Opportunity to observe Them; is sufficient to Confirm
such Relations, as may give One just Cause of Wonder. For these Credible
Persons affirmed, That the Beavers with their sharp Teeth, (whose Shape and
Strength I have Admired,) Cut pieces of Wood so as to make them Fit for their
Purpose: That by Associating their Labors, they lay these together so as to
Build themselves Strong Winter-houses, in which there is sometimes a kind of
Second Story, for the Inhabitants to retire to, when the Water chances to
Overflow: That for These Houses, they choose a very Convenient Situation, just
by some River, or other Water, that can furnish Them with Fish: And, That the
Overture or Hole that belongs to each of these Houses, is placed just by the
Water, that they may immediately Flounce into It, and so Save themselves when
their Houses are Attaqu'd. And to Facilitate their Swimming away, and the
Catching of their Prey in the Waters, Nature has furnished them, as I have
Observed with pleasure in a Live Beaver, with two Feet not made like Those of
Dogs, or Cats, or like their Own two Other Feet, but furnished with broad
Membranes betwixt the Toes, like the Feet of Geese, Ducks, and other Aquatick
Animals, that are to use them as Oars, to Thrust away the Water, and Facilitate
their Motions upon It, and in It.

'Twere easy to accumulate Instances of the Sagacity and Industry of Animals,
for their own Preservation: But it is more easy to find Notable Ones, among
those Actions that concern the Propagation of their Species.

The various Arts employed by Animals of differing Kinds about the Materials,
the Construction, and the Situation of their Nests, is usually Remarkable, and
sometimes Wonderful. Of this Skill, we have diverse Eminent Instances, some of
which I have been delighted to See, but have not time to Recount. Yet One there
is, whose Oddness will not suffer me to pretermit it. For in a Country that
abounds with Apes and Monkeys, that are very Greedy of Birds Eggs, and
oftentimes Climb Trees to come at Them; there is a Sort of Birds, whose Eggs
they peculiarly affect, that do as it were Hang their Nests at or near the end
of some long Flexible Branch or Wand, that grows Over the Water; by which means
their Insidious Enemies, who do not Swim, cannot come at them Underneath; and
by reason of the Yielding of the Flexible Branch or Twigs whereto the Nest is
fastened, they are Frighted from venturing to pass on, for want of a Firm
Support.

The Structure of the Nests of Wasps, which they often make under Ground to
Secure them, I have observed to be very Curious and Artificial, especially when
the Young Ones are Formed in the little Cells, where they lie Hid and Sheltered
till they are ready to Fly away.

I might here multiply Examples of this Kind, but I think it fitter to proceed,
by telling you, That the Instincts that Nature has Implanted in Animals to
Preserve themselves, though they would seem Admirable if they were less Familiar,
are much Infetiour to That Providence that She has furnished Animals with, for
the Propagation of their Species.

There are diverse Notable Things to be met with in the Nests of seve-Birds,
both as to their Materials, their Structure, and the very Situations of the
Places pitched upon to Build them in. I have seen some Nests, especially Indian
Ones, which would make a Man Wonder, how the Birds that Built them, should seek
and find such Odd, and yet, all Circumstances considered, Commodious Materials
to Build with. Of which we have an Eminent Instance in the Nests of certain
Eastern Birds, whose Names I remember not, that make their Nests of a White
Substance, (which has been Presented me by some of our East India Merchants,)
that looks almost like Icthyocolla, in the Shops commonly called Isinglass, and
is Dissoluble in Liquors, and so very well Tasted, that it makes the chief
Sauce that they use in the Southern Parts of India at their Feasts. The
Structure also of the Nests of diverse Birds, both as to their Figure, their
Capacity suitable to the Bulk of the Builders, and the Accommodations they are
furnished with for Warmth and Softness, may deserve to be Applauded by
Mathematicians themselves: especially if it be considered, that these little
Untaught Architects had no Tools to make their Curious Buildings with, save
their Beaks and their Feet. And yet much more of Providence and Foresight
appears in the Situation of the Places, that some Birds make Choice of to Build
their Nests in: As may be observed, not only in the Pendulous Nests of
Swallows, and the Crafty Hidden Ones of some European Birds, but very
conspicuously in the Hanging and Moveable Nests, that we lately mentioned to be
so Oddly placed by some Birds, to secure their Eggs from Apes and Monkeys; and
by the Situation of the well Tasted Nests I was newly speaking of, which are to
be found only upon high and steep Rocks, and are so fastened to those Concave
Parts of them that look downwards, and, for the most part, hang directly over
the Sea, that there is no getting Them without much Trouble and Danger, by the
help of Boats and Poles: Upon which Account, as well as That of their
Deliciousness, they are very Dear in the East Indies themselves. The like Care
to Contrive their Nests Advantageously, and make them in Secure Places, is
taken by diverse Infects themselves, as may be observed in the Subterraneal
Nests of the Wasps formerly mentioned, and in the Eggs of Snails, which I have
sometimes found Hid under Ground, and had the Curiosity to Hatch in Glasses
furnished with the same Earth they were sound in.

If I should here reckon up and display the several Effects, and consequently
Arguments, of the Wonderful Providence, that the most Wise Author of Nature
exercises about the Propagation of Animals, by distinguishing them into Male
and Female: By furnishing both Sexes with Mutual Appetites and Organs,
exquisitely adapted to the Increase of their Kind: By the admirable Formation
of the Foetus in the Womb, without the Females Knowledge How it is performed:
By the strange Subtilties and Courage that Several of them, either Oviparous or
Viviparous, have, to Hide and Defend their Young: By the full Provision that is
made for the Nourishment of the Foetus, and the Welfare of the Female after She
has brought It forth: And by diverse other Ways that I must not now stay to
specify. If, I say, I should venture to do this, I might indeed, much enrich
and adorn my Argument, but should make this Discourse too much exceed the
Limits that my Design, and small Stock either of Ability or Leisure, would
allow. And therefore, instead of pursuing a Speculation, that would lead me a
great deal too far, I shall look back upon the Intimation I gave not long
since, that even those Meaner Parts of Animals which seem to have been Framed
with the least Care or Contrivance, are yet not Unworthy of their Author.

For Proof of which, I shall now observe, That though the Teeth be some of the
least Elaborate Parts of the Humane Body; yet even These afford more
Observations appliable to our present Purpose, than my Intended Brevity will
permit me to take Notice of. And therefore I shall only, and that little more
than transiently, consider a few of Them here; and some of the Others
elsewhere, on those particular Occasions, on which it will be more Proper to
bring them in.

I. And First, It Is considerable, That whereas, when a Man is come to his full
Stature, all the Other Bones of the Body cease to Grow, the Teeth continue to
Grow in Length, during a Man's whole Life.

This Growth of the Teeth appears, not only by their Continuing so many Years
of the Same Length, but by the Unsightly Length of One Tooth, when That which
was opposite to It in the other Jaw happening to Fall out or be Pulld out, the
Tooth we speak of has liberty, to Grow into the Gap made by the Removal of the
Other. Of this Difference in point of Growth betwixt the Teeth and other Bones,
What Reason can be so probably given, as, That it is designed to repair the
Waste that is daily made of the Substance of the Teeth, by the frequent
Atritions that are made, between the upper and lower Tire, in Mastication?

II. Whereas the Other Bones of the Body (some sew Small Ones excepted) are
Invested with a very thin and sensible Membrane, which, for its close adhesion
to the Bone, is by Anatomists called the Periosteum: That Part of each Tooth
which is not covered by the Gums, has none of this Membrane, which would be
subject to frequent and very painful Compressions and Lacerations.

III. To enable the Teeth to Break, and make Comminutions of the more Solid
kind of Aliments, Nature has providently Framed them of a Closer and Harder
Substance, than almost any other Bones of the whole Body; though these be so
Numerous, that Anatomists reckon above Three Hundred of them. And I have met
with Relation^ in Authors of good Credit, That Some Men's Teeth have been so
Hard, as, when struck with another Fit Body, to produce Sparks of Fire.

IV. That These Bones, whose Use (to Prepare Aliments for Nutrition) is so
Great, and almost Necessary, may themselves be continually Fed and Cherished,
though they Grow in Other Bones; the Allwise Author of Things has admirably
Contrived an Unseen Cavity in each side of the Jaw Bone, in which Greater
Channel are lodged an Artery, a Vein, and a Nerve, which thorough Lesser
Cavities, or as it were Gutters, send their Twigs to each particular Tooth;
which by These little Vessels that reach to It, receives a continual Supply of
Nourishment and Strength.

V. In regard that Babes are, according to Nature's Institution, to Feed for a
considerable time on Milk, for which there is no need of Teeth, and which would
also Hurt the Nipples of Her that gives them Suck: Nature forbears for many
Months to produce Teeth in Humane Infants: whereas the Foetus's of diverse Brute
Animals, that are oftentimes reduced Early to seek out Aliments that are not
Fluid, nor very Soft, are Born with Teeth already Formed in their Jaws.

VI. The Bony Substance appointed for the Comminution of Aliments, ought not
for several Reasons, (which for Brevity's sake I here omit,) to be in either
Jaw Entire, or all of one Piece: And therefore Nature has providently made for
that Use, a competent Number of distinct Bones in either Jaw. And, because Men
may often have Occasion, to feed upon very differing Sorts of Aliments, and
usually the Same Aliment may require Differing Preparations in the Mouth, to
Facilitate the Digestion of It in the Stomach: Nature has provided Men with Two
Rows or Sets of Teeth, equal for the most part in Number, (each Jaw in Men
usually having Sixteen, and in Women Fourteen or Fifteen,) and answering to
each other, but yet of differing Shapes, for differing Uses. For Some, as the
Fore-teeth, are Broader, and with a kind of Edge, to Cut the more Yielding Sort
of Aliments; whence these Teeth are called Incisorii. Others are Stronger, and
more fitly Shaped to Tear the more Tough and Resisting Sort of Aliments: These
are They that by the Vulgar are in English called Eye-Teeth, and which, for
their Resemblance to Those of Dogs, are by Anatomists called Canini. And then
there is a Third Sort, whose principal Office is to Grind the Aliments that are
Cut or Torn by the Others; and for this Purpose they are made much Broader, and
somewhat Flattish, but yet with their Upper Surfaces Uneven and Rugged, that by
their Knobs and little Cavities, they may the better Retain, Grind and Commixe
the Aliments, that are to be Chewed by Them: And for this Reason they are
called Molares.

VII. And because the Operations to be performed by the Teeth, oftentimes
require a considerable Firmness and Strength, partly in the Teeth themselves,
and partly in the Instruments that Move the Jaw wherein the Lower Set of them
is fixed: Nature has provided the Lower Jaw, (which alone is Moveable, unless,
as Some affirm, in Crocodiles,) with Strong Muscles, to make it bear forcibly
against the Upper Jaw: And has not only Placed each Tooth in a distinct Cavity
of the Jaw bone, as it were in a Close, Strong, and Deep Socket, but has
furnished the several Sorts of Teeth with Hold-fasts, suitable to the Stress,
that, by reason of their Differing Offices, they are to be put to. And
therefore, whereas the Other Teeth (the Cutters and the Dog-teeth) have usually
but One Root, (which in these last named is wont to be very Long;) the
Grinders, that on many Occasions are employed to Crack Nuts, Bones, or Other
Hard Bodies, before they can be Ground; are furnished with Three Roots, and
oftentimes with Four, in the Upper Jaw, whose Substance is somewhat Softer, and
whose Grinders Serve as so many little Anvils, for Those of the Lower to Strike
or Press against. On which Account, as has been already Intimated, the Lower
Jaw, (for the Other belongs to the Immovable Part of the Skull,) is furnished
with a strong Muscle on either side, capable of Moving It, and consequently the
Teeth in It, with great Force against the Upper Jaw.

If some Favourer of Epicurus's Doctrine shall here Object, that, though Man
indeed be Advantagiously furnished with Teeth, yet there are many Other
Animals, and even Quadrupeds, whereof some have not near so Many Teeth as Man,
nor so Commodiously Shaped and Placed as His; and Others are not furnished with
any Teeth at all: And that likewise there are many Other Animals, that have
some of their Other Parts less Convenient in their Kind, or otherwise are not
near so well provided for, as they would be, if they were not rather Casual
Productions, than those of an Intelligent and Designing Opificer: If These
things, I say, be Objected, I must own myself of a very differing Opinion from
the Objector. And I think I could add much about the Final Causes of Things
Corporeal, as the Consideration of them leads to a high Veneration of their
Divine Author, and as it tends to manifest, that, when His Providence is Denied
or Condemned, it is for want of Its having been sufficiently Understood, and
duly Considered. But, besides that this Third Proposition ought to be but One
Part of our Discourse of Final Causes; I have in great Part prevented myself
already, by what I have formerly said, to Obviate or Answer some Exceptions,
relating to the Eyes of Man, and Differing Animals. For Most of the
Considerations, if not All, that have been Alleged on the Occasion of those
Organs of Sight, may well be, Mutatis Mutandis, applied to the Varieties that
are to be found in the Teeth, and other Parts, of differing Kinds of Animals.
For I may justly represent, That the Reason why This or That Organical Part of
This or That Species of Living Creatures, has not such a Structure, or is not
so Placed, as We might think most convenient, may often be, That in this Case
it would be less proper for Other Ends, of more Importance to the Welfare of
the Animal, than such a Fabric and Situation of the Part as We Prefer, would
be. And there are also many Cases, wherein the Thing that We make bold to think
Wanting or Amiss, is provided for by Other Contrivances in the Same Animal; by
which Provision, the Part under Consideration is made more Serviceable and
Symmetrical to the rest of the Body: And so, performing Other Offices beside
the Main, is, upon the whole Matter, more Useful to the Animal, than Otherwise
it would be.

It Is known that Oxen and Sheep, and many Other Ruminating Beasts, are not
furnished with near so many Teeth as Men are, and as are to be found in Dogs,
Cats, Horses, and many other Quadrupeds. But for the Paucity of Teeth Amends is
made, in most of those Animals, partly, by the Power and Instinct They have to
Chew the Cud, and thereby make a Second Attrition of their already much Softened
Aliments; and partly, by the Successive Cavities or Stomachs, (distinguished by
the Names of Primus, Venture, Reticulum, Omasus and Abomasus,) through which the
Aliment is Transmitted, and more and more Elaborated, to make it Fit for
further Uses. The Mouths (especially the Inward Parts of them,) of the Beaver,
the Tortoise, the Be, the Humming Bird that Feeds on Flowers, whose Exudations
with his long little Bill He Sucks like the Be: These, I say, and many Other
Animals, (to omit the Elephant himself,) have their Mouth, and their Ways of
Preparing their Aliments for the Stomach, very Different from what is observed
in Men, and yet very Convenient for them respectively, all Circumstances
considered.

These and the like, whether Compensations or Expedients, are in many Animals
such, that there is no Cause to tax the Author of Nature, for not having given
Some Animals, all the same Parts that Others are furnished with: But rather the
Thrifty Providence, (if I may so speak,) and Designing Wisdom of God, in the
Contrivance of his Visible Works, may be as well discovered by the seeming
Omission of This or That Part, that is Useful to Other Animals, but is not
Necessary to Those wherein it is not found, as, by Granting Those Parts to the
Animals, to whose Compleatness or Welfare they are Necessary, or highly
Conducive. On which account it is not to be thought Strange, that He has not to
Men, as to Frogs, and many sorts of Birds, given such Tough, Transparent, and
Moveable Membranes, as these Animals are provided of to Cover their Eyes, from
Harms that Those of Men are not usually exposed to. And it is not an Omission,
not to have given Girls Swelling Breasts, before they are capable of
Generation, more than it is, not to continue to them, after their being grown
Mothers, the Placenta Vterina, when they are not with Child.

Though Batts be looked upon as a Contemptible sort of Creatures, yet I think
they may afford Us no Contemptible Argument to Our present Purpose. For in this
Heteroclite Animal, you may discern the Foecundity of the Divine Artificers
Skill, which has in this Formed an Animal that Flies like Birds, and yet is not
only Unfurnished with Feathers, but is of a Fabric quite differing from that
of Other Birds. And in this little Animal We may also observe, both the
Compensation that is made for Parts, that seem either Deficient, or less
Advantaged than Those of the same Denomination in Other Birds: and the Regard,
which the Divine Artist appears to have to the Symmetry of Parts, in His
Animated Works, and to their Fitness for the Places they are to Live in or
Frequent. For the Batt, being to act sometimes like a Bird, that Flies freely
to and fro in the Air, and on some Occasions like a Terrestrial Animal, such as
is that little Quadruped a Mouse; ought to be furnished with Parts suitable to
such Differing Destinations. And therefore, to fit him to Answer the First of
These, the want of Feathers in the Wings is supplied by a broad Membranous
Expansion, and a kind of Toes furnished with Articulations, that make up the
Wings: And, because this Animal was to be able, like Other Birds, to forbear
Settling on the Ground, otherwise than his Occasions required: Each of his
Wings is furnished with a strong Crook, like the Claw of a Bird's Foot, by the
Help of which he can fasten himself to Trees, Walls, and diverse Other Erected
Bodies, and keep himself Suspended in the Air, and continue at what Distances
he pleases from the Ground. And because he is furnished with Teeth, which other
Birds want, to Chew his Food, and thereby prepare it for Digestion: He needs
not have a Crop, or such a Strong and Muscular Stomach, as is usually found in
Birds: And (in short) to Omit the peculiar Structure of Other Internal Parts,
wherein the Batt differs from Other Birds: Since the Female was not, like Them,
to be Oviparous, but, like Mice and Other Quadrupeds, that bring forth their
Young Ones alive: She is not only furnished with an Vterus fitted for that
Purpose, but, in regard She does not, like Birds that lay Eggs, Exclude,
together with the Faetus, a competent Stock of Aliment to Nourish It, till it
can Shift for Itself: The Batt is furnished with Dugs, to give Suck to her
Young Ones: And by Zoographers it is observed, That, as she has but Two Teats,
so she brings forth but Two Young Ones at a Birth; whereas Mice are much more
Proliffick.

The Writings of Zoographers, and the Relations of Travelers, afford diverse
other Instances of the Various, and yet Excellent, Contrivances, that are to be
sound in several Animals that differ from Man, (who is an Animal endowed with
numerous Teeth,) in the Fabric of the Mouth, and Other Parts inservient to the
Reception of Aliments, and their Preparation for Digestion.

But passing by the Mouths of Tortoises, Camelions, and Other Animals, the
Hardness of whose Gums, in reference to their Ordinary Aliments, suffices to
make Amends for their Want of Teeth. There is one American Beast, which I
think, I ought not to forbear mentioning here, as a Notable Instance, to
manifest how the Wise Architect can Compensate the Want of Teeth, by the rare
Structure of the Mouth and Tongue, and Their Fitness to Seize on and make Use
of those Aliments, which, though Uncommon for a Beast of His Bulk, He seems to
have been destinated to Live upon. The Animals of this Kind are by Hernandus,
who retains their American Names, called Achoas and Tamendoas; and of These,
and particularly of the Parts they are provided of to Eat with, he gives us
this Account. Offenduntur apud Yucatenses Quadrupedes quidam, Vid. Schotti
Phys. Curios. l. 8. c. 5.
dorso praeduro and fulvi, agnorum magnitudine, sed qui ventre circiter Terram
attingant, dentium omnino expertes sint, and solo formicarum venatu vivant,
quarum cumulos duobus magnis unguibus quibus singuli anteriores pedes armantur,
excavant turbantque; ac dein exerta lingua, quae dotranto longior est, scabra
tores ac pennam anserinam orassa, formicas eam conscendentes ac densantes
suscipiunt, eademque contracta, and in os, quod mirum in modum angustum ac
parvum est, recepta, gratum sibi pabulum capiunt, and innocentium Animalium
praeda potiuntur. Of the same sort of Beasts, the Ingenious Piso, in his Hist.
of Brasile, (where he Practiced Physic) mentions Two kinds, the Greater and
the Less, which He, like Hernandus, calls Tamanduas, but adds the new coined
Name of Myrmecophaga; and of Both gives this Account. Gulielmus Piso l. 5.
Hist. Not. and Med. c. 22.
Vtraeque (says he) sunt noctambulae pabuli causa; Cicuratae carne quoque
vescuntur, sed minutim concisa quia non solum capite, promuscide, sed and ore
sunt angusto, accuminato, edentuloque, lingua denique, instar chrassior is
Chordae, tereti adeoque longa praesertim: in Tamandua majori, ut duorum pedum
longitudinem excedat, atque proinde duplicata (quod notatu sane dignum) quasi
canali incumbit inter inferiores genas, quam esuriens madidam exerit, and
arborum truncis diu imponit, mox formicis opertam repent retrahit. Si alte
fodiendo latebrae earum detegi postulant, Vnguibus id praestat commode, quibus
pedes posteriores instructi sunt satis validis and longis numero quinque,
anteriores quatuor, iisque recurvis duobus in medio maximis.

It Is also to be considered, That Diverse Things may be Useful in an Organical
Part, besides That whereby its Function is primarily and mainly exercised: As,
though the Eyelids and their Motions, together with the little Glandules that
belong to them (most of which lie concealed under the Edges) are not at all
necessary to the Act of Vision, (no more than Curtains are to a Window;) yet
they are to the Compleatness and Welfare of the Eye, which is the necessary
Organ of Vision: As is manifest by the Pain and Prejudice the Eye receives, if
the Eyelids, which are subject to more than One Distemper, be considerably
Disaffected.

I may hereafter have occasion to take notice, that, besides those Ules of the
Parts of a Human Body, which I venture to call Anatomical, because they are
such as Anatomists have discovered by mere Dissections; there may be of several
Parts Other Uses, which I call Chemical, because These Parts do Elaborate
Spirits of several Sorts, and perhaps Exercise some other Spagyrical Functions
of great Importance, if not of Necessity to the Welfare of a Living Man.

And, besides, the Anatomical and Chemical Uses, there may be others very fit
to be considered in some parts of a Human Body; as the Mechanical Advantages,
for which the Various Shapes and Structures of differing Muscles, and the
seeming Irregular, and as it 'twere Casual Fabric of the Bones, and especially
of the Processes and Protuberances, are admirably Fitted. And there are also in
some Parts, as the Eyes, Optical Reasons to be considered, before One can
otherwise than Rashly Censure, what the Author of Nature has done about them:
As, though the figure of the Chrystalline Humor be much more Globous in most
Fishes, than in Men and Terestrial Animals, yet he that understands the
Doctrine of Refractions, and considers that Fishes under Water are to see
Objects through a far thicker Medium than Air, will readily acknowledge, that
this Difference between the Eyes of Fishes and those of Men, is not an
Imperfection in the former; but whilst those Creatures are in their own
Element, a great Advantage. And, to be short, I think there are so many
Sciences, and other Parts of Knowledge, some of them perhaps scarce yet
Discovered, that may be required to warrant a man, to Censure the Ends of God
in the Bodies of Animals, that very Few have Knowledge enough to be capable of
Condemning them without Rashness: And they that have Knowledge enough to Judge
aright, will not be forward to Condemn them, but Admire them. But, though this
Consideration be not here displayed, yet the now mentioned Intimation of it may
afford us this Reflection, That Men may easily be too Rash, if they think a part
Bunglingly Framed, upon Supposition that, by the Anatomical Inspection of it,
they know all the Uses that the Skill of the Divine Opificer could Design it
for.

Nor will it necessarily follow, that, because in some Particular Bird, or
Beast, or Fish, we may not be able to give an account, Why this or that Part is
not to be found, or Why it is otherwise Framed or Situated than that which is
Analogous to it in Man; it must therefore be Casually or Improvidently Framed
or Placed: Since we cannot expect from Brute Animals, Answers to those proper
Questions about their own Bodies, which we can receive from Men about their
Human Ones. And yet, notwithstanding the great Assiduity, with which the more
curious Physicians are obliged to Cultivate Anatomy, and the frequent
Opportunities they have to do it, and to ask Living Men Questions about what
they find, when the Natural Use of their Parts is Hindered or Perverted: Our
Sagacious Moderns are to this day at a Loss, as to the True Uses of the Visible
Parts of the Body; to say nothing of the Invisible, such as Spirits, Salts,
etc. So that it ought to be no Wonder, if in Animals, whose Fabric we have
much less Concern to Inquire into, and and much less Opportunity to Examine, we
sometimes find Parts, of whose Uses and their Fitness for them, Men are not yet
able to give a satisfactory Account. For I consider, that even in Man himself,
though there be numerous Valves found in his Veins, yet for those many Ages that
the True Uses of them lay Hid, an Asclepiades, or some Other bold Epicurean
Physician, might have thought himself well grounded, to look upon them as
Superfluous Parts: Which, now that the Circulation of the Blood is discovered,
they are acknowledged to be far from being.

On this Occasion it may help us if it be considered, That, since God is both a
most Free and a most Wise Agent, it need not seem Strange that He should Adorn
some Animals, with Parts or Qualities that are not Necessary to their Welfare,
but seemed Designed for their Beauty: Such as are the Disposition of the
Camelion to Change Colors; and the lovely Greens, Blews, Yellows, and Other
Vivid Colors, that Adorn some sorts of Pigeons, and of Parrots, and diverse
Lesser Birds, as Gold-finches, Canary-Birds, and especially those admirably
little Winged Creatures Humming Birds. And on the Other side, sometimes God's
Wisdom seems to be as it were Thrifty, and Solicitous not to bestow on an
Animal, or a Part of it, more than is Necessary for the Use for which it is
Designed. As the Veins are by Anatomists observed to have but One Coat or
Membrane, and usually to lie more Exposed than the Arteries that accompany
them; These having Stronger and Double Coats, because they are to convey a more
Important Liquor, (the Arterial Blood,) which besides that it is more Agitated
and Spirituous, is forcibly impelled into Those Vessels by the Muscular
Contraction, or Strong Impulse of the Heart. And to the same purpose it may be
observed. That the Arteries within the Skull are far more Thinly Coated than
elsewhere; the Solidity of that Bony Part being a Fence to the Vessels that it
covers. And to add That on This Occasion, we may observe, That, though the Nerves
usually lie Deep in the Parts, to be kept both Safe and Warm, being very liable
to be offended both by Cold, and the Contact of External Bodies; yet, it being
necessary that the Optic Nerve should Expand itself into the Eye, the
Membranes that Invest the Nerve and Other Coats of the Eye, (except the Retina,
which seems to consist of the Medullar Fibers,) are made by great Odds more
Firm than the Dura and the Pia Matter, whence they proceed; and though Exposed to
the Free Air, are less sensible of the Cold than most Parts of the Body, and
will bear, without Danger, diverse Liquors, and Other Offensive Things, whose
Pungency would put Other Nerves of the Body into Convulsive, and perhaps very
Dangerous Motions. This (Conduct) looks as if God, like an Excellent
Writing-Master, did, in the great Volume of his Creatures, Intend to bestow on
some of These, Things rather Ornamental than Necessary, as Flourishes on the
Capital Letters of the Alphabet of Nature; and sometimes, to Employ Characters,
and diverse of them very differingly Shaped, (as the Latin are from those of the
Greek, the Hebrew, the Saxon, etc.) to Express the Same Letter; and sometimes
also, to Imply Abbreviations, as a Stroke or a Dash, instead of a Letter or a
Syllable, to Express Compendiously that which might be very Justifiable, had it
been more Fully set down or Delineated.

If That be admitted, which We have formerly proposed as very Likely, that God
Designed, by the great Variety of His Works, to Display to their Intelligent
Considerers, the Faecundity (if I may so speak) of His Wisdom; One may readily
conceive, that a great part of the Variety Observable in the Analogous Parts of
Animals, as their Eyes, their Mouths, etc. may be very Conducive to so Reaching
and Comprehensive a Design; to which the Beauty of some Creatures and Parts, as
well as their more Necessary or Convenient Structure, may be subservient;
especially if the Innocent Delight of Man be also Intended, as it may seem to
be in the Curious Colors and Shapes of diverse Flowers, and in the Melodious
Music of Singing Birds, and in the Vivid and Curiously Variegated Colors of
the Feathers of several Winged Animals, particularly those that make up the
Peacocks Train.

We are not near so Competent Judges of Wisdom, as we are of Justice and
Veracity: For These last named are to be Estimated by Eternal and Fixed Bounds
or Rules, which are very Intelligible to a Moderate Understanding. But as for
Wisdom; the more Profound it is, the less we are able to Look through it, and
penetrating to the bottom of that, to Judge knowingly of its Actions. And
therefore, though we may safely Conclude that God Acts Wisely, when he does
something that has an Admirable Tendency to those Ends we justly suppose him to
have Designed; yet we cannot safely conclude in a Negative way, That this or
that is Unwise, because we cannot Discern in it such a Tendency. For so Wise an
Agent may have Other Designs than we know of, and further Aims than we can
Discern, or perhaps Suspect: And may have at hand, or furnish himself with,
such Means to compass his Ends, and that even by the Cooperation of those
Means we think Useless or Improper, as are far above the reach of our
Conjectures, and without the knowledge of which we but Rashly Censure the
Wisdom of his Proceedings.

In the Double Horizontal Dial formerly mentioned, it would be Rashly done of
those, who should Condemn or Despise the various Lines they find traced upon
that useful Instrument, because they see that they are not necessary to show
the Hour of the day; since the Mathematician that drew those Lines so
curiously, may be well supposed to have had more Ends than One or Two in making
the Instrument, and not to have drawn them by Chance or Unskilfully; though the
Inconsiderate Censurers do not know, for what Other or Further Purposes the
Artist may have Designed them.

Suppose some Indian Fisherman, unacquainted with European Arts and Affairs,
should happen to come aboard a Man of War under Sail: Though he would quickly
perceive by the use that was made of the Ropes, Pulley, etc. that this.
Floating Building was very artificially Contrived: Yet if he should fix his
Eyes upon one of the Guns, and the Anchors, and perceive that no use was made
nor like to be made of them in Sailing, He would be strongly tempted to think,
that those heavy Masses were useless Clogs and Burdens to the Vessel. But if he
were told the Necessity and Usefulness of the Guns for Defense, and of the
Anchors to stay the Ship in Convenient Places in Storms; he would easily Alter
his mind, and Confess, that he Blamed the Builders and Furnishers of the Ship,
for That which nothing but his Ignorance kept him from highly Commending.

I have dwelt much longer than I intended on this Third Proposition, because I
think it a Duty our Reason owes to its Author, to endeavor to Vindicate his
manifold Wisdom, in this Libertine Age; wherein too many Men, that have more
Wit than Philosophy or Piety, have upon Epicurean, and some also even upon
Cartesian, Principles, labored to Depreciate the Wisdom of God, and some of
them presumed to Censure the Contrivances of these living Automata, that (in
their Protoplasts) were Originally His. And it was not only the Seasonableness
of saying, about so Important a Subject, somethings that possibly have not yet
been met with, or at least duly Considered, That has made me thus Prolix; but a
Desire, that my Reader should not barely observe the Wisdom of God, but be in
some measure Affectively Convinced of it. To which purpose in my Opinion, it is
very Conducive, if not Necessary, besides General Notions, to observe with
Attention some Particular Instances of the Divine Skill, wherein it is
Conspicuously Displayed. It Is true, that in the Idea of a Being Infinitely
Perfect, Boundless Wisdom is One of the Attributes that is Included. But for my
part, I shall take leave to think, that this General and Indefinite Idea of the
Divine Wisdom, will not give us so great a Wonder and Veneration for it, as may
be produced in our minds, by Knowing and Considering the Admirable Contrivance
of the Particular Productions of that Immense Wisdom, and their Exquisite
Fitness for those Ends and Uses, to which they appear to have been Destinated.

PROP. IV.
That we be not Over hasty in Concluding, nor too Positive in Asserting, that
This or That must be, or is, the particular Destinated Use of such a Thing, or
the Motive that induced the Author of Nature to Frame it thus.

IT has been above declared, That some Parts are so Excellently, and so
Manifestly, Fitted for a certain Use, as the Eye for Seeing; and so much better
Fitted for That, than for any Other; that 'twere little less than Heedlesness
or Perverseness, to Doubt of Its being Destinated Thereto. But the like cannot
be said of all the Other Parts of the Body, especially of the Internal. And
there are diverse Uses, either Necessary, or highly Conducive, to the Welfare of
the Animal, to which no One Part is so much more conspicuously Fitted than any
Other, but that it is more Difficult than many think, to determine the True and
Primary Uses or Offices of some Parts, especially with so much Certainty, as
thereon to ground Physiological Inferences: And of this Difficulty I conceive
there may be four Reasons, though they do not All, nor perhaps Most of them,
occurr in Each particular Case.

And First, the whole Animal it self, the Use of whose particular Parts is
under inquiry, is but a Part of that greater Body, the Universe; and therefore
cannot easily be supposed, to have been framed and furnished with the Parts it
consists of, merely for its own sake. And when we say, that all its Parts are
Contrived for the best Advantage for the Animal, I conceive it is to be
understood in this Limited Sense; That the Parts are excellently framed for the
Welfare of the Animal, as far forth as That Welfare is consistent with the
General Ends of the Author of Nature, in the Constitution and Government of the
Universe: which Ends, because they relate to the whole World, or to very
considerable Masses of it, as the Terraqueous Globe, the Planets, and other
Stars, I have formerly, for brevity's sake, styled Cosmical: And though it has
not been proved, that None of these Cosmical Ends are investigable by us: yet
to discover them All, is not an easy Task. And yet it seems presumptuous to
suppose, that the Welfare of particular Animals is any further designed and
provided for, than will consist with the Cosmical Ends of the Universe, and the
Course of Gods General Providence; to which his Special or Particular
Providence, about this or that mere Animal, ought in reason to be Subordinated.
And though I think it a great Rashness for us men to Determine positively, and
exclusively to others, what Ends the Omniscient Creator proposed to himself, in
giving to the World the Frame we see it has; yet, as far as I can hitherto
discern, I see nothing that is more likely to have been One Grand Motive of so
great a Variety as we may observe in his Corporeal Works, especially in
Animals, than that which has in part been elsewhere intimated, viz. That He
might, by so many and so very differing Contrivances, as are to be met with in
the Structure of Men, Four-footed Beasts, Birds, Fishes, Reptiles, etc.
Exercise and Display (what could not be by a less Variety so fully manifested)
that which an Apostle, Ephesians. 3.10.
speaking of things of another Order, Emphatically styles the (...) (the
Multifarious or Manifold Wisdom of God.) Man being acknowledged, upon the
account of his very Body, the most Perfect of Animals; if God had simply
Designed the giving of every Animal, the most Advantageous Structure that could
be devised, it seems that He should have Made no Other Animals than Men. But
then there could not have been that Diversity of Contrivance among Living
Automata, that does so much recommend the Wisdom of Him, that could Frame so
Many and so Differing Animals, though not All of them equally Perfect, yet All of
them admirably Furnished for those Purposes to which He Destinated them. And
therefore it does not argue any Want of Providence, that He has not Furnished
Man with Wings, as he has Birds; nor Fishes with four Feet; nor Birds with
Fins and Scales: because these Parts would have been either Superfluous and
Burthensom, or would not have Suited with his Design, of making Some Animals
Live on the Earth, and Some in the Water: And if He Designed any to Live, though
not equally, in Both, He furnished Them with Parts of a Peculiar Structure, as
I have elsewhere noted of the Beaver and the Frog. If it were not for the
forementioned Consideration, 'twould be hard to give a Reason, why Vegetables
were not made the Food of all Animals; But Some should be Carnivorous, and
furnished with Appetites and Organs to Devour Others, and Live, as Birds and
Beasts of Prey do, upon the Destruction of the Weaker. And 'twill be hard to
show, why, even in Animals of the same Kind, the Safety of Some should be so
much better Provided for than that of Others; as We see, that some Ants, and
some Glowworms, are Furnished with Wings; and Some not. And in Mankind itself,
Those of the Female Sex are not so happily Framed, in order to their own
Welfare, as Those of the Masculine: Since the Womb, and other Things peculiar
to Women, which are not Necessary to the Good of Individual Persons, but to the
Propagation of their Species, subject that tender Sex to a whole Set of
Diseases, belonging to them either peculiarly, as they are Women, or as they
are with Child, or brought to Bed; from all which Men are exempt. So that, to
apply these Things to Our present Purpose; Men may sometimes Mistake, when they
peremptorily Conclude, that This or That Part of an Animal Must, or Cannot,
have been Framed for such an Use, without Considering the Cosmical, and
therefore Primary and Overruling, Ends, that may have been Designed by Nature
in the Construction of the whole Animal.

Secondly, Men sometimes erroneously Conclude, that such an Office cannot
belong to such a Part, because they think, It is not so Commodiously Framed for
it, as may be wished or devised; without considering, whether the Structure
which they Fancy would do Better for that Particular Use, would not, in some
Other as considerable Regard, Oppose the Welfare of the Animal: Or, whether it
would be consistent with the Other Uses designed by Nature in that sort of
Living Creatures. For in the Living Works of so Excellent an Ingeneer as
Nature, it must not be expected, that any Particular End should be prosecuted
to the Prejudice of the Whole; but rather it must be supposed, that She Aims
not only at Particular Expedients, but Universal Symmetry; and does indeed
excellently Fit the several Parts, for their respective Offices; but yet only
as far forth as a due Regard to the Design and Welfare of the Whole will
permit. The Reasonableness of this Observation, One need but be moderately
Exercised in Zootomy (as That is distinguished from Androtomy) to discern. For,
though Man be confessed to be the most Perfectly Framed Animal in the World; yet,
His Body is not made the Model, on which Nature has Framed the Correspondent
Parts of Other Animals. The Lungs of Dogs, of Birds, of Frogs and Vipers, and I
know not how many Others, are of a Structure very differing from Those of Man.
He is not furnished with so many Stomachs as an Ox or a Sheep, because Nature
Intended not He should Ruminate like Them. Though His Gall be lodged in a
peculiar Bag, so Placed in the Liver, as to give Helmont a color to call it
Nucleus Hepatis; yet 'twere unadvised to say, That the Secretion of Gall is
none of the Uses of Those Livers, wherein Such a Cystis is not to be met with:
Since in Some Amals, as in Horses and Pigeons, that Bitter Humor, (which in
Frogs I have often oberved to be of a Deep and Transparent Green,) is not
usually, as in Man, collected into one Bag: And in Vipers, though it be included
in one Cystis, yet, as far as I have observed, That Bag does not at all touch
the Liver: And store of such Instances may be met with among the Remarks of
Zootomists: Wherefore I pass on to Observe,

That, in the Third place, It Is Difficult to Determine the True and Primary Use
of a Part, because Nature does often Fit One Part for Several Uses. To which I
shall add,

In the Fourth place, That the Difficulty is sometimes Increased, because
Nature may compass the Same End by Several Means, each of them Sufficiently,
though not Equally, Commodious. I join these Two together, because in Effect they
do often Concur, in making it Difficult to determine the True Use of a Part. And
the latter of the Two is sometimes Increased by this, that Nature does not as
Constantly, as some Men presume She does, Employ only one Part to perform such
an Office; but the Intended Effect is sometimes produced by a Series of
successive Operations, to which several Parts may in Differing manners
Contribute.

And here I observe, (what perhaps has not been Considered,) that neither the
Mechanism of a Human Body, nor that of very Considerable Parts of It, is to be
judged of, only by the Structure of the Visible Parts, whether they be those
Solid or Stable Ones that the Anatomist's Knife is wont to expose to Sight; or
even by the Texture of those Fluid Ones, which are to be found in the Vessels
and Cavities of a Dead Body when Dissected, though never so Skilfully. For I take
the Body of a Living Man to be a very Compounded Engine, such as Mechanicians
would call Hydraulico-Pneumatical: Many of whose Functions, (if not the
Chiefest,) are performed, not by the Blood and other Visible Fluids barely as
they are Liquors; but partly by their Circulating and other Motions; and partly
by a very Agile and Invisible sort of Fluids, called Spirits, Vital and Animal;
and partly perhaps, (as I have sometimes gues'd,) by little Springy Particles;
and perhaps too, by somewhat that may be called the Vital Portion of the Air;
and by Things Analogous to Local Ferments: the Important Operations of all
which are wont to Cease with Life, and the Agents themselves are not to be
Discerned in a Dead Body. So that, besides those Manifest Uses, which the
Visible Fabric of the Engine may suggest to an Anatomist; there may be
Chemical Uses (if I may so call them) of some Parts, that serve for the
Elaboration of Spirits and other Fluids: Which Uses, (as 'twas formerly
Observed, and yet ought to be Inculcated,) are not suggested to the Anatomists,
as Such, by the Inspection of the Structure of the Parts; but to Discern them
may require no mean Skill in Spagyrical Principles and Operations.

Such Considerations as the foregoing, make me think it more difficult than
many do, to determine with any certainty the Main Use of diverse Particular
Parts, [for in some Others it seems manifest enough;] especially if it be done
with the Exclusion of Other Uses. Nor is it enough, to Secure us that we know
the Chief Function and End of a Part, to Know that it is contrived for such a
Purpose. For upon the things I have lately represented, One may ground this
Answer, that this Fitness hinders not, but that the Primary Use of the Part may
be another, (as not Anatomical but Chemical, or Vice Versa,) more Conducive to
the General Welfare of the Animal, or else to the Cosmical Ends of Nature. And
it ought not to seem Strange, that some Pieces of Workmanship, that consist of
many Parts, all of them Curiously Contrived, may by One Learned Man be guessed
to be Intended for This Use, and by Others for That Use, and yet Both these
Uses may be worthy of the Artificer.

When some very Politic Prince does some Great Thing, without declaring Why;
the Guesses of the States Men are often very differing, whilst yet none of them
ascribe to Him a Design mis-becoming a Wise Man. And so, when a Learned Author
Expresses himself, as sometimes it happens, Ambiguously, though One Reader
Interprets his words to This Sense, and Another to That, yet Both the Senses
pitched on, may fairly comport with the Context, and the main Scope of the
Writer. These things, I say, because I would by no means Disparage the Wisdom
of Nature, by proposing the Difficulties I have hitherto mentioned; though I
confess, that, upon the account of These and some Others, I look upon many of
the Arguments that several Authors have made bold to draw from Final Causes,
but as Conjectural Things. And in diverse Cases, I allow what is suggested to me
upon the Supposition of the Intended Uses of Particular Parts, rather as good
Hints to Excite, and give some Aim to, a Severer Inquiry, than as safe Grounds
to build Physical Conclusions on.

PROP. V.
I come now to the Last Caution I would recommend to you, about the
Consideration of Final Causes; and I shall present it you in this Proposition:
That the Naturalist should not suffer the Search or the Discovery of a Final
Cause of Nature's Works, to make him Undervalue or Neglect the studious
Indagation of their Efficient Causes.

It Is true, that to Inquire, To what Purpose Nature would have such or such
Effects produced, is a Curiosity worthy of a Rational Creature, upon the score
of his being so. But this is not the proper Task of a Naturalist, whose Work,
as he is Such, is not so much to Discover why, as how, Particular Effects are
Produced. A Country-Fellow here in England knows something of a Watch, because
he is able to tell you, that it is an Instrument that an Artificer made to
Measure Time by: and That is more than every American Savage would be able to
tell you; and more than those Civilized Chinese knew, that took the first
Watch the Jesuit brought thither, for a Living Creature. But the English
Countryman, that knows no more of a Watch, than that't was made to show the
Hour of the Day, does very little understand the Nature of It. And whereas the
two Scopes, that Men are wont to Aim at in the Study of Physics, are to
Understand, how and after what manner Nature Produces the Phenomenon we
Contemplate; and, in case it be Imitable by Us, how We may, if Occasion
require, Produce the Like Effect, or come as Near it as may be: These Ends
cannot be attained by the bare Knowledge of the Final Causes of Things, nor of
the General Efficient. But to Answer those Aims, we must know the Particular
Efficients, and the Manner and Progress of their Operating, and what
Dispositions they either Find or Produce in the Matter they work upon: as, He
that would thoroughly understand the Nature of a Watch, must not rest satisfied
with knowing in General, that a Man Made it, and that he Made it for such Uses;
but he must Particularly know, of what Materials, the Spring, the Wheels, the
String or Chain, and the Balance, are made: He must know the Number of the
Wheels, their Bigness, their Shape, their Situation and Connection in the
Engine, and after what manner One Part Moves the Other in the whole Series of
Motions, from the Expansive Eadeavour of the Spring, to the Motion of the Index
that Points at the Hours. And much more must a Mechanician know this, if he
means to be able to Make a Watch Himself, or Give sufficient Instructions to
Another Man, that is more Handy, to do it for him. In short, the Neglect of
Efficient Causes would render Physiology Useless: But the studious Indagation
of them, will not Prejudice the Contemplation of Final Causes. For, since it is
Truly said, if it be rightly understood, that Opus Naturae est opus
Intelligentiae; the Wise Author of Nature has so excellently Contrived the
Universe, that the more Clearly and Particularly we Discern, how Congruous the
Means are to the Ends to be obtained by them, the more Plainly we Discern the
Admirable Wisdom of the Omniscient Author of Things; of whom it is Truly said
by a Prophet, that He is Wonderful in Counsel, Isa. 20.29.
and Excellent in Working. Nor will the Sufficiency of the Intermediate Causes,
make it needless to admit a First and Supreme Cause: Since (to inculcate on
this Occasion what I more fully deliver in another Paper,) That Order of
Things, by virtue of which these Means become sufficient to such Ends, must
have been at first Instituted by an Intelligent Cause. And if it be Irrational
to Ascribe the Excellent Fabric of the Universe, such as it now is, and the
Actions that have manifest Tendencies to Determinate Useful Ends, To so Blind a
Cause as Chance; it will be rather More than Less Irrational, to Ascribe to
Chance the First Formation of the Universe, of which the Present State of
Things is but the Natural Consequence or Effect. For it may indeed be plausibly
said, that in the Present State of Things, the several Patts of the Universe
are by the Contrivance of the Whole determined, and thereby qualified, to
Attain their Ends. But it cannot be Rationally Pretended, that at the First
Framing of the World, there was a Sufficiency in the Stupid Materials of It,
without any Particular Guidance of a most Wise Superintendent, to Frame Bodies
so Excellently Contrived and Fitted to their respective Ends.

THE CONCLUSION.
THe Result of what has been hitherto Discoursed, upon the Four Questions
Proposed at the Beginning of this Small Treatise, amounts in short to this:

That all Consideration of Final Causes is not to be Banished from Natural
Philosophy: but that it is rather Allowable, and in some Cases Commendable, to
Observe and Argue from the Manifest Uses of Things, that the Author of Nature
Pre-ordain'd those Ends and Uses.

That the Sun, Moon, and other Celestial Bodies, excellently Declare the Power
and Wisdom, and consequently the Glory of God; and were Some of Them, among
Other Purposes, made to be Serviceable to Man.

That from the Supposed Ends of Inanimate Bodies, whether Celestial or
Sublunary, it is very Unsafe to Draw Arguments to Prove the Particular Nature of
Those Bodies, or the True System of the Universe.

That as to Animals, and the more Perfect Sorts of Vegetables; it is
Warrantable, not Presumptuous, to Say, That such and such Parts were
Pre-ordained to such and such Uses, relating to the Welfare of the Animal (or
Plant) itself, or the Species it belongs to: But that Such Arguments may easily
Deceive, if Those that Frame them are not very Cautious, and Careful to avoid
Mistaking, among the various Ends that Nature may have in the Contrivance of an
Animal's Body, and the various Ways which she may successfully take to compass
the same Ends. And,

That however, a Naturalist, who would Deserve that Name, must not let the
Search or Knowledge of Final Causes, make him Neglect the Industrious
Indagation of Efficients.

FINIS.
SOME UNCOMMON OBSERVATIONS ABOUT VITIATED SIGHT.

LONDON: Printed for J. Tailor, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1688.

Advertisement.
THe Following Observations were not written, with Intention that they Should
be Annexed to the Foregoing Essay, but to Gratify a Philosophical Physician.
Which is the Reason why, besides those things that are more purely Optical, I
thought fit to mention Some Others, that might be either Useful or Grateful to
an Inquisitive Man of his Profession. But having allowed the Stationer to
Expect, that this Book, though it have for Title but an Essay, should not be of
too inconsiderable a Bulk; I made choice of these Papers, among Several that
lay by me, to increase the Bigness of the Book, Because that, the Eyes being
those Parts of the Bodies of Men and other Animals, that I pitched upon in the
Foregoing Treatise, to Strengthen the Doctrine delivered in it about Final
Causes; it seemed Suitable Enough to my Subject and Design, to mention some
Uncommon Things that related to Vision or the Organs of it, that We may be
invited both to Admire the Wisdom of God, which, to furnish Man with a Sense
that requires the Concourse of so very many things, has, if I may so speak,
Crowded them into so Small an Engine as an Eye; and to Celebrate his Goodness
too, which has been Displayed in that, notwithstanding that the Eye is so very
Compounded a Part, and the Sight so easily Vitiated yet the most part of Men by
far do, from their Cradles to their Graves, enjoy the Benefit and Comfort of so
Necessary and Noble a Sense.

OBSERVATIONS ABOUT VITIATED SIGHT.
OBSERVE I.
EXamining a Gentleman, that was already Almost Blind, and feared to grow
Altogether so, about the Symptoms of his Disease, (which came with a Stroke
upon his Head) I found, as I expected, by his Answers, that, though he could not
any thing well distinguish Objects of Other Colors, Yet he could well perceive
those that were White, to be of That Color. Which confirms what I mention in
the History of Colors, concerning the great Quantity of Light, that is
Reflected by White Objects, in comparison of those that are otherwise Colored.
And this Observation it Self was confirmed by another Patient, who, though almost
Blind, could yet discern White Objects.

OBSERVE. II.
I Knew a Gentleman that had a Cataract growing, which, when I looked on his
Eye in a lightsom place, appeared to cover almost just the Upper Part of the
Pupil; and though He were a Young Vigorous Person, and the Weather was very
Clear, he could not well discern Men from Women cross the Street. But this
Gentleman's Misfortune came by a great Stroke he received on that Side of his
Head, where of heshew'd me the Scar; which Circumstance I therefore Note,
because when no Outward Violence has been offered to the Eye, it has been
observed by a good Oculist, and, if I misremember not, I have Seen an Instance
of it, That a small Part of the Pupil, left uncovered by the Cataract, would
serve for more Sight than the Gentleman enjoyed. In him likewise I had a
further Confirmation, of what I was lately Observing about the Conspicuousness
of White Objects. For though he could not, as I was saying, discern Men and Women
that passed by, on the other Side of the Street, yet, having once desired him
to tell me, if he could distinguish any Object there, he told me that he could;
and that I might no longer Doubt of it, when I asked him what he saw, he said
that it was a Woman that passed by with a White Apron, which Apron he saw
directly, and therefore might easily conclude, without distinctly seeing the
Wearer, that the Person that Wore it was a Woman.

OBSERVE. III.
MEeting accidentally with a Man, by Profession a Farrier, whose Eyes looked
very odly, I questioned him about his Distemper; and found by his answers, that
he had had Cataracts in both his Eyes, but either had them ill Couched, or had
not behaved himself orderly afterward. For there Seemed still to be ragged
Films, that covered considerable portions of his Pupils; in so much that I
somewhat wondered to see him go freely about, as he did, without requiring any
body to help him, so much as up or down Stairs: and I hereupon asking him,
whether he were able to Read in a large Print, he told me he was, with the help
of his Cataract Spectacles, as they call them, which I doubting of, brought him
a Book, whose Title Page he was not able to Read; this he Excused by saying
that the place was too Lightsom, which though it did not Seem to Others, yet,
considering that it was about Noon, I caused the Room to be a little darkened,
and then perceived that indeed he could Read well Enough.

OBSERVE. IV.
A Gentleman, having in a quarrel received a Stroke on one Side of his Head,
which knocked him down, found afterward a great Weakness and dimness in his
Eyes; into which when I looked attentively, I plainly discerned, that though
above one half of his Pupil was yet uncovered, so that when he looked
downwards, he could See well enough with That Eye, yet there was grown in it no
less than two Cataracts, which, when I looked on them attentively, and in a
good Light, I could manifestly perceive to be Distinct; the One of them seeming
to be smooth spread, as if its Circular Edge adhered closely to the inside of
the Eye; and the Other, that seemed not altogether of the same Color, hanging
loosely, and as it were a Rag, at some distance above it. What afterward
became of this Gedtleman I could not learn, though I would gladly have done it;
Two Cataracts at a time in one Eye being some what Extraordinary.

OBSFRV. V.
A Learned Gentleman coming once to visit me, with design, as I afterward's
perceive'd, to hear my Opinion concerning an odd Distemper he had in his Eyes;
I found, by Discoursing with him concerning the Phenomenon of his Disease, that
though, when he looked on Objects near at hand, he Saw them somewhat Dimly, but
yet Single, yet, there were some Objects, particularly Posts and Rails, which,
when he beheld at a certain distance (which was not very great) they appeared
to him both more Dark and Double. I found also that he complained of diverse
Black Flies and little Leaves, that passed now and then before his Eyes; which,
though they do not always fore-bode a True Cataract, since Others and I also have
observed them to continue many years without being more than a Bastard
Suffusion (as Physicians Speak) yet in him they were probably Forerunners of a
True Cataract; in regard that I have known it observed by a skilful Oculist,
that some Persons, before their Cataract, have complained that at some
Distances they saw Objects almost Double; so that looking at ones Head, they
thought they Saw a great part of a Dark Head a little above it: which
Description, whether it proceeded from some Refractions made by the yet not
Uniformly Opacous Matter of the Cataract, not having opportunity to examine
those Persons my self, I dare not Venture to say.

OBSERVE. VI.
IT may be worth Observing, How long The better sort of Cataracts, though they
hinder Sight for a time, as a thick Curtain drawn cross the Pupil, yet may
remain in the Eye, without Spoiling the Optic Nerve or hindering Vision when
once the Cataract is removed; Of which I remember, among other Instances, I
took notice in the Case of a Woman, who told me she had Cataracts in her Eyes
so long, that she was brought a Bed of Six Children consecutively, without
being able to See any one of them, till after she was Cured by having the
Cataracts Couched. But then she saw so well, that with Spectacles she could
read in a portable Bible of a small Print. And diverse considerable Persons of
my Acquaintance saw One of Eighteen years Old, born with Cataracts in both her
Eyes, Who not naturally Wanting the Faculty of Seeing, though thus Hindered of
the Exercise of it, had been so happily Couched, as afterward to have the
benefit of Sight in them both.

OBSERVE. VII.
IT has been of late the Opinion of very Learned men, that tho Both our Eyes be
Open and turned toward an Object, yet it is but One of them at a time that is
effectually Employed in giving us the Representation of it. Which Opinion, in
this place where I am writing but Observations, it were not proper to Discuss;
especially because what is supposed to be Observed, will not always Uniformly
happen, but may much Vary in particular Persons, according to their several
Customs, and the Constitution of their Eyes. For I have, by an Experiment
purposely made, several times found, that my Two Eyes Together see an Object in
another Situation, than Either of them Apart would do. On the other side; I met
with a Person, who told me he had a Cataract in his Eye for two Years, without
discerning that he had any such Impediment in either of his Eyes; and when I
asked him, how he knew that, he answered me, that others had taken notice of a
white Filme that crossed his Eye, so long before he himself did. But not
knowing what a Cataract was, and not finding him to complain of it at all
himself, the Thing remained unheeded, till the Patient, having one day occasion
to Rub his Sound Eye, whilst the Lid covered it, was sadly Surpised to find
himself altogether in the Dark; and then resorting to an Oculist, was assured
it was a Cataract, which, a while before I met with him, had been Couched. But
notwithstanding this Relation, what I had tried about the Using of Both Eyes,
made me ask of a very Ingenious Person, that by an Accident had some months
before one of his Eyes struck out, whether he did not observe, that upon the
being confined to the use of One Eye he was apt to mistake the Situation and
Distances of things. To which he answered me, that having frequently occasion
to pour Distilled Waters and other Liquors out of one Vial into an other, after
this Accident he often Spilt his Liquors, by pouring quite Besides the necks of
the Vials he thought he was pouring them directly Into. Afterward inquiring of
a Gentleman that was a Goodfellow, and had by a Wound a while before lost the
use of One of his Eyes; he confessed to me, that diverse times pouring the Wine
out of one Vessel into another, he would miss the Orifice of the Bottle or
Glass that should receive it, and expose himself to the merriment of the
Company. A yet more considerable Instance of Such Mistakes, I afterward had
from a Noble Person, who having in a Fight, where he played the Hero, had one
of his Eyes strangely Shot out, by a Musquet-Bullet that came out at his Mouth;
answered me, that not only he could not well Pour Drink out of one Vessel into
another, but had Broken many Glasses, by letting them fall out of His Hand,
when he thought he had put them into Another, or set them down upon a Table.
And he added, that this aptness to misjudge of Distances and Situations
continued with him, though not in the same Degree, for little less than Two
Years. But on this occasion I shall take notice that, I have often employed a
Dextrous Artificer, whose Right Eye (for in his Left there is nothing more
remarkable) is constantly drawn so much a side toward the greater Angle of the
Eye, that the Edge of the Pupil does almost touch it and one would think it
scarce possible, but that he should see the Object double with two Eyes that
seem so very differingly turned; and yet he answered me, that he does not see
at all, nor that he finds any Inconvenience, save the Deformity of this Unusual
Situation of his Right Eye, which hinders him not from Reading as freely as
other Men. This Accident happend to him by an unwary Mistake of Sublimate for
another thing; after which, it seems one of the Muscles that moved the Eye,
remained Contracted. But this having happened to him, as I found by Inquiry,
ever since he was two Years of Age; he could not remember whether he had seen
Objects Double, before he was accustomed to judge of them by the help of his
other Senses, and the Information of Others.

OBSERVE. VIII.
IT may be worth while to Observe, that a very great Distention may be made of
the Parts of the Eye, without Spoiling the Sight; of which I lately saw an
Instance in a Patient of that Ingenious and Experienced Oculist, Dr.
Turbervill. This was a Gentlewoman about one or two and twenty years of Age,
Whose Complexion and Features would have made her Handsome, if she had not had
that sort of Eyes, which though rarely met with, some call Ox-Eyes; for Hers were
swelled much beyond the size of Human Eyes, in so much, that she complained,
they often frighted those that saw Her, and were indeed so Big, that she could
not move them to the Right Hand or the Left, but was constrained to look strait
forward; or if she would see an Object that lay Aside, she was obliged to turn
her Whole Head that way. And so she answered me she was, when she set herself
to Read in a Book, unless she did with her Hand move the Book from one side to
another, to bring the ends of the Lines directly before her Eyes. She told me
her Eyes did not always retain the same measure of Tumidness, and that the very
day I saw them, they had been in the Morning much more Swelled than when I
looked upon Her. But that which was more remarkable, was, that not only she
could, for all this, See very well and distinctly, and, as I just now
intimated, could Read Books, but her Sight had continued good, though she had
this Distemper these twelve years. And, which is more strange, she answered me,
that her Visive Power was so little Prejudiced by this Distemper, when it first
came upon her, that she never knew any thing was amiss in her Eyes, till her
Friends told her of it, when they found it had continued too long to be a
merely Casual and Transient Tumor. But, though this odd Accident did not Impair
her Sight, it occasioned great Pains in her Eyes, for which she took Purging
and other Medicines, with so little Success, that both she and her former
Physicians, thought her case Desperate; there appearing no way of dislodging a
Humor so long settled there. Upon which I proposed Salivation, as the least
unlikely way that remained, to Resolve and carry off the Peccant Humor. But
this, though much approved by her Dostor, the Modest Patient would by no means
consent to.

OBSERVE. IX.
I Once looked into the Eyes of a Gentlewoman, where I could discern nothing
that was Amiss, or any thing that was unusual, save the Narrowness of her
Pupils, which is often esteemed a good Sign. And yet this Woman was much
troubled with Fumes and Weaknesses of the Head, and had a Disaffection of Sight
very Uncommon; for she told me, that, whereas in the Day time her Sight was so
Dimm that she could hardly discern her way; soon after Sunset, and during the
Twilight, she could discern things far better. And in this Condition she had
continued a good while: In which odd Case, whether the smallness of her Pupils,
which might possibly be Contracted too much by the Daylight, and might be
Expanded by the Recess of so much Light; or the greater Dissipation of the
Visive Spirits at one time than at the other, may have any Intrest, I shall not
now stay to Enquire. But this Patient brings into my mind the rare Case of a
Learned old Divine, who complained to me that he was forced to write his
Letters and Books by Night, because, during the Daytime, his Right Hand shook
so much that he could not manage a Pen, and therefore was forced to make use of
it only by Candlelight. And I remember that, upon his pressing me to propose
some Possible Cause of so odd a Phenomenon, I told him, to put him off, that
perchance the few Animal Spirits that he had to Move his Hands with, were so
Subtle as to be Dissipated or Exhaled by the Warmth of the Day, but were kept
in by the Coldness of the Night, that somewhat constipated his Pores; and
commended to him the use of strengthening things, and, among the rest, of
Chocolate; which when for sometime he had continued to drink; he came to me,
and told me with joy, that he began again to be able to Write in the Day, and
so I think he can do yet. But this upon the by.

OBSERVE. X.
BEing acquainted with two Ladies of very distant Ages, but very near of Kin,
who were both of them troubled with Distempers, that made me guess their Eyes
might sometimes be oddly Affected, I Enquired of them, whether they were not
troubled with sudden Apparitions of Flame or Fire? to which one of them
answered me, that oftentimes there would appear to her Multitudes, as she
fancied, of Sparks of Fire, that were very unwelcome to her. And the other
Lady, that was subject to Convulsive, but not Epileptick, Fits, told me, she
diverse times saw, as she fancied, such Flashes of Fire as I had mentioned, pass
before her Eyes, which at first did not a little Frighten her.

OBSERVE. XI.
THe following Observation is odd enough, to give rise to some curious
Speculations and Disputes: And therefore I chose to set it down as I found it
among my Adversaria, though I suspect part of it to have been lost, that the
Relation may be the more Unbiased, though if I had another opportunity to
Discourse with the Patient, I should upon second Thoughts, have asked some
Questions, and Written down some Circumstances, that I now wish had not been
omitted.

The Gentlewoman I saw to day, seems to be about 18 or twenty years old, and is
of a fine Complexion, accompanied with good Features. Looking into her Eyes,
which are Gray, I could not discern any thing that was unusual or amiss; though
her Eyelids were somewhat Red, whether from Heat, or which seemed more likely,
from her precedent Weeping. During the very little time that the Company
allowed me to speak with her, the Questions I proposed to her were answered to
this Effect.

That about five years ago, having been upon a certain Occasion immoderately
tormented with Blisters, applied to her Neck and other Parts, she was quit
deprived of her sight.

That sometime after she began to perceive the Light, but nothing by the help
of it: That then she could see a Window, without discerning the Panes or the
Bars: That afterward she grew able to distinguish the Shapes of Bodies, and
some of their Colors: And that at last she came to be able to see the Minutest
Object; which when I seemed to doubt of, and presented her a Book, she not only
without hesitancy Read in it a line or two, (fot her Eyes are quickly weary)
but having pointed with my Finger at a part of the Margent, near which there
was the part of a very little Speck, that might almost be covered with the
point of a Pin; she not only readily enough found it out, but showed me at some
distance off another Speck, that was yet more Minute, and required a sharp
Sight to Discern it. And yet, whereas this was done about Noon, she told me,
that she could see much better in the Evening, than in any Lighter time of the
day.

While she was looking upon the Printed Paper I showed her, I asked her whether
It did not appear White to her, and the Letters Black? To which she answer'd'
that they did so; but that she saw as it were a White Glass laid over both the
Objects. But the things that were mostparticular and odd in this woman's case,
were these two. The first is, that she is not unfrequently troubled with
flashes of Lightning, that seem to issue out like Flames about the External
Angle of her Eye, which often make her start, and put her into Frights and
Melancholy Thoughts. But the other, which is more Strange and Singular, is
this, that she can distinguish some Colors, as Black and White, but is not
able to distinguish others, especially Red and Green: And when I brought her a
Bag of a fine and glossie Red, with Tufts of Sky-colour'd Silk; she looked
attentively upon it, but told me, that to her it did not seem Red, but of
another Color, which one would guess by her Description to be a Dark or Dirty
one: and the Tufts of Silk that were finely Colored, she took in her Hand, and
told me they seemed to be a Lightcolour, but could not tell me which; only she
compared it to the Color of the Silken Stuff of the Laced Peticoat of a Lady
that brought her to me; and indeed the Blews were very much alike. And when I
asked her, whether in the Evenings, when she went abroad to walk in the Fields,
which she much delighted to do, the Meadows did not appear to her Clothed in
Green? she told me they did not, but seemed to be of an odd Darkish Color; and
added, that when she had a mind to gather Violets, though she kneeled in that
Place where they grew, she was not able to distinguish them by the Color from
the neighboring Grass, but only by the Shape, or by feeling them. And the Lady
that was with her, took thence occasion to tell me, that when she looks upon a
Turkey Carpet, she cannot distinguish the Colors, unless of those parts that
are White or Black. I asked the Lady whether she were not troubled with Female
Obstructions? To which she Answered me, she was not now, but that formerly she
had been much subject to them, having been obstinately troubled with the
Greensickness.

OBSERVE. XII.
I Shall add on this Occasion something, that, though not so odd as It, has yet an
Affinity with the newly recited Case, and so may make it the more Credible. And
it is, That I lately conversed with a Mathematician, Eminent for his skill in
Optics, and therefore a very competent Relator of Phenomenon belonging to that
Science? whose Organs of Vision are so constituted, that, though in his Eyes I
could discern nothing Amiss, and though he makes much and excellent use of them
in Astronomical Observations and Optical Experiments; yet he confesses to me,
that there are some Colors that he constantly sees Amiss, and particularly
Instanced in one, which in a clear day, (for so it was when we Discoursed
together of this Matter) seemed to him to be the same with that of a darkish
sort of Cloth that he then wore, whilst to Me and Other Men, it appeared of a
quite differing Color.

OBSERVE. XIII.
DIscoursing with a Lady, who had been very long troubled with a very Unusual
Indisposition in her Head, and, though She looks well, is never without Pain in
it; though looking into her Eyes, I perceived nothing Amiss, yet conjecturing
that so Obstinate a Distemper must have had some Unusual Influence upon her
Sight; I learned by Inquiry that after the Violent Fits of Pain and Disorder
she had from time to time in her Head, if she did but cast her Eyes, or turn
them suddenly, from one side to the other, there would presently ensue a
Convulsive Motion in One of them, whereby it would notonly bedrawn away, but,
which was very strange, All White Things, and most other Objects, that she
looked on with that Eye, appeared Green to her: And yet this was not a
Transient Discomposure that would go quickly off, but would Molest her for a
good while, and frequently Returned upon her for a whole year; so that she
dispaired of Recovering the use of that Eye, vvherevvith yet she now sees very
well, though her Cephalic Distempers were rather Mitagated than quite Cured.
And when I asked her, whether, vvhilest the Convulsion of her Eye lasted, she
did not see Objects Double? She ansvver'd, that vvhilest that Distemper was
upon her, if she went to Read in a Book, the Letters were so apt to appear
Double, that when she was bent upon Reading, she was fain to shut the
Distempered Eye, and Employ only the Other.

OBSERVE. XIV.
SOme may think that a Man has rather an Excellent, than a Vitiated Sight, who
can See Octjects with a far less degree of Light than other Men have need of to
Discern them. But though an Extraordinary Tenderness may be a kind of Perfection
in the Eyes of Bats and Owls, whose usual Food may be more easily Purchased by
Twilight: Yet as to Man, the main part of whose Actions is to be performed by
the Light of the Day, or some other almost Equivalent; it may Argue the
provident goodness of the Author of Nature, to have given Him Eyes Constituted
as those of Men generally are: Since, That a very great Tenderness of the
Retina, or principal part of the Organ of Sight, would be, if not an
Imperfection, at least a great Inconvenience, may appear by the Memorable Story
I am going to Relate.

In the Army of the late King of Hapy Memory, (Charles the First) there was a
Gentleman of great Courage and good Parts, that was Major to one of the
Regiments; who being afterward by the prevailing Usurpers forced to seek his
Fortune abroad, ventured to do his King a piece of Service at Madrid, which was
of an Extraordinary Nature and Consequence, and there judged very Irregular.
Upon this he was committed to an Uncommon Prison, which, though otherwise
Tolerable enough, had no Window at all belonging to it, but a Hole in the
thickness of the Wall, at which the Keeper once or twice a day put in liberal
provision of Victuals and Wine, and presently Closed the Window, if it may be
so called, on the Out side, but not perhaps very Solicitously. For some Weeks
this poor Gentleman continued in the Dark, very Disconsolate. But afterward he
began to think he saw some little Glimering of Light, which from time to time
Increased; insomuch, that he could not only Discover the Parts of his Bed, and
other such large Objects, but at length came to Discover things so Minute, that
he could Perceive the Mice that frequented his Chamber, to eat the Crumbs of
Bread that fell upon the Ground, and Discern their Motions very well. Several
other Effects of his Sight in that Dark Place He Related. And that which
Confirms that this Proceeded mainly from the great Tenderness the Visive Organ
had acquired, by so long a stay in so Obscure a Place, was, that when after
some Months, the Face of Affairs Abroad being somewhat Changed, His Liberty was
restored him, he durst not leave his Prison Abruptly, for fear of losing his
Sight by the Dazzling Light of the Day; and therefore was fain to Accustom his
Eyes by slow degrees to the Light. This Strange, as well as once Famous Story,
I the less Scruple to set down in this Place, because I had the Curiosity to
learn it from the Genttleman's own Mouth, who acquainted me with other
Particulars about it, that, for want of the Notes I then took, I shall not now
venture to speak of.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 5. line 4. read Benefit, l. 14. r. hominis, p. 14. l. 18. r. Corporeal. I
say not this, p. 16. l. 20. r. Eye, p. 21. l. 20. r. scil ad Object. p. 26. l.
2. r. eu egare, p. 42. l. 6. r. (...), p. 46. l. 24. r. fortuitous, p. 48. l.
26. r. are brought, p. 50. l. 1. r. dilate, l. 5. r. any notice, p. 53. l. 23.
r. Cornea, p. 58. l. 20. r. notably, p. 59. l. 20. r. Posture, p. 61. l. 10. r.
Cameleon, l. 25. r. slow, p. 68. l. 17. r. it was, p. 79. l. 1. r. it was not
p. 79. l. 17. r. (...), p. 90. l. 27. r. to be done, p. 89. dele (;) p. 105. l.
15. r. sort, p. 106. l. 2. r. Question; about which, p. 129. l. 27. r. live, p
139. l. 14. dele and L. 1, 2. p. 143. l. 23. ^. Chance. The, p. 151. l. 1. r.
Functions, p. 172. (...). r. produced, p. 177. l. 5. r. Inferior, l. (...). r.
several, p. 198. r. teres, p. 199. l. 14. r. crassioris.

A Catalogue of Books, Printed for and Sold by John Tailor at the Ship in St.
Paul's Churchyard.
1. THe Travels of Monsieur de Thevenot into the Levant; in Three Parts, viz.
I. Into Turkey, II. Persia, III. The East Indies; New done out of French, in
Folio.

2. A Free Enquiry into the Vulgarly Received Notion of Nature; made in an
Essay, Addressed to a Friend. By the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire; Fellow of
the Royal Society. The same is also in Latin, for the Benefit of Foreigners.

3. The Martyrdom of Theodora and of Didymus. By a Person of Honor.

4. The Declamations of Quintilian, being an Exercitation or Praxis upon his
Twelve Books, concerning the Institution of an Orator. Translated (from the
Oxford Theater Edition) into English, by a Learned and Ingenious Hand, with the
Approbation of several Eminent Schoolmasters in the City of London.

5. England's Happiness, in a Lineal Succession, and the Deplorable Miseries
which ever attended Doubtful Titles to the Crown; Historically demonstrated
from the Wars between the Two Houses of York and Lancaster.

6. Academia Scientiarum: Or, The Academy of Sciences. Being a Short and Easy
Introduction to the Knowledge of the Liberal Arts and Sciences; with the Names
of those Famous Authors that have written on every particular Science. In Latin
and English. By D. Abercromby, M. D.

7. Public Devotion, and the Common-Service of the Church of England Justified
and Recommended to all Honest and Well-meaning (however Prejudiced) Dissenters.
By a Lover of his Country, and the Protestant Religion.

8. The Best Exercise. To which is added, a Letter to a Person of Quality,
concerning the Holy Lives of the Primitive Christians. By Anthony Horneck,
Preacher at the Savoy.

9. The Mother's Blessing: Or, The Godly Counsel of a Gentlewoman not long
since Deceased, left behind for her Children. By Mrs. Dorothy Leigh.

10. The Enchanted Lover: Or, The Amors of Narcissus and Aurelia. A Novel. By
Peter Bellon, Author of the Pilgrim.

11. Reasons why a Protestant should not Turn Papist, in a Letter to a Roman
Priest.

12. Curious Enquiries, being Six brief Discourses, viz. I. Of the Longitude.
II. The Tricks of Astrological Quacks. III. Of the Depth of the Sea. IV. Of
Tobacco. V. Of Europes being too full of People. VI. The Various Opinions
concerning the Time of Keeping the Sabbath.

13. The Works of Dr Thomas Comber, in Four Parts, Folio.

14. Weekly Memorials for the Ingenious; or an Account of Books lately set
forth in several Languages, with other Accounts relating to Arts and Sciences.

15. Legrand's Historia Sacra.

16. Poetical Histories. By Galtruchius.

17. London Dispensatory. By Nicholas Culpeper.

18. Father Simon's Critical History of the Eastern Nations.

19. -- History of the Progress of Ecclesiastical Revenues.

20. The Several Ways of Resolving Faith by the Controvertists of the Church of
England and the Church of Rome.


