*an apostate
To the Most Powerful in Authority, to unloose the Bonds of Cruelty and
Oppression of an Aged Industrious Person, without Work or Friends.
THomas Boyce of Lambeth, formerly of Horslydown, a Hearer of Quakers; now, and
long since of the Church of England, a Sufferer for Innocence and Truth; and
since his hard Case has not been unknown to both King and Kingdom, Authority
having been pleased to take notice of it, and Publicly cleared his Innocence
under the Hands of 12 Credible Witnesses, besides Sir Richard Ingoldesby, who
have Certified my Honesty and Faithfulness to the Great Trust reposed in me by
his Father Sir Richard, and his Lady Mother, while I, in former days, was many
years Steward to them. But most unfortunately falling since under the English
Inquisition of the Violent Bloody Quakers, who, by some of their Chief Leaders,
unprovoked, and Barbarous Assaults, like so many Wolfes, tore, and devoured
him, and his Substance, in Three and thirty Weeks time, which he had been
Laboring for all his Days, and sorely wounded him in his Body, Mind and
Reputation, to the indangering his Life, themselves have since Confessed he was
amist; as also his Neighbors aforesaid have Certified he was in a weak
Distracted Condition at that time, his Speech taken from him, and the Use of
his Hands; Five Weeks together, had no Sustenance, only drank fair Water, and
Six Weeks and three days kept from his wonted Course of Nature, otherwise than
by Urine. And all the while incapable of Work, notwithstanding the Quakers gave
out, he was able, and might Work, and have spoke too, all the while, if he had
list. And for his refusing to Consent to their Lies, after he had his Speech
restored to him by his Maker, and was capable to Work, the Quakers, instead of
restoring, what they had most falsely taken, and caused to be taken from him,
that is to say, his Trade, Credit, and Livelihood, fell a Cursing him and his
Wife and Children, and threatened him with Plagues and Vengeance that should
come upon him, and be worse than ever he was. Insomuch, that for above these
Twenty years last past, he has been reduced to the Laborious Calling only of a
Tailor, and has not had Work sufficient, nor the value thereof, taking the
whole time, for one pair of hands, to feed and maintain four Mouths the
greatest part of it. What hardships he has undergone in seeking for Work, but
much more by their often Upbraiding him with their Bounty and Charity, so cold,
are too long and sad to trouble the Reader: However he is able to make it
plainly appear, if he might be permitted, that he is a Sufferer at this time
above 500 l. in his very Trade and Livelihood of his Family, besides his
Credit, and a Childs part of an Estate of about 600 l. which was left him by
his Parents and near Relations at Buckingham, which some of the former Leven of
the Quakers possessed themselves of, part of it without Administering, and other
some, of the same Fry, without giving any Account, have, in the like manner,
lately, by their Purses, and Practices of Lying, got the Remainder. So that the
Quakers among them have Swallowed up both my substance of Bread, and not
allowed me wherewith to Work for Money. And it is very hard to be in Age, and in
Want, having hands given Man to Labor, and a Tongue to Ask wherewith, and not
permitted, without he will Belly the Giver of them, or confess himself to be
Lunatic, or Mad, and Lazy. The Reverend Dean G. H. has lately THese are to
Certify, That Thomas Boyce of the Parish of Lambeth, Tailor; formerly of the
Sect of Quakers, and now, and long since of the Church of England, is an Honest
Laborious poor Man, and worthy, as I think, of Protection and Relief,

George Hooper, Rector of Lambeth.
Nov. 7. 1694.



Certify'd, under his Hand, That the said Tho. Boyce is an honest Laborious
poor Man, and worthy, as he thinks, of Protection and Relief. And seeing the
Power of the Most High has shown a Wonder by this your Complainant, so as to
raise him even from the Grave; He humbly desires your Honors, to whom these
are chiefly Intended, would be pleased to consider to what end, and in the mean
time the Grass grows, that my poor Sickly Children, may no longer suffer Want,
for their Father's Transgression, that is to say, for refusing to deny Truth,
and his unwillingness of Mind to Starve for want of Work.

Thomas Boyce, an Inhabitant of this Parish about 22 Years, and 12 Years before
at Horslydown aforesaid.
March 25th, 1697.

