A VOICE FROM HEAVEN, SPEAKING Good words and Comfortable words, concerning
Saints departed. Which words are opened in a SERMON PREACHED At SOUTH-WEAL In
ESSEX, 6. September, 1658.

At the Funeral of that Worthy and Eminent Minister of the Gospel, Mr. Thomas
Goodwin. Late Pastor there.

Hereunto is annexed a relation of many things observable in his Life and Death.

By G. B. Preacher of the word at Shenfield in Essex.

1 Cor. 15.55. O Death, where is thy Sting?

Luke 14.15. Blessed is he that shall eat Bread in the Kingdom of God.

LONDON Printed by S. Griffin, for J. Kirton, at the Kings-Arms, in Paul's
Churchyard, 1659.

TO The Right Worshipful Sir Henry Wright, Knight and Baronet: And to the
Worshipful Mr. John Leech Esquire, Justice of Peace: And to the Good Gentleman,
Mr. Richard Sherbrook: Together with the rest of the Inhabitants of Southweal.
Honored and much Respected,
I Do here present you with a Sermon Preached at the Funeral of your Pastor:
Loath I was to Preach it, not grudging the Service, but wishing the work had
fallen into better hands; More loath I was to Print it, well knowing that there
is nothing in this or any thing of mine, worth Publishing to the world: It
suffices me, if by private Preaching, I may serve God in the place where my
lot is cast, I dwell among mine own people. But the urgent importunings both of
Ministers and other Christians have wearyed me, and being not able to withstand
the many Solicitations, I have forced myself to send abroad this Sermon, which
I Dedicate to your selves, to whom of right it does belong: The occasion of it
was the Death of him, who was your Pastor, your Minister, and whose Flock and
People ye sometime were. It comes to you by way of Dedication, be pleased to
own it with your Christian Acceptance. It is indeed very plain without any
flourishings, and therefore can scarce expect a welcome for its own sake: but
it tends to keep up the memory of him, whom you sometime loved and delighted
in, you may welcome it for his sake: and moreover it contains heavenly
comforts, Counsels, which being the Truths of God, you must welcome it for Gods
sake, and for the sake of your own souls. It comes out somewhat long after the
Preaching, and no marvel if it come late, I had much a do to persuade with my
self to let it come at all. Though indeed the hand of the Lord upon me in a
sore sickness, made it much longer than otherwise it would have been. It is
enlarged beyond what it was when I Preached it, because the straits of time (we
being benighted and many persons far from their home) would not suffer me to
deliver scarce one half of what was then intended: I then only delivered the
heads: now you have the enlargements upon those heads.

And Now, Honored and Worthy Friends, give me leave a little to vent the
sorrows of my heart for this great loss: The blow indeed lights upon you
mainly, but not upon you only, but upon the Neighborhood also, yea the whole
Church of God. I have had many sad Letters since his Death bewailing the loss.
If others at a great distance be so affected, how should you your selves much
more lay to heart, you may justly call your selves Ichabod, Glory is departed:
The Ark is for the present taken from you. God can Glory over you, and set up
the Ark again among you, Amen, the Lord grant it! but yet remember you had a
Goodwin among you, some of you, I am persuaded, being the Seal of his Ministry,
will remember him as long as you have a day to live. Your Town of Brentwood is
famous for its, situation upon an Hill, but its eminency of late years was much
from Mr. Goodwins Ministry in that place: Your Hill seemed to be the
Candlestick, whereon this burning and shining light was set: He was a Tower, a
Beacon, on this Hill. His monthly Lectures, which the Neighbors round about
did partake of, made it as the Hill of Hermon and Mount Sion distilling dewes
upon the Valleys round about. He is now gone and is as water spilt upon the
ground, which cannot be gathered up again.

Though his Person be dead, let his doctrines live, yea because he is gone, let
them the rather remain; He shall Preach to you no more, unless it be by his
former labors and holy life, by both which, he being dead yet speaks; Mr.
Goodwin still lives in Weal, if ye his people stand fast in the Lord: which
that you may do, as also be blessed with one to succeed, who may call home the
uncalled, and perfect what is lacking in the faith of others, is and shall be
the

Prayer of him who is Your Servant in Christ Jesus. GEORGE BOWND.

REVELAT. 14. v. 13. And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write.
Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord from henceforth.


THe words which I have read unto you are part of a Sermon Preached by an
Angel, the third Angel mentioned in this Chapter: That they depend upon the
foregoing words, Ad superiora hac refero. Aret. in loc.
and that the voice from heaven in the Text was uttered by the same Angel is
the Judgment of a good expositor. This Sermon, as it may fitly be called,
begins from verse the 9th. and we may observe three things concerning it. 1.
The Preacher. 2. The Matter. 3. The Method.

First, the Preacher, viz. God by an Angel from Heaven Preaching and
Prophesying to John, what things should come to pass in the latter days: In
what age these things were fulfilled, whether in the time of Martin Luther, as
some, or later Preachers, as others, I shall not spend time to enquire: The
Preacher is an Angel from Heaven, and though the Lord ordinarily Preach to his
Church by men upon earth, yet in some extraordinary cases he preaches by Angels
from heaven: Ministers indeed are called Angels, Rev. 1.20. and it is no small
honor which arises to that office from the name which the Persons bear, yet
though called Angels, (...): Pares Angelis.
they are inferior to them which are in heaven: when they come to Heaven; they
with other Saints shall be Angels fellows, Luc. 20.36.

Secondly, The matter of the Sermon is destruction to the wicked both here and
hereafter, but Salvation to the Godly, if not in this life, yet certainly
hereafter in the life to come, That which this Angel Preached is such, as to
which the Scripture in the whole tenor of it consents, and is agreeable to
the Analogy of Faith: Angels from heaven will Preach, can preach no other: that
of Gal. 1.8. Is the supposition of an impossible case, say Expositors. There be
indeed Angels that Preach other Doctrines, the Devil and his Angels from Hell
in their Instruments false Teachers upon Earth: There be many Errors among the
Schoolmen, though they be called Angelical Doctors: This Angel in the Text is
from heaven, and accordingly his doctrines Scriptural, as all heavenly
doctrines are.

Thirdly, the Method is Doctrine and Use: The doctrinal part of this Angels
Sermon lies in verses, 9, 10, 11. Where the position is this, that most
dreadful plagues do attend Antichrist and his adherents: This position is
illustrated by showing, 1. The Extremity. 2. The Eternity of their misery.

1. The extremity, verse, 16. Drink of the wine of the wrath of God. There is
the wine of Gods love, the consolations of the Spirit, when the soul is led
into the wine-sellar, and there stayed with Flagons, Cant. 2.5. The sweet
preparative for that collation, which Saints shall have in heaven, where shall
eat and drink at Christ's Table in Christ's Kingdom, Luc. 22.30. But this in the
Chapter is the wine of Gods wrath like that in Psalm. 60.3. Wine of
astonishment, or wine given to make them mad. It Is added here without mixture,
not allayed with one drop of mercy, Jam. 2.13. There is indeed fire and
brimstone put into it and mixed with it, but there is little comfort in this
addition, it makes the Cup more dreadful: there shall be drinking in Hell, but
it is in draughts of brimstone.

2. The Eternity and lastingness of these evils, the smoke of their torment
ascends up for ever and ever; and they have no rest day nor night: the evils
which betide the wicked in this life, are but the beginnings of sorrows, the
end will be to have no end.

This is the doctrinal part, the Application follows in a twofold Use.

1. By way of Information, showing that Gods end in these judgments (next to
the taking vengeance on the wicked) is to try the patience of Saints, verse. 12.
To try I say the constancy of their obedience, whether they will hold the Faith
of Jesus in troublesome times: it is easy to sail in a calm Sea, but to
encounter raging waves, and tempestuous storms, and not to make Shipwreck of
Faith, and a good conscience is the trial of a Christian indeed, one that is
not with Agrippa almost, but altogether: here is the patience of Saints, here
are they that keep the Commandments of God, and the Faith of Jesus.

Object. The wicked are threatened with the Vials of wrath to be poured upon
them, but why should this trouble the Saints? they follow the Lamb; how is
their patience tried by the judgments inflicted on such as worship the Beast?

Answ. Yes it does, because when ever the wicked are made to drink the Cup of
wrath, they will be furious, outrageous and exceeding mad (as the expression
was before) which rage will vent it self in bloody persecuting the Saints, as
the Church has found in all ages by sad experience.

Object. Then there is no difference between good and bad, but it may be as ill
with them, who follow the Lamb, as who worship the beast; then we may say with
the profane ones in Malachy, Tros Tyriusque mihi nullo discrimine agetur.
what profit is it to serve God? will God suffer the righteous to be slain with
the wicked, and the righteous to be as the wicked? Genesis 18.25.

Answ. That be far from the Lord, and therefore if we mark what follows, we
shall be able to discern between the righteous and the wicked, him that serves
God, and him that serves him not; the worst that can befall them is the loss
of this present life, Persecutors can but kill the body, and therefore,

Secondly, by way of consolation he shows there is no cause why believers
should be dismayed at the troubles, which may betide them in this present life:
for while Tyrants make havoc of the body, God cares for the soul and eternal
salvation; if they dye by the hand of the wicked, this is the hardest measure
that can be meted to them, this is the heaviest shock which can befall them,
and having once undergone this, perfect blessedness presently follows, Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord. Having thus cleared the coherence, the
Text, as you see, is the very Use of consolation, and it affords very great
comfort to the people of God: especially if we consider what goes before, and
what follows after, for from both it receives both light and strength, and
comes to the Church (as the Queen of Sheba to Solomon) attended with a very
great train.

First, that which goes before is a voice from heaven saying Write. Though
every passage in this Angels Sermon need be attended to, yet this especially:
therefore a voice from heaven alarms us to attention; and though every sentence
be worth noting, writing, setting down, yet this above all: therefore write.
This word write, Nihil hie sine pondere and mensura.
is as a finger pointing to some excellent matter, it is a Star set by it, and a
light held over it, that none may pass by without diligent weighing it, and
though there be nothing in Scripture, but has its weight and worth, yet some
truths are most diligently to be heeded, even above others. Divines observe,
that the word behold in the beginning of a sentence, and Selah in the end of a
sentence, do show, that those are remarkable sentences: so we may say of this
word write. All Scriptures are alike true, but some are to be noted by us in a
principal manner.

Secondly, That which follows after is the Spirits sanction, yea says the
Spirit, and as if the bare testimony of the Spirit were not enough to carry the
matter, there are two reasons annexed.

First is, when death comes, they rest from their labors. The wicked have all
their comfort here, Luc. 16. Son, remember thou have had thy good things; so
the Godly have all their sorrows here. It Is the opinion of some, that Christ's
weeping over Lazarus, Joh. 11. was not because he was dead, but because he was
to be raised to this troublesome life again, for such is this life at the best
to the Godly: had it been Samuel indeed, he might well say, why have thou
disquieted me? 1 Samuel 28.15. The Godly in this life have labors in common with
others (sufficient to every ones day is the evil thereof) but besides, they
have troubles, which the wicked feel not, Satan's winnowings, buffetings, a law
in their members warring against the law of their mind: But death stills and
quiets all, it is to them the silent house and place of rest.

2. Impii judicabuntur secundum and propter opera sua; pii vero secundum fidei
opera, sed non propter opera.
The second reason is, their works follow, in happy rewards, he means their
good works. The best of Gods Children have their evil works, but they are
washed away in the blood of Jesus, and therefore cannot follow them; their good
works do follow through free grace in glorious rewards: they shall be rewarded
according to their works, though not for their works; and thus they follow. The
works of wicked men follow, but it is in everlasting punishments: they shall be
rewarded both according to, and also for their works; and thus they follow
through divine Justice.

Having thus opened the words, I might draw from them many useful observations,
but because the time will not allow the handling of them, I shall not so much
as name them; there is one point only, which I intend to speak to, and it is
that wherein the marrow and sweetness of the consolation lies: I shall lay it
down almost in the very words of the Text, viz.

Doct. They who dye in the Lord, shall certainly be blessed when they dye.

The Point is so clearly held forth in the Text, that I need not look out for
other Scriptures to confirm it, but I shall gain the time in sparing what may
bespared: That which I intend is, first to speak to it by way of Explication,
and secondly by way of Application.

There be three things needful to be explained, 1. Who may be said to die in
the Lord, 2. What the blessedness is, which they who die in the Lord shall
have. 3. The time, when they shall have it.

I. For the explaining of the first, who may be said to die in the Lord, I
shall take notice of two opinions about it, and then lay down a third, which I
conceive holds forth the true meaning of this phrase, to die in the Lord.

First therefore, some widen the Phrase too much, as if it did comprehend and
take in all those, who having lived professors of the true God and true
Religion, die holding this profession. These make every formal profession,
though abstracted from the power of godliness, enough to carry a person to
Heaven, making the Gate wide, which Christ says, Matthew 7. is narrow. Let Men
profess the true Religion, that is, be Christians, not Jews, Turks, at least
be Protestants, not Papists; let them be Orthodox in Judgment, and not grossly
sinful in life; let them but keep their Church, hear, pray, receive, and walk
in a round of duties: these shall be saved when they die. This is the opinion
of some. This has proved a spreading leaven, and it is no wonder to see the
Assertors of such Doctrine, draw many Disciples after them, it is so pleasing,
and who almost would not trade for Heaven, if it may be purchased at so easy a
rate? It Is a Matchiavilian axiom, that to seem religious is profitable, but to
be religious is troublesome; Now if that be enough to make one religious, which
was laid down before, I pray what great trouble is it? hear a few Sermons,
mumble over a few prayers; they may do this and yet live at ease in Syon. It Is
usually said to the reproach of zealous professors that some make more a do,
than they need, Master favor thy self, be not righteous overmuch, less will
serve thy turn: But now if the Kingdom of God consist not in word but in power;
If many may strive to enter into Heaven, and yet not be able; 1 Cor. 4.20 Lu.
13.23. Mat. 11.12
If Heaven must be stormed and taken by violence: then surely every formal,
slight serving of God, will not serve the turn, nor suffice to arrive to that
blessedness promised in the Text, to such as die in the Lord. Carnal
Gospellers may seem to live in the Lord, Rev: 3.1. Have a name to live, and so
they may seem and but seem to themselves, and some others, to die in the Lord,
but the hoped-for blessedness, where, where will it be?

Secondly, Some on the other extreme, Apellabo Martyrem and praedicabo satis.
narrow the sense of this Phrase too much, limiting and restraining it to those
only who die Martyrs, sealing the truth with their blood. Martyrdom indeed is
a piece of service tending greatly to the honor of God, and has always been
honorably remembered by the Saints, and will be gloriously rewarded from the
Lord; These indeed are meant in the Text, yea, chiefly and eminently, but not
excluding others who die in the Lord, though they die not Martyrs. Many
Expositors might be quoted who understand it of all the godly, those who die in
their beds, as well as those who die at the stake; Peter was crucified, and
dying in the Lord was blessed; Beatus est Petrus, dum crucifigitur, sed non
minus est beatus Johannes, dum in lecto moricur, uterque enim, etc. Aret. (...)
Vbi geminum (...) auget vocem.
John dyed in his bed, but yet dying in the Lord was blessed. We read Psalm
116.15. That the death of the Saints is precious in the sight of the Lord, not
this or that death for kind, but in general whatsoever death they die; and the
Original is emphatical, intimating that the Prophet does not assign it and
limit it to any one kind of death, but to whatsoever kind of death; And thus
some Translations render it: And though Beza does translate it as if it
pertained only to Martyrs, yet the phrase does not necessarily import so much,
as Doct. Fulke shows in his confutation of the Rhemish Translation: were it
meant only of Martyrs, the verse would rather run thus, Blessed are the dead
which are killed or slain for the Lord, or for the Lords cause; Now many die in
the Lord, who do not thus die for the Lord; as possibly some may seem to die
for the Lord, who do not yet so much as die in the Lord. The Apostle in 1 Cor.
13. Speaks of some, (...).
who give their body to be burned, and yet have not charity, viz. any work of
saving grace, by a Synecdoche; The first Martyrs were Innocents, and such
should all Martyrs be, but that all be not so, the Apostle himself intimates;
and if this be the meaning of dying in the Lord, then they are all blessed,
which the Apostle will not affirm, but rather deny. But to conclude this, we
may say, in some sense, all that dye in the Lord die for the Lord, viz. as the
Psalmist, For thy sake are we killed all the day long, that is, we are liable
to troubles and persecutions, more or less all Saints meet with them, even they
who have the peaceablest lives and most quiet deaths; But this is not the
restrained sense before, which relates only to such as shall be violently
killed and murdered in the cause of Christ; therefore,

Thirdly, If we would know who they be, which are said to die in the Lord, we
must mark the phrase and manner of expression, which is very frequent and
obvious in Scripture, viz. Some persons are said to be in the Lord, in Christ,
when others are said again, not to be in Christ; now such as are thus in
Christ, shall be blessed when they die. The Scripture, I say, speaks often,
that some are in Christ (who is the Christians Lord, according to those
expressions, the Lords day, the Lords table,) See Romans 16.7. They were in
Christ before me, and Verse 11. Them of the Household of Narcissus, which are in
the Lord, or in the Lord Christ, Thus 1 These. 1.1. Paul writes to the Church,
which is in God, and in the Lord Jesus Christ. Now these phrases denote that
blessed and heavenly union, which believers have with the Father and the Son,
through the Spirit. It Is hard to declare and open what this union is, it is
easier to say, what it is not, than what it is: It is usually for distinction
sake called mystical, meaning, 1. That it is real, not putative and imaginary,
2. Spiritual; it is so real, that the Scripture speaks as if the believer had a
subsistence in the Deity, Heb. 3.14. We are made partakers of Christ, (...).
if we hold the beginning of our Confidence; The word which is translated
Confidence, signifies Subsistence. This and some other Scripture-expressions
have made some speak a great deal too high, saying, believers are deified, and
some in our days blasphemously, saying, believers are God-ded in God, and
Christed in Christ. I do acknowledge it is a most transcendent privilege for a
poor sinful creature to be united to the eternal Son of God, but what ever this
privilege is, we are to look upon it as a very great mystery, Christiani esse
est inesse.
the perfect knowledge whereof is reserved for Heaven. Well, so it is
undeniably, believers are in Christ, united to Christ, yea all Believers; this
union is essential to a believers being, it is that which constitutes a
believer; It is a strong union, which nothing can dissolve; it is not possible
that these ligaments and ties by which the eternal Son of God, and a poor
believer are knit together, should ever be broken; See Romans 8.35. Who shall
separate? so we may say, what shall separate? for the Apostles induction is of
things, as well as of persons: surely if any thing could do it, then Death is
the likliest, but Death cannot, Verse 38. Death separates a Man and his estate,
a Man and his relations, (bury my dead out of my sight,) yea, Death breaks the
union of Soul and Body, but not of the Soul and Christ; no nor yet of the Body
and Christ, for that part which sleeps, which is the Body, sleeps in Jesus, 1
These. 4.14. This union out-lives Death: It is with a believer dying, as with
Christ dying, Death broke not the Hypostatical union between divine and humane
nature in Christ: though it disunited Soul and Body (his death being a true
death) yet not God and Man in Christ; So Death disjoynes not a believer and
Christ, though it disjoyn all other things.

Now then the meaning of the phrase may be clear. Even that they who are in the
Lord Christ, that is, united to him, while they live, shall be blessed when
they die; they were in the Lord whiles they lived, and still remain in the
Lord, though they die, therefore certainly shall be blessed; They die, and so
are not in the world, they die, and so are not in the Body; but for all this,
they are in Christ, though they sleep, it is in Jesus; thus we read of the dead
in Christ, 1 These. 4.16. Such as were in Christ when they dyed, and those
Saints, Heb. 11.13. Dyed in Faith, which is all one with the phrase now before
us, for by Faith we are united to Christ.

This might suffice for the opening of the first particular, who they are that
may be said to die in the Lord; but before I pass this, it may not be
impertinent nor useless to take notice of one phrase, which comes very near
this, but is not the same, Romans 14.8. We read of a dying to the Lord; There
is a dying in the Lord, as in the Text, and a dying to the Lord, as in that
place to the Romans; Dying in the Lord respects our habitual estate, being such
as are united to Christ, but Dying to the Lord, refers to our actual deportment
in the great work of dying. To dying in the Lord it suffices to be true
believers, truly engrafted into Christ. Now dying to the Lord requires the
exerting and putting forth some acts of Faith, which are Four.

1. When Death comes, to see the hand of the Lord in it, not so much the
malignity of the disease, confluence of bad humors, or what ever may be of the
second causes: the eye of Faith still looks unto the Lord; Life is of his
giving, and Death is of his sending: our undoings are the Lords doings. Psalm
46.8. See what desolations the Lord has wrought, whether national or personal,
in the earth, or in the house and family, it is the Lord, he singles out
particular persons: Death is as the casting of the lot. The lot is cast into
the lap, but the disposing is from the Lord. The lot is cast, and such a Tribe
taken, then such a Family, then such a person, perhaps Jonathan a young Man, a
good Man is taken: so the lot is cast, such a Parish, such a Family, such a
person, and still the disposing is from the Lord. It Is not the drawing a bow at
a venture, 1 King. 22 34. 2 King. 9.5.
but every Arrow is levelled and has its particular errand, as the Prophet
said to John, I have an Errand to thee O Captain: This is to die to the Lord,
to see the Lord coming to our particular selves, and saying as to Aaron, Come
up and die.

2. To submit willingly to his hand, and to all those diseases, whereby, as by
Axes and Hammers, he is pleased to demolish thy Cottage: yea to submit
cheerfully, and welcome death as a messenger, that brings good tidings.
Welcome fire and faggot, said some of the Martyrs, they embraced and kissed the
stake, Oh how cheerful were they! How apt are we to bemoan our selves, when
tidings of death come, as if some dreadful evil were upon us; though indeed
it is a very childish thing, children cry when they should be had to bed; Dying
to a believer is but a going to bed, Isai. 57.2. To dye to the Lord is
willingly to submit, saying, if the Lord please, he can turn my captivity, and
rebuke sickness, and send health: If he say, he has no pleasure in me, in my
life, breath, temporal being, here am I, let him do what seems him good.

3. Whiles under his hand, to lie breathing out thy last breath sweetly to his
glory, to lie blessing God, to lie calling upon others to love God and to get
into Christ; Not only not to be moved by the pains of sickness, and pangs of
death to do or speak any thing to the dishonor of God, but to open our mouth
to his glory, and the showing forth his praise: God has made death to work for
a believers good, let them endeavor it may work for his glory.

4. To give glory to God in a firm belief, that the promise of eternal life and
salvation shall now be made good to them, expecting blessedness immediately
upon the dissolution; yea to look beyond the grave and mouldring dust, unto the
resurrection of the body, being assured that it shall rise a glorious body,
death being but the pulling down of a smoaky Cottage, that it may be built a
stately Palace: as the Southsayers said upon the burning of the Capitol by
lightning, the Gods did suffer it to be, that it might be built better, and
more gloriously. Now these are the actings of faith required in him who would
dye to the Lord.

Now a Person may dye in the Lord and be blessed, who yet does not thus dye to
the Lord: for these actings may be suspended, either 1. Through our
inadvertency, not considering what duty is incumbent upon us to glorify God in
dying. 2. Through violence of diseases, depriving or at least dulling and
stupifying the memory, understanding and reason, which are necessarily required
to these actings. 3. By some fit of desertion, whereby we come to doubt of our
evidences, which alone can make us cheerfully to submit, Lord now let thou
thy servant depart in peace, now, and not till now, because now mine eyes have
seen thy Salvation. And thus I have done with the first thing, which needed to
be explained, who they be, that are said to dye in the Lord.

II. I shall now speak to the second, what that blessedness is, which they who
dye in the Lord shall have: This is an hard thing, if not impossible to do, the
Scripture speaks of it as that which is inexpressible, unutterable. See 2 Cor.
12.4. Paul rapt up into heaven heard words unspeakable, (...).
which it is not possible for a man to utter: yea which is more, unconceivable,
1 Cor. 2.9. it has not entered into the heart of man. It Is in vain to expect
that it should be spoken with the Tongue, which cannot be conceived by the
heart: As soon may the Earth and Sea be put into a Pot, as the bliss of
glorified Saints into the understanding; as soon may you hold the whole earth
in the hollow of the hand, as comprehend heaven in the heart.

Much has been spoken and written concerning it, doubtless to the great
chearing of the hearts of Saints, insomuch that some have been ravished with
the news of it, that they have in a kind of impatiency been weary of life, and
longed for death, saying, come Lord Jesus, come quickly; yet I believe, that
when a Saint comes to heaven, he will say in the words of the Queen of Sheba, 1
King. 10 6, 7.
It was a true report that I heard upon earth of heavens glory, but behold the
half was not told me.

The Apostle in the place before describes it Negatively, Eye has not seen,
etc. The eye has seen much, the ear has heard more than ever the eye saw, and
the heart of man can conceive more than ever the eye saw, or ear heard; yet the
heart cannot conceive this. Surely the full and perfect knowledge of this
blessedness is only to those Saints who are comprehenders of it: The blind man
may say much of light, but nothing comparably to him who beholds the light;
much may be said of the sweetness of honey by what is reported of it, but it is
nothing to what may be said from the tasting and eating of it. See 1 John 3.2.
it does not yet appear what we shall be, or what glory we shall have, till we
come to see this light, and eat of this honey. I might therefore shut up this
part in silence, wishing you to wait till this glory shall be fully revealed;
but because something may be expected upon the method before laid down, it
being one of the three things promised to be explained, and besides, much is
said of it in the Scripture to the unspeakable consolation of believers, making
them bear up and be of good cheer under present evils, whereof this life is
full, whiles they have an eye to the recompense of reward. I shall therefore as
the Lord shall enable me, give you a brief collection of what is held forth in
Scripture concerning this blessedness.

I cannot go round about Sion and tell all the Towers, may I at least but point
out some; The Israelites rejoiced but to see some clusters from Canaan, and it
may refresh our hearts whilst we behold some parts or pieces of this glory
laid down before us: They waited for Gods time to take possession of that
earthly Canaan and so must we, it is but tarry till death comes; Death will put
us in possession of the heavenly Canaan, then it shall be said to Saints, as to
Abraham, Genesis 13.17. Arise, walk through the Land in the length and breadth
of it.

Believers shall be blessed when they die, but wherein does this blessedness
consists? I Answer to the making up of blessedness, it is required, 1. That it
be full, 2. That it be lasting. Fullness implies, 1. The absence of all evil,
2. The presence of all good.

1. Then Saints dying are out of the reach and danger of evil, Prastat non
esse, quam miserum esse.
of what may be called evil, even the very appearance of evil: Though there
were no good in Heaven, yet it is very considerable that there is no evil: Now
evil is two fold, 1. Of sin, 2. of punishment, but neither is in Heaven.

1. There is no sin there, this is the grand evil, a poisonous weed that grows
every where but in Heaven. It Is said that no venomous thing will live in
Ireland, I am sure it is true of heaven. This weed took rooting in paradise,
but it was the earthly Paradise and not the heavenly, whereof Christ speaks,
Luke 23.43. and whereof St. Paul, speaks, 2 Cor. 12.4. The best of Saints carry
sin about with them: one need not tell them so, they know it to the great grief
of their heart, it being that which often fetches water from their eyes, and
blood from their Souls; Hearken but to their Closet doors, and you shall hear
sad complaints against it, and mourning over it: This is that stone tied to the
birds leg, Anselm.
(as one well resembles it upon seeing boys play) which pulls it down when it
attempts to fly aloft. This is that Pharaoh which keeps Gods Israel in bondage,
and hinders from serving God as they should and as they would. There is indeed
a principle of grace in believers, and there is also a body of sin, and in this
respect they are like to the tribe of Manasse, half in the Land of Canaan, and
half on the other side Jordan. But death will convey them into the heavenly
Canaan, Col. 3.5:
and the Jordan of sin shall be quite dried up; may not this be one reason why
the Apostle calls sins our members which are upon earth, members, because of
the dear love we are apt to bear to them, they are as dear as the members of
our body, as an eye and hand: and earthly, because they shall not be in Heaven.
These sins by the power of grace are mortified in Saints whiles they are upon
earth, but in Heaven they shall be nullified, there shall not be an hoof left
behind. Here they are cast down, there they shall be cast out. The Lord Jesus
will say to sin, that foul Spirit, as Mark 9.25. Come out and enter no more.

Well then admit this, there shall be no corruption within, I may add farther
no fear of any temptation from without, whether of the Devil or from the World.

What can Satan do? The Devil without us could not harm us, were it not for the
Devil within us: he could do nothing upon Christ, John 14.30. Because he was
without sin, he found nothing in him to fasten his temptations to; If he do
strike, it is as nothing, so long as there is no tinder to catch: But besides I
believe, though he goes to and fro in the earth, that Heaven is none of his
walk, none of his circuit, it is not in his commission, or rather permission,
Add, what can the World do to them who are gone out of the World? Before they
were not of the World, now they are not in the World; The World here as the
Ivy, twisting about the tree sucks the heart out; It flatters as Jael did
Sisera, Butter and Milk in a Lordly dish, and so nails the temples of the Soul
to the ground; but after death there shall be no alluring World. The World, and
the things of the World, as to them, Angeli non habent jumenta.
shall be no more: There is no device in the grave, no trading, no tilling, no
shops, no farms or cattle, we shall be as the Angels, who are not combred with
these things, There as Rev. 12.1. The Moon shall be under our Feet, we shall
have as little esteem of these sublinary things, as the dust under our Feet.
Thus we have the first branch of the negative part, Saints shall be blessed at
death, because they shall not be infected with the evil of sin.

2. After death there shall be, as no sinning so no suffering; this necessarily
follows, for take away the cause, and the effect will cease, there shall be no
complaining in those streets, and therefore blessed, for I may apply the words
of the Psalmist, Psalm 144.14, 15.
Happy are the people that are in such a case: hereupon earth is nothing but
Alas, woe is me! woe worth the day! Not only Hell is full of complaining, but
the earth also: our days here are full of trouble; Our life is like the
Prophets book, Ezekiel. 2.10. Written within and without, lamentations, mournings
and woe: within are Fightings, without are Fears; We are at no time exempted
from complaining because of sin, and it is but seldom but that we are mourning
because of trouble; which sorrowful condition of ours upon earth is elegantly
set forth in that place, Job 5.7. Man is born to trouble, as the sparks fly
upward. Indeed, in Hell is nothing but evil, from one end to the other, It is a
sea of evils, without bank or bottom; On earth are some fair days, though many
be stormy and tempestuous, a rad (...) elatus fuit. Isa. 33.24. Isa. 35.10.
but in Heaven whether Saints go when they die, is no fear of any of these
things; This is that Tower whether the righteous shall run and be safe, or set
aloft out of the reach of danger, Prove. 18.10. There the inhabitants shall not
say, I am sick, sorrow and sighing shall fly away; All evil shall be banished
many thousand thousand miles from the lines of Saints communication. I shall
shut up this part with that comfortable Scripture, 1 These. 1.10. Jesus delivers
from the wrath to come. If saved from wrath, then from those evils which are
the effects of wrath, and where there is no sin to stir up wrath, there can be
no evil, which is the consequence of wrath; and thus we have the Saints
blessedness negatively, but now,

2. Positively and affirmitively, to make up blessedness, there must be the
presence of all good, which brancheth it self into two parts, 1. The perfection
of grace and holiness, 2. The fullness of bliss and happiness.

1. After death, when the Children of God come to Heaven they shall be made
perfectly holy: Heaven is that Holy Land whether they are going on Pilgrimage;
See 2 Peter 3.13. There the Apostle says dwells righteousness, there is its
Mansion House and in comparison thereof, here upon earth it is but as in an
Inn, or a sojourner. (...).
Heaven is the lot or place alloted to holy ones, Col. 1.12. There is no
possibility for a sinner to get in thither, heaven gate is strongly guardded by
holy Angels, should they neglect their trust, yet God is of purer and clearer
eyes then that a sinner should escape him; Yea were it possible a sinner could
steal into Heaven, yet he should soon be thrown out as the Apostatizing Angels
were, and as Adam was driven out of Paradise, and the corrupt Nations beaten
out of Canaan, and the Man without his wedding garment cast out of the marriage
chamber; Yea further, suppose a sinner might be let alone, yet he would soon
void the place of himself, it being not a proper element for him to live in; As
soon may a fish live on dry land, as sinners who drink in iniquity as the fish
drinks in Water, live in that Holy Land.

But further, there the people of God shall be made perfect in holiness, Heb.
12.23. The Souls of just Men shall be made perfect. They are holy in this life,
but not perfectly holy; Yea, here they have a perfect imperfection; Grace is
glory begun, and glory is grace perfected; Grace shall not be lessoned, but
heightened and increased in glory; Grace shall be swallowed up of Glory, as the
rude draught is when the Picture is finished, and as the Morning light is by
the noonday. See 1 John 3.2. shall be like God, this is in the perfecting of
holiness, which is called our being made like God; God at first made Man after
his own Image, that is in holiness, as the Apostle shows, Ephesians 4.24. Now in
Heaven there shall be a perfect restoring of this image. The expression is
full, 1 Cor. 15.49. We shall bear the image of the heavenly, but it may be
Queried, when shall this be? the answer is in the following verse, it shall be
in the Kingdom of God. While we remain in this flesh we cannot bear this image,
and yet it is true again that Believers even in this life do bear this Image,
the difficulty is easily resolved, here we have the truth, there the perfection
of holiness, (...).
the Scripture speaks of true holiness, or the holiness of truth, Ephesians. 4.24.
There is that which is such in truth, though not in perfecton. And surely so
great will this change be, when a Believer shall be made perfect, that he will
seem to be changed into another Man, as was said of Saul, he would even wonder
at himself to see how he differs from himself, what he now is, being a
comprehender, and what he was, whiles a Traveler below; Great and wonderful is
the change in this life, when of a sinner one is made a Saint, where yet a
sinful unregenerate part remains, but oh how most admirable, when shall be made
a perfect Saint! in whom is nothing that is called sin, no appearance of evil,
no defect, no blemish (as is said of Absalon) from the sole of the foot to the
crown of the head. This change will be in mind, will and affections.

1. (...).
In the Mind shall be light without any darkness, there shall be no mistakes,
no doubtings: here though it be given to the godly to know the mysteries of the
Kingdom of God, yet they need pray a prayer for the healing of their
ignorances. Truths indeed which are necessarily required to be known in order
to salvation, are plain, so that he who runs may read, the wayfaring Men,
though Fools, shall not err therein, Isa. 35.8. Yet other truths are dark,
making darkness their pavilion; Of these the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 3.16.
Saying in the Scriptures are some things hard to be understood; Thus the
Scriptures are compared to a River, where a Lamb may wade, yet again so deep in
other places, that an Elephant may be drowned; Such mysteriousness is there in
many truths, that the most knowing Saints may be called a generation of
seekers, seeking more and more to find out the meaning of the^, which shows
that there is much darkness remaining in their minds; There is Ignorance as
well as Knowledge in the best, yea, more Ignorance then Knowledge in the best,
as in the best garden are more weeds then flowers; In this sense we must allow
new lights. (not as some who call old errors new lights,) but new discoveries
of what before we knew not, whiles the knowledge of these heavenly truths is
dropped into us; Son of Man drop thy word, by which expression is meant, that our
knowledge comes to us by little and little; Dies posterior prioris Discipulus.
Thus the Word of God is precept upon precept, line upon line, now a little and
then a little.

But when Saints shall come to Heaven, the dark side of the cloud shall be
taken away, they shall be of the same Intellectual complexion and stature as
the Angels are; There all doubts shall be solved, Vbi Lutherus cum Zuinglio
optime convenit. in vit. Geyn.
truths cleared, consciences satisfied, controversies ended. As Satan carried
Christ upon a Mountain, and in a moment showed him all the glory of the world;
So Christ at death takes the Soul and carries it to the heavenly Syon, and in a
moment will show it all the glory and excellent mystery of divine truths. It Is
in this case as with a dull, yet diligent Scholar, he is continually poring
upon his Book, conning his Lesson, and fain would he, but cannot beat it into
his head, then comes the Master, who by his skill makes it facile to him, and
brings him quickly to understand it, so that even he now wonders at his own
dullness; And certainly when a child of God comes to Heaven, he will much
wonder at his own dullness to understand, slowness to believe. This is the
first, in Heaven the Mind shall be fully and clearly enlightened. Now a word of
the other two.

2. The Will shall be bowed to a perfect conformity to Gods Will, without any
Rebellion, in Heaven the Children of God shall be enabled perfecty to keep the
Commandments of God. No mere Man since the fall is able perfectly in this life
to keep them, but shall be able in another life, because the Will shall be
brought into perfect conformity to Gods Will, the Authentic and original Copy:
here Grace is mixed, some Faith, much Unbeleef, some conformity, Necessitas
immutabilitatis non coactionis: libertas a coactione est, essentiaalis
voluntatis proprietas, secus enim voluntas esset noluntas.
much Rebellion; We wear a linsy welsey Garment as to our spiritual condition,
but then the Will shall be made a Mountain of holiness, an habitation of
righteousness, The Will shall be swallowed up of Gods Will, so that we shall
not be able to sin, yet no force which is inconsistent with the Will, but then
shall the day of Gods power shine forth to make the Soul perfectly willing to
that which is good, and to that only, then we shall be confirmed in goodness
and holiness.

3. And lastly, the Affections shall be thoroughly sanctified, and freed from
all disorder. The exorbitancy and disobedience of these Affections make sad
work here in the most gracious Souls, that often though we know to do good, Jam.
4.17. Romans 1.18
yet we do it not, which becomes sin, even out of measure sinful: that though
we know the truth, yet we with hold it in unrighteousness, whereby our actions
becomes unrighteous in the highest degree; Now in Heaven they shall quietly
comply with and give obedience to right reason, they shall be as obedient as
the Centurions Servant, who went and came at his Masters beck: The Affections
are the Souls Officers, but here they often become proud exactors, but there as
Isa. 60.17. The Lord will make these Officers peace, and these exactors
righteousness; The Affections are the Souls feet, the Souls wings to help the
Soul with expedition to do the Will of God, but alas, whether do they often
carry and hurry the Soul? even to commit sin with greediness, to rush into sin
as the Horse rusheth into the battle; They are fiery metl'd Horses, it is hard
to sit them, they often cast their Rider; Hagar like, they contend against
their Mistress, but in Heaven the bond Woman shall be cast out, there shall be
no Remora of a fleshly part, The Mountain of the house of the Lord shall be set
on the top of all our mountains; Grace perfected in glory shall arise against
the house of evil doers, and against the help of them that work iniquity, at
our very entering the Heavenly Canaan, this Jordan, or stream of vile Affections
shall be dried up. Thus have I done with one part, which shows wherein the
bliss of glorified Saints consists, they shall have the perfection of grace
and holiness. Now,

2. They shall have the fullness of bliss and happiness; What one said of
England is very true of Heaven, Vere hortus deliciarum vere puteus inexhaustus.
it is a garden of delights, a fountain of good things which cannot be emptied;
It was the saying of one of the Popes, who yet went near to have drawn it dry,
but it may without question be fitly applied to Heaven. Surely the children of
God shall live an happy life in Heaven; Thus we read of eating, and drinking,
and feasting, it shall be with them as with that rich Man, they shall fare
delicately every day; We read 1 King. 4.22. What daily provision was made for
Solomon, 30. Measures of fine Flower, 60. Measures of Meal, 30. Oxen, 100.
Sheep, etc. Yet a glorified Saint shall infinitely surpass Solomon, when he
shall come to sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven,
at Gods table.

Here in this life a Believer has sweet refreshments in his or her Souls
peace, which causes joy, that passes Understanding, joy which others know not
of, A stranger intermedleth not with his joy, but this is far short of what
they shall have when they shall come to see God as he is, The best Wine is kept
till last. The joy which Believers have in this life, arising from their inward
peace, is said to be full, 1 John 1.4. Mr. Saunders the Martyr seemed so full,
as if he had some to spare, some to bequeath to his Wife, and therefore in his
Letter from Prison to her, he legacies this to her, who had no money nor worldly
goods to give her: His words are thus set down in the Book of Martyrs; I am
merry, and I trust I shall be merry, maugre the teeth of Men and Devils; Riches
I have none to endow you with, but the sweet feeling of the love of God in
Christ, whereof I thank my God I have a part, that I bequeath to you. Was not
his joy full? Mr. Bolton lying on his sick bed, said to his Friends standing
about him, that he was as full of comfort as his heart could hold. And truly
their joy is full in comparison of the worlds empty joys, which are but from
the teeth outward, but in respect of Heavens joy, it is but inchoative and
comes far short of it: What is the Morning light to. Psalm. 36.8. Cant. 5.4.
Noonday? what is a taste to a full draught? to drink of the river of
pleasures? What is it to look in at the Keyhole, to the being let in to the
Chamber of the Bridegrom? The manner of expression, Mat. 25.21, 23. Is
observable, where the good and faithful Servant is bid to enter into his
Masters joy; There is not only showed that it shall be a place of joy, but
there is hinted the greatness of that joy, such as cannot enter into him, but
therefore he shall enter into it. It cannot enter into a Believer, by
Comprehension, but he shall enter into it by fruition; yea, there is showed in
what measure the Believer shall partake of it, he shall enter into it, not hear
of it, or only see it, but go into it, and walk it in the length and breadth
thereof.

And further, if this joy exceed the sweet spiritual joy of Believers, no doubt
but it far surpasses the joy of wicked Men and wordlings: Indeed their joy is
often great and full in its kind, they drink Wine in Bowls, they lie upon beds
of Ivory, they chaunt to the sound of the Viol. Amos 6.4, 5, 6.
I have heard of one who resolved to spend 500 l. to please his 5. senses, and
I have read of another, who provided ponds of sweet waters to drown himself in,
after he had spent what time of life he might in surfeting and wallowing in
sensual pleasures. Now can we think these joys may be compared with the joy,
bliss and happiness of Heaven, they are not worthy to be named the same day
with the spiritual joy of Believers before spoken, which yet as has been
showed comes far short of what shall be in glory; Worldly joys are vain,
empty, frothy, those we speak of are full and substantial; They are seeming,
painted joys, they do not reach the heart, nor quiet the heart, at least give
but a light touch, a kind salute, and pass away; but those whereof we speak are
lasting and abiding, they refresh both inward and outward Man, the heart and
the flesh, Psalm 84.2.

I shall here lay down one convincing Argument to prove that the joy which
glorified Saints shall have, must needs go beyond all other pleasures and joys
whatsoever: take it thus; The higher and greater the mercy is, the greater must
needs the joy be; These keep pace, and as one rises, so the other rises also,
the more weight is hung on, the faster the wheels move, See Psalm 126.2. Our
mouth was filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing. Now what might
cause this great joy, Verse 3. The Lord has done great things for us, great
Mercies are Ecchoed again with great joys: Now what greater Mercy can a poor
Creature be capable of, than to sit in heavenly places? If this be the greatest
Mercy, as sure it is in it self, and in the account of gracious Souls, Psa.
73.24
witness their waiting, and even longing, till afterward come, when they shall
be received to glory, then it must needs provoke the greatest joy, like that
spoken of Isa. 35.10. Which some expound of Heaven, they shall come to Zion
with songs, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads (the head being put
for the whole Man, as Prove. 10.6. And many other places,) the meaning is, they
shall be all over covered with joy, from top to toe. That which is poured on
the Head will run down, and thus the joy of Heaven shall be, Luc. 6.38.
good measure, pressed down and shaken together, and running over.

I shall close up this second part with one consideration more, whereby besides
what has been already said, it may appear, that the life in Heaven and glory
shall be happy in exceeding great joy, and it is this, The work of Believers in
glory, shall be in continual praising God, singing songs to the praise of free
grace, whereby they are brought to Heaven, whiles others, otherwise alike,
hewed out of the same Rock, dug out of the same pit, are yet turned into
Hell; Now singing is the expression of mirth and joy, as by the bush hung out,
we know there is Wine within, singing comes not from an heavy heart. Prove.
25.20.

Some say it shall be the only work with which the People of God in Heaven
shall be wholly taken up, the Jews say that the sacrifice of praise or
thank-offerings exceeds all other sacrifices in two things. 1. In the
universality, being performed by Men and Angels. 2. In the perpetuity, when all
other sacrifices shall cease, this shall remain, this shall outlive all legal
sacrifices, and be the proper work of the blessed: when praying shall cease,
and hearing cease, Yet praising and singing Hallelujahs shall continue; I may
apply hither, Ps. 84.4. Blessed are they that dwell in this house, they shall
be still praising God; still or evermore; We have heard what flocking there
has been sometimes to the University, to be present at a Music act; Now in
Heaven there shall be continual Music, singing and making melody, continual
praising; Some think the very forms of words, wherewith glorified Saints shall
praise God, are set down in Rev. 5.13. Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power, be
unto him that sits on the Throne, and unto the Lamb, for ever and ever. And
Rev. 11.17. We give thee thanks O Lord God Almighty, which art, and wast, and
art to come. I have read that holy Chrysostom's last words were, Glory be to
God from all creatures, they are as it were the breathings of a Soul in Heaven,
before it was quite gone from the earth.

The sum of all is this, that Believers shall have perfect bliss and
happiness. They shall live in Heaven, where shall be pleasures, mirth, singing
and rejoicing, above what we are able to express or to conceive. This shall
suffice for the first branch of the second part, by way of Explication, They
who dye in the Lord are blessed. Blessedness must be full, that is, there must
be no evil, and there must be all good, the perfection of grace and holiness,
with the fullness of bliss and happiness: But now,

2. As it must be full, so it must be lasting and enduring, and so indeed the
bessednesse of Saints shall be, not only for a long time, but for ever. It
shall be Eternal, such as is the Eternity of our Souls, which had a beginning,
but shall have no ending, called Eviternity, to distinguish from the Eternity
of God, A part post non a part ante.
who alone is the first and last, without beginning, without ending. This bliss
has a beginning, henceforth says the Text, but shall have no ending, it is
Eternal. Eternity, at the very naming of it, is enough to amaze our thoughts in
studying to know what it is; It is the continuance of any good thing which
makes it a full good; Soul take thine ease, thou have goods laid up for many
years, said the rich Man in the gospel: He glories not so much in the abundance
of his goods, as in the hope of their continuance. How do Men rejoice in the
purchase of an estate, because they have that, not by lease for term of years,
but the Deeds run to them, and their Heirs for ever; Though indeed it is not
for ever, but far short of that; For besides, what may happen in the interim,
at the great day all the Evidences shall be undoubtedly burnt, and it is more
than probable from diverse Scriptures, the Land also, Heb. 1.11. Isa. 51.6.
Matthew. 24.35. 2 Peter 36.10, 12. Rev. 21.1. To be sure, the propriety, in these
pronouns Mine and Thine, shall cease: Yet the hope Men have of its continuance
for some long time; does much content them. David took it as a great favor,
that God would bestow a Kingdom upon him, to raise him from following the sheep
to be King over Israel, 2 Samuel 7.18. Yet Verse 19. He says, This was but a
small thing, that which made the mercy great, was that God had spoken of
continuing it for a great while to come; he adds, and is this the manner of Man
O Lord God? he seems to be much transported in admiring the continuance of his
Mercy, though it were not so much to him in person, but to his posterity: Let a
thing in it self be never so excellent, yet the fear of losing it, darkens all
the excellency of it; Earthly treasures are therefore less to be accounted of
because Thieves may break thorough and steal them; What true content could the
rich Man take in his abundance, when once he heard, This night all should be
gone? Corneliam nescie an faeliciorem talem viru^ habuisse, an miseriorem
amisisse. Et invito processit vesper Olympo.
It Is spoken to the humbling of the great ones upon earth, that though they
live like Gods, yet should die like Men; Though the good thing be great, yet if
not lasting, it is not full: yea, the greatness of it, greatens the misery upon
the losing. When a Scholar has been reading a good Book, it troubles him to
see Finis; When the people of God have been keeping a day of Prayer in
Communion with God, it saddens them much that they should break off, because
the day is done.

But now the blessedness of Saints is not only a great good, as has been
showed, but a lasting good, it shall have no end, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. They shall be
for ever with the Lord, Rev. 3.12. He that goes in shall go out no more; some
interpret it of a Believer in this life, Notat gloriae stabilitatem, Pisc. in
loc. Isa. 33.20.
to prove no falling from grace, some again interpret it of the state of glory.
The life of glory is such a life, to which immortality is essential. 2 Timothy
1.10. We read of life and immortality, that is to say, immortal life; Heaven is
a Tabernacle that shall not be taken down, not one of the stakes thereof shall
ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken. The
blessedness of Believers shall be eternal: but what is Eternity? I shall show
you how a learned and holy Divine illustrates it to the meanest capicity,
Suppose, says he, the whole World were a Sea, Mr. Perkins on the Creed.
and that every thousand years expired, a bird must carry away or drink up one
only drop of it: in process of time it will come to pass, that this Sea,
though very huge, shall be dried up, but yet many thousand millions of years
must be passed before this can be done. Now if a Man should enjoy happiness in
Heaven only for the space of time in which this Sea is drying up, he would
think his case most happy and blessed: but behold the Elect shall enjoy the
Kingdom of Heaven, not only for that time, but when it is ended they shall
enjoy it as long again, and when all is done, they shall be as far from ending
of this their joy, as they were at the beginning.

And now by what has been said, we may in some measure understand, what is
that blessedness which the Saints and Children of God shall have; it is great
and full, it is also lasting, yea, everlasting, which cannot be said of any
thing here below; The best of the worlds excellencies are fading, and quickly
blasted; No day so pleasant, but ends in a darknight; No Summer so fruitful,
but ends in a barren Winter; No Body so fair, but will be changed by death,
from Beauty to Deformity: In the days of Noah, they were eating and drinking,
but the flood comes and sweeps them all away; Great mirth was among the
Philistines, but their banqueting house becomes their burying-place; The
Monarch of Babel whose head was of Gold, had the feet of clay: Sic transit
gloria mundi.
All the pomp of the world is like Jonahs gourd, now flourishing and anon
fading, there is that worm in the root of all worldly comforts as will blast
them; But the mercies, and joys, and comforts of Heaven are not such, they are
eternity mercies, eternity joys, eternity comforts: take away the lastingness,
or rather everlastingness, and we blow up Saints happiness. Thus much for the
explication of the second thing, viz. What that blessedness is which they who
dye in Lord shall have. Now a word of the third thing, and so I will come to
the Application. Therefore,

3. Having showed who they be who dye in Lord, and what the bessedness is that
they shall have, it remains to show in the third place, when they shall be made
partakers, and be put in possession of it, and that is immediately upon their
death, for so says the Text, Henceforth they are blessed. (...).
The Apostle Paul reckons upon his being with Christ immediately upon his
departure, Phil. 1.23. Now Christ as he now is, so he then was in Heaven, in
glory. The co^verted Thief is promised he should be received into Paradise, as
soon as he was dead, Luke 23.43. This Paradise must be the heavenly one, for of
the earthly one we may say, as they of Moses his Body, no Man knows where it
is to this day. Again in 2 Cor. 5.8. We may see that the Apostles expectation
was to be present with the Lord, as soon as he should be once absent from the
body; Stephens prayer, Acts 7.59. Lord Jesus receive my Spirit, was in vain, or
could have no comfortable return, if the Soul does not at death presently go
to blessedness; He does not pray nor expect that his body should be received to
the Lord, but his Soul or Spirit: he knew his body should go to the grave, and
he knew also his Soul should go to God, according to what Christ promised, John
14.3. That where he is, there his members should be also.

If the Children of God do not enter into glory presently at death, they are
most lamentably deceived, and sadly frustrated in what they conceive strong
hopes and go forth in full assurance of: Doctor Preston used to say, it is but
wink and be with God: the closing of the eyes by death, would bring the Soul to
the light of life. When Basil that courageous Christian, was threatened with
death by the Tyrant, he prayed to God the Tyrant might not change his
intentions, lest he should lose his expectation; he expected to change misery
for glory. Tailor the constant Martyr, coming within two fields of the place
where he was to be burned, Mr. Fox Act and Mon.
comforted himself that he was within two styles of his Fathers House, which
was, in his meaning, Heaven. Another Martyr embracing the stake said, This day
shall I be married to Jesus Christ. One of the Ancients reproved the immoderate
mourning at the death of godly people thus, Cypr.
saying, why should we put on black clothes, when our Friends put on white?
That is the Robes of glory, calledin the Revelations, the fine linen of
Saints. I might heap up instances of this kind, the constant expectation of
them that dyed in faith, is at death to enter into their Masters joy; And
though they do not say (as I have read of a blasphemous Monk) give me eternal
life which thou owe me, yet in hope of present possession of eternal life,
which God that cannot lie, has graciously promised, they can say with
Hilarian, Go forth my Soul, go forth, why tremblest thou, thou have served
Christ thus many years, and do thou now fear death? I shall add further the
earnest desires and longings after death in some of the Children of God, surely
they promised themselves present blessedness; Saint Paul was not only willing
to die, but did desire it, yea, vehemently. See 2 Cor. 5.2. We groan earnestly;
Some Saints having their hopes raised up to the fruition of this glory, have
been almost impatient, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, and why are the Chariot
wheels so long a coming? they even longed to be (as we may say) fingring of
it, so as never did a rich Heir long more to be in the possession of his Lands;
They have thought every day ten, every year twenty, saying in the words of the
Psamist, Make haste Lord, make haste. So then I may say, and so conclude this
point, if the people of God do not immediately at death enjoy blessedness,
they are the most miserably deluded people of any in the world: Away therefore
with that wretched doctrine of the Souls sleeping in death, being altogether
Anti-Scriptural, Oh that it might for ever lie dormant and awake no more! It
tends much, 1. To the imboldening of sinners in a way of sin, See Matthew. 24.48.
The evil Servant that reckoned of his Masters delaying his coming, thereupon
grew very bold in more and more sin. 2. To the sadning of the hearts of Gods
people, Prove. 13.12. Hope deferred makes the heart sick. This shall suffice to
be spoken to the third and last thing, and also to the whole by way of
Explication, the Application follows. In the Application of this point, I shall
speak to four uses. 1. Of Information. 2. Instruction. 3. Consolation. And 4.
Exhortation.

1. By way of Information, according to the rule of contraries, Oppositorum
eadem est Scientia
if they who are in Christ when they die are blessed, then those who are not in
Christ when they die are cursed, upon different accounts; Death has a
different complexion; it is like the Red Sea, which to the Israelites was a
passage to Canaan, Aliis vehiculum, aliis Sepulchrum.
but to the Egyptians a place of drowning to their utter desturction. To such
as are in Christ, the day of their death, is better then the day of their
birth, being their encrance into everlasting joy: but to others it will be the
saddest day that ever came, being the beginning of their sorrows. It Is
appointed for all to die, in that respect all are alike, but it is not
appointed for all to die in the Lord, in that respect there is a great
difference of persons: Some die in their sins, John 8.24. Some are taken away
in their iniquity, Ezekiel 33.6. These are cursed when they die, Psalm 9.7. The
wicked shall be turned into Hell, which place seems to be commented upon and
explained, Psalm 11.6. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and
brimstone, and an horrible tempest: this shall be the portion of their cup. I
might here inlar^e upon the state of the damned after death, in the same Method
as before of the state of the glorified: Before the bright side of the Cloud,
now the dark side. A little briefly.

When Saints die they are freed from all evil, but when sinners die, they lanch
into a Sea of evils. 1. They will find the absence of all good. A godly Man's
miseries terminate with this life, so do a sinners comforts. I have read of the
old Arcadians, that they would weep bitterly when the Sun did set, fearing it
would never rise more; sure I am, sinners dying have cause to bemoan themselves
sadly, for when the Sun of their life is once set, it will be perpetual night
of darkness and misery: They may weep as those did at Paul's parting, Acts 20.
shall see the Face of comforts no more: they have their portion in this life,
and when once they die, they shall be alarmed with that memento, Luke 16.15.
Remember thou have had thy good things, implying, they shall have them no more.
2. There will be to them not only no good, but all evil, as 1. The evil of
sin, there is sinning in Hell, in Heaven there is none, on earth too much, in
Hell nothing else. Death cannot kill sin, but it will live when the sinner is
dead, and therefore wrath abides for ever, because sin abides for ever: Wrath
will keep pace with sin; Sin as oil feeds the fire of Gods Wrath; One said to a
Swearer, who would not be reclaimed, prithee stay but till thou come to Hell,
there shall have thy fill of sinning and swearing. Again, 2.

There is the evil of punishment, therefore Luke 16.28. It is called the place
of torment; as there is a place of bliss, John 14.3. I go says Christ to
prepare a place for you; The Jews say, every Saint shall have a star assigned
him for his Mansion-place, but they have vain conceits in this, as in many
other things; but surely a certain place there is, it is no Vbiquitary Heaven;
So surely there is a place of torment: how great this torment is cannot be
known by any, but such as feel it; yet it were well if sinners would know it
before they feel it, thereby to prevent the feeling of it; And certainly it is
beyond what can be expressed; And therefore when we would comfort any under the
greatest evils, we say, it is not wrath, it is not Hell; Christ but tasting
this, and that but for a few hours, though he were the strong one, compared to
a Lion, yet did sweat drops of blood; The Scripture expresses it by weeping,
and wailing, and gnashing of teeth; Heavy cheer, said Mr. Latimer, where
weeping and wailing is served up in the first course, and gnashing of teeth in
the second: Legati doloris sunt lachrymae.
weeping and gnashing, two strange effects of a strange fire, weeping is from
burning heat, and gnashing of teeth from bitter cold; They shall weep, not for
their sin, but for their pain; Again, they shall gnash, or envy, and grieve at
the felicity of the godly, Psalm 112.10. The wicked shall see it and be
grieved, he shall gnash with his teeth, and melt away. There shall be weeping,
some constitutions on earth cannot weep, but there are none such in Hell; Many
on earth sin and tremble not, but it is not so in Hell, their hearts ache under
wrath; there is no rejoicing, but trembling, and yelling with the voice of
Dragons, crying out, woe worth the day that ever they sinned, Aristotle knew
nothing worse then Death, (...).
but the Scriptures show that Hell is far worse, the fiery furnace, the Lake
that bnrneth with Fire and Brimstone, which will try the strength of the
stoutest Sinner, had he the strength of stones, or brass.

To this add the Adjunct, as the Saints blessedness shall be eternal, so will
the sinners misery be, and this consideration makes it very dismal and
dreadful; Isreal's bondage in Egypt was long before it had an end: whiles they
were in Babylon they were prisoners in a pit, but yet they were Prisoners of
hope, that captivity had an end: Pharaoh had some rest from his Plagues, Exodus
8.15. Jobs condition was extreme sad, who prays to be let alone that he may
take comfort but a little, Job 10.20. but it had an end, it was temporal; The
sinners misery shall be eternal. See Rev. 20.10. Shall be tormented day and
night for ever and ever. Hell fire is such as cannot be quenched, Mark 9.44.
Though Hell be full of tears, yet these floods of tears shall not be able to
quench this fire. I shall add one thing more, and then I shall have fully
paralleld the miserable estate of them who dye out of Christ, with the blessed
condition of such as dye in the Lord, viz. one branch of the former discourse
was, that the Saints shall enjoy their bliss presently at death; So the wicked
when they die shall be presently plunged into misery, it shall be deferred no
longer; The Scope of the Parable, Luke 16. shows thus much; though every thing
or passage in a parable do not prove, or is not argumentative, yet the scope
carries full and strong proof; Parables are like Knives, the haft will not cut,
and the back will not our, but the edge will; The scope is as the edge of a
Knife, and this seems to be the very scope and drift of that Parable, to show
all impenitent sinners what they must look for at death, to be tormented as
that rich Man was. Further, see Heb. 9.27. After death to judgment, all must
come to judgment, and when? presently after death; The godly shall be judged,
but not condemned, the wicked shall be judged and condemned. The Doctrine of
the Souls sleeping till the resurrection is no doubt pleasing doctrine to
sinners, It would be some lightning to them to think of a reprieve to the
general judgment, but the Scripture speaks of a present judgment to them, and
of their being presently carried to Hell, Luke 12.20. This night shall thy Soul
be required, in the Original it is, this night do they require thy Soul; They,
that is, say Expositors, the Devil and his Angels, Gods instruments for
executing his wrath upon wicked and ungodly men.

Hear this O Sinner, I come to thee with heavy tidings, such as who ever hears
it, might make both his ears to tingle. But woe is me! Sinners are even
Hell-proof now a days; When Paul preached of Judgment to come, Felix
trembled, Oh that Sinners would tremble whiles this judgment is future, yet to
come, when it is come, the stoutest shall tremble: And indeed, better never
have been born, then to go out of the world sinners, as we came into the world.
Better be Dogs and Toads, then sinners and die such: when they die there is an
end of their misery, whereas thou have Millions of years to lie in Hell under
the wrath of God, not only while the Sea (before spoken of) is drying up,
which would be in time, though a long time first, but to all eternity, for ever
and ever. This is the first use.

2. By way of Instruction. Are they blessed who die in the Lord? then this
teaches us the true way to true blessedness: All would be blessed, though
many be but wishers and woulders in this very thing of so great concernment,
having faint, slothful desires, which will Kill them, as Solomon speaks, that
is, leave them short of the good they seem to desire.

It cannot be denied, but that there is in all some desire after blessedness:
Though the tree of happiness be cut down, yet there is (if I may so speak) this
stump left, a desire after it. There be many that say, who will show us any
good? Psalm 4.6. And they spoken of by the Prophet, looked for peace, Jer.
14.19. None say, who will show us any evil, none look for trouble and misery
with an expectation of it; All are for good, peace and blessedness. Good
Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?

Now if any be in good earnest this day, enquiring after the way to happiness,
(some make a show of enquiring, as Pilate when he said, What is truth? which he
loved not, nor cared for to know) they may be directed from the Text; They who
would be blessed, must be in the Lord, must by all means get into Christ, John
14.6. I am the way, says Christ: (...).
The Article in the Original makes it emphatical, The way, the only way: he
adds, and the truth, this is to beget in our hearts a firm belief that he is
the only way. But one may say, he is a way indeed, but whether does this way
lead? he adds the life, as if he should say, I am in truth the only way that
leads to life or blessedness. Know all Men of a truth, if they be Christless,
they will be blisseless, heavenless; It Is Christ who has brought life and
immortality to light, therefore immortal life must be by Christ. Jesus Christ
is that Ladder in Jacobs vision, by which Believers climb up to Heaven; Life
was a book sealed, but Christ has ope^ed it; the way of blessedness was shut
up, but Christ has cleared the passage, we must say with the Martyr, None but
Christ, None but Christ, Creature righteousness will not open the Door of
blessedness: Duties are Creatures, yea, graces are Creatures; Faith it self is
no Savior; So then if we would be blessed, the question which we must put to
our Souls is this, are we in Christ? They who are in the Lord Jesus shall be
blessed.

For the trial of this, take this one conclusion, If we be in Christ, then
Christ is in us: As we read of Saints being in Christ, Romans 8.1. 2 Cor. 5.17.
So we read of Christ being in Saints, Col. 1.27. 2 Cor. 13.5. Take one place
more, wherein this mutual inhabitation is expressed fully, 1 John 3.24. He that
keeps his Commandments dwells in him, that is, in Christ, and he in him,
that is, Christ dwells in him that keeps his Commandments. So that one
discovers the other, viz. if we be in Christ, then Christ is in us.

Yea, but it may be replied, this is as hard to know as the other; how can
Christ be in us? he is in Heaven, him the Heavens must contain till, etc. I
answer, the Scripture shows that though Christ be in Heaven, yet he dwells in
his people upon earth by his Spirit: and thus in the place last quoted, this is
made a mark or note of trial, Hereby we know that he abides in us, by the
Spirit which he has given us.

But yet still there is not a full resolution to a conscience that desires
satisfaction. But it may be further queried, how I shall know whether I have
the Spirit.

To this I Answer, some know it by its immediate witness, the Spirit bearing
witness with their Spirits. Thus Paul, Romans 8:16. 2 Timothy 1.12.
I know whom I have believed, this is an high attainment, not given to all; And
therefore I add, others may know it by its argumentative witness, the Soul
drawing conclusions from the effects, which are such as these following.

1. It is a softening Spirit; Have thou the Spirit of Christ dwelling in thee?
then it has mollified thy Adamantine heart, thou can say, my heart by nature
is in^exible, impenetrable, but it is made tender, bowed and softened.

2. It is an enlarging Spirit; Art thou enlarged with David, to run the way of
his Commandments? This he desired to do, but could not, till God enlarged his
heart, Psalm 119.32. Art thou enlarged in duty, and in graces? stronger in
believing, more broken in heart, more frequent and fervent in praying, hearing,
receiving, is it thus with thee? Sam: 1.5.10.
Thus it was with them who have the Spirit: or rather have not cause to mourn,
as Hannah, because her womb was shut up, so thou, because thy Soul is shut up?
Perhaps have no pantings after God, and instead of being enlarged, thou
decayest, declinest, and go down the wind.

3. It Is an enlightening Spirit; The heart naturally is covered with darkness,
darkness that may be felt, but where the Spirit dwells, it makes an Egypt, Luc.
1.78, 79.
a Goshen: Now has the day spring from on high visited thee, to give light to
thy Soul which sat in darkness? Has it enlightened thee to know the great evil
of sin, the dreadfulnesse of offended Justice, the preciousness of thy immortal
Soul, the sweetness of a pardoned estate, the transcendent excellency of
Christ, the Beauty of holiness?

4. It Is a sanctifying and cleansing Spirit; The heart naturally is lamentably
sulled and defiled, the Conscience is impure: The Soul coming out of an
unregenerate estate, Cant. 3.6.
is said to come out of the wilderness like pillars of smoke: The Soul
naturally is a smoaky, sooted, and defiled thing, but when the Spirit comes in,
it cleanses; Now has God created in thee a clean heart? which David prays
for, Psalm 51.10. The Spirit is compared to fire; Now fire cleanses the Gold
from the dross; has the Spirit consumed the dross of sin and corruption? it is
a Spirit of burning, Isa. 4.4.

5. It Is a fructifying Spirit; The heart by nature is a wilderness, as in the
Canticles, a barren wilderness, bearing nothing but briars and thrones, and no
good fruit; Art thou now become fruitful in good works, or rather art thou not
to every good work reprobate? I might add

6. It Is a warming Spirit; The heart naturally is key-cold, the conscience
benumbed: Is there any spiritual heat, holy warmth in thy Soul? is there
always some of the holy fire burning upon the Altar of thy Soul? The sum of
all is this, if these things be not in us, or at least a sense of the want of
them, with a mourning for to have them, then the Spirit is not in us, and if
the Spirit be not in us, then Christ is not in us, and if Christ be not in us,
then we are not in him, and if we be not in him, we cannot be blessed: They
only are blessed who are in the Lord; There is no other way to blessedness; and
thus much for the second use.

3. By way of Consolation to all true Believers, you are in Christ, and you
shall be blessed when you die: It Is but waiting a while, till Death, and
henceforth you shall be happy. You perhaps are now miserable, but you shall not
always be so, Psa. 73.24
afterward thou will receive me to glory; Thus that holy Man Asaph comforted
himself: Can you not live a little upon hope? Heb. 11.26. Heb. 10.34.
Moses eying the recompense of reward could suffer rebuke: Those Worthies
calling to mind the better and enduring substance, could take joyfully the
spoiling of their goods, and can you bear nothing, suffer nothing? True, you
have not this glory in possession, but you have it in reversion; It Is as sure as
sure as may be, the entail cannot be cut off: Christ urges this as an argument
why his Disciples should forsake all and follow him, Matthew. 19.28.
because they should after sit upon thrones of glory with him; And the Apostle
Paul thence presses, they should be contented to suffer because they should be
glorified: Ridlie the Martyr cheered up his fellow, saying, Romans 8.17.
though we have a bitter breakfast, yet we shall have a sweet Supper, meaning
in glory. From these passages I may infer to your comfort, who are Christians
indeed, that be your present burdens never so heavy, yet glory, yea, I may
say, one half hour in glory, will make amends for all: Some persecutors have
been very witty to invent most exquisite torments, yet the hope of blessedness
has made them to be as nothing; The Martyrs in their undaunted courage, made
no more of them then Sampson of the Philistines withs, or like the Leviathan in
Job, Iron is but as straw, and Brass as rotten wood, Job 41.27.
All their troubles and sufferings are but light: they are heavy in themselves,
but the weight of glory makes afflictions light. See 2 Cor. 4.17, 18.

Oh Christians, do but make experiment: when you are apt to droop, and find
your Spirit is overwhelmed, run to this as to your Aqua Vitae bottle, take but
a sip of it and it will refresh you: you shall be blessed, Write, blessed are,
etc. Yea says the Spirit; Oh then lift up the Hands which hang down, and the
feeble Knees! There is no Cup so bitter, but this will sweeten it; no Fire so
hot, but this will slack and quench it. I say again, do but make experiment;
God has provided many supports for his drooping people; but I may say as David
of Goliahs sword, None like to this, no support like the remembrance of glory:
One leaf of the tree of life, is better then clusters of worldly comforts. Be
thy burden what it will, how heavy soever, yet the calling to mind future
blessedness will make it light and easy: Genesis 21.19.
But alas, Saints droop, and with Hagar are ready to faint, when there is a
Well of water by them, but they see it not, at least have not skill to draw:
The Lord open your eyes as he did hers.

But you will say, when shall we have this blessedness and glory? I Answer, at
Death you shall have it, not now, but afterward. See John 13.36. Christ said
to Peter, whither I go, thou can not follow me now, but thou shall follow me
afterward: Christ went to Heaven, thither Peter should come at length when he
dyed. Death is in a sort a cause of this happiness, that is, without which it
will not be; And indeed, see how graciously God has ordered it; Death came as
a curse, Mal. 2.22.
but it is turned into a blessing: God threatens to the wicked, to curse their
blessings, and promises to the godly to bless their curses. Death with one
hand holds forth a Sword, even over Believers, to slay their Body, it smites
one and other, hip and thigh; But observe its other hand, and with that death
opens a door of glory. Who would think that Death should do this? It Is as in
Sampsons riddle, Edulium ex edente.
out of the eater came meat, it is a riddle indeed, but a very truth. And
whereas Death is dismal and dreadful, the King of fears, it becomes now an
Anchor of hope, the valley of Berachah or blessing; So that the Saints can
welcome it, and say as David of Ahimaas, He is a good Man, 2 Samuel 18.27.
and brings good tidings. They can wait for it, Job 14.14. He was an
expectant all his days, yea wish, for it, thus Paul, I desire to be dissolved,
Phil. 1.23. They can stand as Abraham, in the door of the Tabernacle, to speak
to the Angel, or with Elijah, in the mouth of the cave to meet the Lord coming
to them by death; Now how comes this to pass? even because they know they must
be as it were beholding to Death, to do them this favor and kindness, to bring
them to their blessedness. This sure affords strong Consolation to the Children
of God.

I shall carry on this use of Consolation a little further, to the particular
case of any who may be excercised in the loss of godly Friends, they die in the
Lord, and therefore are blessed. But you will say, this was matter of comfort
concerning those who dyed under that persecution to which this relates: But
mark, the voice from Heaven said, Write, intimating it is of use in all ages,
for what is written is for the Churches Learning and comfort to the end of the
World: Blessed are the dead that die now in the Lord. The Apostle in 1 Thessalonians.
3.4. Holds forth this blessedness which Saints shall have after this life is
done, and makes it a main argument of comfort to those that survive, having
lost their godly friends, verse 18. Wherefore comfort one another with these
words, and chiefly with the words immediately preceding, that they are dead in
Christ, and so shall ever be with the Lord. This is comfort indeed, and it is
but sorry comfort where this hope is not fixed sure: this foundation and no
other, will bear up the building of comfort.

Heathens indeed who knew nothing of the blessedness of such as die in Christ,
had their consolatory addresses to their afflicted Friends: They would tell
them, Death was that which none could avoid, therefore in vain it was to
grieve: Mors ultima linea rerum.
They told them it was the common lot of all things; Not only Men, but famous
Cities, flourishing Kingdoms had their periods: Anaxagoras comforted himself at
the death of his Children, saying, he begat them but mortal ones: Heri vidi
fragilem ftangi, hodie mortalem mori.
Epictetus seeing a Woman weeping for her pitcher which she had broken, and
next day for her Son being dead, stayed her mourning, telling her it was all
one: her Son was but as an earthen pitcher.

Little better are those comforts wherewith carnal Christians labor to relieve
themselves and their Friends in these cases, as thus; Death is the way of all
the earth, the house appointed for all living: Josh. 23.14. Job 30.23. Psalm
119.109. Jam. 4.14. Isa 40.6.
we carry our lives in our hand: Our life is as a vapor, which appears for a
little time, and then vanishes away: All flesh is grass, and the goodlinesse
thereof as the flower of the field, the grass withers, the flower fades.
These are Scripture-truths indeed, and not taken out of Heathen Philosophers or
Poets: They are such as rightly used and applied, may be comfortable to relieve
under the loss of Friends and dear relations; But their intendment is not so
much for Consolation as for Instruction to us, that hearing of the frailty of
this life, we may prepare for eternity. Nor indeed in themselves absolutely can
they afford any solid comfort, because they speak only to the condition and
state of the Body; But when the state of the Soul after Death comes to be
weighed, 2 Cor. 5.10. Rev. 20.12 John 3.3, Rev. 20 10 Psalm. 9.17.
as that all must appear before the judgment seat of Christ, and that the
Books shall be opened, and great and small must stand before God: when it shall
be considered that unless a Man be born again, he shall never see the Kingdom
of God: when hear of the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, and that the
wicked shall be turned into Hell. I say again, when these things come to be
weighed, the other passages barely considered, will be but as a spiders web
wherein is no strength, how finely soever it may seem to be woven. But now when
we have good grounds to believe concerning our dead Friends, that they loved,
feared, and served God in their life time, that they were godly, in Christ
Jesus, or in the words of the Text, that they were in the Lord Jesus when they
dyed, when we can comfort one another with these words, This will afford strong
consolation, for of such the word of truth says, they are blessed; They are
freed from sin, made perfect in holiness, they are entered into their Masters
joy, they would not live again on earth, they are ten thousand thousand times
better: This is comfort indeed, this is an Handkerchief to wipe away all tears
from our eyes, yea, to make us go away and be no more sad. This is the use of
Consolation; Oh that Christians would lay it up as a choice treasure, for so
indeed it is; Some may need it for the present, let them make use of it; Others
may soon need it, therefore lay it up against a time of need: It Is ordinary
with us when we find any thing, though for the present we know not what use to
put it to, yet we will lay it up, saying, we may need it before seven years
come about; So I say of this, you will ere long, one and another, have need of
this cordial, therefore keep it by you carefully: you may need it before seven
years come about, perhaps before seven days, yea, seven hours come about: God
may call you your selves to die, and what will be your comfort in a sick bed,
but to know you are in Christ, and so shall be blessed if you die? He may spare
you and take away your Friends, Relations, wherein can you comfort your selves
under such providence but only in this, they were in Christ, and therefore
are blessed.

4. The fourth and last use shall be for Exhortation: It directs it self both
to Saints and Sinners: But a word to the first, because there is great need of
speaking a little more largely to the other. Therefore

1. Let all the Children of God, and Members of Christ, study their own bliss,
and acquaint themselves before hand with the glory that shall be revealed
afterward. Sursum corda.
Set your affections on things above; Let your conversation be in Heaven:
Labor in your meditations to be rapt up into the third Heaven: Be often as it
were drawing the Latch of Heaven door, and look in, yea, walk thorough that
holy Land in the length and breadth of it: Holy, Heavenly Meditations will
enable you to do all this. Let your hearts take possession of Heaven whiles
your bodies are upon earth, and this will work a disdain of things below, Non
satis futura gaudia, nostri nisi renuat conconsolari anima tua donec veniant.
as also a longing after the things above, which ought to be in every Child of
God: surely the more we study this blessedness, the more will the desire after
it be kindled in our breasts.

But I shall speak no more to this part of the use, because all a long, and
especially in the foregoing use, I have spoken to this matter in particular.
Therefore

2. This use directs it self to such as are yet sinners, out of Christ; My
Exhortation to you is this, that you would speedily get into Christ: That you
would labor to be such, as that when you come to die, you may be blessed: Die
you must. Zerxes that great Commandre, standing in the head of a vast Army,
wept to think that within one hundred years they would be all dead, even those
valorous Men, who might seem to outbrave and defy death; The impossibility to
avoid death is a certain truth at all times, but yet chiefly to be considered
by us in these dying times, times of much mortality, God putting us in fear,
that we may know our selves to be but Men, Psalm. 9.20. We are apt to put far
away the evil day, Amos 6.3. Isa. 28.15
and to make Covenants with death; but when we study seriously the decree of
God passing upon all, like the Laws of the Medes and Persians, which cannot be
altered; when we consider our own weakness and frailty, our mould and metal, we
cannot but know we must die: If our inside were turned outward, it would be
seen that for fear of death, we are all our life time subject to bondage: This
lies near our breast, Heb. 2.15.
and makes the heart even die within us, while yet we live.

Oh poor Sinners! die you must, and no doubt but you would be glad to be
blessed when you die; Balaam would fain be happy in death, Let me die the death
of the righteous, Numb. 23.10. His wish implies, that none shall be blessed in
death but the righteous: Sic mihi contingat vivere, sicque mori. (...).
Now would you be happy in death, be holy in life: live in the Lord, and you
shall die in the Lord: If you be gracious here, you shall be glorious
hereafter: To whom to live is Christ, to them to die will be gain; But to them
who live without Christ and without holiness, Death will be Death, and Hell
into the bargain. It Is a frequent and true saying, that holiness is the way to
happiness, not the causal and meritorious way, which only is Christ, but yet a
way, and therefore the Apostle says, Ep. 2.10. That God has ordained that we
should walk in it, that wherein we are to walk, certainly is a way, and if any
baulk holiness the way, they will never find happiness the end: It Is said of
the Emperor Bassianus, that coming to the Empire, and being to choose a Title,
he was wished by one to take the name of Pius, which signifies Godly, but he
refusing that, chose rather to be called Faelix, which signifies happy, which
occasioned his Friend to make this witty reply, and does the Emperor think to
be happy without being holy? It Is much disputed where the place of happiness
is, and diverse opinions are about it, but it is agreed on all hands about,
which is the way that leads to it: The way is but one in this sense, the way of
Holiness, which is not only but one way, but also a straight and narrow way,
opposed to all loose and sinful walkings: Heaven is a place which receives not
the proud, but the humble, not the covetous, but the liberal, not the unclean,
but the chaste, not the drunken, but the sober, not the envious and malicious,
but such as are of a meek, Col. 1.12. (...), qui idoneos nos fecit. Trem. Beza.
gentle, and loving Spirit: It Is the inheritance of Saints, for which persons
must be made meet or fitted: The Spirit of God finds persons sinful, but it new
moulds them, and changes them into holy ones before it brings them to Heaven.

It Is said of one of the Roman Emperors, when he came to the Empire, he found
the City built of Brick, but before he dyed, their buildings were of Marble: I
may apply it to the change which the Holy Ghost makes in the Soul, Invenit
lateritiam, reliquit marmoream. Suet. in vit. August.
he makes a sinful Soul holy, which is more then to pull down buildings of
Brick, and to erect buildings of marble: The result of all is this, that
Holiness is the way to blessedness, they who would take Christ for a Savior,
must take him for a Sampler: they who would have the benefit of his death, must
take the example of his life. The Exhortation therefore is, labor to be holy,
as ever you desire to be happy; Be divorced from your lusts, cast away your
idols, subdue the strength of sin, bid no welcome to the Friends of sin, watch
against the wiles and fetches of sin: make you a clean heart, get a regenerate
heart, the image of God renewed upon your Souls, Qui vult finem, vult media ad
finem.
cease not till you be partaker of the Divine Nature. In a word, be godly in
Christ Jesus: you must use the means in order to the desired end: Must go to
the School of Grace, before you can come to the University of Glory.

I shall now lay down 4. things by way of caution, and then a few closing
Counsels, and so I will have done. For the cautions.

1. Do not think that all shall be blessed, for only they shall be blessed,
who are in the Lord when they die: To be in Christ, and to be godly is all one:
Now the Scripture says, not only that all are not godly, but that the number
of godly ones, compared with the ungodly, is but small, absolutely considered
they are many, Matthew 8.11. Many shall come and sit down with Abraham, etc.
Revel. 7.4. An hundred and forty and four thousand were sealed: But
comparatively they are but few, Matthew. 7.14. Narrow is the way that leads
unto life, and few there be that find it, Luke 12.32. Fear not little flock, or
as the Original will bear, little, (...).
little flock.

2. Do not think that Christ and grace, and a right to blessedness may be had
when thou will, to be at thy beck, come and it comes: There is this
presumptuous conceit in many, which makes them not so much as look after
getting into Christ, till they come to die, when they have extreme need of
being in Christ, and not to have Christ then to get: Luke 19.42.
Let Sinners hear and fear that word and wish of Christ, Oh that thou had
known in this thy day, the things that concern thy peace! yea, but they might
say, we will know them, it is yet all in good time. He answers they had lost
their day and season, and now they were hidden from their eyes. Will not some
bemoan themselves when it is too late in the words of the Prophet? Jer. 8.20.
The Summer is past, the Harvest is ended, and we art not saved: The time of
grace ends with the time of life to all. Manna must be gathered on the six
days of thy life, there is no gathering on the seventh, resembling thy rest in
death; there is no devise nor knowledge in the grave; But yet the day of grace
may end with some, before they come to the end of the days of their life; And
though we know not the expiration of it, nor can say of any particular person,
nor any particular person say of himself, that the day of grace is past, unless
it were known that he had sinned the sin against the Holy Ghost; Yet Scripture
expressions hold forth the truth of the thing, that it is so; And therefore let
all presumptuous delayers look well about them, and O Sinner, to day, on this
thy day hear the voice of Christ, believe and repent. How know thou but this
may be the day, this the Sermon, which if thou rejectest, Mercy and Peace may
be for ever hidden from thine eyes. Blessedness is not to be had when thou will.

3. Do not think, though thou live in sin, and go on in thy wickedness,
yet thou may come to Heaven at last for all that; Consider, and seriously
weigh but these Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 29.19. Gal. 6.7. 1 Cor. 6.9. And if this have
been thy thought, thy inward thought, (for none will say so, whatever they
think) they may well make thee be of another mind.

4. And lastly, by way of caution, think not that every remiss way of serving
of God, will serve the turn to bring thee to blessedness: Lukewarmness is the
sin of our age, and the bane of our Souls; Many Christians by profession, are
in their spiritual condition, 1 King 2.1.
like David in his old age as to his bodily condition, so cold, that though
they covered him with clothes, yet he gat no heat; All the Ordinances under
which they lie, will not warm them into any Zeal, but they continue either very
cold and frozen, or at most but lukewarm; Like the Climat wherein they live,
which is neither extreme cold, nor violently hot, but temperate; they have a
profession, but no power, they keep in a round of duties, without being
quickened in any love to God, or zeal for God; but alas this will not bring to
Blessedness, as was showed before in the opening of the Text. These are the
cautions.

Now to draw to a Conclusion, I have from the Scripture before us, held forth
the bliss and happiness of Saints, and thereby an offer has been made of the
same blessedness unto Sinners: It offers it self to you, Oh that you would
offer your selves to it! In this Sermon you may say, Salvation came to your
House: it came to your Doors; Heaven goes a begging that it may be accepted;
But it fares in this case, as we commonly observe in other cases, proffered
things find little acceptance, because proffered: And indeed if we consider the
multitude of Sermons that are preached, and how in every Sermon Christ, and
Heaven, and Blessedness are offered, yet by very few accepted; We must needs
think and judge, the frequent tenders do through the corruption of our hearts,
occasion the horrible sleighting of them: Silver in the days of Solomon; being
common was of no account: The Lord grant this sin bring not upon us the
scarcity of the Word, that it should be with us as in the days of Samuel, 1 Samuel 3.1.
The Word of the Lord was precious in those days, there was no open vision.
The time may come, when we would give a world to see one of the days of the
Son of Man, and shall not see it: To hear one Sermon of Heaven and glory, but
shall not hear it.

I have showed Saints the blessedness which they shall have, and also to
Sinners the way how they may share in this Blessedness: I do again counsel
Sinners to look after it, yea, in the Name of the Lord I charge you to close
with it; Now to provoke you to it, I shall lay down five closing Conclusions
very briefly, and so leave them upon your hearts and thoughts.

1. This Counsel is such as never any repented that took it: It works
repentance not to be repented of; If any repent of Christ, it is because he
never truly knew Christ: They who say, it is in vain to serve God, Malachi 3.4.
Are such as never truly served him.

2. It Is such Counsel, as if it be refused, you will certainly repent of the
refusal, yea, and that when it is too late: Oh that I had known the things of
my peace! will be the doleful lamentation in the scorching flames of Hell.

3. It Is such Counsel as in your own Consciences, when you are serious, you
think you ought to take; Yea, Sinners think to do it, whereby they show that
they know, they ought to do it; Fertur equi Auriga
The reason why it is not done, is not because we do not know it ought to be
done, but we are hurried with our strong lusts and corruptions; We are cumbred
with our Farms and our Trades, we loose Heaven in the crowd of earthly
businesses.

4. It Is such Counsel, as if followed, carries its reward with it, though there
were no Blessedness to ensue, no glory afterward: holiness is happiness, Gods
work is wages.

5. And lastly, the contempt of it will not only leave you short of
Blessedness, but conclude you under inevitable misery and cursednesse, it will
bring an heavy shock of wrath and ruin upon Soul and Body.

Hear the Conclusion of the whole matter; Get into Christ, for this will free
you from being cursed, and also make you everlastingly Blessed.

FINIS.
CHRISTIAN READER.
THis Sermon presented to your view, was preached at the Funeral of Mr. Thomas
Goodwyn, an eminent light and pillar of the Church in the place where he lived,
who after he had served his generation by the Will of God, fell on sleep, Sept.
4. 1658.

He sleeps in Jesus; he gave evident proof that he was one in Christ, and
therefore we may conclude from what has been spoken, he is now Blessed, for
blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, or that are in the Lord when they
die: He was a good, yea, a precious Man: Let him have the memorial of the
righteous, which is and shall be blessed. He was well known to be a Minister of
great worth, every way qualified for the work of the Ministry: It was his
desire from a Youth to be a Minister (as himself has sometimes told me) and
according to his hearts desire, the Lord in due time disposed of him, and drew
him out to that service, fitting him for it, and blessing him in it. How he was
fitted for it, the Brethen in the whole County, and many others to whom he was
known in more remote places, will give ample Testimony.

How he was blessed in it, the many weeping eyes at his Funeral, with the sad
complaints still under this great loss do speak: these declare him to have been
under God an instrument of much good. Though success do not constitute a good
Ministry (for a good Man may fish all night and catch nothing,) yet it does
declare and evidence it: These I remember were his own words, long since in the
time of his health at the Lecture in Brentwood, and this evidence he abundantly
had.

He was learned and godly, Doctior an Sanctior?
which is a most blessed conjunction, where ever they meet; it is hard to say
which of the two did bear the preeminence in him, they seemed to keep pace, and
that no slow pace; He was eminent in both. He had much profited in humane
Learning, but especially in the studies of Divinity, and in particular had
gotten great acquaintance with the Scriptures; He was like Ezra, A ready Scribe
in the Law of God, he was an. Ezr. 7.6. Acts 18.24.
Apollos, mighty in the Scriptures. He was but young, yet his seize were
very great, God gave of his Spirit abundantly to him. In Praying he was a sweet
Soul, full of the breathings of the Holy Ghost: In Preaching he was very
powerful, speaking to his Hearers as if he had been within them: In his walking
he was an Exemplary Christian, an Exemplary Minister, he might say to his
people, as Gideon to his Soldiers, Look on me, and do likewise. Jud. 7.17.


His Preaching was such, that the godly learned did admire him, and yet the
meanest capacities (they of the Belfry, as is Mr. Latimer's expression) did
understand him; he had such a winning way, that his Sermons were not tedious,
but his Hearers seemed to be chained to his lips.

He was a great Pains-taker; in preaching so often, and yet carried on with
delight: I am persuaded, he might have said in the words of that holy Bishop,
My witness is in Heaven, Cowper.
that the love of Christ, and peoples Souls, made frequent Preaching my
recreation and pleasure.

His Words seemed to come from his very heart, one that did eat the roll, as
the Prophet is bid, Ezekiel. 3.1.
before he gave it to his Hearers to digest: An Argument that they came from
the heart, was his earnest driving on, that they might go to the hearts of his
people; He thought he had done nothing, till his Hearers hearts were more
renewed, and their Lives more reformed: Till (to use his own words) he could
read the Sabbath-dayes work, in their Week-dayes conversation.

His Life was a looking-glass, wherein the people might see to dress and
attire their Conversation: I may say in the words of the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians.
2.10. His people were Witnesses, Ille solus praedicat viva voce, qui praedicat
vita and voce.
and God also; how holily, and justly, and unblamably, he behaved himself among
them: being as a Minister of Christ ought to be, a lover of good Men, sober,
just, holy, temperate, Tit. 1.8.

He was very zealous in the work of Reformation: The zeal of Gods House did
even eat him up, and in the cause of God he showed undaunted Courage,
vigorously pursuing what might make for the glory of God, in despite of all
opposition; one might stand upon his grave, and say as a great person said over
the grave of Mr. Knox, Here lies one who never feared the Face of any Man. I
knew him well, yet could I never perceive that he was sinfully, and proudly
puffed up, though his large endowments might have tempted him thereunto, but in
his whole Conversation, as far I could judge, did behave himself holily, humbly.

He lived free from worldly Encombrances, but very full of cares for the
promoting Gods glory, and his peoples Salvation: He has sometime told me in
the time of his health, how sadly it would go to his heart, (upon hearing the
Bell ring sometime in the night, which gave notice that some person was dead)
that any one should be sick and die, and himself their Pastor have no notice of
their sickness, nor be so much as desired to confer with them about their
spiritual estate: His Lamentation was in these words, Moriuntur oves, dormitat
Pastor, The shepherd lies a sleeping, while the sheep lie adying. The great
care of Souls made him study how to quit himself from being overcharged with
the cares of this life, declaring by his little meddling with the things of the
world, that he sought not the things of his own, but the things of Jesus
Christ; This should be the endeavor of every sincere Christian, but especially
of every faithful Minister.

The Palm Tree, Psalm 92.12.
to which the righteous is compared, is least in the body or trunk near the
earth, and biggest in the boughs nearest Heaven: The frame of the fleshly heart
in the body being close shut up in that part which is toward the earth, but
more broad and open in the upper part toward Heaven, shows what should be the
spiritual frame of every gracous heart: Thus was it with this good Man, 2 Timothy
2.4
and precious Servants of Jesus Christ, he abhorred to be entangled with the
affairs of this life, that Heaven might have the more room in his heart.

In a word, He was a Minister of the Gospel, and he did, Hoc agere, endeavor
the fulfilling of his Ministry; He did intend his work, he made it his
business, being one who studied to approve himself to God, a Workman that
needed not to be ashamed, 2 Timothy 2.15.

He was taken away young, but he did work while it was day, yea, he labored
much, as if he did foresee, he had not long time to work in: Diu vixit, et si
non diu fnit, He did much work in a little time. It Is much to be lamented that
his Sermon notes were written so illegibly, through a quick and hasty writing,
whereby it becomes impossible, they should ever be published to the glory of
God, and the benefit of the Church.

Thus have I given a brief account of what he was in the time of his Life and
Health: Diverse know what has been spoken, is no other than what might be
spoken deservedly and in truth; yea, much more might be spoken without any
suspicion of Flattery. The sum of all is this, He lived in the Lord, he lived
to the Lord.

I may add, He died in the Lord, yea, died to the Lord, as may be judged by his
deportment under that sickness which ended his days: Dying to the Lord as
has been showed, is when a person cast upon his sick bed endeavors the
exercise and laying out of his graces to the glory of God, and the profit of
them with whom he does converse: Thus did he very sweetly, so far as could
possibly be expressed, considering the shortness of his sickness, being but
for the space of fourteen days, as I best remember, and the Stupifyingnesse of
his Disease, seizing and much dulling his Spirits.

He did much impair the strength of his outward Man, by a free letting out
himself in discourse about Heavenly things to some Neighbors, who came to
visit him, the first Sabbath after he was taken: This did much increase his
distempers, and of this he was the day following very sensible, and could not
but confess it to me, at my first visiting of him; At this my first visit, in
discourse I spoke to him by way of remembrance, if need were, about that
Christian duty of willing submision to Gods Will, under every dispensation of
providence, and so that of his present sickness in particular: To this counsel
he readily concurred, and withal added, that it was his desire to reach
further, and not only to submit, which an ordinary Christian might do, but to
raise up himself to Courage and Cheerfulness under the rod; Annexing also a
reason, why he of all Men should not droop under Affliction, saying, he blessed
God, that hitherto he could date his choicest mercies from some great
Affliction.

I sometime in discourse, held forth what desperate attempts Satan had made
upon Gods Children, when they were brought low by sickness, and therefore
counseled him to set Faith on work, being the only Shield to quench the fiery
darts of the Devil: To this he replied, that I bless God, as yet, Satan has
got no ground by this Affliction. This passed, I think at a second visit. But
coming to him again after a few days, (it was on the Sabbath day, the last
Sabbath to him in this life,) I found him brought low by his sickness,
insomuch that I then began to fear he would not break it: Hereupon I entered a
more close discourse as to eternity, hinting withal my own fears, that his
sickness might be mortal, he took it (as he expressed himself) exceeding
kindly, and gave me a full Answer to what in my discourse I drove at. Dear
Friend, said he, two days since I overheard the Doctor speaking to my Wife, as
if he feared me: and I bless God who so ordered it that I should hear it: For
indeed till then, I did not so seriously consider of death, as since I have
done; I did all a long my sickness set my heart to endeavor a sanctified use
of the Lords hand, but overhearing that, I thought it needful to look most
carefully into my heart, as to evidences for eternity, and truly, says he,
upon a thorough search of my heart, I bless God, I find good old evidences,
though I be but a young Man, and they stick very close to me: But Friend, said
he, one thing I must tell you troubles and afflicts my Spirit very much, that
when I grew very serious, being exercised about serious work, the searching of
my heart for eternity evidences, I perceived this seriousness of mine, was
judged by some to be melancholy for the fear of death: Now this indeed troubles
me very much, that any should take me to be such an one, who am afraid to die.

Some other visits I gave him, but for fear of wronging him being very weak; I
only upon his desire prayed with him and left him: At one of these times he
spoke privately to me, that he was willing to have discoursed, but because of
some Company in the room, he judged it not convenient.

Upon Friday, the day before he departed, I had some discourse with him, which
was occasioned thus: Some godly Neighbors had agreed a private meeting to seek
the Lord for him, and they had desired me to meet with them: Now that I might
know the better how to order my Petitions, I thought it needful to visit my
sick Friend in the way, and thereby to be better informed, whether his sickness
did increase upon him; I came to his Bedside, but he laystil, and seemed not
to know me: Hereupon his Wife asked him if he knew me, he said yes, and called
me by my name; but withal asked if it were Thursday, (supposing I had been
come to the Lecture, and so by the way visited him:) I then told him it was
Friday, and so gave him an account whither I was going, even to join with his
people in seeking the Lord for him, and desired to know, what he would have us
most importune the Lord for on his behalf.

After a little pause, he brake out into most affectionate speeches, to
express his own sense of his peoples love to him, and how greatly his Love was
set upon them: I could not bear away all his words, but he was full of these,
Oh my poor people! Oh the Souls of my poor people! How dear, how precious are
they to me! Oh if God should spare me, how would I lay out my self for them!
After this he prayed me to commend him to his people, and tell them, that
wherein he desired their prayers was to beg of God a clearer sense of his
love, saying, not that I altogether want it, for I bless God, I have it, but
says he, Sometimes -- and so laid down and said no more, and I finding him to
be much spent with speaking, durst not urge him any further, but went away
partly rejoicing that though Satan did buffet, yet that he had been able to
prevail no further.

On the next day being Saturday, (in the evening whereof the Lord took him) I
went again to him in the afternoon, but before I was up the stairs, I heard him
speaking with a very loud voice; This at first hearing struck my heart,
perceiving his distemper was come to that height, that there could be no hopes
conceived of his life: before I went in, I stood hearing him a little time at
the door, Cygnea cantio. Oportet Episcopum concionantem mori.
and by and by went in, and stood by his bedside, attending to what he spoke;
where indeed I heard a precious, powerful discourse about the sweetness and
fullness of Christ: It was spoken just as if he had been in the Pulpit
preaching: I could not but stand and wonder to hear a distempered head vent
such a discourse, so methodical and so clear, with the quoting of Scriptures,
and no failing in sense, and not much faultring in words; he quoted 1 Cor.
3.21, 22, 23. And went as far as he could in rehearsing the words, All things
are yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or
death, or things -- here his mouth being much clam'd he could not get out his
words, but yet made a shift to add, because ye are Christ's: I know the
distemper of his head was the cause of this loud speech, but yet I believe this
distemper was a means to draw forth what was in his heart. Now perceiving that
he had spent himself far beyond what his then little or no strenth would bear,
I spoke to him saying; My dear Friend, though your discourse may be very
profitable to my self and others that stand by, yet I know it does much spend
and weaken you, and so wished him to forbear and lie still; Hereupon he did
cease a while, and after some little pause, he spoke again in some few, (but
very sweet words,) which were these; Well, it is a sweet thing when he that
speaks of Christ, has Christ dwelling in him at that time when he speaks.
After this he spoke no more while I was there, neither can I learn of others
that he spoke any more, but left those for his last words: And so falling into
slumbrings and cold sweats before midnight, he gave up the Ghost. He had
finished his Testimony; The Witnesses cannot be slain till this be done, Rev.
11.7. His work was done, and now he has his Crown; Our work is not yet done,
but it remains that we be followers of the Saints, as they were followers of
Christ, then shall we also receive the Crown, 2 Timothy 4.8.
the Crown of righteousness which the Lord, the righteous Judge shall give, not
to a Paul only, a Minister, a Preacher of the Gospel; But to them also that
love his appearing.


