A SALUTATION of LOVE FROM A Prisoner for the Testimony of Christ Jesus To his
Loving and Kind Neighbors.
FRIENDS and Neighbors, in and about Bromsgrove, amongst whom I have had my
abode from my Childhood,
I understanding many of you are concerned for me, and dissatisfied concerning
my present Sufferings, which with a Spirit of Meekness and Moderation I shall
endeavor to satisfy, if it may be.

Now Friends, we have all one Master, that we must either stand or fall to; for
we must all give an Account to God of our Deeds done in the Body, whether they
be Good, or whether they be Evil, which I desire to stand Approved before. And
although some may account my Sufferings Frivolous, or out of a Stubborn Will, I
do desire to appeal unto the Lord, who knows the Integrity of my Heart, and
that knows all things, that it is not in a Stubborn Will, nor in Contempt of
Authority, but in Obedience unto to the Lord, to bear a Testimony against those
who profess themselves Ministers of the Gospel, and walk contrary to the
Command of Christ, and Examples of the true Ministers in the Primitive Time.
Now it may be said, That every Soul ought to be subject unto the higher Powers;
which my Soul desires to be, and to submit to Magistrates in their places, so
that I may keep my Conscience clear unto the Lord; and to pay Tribute to the
King, who is set over us, as a Ruler to defend our Just Rights in outward
things; but our Conscience we must keep clear unto the Lord, for he must Rule
there: for God must have his Due as well as Caesar his. We do not read in the
Scriptures, that it belonged to Caesar to choose Prophets or Priests in the Time
of the Law; that was God's Due and Work, and belonged unto him, who made use of
Aaron to be as a Mouth and Priest unto Israel; and chose the Tribe of Levi to
perform the Priesthood under the Law, and gave them the Tenth of the Increase,
who were to have no other Inheritance amongst their Brethren; but the Tenth was
their Portion in the old Covenant, who stood until the time of Reformation, and
remained for the offering up of Sacrifices, until Christ, the acceptable
Sacrifice, was offered up, Who offered himself up once for all, and put an end
to that Priesthood under the Law, which continued not by Reason of Death; and
so stands as Priest forever, who ever lives to make Intercession for us, Heb.
7.23, 24, 25. And so this Priesthood which was maintained by Tithe, is Changed,
and that Law also, verse 12. for Christ is to be Prophet, Priest and Lawgiver:
And it is he only and alone that chooses Ministers and fitteth them for his Use
and Service, and sends them forth and takes Care of them, who sent them forth
as Lambs amongst Wolves, and were not to take thought what to eat or what to
put on, but to enquire, Who was worthy, and to eat such things as were set
before them: They were not to Compel a Tenth of Peoples Labors, for they had
no such Command; for that Priesthood that took Tithe was to cease: Christ's
Ministers received Freely of him, and were to administer Freely. And so it was
not Caesar's Due nor Place to choose Ministers and appoint Maintenance for them,
but God's and Christ's Due: And so we must give Caesar his Due in outward
Things, and God and Christ their Due in spiritual Things, and in choosing
Ministers for themselves, and appointing them a Maintenance. The Apostle said,
He was not made a Minister by the Will of Man, nor received his Gospel from
Man, neither was taught it of Man, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal.
1.1, 11, 12. And the holy Ghost said, Separate Barnabas and Saul for the Work I
have for them to do; and they were sent by the holy Ghost, Acts 13.2, 3, 4. And
these whom the Lord chose were not sent to Schools to learn Latin, Greek and
Hebrew to make them Gospel Ministers, which are but Natural Languages, and then
to a College to take their Degrees, as Batchelors of Art and Masters of Art,
for Christ commanded his Ministers not to be called Masters, Mat. 23.10. and
Batchelors of Divinity and Doctors of Divinity; and if they can make Friends
with Money, or otherwise, they may be made Lord Bishops, or Deans, and have
Hundreds or Thousands by the Year; which all is come in since the Apostles
Days, and since Popery came up, in the dark Night of Apostasy: For we do not
read in the Scriptures of Truth of a Lord Bishop; they were not to be Lords
over God's Heritage, 1 Pet. 1.1, 2, 3. There you may read they were not to
compel a Tenth of Peoples Labors; but to feed the Flock of God, taking the
oversight thereof, not by Constraint, but Willingly; not for filthy Lucre, but
with a ready Mind: And when the chief Shephard shall appear, they shall have a
Crown of Life that fa^eth not away. But these who are made Ministers by Man,
taking their Degrees from Schools and Colleges, they Exercise Lordship over
People; he that for Conscience Sake cannot answer their Corrupt Greedy-Mind,
they soon make use of a Law against them; and it may be, for the value of Five
or Six Shillings will cast a man into Prison, and there keep him, it may be,
Months, Years, or for Term of Life: We do not read of such Proceedings amongst
the True Christians. And they will tell us, It is the Law that takes hold of
us, like the Jews, who were stirred up by the chief Priests, against Christ,
our Lord and Master, to put him to Death; Pilate finding him a Just Man, and
nothing worthy of Death, they said, We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to
Dye, John 16.6, 7. Now some may say, Do you compare your selves to Christ? I
say, no otherwise but as Christ Our Lord and Master, and We his Servants and
Followers, who said, The Servant is not greater than his Lord; they have
persecuted me, and they will persecute you. And so that is our Portion from
these that exercise Lordship over People, that bind heavy Burdens, and lay them
on men's Shoulders, grievous to be born, and they themselves not touch them with
one of their Fingers.

And so, Friends and Neighbors, having something cleared my Spirit, I leave it
with you, to consider well of it; and the Desire of my Soul, and Prayer of my
Heart unto the Lord for you, is, That an understanding may be opened in you.
And loving Neighbors, I desire you in the Bowels of Love and Tenderness, That
you judge not of things before the Time; for the Day will discover all things,
and bring every hidden things before to light; and then it will be known who
are they that serve the Lord, and they that serve him not; and a Separation
will be betwixt the Precious and the Vile. And in the mean time I do desire to
rest satisfied in my Condition, until the Lord please to set me Free, which I
believe will be in his appointed time: He who knows our Grief, and Bottleth up
our Tears, will Ease the Oppressed, and set the Prisoners Free. And Loving and
kind Neighbors, I call you Loving and Kind, because you have been so to me, I
take my leave of you, and rest your Friend and Neighbor, willing, in what I
may, to serve you in Love,

Worcester County-Goal, the 16th of the 8th Month, 1679. John Boweter.

Postscript.
WHo goes a Warfare at his own Charge? (some may say) Are not Ministers to
have a Maintenance? Were not they that waited at the Altar, to partake of the
things of the Altar? And is not he that preaches the Gospel, to live of the
Gospel? and he that sows Spiritual, to reap Carnal things?

To this I Answer: He that preaches the Gospel is to live of the Gospel: It
does not say, he that preaches the Gospel shall live of the Law, or Sue men at
the Law for a Maintenance; for the Gospel is a Free Thing, which is the Gift of
God, and received Freely, and is not to be bought and sold for Money, Acts
8.18, 19, 20, 21. Now the Apostle had a Necessity laid upon him, who said, Woe
is to me if I preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16. yet he was not limited, but
that he might reap Carnal things; For the Workman is worthy of his Meat: But
it is not reasonable to compel it of them that set them not at work, neither
own their Work. Now he that should come in the Name of the Lord, and have the
free Gospel to declare, and being Necessitated, I could freely, according to my
Ability, administer of my Carnal or Temporal Things to him for his Relief.

Farewell. J. B.


