For the Inhabitants of Worcester to view, and consider well of, especially
they of Nicholas-Parish.
The Case of us, viz. Edward Bourne, John Knight, Joseph Allibon and Richard
Hill, of Nicholas-Parish in the City of Worcester.
BEing Excommunicated, and a Writ de Excommunicato Capiendo is come down to
imprison us, upon which Edward Bourne is closely confined, who was a Prisoner
before for no Evil, except it be an Evil to exhort, advise and persuade People
to dwell together in Love, Note, That if to do these things be accounted an
Evil by any amongst you, yet they are not so accounted by the Lord.
and to be at Peace amongst themselves, and to live in the fear of the Lord,
and to obey his Voice, by whom we are all called upon, To follow Peace and
Holiness with all Men; which is his Call unto all People, without which no man
shall see the Lord, though they make mention of his Name, and call upon him
never so often; see Matthew. 7.21. and Heb. 12.14. He that reads, let him
understand. So consider, whether it be Righteous in the sight of God, to
imprison any for persuading and advising People to do as above is mentioned,
especially when such believe, they shall sin, if they neglect the same. So, you
see it is for obeying the Voice of the Lord, for hearing and doing what God
speaks to us by his Son Christ Jesus, by whom we are called unto Peace, that
this measure is measured unto us. And consider, if they must go into
everlasting Fire, who did not visit Christ in his Members in Prison; what will
become of them that cast them in? It Is not for us to be silent, and to hold our
peace, and not to warn people of the danger they are in, when the Lord makes us
sensible thereof, and requires it at our Hands: Though it may be said
concerning us, We are no Prophets, nor no Prophets Sons, as Amos said; see Amos
7.14, 15. Yet the Lord who knows best what is to be done, may call whom he will
to such a Service as this, he knows best who is the fittest for it: Who said to
Amos, who was a gatherer of Sycomore Fruit, and followed the Flock; Go
prophecy to my people Israel. And to David the Lord said, I took thee from the
Sheep-Cote, from following the Sheep, to be Ruler over my people, over Israel;
and I was with thee whither soever thou wentest; and have cut off all thine
Enemies out of thy sight, etc. see 2 Samuel 7, 8, 9, etc. So can any know who are
fit for the work and service of the Lord, so well as he? Will it not be a great
presumption in any so to take upon them. It Is appointed for all to dye, and
after that to come to Judgment; to bear and lie under the Sentence and Judgment
of him that judges Righteously, where people will be blessed or cursed
forever. And know, that in the Grave will be no repentance. So, if the Lord
make any of us sensible of the Misery he is bringing upon such as mind not his
Call, nor do not obey his Voice; if we do not discharge a good Conscience
toward them, in warning them thereof, will not their Blood lie upon us? Will
not the Righteous Lord, who loves Righteousness, and requires Truth in the
inward parts, require it of us? See what the Lord said to Ezekiel, See thou, O
Son man, I have set thee a Watchman unto the House of Israel.; therefore thou
shall hear the Word at my Mouth, and warn them from me: When I say to the
wicked man, Thou shall surely dye: If thou do not speak to warn the wicked
man from his way, that wicked man shall dye in his Iniquity; But his Blood will
I require at thy Hand, Ezekiel. 33.7, 8. begin the Chapter, and read to verse 10.
You who shall read this, consider thereof, and the Lord give you understanding.

And now concerning our Case, who are Excommunicated, and a Writ de
Excommunicato Capiendo is come down to Imprison us: This hard measure is
measured unto us by Unmerciful persons, who mind not Christ's command, To do to
others, as they would be done unto themselves. Though they call themselves
Christians, and account themselves Christ's true followers: but the Tree is
known by its Fruit. Concerning whom we can say, (praised be the Lord therefore;
notwithstanding they have measured such measure to us) The Lord forgive them,
and change their Hearts from Hardness to Softness, from Stonyness to
Fleshiness, that they may be as God would have them to be, who is merciful and
kind, and would have people to be so; lest as they have done, it be done to
them again; according as they have measured, it be measured to them again. For
he shall (said the Apostle and Servant of Christ Jesus) have Judgment without
Mercy, who showed no Mercy, James 2.13.

The Wardens of Nicholas Parish, viz. for the last Year, one of which is
High-Warden this Year, demanded a little Money of every one of us; the whole
they demanded was Eight Shillings, toward the repair of the Church (so called)
which we could not pay them, because we believed we should offend the Lord in
doing it; and not because we loved our Money so well, that we could not part
with it. So it was not for Covetousness-sake we were not willing to part with
so much Money; for we have parted with a great deal more many times, as many
know, and that freely, when by the Law we could not be compelled thereunto,
when we believed it necessary so to do; which we did not, nor do believe in
this case to be necessary for us; for reasons you may know more hereafter, if
occasion shall require the same, than at present we may give you. It may be
what we shall say at present for our selves herein, may be satisfactory to you:
However, to such who are reasonable, who desire to do to others, as they would
be done unto themselves; Let us ask you, why should we be forced and compelled
by rigor, to do what God has not given us to believe we may do without
offending him therein? You may say, You see no Harm therein. Suppose it be as
you say, You see no Harm therein? then you may come off the better, when to God
you must come to a reckoning, to give account of all things you have done: For
it is said, The time of Ignorance God winked at. I wish you may reform in what
you see the Lord would have you come to a Reformation in. But be it so as you
say; Must it follow, that others must do so, because you see no Harm therein,
when they believe it will turn to their Harm to do it? Will it be safe for
others to walk by your sight, or by their own? But tell us what is the good you
see herein? Are you the better approved of in the sight of the Lord therefore,
do you believe? You may answer the Question if you see it meet. Ought not every
Man and Woman to do as God has given them to believe they ought to do? And if
any do that which God has not given them to believe they should do, but
forbear so to do; or if in the least they cannot have satisfaction in
themselves, but they shall do amiss therein? Will not such sin in so doing,
since the Apostle says, Let every one be fully persuaded in his own mind in
what he does: For whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin? Romans 14.5.23. If this be
your Rule, ought you not to walk according to it? But if you have a better Rule
then this to walk by, you may do well to let us know it.

So this is our case, and thus it stands with us; and here, as in a Glass, you
may see where we are, and upon what Foundation we stand: And if you can find in
you Hearts to open your Purses to part with Money to throw us into Prison, and
so to disable us from paying Taxes on the Poors account, and other accounts,
which according to our Abilities we were always ready to do, and so to wrong
the Poor, and bring a heavier burden upon your selves, which in likelihood will
be in outward things, as well as upon your Consciences, which certainly will
hereby be loaded, and the righteous Spirit of God grieved in you, to gratify
such persons, whose Fruits declare them to be Envious and Malicious; though
they pray, that God would deliver them from all Envy and Malice. The Lord look
upon it, and judge between you and us herein.

These Wardens caused us to be cited into the Chancellours Court, where we
often appeared, and wrote to them to satisfy them concerning our selves, and
to have satisfaction from them, which they have not yet answered, nor never
will, we believe; through whose doings we are Excommunicated, that is,
delivered up to the Devil, as it is said, which is sad to consider of; for we
have done them no wrong: and Christ says, Love your Enemies. Now if they were
Christ's true followers, do you believe they would deal thus by us? We do not
believe they would. And do not these cry down the Papists for their Cruelty?
The Inquisitors in Spain for their grievous Persecution, and say, They are
Antichristian therein? But satisfy us who can, whether a better spirit be the
guide of these, in these their doings, then such are guided by? And whether it
be not one and the self-same Spirit which guides the one, that guides the
other? But for what they have done against us, we say, The Lord forgive them.
From

Your Friends and Neighbors, Edward Bourne, Joseph Allibon, John Kinght,
Richard Hill.

Worcester-City-Prison, the 1st of June (so called) 1682. Since this was writ,
John Knight was Imprisoned, being Arrested, on the account herein mentioned,
who is under a close Confinement with Edward Bournand also Richard Hill.



THE END.
Books Printed and Sold by Andrew Soul, at the Sign of the Crooked-Billet in
Holloway-Lane in Shoreditch, and at his Shop without Bishops-Gate, 1682.
NO CROSS, NO CROWN; Being a Discourse of the Holy Cross of Christ. By William
Penn.

A Legal Examination of Abuses of LAW, concerning 1. Forcible Entry, 2.
Imprisonment without Warrant, 3. Riots, Routs and Unlawful Assemblies; 4. The
public Peace and breach of it; 5. How Arbitrary and Illegal the late
proceedings at Bristol are; 6. Oppression and Duress by Goals and Goalers, etc.
How contrary to Law: What privilege the Law allows to Prisoners.


Due Order of Law and Justice pleaded, against Irregular and Arbitrary
Proceedings. By George Whitehead.

An Address to Protestants upon the present Conjuncture, in Two Parts. By
William Penn.

Humphry Smith's Books collected into one Volumn.

The Arraignment of Popery; Being a short Collection out of Ecclesiastical
Histories and Chronological Accounts of the State of the Church, viz How long
it was before the Universal Pope and Mass was set up, and the bringing in of
their Rudiments, Traditions, Beads, Images, Purgatory, Tithes, Inquisitions,
etc. And the Cruelty they have acted since the Pope got up. Also, the manner of
the Spanish Inquisition.


