An EPISTLE to FRIENDS
DEAR Friends every where, who suffer Bonds for the Gospel's-sake, which is the
Power of God.
It is an Honor which the Lord does Honor you withal, in that he account you
worthy thereof; wherefore rejoice therein, because God has Honored you with
so high a calling in that it has been His good pleasure to call you thereunto,
which is for your good, yea, for your best good: For these things Dear Friends
are for the Trial of your Faith, and Patience, and that you may be purified,
and made clean from all Impurity and filthiness, both of Flesh and Spirit, that
you may be made more precious than fine Gold, which has often passed through
the fire, to which Sion's-Sons are comparable, and a man comes to be made more
precious than the Gold of Ophire. God knows what is best for us, and
therefore it will be good for us to bear with Patience what he in his Divine
Wisdom sees meet to suffer to come upon us, for the Trial of our Faith and
Patience, that our Faith may be more precious than the Gold which perishes.

Let us be content to follow Christ whithersoever it be, and think no
sufferings too much to suffer for his Name sake, who suffered Death for us all,
yea for the worst of men, even the Rebellious and ungodly, that he might bring
us unto God, in which, says the Apostle of Christ Jesus, God commended his
love to us, in that while we were yet Sinners Christ died for us; Was not this
love indeed? Does not the Rich love of God appear toward us herein? And if he
honors us by calling us to suffer Tribulation for his Name sake; Let us assure
our selves, it is for our profit, and Advantage, and not that thereby we should
come to loss, and be destroyed.

Wherefore lift up your Heads, and be glad in the Lord, and strong in the Power
of his might, yea let the weak hands be strengthened, and the feeble knees
confirmed; who are of a fearful Heart, be strong, fear not; for God will cause
these exercises to work for good to us in the End, by holding out, and
continuing to the End in the Faith and Patience, by our doing as God has, and
shall give us to believe we ought to do with Patience. Hereby shall we obtain
victory over the World, and over him who Rules in the disobedient ones, who are
of this World, by him who is not of this World, and has Chosen us out of the
World, and be made through the great love of God to us in him Conquerors, and
more than Conquerors such come thereby to be, who are Redeemed from those who
get the better one of another by warring and contending one with another, with
their Carnal Weapons; who after they have done all that they can in that way
of Warring and contending, do many of them end their days in sorrow; but who
are made Conquerors through Christ, who has loved them, and tasted Death for
them; their end comes to be happy, the Peace and joy of God being their
portion, in which they are blessed forever.

So DEAR FRIENDS, think it not much because of the fiery Trials which you are
come to be tried withal, as if some strange thing had happened unto you, for
these things are no otherwise than it was amongst those many Ages and
Generations since, who were the called and Chosen of the Lord, who then
rejoiced and were glad in the Lord therein, when they were persecuted for
Christ's sake, yea in that God did reckon, and account them worthy thereof, and
for whose sake they suffered joyfully the spoiling of their goods, knowing that
they had laid up for them in Heaven, a better and more Indurable Substance,
Riches and Treasures, which far exceeded those Earthly Treasures they suffered
the spoiling of, which no Robbers nor spoilers could Rob nor spoil them of,
wherefore rejoice in the Lord, and again I say Rejoice, because with them by
your being Faithful unto the Lord God your maker unto the death, you shall be
sharers and partakers of these Heavenly Treasures, which will never decay, and
so come to receive a Crown of life which fades not away.

It was by sufferings Christ Jesus the Captain of our Salvation was made
perfect, wherefore being called of the Lord thereunto, as was the Apostle of
Christ Jesus, Let us therein rejoice even as he did, when he suffered for his
Lord and Master's sake Christ Jesus, who said to the Saints at Coloss; For
whom, for Christ's sake he suffered, who now rejoice in my sufferings for you,
and fill up that which is behind of the Afflictions of Christ in my Flesh for
his Bodie's-sake which is the Church; with whom if we suffer with him by
continuing Faithful unto the end, we shall come to reign for ever, who is sit
down at the right Hand of Power; wherefore who have set your Hands to the plow
look not back you that have made a good beginning, continue, and hold on
therein, pressing forward to the saving of your Souls.

And you who are at Liberty, viz. who are not Thrown into Prisons and Holes for
the Testimony of your pure Consciences toward God, what ever you may suffer,
be Faithful in your Testimony for him in your Meeting together to wait upon
him; and in making mention of his Name in Righteousness, and in every good word
and work; be ye firm, and steadfast in your Testimony for the Lord, that as
thereby you have know the Lord present with you in the midst of you, to your
Souls great Comfort, refreshment, and Satisfaction, you may know him so unto
you even to the end, and so be your God forever.

And you My Dear Friends, who are in Bonds for the Gospel sake, be patient in
your Sufferings, according to his Holy and Heavenly Will, not otherwise
desiring your Liberty nor Enlargement therefrom, but pray and desire it may be
according thereunto; that so in the appointed time of the Father, you may be
saved, and delivered by him, out of the Hands of all that hate you; and out of
the Hands of all his, and all your Enemies; by that Horn of Salvation, which he
has raised up, and ordained, and appointed in order thereunto; that we might
serve him without fear, in Holiness, and Righteousness before him, all the days
of our life, dwelling in the Love and Goodwill of the Almighty toward all
people, not desiring the Ruin or Destruction of any of them, that you may be
like unto your Heavenly Father, who is Good and Kind unto all, even unto the
unholy and unthankful, even unto the worst of men, in sending his Rain upon
them, and in causing his Sun to Shine upon them; Oh! Let your Light so Shine
forth, that by their beholding the same, they by your good works which they
shall behold, may Glorify God on your behalf; So will the Eyes of the Righteous
Lord, who Loves Righteousness and Truth in the Inward parts, be over you for
good, whose Eyes run to and fro, to show himself strong, for them who believe
and trust in him; according to whose holy and heavenly mind and will herein and
in all things, my prayers are for you, that you may be found to do, that he may
delight in you forever.

To whom I do commit you, with my self, to be preserved and kept, as to a
Faithful Creator: Hoping, Praying and Desiring, that we may so pass the time of
our sojourning here, that when Time shall come to an end with us, Rest and
Peace in Eternity with him may be the Portion of our Souls forever.

So desiring that the Blessing of the Most High God, Possessor of Heaven and
Earth, may rest upon you, I cease at present from writing unto you, but not
from Love, in that which is Pure and Everlasting; In which I remain

Your Dear Friend and Brother, who are the Called, Chosen and Faithful of the
Lord, whom he has set apart for himself: EDWARD BOURNE.
Worcester City-Prison, where I suffer Bonds for the Testimony of a Good
Conscience toward God; the 20th of the 10th Month, 1682. Let this Epistle be
read in the fear of the Lord in the Assemblies of the Righteous every where,
both in Bonds and at Liberty.



London, Printed by J. Bringhurst, at the Sign of the Book in
Grace Church Street.


