DOCTOR LAMB REVIVED, OR, VVitchcraft condemned IN ANNE BODENHAM A Servant of
his, who was Arraigned and Executed the Lent Assizes last at Salisbury, before
the Right Honorable the Lord Chief Baron Wild, Judge of the Assise.

Wherein is set forth her strange and wonderful Diabolical usage of a Maid,
Servant to Mr. Goddard, as also her attempt against his Daughters, but by
providence delivered.

Being necessary for all good Christians to Read, as a Caveat to look to
themselves, that they be not seduced by such Inticements.

By Edmond Bower an eye and ear Witness of her Examination and Confession.

LONDON, Printed by T. W. for Richard Best, and John Place, and are to be Sold
at their Shops at Grays-Inn-Gate and Furnivals-Inn-Gate in Holburn. 1653.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Chief Baron Wild.
MY LORD,
WHen your Honor was pleased to approve of my intentions of acquainting the
World with this Narration, I beheld it with much fear, and had not your
Lordships Encouragements answered all the Objections I met with, I had chosen
rather to deny the World a knowledge of it by my hand, than to expose it to the
Critical view of this Censorious Age; But now since your Lordships former
encouragements have transported me through all difficulties, I humbly lay my
endeavors at your Lordships feet, and hope, that although I have not satisfied
my own desires, nor others expectation, yet your Lordship will Condescend to
the Acceptance of my Endeavors, which are in all things to be found at

Your Lordships service. EDMOND BOWER.
From my Chamber in Shaston, April 10. 1653.
WITCHCRAFT CONDEMND, OR, A Narration of the Trial of ANNE BODENHAM.
THere lived in Fisherton Anger, adjacent to the City of new Sarum, in the
County of Wilts, one Anne Bodenham, Wife to Edward Bodenham Clothyer, aged 80.
years, who formerly was (as she confessed) a Servant to Doctor Lamb of London
long since deceased, but in her later years, taught diverse young Children to
read, pretending to get her livelihood by such an employment. She was a woman
much adicted to Popery, and to Papistical fancies that she commonly observed,
and would declare to her neighbors; she would often tell those, that had
converse with her of lucky and unlucky days, which she would have them observe
in their employments; she was likewise addicted much to Gossipping (as the
vulgar call it) to tell strange unheard of tales and stories of transactions,
and things that have been, and might be done, by cunning and wise people; she
was one that would undertake to cure almost any diseases, which she did for the
most part by charms and spells, but sometimes used physical ingredients, to
cover her abominable practices; she would undertake to procure things that were
lost, and to restore stolen goods, upon which employments she was made use of by
many people, and amongst the very many that came to her, there came one Anne
Styles (then a servant to Richard Goddard Esquire, of the Close in new Sarum)
who had lost a silver Spoon of her Masters, and it was suspected by many
servants of the house, that the Spoon was stolen, who amongst themselves
resolved to send this Anne Styles to Anne Bodenham, or the cunning woman, to
discover the person that had stolen the spoon; she whereupon having received
from the Cook Maid Bread and Meat to give the VVitch, went to the Witches
house, where she was entertained very kindly, and at her coming the VVitch
shaked her by the hand, rubbed her Head and Temples, and told her she knew
wherefore she came, but said the wind did not blow, nor the Sun shine, nor
Jupiter appear, so that she could not help her to the spoon; withal told her,
that she should shortly have occasion to come again to her about a greater
matter; And then the VVitch took of the Maid 12. pence, and also bid the Maid
give her a Jug of Beer, which she did; after which the VVitch told the Maid the
spoon should be brought again shortly, by a little Boy which did use to her
Masters house; And when the Maid came home, she told the Cook Maid, and
Elizabeth Roswel an other of the servants in the same house, what the She named
Mrs. Boddenham, but I name her Witch for distinction sake.
VVitch, had told her; At which time then Elizabeth Rosewel told Anne Styles,
that Master Thomas Mason, Son in Law to Master Goddard, had lost three pieces
of gold, of 22. shillings a piece, and that Master Mason desired her to go to
the VVitch to know who had the same, and withal bid her give the VVitch what
money she demanded, and he would repay her; whereupon the Maid went to the
Witches house again, who bade her come in, and told her she was welcome, and
asked her wherefore she came; to whom the Maid answered, for gold that was
lost; and the VVitch immediately replied, it was Mr. Masons gold, and that
Master Goddards Boy, Robert Beck-ford, had been twice before with her about it;
the VVitch put on her Spectacles, and demanding seven shillings of the Maid
which, she received, she opened three Books, in which there seemed to be
several pictures, and amongst the rest the picture of the Devil, to the Maids
appearance, with his Cloven feet and Claws; after the VVitch had looked over
the book, she brought a round green glass, which glass she laid down on one of
the books, upon some picture therein, and rubbed the glass, and then took up
the book with the glass upon it, and held it up against the Sun, and bid the
Maid come and see who they were, that she could show in that glass, and the
Maid looking in the glass saw the shape of many persons, and what they were
doing of in her Masters house, in particular showed Mistress Elizabeth Rosewel
standing in her Mistress Chamber, looking out of the Window with her hands in
her sleeves, and another walking alone in her Masters Garden, one other
standing in a room within the Kitchen, one other standing in a matted room of
her Masters, against the Window, with her Apron in her hand, and showed others
drinking with glasses of Beer in their hands; after the Witches showing this to
the Maid, she then bad her go home, which when she came home, she asked the
people (she so saw in the Witches glass) what they had been doing while she had
been wanting, and by their answers to her she found that they had been doing
what she saw they were in the glass, and the Maid relating this to Elizabeth
Rousewel, she replied, that Mistress Boddenham, (meaning the said Witch) was
either a Witch, or a woman of God. This being about one of the Clock in the
afternoon the maid went about her imploiment till 6. a Clock in the evening,
about which time Elizabeth Rosewel acquainting the Maid, that her Mistress
going to borrow money of her Daughter in Law Mistress Sarah Goddard, the money
was stained black, and thereupon Elizabeth Rosewel told the Maid that her
Mistress was afraid of being poisoned by the said Mistress Sarah, and by her
Sister Mistress Anne Goddard, for that she had been thrice before in danger of
being poisoned, and therefore desired the Maid to go to the Under the name of
Mrs. Boddenham.
VVitch, to know if there were any such things intended, and the Maid as it was
almost dark went to the Witches house, and to her apprehension there was a
little black Dog that ran before her over Crane-Bridge, in the way between her
Masters and the Witches, and so brought her to the Witches house, where the
doors flew open without her knocking, and the VVitch met her at the second
door, and told her, she knew wherefore she came, and that it was about
poisoning, and told the Maid further that it was intended that her Mistress
should be poisoned, and that there was moneys found in Mistress Sarahs Pocket,
that was stained, but she would prevent it; And further said to her, that it
was Mistress Sarahs intention to go a journey into Summerset-shire, but she
would show her a trick, as she spoke the words, she should break her neck
before she went out of the Gate; and then the VVitch took five shillings of the
Maid, (that she had received from Mistress Elizabeth Rosewel) and so the Maid
left her and went home, and when the Maid came home, she went into Master
Masons Chamber, where Master Mason and Mistress Elizabeth Rosewel were, and
acquainted them with what the VVitch had told her, and upon that, one of them
replied, the Devil appeared in the faces of Mistress Sarah and Mistress Anne,
and desired the maid to go again the next day, to know of the VVitch what the
time should be that her mistress should be poisoned, and the next morning about
six or seven of the Clock, the maid went to the Witches house, and carried
five shillings along with her, and gave it the VVitch, and told her she was
come to know the time when her mistress should be poisoned, and the Witch told
her, it should be on a Friday, but she would prevent it before that time, and
bade the Maid come again in the afternoon; and when the Maid returned home,
Master Mason spoke to her immediately to go again to the Witch, to know of her,
if one Master Rawley did intend him any mischief, for winning his money from
him at play, and gave the Maid two shillings to give the VVitch, And the Maid
did accordingly go, and did ask of the Witch what Master Mason bid her, and the
Witch told her that Master Rawley had intended some mischief against him two
several times, and had way-layd him, but she had and would prevent it, and
would send him a charm, and took a piece of paper and put therein yellow
powder, and so made it up in a cross figure, and gave it to the Maid to deliver
it to Master Mason to wear about his neck; and the Witch further told her, that
if the Charm were about him he need not fear what money he owed, for no Bay liff
could take hold or meddle with him, and so the Maid returned home and gave him
the Charm. The next day Master Mason sent the Maid again to the Witch, to tell
her that he intended some Law suits with his Father in Law Master Goddard, and
to know of her whether he should have the better of it, and gave the Maid three
shillings to give the Witch, and when the Maid came to the Witches house and
told her what she came for, the Witch took her staff, and there drew him about
the house, making a kind of a Circle, and then took a book, and carrying it
over the Circle, with her hands, and taking a green Glass, did lay it upon the
book, and placed in the Circle an earthen pan of Coals, wherein she threw
something, which burning caused a very noisome stinck, and told the Maid she
should not be afraid of what she should then see, for now they would come, they
are the words she used, and so calling Beelzebub, Tormentor, Satan, and Lucifer
appear, there suddenly arose a very high wind, which made the house shake, and
presently the back Door of the house flying open, there came five spirits, as
the Maid supposed, in the likeness of ragged Boys, some bigger than others, and
ran about the house, where she had drawn the Staff, and the VVitch threw down
upon the ground Crumbs of Bread, which the Spirits picked up, and leapt over the
Pan of Coals oftentimes, which she set in the midst of the Circle, and a Dog
and a Cat of the Witches danced with them; and after some time the VVitch
looked again in her book, and threw some great white seeds upon the ground,
which the said Spirits picked up, and so in a short time the wind was laid, and
the VVitch going forth at her back Door the Spirits vanished, after which the
VVitch told the Maid, that Master Mason should demand fifteen hundred pound,
and one hundred and fifty pound per annum of Master Goddard, and if he denied
it, he should prosecute the Law against him, and begone from his Father, and
then he should gain it, with which message the Maid returned and acquainted
Master Mason. She was sent by Mistress Rosewel diverse times to enquire
concerning sweet-hearts, when she should be married, and how she should
dis-ingage her self from her sweet-hearts that formerly had solicited her in a
way of marriage, the one now in France, the other with whom she broke a piece
of Gold to bind their contract, to which the VVitch gave her directions, and
told her what would be the result and issue of those passages, and of many more
of the like nature, that she was sent to propound to the VVitch, And in a short
time after, Mistress Rosewel sent her again to the VVitch, to know of her when
the day should be, that Mistress Goddard should be poisoned, and delivered her
eight shillings to give the VVitch, so the Maid went again to the VVitch
accordingly, and gave her the eight shillings, and the Witch replied she could
not tell her then, but gave the Maid one shilling, and bid her go to an
Apothecary, and buy some white Arsenick, and bring it to her to prevent it,
which the Maid did, and carried it to the Witch, who said to her she would take
it and burn it, to prevent the poisoning, but she burnt it not as the Maid
could see at all; then the Maid returned home, and told Master Mason and
Mistress Rosewel what she had done, who laughed at it. The next day being
Tuesday, she was again sent by Master Mason, to know where the poison should be
found that should be given her Mistress, and when the Maid had proposed the
question to the VVitch, she took her stick (as formerly is related) and making
therewith a Circle, the wind rose forthwith, then taking a Beesom she swept
over the Circle, and made another, and looking in her Book and Glass, as
formerly, and using some words softly to her self, she stood in the Circle and
said, Beelzebub, Tormentor, Lucifer, and Satan appear; there appeared first a
Spirit in the shape of a little Boy as she conceived, which then turned into
another shape something like a Snake, and then into the shape of a shagged Dog
with great eyes, which went about in the Circle; And in the Circle she set an
earthen pan of Coals, wherein she threw something which burned and stank, and
then the Spirit vanished, after which the VVitch took her Book and Glass again,
and showed the Maid in the Glass, Mistress Sarah Goddards Chamber, the color
of the Curtains, and the Bed turned up the wrong way, and under that part of
the Bed where the Bolster lay, she showed the poison in a white paper; The Maid
afterward returned home, and acquainted Mistress Rosewel with what the Witch
had showed her in a Glass, that the poison it lay under Mistress Sarahs Bed,
and also spoke to her that they might go together and take it away; but
Mistress Rosewel replied no, let it alone for Gods sake, and would not, neither
did she take it or suffer it to be taken away. And the Witch further told the
Maid (when she was with her the Thursday) that the next day being Friday, about
7. or 8. of the Clock at night, there should be Sage Ale made for her Mistress,
And that there should be a white Pot set upon the Dresser in the Kitchen
wherein poison should be put, but Mistress Goddard should not drink it, and
that Mistress Rosewel knew best what to do; And on the Friday Night, there was
Aleset on the fire (as the Witch before related) the maid being that while
sleeping in the Hall; Mistress Rosewel awaked her and bid her go into the
Kitchen, and see whether or no there was not poison in the Cup; And the maid
looked and found something there, and called to Mistress Rosewel, and told her
there was something in it, which swimmed on the top, and something in the
bottom, as the Witch before had told the maid should be. And then mistress
Rosewel took the same and carried it up to her mistress, and showed it her, and
the maid afterward asking mistress Rosewel if she had told her mistress of it,
she replied, that her mistress knew well enough of it by her looks. The next
day following being Saturday the maid was sent again to the Witch, to get some
example shown upon the Gentlewoman that should procure the poison, upon which
the maid went again to the VVitch, and told her for what she was sent. Then the
Witch made a Circle as formerly, and set her pan of Coals as formerly, and
burnt something that stank extremely, and took her book and Glass as before is
related, and said Beelzebub, Tormentor, Lucifer, and Satan appear, and then
appeared five Spirits, as she conceived, in the shapes of little ragged Boys,
which the VVitch commanded to appear and go along with the maid to a meadow at
Wilton, which the VVitch showed in the Glass, and there to gather Vervine and
Dill, and forthwith the ragged Boys ran away before the maid, and she followed
them to the said meadow, and when they came thither the ragged Boys looked
about for the Herbs, and removed the Snow in two or three places, before they
could find any, and at last they found some, and brought it away with them, and
then the maid and the Boys returned-back again to the VVitch, and found her in
the Circle paring her Nayls, and then she took the said Herbs, and dried the
same, and made powder of some, and dried the leaves of other, and threw Bread
to the Boys, and they eat and danced as formerly, and then the VVitch reading
in a book they vanished away; And the VVitch gave the maid in one paper the
powder, in another the leaves, and in the third the paring of the Nayls, all
which the maid was to give to her Mistress; the powder was to put in the young
Gentlewomens Mistress Sarah and Mistress Anne Goddards drink or broth, to rot
their Guts in their Bellies; the leaves to rub about the brims of the Pot, to
make their Teeth fall out of their Heads; and the paring of the Nayls to make
them drunk and mad. And the VVitch likewise told the maid, that she must tell
her Mistress, and the rest, that when they did give it them, they must cross
their Breasts, and then say, In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, grant that
this may be, and that they must say the Creed backward and forward. And when
the maid came home and delivered it to her mistress, and told her the effects
of the powder, and the other things, her mistress laughed, and said that it is
a very brave thing indeed. And her mistress sent her again the same day to the
Witch, to desire her to send her some Charm, or writing under her own hand,
that should keep her from ill, and preserve her from danger. And the VVitch
took Pen Ink and Paper, and wrote something, and put some yellow powder
therein, and gave it to the maid to give it to her mistress, and bad her tell
her, that she must never look in it, and must carry it in her Bosom by Day, and
lay it in a purse under her Head by Night; And the Monday following, the maids
mistress, master Mason, and mistress Rosewel importuned her to go again to the
VVitch to know of her whether or no she could not make the young Gentlewomen
exemplary some other ways, seeing that they could not give them the powder, and
whether she could not send a Spirit to bring them upon their knees, to ask her
mistress forgiveness; but the VVitch told her she could not have any power of
them unless she could get her the tayls of their Coats, or of their smocks,
and if she had but that she could make the house fall about their ears, and
could do more than master Lilly or any one whatsoever; which message the maid
carried to her mistress, upon which her mistress replied, That would be pretty
to be done, and mistress Rosewel spoke to the maid to cut off the same when
they should be a bed, but the maid refused to do it, the young Gentlewomen
mistress Sarah and mistress Anne, hearing of these transactions about poison,
and that it should be laid to their charge, that they had a design, and
provided poison to poison their Mother; being much moved at it, and to
vindicate themselves, that no such aspersion might lie on them (in regard it
was also reported, that they should buy one Ounce and half of poison that cost
6 d. at an Apothecaries) they went about Sarum to enquire whether any such
thing was bought, and by whom, that the truth might be discovered, and the
aspersion might be removed; and having found where the poison was bought, the
Maids fellow servants Mirian and Mris. Rosewell told the Maid, that her Mistress
wished her to go away and shift for her self, otherwise they supposed that
she should be examined before some Justice, and so there might some trouble and
disgrace come upon them in the business: And the same night the Maid went out
of her Masters house, and lay at one Mattershawes the Cooks: The next day in
the morning Mris. Rosewell sent her word that she would speak with her at
Longmans house, and the Maid went thither, where Mris. Rosewell brought her her
Clothes, and wished her to go to London, and brought her 9 s. which she laid
out before to the Witch, and 12 d. as a gift from Mr. Mason; and Mris. Rosewell
sent to the Witch, before she went, to know whether she did approve of her
Journey to London, and the Witch wished her to go, and told her that she would
send a Paper by her to Mr. Mason, and did then write in the paper diverse
Crosses and Pictures, and other things, and put black and yellow powder
therein, and told the Maid she should give the same to Mr. Mason, and bid him
use it how he pleased; which Paper the Maid carried along with her as far as
Sutton toward London, and there burnt it: But before the Maid went away from
the Witch for London, the Witch asked the Maid whether she would go to London
High or Low. To which she replied, What do you mean by that? She answered, If
you will go on High, you shall be carried to London in the Air, and be there
in two hours; but if you go a Low, you shall be taken at Suttons Towns end,
and before, unless you have help: But before she departed, the Witch earnestly
desired the Maid to live with her, and told her, that if she would do so, she
would teach her to do as she did, and that she should never be taken; then the
Maid asked her what she could do? she answered, You shall know presently, and
forthwith she appeared in the shape of a great Black Cat, and lay along by the
Chimny: at which the Maid being very much afrighted, she came into her own
shape again, and told her, I see you are afraid, and I see you are willing to
be gone, and told her, if she was, she should say so, and not speak against her
conscience; and the Maid replied, she was willing to go, and not to dwell with
the Witch; then the Witch said, she must seal unto her body and blood not to
discover her; which she promising to do, she forthwith made a Circle as
formerly she had done, and looking in her Book, and called Beelzebub,
Tormentor, Lucifer, and Satan appear, then appeared two Spirits in the
likeness of great Boys, with long shagged black hair, and stood by her,
looking over her shoulder, and the Witch took the Maids forefinger of her
right hand, in her hand, and pricked it with a pin, and squeesed out the blood,
and put it into a Pen, and put the Pen into the Maids hand, and held her hand
to write in a great Book, and one of the Spirits laid his Hand or Claw upon the
Witches, whilst the Maid wrote, and when she had done writing, whilst their
hands were together, the Witch said Amen, and made the Maid say Amen, and the
Spirits said Amen, Amen; and the Spirits hand did feel cold to the Maid as it
touched her hand, when the Witches hand and hers were together writing; and
then the Spirit gave a piece of Silver (which he first bit) to the Witch, who
gave it to the Maid, and also stuck two Pins in the Maids head-cloathes, and
bid her keep them, and bid her be gone, and said also I will vex the
Gentlewoman well enough, as I did the Man in Clarington Park, which I made walk
about with a bundle of Pales on his back all night in a Pond of water, and
could not lay them down till the next morning.

The Maid took her journey immediately for London, and about Park Cooner, two
miles on her journey, there overtook her a man on horseback, who asked her,
whether or no she was going for London? and she telling him yes, he lighted,
and set her on horseback, and went a foot by her about two miles, and then
carried her behind him to Stock-bridge, and then she went a foot through the
Town, but afterward rode again, until she was overtaken by Mr. Chandler and
others, at Sutton Towns end.

Friendly Reader, what is here related was delivered upon oath at the Assizes
before the Judges by the Maid her self, and is not a fancy, but a truth; yet if
thou should doubt it, suspend thy judgment till the last, and hear what
others depose besides her, and many witnesses usually fully confirm what may
be dubious upon one Information.

I must confess I have used some other names in the Narration before going,
Mris. Goddard, Mr. Mason, Mris. Betty Rosewell, Mris. Sarah and Mris. Anne
Goddard, and others, but I could not avoid them, for I have related as the
Maids Evidence was, and should I not have related the ground and foundation of
the business, or if any of these passages should have been omitted, I should
have much covered the wickedness, and sewed fig leaves to hide the vileness
of the Witch.

And further know, Judicious Reader, I am not here to give a partial relation
of any thing, or to speak in the praise or dispraise of any person, neither
does it behove me to meddle with any actions of any persons besides the Witches
and the Maids, therefore mistake me not, my intention was not, neither is it,
by this, to lay any calumnies or prejudices on Mris. Goddard, Mr. Mason, or
others, far be it from me; I must confess they were something to blame in
sending up and down the Maid, if they knew the woman to be a Witch, and no
doubt but they are sorry for it, that such an accident should happen, but the
title and drift of the following part of my book, shows, my intent is to
discover the practice of the Witch, and should willingly let pass any thing
else that relates not to it; but, since I am digressed a little, let me here
insert a word or two, and that is thus:

There was for some short time some conceivings or thinkings that the young
Gentlewomen, Mris. Sarah and Mris. Anne Goddard, should plot and attempt to
poison their Mother in law: I need not say much in their vindication, they have
already sufficiently cleared themselves, and the relation before shows they
knew of no such thing; besides their stirring and going about to the
Apothecaries, to find out the groundwork of the plot, was the first rise and
ground of the discovery of the Witch: so that they are so far from lying under
any imputation, that it is to be acknowledged by all that they were the
instruments of its discovery, and therefore Mris. Goddard or others have no
ground to co^jecture any such thing against them: I speak not any thing
partially, for Mris. Goddard is a Gentlewoman altogether unknown to me, Mr.
Mason is one whom I never to my knowledge saw, and the young Gentlewomen I
never had any acquaintance with, and should I speak any thing to their dishonor
or disesteem, I should speak it not knowingly: Therefore friendly Reader,
harbor not any prejudicate opinion against any of them, by reason of what is
here inserted; for my own part I bear none against them, and I hope this will
not raise or stir up any in the Reader; for what is before said, is not enough
to make them much faulty, but it shows and much aggravates the lewdness and
wickedness of the Witch.

But now to return where I left; you have heard what has been the practice of
the Witch in some measure, now I shall proceed to show how she got power over
the Maid, and what miserable torments she was an instrument in bringing on her.

Mr. Chandler Son in law to Mris. Goddard, hearing that his Mother in law was
in danger of being poisoned, and that a Servant of hers had bought the poison,
and was sled or gone away, he forthwith with one other man, William Atwood
(that gave intelligence which way she was gone) made after her, and overtook
her near Sutton, and had her into the Inn at Sutton, and up into a room, she
being then and at the time of her being apprehended in a great trembling and
shaking, and so continued, and after a while Mr. Chandler and the other man
bringing back the Maid toward Sarum, upon the way between Sutton and
Stockbridge, the Maid did confess and acknowledge all the transactions and
passages between the Witch and her, as are related before: And when the Maid
was brought to Stockbridge, in the Inn at night, she also confessed the
Contract she had made with the Devil, as is before related, and said she had
received a piece of Silver of the Devil, which she showed and delivered to Mr.
Chandler, which is accounted to be Ten pence halfpenny, and the two Pins which
the Witch stuck on her head, she also delivered to him, which he took of her
and threw them into the fire, and presently took the Money out of the fire
again, but found not the Pins; and this was about twelve of the clock at night:
And the Maid then said upon delivery of the said Money and Pins, that she
should be troubled, for that the Devil had promised her that she should never
be troubled as long as she kept it secret, and now having revealed it, she
feared she should be troubled: And about one hour after, the Maid sitting by
the fire, upon a sudden fell into a trance, and cried out she should be thrown
into the fire; and upon that, Mr. Chandler with the rest that were present with
her, held her as fast as they could, yet could hardly keep her out of the fire;
and when the Trance was leaving her, the man that went along with Mr. Chandler,
cried out to him, and bid him look there, poynting behind the Maid, and Mr.
Chandler looking (as he conceived) he saw a black shade go from her, and then
she coming to her self, Mr. Chandler with her and the rest went to prayers,
and the Maid seemed to have such a carriage in prayer as if she minded it, and
prayed fervently, holding fast about Mr. Chandler's leg, and as they were
concluding their prayers, William Atwood called to the Maid, and asked her what
it was that she had thrown into the fire, and she said, it was something that
the Devil had given her to throw upon Mr. Chandler: And after prayers were
ended, the Maid arising from her knees, was not able to go, and then said,
That base and plaguey Witch Mris. Boddenham has bewitched me; and afterward
the Maid would cry out, and say that the Devil, the Witch, and the five ragged
Boys did appear before her as they formerly had done when she was at the
Witches house: And about two of the clock at night, the Maid found her self
very sleepy, and said, Pray God bless me, I wish it may be for my good, I am
very sleepy: whereupon Mr. Chandler persuaded her to lie upon the Truckle bed,
which she did, and then Mr. Chandler lay down on the high bed, leaving the
servants of the house with William Atwood by the fire side; and shortly after
hearing a great noise, and a groaning, Mr. Chandler found the Maid in a great
agony, and much perplexed, and notwithstanding he himself, William Atwood, and
the Servants of the house held her as much and as fast as they could, yet she
was taken from them, and those parts which were holden by them were thrown from
them upon the floor, only her feet which were not holden continued upon the
bed, but the head and the rest thrown down, and all the while making a hideous
noise, with skrieking and crying out, in an agony she continued about one
quarter of an hour; and then about four of the clock the same night she was
taken again, in the same manner, but only the people then in the room were
able to hold her, and she was not thrown away from them as before; and about
daybreak the Maid was taken with another terrible fit, and continued in the
same about one quarter of an hour, but Mr. Chandler, William Atwood, and the
Servants in the house could hardly keep her from tearing her self: And when
the day appeared, and the night was past; they brought the Maid to Sarum, and
being examined before Edw. Tucker Esquire; one of the Justices of the Peace for the
County of Wilts, she was committed on suspicion of the poison pretended to be
provided for her Mistress, as before, and the Witch also apprehended, and both
put into prison, where the Maid remained about three weeks till the Assizes,
and was constantly taken with violent fits, as strange, as strong, not parallel
to any fits that ever any person was known to have naturally, and so strong in
them, that sometimes six men, sometimes more could not keep her from being
hurryed from them, although holding her at the greatest advantage that possibly
they could take her, keeping her down on a low bed, lying on the same, and
every man holding a particular part of her body: so violent were her fits, and
so strong was the motion of her body in them. These fits were also as frequent
as violent, she having not for the most part one quarter of an hours respite
from torment between them, and they continuing half an hour, sometimes an hour
and more, and in this sad condition she continued sometimes two hours; and so,
many days together: And the Monday morning following I coming to Sarum, where
there was a great rumor about the City of a Witch that was found out, that had
bewitched a Maid, and they both were in prison, and that the Maid was often
troubled with such strange fits that drew both pity and admiration from the
beholders, through the persuasion of some friends I accompanied them to the
prison, and when I came into the Chamber where she lay, she was then in her
fit, and so had been half an hour before I came, and I continued there one hour
and half, and all that while her fit seized on her, she lying on a low bed in
the midst of a Chamber, and several compassing her, holding her down: The
nature of her fits I am unable to demonstrate by my pen, only thus far, they
suddenly seized on her, and would cause an exceeding trembling in all the
members of her body, causing her to tear her self unless held, and she was so
strong in them, that two men could not hold one arm, but many times would be
pulled from them, she miserably groaning and skrieking, being deprived of her
speech and sight, and many times she grinded her teeth, and sweat in her fits
continually, constantly in motion, seeking to tear her self, and when her fits
were taking their leave of her, she usually had an exceeding trembling, and a
little reposed frame for two or three minutes before her violent hurryings
would cease: This being the first time I saw her, and beholding so sad a
spectacle, I could not but pity her, and by enquiry of other beholders, I
understood she was sensible of what was said in her presence during her fits
many times, though she was not able to speak her self, (as she said between her
fits) and did desire the prayers of all such as came to her, to seek God on her
behalf: but there being no Minister then in the room, we our selves went to
seek God for her, and after we had concluded our prayers, the Maid continuing
in her fits not able to speak or discourse, I then left her for some time,
afterward went (being accompanied with a multitude) into the room where the
Witch was, where she sat near the fire in the midst of a room, with many
spectators, and she in a very senseless idle manner and discoursing with them,
and now and then cursing them if they used any distastefull words to her; I
finding others conversing with her, after them began to propound some questions
unto her, and asked her whether she was sensible of her miserable condition?
she answered, I am not beside my senses. I told her, I did not mean, whether or
no she had lost the common reason (all men and women naturally (more or less)
had) by a frenzy, madness, or the like; but I told her I meant in respect of
her spiritual condition, whether she was sensible of her damnable estate by
nature, and the guilt she had contracted on her self by reason of her wicked
living, and the vile and abominable practices she had (as it was to be feared)
used, and whether she had any mind or desire to be saved? she answered, Yes,
from the Jury; I replied, But have you any mind to be saved from Hell? Yes,
said she, I hope I have. Q. On what do you ground your hope on? A. A good faith
in Christ. Q. Do you know what faith is? A. My good meaning. Q. Do you know
the Fundamentalls of Religion? which must be known, or else there is no hope of
any salvation. A. If I do not, I wish you or some body would teach me, I
desire to learn any thing for my good. Q. Why do you not desire the prayers of
Ministers, and their company, to reveal your mind to them, and learn from
them, which way you may forsake these wicked courses, and abominable practices,
for now it is time to shame the Devil? A. I would very gladly have Mr.
Connant, Mr. Stickland, Mr. Stone or any Minister come to me to teach me, and
to pray for me, but I am resolved never to hear our Minister of Fisherton more,
if I am released, but I know I shall never be, but hanged I will warrant you;
and I wish you would now teach me, and I will learn; pray with me and I will
with you. Q. Can you pray for your self, and do you make it your constant
business to beg guidance and assistance from God, to direct you in the whole
course of your life, and daily return him praise and thanks for the mercies you
receive? A. I can say a great many good prayers, and I say them constantly; I
do always say the Creed forward and backward every night, and other good
Prayers that I find in my Book.

These and many more such questions I propounded to her, she answered me in
such manner as abovesaid.

Before I had ended my discourse with the Witch, one came to me, and told me
that the Maid was now out of her fits, and desired to speak with me; upon which
I went to the Maid again, where I found her freed from the violent tormenting
of her body; who sitting up, desired to discourse with me; upon which I
propounded these Questions:

Quest. How do you apprehend your own state and condition to be?

Ans. Oh very damnable, very wretched; this hand of mine writ my name in the
Devils book, this finger of mine was pricked, here is yet the hole that was
made, and with my blood I wrote my own Damnation, and have cut my self off from
Heaven and Eternal life; the Devil came, oh! in a terrible shape to me,
entered within me, and there he lies, swelling in my body, gnawing at my heart,
tearing my bowels within me, and there is no hopes, but one time or other will
tear me all in pieces; had I not been held, I had been in hell, the Devil never
leaves but tells me so; I see him also now standing on the top of the house,
looking on me, and now and then he strives to get me from the people, and I
think I were as good go with him, for then I shall be at better ease and
quiet; I am not able to bear his beating and tearing me, he will kill me, there
is no hope, I can scarce breath already, he will torment me as long as I am
here, and will carry away my soul, he tells me so, and I must go.

Qust Do you not know salvation is to be had for the worst of sinners, if they
are willing to be saved? greatness of sin cuts not off mercy, if any have a
mind to be saved; Manasseh voluntarily consulted with familiar Spirits, yet
had mercy; Christ himself when he was in the world made it much of his work to
dispossess evil and wicked Spirits, he crossed the Sea once on purpose, and
all the work he did, was to dispossess one possessed, and lodged among the
tombs; your case is not worse then theirs, for yours was a forced act, theirs
voluntary, you may have salvation; are you but sensible of the dishonor you
have done to God, and have a mind to break off your league with the Devil,
and would have salvation.

Answ. Oh, my act was willingly done as well as theirs; the Witch persuaded me
indeed, but I freely consented, yet I do heartily desire salvation with my
whole soul; Oh, what would I do to be freed from hell! any thing in the world
would I do if I might for all this be saved; sure I have deserved hell, but if
God would have mercy on me, I do with my heart desire it, and I would beg all
the world to bless God for it: Oh the Devils torments! how can I be saved,
when it was my own act to sell my self into the hands of the Devil! I cannot
have one hours rest, and long I cannot be in this condition, the Devil in a
while will have me, do what I can for my life, I shall not be able to help my
self, I perceive he is too strong for me, and will get the masterdome of me at
last: Oh this base Witch, this wicked damnable woman, that should make me
murder my own soul, and would have carried me along with her into hell! Oh how
shall I abide her company, it would be my death to see her, I was well enough
before I saw her; no indeed, I was an ignorant wicked creature, and should then
have gone to hell, but yet I was not in such torments; not one man or woman in
the world knows my pain how great it is, but I hope this shall be the worst of
my misery; But how can I hope so that deserve hell, and the Devil is within
me, and if any thing at the present would give me ease, it must be the burning
of the Witches Cat and Dog, for then I know and am sure that the Devil will
leave me, and go and torment the Witch. But a while I was persuading her that
it was but a fancy, and a cure of the Devils own suggestions, and not a lawful
cure; she then fell into another violent fit, and the night approaching, I left
her, to follow my occasions that called me thither, and it was not in my
thoughts to return to the prison; but on the next day being Tuesday, as I was
going in the street, a Gentlewoman altogether unknown to my self, met me, and
told me that the Witch in prison earnestly desired to speak with me, and if I
would come to her, she would reveal that to me which she was resolved to keep
secret from all the world besides. And also that the Maid did wish for my
company, and did desire, if any knew me, to find me forth if they could, and
persuade me to come to her. Whereupon, I did go to the prison, and when I
came, found her in one of her former fits, not able to speak or see any man,
lying foaming, raving, groaning, skrieking, trembling in an unheard of manner,
impossible to be related so exactly as it deserves for the novelty; in which
condition she remained all the time I was there, which was about one hour and
half, and had been in that fit half an hour before I came; in which time, the
violence thereof had wearied Six men that held her; and such had been her
condition all that night before, having not one quarter of an hours respit
between her fits.

Upon serious consideration of which, it was thought, that in all humane
probabilities 'twas impossible for her body and soul long to keep together; and
by her words there was some ground of hope that she had not quite sinned away
mercy, but that mercy might be obtained for her: The result of our thoughts
that were then present (being many) was, to spend that afternoon in seeking God
for her; having a great many there in the presence, and also one Mr. Allena
Prisoner, very well gifted in prayer, and some knowledge concerning the nature
of this wicked Art: I (for the present) departed, and saw not the Witch, but in
the afternoon came to the prison again, about One of the clock; and when I
came, the Maid was in her fits, in such manner as formerly, and was not able to
speak, being by the violent hurryings of her body (quite) almost wearyed, which
were so strong, that it was impossible any natural strength could support her
long.

Before we began our Exercise, the Maid was set up in a Chair, and four or five
men endeavored to hold her in it; but she got out of it notwithstanding their
endeavors, and tore the Chair in pieces, and being hurryed half way to the end
of the room, they were scarce able to recover her to the bed, that so laying
her along they might have the advantage of holding her, but at last by very
much strength they got her down, and so had such advantage an they held her; at
which time there came into my thoughts a Story which I had long before read in
Mr. Scot's Discovery of Witchcraft:

That one way of Discovery was, to bring the Suspected party into the
Afflicteds presence; upon which I desired that the Witch might be in the room
that afternoon, while we were seeking God for mercy on the behalf of the Maid;
I had my desire granted, and authority to bring them together; and so the Witch
was brought up into the Maids Chamber, but unknown to the Maid, she lying this
while under most grievous hurryings and tortures of body; and as the Witch came
into the room, diverse stood between the Maid and the door that they could not
see each other; at the very instant of time as the Witch set one foot within
the room the Maid gave a most hideous glance with her eyes, and shut them
presently after, and fell asleep in a moment, before it could be spoken almost.
there were at that time in the room some women that were friends to the Maids,
that had taken up a resolution to fall foully on the Witch and get some blood
from her; for prevention of which I stood by the Witch to save her, she being
very much afraid, and crying out, The wicked people will scratch and tear me:
Now to insinuate into her, I began to enter into discourse with her, and said
to her as follows: Mris. Boddenham, you see here is a Maid in a very sad
condition, and thus she has been manydayes; while I was thus speaking, she
broke forth into bitter speeches against the Maid; saying, Ah Whore! ah Devil!
she has belyed me, and the Devils will tear her for it, I will warrant you. I
replied to her, Mris. Boddenham, the business now is to know if you can
prescribe any thing that can cure her, you have formerly cured diverse (many
people say) that have been in the like condition; Pray prescribe a cure
likewise for this Maid. She answered, I have cured hundreds, and believe can
cure this Maid also, if you will let me alone with her; but we suffered her not
to meddle with her, but desired her to prescribe what means she used in the
same case: To which she replied, Nothing but good prayers, and also hanging
something about her neck. And being asked what it was she hung about the neck?
she answered, a Spell written in a piece of paper: And heing demanded to whom
she did pray for cure? she answered, to Jupiter, he is the best and fortunatest
of all the Planets, and in such a case as this we always pray to the Planet
Jupiter. I then told her (after a long discourse of the like nature) that the
business that we had her here for, was, to the intent, that since the purpose
of our hearts here present was to call on God, and wait on him at the throne of
grace that afternoon, to show mercy to the afflicted Maid, it being a lawful
way, and that which has been a means formerly of prevailing with God in the
like nature; and the way that Christ taught his Disciples, when they would
learn to cast out Devils, telling them that it was to be done by Fasting and
prayer; therefore we would know of her whether she would willingly join with
us? We told her our prayers should be, that God would cast an eye of pity on
the Maid, and release her from her misery; that he would acquit the Innocent,
discover the Guilty, and bring to light the hidden and abominable works of
darkness: She answered, Yes, she would join in prayer with us.

And when we had concluded our seekings of God, it was desired that the Maid
might be awaked, for that she had slept ever since Mris. Boddenham the Witch
came into the room, which was almost three hours, and had not been known to
sleep, or take any rest in many days and nights before; and I did apparently
see, that the Maid was, and is the better at ease for the Witches presence: The
Witch presently took hold about me, crying out, Oh pray by no means do you
awake the Maid; for if she should awake, I should then be torn in pieces, and
the Devil would fetch me away bodily; yet, notwithstanding her cryings out and
perswadings to the contrary, I desired the people to awake her; and they tried
what they could, stopped her breath, put things up into her nostrils, took her
from lying along, and held her upright, and struck her extremely; yet all the
means we possibly could use did not awake her; which was a great admiration to
all spectators, that she could not take any rest for many days and nights
before, and should be in such violent fits until the Witch came into the room,
and then she should be on a sudden so eased of her torments and pain, and fall
asleep that no art or means could awake her. I then desired the Witch to use
what means she could to awake her, which she was very loath to do, saying, The
Maid has an Ague, and this sleep would make her well, yet we made her to try
to awake her: The Witch only took her by the hand, but trembled extremely, and
called the Maid by her name, Awake, Awake; and that was the most we could make
her do; but still begging and desiring the people not to awake her: We seeing
there was no remedy or means to awake her, (for my intention was to have caused
them to have discoursed together, thinking by their discourse something might
be found out to prove the suspected a Witch, and to convict her the more
evidently) I caused the Witch to go forth of the Chamber, but she would not
go unless I went along with her, for she then said, I should awake the Maid,
and then she should be torn in pieces; but I would not yield to go along with
the Witch, but was resolved to see the Maid awake out of her sleep; but when
(partly by force and partly by entreaty) we had gotten the Witch out of the
Chamber down the stairs, as soon as ever she was gone from under that roof
where the Maid was, into the prisonhouse where she used to reside, the Maid
began immediately to awake, in such an orderly manner, as if she had been at
the sweetest repose and rest that possibly could be, and afterward having
recovered her senses both to look abroad and speak, she said, I bless God the
Devil went away from me but even now, and to my own thinking I have been in
so sweet a sleep as ever I had in my life, and to my apprehension was in the
most sumptuous pleasant place that ever my eyes beheld, where all the most
pleasant sights of flowers and delights are: Oh how sorry am I that I slept no
longer! yet blessed be God I am now at ease, the Devil went forth of my
stomach even now; indeed he made my body tremble when he went out, but that was
the worst he did to me; he is now departed, he has stood all this day on the
top of the house, in the likeness of a Lion, with flaming eyes, but he is now
likewise gone from thence, and I see him no where, and I hope never to be vexed
more: Indeed I have deserved to be torn in pieces by him, but my Lord Jusus
Christ in mercy has now freed me, and I am verily persuaded shall not be
tormented more, the hour of mercy is now come; I have indeed had mercy in being
kept out of hell, but now I have more mercy to be freed from my pain; it is a
wonder to me, I should be so well in so short a time, that had more pains on me
then ever I could, or shall be able to express: My body is now free from pain,
my mind is now quieted, sure God has heard your prayers for me, the Lord has
stirred up some people to call on God for my salvation, and I trust he has
heard them; sure I shall never in the least requite you all for your love, I
hope God will likewise show you all the same mercy, as (blessed be the Lord) I
am this hour made partaker of. I now begin to be hungry, and I thank the Lord I
have an appetite to my food, I would now eat any thing, and if you would help
me upon my feet, I am confident the Lord would enable me of my self to go
about the Chamber: which she did do, and said, the greatest pain she felt was
the bruisings of her body, by reason of the peoples forcible holding her, and a
swimming in her head by reason of the long distractions of her mind she had
lain under, but said, Blessed be the Lord it is so well as it is with me, I am
resolved to serve this God that showed me this mercy; I will hereafter
heedfully live, and will for ever avoid such base company as this Witch, and
for her I will never have any thing to do with, while I live; yet I bless
God, she can do me no harm, she has done the worst she can already; the
Devil has told me many times, if I would keep counsel I should not be
tormented, but I will not hearken to him, I will speak the truth, though it be
my death, for I have dishonored God too much already.

Many more such like expressions she used, but are too many to be enumerated.

The night being come, we returned praise to God for his seasonable deliverance
of the Maid, and because he had mercifully and suddenly given a gracious
hearing to our prayers: In this time I desired some to eye the person and
carriage of the Witch, that was in the prisonhouse some distance from the
Maid: Who informed me, that as soon as ever the Maid awaked, and began to be at
ease, the Witch began to be tormented, and to roar and cry out, Oh the Devil,
the Devil, the Devil will tear me in pieces, running from one corner of the
room to the other, shaking and rattling her fetters, striking with a stick in
her hand those that were in the room, Prisoners and others; crying out, and
cursing the Maid, saying, Oh this Whore will be the death of me, she will hang
me, and I shall be killed and torn in pieces: And she was in such an hideous
rage, that the people were fearful to stay near her: I being made acquainted
that she was very importunate to speak with me, I left the Maid, and was going
away, but I at a distance called to her, having then no great mind to come
very near her, she being in such a furious condition, and to satisfy her, told
her that the Maid was now very well, and I make no doubt but she would in a
while be released: She replied, Yes, at the gallows, no where else, for I am
sure I shall be hanged; and said to me, For your part, I see you are a knowing
man; and if you will come to me to morrow morning, when I may speak privately
with you, I will tell you all my Art: I told her, I would hearken to any thing
she would tell me, and would come to her the next morning.

The next day, being Wednesday, in the morning I went to the prison, where I
found the Maid then very well freed from her former fits, and was informed, had
been all that night before freed from them, and had took her rest very well.

I then went to the Witch, who desired me to go into a room by my self with
her, which I did, and she shut the door after we were in; she then would have
called for some beer to drink to me, but I would not permit her, telling her, I
was resolved not to drink; she then made me sit down by her, and she took a
piece of silver, I think it was a Shilling, and offered it to me, telling me I
must take that piece of silver of her, if I intended to learn any thing of her:
I replied, I had no need of a shilling, and would not take it, for I was able
to give her a shilling; said she, Give me one then, and that will be as well: I
replied, Not so neither, you do not want one. She then fell a cursing and
swearing that I must take that silver of her, otherwise she could not teach me
any thing: I replied, Tell me what you can do first, happily I can do already
what you can, if not, I may learn it afterward: She replied, Thou must keep my
counsel, or else all will do thee no good; and thou must now promise to me,
that thou will not come to undermine me, to undo me: I answered, you need not
think so, for you see I am come into a room privately, that none else might
know what you teach me. She then said, she could cure Diseases by Charms and
Spells, and had prayers that would do so likewise; and they could cure such
Diseases as the best Doctors could not do; she could discover stolen goods,
and show any one the Thief that had them, in a glass; and that she could raise
Spirits by reading in her Books.

I asked her, what Books she had, and where she had them? She answered, she had
a great many notable books, and she had most part of them of Dr. Johnson; and
withal told me, if I would keep them secret, she would let me have them, if I
would accept of them: I told her Yes, she should let me have what books she
would, and I should be very thankful to her for them; but desired her to let
me see the red Book that the Maid set her hand to, that was written half over
with blood (being the names of Witches that had listed themselves under the
Devils command.) She replied, I cannot help you to that book, for Withers has
that, a man that lives in Hampshire. But then said I too her, Pray let me have
what Books you can help me to: So she sent her Husband with me to her house,
with one man more, to deliver me her Books: And when I had them, I left them
with a Gentleman in Sarum to keep them safe, that they might be brought to the
fight of the Judges at the Assizes. I then went to the Witch, and told her,
that the Books I had were nothing concerning her art; I would willingly have
that Book that did raise the Spirits: Ah! (says she) that is safe enough from
my Hu^band, that is a book of Charms, he is hid safe, but that thou shall have
it, if I could have my liberty to go home, for that book is worth thousands of
other books, and can do more; I will show the use of him, and what Charm thou
shall use to find out a 1000 l. that lies hid in the North part of Wilton
Garden, being hid by the old Earl of Pembrook, Father to the last deceased, and
it is not to be found but by a Charm: But for the present I could not have her
liberty to go for it, so that I had it not.

And she then also told me that she had been a Servant to Dr. Lamb, and the
occasion she came to live with him, she said was, that she lived with a Lady in
London, who was a Patient many times to him, and sent her often in business to
him, and in particular, she went to know what death King James should die; and
the Doctor told her what death, and withal said that none of his Children
should come to a natural death; and she said she then saw so many curious
sights, and pleasant things, that she had a mind to be his Servant, and learn
some of the art; and Dr. Lamb seeing her very docile, took her to be his
Servant; and she reading in some of his Books, with his help learnt her Art, by
which she said she had gotten many a penny, and done hundreds of people good,
and no body ever gave her an ill word for all her pains, but always called
her Mris. Boddenham, and was never accounted a Witch but by reason of this
wicked Maid now in prison, and then fell a cursing of and reviling at the Maid
extremely.

Having spent out this forenoon likewise, I then left the prison, and departed;
and heard no more of any thing concerning the Witch or the Maid, only that the
Maid remained well, and that the Witch would tell those she esteemed her
friends, that surely she did believe that I was a Witch, and did think I should
do many notable things with her books.

And about three weeks after I received a Letter from Edw. Tucker and Francis
Swanton Esquire; two Justices of the Peace, to be at the Assise to prosecute
against the Witch, who withal in their Letter acquainted me that the Maid was
now troubled as formerly, and desired me to come to Sarum again, to see if I
could discover any thing more of the Witches practice, and I came on the Friday
following the Tuesday night in which the Maid began to relapse into her former
fits, and was tormented as formerly; and at night about eleven or twelve of the
clock, the Maid was miserably tormented, crying out, the Devil would carry her
away before the morning; and in short time after she was pulled from those that
held her, and the people in the room run away for fear: The Maid being thrown
from the low bed whereon she lay, to the top of the high bed, and her clothes
torn off her back, and a piece of her skin torn away, the Candle in the room
standing on a Table, was thrown down, and put out; at which time, there being
a little Boy that was almost asleep, but with this noise being frighted, had
not power, with the rest, to go out of the room, stayed there, and saw a
Spirit in the likeness of a great black man, with no head, in the room
scuffling with the Maid, and took her and set her into a Chair, and told her
that she must go with him, he was come for her soul, she had given it to him:
But the Maid answered, that her soul was none of her own to give, and he had
already got her blood, but as for her soul he should never have; and after a
while tumbling and throwing about of the Maid, it vanished away.

It came into some of our thoughts that were afrighted out of the Maids
Chamber, to go into the Witches room to see whether she was asleep, and when
they came, they found her running about the room with her clothes off, and her
iron fetters about her legs, and asked her what was the reason she was not in
her bed asleep at this time of the night, and why she run about the room? The
Witch answered, I cannot keep my bed, nor lie in it at quiet, but am pulled
forth by violence. They asked her the reason why? She replied, Pray what is the
matter in your Chamber: who being not willing to discover the truth said,
Nothing, but a Child is not well, that we are troubled with. The Witch replied,
Do you not lie to me? for I know what is the matter as well as your selves. The
Witch sat then down by her bed side, and there cursing and banning the people,
they left her, and went again to the Maid, where they stayed all that night,
holding the Maid from mischieving her self in her fits.

That the Witch might yet more evidently be discovered, Melier Damer, Alice
Cleverly, Grace Stocks, and other Women, searched the Witch in the Gaol, and
they delivered on their oaths at the Assizes, that they found on her shoulder a
certain mark or Teat, about the length and bigness of the Niple of a Woman's
breast, and hollow and soft as a Niple, with a hole on the top of it: And
searching further, they likewise found in her secret place another Teat, soft,
and like the former on her shoulder: And afterward, when the Witch was on her
trial, as the Women were giving in this their Evidence, they were ordered to
look on that Teat again on her shoulder, as she stood at the Bar, who did, and
they then said, that the Teat was more dryer then, and something less then it
was before, and did seem not to be so freshly pulled and sucked as before.

After which time, I coming to the prison, went to the Maid, who was at the
present under some inward conflict and horror of conscience, who complained
very much of her damnable condition, and said, there was now no hope of her
salvation, for the Devil was returned again to her, and had got faster hold of
her then ever; and also said, My hope is now quite gone, in vain is it for me
to expect salvation: How can God save me? I know he cannot, and the worst is,
He will not; and it cannot be long before the Devil will tear me in pieces.

I then told her the occasion of her present trouble might be in giving way to
some suggestions of Satan. She replied, I do as little as I can: But he tells
'me I shall near be at quiet, until I get my name blotted out of the Red book,
that the Witch made me set, when I sealed with my blood to be a slave all the
days of my life to Lucifer; and if I could have that piece of silver I had at
that time given me, to give again to the Devil, I should then be at rest: But
after a while I persuaded her not to harbor any such fancies within her, for
that they were the mere suggestions of Satan; which she was at last brought to
believe: she in a short time after began to fall into her former fits, but not
so violent as the former were: But after it was over, I asked the Maid whether
she was willing the Witch should be brought into her Chamber, (knowing that the
other time it was a means of her ease) to which she would not consent for some
time: At last I persuaded her to let her come and they should talk together.

Then I went to the Witch to bring her; and when I came to her, she pretended
she did not remember me; for I heard she was prejudiced against me at this
second coming; for that some had persuaded her that I did but ensnare her, and
did what I could only to discover her; so that I could not without much
persuasion cause her to own any acquaintance with me.

I asked her how she did? who replied, Very naught, not well; and the Maid and
I had undone her, for she should be hanged: I persuaded her to go to the
Maid, and talk with her: But she replied, Ah Whore! Ah Rascal! I will see her
in hell first, I will never see her more, she has undone me, by raising these
reports of me that am an honest Woman; 'twill break my Husbands heart, he
grieves to see me in these Irons: I did once live in good fashion, and did not
lie as now I do; I am sick in my stomach, I am tormented that I cannot sleep
at night, and am almost torn in pieces; and being not well, I will not go
forth without the door this day.

I seeing I could not persuade her, went to the Maid, and persuaded her to come
into the presence of the Witch; and after many entreaties I persuaded her to go
to her, which she did: But being come into the room, with multitudes of people
pressing in along with her; (the Witch was in a very spacious upper room, that
was capacious enough to hold 300 people) so soon as ever the Witch saw the
Maid, she ran skrieking and crying out from the Maid to the further side of the
room, where a bed stood, and fell down, she fell on her knees, and went to
creep under the bed, but the people pulled her out again, whereupon she cried
out exceedingly, that there was not any talking to her; maliciously-cursing
those that held her, striking them with her stick, and scratching and biting
them, making a most hideous noise; words cannot express the manner of it;
crying out, Have out of my sight this devilish Maid, I shall be torn in
pieces.

I went to persuade her to be quiet, telling her, none shall do her any harm.
She answered, Oh! the Devil will tear me if I see her: And constantly she kept
crying out and roaring. I thought that in half an hour she would be tired out,
making such a noise, and then she must of necessity be silent: But all the
while the Maid was there, she kept such a roaring and hideous noise, which was
almost an hour: Now the Maid looking on her, seeing her in such a torment, was
at ease; and the Maids ease was her trouble.

I being in the presence of the Witch this while, had it come into my thoughts,
that Mr. Holland Mr. Tucker's Clerk, had told me the morning before, that he
being a day or two before in the prison with others, in company with the Witch,
he saw about her neck a green silk string, with something tied at the end of
it, like a little bag, hanging down her stomach: He asked her, What was that
about her neck? She replied, It was a thing that she could do many things
with; and if he would give her but half a dozen of Ale, she would make a toad
spring out of it: The remembrance of which, caused me to observe if I could see
any such thing about her neck, which I did; I then desired a Gentleman that
stood by me to endeavor the secret getting it away from her; and to that end
some kept a great disturbance, pulling about her: Which while they were so
doing, the Gentleman got away the bag and string about her neck; which she felt
gone immediately: She then roared and cried out much more then before; saying,
Now she was undone, her jewel was taken from her, her life was lost; now
there was no hope but that she should be hanged.

But seeing there was no remedy, or possibility of pacifying her, we all left
her in her rage, and the Maid went again to her own Chamber; So her being in
the presence of the Witch, was a second time of freeing her from her torments.

We then went and opened the bag so taken away, that hung to the string about
her neck: It was a little silk bag, in which there was some powder and pieces
of white paper, with several sorts of seeds in them; probably such a Charm as
she did often use: And for the powder, both my self and those that were
Physicians that saw it, could not otherwise judge of it, but that it was some
sympatheticall powder, that should have caused such Evidence that came in
against her, not to have testified any thing prejudicial to her: And probably
it might be such a powder, in regard of her trouble of losing it. And Magicians
write much of the nature of an herb called Anacrampferos, and the herb
Sowbread will work love and affection in any party whose good will and love
they desire to obtain; and this foolish conceit without doubt she had, to think
that the wearing such a powder about her neck would have wrought such a love in
the Judge and Jury, that the one should not have found her guilty, nor the
other condemned her.

But in this, as well as in the rest, the Devil deceived her: For the assizes
being held at Sarum for the County of Wilts, the Witch was there arraigned on
three several Bills of Indictment touching her compact and practice of
Witchcraft; and found guilty on all three, and sentence passed on her most
justly for such practices, by the Lord Chief Baron Wild, then Judge of life
and death at that Assizes.

After that Sentence was passed on her, she was brought from the Court to the
prison again; but never valued it, or was much troubled that she was to die.

In the Evening after her Condemnation, Mr. Langley a Grocer of Sarum, with
others came to the prison to her, and entering into discourse with her, she
began to rail against me, and said I had betrayed her and wronged her, and they
(to please her) spoke against me: Likewise, she hearing that, began to be
familiar with Mr. Langley, and told him that she lived with Dr. Lamb, and he
taught her to raise Spirits, and she told him how people came to learn it: If
those that have a desire to it, do read in books, and when they come to read
further then they can understand, then the Devil will appear to them, and show
them what they would know; and they doing what he would have them, they may
learn to do what they desired to do, and he would teach them: And further she
did in general terms confess to him, that she did what the Maid had told of
her, and did likewise promise him her books, but because I did prosecute her,
and informed the Judge what she told me, she would not teach me any thing; but
because (as she said) Mr. Langley seemed to be a good honest man, she would let
him have her books, and teach him her Art.

I went from Sarum to Dorchester after the Judges to the Assizes, and after I
had accomplished my business I had there I returned to Sarum again, to speak
with her, and to see her executed: She hearing I came from the Judges, and some
persons informing her (though without cause) I had endeavored for a Repreive
for her, she was willing to speak with me.

The morning before she was to be executed, I went to her; and when I came
there, there was only with her (the door being shut) Mr. Foster a Minister,
who comforted her up to bear death Christianly, boldly, and cheerfully; and
after he had brought her to that pitch as to promise him she would go a true
penitent to her place of Execution, and to die as a Lamb, he then kneeled down,
and read over to her much of the Book of Commonprayer, and she repeated it
after him: I being at the door, when he had done, spoke to him to propound some
questions, which I told him were very requisite should be discovered: he did
go and say something to her, then returned to me, and told me that she would
say nothing to it, and that it was not fit she should now be troubled, but to
be left to her devotion; he also told me that she denied the things she was
condemned for, and that she wrongfully suffered death, and did lament
extremely, and desired to die quietly: I replied to him, God would have more
honor by her confession of other Witches, then she can have comfort by a few
prayers, and a little smoothing up at last. I was resolved to put it home to
her, and make her confess what I could of her practice, and whom she knew
that practiced such Art; though what she said would not be enough to convict
any, yet it would he enough to suspect and examine them. He replied, he was
very willing truth should be discovered, and so went away. I then told her that
this morning was to be the time of her Execution, and there was no hope of any
Reprieve, but die she must; if any thing moved the Judge to mercy, it would be
her confessing her faults, and to say truth, and to confess other Witches, and
to tell what things they had done, that they might be convicted: She answered
me, If I must die this morning, I care not; and swore three times one after
another, by the name of God, she was prepared to die: And for Confessing she
said she would never say that the Maid told truth, but the Maid belyed her, and
the Devil would torment her for it; and as she had dealt with her, she said,
she prayed to God that he would deal with her; and for her part, she would
never forgive the Maid the wrong she had done her: And further said, that
before she had been put to this shame, she would have given Forty pounds for
the saving her life; but now she would not live if she should, but was resolved
to be hanged, and her earnest desire was that she might be buried under the
gallows: And she said, she had made her Will, and given Legacies to many of her
friends. But I told her, her Husband might choose whether he would let them
have them: she replied, If he do not, the Devil shall never let him be quiet.
She also said she had writ a Letter, and put it into her pocket, which was to
her Husband, that he should never live in his own house more; and that her will
was to go directly to the gallows, and there be hanged, and then brought back
into her own house, and there to be shrouded, and then to be carried back to
the gallows, and there buried. Her will was also, that the Women that shrouded
her should go into her Garden, and gather up all her herbs, spoil all her
flowers, and tear up the roots. She also was very desirous for drink, and had
not Mr. Undersheriffs prudence been such as to restrain her from it, she would
have died drunk: She said, she would not have any Psalm sung, or any prayers
for her at the Gallows; but she would have a Psalm sung at the Gaol, and
immediately she her self began to sing. I also asked her who she knew to be
Witches? She said, she knew none but Withers, that lived by Rumsey in
Hampshire, he did use to make Charms for her; and he did help the Woman that
was Owner of the Brick Kill by Sarum to a Spell, and she did frequent him for a
while; and he could do the most tricks of any one she knew: she did also name
one or two more that she said was able to do many such things as she could.

I asked her, whether she had any ground or testimny that repentance was
wrought in her? She replied, I hope for all this to be saved by my Savior the
Lord Jesus Christ: and I defy the Devil; and I am wronged and abused, and so
these Rogues and Rascals shall all know, for all this yet; and then she swore
an oath, I that they should. She then would make a show of sorrow, complaining,
I have not been in bed these three nights, but have been abused, and the Maids
that were with me last night stole the money out of my purse, that I had there
to pay for my supper, and to buy me some drink; and then she would make a noise
as if she wept; that I my self, and I also desired others to observe, but she
was never seen to let fall a tear; but yet many times she would make such an
artificial noise, that one would have thought she wept: And in such discourse
she spent the morning: And if any did bid her pray, she would swear at them,
and revile them.

Mr. Undersheriff coming into the prison to her, told her, She must go along
with him to the place of Execution. She replied, Be you ready, I am ready, in a
jolly manner, and forth she went: But before Mr. Undersheriff came in, I had so
persuaded her, that when she came to the place of Execution, she would confess
every thing; and in regard she should not be able to speak loud enough, she
desired me to stand by her, and she would tell it unto me, and I should speak
it out to all the people: Which I told her I would: And she said, she would
then tell every thing, and keep nothing secret.

Afterward she fell into a rage, and wished for a Knife, she said she would
run it into her heart-blood: Being replied unto by some, Oh Mris. Boddenham you
would not offer to do such wickedness, would you? She swore by the name of
God, but she would, had she a Knife. She then went forth to the place of her
Execution, where a numerous company were spectators; and as she went along
toward the gallows, by every house she went by, she went with a small piece of
silver in her hand, calling for Beer, and was very passionate when denied; one
of the men that guarded her on the way, told her that Mr. Sheriff would not let
her be buried under the gallows, upon which she railed at the man extremely
that told her so, and said, she would be buried there. When she came to the
place of execution, she went immediately to go up the Ladder, but she was
pulled back again and restrained: I then pressed her to confess what she
promised me she would, now before she dyed, but she refused to say any thing.
Being asked whether she desired the prayers of any of the people, she answered,
she had as many prayers already as she intended, and desired to have, but
cursed those that detained her from her death, and was importunate to go up
the Ladder, but was restrained for a while, to see whether she would confess
any thing, but would not: they then let her go up the Ladder, and when the
rope was about her neck, she went to turn her self off, but the Executioner
stayed her, and desired her to forgive him: She replied, Forgive thee? A pox on
thee, turn me off; which were the last words she spoke: She was never heard all
the while she was at the place of Execution to pray one word, or desire any
others to pray for her, but the contrary.

Thus you have her wicked life, her woeful death. Those that forsake God in
their lives, shall be forsaken of him in their deaths.

A Postscript.
HIstory often speaks, and common observation assures us, that Bees gather
excellent honey out of the bitterest herbs: So, were we wise, we might make
good use of this foregoing Relation: Wherein we may consider how the Devil
gulls and deceives the souls of the Sons of men, He (without doubt) to bring
them into such an unhappy league with himself, promises them to be no
Inferiors to the greatest in the World. To the Poor he promises Food; to the
Sick, Health; to the Irefull, to be revenged; to the Curious, Knowledge; to the
Ambitious, Honor; and the Satisfying lusts to the Lustful: He makes large
promises when he means no such thing: Could ever any man at the last say he was
a Gainer by his Contract with Satan? indeed he promised Adam fair, but the
conclusion was a turning out of Paradise; he promised Sodom fair, but the
conclusion was Burning: And how many can our experience testify of, that
(without doubt) after their league with him, built many Castles of Hope in the
Air of their Thoughts, of their future happiness; But what a sad end have they
came unto! How many hanged and burned! And when they need most protection from
the Devil, they have been most disappointed by him: Shall any therefore
wilfully be deceived by his allurements? Suppose the best, That such a
shameful end shall not betyde them: Yet is there any happiness or any good to
be found in the Devils service? Can he procure lost goods, can he restore
decayed health, can he satisfy a proud heart, can he content the ambitious
mind, can he satisfy a fleshly lust, can he bestow on thee and let thee
really enjoy all the glory of the world; yet he cannot save thee from death:
can he prolong thy life in the land of the living, he cannot create comfort to
thee in the day of Gods wrath: What will you then do? Indeed your lusts
perhaps by him have been satisfied, your health by him recovered, your lost
goods by him restored, your ambitious mind something for a while quieted: But
all this while your soul is not saved. Consider how God himself pities thee:
What will you do, says the Lord in the day of my Wrath? Intombing your souls
in the world will not shelter you, nor your agreement with Hell and Death
cannot relieve you: Besides, what outward, temporal, forenamed accommodations
you have by him, as Health, Wealth, and the like; you give a dearer rate then
the most chargeable Physician in the world would or possibly could demand of
you for the restoration ofyour lost health; and it is much sweeter, easier,
and less charge, to go so long a voyage as to the Indies, and there dig for
gold and silver, accounting all its difficulties, then to have it of the devils
sending or bringing it to us.

In this sad foregoing Relation, thou have the great and glorious attributes of
Gods Justice and just Judgment, and of his rich Mercy and free grace.

To demonstrate the last first: Friendly Reader, Thou had in this Narration
the torments of a poor Maid, so fully expressed, that in the reading thereof
thou may take notice of the goodness of God in her support; sure I am, no
natural strength could have subsisted under such violent and strong racks,
tortures and pangs as did seize on her for almost five weeks: Besides, a Maid
so poorly principled as she was; for as she could not read, so she could not
answer, neither did she know, but was altogether ignorant of the Fundamental
grounds of Religion; and besides, lived profanely, yet in the extremity of her
condition, and in the lowest ebb of her sorrows, there was a ground of hope,
and expressed by her self in such terms as these:

Being asked whether she gave way to the Devil, in yielding to any thing that
he suggested into her thoughts and mind: She answered, No: Indeed (says she)
the Devil now appears to me from the top of the house in a fearful shape,
with flaming eyes, and calls to me to come away: But I tell him, I cannot, I am
held, and glad I am that I am held, else I am afraid I should be carried away
by force. And at any time, when she had a little ease from the violent
hurryings of her body, she was desirous to discourse, and said, she would not
keep the Devils counsel; The Devil (says she) claims his promise, and would
have me away, for I have given him my soul: But, says she, I know my soul is
none of mine own to give, Christ has bought it, and his it is, and none of my
mine; and though I did so wickedly as to promise it him through the persuasions
of a Witch, which I am heartily sorry for, yet I have not my soul in my own
custody to dispose of as I will; and this (says she) I tell him, but it will
not satisfy him. What ever questions she was asked against her self between
her fits, when she was able to speak, she would freely relate it, though never
so much against her self; replying, I have deserved death and hell a thousand
times over, and if God show me mercy, sure I do not deserve it, yet I hope God
will: I find (says she) that the Devil is within me, he is got into my
stomach, and there he lies, and has broken all my bones, yet I hope to be
saved at last; I know God is merciful, the Devil had else torn my body in
pieces, he has tried what he can, but God has yet kept me, and I believe he
will still for all the Devil and this wicked base Woman: And further she said,
I heartily desire the prayers of the Ministers and all good people, I do
desire it surely with my whole soul, for though I am a sinful wretch, yet sure
I do believe God will hear their prayers for me. And many other expressions
she used, which are set down in the former Narration. I only relate these
here, to show the divine support she had in her distress.

And Reader, Had thou seen the strength of her spirit, and of her mind in
giving in her Evidence, thou would have believed she spoke truth: And I think
there are none of an unprejudicate opinion, but did believe what she then said:
She sometimes in her Accusation, or rather in her Evidence, accused her own
obnoxiousnesse, and how guilty she her self was of death and hell: And after
sentence was passed on the Witch, I came to the Maid, and asked her whether she
was willing the Witch should be reprieved? She replied, With all my heart, and
glad I should be if any body could prevail for her reprieve; and I do wish
some body or other would try, if they did think they should not sin in so
doing: She then at the same time wept exceedingly, and complaining, Oh my
madness and my folly! Oh wicked Creature that I am, that ever I should sin
against so good a God, that has been so merciful to me in my torments! Surely
the Devil in one of those long nights would have carried me away, had not God
been merciful to me: How has Christ preserved me! Did I ever deserve svch
mercy? Sure I did not; and it will be my sorrow so long as I live, should I sin
against so loving a Christ, and give away my soul from so good a God, and all
by the perswafions of so base a Woman: How can I forget this? Surely I shall
never forget it as long as I live: I am resolved to serve such a God as this
is, I will not count any thing too hard to do for him that would have mercy
upon me, that had given my soul to the Devil. I am not yet too old to learn, I
will learn to read, sure, if God will be pleased that I shall, though I break
my sleeping time to learn; and I will, if possibly I can, get into some good
Ministers house or service, because I would not have any let from living a holy
life: I will learn the knowledge of Religion, that I may serve God, since I have
done so much to his dishonor. I am this day to go away home, I hope now to
begin a holy life: and many more gracious expressions she used, that those that
were present can testify as well as my self. All which she spoke weeping
bitterly: And longer discourse I had had with her, but by reason of her much
weeping, she had not freedom of speech.

I relate not here any fancy, but a real truth, and I believe all my own
actions are under diviue observation, and I should much offend, if I should
under pretense of relating truth, do otherwise; and truly I doubt not but all
these transactions and providence, are but the forerunners of her day of
conversion, and God usually, or at least sometimes, makes use of a wilderness
condition to be a passage into Canaar. O how many souls has God in Heaven,
that have had their passage thither by Hels gate? Manasses prison was a means
to break off his league with familiar spirits, so may I say, a Prison was the
place, where God in mercy visited this poor Maid, and did there disthrone
Satan, and gave her freedom of spirit and liberty of body in one day; and I
make no doubt but the same God, that has brought to the birth, and I believe
brought forth, will not suffer to be despised the day of small things, but will
make her a monument to his own praise, and although Jacob is but small, yet he
shall arise.

I come to the period of my Narration, and shall close up all with a word or
two of the discovery of Gods judgment, and Justice on the Witch. I need not
reiterate what formerly has been said, I have showed something of her
miserable life, and of her woeful death, but nothing in respect of what might
be said; I have only spoken of her practice concerning this Maid, but at her
trial there were many other things brought in against her, and there was at the
least eight witnesses that gave in their Accusations against her on oath, and
it was not solely this business that she was condemned for, but many other
passages were brought in against her, of many of her vile and abominable
practices, which would take up too much time to Insert; but here is enough
already said sufficiently to evidence unto the world how vile and wicked she
was; and notwithstanding this her miserable condition (to the apprehension of
all spectators) she desired nothing more than her end; thus the devil makes
such people willing slaves to himself, and notwithstanding she came to such
misery and sad condition, by reason of her wicked practices, yet she would keep
the devils Council to the last, and would not discover others in League with
her self, although she saw the issue of the Practitioners by her self, neither
would she forewarn spectators of the like practice; we may see much of the
Justice of God herein, that those that will rebelliously harden their hearts
against God, shall be judicially hardened by him; all judgments cannot break
the heart, or humble the sinner, if God soften it not; outward miseries may
break the back, not of themselves melt the heart; all the torments the devils
endure cannot bring down their pride, but they remain still proud, though in
Hell. What a madness rests in the sons of men, to think they can repent when
theywill? I am confident this Witch could not shed one penitential tear, though
thereby she might have been reprieved from death. It Is dangerous to follow that
trade will harden the heart, and it is usual that those that are so besotted and
hardened, as to sin under daily mercies, are in time so hardened, that the worst
of judgments and torments cannot mollify them. This Narration was penned to
reclame poor people from running after such persons, for the restoration of
lost health, or recovery of stolen goods, they may read the Issue thereof by
this Maid, she can and does speak forth, both by word of mouth, and also by her
sufferings she lay under, the misery of such as resort to them; thou have heard
before how low she was brought, into as sad an estate as poor creature could be
brought, and live, both in respect of her bodily torments and inward condition.
I have not related every particular word she spoke of her condition, neither
indeed can I remember them all, but one time she was brought so low with her
pain, being in a trance, that when she came to her self, she said to a God^y
Minister of the City of Sa^um then with her, that she was just then falling
into hell, and the devil was too strong for her, do what she could for her
life, and was carrying her by might and force to hell, and she had
Irrecoverably been thrown in, had not one little twig (or stick) held and
stayed her, she had no refuge in the world but that twig, and no support by
any, or assistance from any, but that twig, which was the greatest comfort to
her she ever met with in all her sorrows, that such a seasonable support should
come to her, when she was as she apprehended swallowed in at hels mouth. Here
see a poor creature, as to its own apprehension, could not lie under greater
misery, why then should the devil prevail with any, thus to treasure up to
themselves sorrow? Besides the condition of the Maid, the Witch her self
infinitely more bespeaks all not to follow after, or practice such wicked arts.
Who would willingly have lived her life? but who then would dye her death? she
had sorrows enough entayled to her practice here, while she lived, but
infinitely more now dead; it is no indifferent thing, such a practice, but
without infinite mercy it is damnation to the followers of it, and very few are
reclamed from it, but as they live, usually they dye. And my friendly Reader,
not to detein thee from thy more serious employment any longer, I say, thou
have this relation, truly and faithfully related unto thee; for what good or
advantage would it be to me, to give a false relation of the same? which if I
should, many hundred spectators can disprove me; but my own heart knows, and
all observers can testify, that the foregoing History, is the birth and true
issues of the life and death of the Witch; neither have thou it penned or
illustrated with counterfeit colors of curious language, for I know it matters
not what Speech we use in telling truth, and I obliged my self in my
undertakings to use the same words and expressions as both the Witch and Maid
used, and have not made them speak my words in this relation. It is expected by
some, having been urged thereto, to annex to this Narration, a word or two
concerning the practice of Witches, their nature and compact, how they may be
discovered, and wherein there power consists; what power Witches have over
others, more than any other person, and how they came by their power, and that
the practice of this Witch, is the way and common practice of such as make
compacts with devils; but those to whom my self am known, do also know, that I
have other public employment, to exercise my Pen, and Head about, than such a
work as this; but providence casting me on the afore-related business, I could
not bury what I knew of it in oblivion, knowing that my self knew the passages
in general, as well as any, and I know none that would take the task to publish
it but my self, and I could not (being solicited by many Justices of the Peace,
that were at the Bench and heard the trial, and other men of eminent worth)
wave i^; but for clearing any objections in writing, that partial Readers might
raise on the same, I think it a work needless; but for the Narration, if any
notwithstanding what has been said doubt the truth of it, if it be any living
in the Western Circuit, Master Clark of the Assizes, or any of (...) Clarks or
servants, can fully satisfy them the truth of it, and also the truth of it will
be made manifest by eminent persons to be believed to every Clark of Assizes of
every Circuit in England, and they will be able throughout, their whole
Circuits to satisfy the truth of it to any that are dubious as to the belief
thereof.

And now friendly Reader, having given thee as brief a Narration of the
Judicial proceeding against this Witch, as possibly I could, I beg thy candid
peru^al thereof, and such an observation of the passages therein, as they call
for from thee.

FINIS.

