A LETTER unto a PERSON of Honor and Quality, Containing some ANIMADVERSIONS
upon the Bishop of Worcester's LETTER.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1662.

Honorable and Worthy Sir,
I Am to thank You for the last piece of Divertisement you gave me, in sending
the Bishop of Worcester's Letter, and I wish you would have let me enjoyed the
satisfaction I took in reading it, without obliging me to give You my sense
upon it: For besides my unwillingness to meddle in a Personal quarrel, it will
not, I think, be very safe for any to engage against so angry an adversary,
which I shall be thought to do, though I resolve to speak nothing but Truth in
the Character I intend to give of him; And it is briefly this, That, in fewer
leaves I never yet read more Passion, which is so very predominant, that his
disorderly and abrupt style does altogether partake of it; so that the Bishops
best way will be, to get his Heat mistaken for Zeal, for else it may justly be
accounted something that has a worse Name, and which, in the Dog-daies will be
very dangerous.

This being, Sir, my Judgment upon the whole Letter, You may well expect that
I should make it good, by an induction from particular instances; but before I
do this I must deal impartially, and assure you, that as to the main
Controversy, I think the Bishop has much the better of Mr. Baxter: For if the
Question between them, was as Dr. Gunning and Dr. Pearson do attest, such a
command is so evidently lawful, that I shall much wonder if Mr. Baxter did
ever dispute it; and till he does clearly disprove that that was not the thing
in Question, I must needs think that he has much forgot himself in making an
Imperfect and Partial Relation.

Setting therefore aside the business of that particular Contest (wherein You
see how much I am inclined to favor the Bishop) there are other things in his
Letter of general concernment, which I think liable to just Exception; As

First, That he supposes there is so strict an Union, and so inseparable a
Dependence between Kings and Bishops, that they must stand and fall together;
and all who are enemies to the one, must needs be enemies to the other. I know
very well this Axiom is much talked of, and some advantage may be taken to
confirm it, from the event of our late Wars: You know likewise, Sir, how much
my Judgment is for the Order of Bishops; and how Passionate a Lover I am both
of the Kings Person and Government, but yet, being thus called by You to
declare the truth, though contrary to my own Humor and Interest, I must needs
say, 1. It is clear from Story, that Kings were in all parts of the world, in
their most flourishing Estate, before ever Bishops were heard of; and no reason
can be given, why what has once been, may not with the same terms of
convenience be again. 2. Bishops as they are by Law established in England, are
purely the Kings subordinate Ministers, in the management of Ecclesiastical
Affairs; which his Majesty may confer upon what order of men he pleases,
though they be as much Lay-persons as You and I are. It is therefore very
injurious to the Kings Authority, to aver that He could not otherwise uphold
and maintain it, then by preserving the Undue, and, as some think,
Antichristian Dignity and Prelation of his inferior Officers. 3. Bishops are
so little useful to support the Regal Dignity (which is founded upon a
distinct Basis of its own) that upon enquiry it will be found, how none have
been greater enemies to the True and Undoubted Sovereignty of Princes, then
some Bishops themselves: for by their Officious, and scarce warrantable,
intermedling in Civil Affairs; by their Absurd and Insignificant distinguishing
between Civil and Ecclesiastical Causes (of which last they have always made
themselves sole Judges) they mangle the Kings Authority, and as to
Church Matters (which may be extended as far as they please) they leave the
King nothing of Supremacy but the Name. The Pope of Rome therefore (who is the
great Father of all such Bishops) has improved this Notion and Distinction so
far that in ordine ad spiritualia, he has labored to subject all Civil
Empires unto his sole Jurisdiction. So that if the Bishop of Worcester's Rule
hold good, of Crimine ab uno -- Disce omnes, Page 21.
i.e. That all men who are of a Party may be judged of by the miscarriages of
one, then I must leave it to You to judge, what all those Bishops, that are of
the Bishop of Worcester's complexion, really drive at, by the fatal example of
that one Bishops Usurpation: For

Secondly, That Assertion, that the Bishop of Worcester (and consequently every
other Bishop) is the sole Pastor of all the Congregations in his Diocese, if it
bent all defensible, Page 2, and 3.
I am sure can be defended only by those Arguments; which are commonly
alleged to maintain the Popes Supremacy over all Churches whatever. For since
a Bishop can no otherwise discharge his duty herein, then by providing
Substitutes, what hinders but the Bishop of Rome may as well oversee a million
of Churches, as the Bishop of Worcester five hundred? Since if Deputation be
lawful, more or less compass and circuit of ground does not at all alter the
case. I forbear to urge how contrary this Practice is to the Doctrine of the
Apostles, both Paul and Peter (I hope the Bishop will not take it ill that I do
not call them Saints, for these Holy men do not need any style of Honor out of
the Popes Calendar.) When Paul had sent for the Elders of the Church at
Ephesus, he bids them to feed the Church of God, over which (not he himself,
Act. 20 28.
by his sole Authority, as Bishop of the Diocese, but) the Spirit of God had
made them (...) i. e. Overseers, 1 Pet. 5.2.
or to use the proper style, Bishops. And Peter commands his Fellow-Elders,
(for so does that Apostle condescend to call himself) to feed the Flock which
was among them, (...) Overseeing, or Acting the Bishops, not (like the Bishop
of Worcester) as Lording it over Gods Heritage, but as Patterns of the Flock.
From which places we learn, not only that those two so much controverted Names
of Bishop and Presbyter, are without distinction ascribed to the same Persons,
but likewise, that whoever feed the Flock, are, under Christ (whom the Apostle
there styles the Chief-Shepherd) the next and immediate Pastors of the Flock;
and to extend the Pastoral Power beyond the actual care of Feeding, is a Notion
altogether unscriptural, and likewise leaves us no bounds where to fix, till we
come to center upon some one Universal Pastor, who may claim this Power over
the whole world, by the same parity of reason, that a Bishop does over one
Diocese.

Thirdly, It seems to be a Light, and (to say no more) unseemly trifling with
sacred Scripture, to affirm that those words of our Savior concerning such as
come not in by the door, Page 3.
and therefore are Thieves and Robbers, ought to be understood of such
Ministers, as preach to Congregations without the Bishops License. Which thing,
the Bishop (in great Heat and Earnestness, as if he had done very well in it)
tells us more then once, P. 3, 6, 8, and 9.
that it was the Principal reason why he silenced Mr. Baxter. Truly if this
practice be justifiable, and those who design themselves to preach the Gospel,
must, besides their Ordination, procure a License from a Bishop, to do that,
which a Woe is denounced against, if they offer to omit, then 1. I see not what
Ordination signifies, since the Power that then is given, no Authority from Man
can take away, any more then dissolve the Contract of a Marriage, much less
empeach and hinder the free use of it, except for Moral and notoriously vicious
Misdemeanors. 2. For one Minister of the Gospel (for certainly a Bishop is no
more) to Silence another, and that for no better Reason, then because his
Fellow-Minister is desirous to preach the Gospel without a new License, this is
an abuse of Dominion, which as our Savior does no where countenance, so the
first Ages of the Church were altogether unacquainted with. For the Bishops
instance of our Saviors putting to silence the Scribes and Pharisees is both
Impertinent and False, because our Savior did only silence them by Argument,
which the Bishop may do whenever he is able; but what is that to an
Authoritative and Imperious commanding men to be Silent. Besides, even then
when our Savior was most strict in pronouncing Woes against the Pharisees, in
that very Chapter, he is so far from forbidding the Pharisees to preach, that
he commands his Disciples both to Hear and to Obey their Doctrine. So that
since the Bishop will needs have the Presbyterians to be Pharisees, let him but
allow them the same Liberty of Teaching the People, as our Savior did the
other, and I believe they will not (at least were I a Presbyterian I should
not) envy his Lordship, either his Tide or Maintenance, how undue and unmerited
soever they both be. And though the Bishop is pleased to say that the
Presbyterians preach nothing but Sedition and Treason (which is most false, as
being directly contrary to their declared Principles) yet the Pharisees taught
something worse, and that was Blasphemy: Yet our Savior (who sure had more
power, and withal, more care of his Church then the Bishop of Worcester) did
not go about by Force to prohibit them. I wish therefore, that this Bishop and
the rest of his Brethren (if any are Choleric and Testy enough to be of his
mind) would consider, that as by silencing their Fellow-Ministers, for such
frivolous and slight pretenses, they usurp a Power, which Christ never gave, so
at the last day he will not thank them for the Exercise of it.

Fourthly, How consistent with the Civil Peace (for as to Christian Charity,
Page 8.
the whole thing is but a Letter of defiance against it) the Bishops
Distinction is about the Act of Indemnity, and (the so much forgotten) Act of
Oblivion, I hope his Majesty and the Parliament will in due time consider. For
he is so hardy as to tell us, That the King by it, only pardoned the corporal
Punishment; but the Church had not, nor ought not to forgive the Scandal, till
honorable amends were made her by Confession and Recantation. Where by
speaking of the Church, as distinct from the State (I mean in point of Coercive
Jurisdiction) the Bishop would make us believe, that after his Majesty and the
Parliament have forgiven men their Civil Crimes, there is still another Power,
which he calls the Church, unto which they are still accountable, even so far
as to make a Public Recantation. Here I wish the Bishop would have spoken out
of the Clouds, and plainly told us, what he meant by the Church: For if it be a
Congregation of the Faithful met together for the Worship of God, as the
Definition of Scripture, and of the Church of England is in the 39 Articles;
this will not at all advantage him, since such a Church has no Coercive or
Imposing Power: But if he means the Hierarchy or Ecclesiastical State, by
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. there can be nothing more False, or more
dishonorable unto our Civil Government, than to affirm that it lies in their
power, not only to Punish, but likewise to exact a Recantation, for those
Faults which the King and Parliament have not only pardoned, but under severe
Penalties commanded should never more be remembered: And therefore I doubt not,
but they will resent this Malicious and Ill-grounded Fancy. And since the
Bishop is so over-zealous for the very Letter of the Law, when it imposes
Ceremonies, give me leave a little to wonder, that one of his Profession and
Place in the Church should so unchristianly go against it, when it enjoins
Moderation and Forgiveness as to Civil Injuries. Such as he, who make the Law,
instead of being a Buckler to protect Converts, a Sword only to cut off all
such as were once Offenders, labor what they can to make men Desperate, and
thereby render the Peace of the Nation, and, in that, the Prosperity and
Welfare of his Majesty very Insecure and Hazardous. For what can more enrage
Men to take Wild and Forbidden courses, then to see even Preachers of the
Gospel strive to widen their Wounds, and, contrary to their own former
Professions, to pull off that Plaster, which the Wisdom of our State
Physicians had provided to heal our Distempers.

Fifthly, It is Bold and Impious (I know not how to express it more mildly)
what he affirms, Page 11.
that If to command an Act, which by accident may prove an occasion of sin, be
sinful, then God himself cannot command any thing. For, though as I said
before, I will by no means own that Assertion, yet, a thing, which by accident
may become sinful, may be Unlawful, in another to command, for want of
sufficient Authority. whereas Gods Sovereign power does without dispute or
Controversy make all his Commands to be Just; and therefore his Name ought not
to be mentioned in our trivial disputes, because every such vain Use of it, is
nothing but a diminution and lessening of his Greatness.

Sixthly, That an Offense, to which a disproportionable Penalty is annexed, is
not to be measured by the Quality of the Act considered in it self, but by the
mischievous consequences it may produce; whether this ought to hold good in
Civil Laws, becomes neither the Bishop nor me to dispute: but in Divinity
nothing can be more False and Dangerous. For to impose, in the Worship of God
as necessary circumstances of it, things confessedly trivial and needless; and,
upon the forbearance of them, to debar any from the benefits first of
Christian; and then of Civil Communion; is a thing which has not the least
pretense of Scripture or Primitive practice to justify it. For our Savior
tells us, That whoever were not against him, were for him; and the Apostle bids
us to receive our weak Brother, and not to judge, much less to burden his
Conscience. Unto which Sacred Canon, nothing can be more directly contrary,
then what the Bishop most Incompassionately tells us, That the Laws do well to
punish, even with non-admission to the Sacrament, such as will not, or perhaps
dare not, kneel. And the Reason he gives* is equally Apocrypha, Because, says
he, it becomes not the Lawgivers to endanger the Churches peace for their
sake: As if first, It did not much more become all Lawgivers, in the things of
God, to observe the Law of Christ, which is a Law of Love and Liberty.
Secondly, As if the Churches peace would not be much more endangered, by the
Pressing of things doubtful, than by the forbearance of them. For since by the
enforcing of such things, as God has no where commanded, our Christian liberty
is enfringed; from hence it follows, that, if we ought not, yet we lawfully may
refuse, to submit unto such Impositions; as our Savior did, in not washing his
hands before Meat; and the Apostle Paul, in the case of Circumcission.

Seventhly, As for the chain of Consequences, which the Bishop links and ties
together. Page 20.
As that from Diversity in external Rites, arises Dislike; from Dislike,
Enmity; from Enmity, Opposition; thence, Schism in the Church, and Sedition in
the State: For proof of which he does very virulently instance in our Unhappy
times. To prevent which, he tells us, That the State cannot be safe without the
Church, nor the Church without Unity, nor Unity without Uniformity, nor
Uniformity without a strict and rigorous Imposition. To all this I answer, that
it is a mere Rope of Sand, and the Parts of his Chain do as little hang
together, as Sampsons Foxes did before they were tied by the Tails, which
course the Bishop has imitated, not forgetting to put in even the Firebrand it
self to make up the comparison. For 1. Nothing is more clear than that there
has been, nay ought to be, Diversity in external Forms, without any Dislike at
all as to the Person of another: For the Apostles that preached to the
Circumcision gave the right of Fellowship unto the Apostles of the Gentiles;
although their Outward Rites in public Worship, were far more different, than
those, which, by any of the most distant persuasions, are now practiced in
England. 2. The State may be preserved, without the least reference to the
Church, unless it turns Persecuter of it; as is evident in those 300 years
before Constantines time, in which there was no Church at all legally
countenanced; and for some scores of years after, both the Christians and
Gentiles were equally advanced and favored. 3. Unity, I mean such as Christ
came to establish (which is an Unity in heart and spirit) does not in the least
depend upon Uniformity, but upon Charity, i.e, a Christian and a Candid
forbearance of one another in things Circumstantial, when we agree in the
Essentials of Worship; which is a thing, that mere Civility would teach, though
Religion were silent in it. And whereas the Bishop thinks he has got some
advantage, by reviving the memory of our late Civil Wars which, were he either
Christian or Man enough, he would wish, were eternally buried in silence) I
must (to use his own Phrase) tell him in his ear, that our Wars did not arise
from the separation of Conscientious Dissentors, but from the violence and Fury
of Unconscionable Imposers: Who would not allow their Brethren (who desired
nothing more than to live peaceably by them) that sober Liberty, which the Law
of God commanded, and no Law of Man could justly deprive them of. And whether
the public maintaining of the very same Positions and Practices, may not in
time beget the same Feuds and Animosities, although, this Bishop cares not, yet
I doubt not, but his Majesty, as he now does, so will always graciously
consider.

Eighthly, Whether, as to the matter of Fact, the French Protestants do enjoin
standing at the Sacrament; and the Dutch, kneeling; I will labor to enform my
self of some more Unbyassed witness than this Bishop; for in the Ecclesiastical
Laws of those Churches, which I have carefully perused, I can find no such
matter. But if they did so, this would not at all justify the Imposition of
Kneeling; because 1. The Question is de Jure, whether it be lawful to prescribe
any one such certain Posture, without submitting to which, it shall not be
lawful to admit any to the Sacrament, and till the Affirmative of this be
proved by Scriptures, Examples, and Instances from the Practice of men, will
not satisfy a doubting conscience. 2, Neither of those fore mentioned Postures
are so much to exception as Kneeling; because this last is manifestly more
superstitious, for 1. It varies most of any from the First Pattern. 2. It has
been monstrously abused by the Papists to Idolatry; which alone renders it most
Unsafe to be practiced, and most Unwarrantable to be imposed: Especially, till
it be again explained, as in the very first Liturgy of all it was; which I
particularly mention, to show how little our Reformation since Edw. 6th. time,
has been improved.

Lastly, As it was needlessly, so was it likewise Uncharitably done, to revile
the whole body of Presbyterians for the Faults of Mr. Baxter; upon supposition
that either he is a Presbyterian, or so culpable as the Bishop would make him.
For since every man is to bear his own Burden, what Bible did the Bishop find
it in, that he might, without scruple, asperse a whole order of Men, for the
pretended miscarriage of one; who, by the Bishop's own Confession, was not of
so Amicable and compliant a Temper as the rest: And therefore certainly they
ought not to be brought in as Parties in that crime of Unpeaceableness, from
which the Bishop just before had absolved them: but choler spoils the Memory;
and, sure his Brethren the Bishops would not take it well of a Presbyterian,
should he cry out Crimine ab uno, disce omnes -- See what manner of Spirit
these Bishops are of, and judge them all by the Bishop of Worcesters example.
Truly, Sir. I am a little angry, when I consider how much this one man's
Indiscretion has exposed all of the same Order to Censure; For were they all
like him (which I do not, nor dare not think) I should not scruple to pray
heartily, what the Bishop does in scorn concerning the Preachers -- Lord
deliver us from such Bishops. And let all the People say, Amen.

Thus, Sir, you see how willing I am to serve you in proposing my Exceptions,
the fuller prosecution of which I must leave to some other Pen, more able both
in Divinity and Policy; who may convince, both the Bishop and the World, that
it is not yet time to sow such Tares; This Age is a little too knowing to be
gulled, with an (...), or to take every thing for Oracle which a Bishops
Passion dictates. But before I ease you of your Trouble in reading this, I will
crave leave to give you a Taste of the Reverend Father's deep wisdom in two or
three particulars --

1. In that he declaimes, so fiercely, as if he would crack his Girdle, against
all those who force all Communicants to come unto them and be particularly
examined before they admit them to the Sacrament. Indeed, Sir, this was an
Imposition, as no way Justifiable, so, for ought I can hear, no where
practiced. The Custom being that men were only once for all examined, at their
first coming to the Sacrament; which the Bishop himself allows under other
Names of being Catechized and Instructed. It was therefore wisely done or the
Bishop, this cold weather, to set up a Man of straw, and then get himself heat
by threshing it.

2 It is methinks very Politickly done to Exclaim against the poor Covenant;
and, in great zeal, to wish all the Books, which defend it, were burnt by the
Authors, to save the Hangman a labor. For here let his Adversary do what he
can, the Bishop will be too hard for him: For if he takes no notice of the
Covenant, the Bishop clearly gains the Cause, if he ventures to assert it, he
shall presently be confuted with a Confiscation. So that under the shelter of
this Unanswerable Dilemma I leave him, lest I should be gored with the Horns of
it. And this I speak, Sir, as one that, though I never took, but always
opposed the Covenant; yet I have a very good opinion of many that did, and
withal a great Tenderness for the lawful Part of an Oath, after it is once
solemnly taken. I will only add this, That since that Oath has been so
generally taken, even by those that were most Active in his late Majesty's
service; and several times ventured their Lives, to signalize their Loyalty; I
think the Ashes of it (since it was burnt by Public Authority) had much better
have been suffered to rest quietly, than thus to be blown up and scattered
abroad by the Bishop's furious Breath, when no occasion was given him so much
as to mention it.

Lastly, I can never enough commend the Bishops wisdom, in resolving so angrily
never to write again; for he is Old, and has Traveled far, and knows that it
is much easier to speak rash and unjustifiable things than to defend them. And
therefore he deals with those, that he has provoked, as witty School-boyes do
wish their Companions, first he hits them a box on the Ear, and then very
discreetly retreats, and fairly runs away But if Goliath, who took upon him to
defy the Host of Israel, should, as soon as ever he had done, have sneaked out
of the Field, and thought he had done manfully enough in making a Bold
Challenge, and in showing his Teeth at them; I believe the Philistines would
hardly have thanked him for that Empty show of Valor, whereby he could not
Conquer, but only enrage the Enemy. And whether the Bishops will not have the
same opinion of this over-forward and unwary Champion of theirs, I hope, Sir,
you will neither enquire your self, nor desire that I should: For I have
already done enough to show how much I am,

Jan. 21. SIR, Your most humble Servant D. E.


