A TREATISE OF THE High Rebellion of Man against GOD In Blasphemy:

Showing what it is according to God in the LAW. And proving, that men not
knowing the Sin, come daily to commit it, without sense thereof.

WITH An Examination of an ORDINANCE made by the LORDS, and the ACT made by the
late Parliament against the same.

Written by an unworthy witness of the Name and Sovereignty of the JEHOVAH
Elohims, JOHN BRAIN.

Rabbi Eliezer. We say that (...) Elohim in every place signifies judgment.

Numb. 15.30, 31. The soul that does ought presumptuously, whether he be born
in the land, or a stranger, the same reproacheth the Lord; and that soul shall
be cut off from the people, because he has despised the word of the Lord, and
has broken his command. That soul shall utterly be cut off; his iniquity shall
be upon him.

1 Samuel 15.23. Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, etc.

Acts 19.37. Ye have brought hither these men, which are neither sacrilegious
persons, nor blasphemers of your goddess.

Gal. 4.16. Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth?

London, Printed for Richard Moon, at the seven stars in Paul's Churchyard,
near the great North-door. 1653.

To his Excellency The Lord General CROMWELL, and to his honorable Council.
Right Honorable,
I Am emboldened to desire your approbation of this ensuing Treatise: in all
tenderness of heart, humbleness of mind, and sincerity of love and affection I
present it to you. In which I commend to your considerations the most weighty
Case of Blasphemy: and the rather, in that I see the wise of the world are at a
to-be-admired loss about the nature and being of it; the most wise God, as by a
veil, having hid it from their eyes; whose glory is most nearly concerned
therein. And your selves are never able to discharge your trust to God or Men,
but in your conscionable declining of it with fear in your selves, and
suppressing it in others.

I have no more to commend to you, but my remembrances of you to God, that he
would sanctify you to the great work he has to do in the world; and that he
would also direct you in the way thereof, and enlarge your hearts thereunto,
that glory may dwell in our land; that your selves may be accepted with, and
saved of the Lord, in the day of salvation, and the people (as they are
capable) by you.

And so resting, I remain, as I am bound in duty, to be a faithful well-wisher
to you all, and to all in the nation under you; subscribing my self

From Winton, November. 22. 1653. Your servant and theirs in the truths of God,
John Brain.

A Treatise of the high Rebellion of MAN against GOD in BLASPHEMY.
BLASPHEMY is against God, as it opposes his Sovereignty and revealed will in
the Law, made inglorious by it in his Attributes.

Or, 2. as it opposes Gods love in Christ revealed in the Gospel, Jam. 2.7. 1 Timothy 1.13.

Or, 3. as it opposes the glory of God revealed in the operations of the Holy
Spirit, as in Matthew. 12.24, 31. Mark 3.29, 30.

It Is only Blasphemy that opposes God in his Sovereignty and Rule, or will in
the Law, that is intended in this Treatise, in that it concerns the Magistrate
only.

This Blasphemy is of two kinds, and forbidden under two of the Commands.

1. There is Blasphemy that is directly against Jehovah Elohims, or the Lord
God in himself, which is forbidden in the first Command, and opposes his
Sovereignty. 2. There is Blasphemy against God in his Name, that is, in his
authority, his Power, his Justice, his Law, his Government: and this is
forbidden in the third Command. Under which two heads or Commands, all
Blasphemy that concerns the Magistrate to judge is comprehended: for the Law
makes no other Blasphemers but these.
Blasphemy is in Scripture expressed by three words.

1. By (...), which signifies lightness, dis-esteem, or vilifying of a thing;
and in this is opposed to the Hebrew (...), which signifies weight and glory.

It signifies cursing, and is opposed to (...), blessing, Genesis 27.11. which
word is used to set out the evil wishes and contempt of inferiors toward the
superior in his person and rule.

2. By (...), whose primary signification is to bore, or to make hollow a
thing; in which is a taking away the pith or substance of it, and leaving it
nothing but the rind or bark: and this word is used to set out blasphemy
against the Name, that is, the authority, the power, the justice, the
sufficiency of the law and government of God.

Both which are expressed, Levit. 24.15, 16.

(...) Whatever man shall vilify, lightly esteem, or dishonor his Elohims,
his sin shall be upon him.

(...), or shall make empty or nothing the Name, the Authority, or Law and
Government of God, shall surely die.

Which is a blasphemy or evil speaking committed daily among us, without fear,
or remorse of conscience: yet ye see it is such a sin, that not a pecuniary
mulct or bodily imprisonment inflicted on Blasphemers by Civil Sanctions (if I
may so call them) does suffice, but certain death: for which among men is no
Law, and so men committing it daily are not reputed transgressors.

So that that that is indeed blasphemy is not punished, and that that is not
blasphemy is punished for it, not with the punishment of blasphemy according to
God, but such as men allow of. When sure, were that is blasphemy punished
according to God, the other horrid execrations among men would quickly be done
away from among men in the land, God sanctifying his own Institutions
thereunto; when men's prudential rules prove nothing at all effective. Blasphemy
against God being as he has instituted punished, would bring an awe and a fear
of Himself and Name, so as that men would tremble to trample his glory under
foot, or name him but in reverence. God will be found in his own way, but not
in man's. Man's justly deserve to be blasted, because they neglect the Lord and
his law: God honoring those honor him, when those slight him shall be lightly
regarded.

But to the first word (...) and how it is used in the case of Blasphemy in the
Scriptures.

1. As it represents God himself in the first Command, it shows that no man is
to slight, dishonor, or vilify Jehovah, as he is Lord and King, or to make
light of him.

1. It is committed in rejecting him, with those, Luke 19.14. We will not have
this man to reign over us: verse. 27. which were to be destroyed by the Gospel,
as the Kings enemies.

2. Or, as the Israelites desired to have a King as the Gentiles. Which though
then God did not so severely punish, it a greeing with his will, thereby to set
up Types to men of his Son: but now to do it, were more sinful.

3. But perfected, in that they allege for the cause why God should not be
King, in the two first. Contradiction comes in the last, to fill the sin of
Blasphemy up in the measure of it.

As to say, We would not have God reign, because he is so severe. So the man in
the Gospel said he knew he was an austere man, and reaped where he sowed not,
Matthew. 25.24. (...), an hard man, who also gathered where he strawed not. In
which indeed blasphemy is committed against God, if it be spoke against him as
King and Lord of a people: and a man does for suchlike sayings deserve death
by the Law. And doubtless the Egyptian, Levit. 24.15. in his blaspheming God,
said no more.

Or if it be understood cursed. as opposed to (...), it is only a desire in
opposition to God his magnificence and glory, that he might be acknowledged as
King no longer, but that they may be under men, who would not rule with the
like justice, but give a greater liberty to sinners in their lives, to live
after their lusts and licentiousness. It was blasphemy in the Jews account,
that Christ, as they thought a mere man, made himself equal with God. Now men
make themselves equal with God many ways.

That the truth of this may appear.

Exodus 22.28. (...), Thou shall not revile, blaspheme, or lightly esteem the
Elohim. By which was understood the Judges, who were Gods deputies. For which
very fact, by the Law, it was death. Now if it be death to blaspheme the Deputy
of the King, how then to blaspheme the King himself!

1. This is illustrated in Gaal and his brethren, Judge. 9.27, 28. who in the
house of their Elohims eat and drink; (...), and made light of Abimelech, or
blasphemed Abimelech, saying thus: Who is Abimelech, or who is Shechem, that we
should serve him? is be not the son of Jerubbaal, and Zebul his officer? Serve
the men of Hamor, and the father of Shechem; for why should we serve him? Verse.
29. Would to God this people were under my hand, then would I remove Abimelech.
Note well, he vilifies Abimelech, to set up himself in his place only. A thing
natural, arising out of an unsound heart to God.

2. In Shimei, 2 Samuel 16.5. He came forth, and cursed or blasphemed still as he
came; which God explains, verse. 7. And thus said Shimei when he cursed: Come
out, come out, thou bloody man, and man of Belial. Verse. 8. The Lord has
returned on thee all the blood of the house of Saul, in whose stead thou have
reigned. And the Lord has delivered the kingdom into the hand of Absalom thy
son, and behold, thou art taken in thy mischief, because thou art a bloody man.
Verse. 9. for which Abishai calls him dead dog: as a dog, he barking; and as
dead, being by the Law condemned to die; and therefore would have cut off his
head.

Note In this of Shimei were many blasphemies or curses: he did it all the way
as he came.

1. Dishonouring him, by calling him man of bloods.

2. By saying that he was a child of Belial, or of the devil, one that was not
under the yoke of God's law, and so unfit to rule. And so the rest, as
deprecations.

But (...) what Abishai said, when he humbled himself to David, 2 Samuel 10 22.
Shall Shimei not die for this? As if he had said, Shall this serve his (...)
for cursing the Anointed of JEHOVAH?

Which proves that the Magistrate may pass by reproaches cast on himself, so
that God be not concerned therein: but if God be directly concerned in the
blasphemy of any, he might not. Acts 6.11. It is Moses and God.

Now Abab, to prove Naboth's death just, and that none should be found to
intercede for him, sets up witnesses to say he blasphemed not the King only,
but God and the King; which man could not pardon, Levit. 24.14.15. Yea, note, 1
King. 21.10. the witnesses were sons of Belial. men with whom God or his Law
were of no esteem, who yet cover their impiety with seeming zeal of God, by not
saying He cursed God, but, Thou blessedst God, by the contrary word, as that
the people should think they to honored God and his Law, that they were afraid
to mention the word curse before them, as not to be named.

Not to pass by Shimei in his end for cursing David, 1 King. 2.7, 8, 9. he was
the last man David gave Solomon charge of, that he bring him to the grave in
blood for it: who for breaking the Oath of God after, verse. 43, 44. was slain
by Benaiah.

The Heathens punished blasphemy of their gods: Acts 19.37. freely proves it.

Again, as to vilify God, or the Magistrate, Gods deputy, was death; so for
the child to vilify his father, it is death also, Exodus 21.17. (...), or, the
despiser of his father or mother shall die. Which sentence of the Law Christ
confirms in the Gospel, Mat. 15.4. and renders (...) by (...), evil speaking to
or of his father or mother. How much more shall he evil speaks of God die?

The advice of Solomon, Eccles. 10.20. Despise not the King in thy conscience,
and in thy lodging chamber despise not the rich. A bird of the air will carry
the voice of it, and on its wings shall the thing be declared. Now if a man
should fear to despise man in the secret of his conscience, how should man fear
to despise God the King in his thoughts or conscience, since he needs no birds
nor wings to reveal it, but knows them long before they were within man, and
needs not any to testify of what is in man? Psalm. 139.2.

Again, not to punish Blasphemy, is a dangerous thing. 1 Samuel 3.13. For I have
told him, that I will judge his house for ever, for the iniquity which he
knows, because his sons are to themselves blasphemers, (...), and he
restrained them not; who was he that then judged Israel. That is, by their
abuse of their trust, they made the people to slight them, to vilify them, and
despise them: for which neglect of Eli, and his sons sin, God judged his house
for ever, that it should not be purged by sacrifice nor offering for ever. The
70 read (...).

Eccles. 7.21. God would not have the Master give heed, though he heard his
servant slight him, vilify him, or curse him, verse. 22. and that because his
own heart knows he oft-times had cursed others.

Hear England, hear also ye Magistrates, Ezekiel. 22.7. (...) In thee the father
and mother are made slight of: or, as we read, In thee have they set light by
father or mother; by God, his Law and Rule.

And it is not to be past by, that to men in Covenant the blessings and curses
are to be often read that are annexed to the Law, Deuteronomy. 11.26. Josh. 8.24. as
inforcements to obedience, and from disobedience.

As for the third Commandment, I read it thus: Thou shall not bear the name of
Jehovah thy Elohims for nothing, for a vain thing, or for a lie.

(...) bears either expression.

Again, I read (...) Thou shall not bear, and not Thou shall not take from the
Prophets, who call their prophecies The burden of the Lord, Hab. 1.1. Mal. 1.1.
Now of any discovery of God, the Law is the burden of the Lord, which the
people, on the very knowledge thereof, are to bear, God laying it on them, as
appears by the acts of Conscience, in their agreeing with it against men
themselves. And when they acknowledge the Law to be God's, then they take it on
them as their burden; who yet bear it for a vain thing, against the command;
and like Ephraim, who as a heifer unaccustomed to the yoke, kicks against the
pricks; and having taken the burden on them, would cast it off again.

O England, thou have the Law, thou ownest that Law to be Gods; and as God's,
thou submittest to the teaching thereof, but thy self art not governed by it:
in which is a bearing Gods name for nothing, a professing we know God, but in
works we deny him.

By this Command, the Magistrate is to punish false swearing; and in that,
there is a great evil committed in the nation by swearing men. Note that the
oath of God was ministered only in cases where was want of witnesses to assist
in judgment, and not else; as in Exodus 22.8, 9, 11. Cases to prove the
practice in all other like kinds.

2. It was never the mind of God that Witnesses and Juries should be sworn at
all: they were appointed for trial of things by matter of fact, proved by
testimony of men that saw it.

The one is commanded in the third Command; the other in the ninth.

The ones punishment is by Retaliation; the others, by Satisfaction.

So that it is a sad thing to swear Constables, Churchwardens, Officers,
Juries, Witnesses, that God has not appointed; because, if they swear falsely,
they sin against their souls, a sin to death; and so it becomes a grievous
snare to men. 1 Kings 2.43, 44.

In which comes to be considered the Magistrates just authority to give unto
men the oath of God, not only about things lost, etc. but Neh. 13.25. he made
the Jews swear by God that they should not give their sons, nor take their
daughters to their sons or themselves: which before they had done, and was
against the Covenant.

1. To bind them from future breach thereof, he swore them by God.

2. So that if after they had done the same, they had died not for marrying,
but for breaking the Oath of God.

3. He could not have put them to the Oath, but that they broke the Covenant;
when the Oath was instituted to preserve it, and men from breach of it, or it
was death to them.

4. They promised not to do it more: and for confirmation of their promise, he
required an Oath of them, Nehem. 10.28, 29, 30. Lev. 5.4. was not an Oath put
on men by a Magistrate.

5. It is true, that the thing that was committed to a man, and he hid it, and
swear falsely to conceal it, was to be restored, and a fifth part to it, because
it was committed to his trust; and violently, as in case of theft, he took it
not out of the owners possession, Lev. 6.3, 5.

6. Leagues with people are confirmed by Oath, Josh. 9.15. See how it was kept,
verse. 19, 20. And the sin of the Princes is reproved, in making their League,
v. 14. They were cursed for their deceit in swearing, v. 22, 23.

It is a very remarkable case, that the Israelites were not to cause to swear
by the name of Idol-gods, Isa. 65.16. Josh. 23.7.

See how God revenged the breach of the Oath by Saul with the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel 21.2. In that verse. 1. there was famine three years for Readiness slaying
them. The Gibeonites must have satisfaction, David must give it: which was not
in silver or gold, verse. 6. Seven men of Readiness sons must be delivered them,
and they hanged them up to the Lord in Gibeah of Saul: when the love of Rispah
was such, that she continued with the carcases a long time, keeping the fowls
by day, and beasts by night from them; who was Readiness concubine. After which,
God was entreated for the land.

Yea the Covenant on man's part was done to God by an Oath, 2 Chronicles. 15.14, 15.
Ezra 10.3, 5. Neh. 10.29. and by a curse, by the Prince of the peoples writing,
and sealing to it, Nehem. 9.38.

But to return to the second word used of the Spirit to set out blasphemy by,
and that is (...), which properly is applied to the boring, hollowing, or
taking forth the substance of a thing; and fitly agrees with taking God's Name
for vain, or a making it nothing, empty, and insubstantial.

Against this Command, is the despising of the Law, as well as authority of
God; of which says Paul (Heb. 10.28.) He that despised Moses law, died without
mercy.

And it is blasphemy for men to say of the Law of God, It is insufficient to
rule men by, It Is no fit government for people is contained in the word; and to
say that any other is as good or better then that; or to say it is too severe,
too hard, too strict: they take out the substance of the Law, hollow it, and
make it nothing.

Deuteronomy. 17.12. The man that will do presumptuously, not harkening to the judge,
that man shall die: which was in a difficult case only. What is it then not to
hearken to the Law in clear cases? And proves, that for the difficult cases may
arise or be supposed to be, the Law is not to be laid aside, because though we
see them not stated in the Law, God does admit that men search the Word, and
see his wisdom in it.

Of this sin of Presumption, see Numb. 15.30, 31. The soul that does ought
presumptuously (which is to be understood in judgment, or actions that do
appertain thereunto, when they do them otherwise then God commands in his Word)
1. Reproacheth the Lord in his authority over them. 2. He despises the Word of
the Lord. 3. He has broken his Command: to which the word despised did
pertain, for which the soul was to be cut off; and is a word concerns Judges
and Judgment primarily.

Now as it is Blasphemy to impair the Law of its glory, to take ought from it;
so is it much more blasphemy to take from the name of God in his Authority or
Sovereignty in like kind, and according to God. Herein, great and grievous is
the blasphemy that is committed in the Nation daily: the Lord pardon it, as
done in ignorance among us: yet the Law says, The Lord will not he be free
from punishment that bears his name for nothing: (...) guiltless, or
punishless.

As for the third word, it is (...), and answers to the Greek word (...), as
signifying imprecations.

The word is an expression of a Superior to an Inferior, and usually
accompanies power and authority; as Christ in cursing the figtree.

By this word God cursed the earth, Genesis 5.14, 17, 29. and he cursed the
Serpent by it. By this word he declares those cursed that curse his people,
Genesis 12.3. By this word, the curses on breach of Covenant were threatened, Deuteronomy.
27.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. The rebuilder of Jericho was cursed by this word,
Josh. 6.26. and those do the work of God negligently, Jer. 48.10.

In one place, Exodus 22.28. the inferior hereby is forbid to curse the Prince
of the people; which yet Inferiors may do to men like themselves, though not to
God: that is, blast them in their names, through the infirmities abide in man.
The word also, as the 70 render it, may be read, Thou shall not speak evil of
the ruler of thy people.

Men by this word are not said to blaspheme God or his Name in the holy
Scripture; and in the New Testament by (...), Romans 2.24.

The ground and rise of Blasphemy, as committed against the Name of God in the
third Command, in the slighting of the rule, government, authority, law, or
covenant of God, is this, That therein the Attributes of God are concerned: so
that in the despising of the one, the other also is despised, set at naught,
vilified, and dishonored; and the glory of God taken from him, and bestowed on
some other.

1. He that says the Law of God is not a sufficient rule, and that there needs
the Prudentials of men to complete it, sets at naught the wisdom of God, who
would make such a Law as was deficient for the end he made it: and so dishonors
him in the glory of his wisdom, and makes man to men more glorious, in that he
must come and give it its beauty of perfection.

2. He that says it is too severe, condemns God in his mercy, and renders him
as a Tyrant to man, as ruling by power only; in which fear and servility is
begot in man, and love destroyed, which is the ground of obedience, and the
fulfilling of the Law; and the other, of disobedience.

3. He that says it is a law to the Jews only, denies his Sovereignty, as if
he were God of the Jews only, and not of the Gentiles also.

4. He that says it is only a ground of Law, or a rule to make Laws by, but
not a Law to govern men by, bores the Law, hollows it, and makes it empty and
void, yea a lie, and God a liar to man, who enjoined men not to turn from it to
the right or left hand: Or denies Gods goodness to the Gentiles, who was so
good, kind, and careful of the Jews, as to give them a Law fitting them; but
as for the Gentiles, he respected not them so as to give them any Law at all:
Or else despise his goodness to the Jews, who in giving them a Law, and ruling
over them, did it by such a Law as was unfit to be a Law to men; and so become
judges of the Law, and not doers of it, James 4.11. But, as Christ said in
another case, Judge not according to appearance, but judge righteous judgment:
that men come not to make themselves God, Joh. 10.36.

5. They that say their own humane law is fitter and better for them then the
Law of God, despise God and his Law in the glory of his Will, that would give
them no fitter; and in the glory of his goodness and prudence, that would in
giving a Law give them no better.

6. They that say they ought not to be under God's Law, but their own, despise
his power, rule, and authority, and thrust him from them, saying, We will not
have thee to rule over us.

7. They that slight the setting up of the Covenant in the Nation with God, set
God at naught, despise the promises annexed to the Covenant, and intail the
curses on themselves and posterity, casting them and theirs out of his
protection, to be devoured of their enemies, who may say, Persecute and take
them: there is none now to deliver them; God, who should be their glory, is
departed from them.

8. If any should be so profane as to say that the Law is not just nor holy, he
robs God of the glory of his holiness, and contradicts the Spirit of God in the
Gospel, which says that the Law is holy, just, and good, Romans 7. Wherefore the
Law is holy, and the Command holy, just, and good.

Note it well; the Command is not only holy, just, and good, but the Law
Judicial also, that depends on that Command: both are by the Spirit in the
Gospel, and by the Gospel, commended, owned, and established to Gentiles, viz.
the Romans as well as Jews.

9. If it be Crimen laesae Majestatis to say of the Supreme authority of a
Nation, It is bloody, tyrannical, usurped, unjust, childish, unfit, etc. how
then for a man to say so of God himself in his Law and Government? in all which
is a denying God to be God, and man's subjection to, and his acknowledgement of
him as such: Or to wish the Government of God ill, as that it might never be,
is blasphemy, yea a cursing the name of God.

Again, if you live by Gods Law, and teach that for Law, ye must judge by it:
if ye judge by it, ye must punish by it, Act. 23.3.

In the Ordinance of Lords and Commons dated May 2. 1648. against Blasphemy, 1.
It is mentioned as an error for men to say that the Moral Law or Ten Commands
is not a rule of Christian life: when indeed the rule of the Christians life is
more spiritual: not only, Thou shall not kill; but, Thou shall not be angry
with thy brother without cause, nor say Thou fool to him: and Thou shall not
commit adultery is not enough; but, Thou shall not lust.

Indeed it should have been set down Blasphemy, for men to say the Divine Law
is no Law; and that men are not to submit to it, but live as they list.

2. It is by that Ordinance blasphemy to say There is no God, or that he is not
everywhere, or not omniscient, eternal: That the Father, Son, and Spirit, are
not one God.

Now Blasphemy against God in the Law chiefly relates to him as King of a
kingdom, supreme of a people, Judge of breach of his Law: and so as God is in
the Law, the Judges are called Elohim. That blasphemy is rather against his
justice, authority, power, rule, law, and government, and his attributes
secondarily in them.

3. As for the rest of the Ordinance, it is against Church-blasphemy, Herefie
and Error, which the Magistrate was not to judge or punish with the Civil
sword by the Law in death, but the Church with the sword of the Spirit by
Excommunication: as the denial of the manhood of Christ, or the two natures of
Christ, or the unspottedness of his humanity: the denial of his death, his
resurrection or ascension into heaven; or that he is not the Son of God: the
denial of the Canonical Scriptures to be the Word of God, or the Resurrection,
or the Last Judgment, or that Christ's death is not meritorious.

1. The Law punishes no man for any of these; nor does it condemn it.

2. Nor does the Gospel punish any man with imprisonment or death, nor convict
any man of felony.

In the Act these Truths are called Errors, and those professed them adjudged
to imprisonment, or enforced to deny them, which is worse.

1. The denial of Infant Baptism; which is agreeable to the precepts, practice,
and qualifications required in men to be discipled.

2. To say the soul lies in the grave; which by Acts 2.31. is the truth of
God, though the Spirit indeed goes immediately to God. Of this see my Treatise
of Soul, Spirit and Body.

3. Or that men baptized in infancy must be again baptized; when sure if that
Pedobaptism be not of Christ, it is no baptism: and so if a man will be
baptized, he must submit to it in the way of God.

4. To say the observation of the Lords day as enjoined by the Law of the Land,
is not according to Gods word, or contrary to it.

5. Or to say the Church of England is not a true Church, the Ministry a true
Ministry, or the Ordinances not true Ordinances.

6. Or that the Presbyterian Government is Antichristian.

I made bold to mention this Ordinonce, 1. because thereby a snare was laid for
me from these last supposed Errors: but my Adversary giving me notice of it, it
was broken, and I escaped.

2. To show how dangerous a thing it is for men to be Lawmakers in the Face of
Gods Law. I believe many that had a hand herein, in heart are now sorry for it;
who then acted as then were led by their own reason and others persuasion.

3. Consider, when things are not of God, in these times, they are quickly laid
aside; and therefore men in Authority and power should be wise in doing what
they do, that it be of God, that their labor come not to nothing, or worse
then nothing; and still to mind, that he that is not with God, is against him:
there is no indifferency or Medium in the thing.

4. I could show how in this Ordinance against Blasphemy, Heresy and Error, is
Blasphemy, Error and Heresy; so unfit is man to presume above himself to act
in the work of God, and not rest in his will as revealed in his word.

5. I cannot pass by counselling men to take heed of censuring God in his
Justice condemning the man for picking Sticks on the Sabbath, for appointing
death to Idolatry, Blasphemy, dishonouring of Parents, etc. for in it is high
Blaspemy; and if the Magistrate should not execute it, he bears the name, that
is, the Authority of God for nothing: and as Saul (sent against Amalek) would
spare the best, and thought the judgment too severe, was justly cut off from
the Kingdom for it, and had this tingling speech of God for it, 1. Sam. 15.23.
Rebellion is as the sin of witchraft, and stubbornness is an iniquity and
idolatry: because thou have rejected the word of the Lord, he has also
rejected thee from being King, This is Blaspemy against God in his justice, and
concerns the People in disputing it, and the Magistrate in his neglect of
executing it; which not to do, is Rebellion, as divination is; when to execute
Gods decree is better then sacrifice. Saul's rebellion is here compared to
divination, in that it coms from Satan, yet pretends to divine light and power.
So Saul's sparing the Cattle to sacrifice, seemed better to them then Oods
command, and bewitched them from obedience to God; their own ways inclining
them from it, as Romans 10.3. Being ignorant of the justice of God, they sought
to establish their own justice; and so they submitted not to the Justice of
God. By this ignorance they could not be said to stand in rebellion against
God, as Saul, that knew it, by this word (...), Ezekiel. 21.21. The King of Babel
at the Mother of the way, where two ways were divined by Augury which he
should go: so men having before them Gods way and man's, do (as he) divine which
is best, profitablest, most acceptable to the People, and safest and easiest to
be undertaken: which to God is as the King of Babels divination, and inquiry at
the Teraphim, and looking into the Liver of the Beast, and neglecting the
counsel of God and his being to them. This may seem harsh to be spoke, as to
him Amos 7.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. but if I should say less then the
truth, I should be unfaithful to God and man, and an Enemy to my own peace: I
must therefore do it, and in doing it, I do it in love, and in good will, to
the safety of all men. God is witness, and my heart also, that I envy no man,
but wish all good to my very Enemies, and God his glory and praise among us in
all I write; how then to these preserve me under God?

Again, (...) which we read Rebellion, Rabbi David Transgredi voluntatem Dei;
and so the trangressor of Gods will is a lie, of Teraphim, that is, as the Idol
into which Idolaters in divinations inspected for direction in their
undertakings, which was a lie to them: the Root (...) signifies cogere, and
shows that he that compels any thing against God, is as the Teraphim, to set
out a false way to man as by a divination, like Jeroboams, who made Israel to
sin.

As concerning the Act, in it are considerable the Law, the sin, the
punishment: and of the present Authority I earnestly beg, as if God by me
desired them to take heed what they do in making Laws: and let the Acts made by
Hen. 8. and since, so much against God, be an admonition to them, that they
give up their account to God for their great trust with joy, and not with
sorrow in that day.

The Act was made August 9. 1650. it mentions unheard of Blasphemies, even not
to be named among the Heathens; when yet the Root of Blasphemy, and that the
Law condemns, is not mentioned; as, to deny God his dominion and soverainty
over us as King or Judge, and his rule in the Law. If these had been punished
as God requires; the rest, which come from thence, as from the Root of
bitterness, and the Womb of Hell, had never been heard of; which now as a
leprosy overspreads the Nation.

As for its punishments, That they be sent to the house of correction, and
bound to good behavior, the first time, banishment the second time, and their
return be death, without benefit of Clergy: as for the sin, it is such, that
the house of correction is not an equal punishment; not can men be bound for
him he shall do no such offense: and to banish him, is to defile others no less
evil before God then our selves, but may prove worse; and at last to put him to
death as a Felon or transgressor of man's Laws and not Gods, is no way aceptable
to God at all.

As for the Act against swearing by God, or by his Attributes, the people of
God used it in truth, and may do, as Paul did, yea, on civil and ordinary
occasions, so that it be done in fear: and men doing it in that kind, ought not
to be liable to pecuniary mulcts. For the calling of God for witness in truth,
may be done as lawfully, as to do it in judgment, as the word of God
abundantly witnesses: it is part of Gods service, Deuteronomy. 6.13. Jerem. 4.2.

But when it is not done in reference to the end of an Oath, in righteousness,
but hellishly, vainly, profanely, then there is a taking Gods name in vain, and
men to be punished as the Law injoines, and no otherwise, Lev. 19.19. Ye shall
not swear by my Name falsely, nor profane the Name of thy God: If they swear
falsely, they are penable; or if profanely without conscience or fear.

Or if men swear by them are no Gods, Jer. 5.7. in which civil converse as well
as Gods glory is destroyed.

Right honorable, consult in the truth of God, and that will show you, as in a
glass, what is to be done by you, and what men miscarried in that were before
you. The word is better then the Urim and Thummim, the lights and perfections
the high Priest enquired at. Whoever among you fear God, and love his name,
looking for salvation by him, cannot but give entertainment to what is written
in his word, to which I commend you all, as to the only light, by which in
safety you may receive directions from, and give stability to your
undertakings; remaining, as before,

Your servant in God and his truth John Brain.

FINIS.

